COLLECTIONS OF TRAVELS THROUGH TURKEY into PERSIA, and the EAST INDIES.

Giving an Account of the Present State of those Countries.

AS ALSO A Full RELATION of the Five Years WARS, between Aureng-Zebe and his
Brothers in their Father's Lifetime, about the Succession. And a Voyage made
by the Great Mogul (Aureng-Zebe) with his Army from Dehli to Lahor, from Lahor
to Bember, and from thence to the Kingdom of Kachemire, by the Mogols, called,
The Paradise of the Indies.

TOGETHER With a Relation of the Kingdom of JAPAN and TUNKIN, and of their
particular Manners and Trade.

To which is added A New Description of the GRAND SEIGNIOR'S SERAGLIO, And also
of all the Kingdoms that encompass the Euxine and Caspian Seas.

BEING The Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER BERNIER, and other great Men: Adorned
with many Copper Plates.

The First Volume.

LONDON, Printed for Moses Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.

M. DC. LXXXIV.

THE DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR.
Where he gives a brief Relation of his first Travels through the best parts of
Europe as far as Constantinople.
IF the effect of Education may be liken'd to a second Birth, I may truly say,
that I came into the World with a desire to travel. The daily discourses which
several Learned men had with my Father upon Geographical subjects, which my
Father had the reputation of understanding very well, and to which, though ver^
young, I was with much delight attentive, inspired (...) betimes with a design
to see some part of those Countries, which were represented to me in the Maps,
from which I never could keep off my Eyes. By two and twenty years of Age,
therefore I had seen the fairest Regions of Europe, France, England, the Low
Countries, Germany, Switzerland, Poland, Hungary and Italy; and I speak
indifferently well the Languages most necessary and most generally spoken.

My first sally was into England, where at that time Reigned King James; from
thence I passed into Flanders to see Antwerp, my Father's Native Country, and
so into the Low Countries, where my inclination to travel became the stronger,
by reason of the great Concourse of Strangers which I met at Amsterdam, that
crowded thither from all parts o the World.

Having seen what was most considerable in the united Provinces, I passed into
Germany, and when I came to Norimbergh, by the way of Frankfort and Auspurgh,
the noise of the Armies that were marching into Bohemia to retake Prague,
instilled into me a desire to go to the Wars, where I might learn something
that might be useful to me in the series of my travels. I was not above a days
journey from Norimbergh, when I met a Colonel of Horse, whose name was Hans
Brener* the Son of Philip Brener, Governor of Vienna, who engaged me to follow
him into Bohemia. Sometime after I bore the same Colonel company to Vienna, who
presented me to the Governor of Raab, his Uncle, then Viceroy of Hungary also;
who received me into his Family as one of his Pages. For it is a usual thing in
Germany for Gentlemen's Sons to serve in that quality 'till five and twenty
years of age, and seldom to quit that fervice, till they have a Commission for
a Cornet, or Ensign's place. Four years and a half I served the Viceroy, when
the Prince of Mantua came to Vienna, to engage the perour in certain designs of
his own without success. At that time the Count of Arc, whose Sister the
Viceroy had Married, was chief Minister to the Prince of Mantua; and coming to
visit the Viceroy at Javarin, I was appointed to attend him during his stay
there. Upon his departure, he told the Viceroy, that the Prince of Mantua had
no person about him that understood the Language, and that therefore he might
be sure that the Prince would take it for a great kindness, to permit me to
attend his person during his stay at the Emperors Court. This was a thing
easily granted to the Count of Arc; who thereupon carried one along with him to
Vienna, where having had the good fortune not to displease the Prince, he
testified to me at his departure, that he should be glad to see me at Mantua,
where he would not forget the services* I had done him. This presently infused
into me a desire of seeing Italy, especially upon the opportunity that offered
it self not long after.

For Monsieur de Sabran, the King of France's Envoy to his Imperial Majesty,
being to go for Venice, and desirous of one that understood the German Language
to bear him company, I laid hold of the occasion; so that in eight days we got
to Venice. While we stayed at Venice, I took a view to my great satisfaction,
of that most Celebrated City, and in regard it is in many things like to
Amsterdam, as in Situation, Greatness, Magnificence, Commerce, and Concourse of
Strangers, my being there did but still reinforce my inclination to ^vel.

From Venice I went to Mantua with Monsieur de Sabran, where the rince being
glad to see me again, gave me my choice of an Ensign, ^r of a place in the
Company of the Ordonnance of the Duke his Father. accepted the latter as being
glad to be under the Command of the ^on^de de Guiche, who was then Captain. At
the Siege of Mantua I had ^ike to have been slain, but for the goodness of a
Cuirafs which I had chosen out of the Princes Magazin, being hit with two
Bullets above and upon the left pap, which had entered, had not my Arms been
excellent proof: So that after I was recovered of my Bruises, a longer stay it
Mantua did not agree with my desire to travel.

Therefore some time after the Siege was raised, I took leave of the rince, who
gave me an honorable Pass, by virtue whereof five or six ^orse-men bore me
company back to Venice. From Venice I went to Lauretta, from Lauretta to Rome,
from Rome to Naples, from whence returning to Rome again, I staid there ten or
twelve days. After that I went to see Florence, Pisa, Ligorn, and Genoa, from
whence I Embarked for Marseilles.

From Marseilles I hasted to Paris, where I could not stay long; for being
desirous to see Poland, I passed once more into Germany through Switzerland,
after I had taken a survey of the principal Towns of the Can^ons. I went by the
Rhine by Water, to visit Strasburgh and Brisack; then^e by Land crossing
Suabia, I passed through Vlme and Auspurgh to go to Munich. There I saw the
Magnificent Palace of the Dukes of Bavaria, which William the fifth began, and
which Maximilian his Son finished* in the heat of the Wars that troubled the
Empire. From thence I went the second time to Norimbergh, and Prague, and
leaving Bohemia I entered (...) Silesia, and passed the Oder at Breslaw. From
Breslaw I went to (...) one of the greatest Cities of Europe, ^or (...) of
three Cities, the ancient Seat of the King of Poland. From thence, keeping the
Vistula upon the left hand, I went to Warsaw and saw there the Court of King
Sigismund, which is a noble and splendid Habitation.

From Warsaw I returned to Breslaw, taking the Road toward the Lower Silesia,
designing to visit one of the principal Officers of the Emperors Household, who
was my particular acquaintance. But about two Leagues from Glogaw, meeting with
Colonel Butler, a Scotch Gentleman, Colonel of one of the Emperors Regiment of
Horse, who afterward killed Walesteyne in pursuance of the Orders he received,
I gave over my first intended journey. His Wife was a great lover of the
French, so that benig earnestly obliged by both together, I could not withstand
the testimonies of their kindness. There I understood that the Emperor was
going to Ratisbone with his Son Ferdinand the Third, to Crown him King of the
Romans; so that I, who had seen the Coronations of the Kings of Hungary and
Bohemia, being so desirous to see the third Solemnity also, took leave of my
Colonel, and hasted to Ratisbone.

At that time arrived to Ratisbone several Jewellers, one of which came to his
end by an accident so tragical, that all the whole Court pitied his untimely
fate. He was the only Son of one of the richest Merchants of Europe, that lived
in Frankfort, whose Father had sent him with Jewels to sell at the Coronation.
For fear of being Robbed he had conveyed them before into the hands of a Jew,
in Ratisbone, his Correspondent, to be delivered to his Son at his coming. This
young man arriving at Ratisbone, went to the Jew, who told him that he had
received a small Casket of Jewels from his Father, which he might take away,
when he pleased. At the same time the Jew invited the young man to drink, and
carried him to a public House upon the Key of the City, where they continued
'till about an hour after day was shut in. At this time, both going out
together, the Jew led the young man through a private Street where poor people
passed by, and there having stabbed him five or six times in the Belly with a
Dagger, left him wallowing in his Blood. A while after, one of the Emperor's
Trumpets going that way in the dark, stumbl'd at the Legs of the unfortunate
youth, who still breathed, and fell upon his Body. At first feeling his hands
wet: he thought it had been some drunken fellow that had eased his stomach; but
upon second thoughts imagining it might be some wounded person, he ran and
called the Officers, who coming with Lanthorns, beheld the tragic spectacle of
a youngm man weltring in his own gore. Thereupon the Officers carrying the Body
to the same publick-house, as being next at hand, his face was no sooner
washed, but the Woman and Maid of the House knew him to be the same young man
that had been there drinking with the Jew not long before. But as for the young
man he presently expired, without being able to make the least discovery.
However the Jew was seized that evening, and being seized, confessed the Crime.
The Imperial Laws ordain, that a Jew for killing a Christian should be hung
upon a Gibbet by the Heels, and that two fierce Dogs should be hung by him in
the same manner to the end, that the Dogs in their madness should tear out his
Bowels. But the Jew made such presents to the Empress that the Sentence was
changed, though the punishment was not much less rigorous. For his flesh was
torn with red hot Pincers from several parts of his body, in several Streets of
the City, and boiling Lead poured into the raw wounds; after which he was
broken alive upon the wheel, at the public place of Execution.

Being upon my departure from Ratisbone, I met with Father Joseph, Resident
there for the King of France, who knowing me in Paris, proposed to me to go
along with the Monsieur, the Abbot of Chapes, Brother of the Marshal de Aumont,
and Monsieur St. Liebau, who were then intending for Constantinople, and so for
Palestine. I liked the proposition well, and immediately put my self into the
Society of those two Gentlemen, from whom I never separated 'till they departed
for Syria from Constantinople.

But before we left Germany, we resolved to see the Court of Savony, whither we
got in a few days, By the way we passed through Freybergh, a small City, but
well worth seeing, for the beauty of the Electors Tombs, and most splendid and
magnificent both for Materials and Workmanship in all Europe. From thence we
went and viewed the stately Castle of Augustburgh, seated upon a high Mountain,
wherein among other things there is a great Hall, adorned from top to bottom
with nothing but Horns fastened to the Wall; among the rest is the Head of a
Hare with two Horns, sent the Elector by the King of Denmark for a great
Rarity. In one of the Courts of the Palace stands a Tree so large in Body, and
spreading out the Branches at so wide a distance, that they will cover three
hundred sixty five Tables with their shade. And that which makes this Tree more
wonderful is, that it is only* Birch, that rarely grows to that Immensity.

Dresde is the Residence of the Elector, a little City, but a very neat one,
and well fortified; with a Stone a Bridge over the Elbe, that parts the Old and
New Town. The Palace is one of the largest and fairest in Germany. But it wants
a Piazza before it, the Principal Gate standing just at the bottom of a narrow
Lane.

From Dresde we went to Prague, which was a third time that I saw that great
and fair City, or rather three Cities together, only saparated by the Molda,
that throws it self into the Elbe, some five or six Leagues below.

Having traversed Bohemia, and touched upon the corner of Moravia, we entered
Austria, and came to Vienna, resolving there to Embark with all speed, because
the Winter came on.

We stayed one day at Presburgh to see the great Church, and some Relics which
they showed us, and from thence fell down to Altenburgh.

Altenburgh is a City and Province belonging to the Count of Arach. It was the
Child's part of one of the Queens of Hungary, who upon her deathbed bequeathed
it to one of the Lords of her Court, upon condition that he and his Successors
should always keep such a number of Peacocks; for defect whereof, the Territory
should revert to the Crown.

T^ence we came to Signet, from whence I took a little Boat and hasted to Raab,
where I did my Devoirs to the Viceroy, who was glad to see me, and gave noble
entertainment to the Messieurs de Chapes, and de St. Liebau. Here we staid
eight or ten days for the Basha of Buda's Answer, whether he would give liberty
to two French Gentlemen, to pass with their Train through his Garrison or no;
which being returned such as we could desire, we Embarked at Comorra in a sort
of Bigrantines well fitted for defense and convenience.

From Vienna to Javarin we lay three days upon the water, by reason of the
great turnings and winding of the Danaw. Leaving Javarin we lay at Comorra; and
from Commorra we rowed to Buda in two days. For the Road by Land is seldom
traveled in regard that the Frontiers of both Empires are full of Thieves and
Boothaylers. In fair weather you may go from Buda to Belgrade in less than
eight days, but we were forced to stay longer upon the Water, in regard of the
Cold weather.

It is the custom in Hungary, that in all Roads little frequented by Strangers,
not to take any Money of the Travelers; For the Burghers lodge and entertain
them civilly, for which the Burgo Master at the years end repays them out of
the public stock. But besides, that they are not troubled with many
Passengers; Hungary, which is one of the best Countries in Europe, affords
provision at so cheap a rate, that to Belgrade it costs us not above two Crowns
a day for fourteen people.

Buda stands upon the right hand of the Danaw, about half an hours traveling
from the River. The Basha being advised of our arrival, sent his Squire with
led Horses, and several slaves in very good Liveries to conduct us to the Town.
And though we stayed twelve days before we could speak with him, by reason of
his being sick at that time, yet he allowed us a fair provision of Mutton,
Pullets, Rice, Butter, and Bread, and two Sequins a day for small expenses. He
was a comely person, and of a handsome carriage and at our departure, he sent six
Caleshes with two Spahi's to conduct us to Balgrade, with order to defray our
expenses, which would by no means be accepted,

Coming to Belgrade we found the Sangiai as rude, as we had found the Basha
civil before. For he made a ridiculous demand of two hundred Ducats a Head, and
for fifteen days prolonged the contest. But at length I so terrified him, by
threatening to send our Complaints to the Ottaman Port, of his ill usage of two
Gentlemen, Kinsmen to the Ambassador of France, that he was contented with
fifty Ducats for all. Belgrade is situated upon a point of Land, where two
great Rivers, the Danaw and the Sava meet; and is furnished with Wine, Bread,
and all sorts of Provisions at a cheap rate.

From Belgrade we took some saddle Horses, some Coaches for Adrianople, as
every one liked best. We passed through Sophia, a large and well peopled City,
the Metropolis of the Ancient Bulgarians, and the residence of the Basha of
Romeli. In it stands a fair Mosquee, which has been a Christian Church, built
with so much Art, that three men may go up to the top of the Steeple, and not
see one another.

From Sophia we came to Philippoli, between which Town and Adrianople we met
with two Troops of Tartars well mounted. When they saw us, they made a Lane for
us to pass through them, with a design most certainly to have fallen upon us;
since they could not hope to do any good upon us, but by surprise and number;
for they were ill provided of Weapons, and we rarely well well Armed. Thereupon
we alighted and Barricado'd up our selves with our Chariots. In the mean time
we sent our Saphi's to the Commander of those Tartars, to tell them, we would
not stir 'till they were gone, and that being Soldiers as they were, they
could not hope for any booty from us. The Commander answered, that he had
divided his men in that manner only to do us Honor; but since we desired they
should be gone, they requested us but to send them a little Tobacco. A boon
which we readily granted them, and so we passed on.

We came to Adrianople the three and twentieth day after we parted from
Belgrade. Adrianople takes its name from the Emperor Adrian, being formerly
called Orestes. It is pleasantly situated at the mouth of three Rivers that
throw themselves into the Archipelago. The old Town is not very big, but the
Turks daily enlarge the Suburbs, being a place which the Grand Signors very
much delight in for the pleasures of Hunting and Hawking, especially, at the
wild Duck and Heron.

The fifth day after we departed from Adrianople, and the forty second after we
departed from Vienna, we happily arrived at Constantinople, and crossing
through the City over to Galata, went to the Ambassador's House. While we
stayed there to winter, he made a small Voyage to the Dardanells, to the Ruins
of Troy, where we beheld nothing but Stones, not worth the while of going so
far to see. Another day we took three Barks and Sailed to Calcedon, that lies
upon the Sea. There is in it a very ancient Church; and they showed us the Room
where the Council was held, with the same Chairs which were then made use of.
Now it is only a Monestary, where two Bishops after they had showed us what
they could, handsomely entertained us.

Then we went to view Pompey's Pillar at the mouth of the Black Sea. Concerning
the Channel of which Sea, I must make one Observation; that though there be no
part of the Sea but has one Current, yet this has two quite contrary one to
another. That part next to Europe carries the Vessel to the Black Sea; and that
next Asia brings it back again to the Mediterranean. So that you have no more
to do but to cross over from one Shore to the other.

The Winter being over, the two French Gentlemen pursued their Voyage for
Alexandretta. But for my part, I having another design in my head, stayed at
Constantinople, in expectation of of a Caravan, which the people told me from
Month to Month was coming. I was then ignorant, and did not understand that
every year there were five or six Caravans that went from Bursa. Besides, that
sometime eight or ten Merchants traveling together, might go safe to Ispahan.
Which ignorence of mine made me stay longer than I intended. At length, after I
had continued eleven Months in Constantinople, I departed with a fair and
numerous Caravan for Ispahan, which was the first time I traveled into Asia.
After that I made five others, wherein, I had time better to understand the
Qualities of the Countries, and the Genius of the People. The three last times
I went beyond Gauges, to the Island of Java; so that for the space of sorty
years, I have traveled above sixty thousand Leagues by Land; never returning
but once into Europe by Sea. And thus in my six Voyages, and by traveling
different Roads, I had the leisure and opportunity to see all Turkey, all
Persia, and all India, particularly the famous Diamond Mines, where no European
had been before me. Of these three great Empires therefore have I resolved to
make an ample and exact Description: and I will begin with the several Roads
which may be taken from Paris into Persia.

Place the CUTS as they are Paged.
PERSIAN Travels.
THe Spear, Page 13. Erivan, p. 15: Money of Persia, p. 51. Bagdat, p 87.
Comouchs, p. 129. Persian Seals, p. 178, 179. Gomrom, p. 257. Candahar, p. 258.
[9 Cuts.]

INDIAN Travels.
LArins, Money of the Great Mogul, of a King, and two Raja's Page 2, Pieces of
Gold called Pagods, p. 5. Money of Beda, Pera, Achen. Siam, p. 7. China Money,
p. 8. Japon Money, p. 9. Silver Ingots of Japon, and representing the 12 Signs,
p. 10. Portugals Muscovy, p. 13. Stones, Diamonds, p. 148. 2 Cuts more, p. 149.
Balais Rubies, p. 150. Pearls, p. ^50. Musk Cat, p. 153. Faquirs Tree, p. 166.
Faquir, p. 167.

[14 Cuts.]

These Computations are made, supposing a French Crown to be in value Sterling
54 pence, or 4 s. 6 d. the reputed Par, and that 12 Deniers make a Sous, 20
Sous a Liver; whereof 3 make an Escu. By which Computation 10 Sous is in value
9 d. and 10 Deniers 3 q.
Persian Money. French. English. l. s. d. q. A Bassi 18 Sous, 6 Deniers 0 01 04
2 3 Abassi's and 1 Chayet 1 Ecu 0 04 06 2 Mamoudi's 1 Abassi 0 01 04 0 2
Chayets 1 Mamoudi 0 00 08 0 Casbeke Simple 5 Deniers, 1 Halfpenny 0 00 01 2
41/100 Double Casbeke 11 Deniers 0 00 03 0 81/100 Basti 1 2 Double Casbekes 0
00 06 1 74/100 Chayets 1 5 Double Casbekes 0 00 04 0 1 Or 5 Abassi's 0 06 11 1
1 Toman 46 Livers, 1 Denier, Piaster 3 09 00 0 9/25

Indian Money. French. English. l. s. d. q. LArins 5 1 Ecu French, within 8
Sous 0 03 10 3 Demi-Larins 10 Half as much 0 01 11 1 Roupy of Gold 21 Livers 1
11 06 Roupy of Gold 30 Sous 0 02 03 Pecha 6 Deniers 0 00 00 1 Half Roupy 16
Sous 0 01 02 1 Quarter of a Roupy 7 Sous, 6 Deniers 0 00 06 3 Pagods
Demi-Pistol (in Gold a Pistol is 11 Livers) 0 08 03 Fano's 6 1 Ecu 0 04 06
Cheda Money 1. 2. 2 Sous 0 00 01 3 Cheda 3. 4. 4 Deniers 0 00 00 1 Achen Gold
16 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 01 03 Macassar Gold 23 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 01 09 1 Camboya
Silver 4 Sous 0 00 03 2 Siam Gold 7 Livers, 1 Sous 0 10 06 3 Siam Silver 32
Sous, 4 Deniers 0 02 05 0 Asem Silver 23 Sous 0 01 08 2 Tipoura Silver 22 Sous
0 01 07 3 Arakan Money 21 Sous 0 01 06 3 Pegu Silver 20 Sous, 6 Deniers 0 01 06
1 Gold Fanos 15. 1 Real 0 04 04 Asem Fanos 22. 1 Ecu 0 04 06 China Goltschut
1350 Livers 101 05 00 China Silver pieces 59 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 04 05 2 Japon
Gold* No 1. 87 Livers, 10 Sous 6 11 03 No. 2. 3. 29 Livers, 31 Sous, 4 Deniers
2 05 10 1 Japon Silver*pieces 30 Sous 0 02 03 Silver Ingots, No 1. 24 Livers,
10 Sous 1 16 09 2. 8 Livers, 10 Sous, 7 Deniers 0 12 09 2 1/10 3. 4 Livers, 5
Sous, 5 Deniers 0 06 04 3 4. 3 Livers, 10 Sous, 11 Deniers 0 05 03 3 3/10 5. 3
Livers, 8 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 05 01 3 6. 1 Liver, 5 Sous, 1 Denier 0 01 10 2 3/10
7. 1 Liver, 9 Deniers 0 01 06 2 7/10 8. 16 Sous, 4 Deniers 0 01 02 2 A Tell 4
Livers, 5 Sous 0 06 04 2 Moscovy Gold 20 Sous, 1 Denier, 1 Halfpenny 0 01 06 0
(...) Moscovy Silver 1 Sous 0 00 00 3

THE CONTENTS OF THE Persian Travels.
The First BOOK of Monsieur TAVERNER's Persian Travels. Of the several Roads
from Paris to *spahan the chief City of Persia, through the Northern Provinces
of Turkey.
Chap. I. OF the Roads from France to the hither parts of Asia. and the places
from whence they usually set out for Ispahan. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Road from
Constantinople to Ispahan, which the Author kept in his first Travels into
Persia. 3 Chap. III. A Continuation of the Road from Constantinople to Ispahan,
from the Borders of Persia to Erivan. 10 Chap. IV. A continuation of the same
Road from Erivan to Tauris. 15 Chap. V. A continuation of the
Constantinopolitan Road from Tauris to Ispahan, through Ardeui and Casbin. 24
Chap. VI. The ordinary Road from Tauris to Ispahan, through Zangan, Sultany,
and other places. 26 Chap. VII. Of the Road from Smyrna to Ispahan, through
Natolia. 32 Chap. VIII. How the Author was robbed near Tocat, and of a certain
sort of a rare and fine Wool, which he first brought into France. 40 Chap. IX.
Of the Road from Kerman, to Ispahan; and the fortune of Nazar Mahomet-Ali Beg.
42 Chap. X. Of the Caravansera's, and Government of the Caravans. 45 Chap. XI.
Of the breeding, nature, and several sorts of Camels. 49 Chap. XII. Of the
Coyns and Money of Persia. 50
The Second BOOK of the Persian Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER, containing the
several Roads from Paris to Ispahan, the Capital City of Persia, through the
Southern Provinces of Turkey, and through the Deserts.
Chap. I. THe second Voyage of the Author from Paris to Ispahan, and first of
his Embarking at Marseilles for Alexandretta. 53 Chap. II. The Description of
Aleppo* now the Capital City of Syria. 57 Chap. III. Of the several Roads in
general from Aleppo to Ispahan, and particularly of the Road through the Great
Desert. Page 60 Chap. IV. Of the Road from Aleppo to Ispahan, through
Mesopotamia and Assyria, which I traveled in my third Voyage to the Indies. 66
Chap. V. A Continuation of the Road from Nineveh to Ispahan, together with the
Story of an Ambassador called Dominico de Santis. 72 Chap. VI. Of the Road
which the Author kept, when he traveled the fourth time into Asia, to go from
Paris to Ormus. And first of his Voyage from Marseilles to Alexandretta. 78
Chap. VII. A Continuation of the Road which the Author kept in the fourth
Voyage into Asia, and particularly of his passage upon the Tigris from Nineveh
to Babylon. 82 Chap. VIII. A Continuation of the Road from Bagdat to Balsara,
and of the Religion of the Christians of St. John. 87 Chap. IX. A Continuation
of the Road from Balsara to Ormus. 94 Chap. X. Of the Author's first Voyage,
and the Adventures of the four Frenchmen. 95
The Third BOOK of the Persian Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER, containing the
Author's Sixth and Last Voyages, and the Roads through Turkey into Persia,
through the Northern Provinces of Europe. With a Description of several
Countries, lying upon the Black and Caspian Seas.
Chap. I. OF the Author's sixth and last Voyage from his setting out of Paris,
to his Landing at Smyrna. 99 Chap. II. A Continuation of the Author's sixth
Voyage, as he traveled from Smyrna to Ispahan. 102 Chap. III. The Road from
Aleppo to Tauris, through Diarbequir and Van. 103 Chap. IV. Another Road from
Aleppo to Tauris, through Gezire and other places. 108 Chap. V. The Road from
Aleppo to Ispahan through the small Desert, and through Kengavea. 109 Chap. VI.
Another Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, by the Euxine or Black Sea; with
some Remarks upon the principal Cities thereabouts. 113 Chap. VII. The Road
from Warsow to Ispahan, over the Black Sea, and from Ispahan to Mosco; with the
names and principal Cities and Islands of Turkey, according to the vulgar
pronunciation, as they are called in the Language of the Turks. 115 Chap. VIII.
Remakrs upon the Trade of the Island of Candy, and the principal Isles of the
Archipelago; as also upon some of the Cities of Greece adjoining; with a
particular Relation of the present condition of the Grand Signor's Galleys,
belonging as well to the Isles as to the Contine^t. 118 Chap. IX. A Relation of
the present state of Georgia. 123 Chap. X. A Relation of the present state of
Mengrelia. 125 Chap. XI. Of Comania, Circassia, and of certain people which
they call Kalmouchs. 126 Chap. XII. Of the Ceremonies and Customs of the people
of Comania and Circassia. 129 Chap. XIII. Of the lesser Tartars, called
Nogaies, bord'ring upon Comania. 132
The Fourth BOOK of the Travels of Monsieur Tavernier, being a Description of
Persia.
Chap. I. OF the extent of Persia, and its Division into Provinces. 141 Chap.
II. O^ the Flowers and Fruits of Persia, of Turquoises and Pearls. 144 Chap.
III. Of the Beasts of Service, of the Fish and Fowl of Persia. 145 Chap. IV. Of
the manner of Building in Persia. 147 Chap. V. A Description of Ispahan, the
chief City of the Kingdom and Dominion of the King of Persia. 148 Chap. VI. Of
Zulpha, a City separated from Ispahan by the River Senderou. 155 Chap. VII. Of
the Religion of the Persians; of the great Feast of Hocen and Hussein, and the
Camel Feast. 160 Chap. VIII. Of the Religion of the Gaurs, the Relics of the
ancient Persians, Adorers of Fire. 163 Chap. IX. Of the Religion of the
Armenians, and of their principal Ceremonies; and how the Armenians Consecrate
and Administer the Sacrament. 169 Chap. X. Of the Ordination of their
Priesthood; and their Austerities. 170 Chap. XI. Of their Baptism. 171. Chap.
XII. Of the Marriage of the Armenians. 172 Chap. XIII. How the Armenians Bury
their Dead. 173 Chap. XIV. Examples of the Constancy of the Armenians, in
maintaining their Religion against the Persecutions of the Mahometans. 174
Chap. XV. Of the Author's Reception at the Court of Persia in his sixth and
last Voyage, and what he did there during his stay at Ispahan. 177 Chap. XVI.
Of the Honors and Presents which the Author. received from the King of Persia.
179 Chap. XVII. How the King was pleased to divertise himself in the Author's
Company. 181
The Fifth BOOK of the Persian Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER, being a Politic
and Historical Description of Persia, with the Roads from Ispahan to Ormus.
Chap. I. OF the Genealogy of the Kings of Persia, of the last Ra^e. Chap. II.
Of certain particular Actions which denote the Virtues and Vices of the Kings
of Persia, from Sha-Abas the first, to Sha-Soliman the present King. And first
of Sha-Abas the Great. 202 Chap. III. Of what felt out most memorable in the
Reign of Sha-S^fi the first; and particularly of the Death of Iman-Kouli Can,
and his three Sons. Page 198 Chap. IV The Tragical and memorable Story of Ralph
Sadler, Native of Zurich, in the Reign of Sha-Sefi, who had retained him in his
Service. 207 Chap. V. Of some particulars under the Reign of Sha Abas the
second. 199 Chap. VI. Of the misfortune of Mahomet-Beg, in the Reign of
Sha-Abas the second. 212 Chap. VII. Of the Rebellion of the Prince of Jasque, a
Vassal to the King of Persia, in the Reigns of Sha-Sefi the first, and Sha-Abas
the second. 217 Chap. VIII. Observations upon the Reign of Sha-Soliman the
present King. 218 Chap. IX. Of the Government of Persia. 219 Chap. X. Of the
first of the three Orders or States of Persia, which comprehends the King's
Household, the Kans or Governors of Provinces, and the Soldiery. 221 Chap. XI.
Of the second Order containing all those that belong to the Ecclesiastical Law,
and their Courts of Justice; and in general of all the Gown-men, such as are
chiefly the Officers of the Chamber of Accounts. 226 Chap. XII. Of the third
Estate of the Kingdom, comprehending the Tradesmen and Merchants; as also the
Trades, Manufactures, and Commodities of Persia. 229 Chap. XIII. Of the Justice
and Policy of the Persians. 232 Chap. XIV. Of the Manners and Customs of the
Persians. 234 Chap. XV. Of the Diseases of Persia, and the manner of Curing
them. 239 Chap. XVI. Of the Division of Time among the Persians. 240 Chap.
XVII. Of the Feasts and ordinary Diet of the Persians. 241 Chap. XVIII. Of the
Marriages of the Persians. 243 Chap. XIX. Of the Death and Burial of the
Persians. 244 Chap. XX. The Author departs from Ispahan to Ormus, and describes
the Road to Schiras. 245 Chap. XXI. Of the City of Schiras. 247 Chap. XXII. A
Continuation of the Road from Ispahan to (...) from Schiras to Bander-Abassi.
251 Chap. XXIII. Of the Island of Ormus, and of Bander-Abassi. 225 Chap. XXIV.
Of the Roads by Land from Casbin to Ispahan, to the Frontiers of the
Territories of the Great Mogul through Candahar. 257
THE CONTENTS OF THE Indian Travels.
The Figures of the Pieces of Gold, Silver, and Copper; and of the sorts of
Shells and Almonds, that pass for Money over all Asia.
THe Money of Arabia. Page 1 The Money current under the Dominions of the Great
Mogul. 2 The Money of a King and two Raja's, all three Tributaries to the Great
Mogul. 3 Pieces of Gold called Pagods, which are current in the Territories of
the King of Golconda, the King of Visapour, the Great Raja of Carnatica, the
Raja of Velouche, and at the Diamond Mines. 4 The Money which the English and
Hollanders Coin in the Indies. 5 The Money of the King of Cheda and Pera. 6 The
Money of Gold and Tin of the King of Achen, with the Money in Gold, Coined by
the King of Macassar, and the Celebes. And the Silver and Copper Money of the
King of Camboya. 7 The Money in Gold, Silver, and Copper, of the King of Siam,
Ibid. The Gold and Silver Money of the King of Asem, Tipoura, Arakin, and Pegu.
8 Lumps or Pieces of Gold and Silver, which go for Money in the Kingdom of
China, and the Kingdom of Tunquin. Ibid. The Gold and Silver Money of Japon. 9
The Portraiture of the Silver Ingots of Japon, which go for Money. Ibid. Money
that represents the Figures of the twelve Signs; and which were Coined during
the twenty four hours, that Jehan-Guir, King of the Indies, permitted Queen
Nourmahall, his Wife, to Reign in his stead. 10 The Gold, Silver, and Copper
Money, which the Portugals Coin in the East Indies. 12 The Gold and Silver
Money of Muscovy. 13
The First BOOK of the INDIAN Travels. What Roads to take in Traveling from
Ispahan to Agra, from Agra to Dehly and Gehanabat, where the Great Mogul
resides at present: And how to Travel also to the Court of the King of
Golconda, to the King of Visapour, and to many other places in the Indies.
Chap. I. THe Road from Ispahan to Agra through Gomron, where is particularly
described the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Surat. Page 15 Chap. II. Of the
Customs, Money, Exchange, Weight, and Measures of the Indians. 17 Chap. III. Of
their Carriages, and the manner of traveling in India. 27 Chap. IV. The Road
from Surat to Agra, through Brampour and S^ronge. 30 Chap. V. The Road from
Surat to Agra, through Amadabat. 36 Chap. VI. The Road from Ispahan to Agra,
through Candahar. 43 Chap. VII. The continuance of the same Road from Dehly to
Agra. 48 Chap. VIII. The Road from Agra to Patna and Daca, Cities in the
Province of Bengala, and of the quarrel which the Author had with Cha-Est-Kan,
the King's Uncle. 51 Chap. IX. The Road from Surat to Golconda. 60 Chap. X. Of
the Kingdom of Golconda, and the Wars which it has maintained for some few
years last past. 63 Chap. XI. The Road from Golconda to Maslipatan, or
Masalipatan. 69 Chap. XII. The Road from Surat to Goa, and from Goa to
Golconda, through Visapour. 71 Chap. XIII. Observations upon the present State
of the City of Goa. 74 Chap. XIV. What the Author did during his stay at Goa,
the last time he went thither, in the year 1648. 78 Chap. XV. The Story of
Father Ephraim, and how he was put into the Inquisition at Goa by a surprisal.
85 Chap. XVI. The Road from Goa to Maslipatan through Cochin, here described in
the Story of the taking of that City by the Hollanders. 88 Chap. XVII. The
passage by Sea from Ormus to Maslipatan. 90 Chap. XVIII. The Road from
Maslipatan to Gondicot, a City and Garrison in the Province of Carnatica; and
of the dealings which the Author had with Mirgimola, who commanded the King of
Golconda's Army. With a discourse at large concerning Elep hants. 91 Chap. XIX.
The Road from Gondicot to Golconda. 100 Chap. XX. The Author's return from
Surat to Ormus. 105
The Second BOOK of the INDIAN Travels. Containing an Historical and Political
Description of the Empire of the Great Mogul.
Chap. I. A Relation to the last Wars of Indostan, which gives an insight into
the present Estate of the Empire and Court of the Moguls. 106 Chap. II. Of the
Sickness and supposed Death of Cha-Jehan King of India, and the Rebellion of
the Princes his Sons. Page 108 Chap. III. Of the Imprisonment of Cha-Jehan, and
how he was punished by Aurenge-Zebe his third Son, for the injustice he had
done Prince Boulaki his Nephew, the Grand child of Jehan-Guir, to whom as to
the Son of the Eldest Son, the Empire of the Mogul belonged. 111 Chap. IV. Of
the flight of Dara-Cha to the Kingdom of Scindi and Guzerat, of the second
battle which he fought against Aurenge-Zebe, his being taken Prisoner, and
Death. 114 Chap. V. How Aurenge-Zebe caused himself to be declared King, and of
the flight of Sultan-Sujah. 116 Chap. VI. Of the Imprisonment of
Sultan-Mahomed, Aurenge-Zebe's Eldest Son; and of Sultan Soliman Chekour,
Eldest Son of Dara-Cha. 117 Chap. VII. Of the beginning of Aurenge-Zebe's
Reign, and the Death of Cha-Jehan his Father. 120 Chap. VIII. Of the
preparations against the Feast of the Great Mogul, when he is weighed solemnly
every year. Of the Richness of his Thrones, and the magnificence of his Court.
122 Chap. IX. Some other observations upon the Court of the Great Mogul. 124
Chap. X. Of the Commodities which are brought, as well out of the Dominions of
the Great Mogul, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visasapour, and other
Neighboring Territories. 126 Chap. XI. Of Diamonds, and the Mines and Rivers
where they are found; and first of the Author's Journey to the Mines of
Raolconda. 134 Chap. XII. The Author's Journey to the other Mines; and how they
find the Diamonds there. 137 Chap. XIII. A Continuation of the Author's Travels
to the Diamond Mines. 139 Chap. XIV. Of the diversity of Weights used at the
Diamond Mines; of the pieces of Gold and Silver there current; and the Rule
which they observe to know the price of Diamonds. 140 Chap. XV. The Rule to
know the just price and value of a Diamond of what weight soever, from three to
a hundred, and upwards; a Secret known to very few people in Europe. 142 Chap.
XVI. Of Colored Stones, and the places where they are found. 137 Chap. XVII.
Of Pearls, and the places where they fish for them. 145 Chap. XVIII. How the
Pearls are bred in the Oysters, and how they fish for them, and at what time.
146 Chap. XIX. Observations upon the fairest and largest Diamonds and Rubies,
which the Author has seen in Europe and Asia, represented according to the
Figures in the Plates; as also upon those which the Author sold to the King,
upon his last return from the Indies; with the Figure of a large Topaz, and the
fairest Pearls in the World. 148 Chap. XX. The forms of twenty Rubies which the
Author sold to the King, upon his last return from the Indies. The first part
of the Plate shows the weight, extent, and thickness of every Stone. 149 Chap.
XXI. Of the Coral, and yellow Amber, and the places where it is found. 151 Chap.
XXII. Of Musk and Bezoar, and some other Medicinal Stones. 1^3 Chap. XXIII. Of
the places where they find their Gold, both in Asia and America. 156 Chap.
XXIV. The Relation of a notable piece of Treachery, whereby the Author was
abused when he Embarked at Gomrom for Surat. 157
The Third BOOK of the INDIAN Travels.
Chap. I. OF the particular Religion of the Mahometans in the East Indies. Page
159 Chap. II. Of the Faquirs, or poor Mohammedan Volunteers in the East Indies.
160 Chap. III. Of the Religion of the Gentiles, or Idolatrous Indians. 161
Chap. IV. Of the Kings and Idolatrous Princes of Asia. 163 Chap. V. What the
Idolaters believe touching a Divinity. 164 Chap. VI. Of the Faquirs, or poor
Volunteers among the Indians, and of their Penances. 165 Chap. VII. Of the
Idolaters Belief touching the State of the Soul after Death. 197 Chap. VIII. Of
the Custom among the Idolaters to Burn the Bodies of their Dead. 168 Chap. IX.
How the Wives are Burnt in India, with the Bodies of their deceased Husbands.
169 Chap. X. Remarkable Stories of Women that have been Burnt after their
Husbands decease. 171 Chap. XI. Of the most Celebrated Pagods of the Idolaters
in India. 173 Chap. XII. A Continuation of the Description of the Principal
Pagods of the Indian Idolaters. 177 Chap. XIII. Of the Pilgrimages of the
Idolaters to their Pagod. 179 Chap. XIV. Of diverse Customs of the Indian
Idolater. Ibid. Chap. XV. Of the Kingdom of Boutan, whence comes the Musk, the
Good Rhubarb, and some Furs. 182 Chap. XVI. Of the Kingdom of Eipra. 186 Chap.*
XVII. Of the Kingdom of Asem. 187 Chap. XVIII. Of the Kingdom of Siam. 189
Chap. XIX. Of the Kingdom of Macassar, and the Ambassadors which the Hollanders
sent into China. 191 Chap. XX. The Author persues his Travels into the East,
and Embarks at Mengrelia for Batavia. The danger he was in upon the Sea; and
his arrival in the Island of Ceylan. 194 Chap. XXI. The Authors departure from
Ceylan, and his arrival at Batavia. 195 Chap. XXII. The Author goes to visit
the King of Bantam, and relates several Adventures upon that Occasion. 196
Chap. XXIII. The Author's return to Batavia. His Revisiting the King of Bantam.
And a Relation of several extravagancies of certain Faquirs in their return
from Mecca. 199 Chap. XXIV. Of the War of the Hollanders, with the Emperor of
Java. 202 Chap. XXV. The Author Buries his Brother; and is again quarreled
withal by the General of his Council. 203 Chap. XXVI. The Author Embarks in a
Dutch Vessel, to return into Europe. 204 Chap. XXVII. The Holland Fleet arrives
at St. Helens. The Description of the Island. 207
THE FIRST BOOK OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER'S Persian Travels, Containing the several
ROADS From PARIS to ISPAHAN the Chief City of PERSIA.
Through the Northern Provinces of TURKEY.
CHAP. I.
Of the Roads from France to the hither parts of Asia, and the Places from
whence they usually set out for Ispahan.
A Man cannot travel in Asia, as they do in Europe; nor at the same Hours, nor
with the same ease. There are no weekly Coaches or Wagons from Town to Town;
besides, that the Soil of the Countries is of several natures. In Asia you
shall meet with several Regions untilled and unpeopl'd, either through the
badness of the Climate and Soil, or the sloth of the Inhabitants, who rather
choose to live miserably, than to work. There are vast Deserts to cross, and
very dangerous, both for want of Water, and the Robberies that the Arabs daily
commit therein. There are no certain Stages, or Inns to entertain Travelers.
The best Inns, especially in Turkey, are the Tents which you carry along with
you, and your Hosts are your Servants, that get ready those Victuals which you
have bought in good Towns. You set up your Tent in the open Field, or in any
Town where there is no Inn: and a good shift too in temperate weather, when the
Sun is not too hot, or that it does not rain. In the Carvansera's or Inns which
are more frequent in Persia than in Turkey, there are persons that furnish you
with Provisions, and the first come are best served. As for Turkey it is full
of Thieves, that keep in Troops together, and way-lay the Merchants upon the
Roads, and if they be not very well guarded will certainly rob them: nay many
times murder them. A mischief prevented in Persia by the well ordered
convenience which is provided for Travelers. To avoid these dangers and
inconveniences, you are obliged to stay for the Caravans, that go for Persia or
the Indies, which never set out but at certain times, and from certain places.

These Caravans set out from Constantinople, Smyrna, and Aleppo. And it is from
one of these Cities that a Traveller must set out, that intends for Persia,
whether he keeps company with the Caravan, or will hazard himself alone with a
Guide, as once I did.

I will begin with Constantinople, from whence you may go either by Land or
Sea: and either by Land or Sea there are two ways to go. The first of these by
Land is that which I took with Monsieur Chapes and Monsieur St. Liebau, By the
way take notice, that Vienna is the halfway near-upon between Paris and
Constantinople. The second Road is less frequented, but is less inconvenient
and less dangerous: for there are need of the Emperor's Pasports, which he
does not grant very freely: besides that here is no fear of the Pirates of
Tunis or Argier, as when you embarque from Marseilles or Ligorn. If you intend
this way, you must go to Venice; from Venice to Ancona, from whence several
Barques are bound every Week for Ragusa. From Ragusa you sail along by the
Shore to Durazzo a Sea*Port of Albania; from whence you travel the rest of the
way by Land. From Durazzo to Albanopolis, distant three days journey, from
thence to Monestier, just as far; from Monestier you may either take the left
hand through Sophia, and Philippopolis, or the right through Inguischer, three
days journey from Monestier, and ten from Adrianople, from whence in five days
you reach Constantinople through Selivrea.

This last way is part by Sea and part by Land: but there are two other ways
altogether by Land, above and below Italy, according to the distinction which
Antiquity made of the two Seas that almost encompass it. You may embark at
Venice, and sailing along the Gulf which is free from Pirates, you must double
the Cape of Matapan, the most Southern Point of all Europe, to enter into the
Archipelago. The other way is from Marseilles or Ligorn, from whence several
Vessels are bound for the East. The safest way is to go along with the English
or Holland Fleets, that usually arrive at Ligorn either in the Spring or in
Autumn, and part just against the Morea, to the several parts whither they are
bound. As the Wind serves, those Fleets sometimes make Sail between the Island
of Elba and Italy, and by the Tower of Messina* sometimes below Sicily and
Sardigna, within sight of Malta. Thus you must come within sight of Candy,
whether you are bound for Constantinople, Smyrna, or Alexandretta, from whence
it is but three days journey to Aleppo: from one of which three Cities, you
must necessarily begin your journey, if you intend for Persia.

Some take Egypt in their way, using through Alexandria, Cairo, and Damiata,
whence several Vessels are bound for Joppa; or St. John's of Era, which is not
far off: from thence to Jerusalem or Damascus, and from thence to Bagdat or
Babylon.

If you will venture in a single Vessel not staying for the Fleets, you may
hire a Vessel from Ligorn to Naples, from Naples to Messina, keeping along by
the Shore, and lying a shore every night. I took this way, and went from
Messina to Syracuse, where are to be seen the most remarkable footsteps of
Antiquity. It Is like a City under ground, and near to it is a great Rock which
has been made hollow, at the bottom whereof if a man whisper, they that are at
the top may hear him. They call this Rock Dionysius the Tyrant's Ear: for being
at the top, he easily understood what the People said of him below; and
discovered the Counsels of the chief Men of Syracuse, whom he kept prisoners
there. Syraecuse has nothing of that splendor which renowned it when it was
the Mistress of all Sicily, and when Greece, jealous of her power, made War
upon her. But the Soil is very plentiful, and the Galleys of Malta very often
take in their Provisions there. Near the City is a fair Convent of Capuchin
Friars, going out of which, you may walk for half an hour between two very high
Rocks, where there are several little Cells with every one a Garden, where the
Friars sometimes retire, and it is certainly one of the most pleasing Solitudes
in the World.

From Syracuse I went to Malta, where you must wait for some Ship that is bound
for the East.

CHAP. II.
Of the Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, which the Author kept in his first
Travels into Persia.
IT is seldom that any Caravans go from Constantinople into Persia; but from
Bursa they go every two Months: Bursa is the Capital City of Bithynia, not
above three days journey from Constantinople, or a little more. These two Roads
meet at Chabangi, where you may be from Bursa in two Days: and so I will only
speak of the Roads from Constantinople to Ispahan. This Journey is to be
undertaken either with the Caravan of Camels, or else ten or twelve Men in a
Company, well mounted and well armed.

From Constantinople you cross over to Scutari, upon the Coast of Asia.

Setting out from Scutari, the first days journey is very pleasant, over Fields
gayly painted with Flowers in their season. At first for some time together,
one both sides the way, you see nothing but fair Sepulchers with their
Pyramids, and you may easily discern the Women's Monuments from the Men's. For
there is a Turbant upon the Pyramid of the Men's Sepulcher, but the Pyramids of
the Women's Monuments are trimmed with the Head-Attire which is worn by the
Women of the Country. That Evening you must lie at Cartali, a Village of
Bithynia, the next Day at Gebisa, anciently Lybissa, famous for the Tomb of
Hannibal. In that place there are two good Inns, and two fair Fountains.

The third day you come to Isnich, which is thought to be the ancient Nicea;
one part of the City is built upon the descent of a Hill, the other part upon a
Plain that reaches to the Sea, and makes the Golf of Isnich. The Haven consists
of two Moles made of Freestone, and three great Enclosures encompassed with
Walls, which serve instead of so many Arsenals, wherein there are Store houses
full of large Timber, for building Houses and Galleys. The Country round about
being an excellent place for Hunting, and the Soil bearing rare Fruits, and
rich in Wine, caused Sultan Amuratt to build a Seraglio in the highest part of
the Town, from whence there is a prospect at the same time both over the Sea
and the Country. The Jews inhabit the greatest part of the Town, dealing
chiefly in Timber and Co^^. When the Wind ferves, you may go from
Constantinople to Isnich in seven or eight Hours, there being no danger in the
passage.

The fourth Day you stay at Chabangi, a small Town built upon the side of a
Lake called Chaban Gigul, where there are two Inns. From the beginning of the
Lake for two Leagues together you travel partly over Mountains, partly by the
Lakeside, where in some places the Horse will be up to the Belly. This Lake is
not above ten Leagues in compass; but it yields great store of large Fish,
insomuch that I have bought a Pike two Foot and a half long for three Sous.
Many Emperors have had a design to make a Cut out of this Lake into the Sea,
for the more easy transporting to Constantinople the Timber which grows upon
the Mountains near the Lake. And if the Grand Vizier, who by a Miracle died in
his Bed, and left his Son successor to his Employment, had lived some Years
longer, he had no question added this to the rest of those famous Wotks that
eternized his Memory.

Departing from Chabangi, you come to lie at Night upon the Bank of a River
called Zacarat, which runs Northward and falls into the Black Sea. It is a
River plentiful in Fish, and you cross over it with a wooden Bridge. There is
neither Town, nor Inn in that place; but a League from the River is a great
Town called Ada, the chiefest part of the Inhabitants whereof are Armemians.
Thither we sent for excellent good Wine, and other necessary refreshments.

From that River to Cancoli, where you lie the next Night, and have your choice
of four Inns; you travel all the day in the Mershes, over wooden Bridges and
Causeys.

Tuskebasar is the next place, a small Village with two Inns. From thence to
Cargueslar, a great Town, with one Inn, built upon a River, where there is
great store of Fish taken, which the Inhabitants call Bourma-balouky, that is
to say, the Fish with the long Nose: It is speckl'd like a Trout; but of a
better taste, and more esteemed. Polia or Polis, is a City seated at the foot of
several Mountains, the Inhabitants whereof are for the most part Greeks. These
Mountains are very high, and extend themselves along the Road for Two days
journey. They are full of several sorts of Trees, which are straight and tall
like Firr-Trees: and divided by so many Torrents, which it would be hard to
pass over, where it not for the Bridges that the Grand Vizier Kuprigli caused
to be built. In regard the soil of these Mountains is very fat, there would be
no drawing for the Horses after great Rains or the melting of the Snow, had not
the same Vizier caused all the Ways to be Paved and Pitched, even as far as
Constantinople. A Work of great charge, in regard there is not a Flint in any
part of the ^ountain, and for that the Stone is to fetched a great way off.
There are abundance of Pigeons as big as Hens, and of an excellent taste, which
not only pleased our Appetites, but afforded us very good Pastime to shoot
them. Between the City and the Mountain, there is a Plain about two Leagues in
length; near to which, there glides a River that waters it, and very much
contributes to its fertility. It is an excellent Soil, and produces all things
necessary for humane Life. Upon each side of the way I counded above Twenty
Churchyards* For it is the custom of the Turks to bury near the Highway,
believing that the Travelers pray for the Souls of the deceased. Upon every
Tomb, there is to be seen a Marble Pillar, half fixed in the Earth: of which
Pillars there are so great a number, of various Colors, that it is from thence
conjectured, that there were a very great number of Christian Churches in
Polia, and the parts thereabouts. They assured me likewise, that there was a
vast quantity of these Pillars in the Villages up and down in the Mountains
which the Turks every day pull down and set up their Tombs.

Bendourlour is a Village in the Mountains where there is one Inn.

Gerradar is beyond the Mountains, where there are two Inns.

Cargeslar has two Inns, and lies in a good Country.

Caragaler is a Town where there are two Inns.

Cosizar is a Village with one Inn.

Tocia is a great City situated upon rising Hills, that join to very high
Mountains. Upon the Winter West, there appears a fair Champain Country, watered
by a Stream that falls into a River of a greater bigness, called Guselarmac.
Upon the highest of the smaller Hills toward the East, there is a Fortess,
where a Basha resides; and in the Town is one of the fairest Inns upon the
Road. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are Christian Greeks, who have the
advantage to drink excellent Wine, with which the Country furnishes them in
abundanee.

Agisensalou stands upon a River, and there is an Inn and a fair Mosquee in it.

Ozeman is a little City seated at the foot of a Hill, upon which there stands
a strong Castle, and below two very commodious Inns. The River Guselarmac,
broad and deep, washes the South Side of the City, which you cross over one of
the fairest Bridges that ever was seen. It consists of Fifteen Arches, all of
Freestone, and is a work that shows the Grandeur of the Undertaker. Somewhat at
a distance from the Bridge stands Six Corn-Mills all together, with little
wooden Bridges to go from one to another. This River falls into the Euxin Sea,
about eight days journey from Ozeman.

Azilar is a great Town, where there are two Inns.

Delekiras is a great Village, with one Inn.

These Four days Journeys are very dangerous, by reason that the Ways are
narrow, and commodious for Robbers. They are very numerous in this Country; and
therefore understanding that we were waylaid, we sent and desired a Convoy of
the Basha, who lent us fifty Horsemen.

Amasia is a great City, built upon an ascent in the hollow of a Mountain. It
has no prospect, but only from the South over a fair Plain. The River that runs
by it comes from Tocat, and throws it self into the Black-Sea, four days
journey from Amasia. You cross it over a wooden Bridge, so narrow that not
above three persons can go a-brest. To bring fresh Water to the City, they have
cut a League into Rocks as hard as Marble, which was a prodigious Labor. On
the West Side, upon a high Mountain, stands a Fortress, where they can come by
no other Water than what they preserve in Cisterns when it rains. In the middle
of the Mountain is a fair Spring, and round about it are several Chambers cut
out of the Rock, where the Dervichs made their abode. There are but two Inns,
and those very bad ones, in Amasia. But the soil is good, and bears the best
Wine and Fruits in all Natolia.

Ainabachar, is the name of an Inn, distant a quarter of a League from a great
Town where they fetch their Provisions.

Turcall is a great Town near to a Mountain, upon which there stands a Castle.
The River that comes from Tocat washes the Houses, and we caught excellent Fish
in it. In that place is another of the fairest Inns upon the Road.

From Turcall you may travel in one day to Tocat, where the Road from Smyrna to
Ispahan meets.

Tocat is a good fair City built at the foot of a very high Mountain, spreading
it self round about a great Rock that stands almost in the midst of the Town,
upon the top whereof a high Castle commands the neighboring parts, with a good
Garrison in it. It is very ancient, and the remainder of three others that
stood there in former times. The City is very well inhabited with Turks, who
are the Lord Controllers, Armenians, Greeks, and Jews. The Streets are very
narrow, but the Houses are indifferent well built; and and among several
Mosquees, there is one very magnificient, which seems to be newly reared. There
was also a very fair Inn going up, which when I last traveled that way, was
not quite finished. There is one thing more particular and more commodious at
Tocat, which is not to be found in any Inns upon the Road, That round about all
the Caravansera's in the Town, there are ^odgings which they let out to
Merchants, that desire to be by themselves out of the noise and hurry of the
Caravans, whiles they stay at Tocat. Besides that, in those private Lodgings
you have your liberty to drink Wine, and provide for the rest of your Journey;
which is not so easily done in the public Inns, where the Turks will have an
eye upon the Merchants, to draw Money out of their pockets. The Christians have
twelve Churches at Tocat, and there resides an Archbishop, that has under him
seven Suffragans. There are also two Monasteries for Men, and two for Women;
and for fourteen or fifteen Leagues round Tocat, the Country is all inhabited
by Armenian Christians, but very few Greeks being intermixed among them. The
greatest part of these Christians are Tradesmen, and for the most part Smiths.
A fair River runs about half a quarter of a League from the City, which rises
near to Erzerom, and is crossed at Tocat over a very beautiful stone Bridge.
Upon the North side of the City, it waters a Plain three or four days Journey
in extent, and two or three Leagues broad. It is very fertile, and replenished
with fair Villages very well peopled. A man may live very cheap at Tocat: the
Wine is most excellent, and all sort of rare Fruit very plentiful. It is the
only place in all Asia where plenty of Saffron grows, which is the best
Commodity you can carry to the Indies, where a Pound, as the Years fall out, is
worth thirteen or fourteen Every Frank being 2 s. sterling.
Franks, though the Wax that preserves it, be as much in weight as the Saffron.
This City, with the Lands belonging to it, usually is the Dowager Sultanesses
Jointure. There is only an Aga and a Cady, that command there in the behalf of
the Grand Signor: for the Basha, from whom they receive their Orders, lives at
Sivas, which is the ancient Sebastia, and a very great City, some three days
journey from Tocat. In short, Tocat is one of the most remarkable Thoroughfares
in the East, where are continually lodged the Caravans from Persia, Diarbequer,
Bagdat, Constantinople, Smyrna, Synopus, and other places; and here the
Caravans turn off, as they are variously bound. They that are for
Constantinople, take to the Winter West upon the right hand; they that are for
Smyrna, incline to the Summer West, upon the left hand. When you set out either
way out of Tocat, there is a Toll-gatherer that counts all the Camels and
Horses that pass by, and exacts for every Camel a quarter of a Rixdollar, and
for every Horse half as much. As for the Horses or Camels that carry the
Passengers or their Provisions, they pay nothing. This con^^^ual concourse of
the Caravans trolls the Money about at Tocat, and makes it one of the most
considerable Cities of Turkey.

Setting out of Tocat to go to Erzerom, you discover a little Village so
situated under a Hill, as if the Mountain lay atop of it; and between that
Mountain and the River, the Road is very narrow where the Caravan is to pass.
In this Road it was, that we met the Grand Vizier returning from Hunting, with
a Train of four hundred men: so soon as he perceived us, he filled off all his
men to give us liberty to pass by. But among all the Company, there was not
above four Franks upon which he particularly cast his Eye; which made him send
for the Caravan Bacchi to know who we were. The Caravan Bacchi, to avoid the
ill Consequences of jealousy which the Vizier might have of the Franks, at a
time when the Grand Vizier made War in Persia, told him we were Jews; at which
the Vizier, shaking his Head, replied only that we did not look like such, and
happy it was for us that he took replied only that we did not look like such,
and happy it was for us that he took no farther notice. For it was twenty to
one, but that upon better consideration he might have sent after us to have
stopped us. But when he came home to his Lodging he found a Capigi staying for
him, with Orders from the Grand Signor to take off his Head, which were
presently executed. For Amurath being troubled for the loss of his Army, had no
way but to revenge himself upon the person that had the command of it.

Notwithstanding that the Caravans rest at Tocat, yet they stay likewise two or
three days at Charkliqueu, which is not above two Leagues distant from it; for
Charkliqueu is a great Town in a lovely Country, between two fertile Hills,
where there grows excellent Wine. It is for the most part inhabited by
Christians, who are generally Tanners. The fine blew Goat leather Skins being
dressed in Tocat, and the Parts thereabout. It is thought the Water contributes
very much to their Art. For Tocat is as famous for the blew Goats* leather
Skins, as Diarbequir and Bagdat are for the red, Moussul or the ancient Ninivch
for the yellow, and Ourfa for the black. About two thousand Paces from this
Town, in the midst of a Plain rises a vast Rock, upon the North-side whereof
you ascend about nine or ten steps into a Chamber with a Bed, a Table, and a
Cupboard in it, all hewn out of the Rock. Upon the West side you ascend other
five or six steps that lead to a little Gallery, about five or six Foot long,
and three broad, all hewn out of the Rock, though it be of an extroardinary
hardness. The Christians affirm that St. Chrysostom made this Rock his
retiring-place during his Exilement, and that he had no other Bed or Bolster
than the Rock it self, in a place where they show you the print of a Man's
Body. Hence it is, that the Caravans, consisting for the most part of Christian
Merchants, stay at Charkliqueu, to pay their Devotions to this Rock, where the
Bishop of the place, attended by some Priests, with every one a Taper in their
Hands, goes and says Mass. But the main Reason is, because there grows
excellent Wine in this place, which being cheaper by half here, than it is at
Tocat, obliges the Armenians to stop here, to provide themselves for the rest
of their Journey.

Two Leagues from Charliqueu, you cross over very high Mountains, with
Precipices on both sides. It is the custom of the Armenians, when they hear of
the approach of a Caravan, to ride out two or three days journey to meet their
Countrymen and carry them fresh Provisions. These of Charliqueu coming to meet
our Caravan, three of the Armenians took a large Morning*draughts, which made
them so Pot*valiant, that they would needs ride before to the Town alone by
themselves; but by the way they were set upon by six Horse men that came from
the North, where there are higher Mountains than those which we were to cross.
Immediately the Thieves darted their Half-Pikes at the Armenians, in so much
that two of them fell down mortally wounded, and the other saved himself among
the Rocks, but the Thieves got their Horses and Goods, which were valued at ten
thousand Crowns. The Caravan at the top of the Hill beheld the misfortune of
those poor men which their own folly had brought upon them, but could not help
them, by reason of the narrowness of the ways; besides, that the Thieves
knowing all the by-turnings, were presently out of sight. And therefore it is a
dangerous thing to leave the Body of the Caravans, either by staying too far
behind, or running too fast before: and some have suffered for distancing
themselves not above five hundred Paces from it.

The Caravans do not not make their Journeys all alike; but come to their
Stages sometimes sooner, sometimes later, according as they meet with Waters
and Inns, or places fit to pitch their Tents in, to which places the Natives
bring Provision and Provender from the Mountains. There are some places where
there is a necessity to provide Straw and Barley for two or three days. If you
travel in May* when the Grass is high, it costs nothing to seed the Horses and
Camels For as soon as the Caravan is lodged, the Servants go and cut the Grass
from off the Hillocks, where it is much better then upon the Plains. But while
the Beasts feed only upon Grass they are much weaker, and cannot travel so far
as at other times.

From the Mountain where the Armenians were set upon, you come to Almous, a
little Village upon a River, which you cross, over a Bridge of Wood.

Going out of Almous, you cross a large Plain, at the end whereof you lodge
upon the Bank of a fair River, called Toufanlou-sou, which falls into the River
of Tocat.

Having passed this River, you ascend a high Mountain, which the People of the
Country call Kara*behir*beguiendren, or, the Mountain that stops the Grand
Signors; for it is very rugged, and you must of necessity alight to ascend it.
In that bad Way two Horses that carried each of them two Bales of English Cloth
burst under their Burden, which proved excellent Food for several Tartars that
were before us, and were pitched in the place where we intended to have lodged
our selves; so that we were forced to go a quarter of a League farther. These
Tartars when they heard of our two dead Horses, made immediately to the
Mountain fifteen or sixteen of them with all joy imaginable to devour it. They
flayed the Horses, and when they came back (for I stayed to see them) they
brought every one a great piece of Flesh between the Saddle and their Horses
backs. For by that means the Flesh mortifies, and bakes as it were, through the
motion and heat of the Horse, and so they eat it without any more a-do. I saw
one of them that took a piece of those Horses Flesh, and after he had beaten it
soundly between two nasty Linen Clothes, with a piece of Stick, set his Teeth
in it, and devoured it with a very greedy appetite.

Upon the top of the Mountain which I have mentioned, there is a Plain, and in
the midst of the Plain a Fountain called Chesme-beler, or, A Fountain of
Crystal; near to which, on the South Side, there stands a Village.

From the place where we lodged, we came to a little Town called Adras, the
Inhabitants whereof are all Armenians.

Aspidar is but two Leagues from Adras, and is but a Village.

Isbeder is another Village in the Mountains, where the Caravan generally stays
one or two days; as well to pay the Custom, which is the fourth part of a
Rixdollar upon every Camel, and half as much for every Horse; as for the
excellency and cheapness of the Wine, where every Man provides for himself.

Twice we passed by and paid nothing, in regard that the Caravan was too strong
for the Toll-gatherers; and were it not that they stay for the Wine, they might
go directly forward without paying any thing.

Leaving Isbeder, we came to another great Town in the Mountains; all the
Houses are hewn out of the Rock upon which it is seated, as are also all the
Stair-Cases. From this Village, having passed a River, over a wooden Bridge, at
the end *whereof there stands an Inn, you come to Zacapa, another Village, from
whence through very narrow passages, where you are forced to unload the Camels,
and carry your Goods upon Men's shoulders for thirty Paces together, you come to
encamp in a little Plain. It lies at the foot of a high Mountain, which they
call Dikmebell, beyond which lies the Town Kourd Aga, after which you cross
three Rivers; one fordable, the other over two Bridges, and then you come to a
Village called Garmeru.

From Garmeru you go to Seukmen, another Village; from Seukmen to Louri; from
Louri to Chaouqueu, which are two very handsome Towns.

I saw an Old man at Chaouqueu who was above a Hundred and Thirty Years old,
who when Sultan Amurath besieged Bagdat, gave his whole Army as much Oats as
served them one whole day. In recompense whereof, the Sultan exempted him and
his Children from all Taxes and Tolls for their Lives.

Leaving Chaouqueu, you come to a high craggy Mountain which is called
Aaggidogii, or, The Bitter Mountain. The Ways being narrow, the Caravan is
forced to travel single; and then it is that they count all the Horses, and all
the Camels; every Horse and every Camel paying to the Caravan-Master a certain
Duty, which amounts to a good Sum if the Caravan be numerous. One part of that
Money is to pay seven or eight Armenians, that guard the Caravan all the way;
another part defrays the Expenses upon the Road; and the remainder is the
Captain of the Caravan's Profit.

Having passed this Mountain, you come^ to lodge in a Plain which they call
Gioganderesi, and from thence to Erzerom you meet only with three Villages by
the way, Achikala, Ginnis, and Higia, which are the Caravan's Stages. During
these three last days* journeys, you keep all along the Banks of Euphrates for
the most part, which is yet but narrow, taking its source Northward of Erzerom.
It Is a wonderful thing to see the vast quantities of large Asparagus that grow
all along the River, with which you may load several Camels.

A League on this side Erzerom the Caravan is constrained to stop; For the
Officer of the Custom*House accompanied with the Basha's Lieutenant, comes here
and ties all the Bales and Chests with a cross Cord, upon which he puts a Seal,
to the end that when the Merchants come to the Town, they may not be able to
take out any Bags of Money, or any pieces of Stuff on purpose to hide them till
they go away. The particular Business of the Basha's Lieutenant in meeting the
Caravan, is to see whether the Merchants be well provided with Wines. And if he
desire any Bottles, whether it be then, or in the City, where they are not
ashamed to visit every Merchant, there is no refusing them. For there grows no
Wine at Erzerom, all that is drank there being a small Wine of Mingrelia, which
is always green: which forces the Merchants to furnish themselves with Wine at
Tocat, which they may do sufficiently to last them into Persia. The Officer of
the Custom-House generally allows the Caravan three days to rest; during which
time, he sends to the principal Merchants some Fruit and other small
Refreshments, by which he is no loser. After the three days are over, he comes
and opens all the Bales and Chests, and takes a particular account of all the
Merchandises. This Search and the changing of Beasts, causes the Caravan to
stay generally twenty or five and twenty days at Erzerom.

Erzerom is a frontier Town of Turkey toward Persia. It is situated at the end
of a large Plain environed with Mountains, the Plain being beautified with many
fair Villages. If you take in the Castle and the Suburbs, it may pass for a
City, but the Houses are ill built of Wood, without any neatness or proportion.
There are some Remains of Churches and of the ancient Buildings of the
Armenians, by which you may conjecture that it never was very beautiful. The
Fortress stands upon a high ground, with a double Wall, square Towers close one
to another, and a pitiful Moat. The Basha resides there but in a very ill
House, all the Buildings about the Fortress being in a bad condition. In the
same Enclosure there is a little rising Ground upon which they have raised a
small Fort, wherein the Janisary-Aga lives, and where the Basha has no Power.
When the Grand Signor has a mind to the Head of this Basha, or any other
considerable Person in the Province, he sends a Capigi, with order to the
Janisary to send for the Person to the little Fort, where the Execution is
presently done. One Example hereof I saw in my last Travels into Persia: For
the Basha of Erzerom not having sent Twelve thousand men so soon as the Grand
Signor required them for his Wars in Candy, the same Capigi that brought the
Sentence of his Death, had the same Order for the Execution of the Basha of
Kars; and meeting this Capigi upon the Road in a Village, upon his return for
Constantinople, he would needs show me whether I would or no, the Heads of the
two Basha's, which he was carrying to the Grand Signor in a Bag.

Between the first and second Gate of the Fortress are to be seen four and
twenty Pieces of Cannon, most excellent Guns, but lying one upon another
without Carriages. They lie at Erzerom to be ready upon all occasions when the
Grand Signor makes war against the Persians.

There are in Erzerom several great Inns; this City, like Tocat, being one of
the greatest Thoroughfares in Turkey. The Country about it bears Wine, but not
very good, and in regard the People are strictly forbid to drink Wine, the
Merchants are forced to buy it very privately, for fear it should come to the
knowledge of the Cadi. Though it be very cold at Erzerom, Barley grows there in
forty days, and Wheat in sixty, which is very remarkable. The Customs paid
there for the carrying out of the Gold and Silver, and upon all other
Commodities, is very severe. Silk, that comes out of Persia, pays four and
twenty Crowns for a Camel's Load, which is eight hundred Pounds. For in the
mountainous Countries a Camel's Load is no more; but in the plain and even
Countries they make 'em carry above ten hundred weight. A Load of Indian
Calicuts pays a hundred Crowns; but the Loads of Linen are much heavier than
those of Silk. As for other Commodities, they pay Six per cent according to
their value.

From this Stage the Caravan sets forward to a Fortress called Hassan Kala,
where you must pay half a Piaster for every Camel's or Horses Load going from
Erzerom to Erivan, but returning you, pay but half as much.

Leaving this Fortress, you must go and lodge at a Bridge near to a Village
which is called Coban-Cupri. Over this Bridge, which is the fairest in the
whole Journey, you cross two Rivers which there meet, one is the Kars, and the
other is a Stream that falls from a Mountain called Binguiel, both which
disburthen themselves into the Aras. The Caravan usually stays a day or two at
this Bridge; because the Caravan divides it self at this place, some continuing
on the High-road, others taking the Road of Kars, as well to avoid fording the
Aras several times, as the paying a great Duty upon the great Road, where they
exact four Piasters upon every Camel's Load, and two upon every Horse-Load,
whereas at Kars you are dismissed for half so much.

I went Kars Road twice; but it is longer, and more troublesome than the other.
As soon as you leave the Bridge, for the first four days you travel over woody
Mountains, and very desert Countries, where you meet but with one Village; but
coming near Kars the Country is more pleasant, and well manured; bearing all
sorts of Grain.

Kars is in 78 Degrees. 40 Min. of Longitude, and 42 Degrees. 40 Min. of Latitude; in a
very good Soil. The City is very large, but thinly peopled, though Provision be
very plentiful and very cheap. But the Grand Signor always choosing that place
to rendezvous his Army, whenever he intended to recruit it, and to lodge his
People there which he sent to build Villages; the King of Persia has ruined all
the Country, as he did at Sulfa, and in many other Frontier places, for nine or
ten days journey together.

From Kars to Erivan the Caravan makes it nine days journey, and lies where it
can find most convenience, there being no certain Stages. The first days
journey ends at a Monastery and a Village, the one no less deserted than the
other. The next day you come to the Ruins of a great City, called Anikagae, in
the Armenian Language the City of Any, which was the name of an Armenian King
that was the Founder of it. By the Wall, on the East Side, runs a rapid stream
that falls from the Mountains of Mingrelia, and empties it self into the River
of Kars. This City was very strongly situated; being placed in a Mersh, where
are to be seen the Remains of two Causeys that only lead to the Town. There are
the Ruins of several Monasteries; among the rest two that are entire, supposed
to be Royal Foundations. From thence to Erivan for two days jourhey, you meet
with only two Villages; near the last of which you ride by the side of a Hill,
whether when the Caravan passes by, the people bring Horses from several parts
to be sold. The Great Road from the Bridge, where the Caravan parts, lies thus:

Two Leagues from the Bridge, on the right hand toward the South, lies a great
Mountain which the People of the Country call Mingol. In this Mountain there
are abundance of Springs, and from one side of it falls Euphrates, from the
other side the River of Kars, which empties it self into the Aras fourteen or
fifteen Leagues on this side Erivan. The Aras, which the Ancients called
Araxes, falls from other Mountains Eastward of Mingol, which after many
windings through the Upper Armenia, where it receives many other Rivers that
swell its Streams, it discharges it self into the Caspian Sea, two days journey
from Shamaki, upon the Frontiers of the ancient Medes.

The whole Country is inter-cut by the Rivers Aras and Kars, and several other
Streams that fall into them, inhabited by very few, but what are Christians;
those few Mahumetans that live among them being so superstitious, that they
will not drink the Water of any of those Rivers, nor wash in them* believing
them impure and defiled by the use which the Christians make of them. They have
their particular Wells and Cisterns by themselves, which they will not suffer a
Christian to come near.

Comasour is the first Village where you lodge after you leave the Bridge of
Choban-Kupri, going to Erivan.

Halicarcara is the next Stage to Comasour: this is a great Town also inhabited
by Christians, but the Houses are built all underground like Caves. Coming
thither the 7 th of March 1655, the Snow was so deep that there was no
traveling, so that we were forced to stay there eight days. But the Customer
of Erzerom understanding in what a bad condition we were, came in person with
five hundred Horse to make way for us, and sent for the Country people round
about to clear away the Snow. But it was not so much out of kindness to us, as
for his own Interest. For a new Officer being to succeed him upon the 22d o^
March, and our Caravan being very numerous, he would have lost above an Hundred
Thousand Crowns, had we not come to Erzerom before that day. Many of the
Passengers were almost blinded by continually looking upon the Snow, the color
whereof very much dims the Sight: for preservation whereof the Travelers are
wont to wear black Cypress Hoods, made on purpose, over their faces. Others
wear furred Bonnets fringed about with Goats hair, which being long, falls over
their Eyes, and does altogether as well as the Hood.

The Caravan is usually twelve days upon the Road, from Erzerom to Erivan.
Leaving Halicarcara, you ford the Aras three times, and cross it the next day
again: for it winds exceedingly. A League and a half from the place where you
ford it the fourth time, upon the top of a high Mountain stands a Fortress
called Kaguisgan, which is the last place which the Turks possess on that side.
The Customers that live there come to the Caravan to take their Toll, which is
four Piasters for every Camel laden, and two for every Horse laden. In the
year 1655 the Caravan lodging about a League from the Fortress of Kaguisgan,
the Mountains adjoining being inhabited by Christian Armenians, there came to
us a poor Bishop attended by fifteen or sixteen persons, among which there were
certain Priests who brought us Bread, Fowl, and Fruit, desiring the Charity of
the Merchants, who recompensed them to their satisfaction. About four or five
Months after, this Bishop had one of his Eyes struck out by a Janisary. That
wicked Fellow came to the Town where the Bishop lived, and lighting upon the
Bishop, asked him for Money, which because the Bishop had none to give him, in
a rage he stabbed him in the Eye with his Dagger. Complaint was made to the
Aga, who it is thought would have punished the Offender, but he fled, and lest
the Bishop without remedy of satisfaction.

From the last place where we encamped near the Aras, we went and lodged the
next day upon the same River, in the sight of a Village not above a quarter of
a League. The Next day we crossed the River that runs from Kars, and parts
Turkey from Persia. The next day we stopped upon the Banks of Aras, half a
League from a little Town; and this is the last time you see this River which
you are constrained to pass so often.

Leaving Aras, we came to lodge in a plain, in sight of a Town which is not far
distant. The next day the Caravan lies in the Field, and the next day it comes
to a place where there are three Churches, whence it is but half a days journey
from Erivan.

CHAP. III.
A Continuation of the Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, from the Borders of
Persia to Erivan.
THE first Place worthy observation, entering into Persia through Armenia, is
that which they call the Three Churches, three Leagues from Erivan; which Three
Churches, are three Monasteries distant one from the other. The biggest and the
fairest is the Residence of the Patriarch of the Armenians. There is another to
the South of that, about a Musket shot distant, and another a quarter of a
League from it toward the East, which is a Nunnery for Virgins. The Armenians
call this place Egm^asin, or the only Daughter, which is the Name of the chief
Church. You may find in their Chronicles, That it began to be Built about three
hundred Years after Christ, and that the Walls being raised to a good height,
the Devil came in the Night and pulled down what they built up in the Day;
which he did for several Years: but that one Night Christ himself appeared, and
that from that time the Devil surceas'd to molest them any more; so that they
finished the Church. It is dedicated to St. Gregory, whom the Armenians have in
very great veneration. And there is a Table of Stone, whereupon, according to
their Chronicles, Christ rested when he appeared to St. Gregory. They that go
into the Church, kiss this Stone with a very solemn Devotion.

The second is built in honor of a Princess that came with forty Virgins of
Quality to visit St. Gregory. This Lady an Armenian King caused to be thrown
into a Well full of Serpents? but she received no harm. For she li^'d* therein
14 Years by a great Miracle, and from that time to this, the Serpents that
breed thereabouts never did any harm. That idolatrous King had a design to have
enjoyed that Princess, who was very handsome, and all her Companions; but they
overcame him by their Virtue: who thereupon, seeing he could not have his Will,
put them all to Death.

The Custom of all the Armenians, as well those that come out of Persia, as
those that travel into Persia, is to perform their Devotions at these Three
Churches; and the Caravan stops usually five or six days, during which time
they Confess, and receive Absolution from the Patriarch.

The Patriarch has under him forty seven Archbishops, and every Archbishop has
under him four or five Suffragans, with whom he lives in a Convent, where there
are several Monks under their Jurisdiction. So soon as they have said their
Mass, which is generally done an Hour after Day, they all go to work, and to
dig and delve for their living. The Revenue of the Patriarch is 600000 Crowns
or thereabouts: for all the Armenian Christians that are above fifteen Years of
age, ought to pay him yearly five Sous. However there are many that do not pay
him, by reason of their poverty. Yet their defect is supplied by the rich, who
sometimes pay him two or three Crowns a Head. But this Money does not stay in
the Patriarch's Pocket: nay he is sometimes behind-hand; for he is engaged to
relieve the poor Armenians, who have not wherewithal to pay the Carage, which
is an Annual Tribute that they owe to the Mohammedan Princes, to whom they are
subject: Otherwise necessity would force them to become Mahometans; and they,
their Wives and Children would be liable to be sold, which the Grand Patriarch
labors all he can to prevent. Every Archbishop sends him out of his Diocese
what is necessary to be raised for that intent. So that the Patriarch does but
only receive it with one Hand, and pay it with the other; making no profit to
himself of a Revenue which he has out of 400000 Villages, which the Archbishop
of St. Stephen's affirmed to me to be under his Jurisdiction.

As I returned from Persia in the Year 1655, I came to the Three Churches about
the end of February; the Caravan stayed there eleven Days, as well by reason of
the great Snows that stopped up the Ways, as for that the Armenians resolved to
keep their Carnival there, and after that to perform their Devotions. The next
day I went to visit the Patriarch, who was sitting cross-leg'd upon a Mat.
There were four Archbishops, and nine Bishops sitting about him in the same
posture, among whom there was one that spoke very good Italian. I stayed with
him three Hours; and while we were discoursing together, in came one of the
Monks of the Covent, who had not spoken to any person whatsoever in Two and
twenty Years, by reason of a Penance that was imposed upon him. Never did Man
appear so meager and deformed; but the Patriarch sent for him, and by his
Authority commanded him to break silence, which he did, by speaking at the same
Instant.

The Saturday before Shrove-Sunday the Patriarch invited all the Caravan, as
well Masters as Servants, to hear Mass the next day, and then to dine at the
Covent. Mass being concluded, the People were brought into a long Gallery,
about 15 or 20 Foot broad, there being a Table on both sides, made of several
Stones, and Benches next the Walls. At the upper end of the Gallery stands a
Table four Foot square, over which is a vaulted Roof sustained with four
Pillars, which serves for a Canopy: in the midst whereof is a Chair set for the
Patriarch, who from thence has a full view of both sides the Gallery; with two
other Chairs of each hand, for two Archbishops: the other Archbishops, Monks,
and Guests sat at the long Tables. The Meat which they brought us was several
sorts of Pilaw, and several Dishes of Fish, among the rest excellent Trouts.
The Pilaw was brought in forty wide Plates, so well filled and so large, that
they were every one as much as a Man could carry. They were all set down upon
the Ground before the Patriarch; who then Prayed and gave Thanks. Then six
Bishops with Ladles took out the Meat out of the great Platters, and putting it
into lesser, served both the Tables. Every one had also his earthen Pot of
Wine, which was very good, and was filled again when it was empty. The
Patriarch and the two Archbishops eat nothing but two Eggs, and a few raw
Herbs; no more did the other Archbishops that sat at the Table.

At the end of the Feast, a Bishop comes with a Paper and Pen and Ink in his
Hand, and asks of every one what he pleases to Subscribe for the Benefit of the
Church; then every one proposing, according to his Devotion, the Bishop writes
down the Names of the Persons, and the Sum which they mention; which he comes
and gathers the next day. There are some rich Merchants that will give two
Tomans, but the meanest Servant will give an Or. The Bishop having done
writing, the Table was cleared, and then they brought us Melons and other
Fruits. In a short while after the Bells rung to Evening Service, and the
People went to Church.

After Evening Service the Patriarch sent for me to behold a Combat of
Bufalo's, of which there are great store in that Country, some serving to Till
their Ground, while the Female ones yield store of Milk, of which they make
Butter and Cheese, and which they mingle with all sorts of other Milk: There
are some of these female Beasts that will give two and twenty Pints of Milk a
day.

They brought us into a wide Enclosure, to behold the Sport, wherein there were
eight Bufalo's. To provoke them one against another, they show them a Red
Cloth, which puts them into such a Rage, that there were two that died with the
stroke of their Horns upon the place, and there were none of the rest which
were not very much lamed. The Sport being at an end, they bring a great
quantity of Wood, which they pile together on purpose to set it on Fire. When
the Wood was heaped in as big a Pile as they intended, one of the Archbishops
presented a Taper of white Wax to all the Company, both Masters and Servants,
who every one agreed with him what they should give the next day for their
Tapers. The Tapers being lighted, the Patriarch with a Stick like a Bishop's
Crosier, marched before, singing an Hymn, attended by all the Persons both
Ecclesiastical and Secular, till they had in that manner walked three times
about the Pile. When the Pile came to be lighted, there was great striving who
should have the Honor. One of the Merchants offered a quantity of Oil, for
Lamps for the Church; another out-did him, and a third proffered more than he;
and the Honor of Lighting the Pile was given to him that offered most.
Immediately upon that every one put out his Taper: For they esteem it a most
precious business; believing that the lighting of one of those Tapers in a
Storm, and throwing it into the Sea, is a present Charm against Shipwreck. For
say they, The Virgin Mary, forty days after she was brought to Bed, went to
Jerusalem with Joseph and her Son; and going into the Temple met old Simeon,
who taking the Child in his Arms, began to sing the Song, Lord* now let thy
Servant, etc. the Song being ended, all the People began to cry that Christ was
born, and to publish it about the City. Now in regard it was Night, every one
ran out with Torches in their Hands, and some made Fires before their Doors,
where Christ was to pass along. This Festival among the Armenians is like that
of Candlemas-day; and they call it in their Language, Ter en Areche? Where is
the Lord? The Armenians, Masters and Servants, drank all Night to make an end
of their Carnival: while the Patriarch was busy in dressing up the Church with
its gayest Ornaments.

I could not believe there had been so much Riches in the Christian Churches
under the Power of the Mahumetans. It is not a hundred Years since this
Patriarchal Church was in a much meaner Condition: But since the great Sha-Abas
put the Armenians upon Traffic, they have very much enriched themselves: For
as they go^ great Gains; so they made great Vows, and gave largely to the
Church* ^a^er^^ers Persian travels Page 13

wherein there are now as rich Ornaments as in any Church of Christendom. The
Choir of the Church was hung round with a Venetian Tissue of Gold. The Pavement
also of the Choir and the Body of the Church, together with the Steps to the
Altar, were spread with rich Tapestry. For they all put off their Shoes before
they go into the Church; nor do the Armenians kneel as in Europe, but stand all
the while upright. When they hear Mass, they sit after the Mode of the Country,
but when the Lessons are reading they stand up. All the Service-time their
Heads are covered, unless at the Elevation of the Host, for then they take off
their Bonnets, and kiss the Earth three times. There was upon the Altar a
Cross, with six Candlesticks of Gold; and upon the Steps to the Altar four
Candlesticks of Silver five foot high. After they had sung several Hymns, the
Patriarch seated himself in a Chair covered with Silk Tapestry, four
Archbishops sitting with their Backs to a Pillar at his right hand. The Service
was solemnly performed by an Archbishop, with two Bishops on each side of him.
After the Archbishop had made certain Prayers, he took the Book wherein he had
read the Gospel and gave it the Patriarch, the Archbishops, Bishops, and all
the People to Kiss. On the one side of the Cover of that Book there are two
Relics enchas'd, which are covered with Crystal, which was the side of the
Book that was given to be Kissed. The Ceremony being ended, many went to Kiss
the Patriarch's Hand, and so retired.

Ten Leagues from Erivan, toward the North, appears a great Lake, wherein there
is an Island, upon which is built a very fair Covent. The Monks that live
there, live so austere a Life, that they never eat Fish or Flesh above four
times a Year: neither do they speak one to another, but upon those four Days.
The rest of the Year they feed only upon Herbs, which they gather out of the
Garden: for say they, it is not Fasting, to eat either Butter or Oil. The Bread
which they eat is brought from the neighboring Villages: and the Island is
replenished with all sorts of excellent Fruits.

On the one side of the Lake nearer to Erivan is a large Plain, wherein there
are six Monasteries. One of which is entirely hewn out of the Rock, with the
Pillars that sustain it, being seated in a very hard Rock. The Armenians call
that Church Kickart in their Language, and the Turks in theirs Guicurghieche,
that is, See and away. In this Church, according to the Traditions of the
Armenians, is kept the Lance wherewith the Side of Christ was pierced; the
Figure whereof I caused to be drawn upon the Place. The Armenians have this
Lance in great Veneration, saying, that it was brought thither by St. Matthew.

Five Leagues from Erivan, toward the South-East, begins the Mountain Ararat;
which will be always famous for being the resting place of Noah's Ark. Half a
Leaugue from that Mountain, where the Plain begins to grow level, stands a
Church upon a little Hillock, close by which are several Pits like Wells. They
report that it was into one of these Wells that Cerda, an Armenian King, caused
St. Gregory to be thrown, because he would not Worship his false Gods. Between
this Church and Erivan are to be seen the Ruins of the Ancient Artaxate, the
Seat of the Kings of Armenia, which demonstrate that it has been a great City:
besides, there appear the Ruins of a fair Palace.

Erivan lies in 64 Degrees, 20 Minutes of Longitude; 41 Degrees, 15 Minutes of
Latitude; in a most plentiful Country of all things necessary for Humane Life,
but especially abounding in good Wine. It is one of the best Provinces of all
Persia, and yields the King a very large Revenue, as well by reason of the
goodness of the Soil, as for being the great Thoroughfare of the Caravans. The
yearly Revenue of the Governor only, otherwise called the Kan of Erivan,
amounts to above 20000 Tomans, which make 840000 Livres. This City lying upon
the Frontiers of both Empires, has been taken and retaken by the Turks and
Persians, several times. By which means the old City being ruined, they have
built a new one, 800 Paces on this side, upon a Rock, at the foot whereof, upon
the West Side runs a rapid Stream: it is called by the Name of Sangui-Cija, and
in many places it is deep and full of Rocks. You cross it, over a fair Bridge
of three Arches, in which are built little Chambers, where the Kan retires in
the heat of the day. It is full of Fish* especially Trouts, which nevertheless
are dear enough. This River comes from a Lake called Gigaguni; about 25 Leagues
from Erivan, toward the North, and falls into the Aras, that runs not above
three Leagues off to the South. Though this City be fortified to the West by
the River, yet it is never the stronger, by reason of the Hills on the other
side which command it: and in regard it is built upon a rock, the Moats of the
Fort are not above three or four Foot deep. In some places the City is secured
with a double Wall with several Towers; but the Walls being only of Earth, as
are most of the Houses, the Rain does more mischief, than the Cannon would do.
That part of Erivan to the North-West, is a kind of Suburb, but far better
inhabited then the City: for there live all the Merchants and Artificers,
together with the Christian Armenians, who have four Churches there, with a
Monastery. And of late years they have built also a very fair Inn in the same
Quarter. In the City there only lives the Kan, with the Military Officers and
Soldiers; the Kan's Lodgings lying upon the River. The Governor is a Person
of great Power, and has always sufficient Forces about him to guard the
Frontiers. The Summer being very hot at Erivan, he lies in Tents upon the
Mountains during the Heat. When a Caravan arrives, he is forced to give the
King advice thereof: and if any Ambassador come thither, he is bound to
maintain him at his own expense, and to cause him to be conducted to the
Territories of the next Governor, who is obliged to do the same. So that
Ambassadors are not bound to be at any Expenees in the Territories of the King
of Persia. Four Leagues from the City are high Mountains, where the Natives
that inhabit the hot and Sun*burnt Countries toward Chaldea, come Twenty
Thousand together, to seek out good Pasturage for their Cattle* and about the
end of Autumn return again into their own Country. I cannot compare this
Mountanious Tract, whether for its Valleys* and Rivers, or for the nature of
the Soil, to any Part that I have seen, better than to that proportion of
Switzerland, which is called the Country of Vanx: and there is a Tradition
among the Natives, That certain people that inhabited between the Alps and
Mount Jura, and which composed a Squadron of Alexander's Army, having served
him in his Conquests, seated themselves in this part of Armenia, which they
found so like their own Country. From Tocat to Tauris the Inhabitants are for
the most part Christians. Which large Tract of Ground being that which the
Ancients called the Province of Armenia, it is no wonder to meet with fifty
Armenians for one Mohammedan. There are many ancient Armenian Families in
Erivan, which is their native Country; but they are well used by the
Governors, who being far distant from the Court, do what they please. This
City not being far remote from the Province from whence the Silks come, is the
place where all the Buyers and Sellers resort. But neither in Erivan, nor in
any other part of Persia are the Merchants put to open their Bales at the
Custom-Houses, as in Turkey. They only pay certain Duties toward securing the
Highways; which Duties they call Raderies, and those tha^ gather them Raders.

The Kans or Governors of Provinces in Persia are civil to Strangers,
especially to those that they like, or that show them any thing of Curiosity.
The first time that I went into Persia I took a young Watchmaker with me, and
coming to Erivan, I carried him to the Kan who was then Governor. It was at a
time when Watches were very rare in Persia; and the Kan, understanding what*
Trade the Young Man was of, told us he was the first Watch-maker that ever had
been in Persia: Thereupon he brought the young man a Watch to mend, and that he
might have the pleasure of seeing him work, he lodged us in a Chamber next his
own, and made us drink with him every day; for he was a true Toper, and
compelled us to drink with him from four in the Afternoon 'till near Midnight,
in a place which he had made on purpose, in his Garden, to take off his Glasses.

This was he, that having delivered Erivan to Sultan Amurat, went along with
him to Constantinople, and became his Favorite for teaching him to Drink.
Amurat left a Garrison of 22000 Men in the City; but Sha-Shefi the Persian King
begirt it presently with a strong Army; and planting him securely under one of
the Hills that command the City, he battered it incessantly with eight Pieces
of Cannon: the fourth day he made a Breach, and though he had the repute of a
Coward, he was the first at the Assault, and took the City: and because they
would not yield at his Summons, he put all the Garrison to the Sword. For which
Amurat, was quit with Sha-Shefi afterward, though not in so noble a way; for
entering a Victor into Bagdat, he put all the Persians to the Sword, after he
had given them his word to the contrary, and promised to spare their lives.



The Platform of Erivan and the Suburbs.
A. The Town and Fort. B. The Suburbs, inhabited by the Armenian Christians. C.
The Church. D. The Covent. E. The River of Sangui-cija. F. The Stone Bridge. G
The Highway for the Caravans. H. The Fort which Sha-Sefi built to batter the
City. I. The River that falls from the Mountain. K. The Highway to T uris. L.
The way to ^efl^^ the chief City of Georgia; and the way to the Mountain where
the (...) of (...) twice a Summer to drink. M. The Market places, for (...) of
(...).
CHAP. IV.
A Continuation of the same Road from Erivan to Tauris.
IT usually takes up ten days journey for the Caravan to go between Erivan and
Tauris; and Naksivan is almost in the midway between both. The first days
journey you travel through large Plains sowed with Rice, and watered with
several Rivulets. The next day you contiue to Travel through Plains of the same
nature, in sight of the Mountain Ararat, which is full of Monasteries, leaving
it upon the South. The Armenians call this Mountain Mesesoufar, The Mountain of
the Ark; because the Ark of Noah rested upon it. It is as it were unfasten'd
from the other Mountains of Armenia, and from the halfway to the top, it is
continually covered with Snow. It is higher than any of the neighboring
Mountains; and in my first Travells I saw it for five days Journey together. So
soon as the Armenians discover it, they kiss the Earth, and lifting up their
eyes to Heaven, say their Prayers. Yet you are to take notice, that the
Mountain is hid in Clouds for two or three Months together: In the plains that
you cross in this second days journey, to the Southward a League and a half
from the Highway, is to be seen a work of great Art; being the Ruins of a
Magnificent Castle, where the Kings of Armenia were wont to reside in the time
of their Hunting Divertisements; more especially when they continued their
sports at the Mallard and Heron. The next day we lodged near to a Village where
there was good Water, which constrained the Caravan to stay there; there being
none to be met with for ten Leagues farther. The next day you must Travel one
by one through the Pass of a Mountain, and cross a large River named Arpason,
which falls into Aras. It is fordable when it is low, but when the Snow melts
and swells the stream, you must go a League out of your way to the Southward to
cross it, over a Bridge of Stone. From thence you go to lodge near a Village
called Kalifakiend, where you are forced to fetch you Water a good way off. The
first days journey is through a Plain, at the end whereof you meet with an Inn,
called Kara-bagler, standing upon a Rivulet; which was finished in 1664. The
Head of this Rivulet springs three or four Leagues higher toward the North; and
half a League below Kara-Bagler, the Water congeals and petrifies; and of those
Stones is the Inn built. The Stone is very slight; and when they have need of
it, they make Trenches all along the Stream, and fill them with the same Water,
which in eight or ten Months turns into Stone. The Water is very sweet, and has
no bad taste; yet the Countrymen thereabouts will neither drink it, no water
their Grounds with it. The Armenians say, that Sem the Son of Noah caused the
Rock to be hollowed, out of which this River issues; which four or five Leagues
from its Head, and two from the Inn, falls into Aras. From this Inn to Naksivan
is but a small Journey. Naksivan, according to the Opinion of the Armenians, is
the most ancient City of the World* built about three Leagues from the Mountain
upon which the Ark of Noah rested: from whence it also takes its Name; for Nak
in the Armenian Tongue signifies a Ship, and Sivan, resting or reposing. 'Twas
a great City, now wholly ruined by the Army of Sultan Amurath. There are the
Remains of several rare Mosquees, which the Turks have destroyed; for the Turks
and Persians destroy one another Mosquees as fast as they fall into one
another possession. This City is very ancient, and the Armenians report, that
it was in this place where Noah went to live, when he went out of the Ark. They
say further, that he was Buried here; and that his Wife has a Tomb at Marante
upon the Road to Tauris. There runs a little River by Naksivan, the Water
whereof is very good; the Spring whereof is not far distant from the Head of
the River of Karabagler. The Armenians drove a great Trade in Silk formerly in
this Town, which is now very much abated: however, there is a Kan which has the
Command there. All the Country between Erivan and Tauris was wholly destroyed
by Sha-Abas King of Persia, and the first of that Name; to the end that the
Armies of the Turks, not meeting with any subsistence, might perish of
themselves. To this purpose, he sent all the Inhabitants of Zulfa and the Parts
adjoining into Persia, Old and Young, Fathers, Mothers, and Children, with
which he planted new Colonies in several parts of his Kingdom. He sent above
27000 Families of Armenians into Guilan, whence the Silks come; and where the
harshness of the Climate killed abundance of those poor people, that were
accustomed to a milder Air. The most considerable were sent to Ispahan, where
the King put them upon the Trade of Silk, and lent them Commodities, for which
they paid upon the return of their Markets, which suddenly set the Armenians
upon their Feet again. These are they that Built the City of Zulfa, which is
only separated from Ispahan by the River of Senderou, calling it New Zulfa, to
distinguish it from the old City, which was the Habitation of their Ancestors.
A third part of the people were dispersed into other Villages between Ispahan
and Sciras. But the old People dying, the young ones generally turn Mahumetans:
so that now you can hardly meet with two Christian Armenians in all those fair
Plains, which their Fathers were sent to manure.

Among the Ruins of Naksivan appear the Ruins of a great Mosquee, which was
one of the most stately Buildings in the World: which some say was built in
memory of N^ah's Burying-place. As you depart out of the City, near to the
River that runs by it, appears a Tower, which is an excellent piece of
Architecture: It is composed of four Duomo's joined together, which support a
kind of a Pyramid, that seems to be framed of twelve little Towers; but toward
the middle it changes its figure, and lessening like a Spire, ends in a Point.
The Building is all of Brick, but as well the outside as the inside is
overspread with a kind of Varnish of Parget, wrought into Flowers, like
Embossed work. It Is thought to have been an Edifice, set up by Temur-leng when
he had Conquered Persia.

Between Naksivan and Zulfa, on each side, as well to the North as to the
South, there are ten Covents of Christian Armenians, distant about two or three
Leagues one from the other. They acknowledge the Pope, and are governed by
certain Religious Dominicans of their own Nation. And to keep up their
Religion, they send from time to time to Rome certain Children born in the
Country, to learn the Latin and Italian Tongues, and other necessary Sciences.
It is thought there are in this Quarter above six thousand Souls that
absolutely follow the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; only that they sing the
Office and the Mass in the Armenian Tongue, that all the People may hear and
understand them. The Archbishop, being chosen, is sent to Rome to be confirmed.
He resides at a great Town, which is one of the most lovely places in all Asia;
the Wine and Fruits that grow there are very delicate, besides the abundance of
all other things necessary for Humane Life. Every Covent stands near a great
Village: the chiefest where I have been twice, is Aba^ener, the second
Abraghonnex, the third Kerna, the fourth Soletak, the fifth Kouchkachen, the
sixth Giaouk, the seventh Chiabonnez, the eighth Araghouche, the ninth Kauzuk,
the tenth Kisouk, which lies upon the Frontiers of Curdistan or Assyria: Here
it is, that the Armenians believe St. Bartholomew and St. Matthew to have been
Martyred, of which they pretend to show some Relics at this day, Many
Mahometans came thither out of Devotion, especially such as are troubled with
Fevers. There are two or three of those Convents, where they civilly entertain
such Christians as come out of Europe; though the Monks there are very poor.
They also live very austere lives, feeding upon nothing but Herbs. That which
makes them so poor, is the often change of Tyrannical Governors, whom they are
obliged to present with large Gifts But in regard they cannot give much, those
Governors have no kindness for them; for which reason, being instigated by
those other Armenians who are able to oblige them, they use them so severely,
that they are often forced to complain to the King; which I have many times
seen done at Ispahan.

A League and a half from the chief of these Covents there is a high Mountain,
separated from all the rest, which rises like a Sugar loaf, as does the Pike of
a Tenariff. At the foot of this Mountain are certain Springs, that have the
virtue to heal those that are bit by Serpents; in so much that Serpents carried
to that place will dye immediately.

When the Caravan is ready to set out from Naksivan for Zulpha, which is not
above a days journey from thence, the principal Armenians usually go out of the
way to the Covent of St. Stephen, which lies to the South.

Now the Road from Naksivan to St. Stephen's lies first to a great Village
called Ecclisia, where live the richest Armenians, that drive a great Trade in
Silk, and have built them a very fair Church.

Two Leagues from Ecclesia you must cross the River Aras in a Ferry-Boat, being
as it were fqueez'd between two Mountains in that place: Once I went over upon
the Ice. About two Musket shot from thence, you must cross over a Bridge,
another River that salls into the Aras. From the foot of the Bridge you begin
to ascend a little Hill, at the top whereof you meet with a great Village,
called Shambe, all the Inhabitants whereof, as well Men as Women, grow Mad at
18 years of age; but it is such a madness that it is not mischievous. Some
believe it to be the Punishment of Heaven, for that their Forefathers in these
Mountains persecuted St. Bartholomew and St. Matthew.

From hence to Stephen's it is not above a League, but the Way is very
troublesome. St. Stephen's is a Convent built not above 30 years ago. It stands
upon the Mountains, in a barren place, and of difficult access. But the reason
why the Armenians chose that place before any other, is because that St.
Bartholomew and St. Matthew retired thither in the time of their Persecution.
They add, that St. Matthew did a Miracle in that place; for that there being no
Water there before, he only struck his stick upon the Ground, and presently
there arose a Spring. This Spring is about half a quarter of a League from the
Convent, under a Vault with a good Door to it, to keep the Water from being
wasted. The Armenians go to visit this Spring in great Devotion, having laid
the Water into the Covent with Pipes. They also say, that in this place they
found several Relics which St. Bartholomew and St. Matthew lest there, to
which they add a great many others; among the rest a Cross, made of the Basin
wherein Christ washed his Disciples Feet: In the middle of the Cross is a white
Stone, which as they report, if you lay upon a Sick person, will turn black if
the person be likely to dye; and recover its former whiteness after the death
of the party.

A law Bone of St. Stephen the Martyr.

The Scull of St. Matthew.

A Bone of the Neck, and a Bone of the Finger of St John Baptist.

A Hand of St. Gregory, who was the Disciple of Dionysius the Areopagite.

A little Box, wherein they keep a great number of pieces of Bones, which they
believe to be the Relics of the Seventy Two Disciples.

The Church is built in the form of a Cross, as are all the Churches of the
Armenians; in the middle whereof rise^ a fa r Duomo, round about which stand
the twelve Apostles. Both the Church and Covent are of Free stone, and though
the whole Edifice be not very big, there has been abundance of Gold and Silver
wasted upon the Walls: Many Armenian Families have been very much endamag'd
thereby; for the Women were so devout, that unknown to their Husbands they sold
their Jewels, and their very Clothes to defray the Expenses of Building.

The first time that I was at St. Stephen's, in the company of some Armenians,
two Bishops, attended by several other Monks, came out to meet us, and led us
into a great Hall, where we were very well treated. For it is the custom of the
Armenians, a little before Meals to present their Guests a large Cup of
Aqua-Vitae, with Sweetmeats of all sorts, besides Citron and Orange-peels
candy'd, in seven or eight Porcelan-dishes, laid in a great China Basin. This
is a little Prelude to excite the Appetite; for the Armenians, both men and
Women, will empty great Cups of Aqua-Vitae. After Dinner they go to Church,
where they sing certain Hymns: when you return, there are a sufficient number
of Mattresses or Quilts to lie upon; for they use no other sort of Beds over
all Asia: only at Night you spread a Carpet upon a Quilt, and shut the Door. We
saw not the Archbishop all that Evening, only at Church.

About Midnight all the Bells rang, and every body rose to go to Church. I
belieye it was more than usual, because it was Shrovetide; for both the Office
and the Missa were both concluded by break of day. Between eight and nine in
the Morning the Cloth was laid; before which time we saw abundance of the
Neighboring Country people, who brought Wine, Fruits, and other Provisions,
and presented all to the Archbishop.

While we were at Breakfast news came that a certain Bishop was dead, in his
return to the Three Churches; whither he was sent by the Patriarch to gather
certain Duties due from the Villages. Immediately the Archbishop rising from
the Table with all his Assistants, and having made a Prayer for the Dead, sent
a Bishop and six Monks to fetch the Corpse; who returning a little after
Midnight, the Body was presently laid in the Church upon a Carpet spread upon
the Ground, with the Face turned toward the Altar. In the mean time, a great
number of Wax-candles were lighted, and all the rest of the Night two monks
watched by turns to Pray for the Dead. Early in the Morning the Archbishops,
the Bishops, and all in Religious Orders, said the Office for the Dead, which
lasted half an Hour; and at the end of the Mas^ they brought the Corpse to the
Altar, so that they made the Feet of the Corpse to touch it. Having so done,
they took off the Linen Cloth that covered his Head, at which time the
Archbishop anointed him in six places with the Holy Oil, saying certain Prayers
every time. Then they covered him again, and said other Prayers which lasted
half an Hour. These Ceremonies performed, they carried the Corpse out of the
Church with Crosses and Banners, and every one a Taper in his Hand. As the
Corpse passed by, one of the Bishops put a Paper in his right hand, containing
these words, I came from the Father, and I return to the Father. Being brought
to the Grave, upon a little Mountain near the Covent, and set down, they said
other Prayers which lasted a quarter of an hour. In the mean time a Bishop
going down into the Grave, took away all the Stones and made the place smooth,
after* which the Corpse was let down wrapped in a large Linen Sheet. Then the
Bishop, according to there custom, raised his Head a little higher than his
Body, turning his face to the East. Which being done, the Archbishop and
Assistants took every one a handful of Earth, which the Archbishop blessed, and
giving it to the Bishop, he strewn it over the Body. Then the Bishop coming
out again, the Grave was filled up.

From St. Stephen's there is a descent for a League together to Aras, by the
side whereof you are to keep along till you come to Zulpha, where you come into
the high Road again. There is another way quite over the Mountain, which is the
nearer way by a League, but it is very troublesome and toylsom, and therefore the
less frequented.

But to return to the High Road from Naksivan; half a League from Naksivan you
meet with a River which falls into Aras, which is to be crossed over a
Stone Bridge of 12 Arches, though there be but little Water, unless it be when
the Snow melts, or the Rains fall. In a Meacow, next the Bridge, where we
lodged one time that I traveled that way, there is a Spring of luke warm
Water, which will loosen the Belles of them that drink it. At this Bridge it is
that the Toll-gatherer comes and takes his Duties, when the Caravan stays not
at Naksivan. You must pay ten Abassi's for every Camel's Loading, or nine
Livers, which is for the securing the Highways. These Duties are demanded in
many places of Persia without searching the Packs. The Governors also in their
Provinces are made to answer for every Robbery committed: which makes it so
safe traveling in Persia, that you need not keep with the Caravan, unless you
will your self.

From this Bridge to Zulfa is but one days journey; which Town being altogether
ruined, shows the reason wherefore the Caravan lodges upon the Bank of the
River five hundred Paces on this side.

Zulfa, the ancient Habitation of the Armenians which Sha-Abas carried into
Persia, is a Town squeezed between two Mountains, through which the Aras runs,
leaving but little Land on either side. It carries no Boats till about two
Leagues below, (for upward it will hardly bear a piece of Timber) and in regard
the Country grows low and extends it self into Plains, there is no fear of
Rocks, the course of the Stream being very quiet. There was a fair
Stone Bridge, which Sha-Abas caused to be broken down, when he wholly destroyed
the Town, that it might be no harbor for the Turks. Neither by the Ruins, nor
by its Situation, does it appear to have been a City of any ancient Beauty; the
Stones were clapped unskilfully together without Mortar, so that the Houses were
more like Caves than Houses. The North-West side was most inhabited, there
being nothing on the other side worth taking notice of. The Lands about Zulfa
being very fertile, there are certain Armenian Families returned, who live very
quietly. Cogia Nazar, one of the chief Armenians that went out of Zulfa,
growing rich by Trade, and being in great reputation with Sha-Abbas, and
Sha-Sefi his Successor, who made him Kelonter, or Chief Judge of the Armenian
Nation, built two great Inns, for the Honor of his Country, in Zulfa, upon
each side of the River one. He spent above an hundred thousand Crowns, but
dying left two remarkable Pieces of Work unfinished.

Half a League on this side Zulfa, before you cross a Torrent that falls into
Aras, you may take your choice of two ways to go to Tauris. The one upon the
right hand, leading to the South East, which is the ordinary Road; the other
upon the left hand, toward the North East, which we took eight or ten in
company together on horseback, the last time I went to Ispahan. We left the
Caravan, that takes the great Road, and never goes the other way, because it is
full of Rocks and Stones that spoil the hoofs of the Camels. However I was
willing to see a new Country, which I shall describe before I come to the great
Road.

From the Torrent where we left the Caravan, we went forward, and lay at a
Village not above a League and a half off.

The next day, after we had kept along by the Banks of the Aras for five or six
Hours, we came to Astabat, which lies a League from the River, where we staid
above two Days to divert our selves. This is but a little City, but a very neat
one; where there are four Inns, and every House has its Fountain. The great
plenty of Water makes the City very fruitful in all things; more especially in
good Wine. This is the only Country in the World that produces the Ronas, for
which there is a vast utterance all over Persia and India. The Ronas is a Root
that grows in the Earth like Liquorice, and is not much bigger. The use of it
is to dye Red, and this is that Red which gives that beautiful tincture to all
the Calicuts that come out of the Mogul's Country. Though the Roots which are
pulled out of the Earth are very long, yet they cut them into pieces not above
as long as a Man's Hand, for the better accommodation of Carriage. It is a
wonderful thing to behold at Ormus whole Caravans laden with this Ronas, which
they Ship off from thence to the Indies.

The Root is full of Juice, and yields a very high Tincture; for I remember
that an Indian Vessel that was laden with it, being cast away in the Road of
Ormus, where the Bags of Ron^s floated, the Sea looked of a red color for
several days.

Departing from Astabat, it behooved us to provide our selves with Straw and
Barley for our Horses, understanding that we should meet with none all that
days journey. From thence we traveled upon a descent for an hour together to
the River Aras, which we crossed in a Boat; and all the rest of the day we
traveled through Mountains, over Torrents and Stones. That Evening we lay upon
the Bank of a small Stream.

The day following, after we had traveled through a spacious Valley for two or
three hours, we ascended a high Mountain, at the top whereof we met with two or
three pitiful Houses, where we stopped that day.

The next, which was the fifth after, we left the Caravan, we traveled upon a
descent for two or three hours, till we came to a great Village neatly
situated, where there grows excellent Fruit. There we reposed for an hour or
two; and from thence we came to a great Stone-Bridg on a River where there is
no Water but when the Rains fall. It falls into the Lake Roumi, but the Water
of the River is so sour and ill tasted, especially when it is low, that it is
not to be drunk. About a quarter of a League from the Bridge are three long
Stones set in the Ground like Pillars: the Natives say that they were placed
there for a Monument, in the same place where Darius the Son of Hystaspes was
elected King by the cunning of the Gentleman of his Horse: from whence to
Tauris is but half a League. The Mountains of the Medes which we crossed in
this Road, and those which run along toward the ancient Parthians, are the most
fertile in all Persia. They bear Corn and Fruit in abundance; for upon the high
Mountains there are fair Plains sowed with Wheat, which are extraordinary
fertile. The Springs which rise there, and Rains which fall give a fresher
beauty and a higher taste to what grows there, more than in any other part of
Persia that wants Water; and the products of those Fields are of a higher price.

Now for the great Road. The Caravan having crossed the Stream where we left
it, lodges the next Night upon the Banks of Aras, over which it ferries the
next Morning. It does not go thorough Zulfa, though it be so near it; because
that on the other side of the City, there are three Leagues of Way very bad and
unfrequented. For which reason you must leave Zulfa on the right hand, which is
not much out of the way. After two hours travel you go by a Bridge which is
called Sugiac; after which you come upon Heaths encompassed with high Rocks.
All this days journey you meet with no Water, but only one little Fountain, and
the Water is so bad that the Beasts will hardly drink it.

The day following you travel through an even Country, but very barren: where
you meet with nothing but a forlorn Inn; though it be a place where Cost has
been bestowed, and built all of Freestone, that was fetched a great way off.
The next Stage is Marante, famous for the Burying-place of Noah's Wife. The
Town is not very big; resembling rather a Thicket than a City: but the
situation is very pleasant, in the middle of a fertile Plain adorned with
several well peopled Villages. This Plain does not extend above a League round
about Marante, the Country beyond it being all barren. However it is not
altogether unprofitable: for being a continual Heath, it affords feeding for
the Camels, which are there bred for the Caravans. Which is the reason that
there are so many Camel-Masters at Sugiac and Marante, who furnish great part
of the Road. At Marante you must pay thirteen Abassi's, or four Crowns for
every Camel's Load, for the security of the Road.

Leaving Marante, you lodge the next night a League from Sophiana in a bushy
Plain, where the Water is worth nothing; after you have traveled a mixed
Country, barren enough, where you meet with but one Inn in a Valley: but it is
a very fair one. Sophiana is an indifferent large City, which you cannot see
till you come within it, by reason of the great number of Trees planted in the
Streets and round about it, which makes it look rather like a Forest than a
City.

The next day, which is usually the tenth days journey from Erivan, the
Caravan, having crossed fair, large and fertile Plains, arrives at Tauris. Those
Plains are watered with several Streams that fall from the Median Mountains;
but the Water is not all of the same goodness, for there is some which cannot
be drunk.

In the midway between Sophiana and Tauris, lies a Hill, from whence you have
a prospect over those Plains, upon which the Army of Sultan Amurath Encamped,
when he besieged Tauris. The news coming to Sha-Sefi King of Persia, that he
had burnt it, and was marching further into the Country with a hundred thousand
Men, Let him come, said he, without any disturbance, I know how to make the
Turks pay for their Invasion without any great trouble. They were then not
above fifteen days march from Ispahan, when Sha-Sefi, turned the course of all
the Streams both before and hehind, which only run from certain Springs, and
are brought in Cutts or Channels into the Inland-parts of Persia, where there
are no Rivers: By which means the whole Army of the Turks perished for want of
Water in those vast unwater'd Countries where they had engaged themselves too
far.

Tauris lies in 83 Degrees, 30 Minutes of Longitude; and 40 Degrees, 15 Minutes
of Latitude, in an open place where there is not a Tree to be seen; and
environed with Mountains on every side, but only upon the West. The further^
Mountain is not above a League from the City; but there is one which almost
touches it, being only separated from it by the River. It Is a good Country, and
fruitful in Corn; there is good Pasturage, and great store of Pulse. Some think
that Tauris was the ancient Ecba^ane, the Metropolis of the Empire of the
Medes. It is at this day a great City and well peopled, as being the Mart for
Turkey, Muscovy, the Indies, and Persia, There are an infinite number of
Merchants, and vast quantities of all sorts* of Merchandise: particularly of
Silk, which is brought out of the Province of Guilan, and other places. There
is also a great Trade for Horses, which are handsome and cheap. Wine,
Aqua-vitae, and indeed all sorts of Provisions are cheap enough; and Money
trolls about in that place more than in any other part of Asia. Many Armenian
Families have got great Estates there by Trade, and understand it better than
the Persians. A little River, the Water whereof is very good, runs through the
middle of Tauris; it is called Scheinkaie, over which there are three Bridges to
cross from one part of the City to the other.

The most part of the Buildings in Tauris are of Bricks baked in the Sun; the
Houses not being above one or two Stories high at most. The tops of the Houses
are terrass'd; the Roofs within are vaulted, and plastered with Earth mixed
with chopped Straw, which they whiten afterward with Lime. In the year 1638 the
City was almost ruined by Sultan Amurath; but it is almost all rebuilt again.
There are in it Bazars, or Market-houses, which are well built, and many Inns
very commodious, two Srories high. The fairest is that of Mirza-Sade Governor
of the Province, who caused it to be built with a Market-house adjoining, to
which he has added a Mosquee and a College, with good Revenues.

The great Trade of Tauris renders it renowned over all Asia: for it has a
continual Trafsick with Turks, Arabians, Georgians, Mengrelians, Persians,
Indians, Muscovites, and Tartars. The Bazars or Market-houses, which are
covered, are always full of Goods: for there are some which are peculiar to the
Handicraft-Trades; the most part whereof are Smiths, such as make Saws, Axes,
Files, and Steels to strike Fire, with Tobacco-stoppers belonging to them. Some
there are that make Pad-locks: for the Eastern People fasten their Doors only
with wooden Bolts. There are also Turners, that furnish the neighboring Parts
with Spinning-Wheels and Cradles: and some Goldsmiths, that make trifles of
Silver. But there is abundance of Silk-weavers that are Artists, and work very
neatly; and indeed there are more of those than of any other Trade. Here it is
that they dress the greatest part of the Shagrin-Skins that are vended so
plentifully all over Persia; for there are none unless it be the
Country People, but wear Boots or Shoes of Shagrin-Leather. This Leather is
made either of the Hides of Horses, Asses, or Mules* and only of the hinder
part of the Hide: but the Asses Hide has the best grain.

There are to be seen at Tauris, Ruins of the stately Edifices round about the
great Piazza, and the neighboring parts: they have also let run to ruin four
or five Mosquees of a prodigious height and bigness. The most magnificent and
the biggest stands as you go out of the Town, in the Road to Ispahan. The
Persians will not come near it, but look upon it as defiled, and a Mosquee of
Heretics, in regard it was built by the Sounnis, or the followers of Omar.
It Is a vast Structure fairly built, the Front whereof is fifty Paces broad,
with an ascent of eight Steps. It is lined without with Brick-work varnished
with different Colors; and adorned within with very fair Painting A l'antique,
and abundance of Cifers and Arabian Letters in Gold and Azure. Upon two sides
of the Forefront are reared two Minarets or Towers very high, but not very
wide, yet with Stairs to go up to the top. They are lined with varnished
Brick-work, which is the usual Ornament of the Persian Buildings: and at the
top stand two Cupola's, formed like the Turbants which the Persians wear. The
Gate of the Mosquee is not above four Foot wide, cut out of a great transparent
white Stone, four and twenty Foot high, and twelve broad. Entering at the Door
of the Mosquee, you come into a spacious Duomo, thirty six Paces in Diameter,
raised upon twelve Pillars within, and supported by sixteen without, which
Pillars are very high, and six Foot square. Below there is a Balustrade or
Rails that run round about the Building, with Doors to go from one side to the
other: and the Foot of every Pillar, which is of white Marble, is hollowed into
little Niches equal with the Floor, where the People put their Shoes, when
they go farther to their Devotions. The inside of the Walls is varnished in
Squares of several Colors, with Flowers, Cifers, and Arabian Letters
intermixed, and wrought in Embossed work, so well painted, so well gilded that
it seems to be but one piece of Work, cut out with a pair of Scissars. From
this Duomo you pass to another lesser, but more beautiful in its kind. The
lower part is of transparent white Stone, of the same nature with that in the
Front, cut in great Panes like a Door that never opens. This Duomo has no
Pillars, but eight Foot high, it is all of white Marble, where are to be seen
Stones of a prodigious length and breadth: The inside of the Vault is a violet
Enamel, painted with all sorts of Flowers in Flat-work, but the outside of both
the Duomo's is covered with varnished Brick-work, and Flowers embossed A la
Moresque. Upon the first the Flowers are black upon green; upon the second,
white Stars upon black: which diversity of Colors is very pleasing to the Eye.

Near the Door out of which you enter into the lesser Duomo, on the left hand,
stands a Chair of Walnut-tree curiously-carv'd, and fastened to the Wall; it
stands upon a Platform raised six steps high, without any Canopy. On the right
hand stands another Chair of the same Wood, and an exquisite piece of
Workmanship; with a kind of State over it of the same Wood, fastened to the
Wall. There is a little Rail about it; and the Platform is four steps high. On
the South Side of the Mosquee there are two white transparent Stones, which
when the Sun shines upon them look red: And sometimes after the Sun is set, you
may read at those Stones by the reflection of the Sunbeams.

Just against the Mosquee on the other side is another Front, which is the only
Remain of a ruined Building. It was the abode of the Sheck Iman, or the Chief
Priest. There had been large Baths which belonged to it, but they are all
destroyed; some others there were of less note, which are not looked aster.

In the great Piazza of Tauris and in the parts adjoining, stands a sair
Mosquee, a College, and a Castle, which fall to decay; these Buildings being
forsaken; by reason they were made use of by the Sounni's, which were followers
of Omar. Near the same Church is a ruined Church of the Armenians, whither they
say St. Helena sent the true Cross. There is another Mosquee, which was
formerly a Church dedicated to St. John Baptist, where they say one of his
Hands was preserved a long time.

The Capuchins have a very convenient House at Tauris; for Mirza-Ibrahim
Governor of the Province, whose credit is equal to the Kan of Tauris, which is
the chiefest Command in Persia, favors him very much with his protection. This
Governor has made himself very considerable at Court* and very much respected
by the King for his indefatigable pains, and his extraordinary agility in
augmenting the King's Revenue: having found out such ways for that purpose, as
never entered into the thoughts of any that preceded him in the the same
Employment. He is very curious to learn all the Noble Sciences, which is a
quality very rare among the Persians: He also takes great delight in the
Mathematics and Philosophy, discoursing often with Gabriel de Chinon,
Governor of the Capuchins Covent in Tauris. But the great desire which
Mirza-Ibrahim had, to have his two Sons taught by the said Gabriel, was the
chief motive that made him so savourable to that Covent. He bought the Friars a
place to build their House, and liberally furnished them for the Expense of the
Work.

When the Sun sets and rises, there are a certain Company of People, who are
obliged to make a hideous noise with Drums and Trumpets in the Meidan, or great
Piazza of the City. They stand upon one side of the Piazza in a Gallery
somewhat raised, which is a Custom observed in all the Cities under the Persian
Government.

As you go out of Tauris upon the North-side, there is a Mountain close by,
there being only the River between it. The name of it is Einali-Zeinali, and
formerly there stood upon the top of it a fair Hermitage of the Armenians,
which the Mahometans have converted into a Mosquee. At the bottom of the
Mountain stands a Fortress and a Mosquee, which they let go to ruin, because
they were built by the Ottomans. A little farther upon the brink of the
Precipice stands a Monastery, near to which are two Caves, where are certain
Sepulchers and Marble Pillars lying along upon the Ground. There are also in
the Mosquee certain Tombs of the ancient Kings of the Medes, the Remains
whereof show that the Work was very Excellent.

Upon the Road from Tauris to Ispahan, about half a League from the utmost
Gardens, between several knaps of the Mountain which you leave upon the right
hand, upon the top of the highest of all, where there never was any Water, and
where it is impossible to bring any, appears a Bridge Fifty paces long, the
Arches whereof are very fair ones, but it falls to decay. It was a Mollah that
built it, out of what design no person new: nor can you come to Tauris upon
that side, but you mu^t see that Bridge, because there is no other way, there
being nothing but Water and Precipices on either hand. Afterward he confessed
that he built it out of mere Vanity, knowing that Sha-Abbas the first of that
name, was to come to Tauris. The King indeed came some time after, and seeing
an unprofitable Bridge upon the top of a Mountain, he demanded who built it,
and what was his design. To whom the Mollah returned this answer, Sir, said he,
I built that Bridge, that when your Majesty ^^me to Tauris, you might inform
your self from the mouth of him that built it. By which it appeared that the
Mollah had no other ambition than to oblige the King to speak to him.

A League from Tauris to the West, in the middle of a field, stands a great
Brick Tower, called Kanhazun. It is about fifty Paces in Diameter, and though
it be half ruined, yet it is very high. It se^ms to have been the Dungeon of
some Castle, there being very high Walls round about it; which though they be
but of Earth, nevertheless appear to be very ancient. It is not certainly known
who built this Tower, but the Arabian Letters upon the Gate afford us some
reason to conclude that it was a Mohammedan structure. In the year 1651 there
happened a terrible Earthquake in Tauris and the parts thereabouts, by which
many houses were overturned, and this Tower then cleaving from the top to the
bottom, a good part of it fell down, and filled up the hollow within-side.

Besides the little River that runs by Tauris, there is another bigger to be
crossed about half a League from the ^ity, over which there is a very fair
Stone Bridge: Near to it stands a Sepulcher, covered with a little Duomo, where
the Persians say that the Sister of Iman Riza lies interred; and they have it
in great veneration. The River that runs under the Bridge comes from the
Mountains of the North, and falls into the Lake Roumi, thirteen or fourteen
Leagues from Tauris. They call it Aggisou, or Bitter*water; for the Water is
very bad, and without any Fish. The Lake which is fifteen Leagues in compass,
has the same quality, the Water being blackish: the Fish that happen into it
out of other Rivers that fall into it, presently become blind, and in a short
while are found dead by the Shore. This Lake takes its name from a Province and
a little City, which are both called Roumi, being not above Eleven Leagues from
Tauris.

In the middle of the Lake, upon the way that leads to a little City called
Tokoriam, there is a little Hill that rises insensibly, the ascent whereof is
very smooth, and out of it there rise many little Springs. The farther they run
from the Head, the wider grow the Streams. And the Earth which they water is of
two distinct qualities; the first Earth that is dug serves to make Lime: the
next to that is a hollow spungy Stone, the is good for nothing: but under that
again is a white transparent Stone, which you may see through as through Glass,
which being smooth and polished serves to adorn the Houses. This stone is only
a congelation of the Waters of these Streams; for sometimes you shall meet with
creeping Animals congealed within. The Governor of the Province sent one piece
to Sha-Abbas, as a great present, wherein there was a Lizard congealed of a
Foot long. He that presented* it to the Governor had Twenty Tomans, or three
hundred Crowns; afterward I offered a thousand for the same Piece. In some
parts of the Province of Mazandran, where the Enxin Sea stretches farthest into
the Persian Territories, these congealed Stones are to be found, but not so
frequently as near the lake Roumi; and you shall many times find pieces of Wood
and Worms congealed in the Stones. I brought away a Camels loading of these
Stones; and left them at Marseilles; till I could find what use to put them to.

CHAP. V.
A Continuation of the Constantinopolitan Road from Tauris to Ispahan, through
Ardevil and Casbin.
FRom Tauris to Ispahan the Caravan makes it generally twenty-four days journey.

The first day you cross over dry Mountains, and four Leagues from Tauris you
meet with one of the fairest Inns in Persia. This Inn Sha-Sefi caused to be
built; it is very convenient, and large enough to lodge a hundred persons with
their Horses. Over all Persia, especially from Tauris to Ispahan, and from
thence to Ormus, you meet every day with Inns at an equal distance.

The next day you descend a Mountain, in very rugged and narrow way. At the
foot of this Mountain there are two ways for the Merchants to choose that will
go to Ispahan. They that will go the ordinary road and the direct way through
Kom and Kachan, leave a Lake upon the left hand that parts the two Roads; and
they that will go through Ardevil and Casbin, two other good Cities, leave the
Lake upon the right hand, and coast along by the side of the Mountain. From
Tauris to Ardevil it is not above a dozen Leagues; and having passed the Lake,
the Country is very good: Which is the Road I intend to describe first.

Ardevil being at so small a distance from Tauris, lies almost in the same
Degrees and Minutes of Longitude and Latitude. This City is famous, as well for
being the first Market of Silks that come from Guilan, from which it is not far
off; as also for the Sepulcher of Sha-Sefi, the first of that name, King of
Persia. The avenues to it are very pleasant, being as it were Alleys of great
Trees, which are called Tchinar, planted in a straight line, at a due distance*
It is of a moderate bigness, and seated in a lovely opening of the Mountains.
The next to the Cities, which is called Sevalan, is the highest in all Media.
The Houses of Ardevil are built of Earth, as are most of the Houses in the City
of Persia: but the Streets are very uneven, dirty, and narrow. There is but one
which is handsome, at the end whereof is built the Armenian Church. A little
River runs through the middle of the City, which descending from the
neighboring Mountains runs from East to West. It is by Industry brought into
many Cuts to water the Gardens, and in many places there are very fair Trees
planted, which are very delightful to the Sight. The Meydan or Marketplace is
a very great one; more long than round; where stands a very fine Inn, upon one
side, which the Kan caused to be built. There are several others in several
parts of the City, which have the Prospect over several lovely Gardens,
especially that which belongs to the King; to which you go through a long and
stately Walk of four rows of Trees, at the end whereof stands a large Gate that
gives you entrance. Though the Country about Ardevils be proper to bear Vines,
yet there are none thereabouts; nor is there any Wine made till about four or
five Leagues from the City. The Armenians that dwell in the City are very well
stored with it; though there be no place in all Persia, where there is so much
Caution to be used, either as to the Importing it, or the Drinking it; both
which must be done very privately: Which proceeds from the Mohammedan
Superstition; the Persians having so peculiar a veneration for that place, that
they believe it a sin to suffer Wine to be publicly drank therein.

The people come in Pilgrimage from all parts of Persia to the Sepulcher of
Sha-Sefi; which together with the vast Trade of Silk, makes Ardevil one of the
most considerable Cities of all Persia. There are several other Buildings added
to the Mosquee wherein he lies interred; the Entry whereof faces, the Meydan,
to which it is joined upon the South Side with a large Portal. The Gate is
chained with Chains fastened a cross with great Rings; which if any Criminal
Offender can but touch, and enter into the first Court, he is safe; for no
person can apprehend him. This is a large Court, yet more in length than
breadth, without the Wall whereof that looks upon the Marketplace, several
Shops are built for Merchants and Tradesmen.

Out of this Court you pass into another which is less, and paved with broad
Stones, with a Rivulet running through the middle. The Entry into it is through
a Door, fortified with Iron Chains like the former* and is made at a corner of
the great Court upon the left hand. It brings you presently under a Portico*
where there are fair Balconies raised after the fashion of the Country* Those
Balconies are full of several People; either Pilgrims, or persons whose Crimes
constrain them thither for Sanctuary. In that place you must leave your Stick
and your Sword, before you go any farther; and give something besides to a
Moullah, who is always attending there with Books.

In that second Court through which the Rivulet glides, on the one side are
Baths, on the other Granaries for Rice and Corn; and upon the left hand, at the
end of the same Court, there is a little Door which brings you to a place where
the Royal Alms are distributed to the Poor, Morning and Evening; being just
against the King's Kitchen. This Gate is covered with Plates of Silver; and in
the Kitchen there are about thirty Ovens contrived in the Wall, with as many
great Caldrons to dress Pilaw and other Food, as well for the Poor as for the
Officers of the Mosquee. While these Alms are distributing, the Master-Cook,
who commands all the rest, sets upon a Chair covered with Plates of Silver, and
sees that every thing be done in order. He sees to the measuring out the Rice
every day for the Kettles, and causes the Victuals to be divided in his own
sight: For there is an excellent Economy in the King's House.

At the end of the Portico beyond the first Court there are two Gates, one
beyond another, both covered with Plates of Silver, between those two Gates on
the right hand appears a little Mosquee, where are the Tombs of several Persian
Princes of the Blood Royal. You must have a great care not to tread upon the
Thresholds of the Gates; for it is a Crime not to be expiated without a severe
Punishment. From hence through a little I Will, you come into the Body of the
Church, richly hung with Tapestry, and set about with high Desks, where lie a
great many Books, wherein the Moullahs, or Doctors of the Law read continually,
having Stipends to Officiate in the Mosquee. At the end of the Body of the
Mosquee, is a little Octagonal Monument, like the Choir of a Church, in the
midst whereof stands the Monument of Sha-Sefi. It is only of Wood, but
curiously carved and inlaid. It exceeds not the height of a Man of an ordinary
stature* and seems like a great Chest, having four Apples of Gold set up at
each corner. It is covered with a Crimson Satin purfl'd with Gold; and all the
other Tombs that are by it, are covered with Silks as rich. As well in the
Choir as in the Body of the Church, there are abundance of Lamps, some of Gold,
some of Silver; but the biggest of all is of Silver; gilded and vermilion'd,
and neatly engraved. There are also six great Branches of a curious sort of
Wood, covered with Silver, with great Wax Candles in them, which are never
lighted but at their great Festivals.

From the Duomo where stands the Tomb of Sha-Sefi, you go under a little Vault,
which encloses another Monument of another King of Persia, whose Name I could
not learn. It looks like another great Chest, curiously wrought, and covered
with Satin. The Roof of the Mosquee is adorned within with a Painting of Gold
and Azure, a la Moresque; on the outside, with a fair Varnish of several
Colors, like the stately Mosquee at Tauris.

In the adjacent Parts round about Ardeuil are several Monuments worth a Man's
sight, being very ancient; and some which are ruined, show by what remains the
care which they took to enrich them with curious Workmanship. A quarter of a
League from the City stands a Mosquee, in which are the Tombs of the Father and
Mother of Sha-Sefi. It is a fair Structure, with Gardens and Courts, in one of
which there is a very clear Fountain where they keep Fish.

Ardeuil is not only famous, as I have said already, for the Royal Sepulchers
which are in it, and for the Pilgrimages which have been made to it from all
parts of Persia; but the numerous Caravans of Silk, which sometimes consist of
eight or nine hundred Camels, add very much to its Grandeur. For being near to
Guilan and Shamaqui, from whence those vast quantities of Silk come; and for
that the Road from both those places, to Constantinople and Smyrna, lies
through this City, there is a continual confluence of Merchants, and all sorts
of Merchandises are here to be had as well as at Tauris.

From Ardeuil to Casbin you travel through a good Country; for every three of
four Leagues you meet with little Rivers that fall from the Northern Mountains,
and water the Earth. The Caravan is usually five days between Ardeuil and
Arion, between Arion and Taron two, between Taron and Casbin two more. Half a
League on this side Taron you must cross a great River over a stone Bridge, and
half a League beyond you come to Kalkal.

Arion is a little City, Taron and Kalkal are two great Towns; and there are
but these three places in all Persia where there grow any Olives, or that they
make any Oil. Leaving Kalkal, you travel over a Plain ^or three hours, at the
end whereof is a Way which you you cannot get over in less than four hours. The
way is so bad that the Horses and Mules can hardly get up; but for the Camels,
they must take the lower Road, which is also very tedious, and full of Stones,
which the Torrents tumble down, and it is three or four Leagues about. When you
are up, the Country is level, and you have not above three Leagues to Casbin.

Casbin lies in 87 Degrees and 30 Minutes of Longitude, and 36 Degrees and 15
Minutes of Latitude. It is a great City, the Houses whereof are low and ill
built; except seven or eight, which are next to the King's Gardens. It has no
Walls, and indeed the best half of the City is in Gardens. There are three
Inns, with Marketplaces round about; one of the three being large and
commodious. It is inhabited altogether by Mahometans; or if there be any
Christians, they are very few.

The Soil about Casbin produces Pistaches. The Tree that bears that is never
bigger than a Walnut-tree of ten or twelve years old. The great quantity of
Pistaches that are exported out of Persia come from Malavert, a little City
twelve Leagues from Ispahan, toward the East. These are the best Pistaches in
the World, and the Country being of a large extent, produces them in such
abundance, that it furnishes all Persia and the Indies.

Leaving Casbin, you come to a little Village where there is but one Inn; and
you travel that day six Leagues through Countries fertile enough, and well
watered.

The next day you travel through a good Country, and in nine or ten hours you
come to Denghe. This is a great Village at the foot of a Hill, through which
there runs a fair River. It abounds with excellent both White and Claret Wine,
where the Travelers take care to replenish their Bottles. But generally they
never lie here; being desirous to go a League farther, for a good Inn's sake,
which makes it a handsome Stage.

At this Town of Denghe it is where the two Roads from Tauris to Ispahan meet:
the first, through Ardeuil and Casbin, I have already described. Hither also
come the Caravans that go for the Indies through Meshehead and Candahar, and
where they leave Ispahan Road to take the left hand Way, which carries them
Eastward.

CHAP. VI.
The ordinary Road from Tauris to Ispahan. through Zangan, Sultanie, and other
places.
WE must now return again to the Lake six Leagues beyond Tauris, where they
that will take the ordinary short way through Zangan and Sultanie, leave the
left hand way of Ardeuil and Casbin. This Lake is usually full of large red
Ducks, which are very good Meat.

From thence, after twelve or thirteen hours travel, in which time you meet
with three Inns, you come to Karashima, a large Town in a deep Valley, that
seems to be well manured. There is in it only a small Inn built of Earth, the
Doors whereof ^re so low, that the People are forced to creep upon their knees
to get in.

The next day you come to another large Village called Turcoma, where the Soil
is fertile, though it be very cold. There are several Caravansera's built like a
long Alley covered, which are only of Earth, the Men lying at one end, and the
Horses at another.

The next day you travel over an uneven and desert Country, and in eight hours
time you come to Miana, a little City situated in a Marsh, where you pay a Toll
for Guarding the Highways. In this City is one of the fairest Inns in all
Persia.

Two hours after you leave Miana, you must cross a River, over a fair Bridge
which runs to decay; the Arches whereof are hollow within; it is built of Brick
and Freestone, being near as long as Pont neuf in Paris. This Bridge stands
almost at the foot of a Mountain called Kaplenton. Sha-Abas caused all the way
to be Paved, because the Land is so fat and sloughy, that when it thaws, or
that the least Rain falls, it is impossible for the Caravan to pass. Besides,
there are a sort of Camels in Persia, that when it comes to rain in a deep
Soil, are not able to keep their Legs: nay through the weight of the Burdens
which they carry, their very Qua^ters will rive from their Shoulders, and their
Bellies will burst. So that before the way was paved, they were forced to
spread Carpets in the most slippery ways where those Camels were to pass: which
must be still done in some places, where the Pavement is worn away.

At the lower part of the descent toward Ispahan, upon the knap of a Hill which
stands by it self, appears an old forsak'n Fortress: it is near the Highway,
and a River, which falls into the Caspian Sea, after it has crossed the
Province of Guilan, where it is cut into several Channels. But generally the
Corn and Fruits which grow in Persia by the help of Water forced into Channels,
are of little esteem, and much cheaper than those that grow in the Provinces
whose Fertility is not Artificial. Moreover, that sort of forced Grain will not
keep above a Year; and if you keep it longer, it breeds a Vermin that eats it.
It Is the same thing if the Corn be ground; and more than that, there breeds a
Worm in the Flower, that makes it so bitter that it is impossible to eat it.

On this side the Mountain Kaplenton appear at a distance two others very high,
one toward the North called Saveland, another toward the South called Sehand:
there is a third, which cannot be seen in Ispahan-Road, being two far out of
the way, near the City of Hamadan. These three Mountains are full of Springs,
from whence most of the Streams do fall that water Persia: And the Persians do
say, that formerly there were many more of these Springs, but that about a
hundred Years ago several of them have been dried up, or otherwise no body can
tell what is become of them.

There are several Villages near the Mountain that pay nothing to the King, but
are obliged to send him a certain quantity of Rice and Butter, for the use of
the Mosquee at Ardeuil. They have also one great Privilege, That if a Man
commits a Murder, and flies to any of these Villages, he cannot be
apprehended, nor can the King himself punish him.

Leaving the River that runs at the foot of the Mountain Kaplenton, you come to
a fair Inn called Tshamalava, built some years ago: and for thirteen hours
after* traveling over a very barren Country, you meet with another Inn, which
is called Sartcham, standing in a very desert place: which makes the Raders,
that lie there to secure the Highways, very insolent, finding themselves so far
from any Towns or Villages.

From Sartcham you come to a River, by the Banks whereof you travel a good
while, till you come to an Inn which is called Digbe, near a large Village. The
Structure is very handsome, the lower part being of Freestone undulated with
red and white, and very hard.

The next day you travel a very uneven Country, till you fall into a deep
Valley, at the end whereof you meet with Zangan, a great Town and ill built.
However, it has a very fair Inn, which when I went last to Ispahan was so full,
that I had like to have lain abroad in the Rain, but for the Courtesy of two
Armenians. From Zangan you go to an Inn, where you must pay the Duties due to
the Kan of Sultanie.

Sultanie is a very large City, which you leave half a Mile from the Road, near
to a Mountain. Formerly it had in it very beautiful Mosquees, as may be easily
conjectured by the Ruins that remain. Many Christian Churches also were
converted into Mosquees; and if you will believe the Armenians, they will tell
you, that there were in Sultanie near eight hundred Churches and Chapels.

Three Leagues from Sultanie stands an Inn, and a League farther a great Town
called Ija, where there is another very commodious Inn, and most excellent Wine.

From thence you go to Habar, an ancient City and of a large extent, but very
much ruined, inhabited by Armenians for the most part: Here, for the good Wines
sake the Travelers stay to recruit their Bottles.

From Habar, after seven hours travel you come to a Village called Partin. From
Zangan to Partin you reach in two days. It stands in a fertile Plain, where
there are several other Villages. It is not above three Leagues broad, being
enclosed on each side, to the East and West, with a row of high Mountains.

Having passed this Plain, you come to a barren Country and ill inhabited,
which lasts all the day, till you come to Saxava. You pass by the Ruins of a
Village, where there are but two Houses standing, with the Tower of a Mosquee,
which is very high and slender. Then you come to a Mud-wall'd-Inn, built some
few years since; and near to that a Castle called Khiara, upon the peek of a
Hill, but very ill built.

Sexava is a little City in a Soil that bears excellent Nuts. The Inns that are
there being built of Earth, and being but little, are very handsome and
covenient, their number supplying the defect of their smalness.

From Sexava, after seven hours travel, you come to a great Inn, called
Idgloup, which was formerly a nobler place than now it is, standing alone in a
Field. Three Leagues from thence you meet with another spacious Inn, called
Cochkeria; and four hours farther you come to the Inn Denghe, where the two
Roads meet which I spoke of in the foregoing Chapter.

From Denghe to Kom are three days journey, over a barren, dry, and desert
Country, where there is no Water but Cistern-water, except in some very few
places, where it is very good. Four Leagues from Denghe is a fair Inn; and
three Leagues farther stands another, about a Mile from a Village to the South,
where there grows excellent good Wine, white and red. From this last Inn to
Sava is not above three hours travel with the Caravan.

Sava is a good City in a fertile Plain, where there are several Villages. The
greatest Trade of the Town is in little gray Lamb-skins, the curl whereof is
very neat, of which they make Furrs. Two or three Leagues beyond Sava the
Country is very well manured, and after you have forded a River half a League
from the City, after two hours travel you come to one of the fairest Inns in
all Persia, which was finished when I went last to Ispahan. From thence to Kom
it is about seven or eight hours journey, through a dry and sandy Road: but
half a League on this side Kom the Land is very good and fruitful.

Kom is one of the great Cities of Persia, in a fat Country abounding in Rice.
There grow also excellent Fruits, particularly large and excellent Granates.
The Walls are only of earth, with little Towers close one to another; and the
Houses being only of Earth, are never the hand somer withinside. At the entry
into the Town, you must cross a River, over a stone Bridge, and then turning to
the right hand over a fair Key, you come to an Inn very well built and very
convenient.

That which is most remarkable in Kom is a large Mosquee, no less in veneration
among the Persians, than the Mosquee of Ardeuil. There it is that you may see
the Sepulchers of Sha-Sefi and Sha-Abas the Second; as also the Tomb of
Sidi-Fatima, the Daughter of Iman-Hocen, who was the Son of Haly and
Fatima-Zuhra the Daughter of Mahomet. The great Gate of the Mosquee answers to
a Piazza more long than broad, where stands an Inn and certain Shops, which
without-side are somewhat beautiful. One of the sides of the Piazza is closed
up with a low Wall, over which appears the Shore, and a River which you cross
at the end of the Piazza. Over the great Portal of the Mosquee stands an
Inscription, in Letters of Gold, in the praise of Sha-Abas the Second. The
first place that you enter into is a Court of more length than breadth, which
may be termed a Garden, in regard that on each side of the Alley in the middle,
which is paved, there are several square Beds of Flowers, yellow Jasmin, and
other Plants; which are railed in by a Rail that runs all the length of the
Alley on each side. It is not an easy thing for the Christians to get in to
this Court, especially such whose Habits and Aspect they do not like: But as I
clothed and carried my self, I never was denied entrance into any place either
in Persia or India.

In this first Court on the left hand as you enter, are little Chambers, where
they that receive the Alms, which by the Foundation of the Mosquee are to be
distributed every day, come and eat their proportion, and then go their ways.
Those Chambers serve as an Asylum to those that cannot pay their Debts, as at
the Mosquee of Ardeuil. Neither are these Priviledg'd places like ours, where
they that retire must live at their own Charge: For in Persia they are sed at
the expense of the Mosquee; and being in that manner freed from Care, their
Friends more easily bring their Creditors to Composition.

Out of the first Court you pass into a second, which is larger, and all paved;
and from that into a third, which is square, and raised like a Terrass. You
enter into it through a large Gate, at the end of an open Passage, where stand
the Lodgings of the Moullah's.

Out of that Court by an ascent of Brickwork of ten or twelve Steps, you enter
into a fair Court, which is also raised like a Terrass; in the midst whereof is
a fair Fountain. It is continually filled by little Pipes of Water which run
into it, and is emptied by others that carry the Water into several parts of
the whole Enclosure. There are some Buildings in this Court, but one of the
sides of it is taken up with the Front of the Mosquee, which is no displeasing
Structure. There are three large Gates belong to it, very well expanded,
according to the mode of the Country; with a Brick-wall before, about the
height of a Man, with Holes in it for Light, made like a Lozange. The Threshold
of the middle Gate is Covered with a plate of Silver; and between these three
Gates and that of the Duomo, are several Doctors that hold Books in their
hands, and read perpetually.

This Mosquee is Octagonal, and at every angle is a small wooden Door of
Walnuttree, varnished with gray and yellow. The Tomb of Sidi-Fatima is at the
farther part of the Mosquee, there being only room for one Man to pass between
the Wall and the Tomb. It is encompassed with a large Silver Grate, sixteen
Foot square; the Bars whereof are round, and knob'd in those places where they
cross each other; it is lighted by several Lamps of Gold and Silver: which
altogether is very pleasing to the Eye. The inside of the Mosquee, to the
elevation of the Angles that support the Duomo, is composed of square Tiles
varnished over with diverse Colors; and the Cupola of the Duomo, as also the
Vault of the Portico of the Mosquee, is a Moresco piece of Painting in Or and
Azure. Upon each side of the Mosquee, and near the side where the Tomb of
Sidi-Fatima stands, appears a great Hall, where the Royal Alms are distributed
to the Poor, which consist of Pilaw and other diet, very well dressed. From this
Tomb you turn to the left hand toward an Ascent, distant five and twenty or
thirty Paces; and at the top of this Ascent is a Door, over which there is an
Inscription in Honor of Sha-Abas the Second. The Door being opened, shows you
the place where the Body of that King reposes: and through another Door with a
Grate in it, you may discover, under a small Duomo, the Tomb of Sha-Sefi his
Father; which is covered with a Carpet of Cloth of Gold. They were continually
at work upon the Tomb of Sha-Abas, which they said, they would make very famous.

I had not been two hours in Kom, but a multitude of People ran by the Inn
Gate, all in extraordinary have. Asking what the matter was, they answered me,
that it had been a day long designed for the two Prophets to fight. Thereupon I
went to the Piazza, which was so crowded, that I had much ado to get to see. In
the first place a sufficient number of Tumblers and Puppet players, divided
into two Bands, kept the middle of the Piazza, and made a sufficient Ring for
the Combat. Each Band held a Bull by the Horns, one of which they called
Mahomet, and the other Haly: and whether it where by accident, or by the
cunning of the Bull-Masters, after an obstinate Combat, wherein the Beasts
foamed again with heat and rage; Mahomet at length quit the Field, and yielded
Haly the Victory. Then all the People shouted for joy, and all the Piazza was
filled with the noise of Flutes and Hautboys; and every one coming as if it
were to adore Haly, cried out, Behold the Works of God, that Haly has made! At
length they bring the Bull Haly under a Gate, with his Head turned toward the
People; where after they have rubbed him to refresh him, after a Combat so
courageously maintained, every one sends him Presents, which are all the
Tumblers profit. The Kan or Governor of Kom, who was present with a hundred
Horses richly trap'd to behold the Sight, sent the Bull a Present of 50 Tomans,
or 750 Crowns. They who accompanied him, and the chief Inhabitants of Kom, gave
him some a Garment, others a Girdle. Neither did the meanest of the People
spare to send or carry him Fruits, or other things, according to their
abilities.

The Kan was a Lord who was very civil, and there was no Stranger that did not
commend his behavior, in regard he was so obliging.

So soon as I came to the place, whether it was that he perceived me with a
Dutchman that I had brought along from Constantinople, or whether any one had
informed him that there were Strangers near him, he sent for us, and after he
had asked us some Questions concerning the occasion of our Traveling, he sent
for a Seat and caused us to sit down. Then he asked us whence we came, and what
we did at Ispahan; to which when we had answered him, that we went to wait upon
the King, he approved our Intention, complaining that we had not given him
advice of our Arrival. In the Evening he sent us several Delicacies, among the
rest, six fair Melons, and four Bottles of excellent Wine.

He appeared to me so brave and generous a Person, that I was very much
troubled afterward for his being in dis*favour with the King, and his death,
which ensued. For this Kan finding the Walls of the City, which were only of
Earth, and the Bridge over the River to be out of repair, without writing to
the King, of his own head, laid a slight Imposition upon every Basket of Fruit
that was brought into the City. Now there are in all the Cities of Persia,
persons who are hired to take an account every Week what the Commodities may be
worth, and to take care that no more than such a Toll be laid upon any thing;
which they tax among themselves, and when they had set the Rate, they cause it
to be cried at the beginning of every Week. Sha-Sefi then reigned, it being the
year 1632. The King being informed by these people of the Impost which the Kan
had set upon Fruit without his knowledge, was so enraged against him, that he
caused him to be brought in Chains to Ispahan, where he used him with a strange
severity. For at that time the Son of the Kan stood at the King's Elbow, it
being his Office to give him his Pipe and his Tobacco, which is a very
honorable Employment in Persia. When the Kan came, the King caused him to be
carried to the Gate of the Palace, in the presence of all the People, and then
commanded his Son to pull the Hair of his Father's Mustaches by the roots from
his Skin. After that he commanded him to cut off his Nose and his Ears; after
that to put out his Eyes, and lastly to cut off his Head. When he had done the
Execution according to the King's pleasure, he commanded him to go and take
possession of his Fathers Government, and allowing him an experienced Old Man
for his Lieutenant, he sent him to Kom with these words; If thou govern'st no
better than this dead Dog has done, I will put thee to a more cruel Death than
this.

Leaving Kom, for four hours you travel over a fair Champain Country, after
which you come to a fair Village with five or six Inns in it. Beyond that is
nothing but Sand, till you come to a place called Abschirim, or Fresh Water,
where there are three Inns at a Distance from any Villages. From Abschirim to
Cachan is six hours journey through a Corn Country, and stored with great
Villages.

Cachan is a large City, well peopled, and furnished with all things necessary
for humane subsistence: There is an old Wall about it which is fallen down in
many places, so that there is no need of seeking for Gates to get into the
City. On that side which looks toward Ispahan the Soil is good, and produces
great store of Fruit and Wine, which the Jews take care to make. It is reckoned
that there are in Cachan a thousand Families of Jews; in Ispahan about six
hundred; but in Kom there are not above nine or ten. Not but that there are
many Jews in Persia, but those that live in Ispahan, Cachan and Kom, boast
themseves particularly of the Tribe of Judah.

There are an abundance of Silk-Weavers in Chachan that are very good Workmen,
which make all the best purfl'd Sattins mixed with Gold and Silver, that come
out of Persia. There they also coin Money, and make Copper-vessels, which they
vend in great quantities at a good distance off. The Market-houses are very
fair ones, and well vaulted, the Inns large and convenient: but there was one
among the rest which was very magnificent, near the King's Gardens, at the
entry of the City. As well the Inn as the Gardens were made by the order of
Sha-Abbas, the first of that Name, who was at a vast charge. The Inn is above a
hun^^ed Paces square, built of Brick two Stories high, containing twenty-six
vaulted Chambers of a reasonable bigness. It was a Structure too fair to be so
little regarded, as now it is, being much fallen to deca^. In the middle of the
Court was a Fountain to receive Water, which is spoiled. The Persians and Turks
are of that bad humor, rather to build new Houses than to repair old Buildings.
For which reason they have since built at Cachin four or five Inns, as fair and
commodious as that of Sha-Abas. This Custom is grown to that height, that the
Children are so far from taking care to repair the old Houses where their
Parents lived, that they will not so much as live in them after their decease,
covetous of the honor of building Houses for themselves.

Before we le^ve Cachan you must take notice, that as you are to travel from
that City to Guilan, you cannot avoid traveling thorough Plains for twelve
hours together, which are all pure Salt; and there is nothing to be met with by
the way, but one Cistern; nor can the Water which is in it be otherwise than
very bad.

Leaving Cachan, you cross a Plain of three Leagues, after which you enter in
among the Mountains, where you come to a very fair Inn of Brick. From thence
you descend a pleasant Vale, where you travel a long time by the side of a
River, over a ver^ narrow way. At the end of the Valley you meet a great Wall,
which crosses it, and joins the two Mountains together. This Wall is above a
hundred Paces long, above thirty Foot thick, and fifty high. It was the Work of
the Great Sha-Abas, whose design it was to stop the Waters that fall from the
Mountain, and to make a Receptacle for Water in that place, to serve his
occasions. At the foot of the Wall there is a Sluice, which being let down keeps
in the Water; but is pulled up to let out the Water over all the neighboring
Lands to the Plain of Cachan. From this Receptacle to Coro^ is about two hours
travel.

Corou is a very large Village, and well peopled, in a Soil environed with high
Mountains, and planted with great store of Walnut-trees. The Houses consist but
of one low Story, being built of Flint-stone; but the Inn therein is very fair
and commodious. This Village consists but of one Street, but it is almost half
a League long, and very troublesome in the Winter, by reason of a great River
that runs through it* and the great quantity of Stones that lie in the way. All
about this Village, as in several other places of Persia, there are a great
number of Sha^ales; which are a kind of Foxes, that in the night time make an
ugly noise; for if but one cry, all the rest will make answer, and set up a
howling.

From Corou you must travel three Leagues between Mountains, after which you
have but twelve Leagues to Ispahan. It is a continued Plain that extends it
self beyond the City, and in many places the Soil is very good. At every three
Leagues end you meet with Inns. The first is called Achaha-Acacamala; the
second, which is the halfway between Corou and Ispahan, is called Michiacour.
This place consists not only of one Inn, for there are many others, so that it
resembles a large Village. From Michiacour you come to Aganura, another Inn,
but ill built; and from Agan^ra, after you have traveled three Leagues through
a fat and fertile Country, you come to Ispahan.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Road from Smyrna to Ispahan, through Natolia.
SMyrna is at this day for Trade, whether it be by Sea or Land, one of the most
celebrated Cities of all the Levant, and the greatest Market for all sorts of
Commodities which are transported out of Asia into Europe, or out of Europe
into Asia. Hither all the Western Fleets are most regularly bound, that came
formerly no farther than Ligorn, and from whence, at times most regularly
appointed, the ^airest Caravans set out.

This City lies in 50 Degrees of Longitude; and 38 Degrees, 45 Minutes of
Latitude; at the bottom of a Gulf in the Archipelago, which is seven Leagues in
length, upon the right side of the Isthmus which begins to form the Peninsula
of Clazomene, right against the Island of Schio. It lies in that part of the
Lesser Asia, which the Greeks possessed, under the Name of Iconium; at a
distance almost equal, between Ephesus and Sardis; and was one of the seven
Churches mention*d in the Revelation of St. John. It is at this day a great
City, built like an Amphitheater, upon the descent of a Hill that looks toward
the Summer-West. But it is neither so great, nor so beautiful as formerly it
was, as may be easily conjectured by the Ruins of certain Edifices that remain
upon that Hill, which from the middle to the top, where the ancient City stood,
are altogether uninhabited. There are also to be seen the Walls of a fair
Castle, and above that the Ruins of an Amphitheater, where they say St.
Polycarp was exposed to fight with Lions. This Amphitheater was not in the form
of those other, which are usually round; for it contained but half a Circle,
being left open to the Seaside. The Turks have almost quite destroyed it:
making use of the Stones to build a Fort two Leagues from the City, upon the
Gulf, where the passage is very narrow; which the Ships are forced to salute as
they inter in, and to speak with when they sail ou^* Moreover, that they might
not be put to send for Stones a-far-off, they consulted whether they might not
make use of the Stones of the Christians Monuments, as also of those of the
Jews, which are near the Shor^* But they took very few, whether out of kindness
to the Tombs, or whether they did not think them so proper for use as the
Stones of the Amphitheater. This Castle had not been long built, but upon an
occasion very remarkable. In the last Wars of the Turks with the Venetians, the
Ottoman Fleet having been beaten in the Archipelago, the G^and Signor resolved
to re-fit another to Sea, and thereupon sent to all the parts of his Empire*
where he knew any English or Holland Vessels usually were wont to ride, to
solicit them to serve him for his Pay. More particularly ^e aimed at those
Vessels which were in Smyrna, where there were generally more than in any other
Port. But the Captains, who rejected his Proposition of fighting against the
Ven^tians, believing that he would put some force upon them, suddenly* hois'd
Sail and got away; it being at a time when he could not keep them in, having no
Castle then built to command them. The Grand Vizier nettl'd at the refusal of
the Captains, as an affront done to his Master, and to see that the Ships could
come in and go out, without any let or* molestation, bethought himself (to the
end he might keep them for the future und^^ subjection) of building a Fort upon
the Gulf, in such a part where the Vessels must necessarily touch; where now
there lie great Cannons level with the Water, which no Vessel can escape. Ever
since the Convoys will not come to Smyrna, as they were wont to do, but lie out
at Sea, out of the reach of the Fort.

Near to the Sea are yet to be seen some Remains of a Church, two sides whereof
seem to have been distinguished into Chapels by little Walls, which are yet
standing: But the Natives doubt whether they be the Ruins of a Church
dedicated to St. Polycarp, or of an ancient Temple of Janus.

Smyrna has been oftentimes ruined either by the Wars, or by the Earthquakes
which often happen there. One time that I staid there, there happened one,
which did not last long, but was very terrible. About sixty Paces from the Sea
are to be discerned the Ruins of great Walls two Foot under Water; and at the
end of the City that looks toward the Winter-West, near to the Sea, appear the
Ruins of a Mole, and certain ancient Magazines.

The English Merchants have dig'd among the Ruins of Smyrna, and have found
great store of ^air Statues, which they transported into their own Country.
There are still found some or other every day; but when the Turks find any,
they disfigure them presently. It may be conjectured, that there was one of a
prodigious bigness, by a great Toe broken off of some one, and for which I paid
sufficiently, out of the desire I had to buy it. I sent it to Paris to a Person
of Quality, who looked upon it as a great Curiosity. This Toe was of a hard
white Stone, and well shaped, and by the proportion whereof, the Figure could
not be judged to be less than the Colossus of Rhodes.

Upon that side of the City where the Mole was, stands an old Castle of no
defense, at the foot whereof the Sea makes a small Creek, where sometimes the
Galleys of the Grand Signor lie.

The City is well peopled containing no less than fourscore and ten thousand
Souls. There are reckoned no less than 60000 Turks, 15000 Greeks, 8000
Armenians, and about six or seven thousand Jews. As for the European Christians
that Trade there, their number is very small. Every one of these Nations has
the exercise of their Religion free to themselves. The Turks have in Smyrna
fifteen Mosquees, the Jews seven Synagogues, the Armenians but one Church, the
Greeks two, and the Latins three. There are also French Jesuits, and Italian
Observantins, or a sort of Gray Franciscans. The Turks, the Greeks, the
Armenians, and Jews live upon the Hill; but all the lower part toward the Sea
is inhabited only by the European Christians, English, French, Hollanders, and
Italians. The Greeks have also in the same Quarter an old Church, and some few
small Houses, where Seamen make merry.

All these different People of Europe are generally known in Smyrna by the Name
of Franks. Every Nation has its Consul: and the French Consul has two
Vice-Consuls under him; the one at Scalanova, the other at Chio.

Scalanova, or the New Port, is two Leagues beyond Ephesus, and being a good
Haven, the Vessels were wont to unlade there; but the Turks would not permit it
any longer. For that Place being the Dowry of the Grand Signor's Mother, the
Vice-Consul agreed with the Governor of Scalanova, who permitted the
Transportation of Goods to Smyrna, which is not above three little days journey
with the ^aravan: A thing that spoiled the Trade of the City, and injured the
Officers of the Custom-House. Whereupon they Petitioned the Grand Signor that
no more Goods might be unladed at Scalanova: so that now no more Vessels go
thither, unless it be to take in fresh Victuals.

Chio is one of the greatest Islands in the Archipelago, of which in another
place: but the Vice-Consul that lives there has no more business there than the
other at Scalanova; for the Vessels that touch there, neither unlade no^ export
any Goods from thence.

The Quarter of the Franks is only a long Street, one side whereof lies upon
the Sea; and as well for the Prospect, as for the convenience of Unlading
Goods, the Houses upon the Sea are much dearer than those that lie upon the
Hill.

The Soil about Smyrna is fertile, and abounds in all things necessary for
humane support; but particularly in good Oil and good Wine. There are Salt Pits
also half a League from the City, toward the North. The Sea affords great store
of good Fish; Fowl is very cheap; and in a word, Smyrna is a place of great
plenty. There is a lovely Walk all along the Sea to the Salt*Pits, where
generally abundance of People walk in the Summertime to take the fresh Air:
and there being more liberty at Smyrna than in any other part of Turkey, there
is no necessity of taking a Janisary along, when a man goes abroad. If a man
loves Fowling, it is but ^aking a Boat, which lands him two or three Leagues
from the City, toward the Mountains, where there is so much Game that he can
never return empty. For the value of three Sous you may buy a red Partridge at
Smyrna, and all other Fowl is proportionably cheap.

But if Smyrna have these great advantages, it has also its inconveniences: the
Heats are very excessive in Summer, and indeed they would be insupportable,
were it not for the Breezes that come off the Sea: these Breezes rise about ten
in the Morning, and continue till the Evening; but if they ^ail, it is very bad
for the Inhabitants. Besides, there hardly passes a Year but the City is
infested with the Plague, which however is not so violent as in Christendom.
The Turks neither fear it nor fly it, believing altogether in Predestination.
Yet I believe, if the Inhabitants of Smyrna would take care to drain away the
standing Puddles that gather in the Winter about the City, they would not be so
frequently molested with the Plague as they are. It is most rife in May, June,
and July; but the malignant Fevers that succeed it in September and October are
more to be feared, more People dying of them than of the Pestilence. In all my
Travels I never was in Smyrna at these unfortunate Seasons. There is no Basha
in that City; it being governed only by a Cady, who is not so severe to the
Christians as in other places: For should he abuse his Office, Constantinople
is at hand, where you may complain to the Mufti, and have relief; who for some
good Present may be easily persuaded to depose the Cady, as being glad of the
opportunity to displace him, and to put another in his room.

The Customs of Smyrna yield a great Revenue to the Grand Signor, being paid
there very exactly. But were there a certain Rate put upon Commodities, the
Merchants, who would otherwise be losers, would not study so many ways as they
do to deceive the Customers: For those Customers lay what Price they please
upon Commodities, valuing that at a thousand Crowns, which perhaps is not worth
three hundred, being absolute Masters of the Rate. In my last Voyage to Smyrna,
four Dutch Women that went thither in our Ship from their own Country, carried
a-shoar under their Coats whatever I had of rich Merchandise: for the Turks
have such a respect for that Sex, that they will not so much as offer to search
them. If a man be taken in stealing Customs, there is no other punishment than
to pay double.

The Trade of Smyrna is very great, and the principal Merchandises which the
Franks transport from thence, are raw Silk, which the Armenians bring out of
Persia; Chamlet-yarn, and Chamlet or Goats-hair, which come from a little City
called Angouri, fifteen or sixteen days journey from Smyrna; Cotton twisted;
Skins and Cordovans of several colors; Calicuts, white and blew; great
quantities of Wool for Mattresses, Tap'stries, quilted Coverlets, Soap,
Rhubarb, Galls, Valanede, Scammony, and Opium; which four last Commodities are
to be had in the Countries near to Smyrna, but not in great quantities. The
Caravans come generally to this Town in the Months of February, June, and
October; and depart again to the Countries from whence they came the same
Months.

Ephesus not being above a day and a halfs journey from Smyrna, on Horse-back-I
took an opportunity to go thither. There were twelve of us that joined
together, Franks and Hollanders, who took three Janisaries along with us, and
three Horses to carry our Provision.

We traveled this little Journey in the Summer, and setting out of Smyrna about
three of the Clock in the Afternoon, we rode through a Country part Plains, and
part Hills, till we came to a great Village, where we supped.

After we had staid there three hours, we took Horse and traveled till
Midnight, to avoid the Heats: By the way we met with nine or ten Arches, very
narrow; which we could not conjecture to be any thing else than the Ruins of
some Aqueduct. From thence to Ephesus the way is very pleasant, through little
Thickets watered with Rivulets.

A quarter of a League from Ephesus you meet with another Mosquee, which was
formerly a Christian Church, built out of the Ruins of the Temple of Ephesus.
This Mosquee stands enclosed with Walls, and you must ascend up to it by two
Ascents of twelve Steps a-piece, which bring you to a large Passage. From
thence you enter into a large Cloister, the Arches whereof are sustained with
Marble Pillars of several colors, delicately wrought; and the lower part of
the Gallery, which runs along three of the sides, that consists of great
Squares of Stone. The Mosquee takes up the fourth side upon the left hand, the
Gate being in the middle. The Mosquee it self is a wide Arch, supported by five
Columns, all of most exquisite Work. There are four of Marble, and every one of
a different Color; but the fifth is a most rare piece, being of Porphyry, aed
the bigness of it makes it so much the more to be admired.

Ephesus does not look like a City, being so absolutely ruined, that there is
not a House standing. It was built upon the descent of a Hill, in a situation
not much unlike that of Smyrna, at the foot whereof runs a Rivulet, after it
has made a thousand Maeander^* in the Meadows. The City seems to have been very
large, for you may discern upon the top of the Gates the compass of the Walls,
with several square Towers, some of which are still standing: and there is one
very remarkable, having two Chambers in it, one of which is a very fair one,
the Walls and Pavement whereof are Marble.

The famous Temple of Diana stood at the bottom of the Hill, near one of the
Gates of the City. There remains nothing of it at present but the great Portal,
which is entire. The Vaults of the Arches under ground stand to this day, and
are very large, but all full of nastiness. We went in with Lanthorns; and
though you must creep to get in, by reason that the Wind has almost stopped up
the Hole, by gathering the Dust about it, yet when you are in, you may go
upright; for the Arches are high and fair, and little the worse. Near the Gate
lie four or five Columns upon the Ground, and near to that a Fountain, ten Foot
in Diameter, and two deep. The People of the Country report, that it was the
Fountain wherein St. John Baptized the Christians. For my part, as I have seen
in the Indies several Pagods and Edifices much more beautiful than ever the
Temple of Ephesus could be; I believe it rather to have been a Basin wherein
the People put their Offerings, of which there are several such that belong to
the Indian Pagods. The Greeks and Armenians, but above all the Franks, when
they go to Ephesus always endeavor to break off some piece of that Basin, to
carry it away with 'em as a Relick: but the Stone is so hard, that they can
break off but very little at a time.

Not far from the Temple appears another Gate of the City, over which there
lies a great Stone seven or eight Foot square, with an embossed Figure of Q.
Curtius that Famous Roman, who threw himself, Horse and A^^ms into the gaping
Earth, for the good of his Country. Many Merchants have offered Money for
liberty to carry it away, but cannot obtain leave. About five hundred Paces
from Ephesus is the Grotto which they call the Seven Sleepers, at the bottom of
the same Hill where the City was built.

From Ephesus we went to Scalanova, which is not above two Leagues off. By that
time you come half the way, the little River that runs by Ephesus falls into
the Sea, in the mouth whereof there are always a great number of Greek Barks
fishing for Sturgeon. Of the Spawn of this Fish they make Caveare, and drive a
great Trade in it in those Parts: then they take the most delicate and smallest
Entrails of that Fish, which they fill with the same Spawn, of which they make
a kind of a flat Pudding, as long as a Biscuit, which they call Botargo. This
they dry in the Smoke, and cut it afterward in slices to eat. Upon this and
the Cuttle-fish the Grecks generally feed during their Lent, which is very
austere.

Scalanova is a Port of which I have already spoken, and thither we came by
seven a Clock in the Evening; where the Governor of the Place, more civil than
usually the Turks are accustomed to be, made us very welcome.

In the Evening one of our Janisaries had quarreled with one of our Servants,
who thereupon had beaten him; and therefore he complained to the Fellow's
Master, who not giving him that satisfaction which he desired, thereupon the
Turk studied to be revenged upon the whole Company. For this reason, upon some
pretense or other, he went before, the better to bring about his design. We
staid till the Morning, and then departed early from Scalanova, and by Noon we
came with good Stomachs to the Mosquee near Ephesus, where we had been the day
before: And some of the Company thought it a very convenient place to dine in,
in the shade; thereupon we sent for our Provisions, with a Boracho of Wine, and
another of Water, and fell to eating in the Passage into the Mosquee, not
dreaming any harm. We had not been long at it, when we perceived two or three
Turks about two hundred Paces off, who came from a Village very near to the
Mosquee. I knowing the custom of the Country better than they, told them, that
they were certainly coming to pick a quarrel with us, and therefore caused them
to hide the Bottle of Wine immediately; for it was then Turks Ramezan, or Lent;
during which time Wine is strictly forbidden. These two ill-contriv'd and ill
clad Fellows were the Janisaries of the place, whom the Cadi had*sent, upon the
information of our Janisary (who knowing we had eaten in the same place before,
as indeed we had done, made no question but we would do so again) thinking to
surprise us as we were drinking Wine, in a place which they esteem Sacred, and
by consequence was among them accounted an act of Sacrilege. Christian Dogs,
cried they, when they came near us, to eat and drink in a Mosquee, and profane
a holy place as you do, at a time that renders the offense more criminal! No,
cried I, answering for the rest, we drink no Wine, we drink nothing but Water,
and you may taste it, said I to him that was the most busy; with that I caused
a Glass to be poured out and given him; and I gave one of the Turks a private
wink, who understanding it was a promise of gratuity, turned about to his
Comrades, and cried, It Is very true, they drink no Wine. However in regard they
had Orders to bring us before the Cady, there was no contending. Thereupon I
and three others undertook to answer for all the rest. The Cady reviled us as
bad as the Janisary at first; but he was not only surpised, but very much
troubled, when they all unanimously affirmed that we drank no Wine, believing
they were confederates with us. But I had cunningly slipped eight Ducats into the
Hand of the Turk to whom I had made a sign with my Eye, who overjoyed at so
plentiful a gratuity, had over-perswaded his Comrades not to say any thing
against us. The Cady, though he did not like their Testimony, yet called for
Coffee for us, according to the custom of the Country, and sent us to his
Lieutenant; who having been often greased in the Fist by the Smyrna-Merchants,
received us very kindly, and told us that the Cady was but newly come to his
Place, and was needy; however a small matter would content him. Thereupon we
gave the Lieutenant twenty-five Ducats, who most certainly went snips with the
Cady, and so returned us to our Company, who were much afraid we would not have
come off so.

We were resolved to return to Smyrna not the same way we came, and so we took
another Road, which was a very pleasant way, partly over firm Sands, and partly
thorough Meadows, where we met with several narrow Dikes very well Paved. Then
we cross a rugged high Mountain, and lay in a Mahumetan Barn.

The next day we returned to Smyrna, having finished our small Journey to
Ephesus in five days. When we told the Consuls how the Janizary had betrayed
us, they made their Complaint to the Janizary Aga and the Cady, who, for his
punishment put him out of the Consul's service, which is an advantageous
Employment. For besides that the Consul's Janissaries are exempt from the Duties
of War, they are well placed; for there is never a Merchant that is not
beneficial to them some way or other; especially at good times, as
New-years-day and other Festivals. Nor could the Janizary have been more
severely punished; for the Turks love Money above all things in the World.

But to return to our matter. The Rendezvous of all the Caravans is generally
two Leagues from the City, near a Town called Pongarbachi. The day of their
setting out being fixed, every one provides himself for his Journey, and meets
the Evening before at the place appointed, to be ready at the hour.

From Smyrna to Tocat, is thirty-five days journey with the Caravan, and the
last time I went we made it thirty-eight from Pongarbachi.

The first day we traveled eight hours through a Country whose prospect was not
unpleasing, leaving some Villages more than a League from the Road; and we
lodged in a Park, near the River Pactolus; which is a small River, the Sand
whereof shines, and is of several colors. Which caused Antiquity to call
Pactolus Golden-Sanded. It falls from the Mountain Tmolus, and after it has
watered the Territory of Sardis, mixes with the River Hermus, that throws it
self into the Archipelago through the Gulf of Smyrna. The Mouth of it is not
above two or three Leagues from the City, toward the North.

The next day in six hours we came to Durgout, a little City in a Plain. All
Christians that live not in the Territories of the Grand Signor, and pass that
way, once a Year pay Carrage, or a Tribute of four or five Crowns: but the
Franks are exempt, both at Durgout and over all Turkey. There resides a Bashae
in this City; and we were constrained to stop there a whole day, because the
Caravan that comes from Persia arrived at that time, so that they were fore'd
to change their Camels.

The third day, after five hours travel in extremity of Heat, we came to lodge
near a paltry Village.

The fourth day we traveled six hours, and stopped near to a small River. In the
Morning we passed over the Ruins of the ancient Sardis, the Capital City of
Lydia, and Seat of King Croesus. There were still to be seen the Ruins of a
large Palace and two fair Churches, with a great number of Pillars and
Corniches of Marble. This City having held out six Years against the Army of
Temur-leng, who besieged it; so soon as he had taken it, in revenge he utterly
destroyed it. There is a Village near Sardis of the same Name, where stood the
City, which was one of the Seven Churches mentioned in the Revelation. The
fifth day we rode for seven hours through a Country, but ill manured, and took
up our Stage in a Plain upon the side of a River.

The sixth day we passed by the Walls of the ancient Philadelphia, called at
present Allachars, which was also one of the Seven Churches of Asia. There is
something of Beauty still remaining in those Walls, and the City is very large,
but ill peopled. It is situated upon four little Hills, at the foot of a high
Mountain over-looking a fair Plain to the North, that produces excellent Fruit.
To witness its Antiquity, there is yet the Ruins of an Amphitheater, with
certain Sepulchers* from whence the Inhabitants report that the European
Christians took out the Bodies that were buried there, and transported them
into Europe, believing them to be the Bodies of Saints. It is now all
destroyed, but rebuilt of Earth by the Turks after their mode. It was formerly
one of the principal Cities of Mysia, and in regard it was always very subject
to Earthquakes, the most part of her Inhabitants lived in the Country. The last
time I traveled that way, in the year 1664, the seventeenth of June, the Turks
were feasting and rejoicing upon the News, as they said, which they had
received, of the defeat of the Christians in Candy. But the News was false, and
only contrived to encourage the People; for the Grand Signor was then making
Levies in those Parts. We lodged that day, after seven hours travel, upon the
Bank of a small River, a League and a half from Philadelphia.

The seventh day we traveled eleven hours over a Mountain, where those Trees
plentifully grow that bear Galls, and Valanede, which is the shell or rind of
an Acorn, that Curriers make use of to dress their Leather. We lodged in a
Meadow on the top of a Mountain which is called Ijagli-bogase, or, The Mountain
of Robbers.

The eighth day we continued our Journey over the same Mountain, which is a
very barren Country where there is no Provision to be had. We traveled but six
hours, and lodged near a River in a Plain called Sarroucabaqui.

The ninth day the Caravan traveled thorough dry Lands, where there is not one
Village to be seen, and lodged near a Bridge built over a River called
Copli-sou, in the Plain of Inahi.

The tenth day, after we had traveled eight hours over an uneven and barren
Country, we stopped in a Valley near a River called Bana-sou, the Water whereof
is not good. In the Night there arose a Tempest that put us all in a disorder,
and the Rain that fell was as cold as if it had been in the depth of Winter. We
were wet to the Skins, and were forced to throw Coverlets over the Bales to
keep the Goods from being spoiled.

The eleventh day we traveled through a pleasant Country, between Vales adorned
with a most delightful Verdure; and we were in view as we passed along of
certain hot Baths, though very little regarded. We lodged upon the Banks of a
small River, by the side whereof we had traveled for some hours.

The twelfth day we continued our Road for six hours between the same Valleys,
and lodged by a River.

The thirteenth day, we traveled eight hours* and stopped near to a Village in a
Country called Dougasse.

The fourteenth, after a Journey of seven hours we passed by the Walls of
Aphiom-Carassar, that is, The Black City of Aphiom or Opium; because it has a
Prospect over a fair and large Country well cultivated, where they sow great
store of Poppies, whence they draw their Opium or Aphiom, as the Turks call it.

Aphiom-Carassar, is a great City, dirty and ill built, the ancient Name
whereof I could never learn, for the Greeks and Armenians are very ignorant.
But according to all probability and the situation of the place, it ought to be
the ancient Hi^rapolis situated upon the Maander, a famous River of the Lesser
Asia, that winds and turns the most of any River in the World. And indeed we
are the more to seek, in regard the Turks change the ancient Names according to
their own custom and pleasure, and give no other Names to Rivers than that of
the principal City through which they pass; or else deriving their Names from
the Color of their Sands. There is to be seen in that City an ancient Castle
of Freestone upon the Point of a high Rock, separated from the Mountains that
are next it toward the South, which make a Semicircle. All the Armenian
Christians, Subjects to the King of Persia, passing thorough Aphiom Carassar
must there pay Carrage, from which they are not exempted, though they have paid
it before at Erzerom or elsewhere. The Caravan does not stop at
Aphiom-Carassar, as well for that there are no Inns but what are ruined, as for
that about a League farther there is a place where you have excellent Fish, and
very cheap, and they of the City bring Barley, Straw, and other things which
the Caravan wants. The Caravan therefore that day lodges upon the Banks of
Maeander, which is to be crossed over a Bridge not far distant from a small
Village. In this River are great store of Crawfish and Carps; and the Fishermen
will be sure to attend upon the Caravan. I have seen some Carps there above
three Foot long.

The fifteenth our Caravan began to part it self, some for Tocat, some for the
Road to Aleppo; the one part taking the right hand. Road toward the
Winter-East, for Syria; the other the left hand. Road North-East, for Armenia.

After we were parted, we traveled two or three hours in sight of one another.
They that go to Aleppo, fall into Tarsus, where St. Paul was born, and from
Tarsus to Alexandretta. But we continued our Road to Tocat, and after we had
crossed a great Plain, having traveled six hours, we lodged in a Mershy place
near a small Village. There is one thing remarkable in this Road as in many
others, which manifests the Charity of the Turks. For in most of the high
Roads, that are far from Rivers, they have set up Cisterns, whither when the
Rains fail, the neighboring Villages bring Water for the Travelers, who would
else be very much distressed.

The sixteenth we traveled eight hours through a very even Country, but ill
manured; where we saw a little City called Boulavandi. There are some
Mosquee's, which the Turks have built out of the Ruins of the ancient Greeks
Churches, from which they have taken Pillars of Marble, and other pieces of
Architecture, to adorn their Sepulchers without any order at all, which you
meet with very often upon the high Roads; the number is the greater, because
they never lay two Bodies in one Grave. There is also in this City an Inn,
covered with Lead, which is all the Beauty of it; nor do Travelers make any
use of it but only in foul weather. We lodged a League and a half from the
City, and staid there all the next day.

The seventeenth we traveled eleven hours through a mixed and uneven Country,
and came to lodge in a Village where there are not above three or four Houses,
though there be excellent Pasturage about it. There is no Water, but what is
drawn out of three deep Wells; for which reason the place is called Euche
derin-gi^.

The eighteenth we traveled not above five hours through desert Countries, and
took up our Stage in a king of a Bog, near a pitiful Village.

The nineteenth, after we had traveled eight hours through spacious desert
Plains, we passed through a large Village, the Inhabitants whereof were gone
with their Cattle into the Mountains, for the cool Air, during the Summer time,
according to custom. There is an indifferent handsome Mosquee of Freestone; and
indeed the Village, the Name whereof the People told me was Tshaciclou, has
been much bigger than now it is, as may appear by the Ruins. In two hours
after we came to lodge beyond it in a Meadow, near a Rivulet.

The twentieth we crossed over desert Plains, but which seemed to have been
formerly well manured; and after ten hours travel, we stopped in a Bottom near a
bad Water.

The twenty-first, for ten hours the Country was all barren and desert, and we
came to lodge at the end of a long Plain, near two Wells, the Water whereof was
good for nothing.

The twenty-second we traveled through the forementioned Plain, and met with
little Valleys where there was very good Pasturage. The Caravan stopped near to
a pitiful Village, and a nasty Well.

The twenty-third we traveled not above five hours; because it was the time of
the Turks Beiram, or Easter, which our Caravan, consisting of Turks, would
needs solemnize. That day we traveled through an indifferent good Country, and
well tilled, where we discovered several fair Villages; and we lodged upon a
rising Ground, from whence we had a very fair and far distant Prospect.

The twenty-fourth we traveled six hours, and came to lodge in a Meadow where
the Water was bad. Near to that place, we discovered a Plain that extends it
self eight or ten Leagues in length, though it be not above one or two in
breadth: it seemed like a Lake; and indeed it is only a salt Water congealed,
and thickn'd into Salt, which you can hardly dissolve but in fair Water. This
Lake furnishes almost all Nato^^^ with Salt; where you may buy a Wagon load
drawn by two Bufalo's for 45 Sous. It is called Douslag, or The Place for Salt;
and the Basha of Couchahar, about two days journey from it, gets by it 24000
Crowns a Year. Sultan Amurath caused a D^^^ to be ^ut quite thorough it when
his Army marched to the Siege of Bagdat, which he took from the Persian.

The twenty-fifth we traveled nine or ten hours, and met not with one Village,
the Country being all desert. We lodged upon a rising* Ground, near a good
Fountain called Cara-dache-cesme, or, The Fountain of the Black Stone.

The twenty-sixth we passed through a great Village called Tshekenagar, in a
pleasant situation, but very ill built; and after we had traveled eight hours,
we came to lodge in a delightful Meadow, near another Village called Romcouche.

The twenty-seventh we traveled nine hours through Countries full of Licorice,
and having passed a great Town called Beserguenlou, we lodged in a Meadow.

The twenty eighth we crossed a great River called Jechil^irma, over a long
well built stone Bridge. At the end of the Bridge called Kessre-kupri stands a
great Village, wherein the greatest part of the Houses are built under Ground,
like Foxes Holes. We put on farther, and after seven hours travel, we lodged
below another great Village called Mouchiour, where there are abundance of
Greeks, which they constrain ever and anon to turn Turks, The Country being
inhabited by Christians, and fit for the Plantation of Vines, there is Wine
good store, and very good, but it has the scent of the Wines of Anjou. The
Village is well situated but ill built, most of the Houses being under Ground,
in so much that one of the Company riding carelessly, had like to have fallen into
a House.

The twenty-ninth we rode for seven hours through a pleasant Country, where we
saw several Villages; near to one of which the Caravan lodged in a Meadow,
close by a Fountain.

The thirtieth we rode through a flat Country, well manured, and stopped near a
River wherein there was but very little Water: it is called Cara-sou, or, The
Black River. For two or three days together, at every two Leagues distance we
observed little Hillocks of Earth artificially reared, which they told us were
raised during the Wars of the Greeks to build Forts upon, for Watch-Towers.

The thirty-first we traveled a very uneven Country, but abounding in Wheat,
and after we had traveled nine hours, we lodged in a Meadow, near a River,
which we crossed next Morning before day, over a stone Bridge.

The thirty-second, after we had traveled eight hours, we lodged by a River,
where we saw a great number of Turcomans: They are a People that live in Tents
like the Arabians, and they were then leaving that Country to go to another,
having their luggage in Wagons drawn by Bufalo's.

The thirty-third we met again with Mountains and Woods, which we had not seen
in 18 days before, which had constrained us to carry* Wood upon our Camels to
dress our Provision: We were very sparing of it, and sometimes made use of
dried Cows dung or Camels dung, when we came near the Waters where they were
wont to drink. We traveled eight hours that day, and lodged in a Meadow where
the Grass was very high, yet where there had been Houses formerly standing.

The thirty-fourth we forded a deep and rapid River called Jangou, from the
Name of the Town next to it. A little above the place where we forded it, we
saw a ruined Bridge, which had been built over it.

The thirty-fifth we traveled eight hours through a fair Valley well manured,
and upon the left hand we left a Castle raised upon a Rock. The Caravan lay
that night upon a rising Ground near a Village.

The thirty-sixth we traveled through the same Valley for eight or nine hours
longer; in this Valley were several pleasant Villages, but we lay by a small
River.

The thirty-seventh we traveled six hours among the Mountains, where there are
some very narrow Passages, but store of Water; and we lay in a Vale abounding
in Pasturage.

The thirty-eighth we rode for four or five hours over a rugged Mountain in
craggy way, at the foot whereof we met with a Village called Taquibac; from
whence it is but five Leagues to Tocat. And these are all the Roads from Paris
to Ispahan, through the Northern Territories of Turkey.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Author was robbed near Tocat, and of a certain sort of rare and fine
Wool which he first brought into France.
TAquibac is the place where the Persian Caravan uses to meet, when it departs
from Tocat to Smyrna, and this is the only place in all the Road where a
Traveller ought to stand upon his guard; by reason of Thieves who haunt these
Quarters, and are great Masters in their Trade. Once as I came out of Persia
they would needs give me a taste of their Art, notwithstanding all the care I
took. There were three or four of us that would needs ride before with our
Servants to Taquibac, in expectation of the Caravan which was to come the next
day; where we set up our Tents upon the Bank of a small River. I had then a
good many Bales of Wool, with which I made as it were a double Wall about my
Tent: so that there was but one passage between the Bales, for one Man. In four
of these Bales I had a quantity of Musk in lead'n Boxes, to the value of ten or
twelve thousand Crowns: which Bales I put within-side, so that they touched the
Tent and my Beds-head. Next Night, it being very dark, the Thieves came, and
finding the outward Bales smell so strong of Musk, they thought one of those
Bales would be a considerable Booty. The Bales were all tied together with a
Cord that kept them fast; nor was it easy to undo them, without a noise. They
waked me with their bustle at first, and I sent out my Servants to see if they
could catch them; but they will lie so close upon their Bellies, that in such a
dark Night as that was it is impossible to discover them. Thereupon my Servants
went to sleep again, and the Thieves to their Work; and having with a great
deal of ingenuity cut the Cord, they carried away the two Bales. In the Morning
four or five of us with a Camel-driver for our Guide pursued them, and in half
an hour we met with the marks of the Robbery; for the Rogues being mad that
they found nothing but Wool, which they thought to be of no great value,
scattered it in the Highway for two or three Leagues together: so that I
caused it to be picked up again, and lost not above fifteen or twenty Pound. I
speak this to caution the Merchants that carry Bales of Silk or other rich
Commodities, to beware of these Thieves; for they will come creeping upon their
Bellies, and then cutting the Bales with great Razors, will presently empty a
Bale of one half of the Goods.

It Is true, the Wool was of no great value for their use; but it was a sort of
rare and very fine Wool, which I carried out of Persia to Paris, where such
fine Wool was never seen. As to the place where it is to be had, I met with one
of the Gaures, or Persians that adore the Fire, who when I was at Ispahan in
the year 1647 showed me a Sample of it, and informed me that the greatest part
of this Wool comes from the Province of Kerman, which is the ancient Caramania;
and that the best Wool is to be met with in the Mountains that are next to the
City, that bears the name of the Province: That the Sheep in those Parts have
this particular property, that when they have fed upon new Grass from January
till May, the Fleece falls off of it self, and leaves the Sheep naked, and
their Skins smooth, like a Pig's that is scalded off; so that there is no need
of shearing them, as with us: after they have gathered it, they beat it, and
the course Wool breaking, the fine only remains. That if you transport it,
before you make it into Bales, you must throw Salt Water upon it, which keeps
the Worms out of it, and preserves it from rotting. Now you must take notice
that they never dye this Wool, it being naturally of a clear Brown, or a dark
Ash Color; and that there is very little of it White, which is also much
dearer than the other, as well for that it is scarce, as because that the
Mufti's, the Moullah's and other persons belonging to the Law never wear any
Girdles or Vails (wherewith they cover their Heads when they pray) but White:
for at other times they wear them about their Necks, as the Women do their
Scarfs.

Into this Province of Kerman almost all the Gaures are retired, and they are
they that only Trade in this Wool, and have the whole Manufacture of it. They
make those Girdles of it which they use in Persia; and some Pieces of Serge,
which are almost as fine and transparent, as if they were of Silk. I brought
over two Pieces into France, and presented one to the late Queen Mother, the
other to the Princess of Orleance.

I could not drive any Trade in this Wool till the year 1654, returning out of
the Indies by Sea from Sura^ to Ormus. To which purpose, I departed from Ormus,
and took Guides along with me to show me the way to Kerman, whither I could not
get on Horseback in less than twenty-seven days. I dare say that Alexander the
Great did not march this way into the Indies: for in the whole extent of the
Country there is no Water to be met with but in some certain places, and in the
hollow of some Rocks, where there is not enough neither to water eight or ten
Horses. Besides, in some places a man is constrained, by reason of the
Mountains, to fetch a great compass about; for a Footman that makes his way
through those Rocks, shall go farther in half an hour than a Horseman can do
in four.

Kerman is a large City, which has been often ruined by being several times
taken and re-taken; nor is there any thing handsome in it, but only one House
and a Garden, upon which the last Kans have bestowed a vast expense to make the
place delightful. They make there a sort of Earthen ware which comes very near
to Porcelan, and looks as neat and as fine. As soon as I arrived, I went to
visit the Kan, who made me very welcome, and gave order to the Gaures to furnish
me with Bread and Wine, Pullets and Pigeons, which in those parts are fat, and
as large as little Capons. The Gaures are they that make the Wine; and to make
it more sweet and pleasant, they take away the Stalks, and never press any
thing but the mere Grape.

The Kan was but newly entered into the possession of his Government, and being
desirous, according to the custom of the new Governors, to have a noble Sword
and Dagger, with a rich Furniture of his Horse, which required some Jewels, I
presented him with a Diamond worth eight hundred Crowns, which he caused to be
set in the end of the handle of his Dagger. He also desired to have of me as
many more Jewels as came to seven or eight hundred Livres: and by the Present
and the Bargain I facilitated my purchase of the Wool which I intended to buy.
Two days afteer he invited me to his Entry-Feast, which he made for the chief
of the City; and knowing I wanted a Mule, he sent me one well worth a hundred
Crowns. This is the Noblest Carriage in all Persia, which the great Personages
choose before Horses, especially when they are in years. But it was not the Kan
alone who was civil to me. A young Lord, who lived in Kerman, and was at the
Feast, whose Father had been formerly Kan himself, took great delight to
discourse with me concerning my Travels; and offered me his service in a very
obliging manner. Now the Persians are very curious, and great admirers of the
Rarities of Foreign Countries: which inclination led the young Lord to enquire
of me whether I had any Firearms, telling me he would content me for them to
my satisfaction. The next Morning I presented him with a Carbine, and a pair of
Pistols that pleased him exceedingly; and a little Watch, for which I would
take no Money, whereat he seemed to be not a little troubled. However he sent
me a stately Horse worth about two hundred Crowns, or twelve Tomans. This young
Lord was of a clear humor, civil, accomplished, generous, and did every thing
with a good grace. So that when he sent me the Horse, he sent to entreat me
withal, if I did not like that Horse, to come and choose which I liked best in
his Stable.

By the favor of this Lord and the Kan, I made good the Purchase that I
intended. For the People began to murmur (knowing what a Parcel I had got
together) and told the Kan that I would carry away all the Cloth out of the
Country, so that they should have none to set the Poor on work. Thereupon the
Kan sent for me, and for those reasons told me I must buy no more. To send off
the blow, I made answer, That it was the King of Persia's desire to try if we
could make as fine Cloth of his Wool in France, as they did in England and
Holland; and that if-it succeeded, I should bring French Workmen into Persia,
and so by settling the Trade in his own Country, free him from the Charge of
foreign Manufacturers. This silenced the Kan, so that I still bargained for
more. But when I was returned to Ispahan, the People of the Country would not
keep touch with me. However, I wrote so home to the Kan, threatening withal to
complain to the King, that he fearing the King's displeasure, forced the
Natives to send me my Bargain to Ispahan.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Road from Kerman to Ispahan; and the Fortune of Nazar Mahomet-Ali-Beg.
FRom Kerman to Ispahan is no less than five and twenty days on Horseback. In
those places where there is any Water, the Conntry is very good; but those
places are very rare; for the Road is generally Sandy, and offensive to the
Eyes. The Chiefest comfort to a Fraveller is, that every Evening he meets with
an Inn, where there are Cisterns, which is a great refreshment in those desert
Countries. The most part of those Inns were built some Years since by the
special care of Mahomet-Ali-Beg Nazar, or Grand Master of the King's House and
Treasury; a Person the most Virtuous of any that Persia can boast of for many
Years. He was Generous, and favored the Franks in all things, for he loved
them exceedingly. He faithfully served his King, and defended the People
against the Oppression and Insolences of the Great ones; which drew upon him
the hatred of many: but still he preserved himself by his syncerity and
prudence; as by the following Story will remarkably appear.

The Great Sha-Abas the First, being one day a Hunting in the Mountains far out
of sight from his followers, met a young Lad playing upon a Pipe by an Herd of
Goats. The King asking him some Questions, he answered him to the purpose to
every one, not knowing who he was. The King surpised at his Repartees, made a
sign to Iman-couli-Kan Governor of Schiras, who was just come up to him, not
to tell the Goat-herd who he was. After that he proceeded to ask him other
Questions; to which the young man answered so smartly, that the King could not
choose but stand in an amaze. Thereupon the King asked the Kan what he thought
of the Goat-herds Wit? Who answered, that he believed if the Boy were taught to
Write and Read, he might do good service to his Majesty. Upon that the King
immediately caused him to be sent to School, where the young Lad being
naturally of a solid Wit, clear Judgment, and happy Memory, grew so
accomplished, and so well acquitted himself of several Employments which his
Majesty bestowed upon him, that the King advanced him to the Office of Nazar,
or Grand Master of the House, and did him the honor to call him
Mahomet-Ali-Beg. The King observing his fidelity, and good management of all
things, sent him twice Ambassador to the Great Mogul, and both times was
extremely pleased with his Negotiation. Mahomet loved Justice, and would not
stoop to be corrupted by Presents: A thing which is very rare among the
Mahumetans. This great Integrity of his made all the Lords of the Court his
Enemies, especially the Eunuchs and the Women, who have always the King's Ear.
But while Sha-Abas lived, there was no person that durst open his lips against
the Nazar, so much was he in favor, and that justly, with the King. Sha-Sefi
succeeding his Grandfather Sha-Abas, and being very young, the Nazar's
Adversaries thought they had now a fair Game to play. Thereupon the Eunuchs,
who are always at the King's Ear, suggested to him many things to the
disadvantage of the Grand Master; but whatever they said, the King gave little
heed to their Tales. At length, one day when the King was looking upon certain
Skains and Daggers set with precious Stones, one of the Eunuchs told him those
were trifles, and then desired his Majesty to send for a Scimeter that the
Grand Signor had sent Sha-Abas, all over set with Diamonds. True it is, that
the Grand Signor had sent a rich Scimiter to Sha-Abas; but Sha-Abas had defaced
it long before Mahomet's time, and had made a noble Jewel of the Stones that
adorned it. Thereupon this Scimitar was sought for in the Treasury, where
Mahomet was chief Officer; but not being to be found, the King was troubled,
finding it registered in the Book of Presents. Then certain Eunuchs and Grandees
of the Court took their opportunity to rip up Mahomet's Life; they represented
to the King how many Inns, Bridges, and Dikes Mahomet had built at his own
charge; what a House he had reared for himself, fitting for his Majesty to live
in: and aggravated withal, that he could not do such great things as those,
without purloining notably from the Public Stock; for which he should do well
to call him to an account. As they were thus discoursing, Mahomet came into the
Presence, to whom the King (not receiving him as he was wont to do) spoke some
hard words about the Scimiter that could not be found: telling him withal, that
he would see if the all rest of the things in the Treasury were agreeable to
the Register, and then gave him fifteen days time to give in his Account.
Mahomet not at all moved, replied to the King, that if his Majesty pleased he
might come to the Treasury to morrow: and withal besought him so to do, though
the King a second time gave him fifteen days. Thereupon the King did go to the
Treasury next morning, according to Mahomet's desire, and found all things in
good order; having heard before what became of the Scimiter. From thence he
went to Mahomet s House, who made the King a mean Present: For it is the
custom, that he whom the King honors with a Visit, must make a Present to his
Majesty. After the King had received it, he walked up and down, and viewed the
Chambers, Halls, Parlours and Rooms of State; and wondered to see them so ill
set out with plain Felts, and course Carpets; whereas in other Lords Houses a
man could not set his Foot upon any thing but Cloth of Gold and Silk. For the
King, as they had set the Nazar out, expected to have found other things; which
made him admire at so great a Moderation in so high a degree of Honor. Now at
the end of a Gallery, there was a Door locked with three great Padlocks. Of this
the King took no notice: whereupon the Meter, who is the White Eunuch, and
chief of his Chamber, as he came back, showed the King the Door that was so
strongly Padlock'd; which made the King so curious to have it opened: withal,
asking Mahomet what he had got there locked up with so much care? Oh Sir, said
he, it behooves me to keep that locked, for there is all the Estate I have in the
World. All that your Majesty has seen in this House is yours, but all that is
in that Chamber is mine, and I dare assure my self, your Majesty will be so
gaacious as never to take it from me. Those words inflamed the King's curiosity
so, that he commanded the Door to be opened: But he was strangely surpised,
when he saw nothing more within than Mahomet's Sheep-hook, that lay upon two
Nails, his Scrip wherein he used to put his Victuals, his Bottle for his Water,
his Pipe, and his Shepherd's Weeds, all hanging against the Wall. The Nazar
beholding the King's astonishment at such a Sight, Sir, said he, when the King
Sha-Abas ^ound me in the Mountain keeping Goats, then that was all I had, and
he took nothing from me: I beseech your Majesty that you would not deprive me
of these things neither; but rather, if you please, let me resume them again,
and fall to my old calling. The Kin^ touched at so high a piece of Virtue,
caused himself to be disapparel'd, and gave his Habit to the Nazar, which is
the greatest Honor that the King of Persia can bestow upon a Subject. Thus
Mahomet continued and died honorably in his Employment. This brave Person was
the Protector of all the Franks in Persia: and if any one had done them wrong,
upon complaint he did them Justice immediately. One day as I was shooting
Ducks, upon the River of Ispahan near the Nazar's Gardens, with two Servants,
some of the Nazar's people that did not know me set upon me, and would have
taken away my Gun; which I would not let go till I had broke the Stock about
the Shoulders of the one, and f^ung the Barrel at the other's Head. Thereupon I
took some of the Franks along with me, and complained to the Nazar: He
testified his sorrow for what had happened, and gave us evident Proofs thereof,
by the blows which he caused to be laid upon those that had done me the injury.

Another time, Sha-Sefi being upon his return from Guilan, his Tents were set
up near Zulfa in Armenia, where the King staid to hunt two or three days. Now
among the rest of the Courtizans that followed the Court, to divertise the King
with Dancing and Mummery, there was one who was perfectly handsome, to whom the
King had already sent Presents; which could not be unknown to any Lord in the
Court. But the Nazar's Son, for all that, being in the heat of Youth, got this
Courtizan to his Tent, and there lay with her: which came to his Father's Ears
next day. The Nazar, whether out of his zeal to the King, or whether it were an
effect of his prudence to prevent the King's anger, which would have certainly
been the death of his Son, caused him to be drub'd, after the manner of the
Country, and bastinado'd all over, till the Nails of his Toes dropped off, and
that his Body was almost a perfect Gelly. Which when the King understood,
together with the Young Man's Crime, he said no more, but that the Nazar had
done wisely by punishing his Son himself, to prevent his Justice.

But to return to the Road from Kerman to Ispahan. The first day that I set out
from Kerman, at my Stage in the Evening I met with a rich Moullah, who seeing I
had Wine, civilly offered me some of his Ice to cool it. In retaliation, I gave
him some of my Bottle. He invited me to his House, which was well built, with a
handsome Garden with Water in it. He entertained me with Spoon-meat, according
to the mode of the Country; and when I took my leave, he filled my Baracho with
very good Wine.

The following days I saw nothing worthy observation; the Country being as I
have already described it.

Yezd lies in the Road, almost in the midway between Kerman and Ispahan, in 93
Degrees. 15 Min. of Longitude, and 13 Degrees. 45 Min. of Latitude. It is a great Town
in the middle of the Sands, that extend themselves for two Leagues round it: so
that when you leave Yezd you must take a Guide, for upon the least Wind the
Sand covers the Highway, whereby a man may be apt to fall into Holes, which
seem to have been either old Cisterns, or the Ruins of ancient Buildings.
Between the Town and the Sands there is a little good Soil, which produces
excellent Fruits, but above all, Melons of several sorts: the Pulp of some is
green, of others yellow and vermilion; and some there are, the meat whereof is
as hard as a Renneting. There are also very good* Grapes, and good Wine; but
the Governor will not permit the Inhabitants to make Wine. Some therefore they
dry, and of the rest they make a kind of Confection to eat with Bread. There
are also abundance of Figs, which are large and well tasted. They distill vast
quantities of Rose Water, and another sort of Water with which they dye their
Hands and Nails red, which they squeeze out of a certain Root called Hina.
There are three Inns in the* City, and several Bazars or Marketplaces covered
and vaulted, which are full of Merchants and Workmens Warehouses. They also
make at Yezd several Stuffs of Silk intermixed with Gold and Silver, which they
call Zerbaste; and another sort of Stuff of all pure Silk, called Darai, like
our smooth stripped Taffata's. Other Stuffs they made, half Silk half Cotton;
others all of Cotton, like our Fustians. They make also Serges of a particular
Wool, which is so fine and delicate, that it looks handsomer, and is much
better than Silk.

Though I had nothing to do, I staid in Yezd three days, because I met with
some Armenians of my acquaintance. In which time I found the general Opinion to
be true. For certainly the Women of Yezd are the handsomest Women in all
Persia. There is no Feast made, but five or six of them come to divertise the
Guests with Dancing, who are generally none of the meanest Beauties and
Conversations among them. However it comes to pass, the Persian Proverb is,
That to live happy, a Man must have a Wise of Yezd, eat the Bread of Yezdecas,
and drink the Wine of Schiras.

CHAP. X.
Of the Caravansera's, and Government of the Caravans.
THE Caravansera's are the Eastern Inns, far different from ours; for they are
neither so convenient, nor so handsome. They are built square, much like
Cloisters, being usually but one Story high; for it is rare to see one of two
Stories, A wide Gate brings you into the Court; and in the midst of the
Building, in the front, and upon the right and lest hand, there is a Hall for
Persons of the best Quality to keep together. On each side of the Hall are
Lodgings for every man by himself. These Lodgings are raised all along the
Court two or three Steps high, just behind which are the Stables, where many
times it is as good lying as in the Chamber. Some will rather lie there in the
Winter, because they are warm, and are roof'd as well as the Chambers. Right
against the Head of every Horse there is a Nich with a Window into the
Lodging-Chamber, out of which every man may see how his Horse is looked after.
These Niches are usually so large, that three men may lie in them; and there it
is that the Servants usually dress their Victuals.

There are two sorts of Inns. For some are endowed; where you may be received
for Charities sake; others, where you must pay for what you call for. There are
none of the first, but between Buda and Constantinople. Nor is it lawful for
any others to build such, but only the Mothers and Sisters of the Grand Signor,
or such Viziers, and Basha's as have been three times in Battle against the
Christians. In these Inns, which are built out of Legacies, there is a very
good allowance of Diet to Travelers* and at your departure you have nothing to
do but to thank the Benefactor. But from Constantinople to Persia, there are
none of those endowed Inns; only such where you have nothing but bare Walls. It
is for you to provide Utensils for your Kitchen, and a Bed to lie on: as for
Provision, the people bring Lambs, Pullets, Butter, and Fruits in their
seasons: or else you may buy it, provided beforehand by the Master of the
House. There you also meet with Barley and Straw for the Horses, unless it be
in some few places that I have been at upon the Road. In the Country you pay
nothing for your Chambers; but in the Cities you pay something, though it be
but a small matter. Usually the Caravans never go into the Towns, which are not
able to contain so many People and Horses. When you come to your Quarters every
one looks after his own Chamber, for there is no regard to Poor or Rich:
sometimes out of Breeding, or out of Interest, an ordinary Tradesman will give
way to a great Merchant; but no man is permitted to leave the Chamber which he
has once made choice of. In the night the Innkeeper shuts up his Gates, being
answerable for all things that shall be lost; for which reason he keeps a Guard
about the Inn.

As for the Persian Caravansera's, they are more commodious, and better built
than those of Turkey, and at more reasonable distances, throughout almost all
the Country. By which description of Inns it is easy to observe, that though
these Caravansera's are not so commodious for the Rich as our European Inns,
yet they are more convenient for the Poor, to whom they never refuse to give
admittance: no person being obliged to eat or drink more than he pleases; but
every one being allowed to spend according to his Stock, without grumbling.

You may travel in Turkey or Persia, either with the Caravan, or else in
company, ten or twelve together, or else alone with a Guide. The safest way is
to go with the Caravan, though you are longer upon the Road, by reason of the
slowness of their march, especially when the Caravans consist of Camels.

The Caravans are as it were great Convoys, which consist of a good number of
Merchants, that meet at certain times and places, to put themselves into a
condition to defend themselves from Thieves, that are very rise in Troops in
several desert places upon the Road. These Merchants choose among themselves a
Caravan-Bashi, who orders them how they shall march, assigns the places of
lodging at night, and who with the chief of the Caravan, is a kind of Judge of
the differences that fall out by the way. There is no honest man that covets
the employment; for the Caravan-Bashi, being to discharge several small duties
upon the Road, however he behave himself, is still suspected for his fidelity.
When the Turks are most numerous, they make choice of a Turk; when the Armenian
Merchants are most, they choose an Armenian.

There are two forts of Caravans. There are Caravans which consist of Camels,
which are the most usual; in regard that Camels are cheap, and for that some
Camels will carry as much as three Horses, others as much as four or five. But
among the Caravans of Camels, there are several Horses and Mules, which the
Merchants themselves ride upon; it being very tedious to ride upon a Camel when
he only goes a foot-pace, but very pleasant when he goes upon his large trot.
There are other Caravans that consist only of Horses; and among these, if the
Merchant have none of his own, he may hire one. The Servants ride upon those
Horses that are least laden; but at Smyrna you may meet with several good
Horses very cheap, from thirty to sixty Crowns. As for those persons that are
either unwilling or unable to be at any expense, they make use of Asses, of
which there are enough to be had. Above all things, you must take care to provide
Pack-Horses to carry your Wine; for the Camel-Masters being Mahometans, will
not permit you to lade their Camels with any such Liquor; that Beast being
particularly consecrated to Mahomet, who so strictly forbad the use of Wine.
You put your Wine in Bottles made of wild Goats Skins, with the hairy side
turned innermost, and well pitched within. There are some of these Bottles from
which they take off the Hair; but they are not so good, as being seldom without
holes.

These Camel-Masters are an insolent sort of people, which you shall never know
how to deal with, unless you can bring them to punishment. There was one that
played me some of his jades tricks in the Road from Smyrna to Tauris; but when
I came to Escrivan, I complained to the Kan, who presently caused a hundred
Bastinado's to be given him upon the spot. Nor is there any other way to bring
those Scoundrels to reason, especially at Smyrna and such other places, where
the Merchants have their Consuls, who upon the least complaint to the Cady have
Justice done them immediately. The examples of some of these Camel-drivers that
have been paid off, keep the rest in good decorum; and they will be very
tractable for a good while after.

The Journies of the Caravans are not equal; sometimes not above six hours
travel, sometimes ten, and sometimes twelve; it being the convenience of Water,
which is not every where to be met with, that is the Rule of Lodging the
Caravan. At all times the Caravan travels more by night than by day; in Summer
to avoid the heat, and at other times, that you may be sure to have day enough
to set up your Tents. For if the Caravan should come to pitch in the night, it
would be impossible for them to find where to set up their Tents, to dress and
look after their Beasts, make ready their Kitchins, and provide things
necessary for so large a Company. True it is, that in the depth of Winter and
in the great Snows, they seldom set out till two or three hours after midnight;
and that sometimes they stay till daybreak. But in Summer, according to the
Journey which they intend, they set out either at midnight, or an hour after
Sunset. The last time I went from Smyrna the Caravan consisted of six hundred
Camels, and almost the same number of Horse. Sometimes their number is greater,
so that the Camels going but by one and one after another, a Caravan seems to
be an Army; and whether it be in traveling or lodging, they take up a world of
Ground. Now by reason they travel all night in Asia, it happens that the Air is
indifferent wholesome; and that the Travelers, that lie for the most part upon a
Carpet spread upon the Ground, find themselves very little inconvenienc'd by it.

The Camels that go into Persia through the Northern Provinces of Turkey,
travel like Horses in a Cart, by seven and seven; they are tied together by a
Cord about the bigness of a Man's little Finger, and a Fathom long; fastened to
the Packsaddle of the Camel that goes before, and to the Head-harness of the
Camel that follows. Those little Cords are made no stronger, to the end that if
the Camel before should chance to fall into any hole, the Camel behind should
either keep him up, or else not be pulled in after the other. And to the end
that the Camel-driver who leads the foremost, may know whether the other six
follow him or no, the last Camel has a Bell about his Neck, which if it cease
to ring, it is a sign that some one of the small Cords is broken, and that a
Camel has got a mischance. The seventh Camel generally carries the Provisions.
For if a Merchant have six Camels laden, he is generally allowed one to carry
his Provision; if he have but three, he is allowed but half a Camel's load; but
if he have nine or twelve, he pays nothing for the carriage of his Provisions
of Food, or any thing else that he pleases. Every Merchant with his Servants
rides by the Camels that are laden with his Goods, especially in the dark
nights; for there are a subtle sort of Thieves, that have a trick to cut the
two Cords behind and before, and without any noise drive the Camel out of the
way; for having no Hoofs, his Feet cannot be shod, and consequently he makes no
noise. As well Merchants, as others, Camel-drivers and Servants, keep
themselves from sleeping sometimes by singing, and sometimes by taking Tobacco,
and sometimes by discourse.

The Caravan lies in such places as they think most convenient, chiefly near to
the Waterside. When the Sun is set, the Shaoux, who are a sort of poor people,
are diligent to guard the whole Field, and take care of the Goods. They walk up
and down, and either in the Arabian or Armenian Dialect they cry one to
another, God is one, and he is merciful; adding from time to time, Have a care
of your self. When they see that the time grows near to set out, they give
notice to the Caravan-Bashi, who gives order to bid them cry, Saddle your
Horses; and after that, to cry again, Load. And it is a strange thing to
consider, that upon the second Cry of the Shaoux every thing is ready upon an
instant, and the Caravan begins to set forward in great order and great
silence. Every one takes care to be ready, for it is dangerous to be left
behind, especially in those Countries which are haunted with Thieves. The Wages
of these* Shaoux is the fourth part of a Piaster for a Bale from Smyrna to
Erivan.

When the Stages are long, and that they believe that they shall not get
thither by ten or twelve in the morning, every one carries two small Wallets on
each side his Horse, and when they come to the place where they intend to
Breakfast, they spread a Carpet upon the Ground and fall to.

When you go from Constantinople, Smyrna, or Aleppo with the Caravan, it
behooves all people to carry themselves according to the mode of the Country; in
Turkey like a Turk, in Persia as a Persian; else would they be accounted
ridiculous, nay sometimes they would hardly be permitted to pass in some
places, where the least miscarriage makes the Governors jealous, who are
easily persuaded to take Strangers for Spies. Always, if you have upon the Road
but an Arabian Vest, with a mean Girdle, whatever Clothes you wear under, there
is no danger of passing any where. If you wear a Turbant, you must of necessity
shave off your Hair, else it will never stay upon the Head. As for Beards, they
never mind them in Turkey, the greatest being accounted the handsomest; but in
Persia they shave their Chins, and wear their Mustaches: and I remember I have
seen one of the King of Persia's Porters, whose Mustaches were so long, that he
could tie them behind his neck, for which reason he had a double Pension. More
than that, you must provide your self of Boots according to the custom of the
Country: they are made of red, yellow, or black Cordovan, lined with Linen
cloth; and in regard they never reach higher than the Knee, they are as
convenient to travel in as Shoes. As for Spurs, they never wear any; for the
Iron at the upper end of the Stirrup, which is apiece, serves to spur the
Horse: so much the better, because it is the custom of all Asia to ride very
short.

Before you set out, you must provide your self of several Houshold-Goods,
especially of those Bottles that are called Matares, which are made of
Bulgary-Leather; every man carries his own at the Pummel of his Saddle, or else
fastened to the Crupper of the Saddle behind. Besides these you must buy
Borracho's; the most serviceable things in the World; for they will never
break, and will hold above fifty Pints at a time. The smaller Bottles serve to
put Aqua-vitae in: and the Leather whereof they are made, has that peculiar to
it self, that it keeps the Water fresh. Then you must provide Food, and make a
provision of Rice and Biscuit as far as Tocat: For as for Pullets, Eggs, and
such like things, you meet with them almost every where; as also with Provision
for your. Horses, and new Bread, unless in some few places. You must also carry
a Tent with all its appurtenances, with a Mattress; and Clothes to cover the
Horses at night, especially in the time of the deep Snows, wherein you shall
find them almost buried the next morning.

When the Caravan comes near the place where it intends to stop, every Merchant
rides before to take up a convenient place for himself and his Goods, for which
he covets a rising Ground, that if it should happen to rain, the Water may run
from the Bales. They also in that case lay Stones under the Bales, and a Cloth
over them; and the Servants make a Ditch about the Tent for the Water to run
into. But if it be fair weather, there is no care taken to set up the Tent: or
if it be, it is folded up after Supper; to the end the Owners may have the more
liberty to look about them, and may be in a better condition to look after the
Thieves. But if there be any likelihood of foul weather, the Tent is let stand
till the first Cry of the Shaoux. The Horses are tied before the* Tent with
Cords fastened to a Nail, and their hinder Legs are tied with other Cords, to
the end they may not stir out of their places. If it be not seasonable for them
to eat Grass, you must buy Barley, and Straw of the Countrymen that come to
serve the Caravan, their being no Oats neither in Turkis nor Persia.

In dressing your Victuals, you must follow the custom of the Country; which
is, to make a Hole in the Ground, and then kindling a Fire in it, to set the
Pot over it.

But the greatest inconvenience which Trevellers suffer with the Caravans is
this, that when they come* Waters, which are only Wells, or Cisterns, or
Springs, where only two or three lade up Water at a time. For after* the
Caravan is lodged, the Merchants shall be forced to stay for Water two or three
hours together; for they that belong to the Beasts of Carriage, will not suffer
any person to take any Water, till the Camels, Horses, Asses, and Mules are all
served. Nor is there any contending with these Camel-drivers and Muleters; for
as they are a rude sort of people, a Man runs the hazard of his Life by
contesting alone: of which one Example may suffice for all.

Setting out one day from Bander-Abassi, for Ispahan, with a Merchant of
Babylon, as we came to the Inn where we lay the first night, which was called
Guetchy* the Merchant commanded one of his Slaves who was a Cafer of
Mozambique, to fetch him some fresh Water at the Cistern, to drink: The Cafer
went thither, and returned without any Water, telling his Master, that the
Camel-drivers and Muleters threatened to beat him, and would not let him come
near the Cistern. The Merchant either ill advised, or not knowing the custom,
bid him go back, and kick those that refused him. Whereupon the Cafer
returning, and finding the same resistance as before, began to give ill
language to the Camel-drivers, so that one of them happened to strike him. Upon
that the Cafer drawing his Sword, ran him into the Belly, so that he fell down
dead: Thereupon the whole Rabble fell upon him, bound him, and carried him back
to Bander-Abassi for the Governor to put him to death. The Master of the
Cafer, accompanied by several Merchants, went to the Governor and represented
to him the insolence of those people, and how the business had happened. Upon
which the Governor took the poor fellow out of their hands, and caused him to
be kept safe; after that, he caused ten or a dozen of those Muleters to be
seized, and orderd'd them to be soundly bastinado'd, for hindering a Merchant's
Servant from fetching Water for his Master. He also put others in Prison; who
had not been released so soon, but at the request of those Merchants whose
Goods they carried, and who stood in need of their service. The Governor* spun
out the business, on purpose that the rest might be gone: but as soon as they
were all departed except the two Brothers of the party slain, he told them, he
could not do them Justice, because their Brother belonged to Schiras; so that
all that he could do, was to send the Criminal thither. The Master of the Cafer
being rich, and loving the Slave, made have to Schiras, to tell his Story first
to the Kan. And I remember, two days jourey yon this side Schiras we met in the
High way abundance of poor people, the kindred of the party slain, who were
staying for the Cafer, to carry him before the Kan, and to demand Justice. Two
o^ three Leagues also from Schiras I met the Father and Mother, together with
the Wife and Children of the deceased, who seeing me pass along, fell at my
Feet and recounted to me their Grievances. I told them by my Kalmachi, that
their best and surest way was to take a piece of Money of the Cafer's Master,
and so to put up the business. This Proposal, that would have been accepted in
Christendom, was rejected by those poor Mahometans; in so much that the Father
tore his Beard, and the Women their Hair, crying out, That if it were the
custom of the Franks to seil the Blood of their Kindred, it was not their
custom so to do. When the rest of the kindred came with the Cafer to Schiras,
the Kan did all he could to persuade the Widow to take Money; but not being
able to overruled her, he was forced to give the Cafer into their hands: and
how they used him I cannot tell, being constrained at the same time to pais
from Schiras for Ispahan.

CHAP. XI.
Of the breeding, nature, and several sorts of Camels.
THE Female Camel bears her Burden eleven Months; and her Milk is a sovereign
Remedy against the Dropsy. You must drink a Pint of it every Day for three
Weeks together: and I have seen several Cures wrought thereby at Balsara,
Ormus, and in other places in the Persian Gulf, upon several English and
Holland Mariners.

So soon as a Camel comes into the World, they sold his Feet under his Belly,
and make him lie upon them; after that they cover his Back with a Carpet that
hangs to the Ground, laying Stones upon each side* so that he may not be able
to rise; and thus they leave him for fifteen or twenty days. In the mean time
they give him Milk to drink, but not very often; to the end he may be
accustomed to drink little. This they do also to use them to lie down, when
they go about to Lade them; at which time they will fold their Legs and lie
down so obediently, that it is an admirable thing to consider. So soon as the
Caravan comes to the place where it is to lie, all the Camels that belong to
one Master will range themselves in a Circle, and lie down upon their fore
Feet; so that ^is but untying one Cord that holds the Bales, and they will
slide off gently from each side of the Camel. When it is time to lade again, the
same Camel comes and crouches down between the two Burdens, and when they are
fastened, gently rises up with the Burden again; which is done without any
trouble or noise. When the Camels are unladen, they let them go afield to feed
upon the Heath and Bushes, and half an hour before Sun set they return of
themselves, unless any one happen to wander, which they will call again with a
certain Cry which is natural to them. When they return, they range themselves
in a Circle, and the Muleters give to every one little Balls of Barleymeal
kneaded, as big as two Fists. The Camel though he be of a large bulk, eats very
little, contented with what he meets with upon the Heaths; where he more
especially looks for Thistles, of which he is a great lover. But it is more
admirable to consider with what patience they* endure drowth: For one time that
I crossed over the Deserts, where we were 65 days upon the Road, our Camels
were nine days without Drink. But what is more wonderful is this, that when the
Camel is in the heat of Generation, he neither eats nor drinks for 40 days
together; and he is then so furious, that without great care you cannot avoid
being bitten by him: And wherever he bites, he carries away a piece of the
Flesh. At that time issues out of their Mouths a white Foam, besides that there
appears on each side of their Chops two Bladders large and swelled, like the
Bladder of a Boar.

In the Spring time all the Camel's Hair falls off in three days. The Skin
remains bare, and then the Flies are very troublesome. There is no way but to
Tar them all over* though it be a ventrous thing to come near them at that time.

A Camel must be dressed as well as a Horse; but the Camel keeper never uses any
Curry-comb, but only beats him all over with a small Wand, as Carpets are wont
to be dusted. If a Camel be hurt or galled under the Pack* saddle, they never
apply any thing to it, but only wash it well with Urine, without using any
other Remedy.

There are two sorts of Camels; the one which is proper for hot Countries, the
other for cold Countries.

The Camels in hot Countries, such as go from Ormus to Ispaehan, cannot travel
if the Ground be dirty and slippery; for their Belldies burst, while their
hinder Quarters rive from their Bodies. These are small Camels, that carry not
above five or six hundred Pound weight; but they are kept for little, and
endure Thirst a long time. They do not tie them Head to Tail, as they do the
great ones, but let them go as they please themselves, like a Herd of Cows. The
Camel-driver follows them singing, and sometimes playing upon his Pipe: the
louder he sings and pipes, the faster the Camels go; nay they will stand still
when he gives over his Music. When the Camel-drivers come to a Heathy Ground,
they will give them leave to seed for half an hour, taking their Tobacco the
while; and then singing them together again, they set forward. The Camels bred
in the Deserts are handsome, but very tender, so that they must be gently used,
and never be put upon long Journies. However, they eat and drink less than
others, and endure thirst more patiently.

The Camels of cold Countries, such as those that travel from Tauris to
Constantinople, are large Camels, that carry great Burdens, and will pull
themselves out of the dirt. But in fat Grounds and slippery Ways the Drivers
are fain to spread Carpets, sometimes an hundred one behind another; otherwise
their hinder Quarters are also apt to rive from their Buttocks; but if the Road
be slippery for too great a distance together, there is no way but to tarry
'till it be dried up and fair. These Camels usually carry a thousand Pound
weight: but if the Merchant has any hank upon the Camel driver, he will lay
upon every Camel fifteen hundred weight, thereby making two of three Burdens.
This the Merchants do, when they come near the Custom-Houses, especially that
of Erzerom, which is the most severe. The Merchant does this for his own
Profit: So that when the Customer mistrusting, demands how so many Camels come
to travel empty, he makes answer, that they were Camels that carried Provision:
But the Customer most commonly winks at that good Husbandry of the Merchant,
for fear of losing his Custom, and obliging the Merchant to take another Road.

There is as much knavery among the Camel drivers, as among our Horse-Coursers.
For I remember, that being once at Casbin, a Persian Merchant, thinking he had
bought eight good Camels, was deceived in four which he thought the best. He
verily believing they had been fat and in good case, but they were only blown
up. For those Cheats have a trick to cut a Hole near the Tail, of which the
Purchaser takes no notice, and which they know neatly how to sow up again: In
this Hole they will blow till they have pust up a lean Camel, that he shall
appear as fat and plump as the soundest that ever fed: whereby they often
deceive the quickest sights, especially when the Hair is all off, and that the
bare Skin is all rubbed over with Tar.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Coyns and Money of Persia.
IN the first place, you must take notice that there are no Pieces of Gold
coined in Persia, but only some few, to be thrown among the People when a new
King ascends the Throne: which Pieces are neither current among the Merchants,
nor of a certain Price. When the Solemnity is over, they who get the Pieces,
are not so curious to keep them, but carry them to the Changer, who gives them
the value in current Money. These Pieces of Gold may be worth five A Frank is
worth 2 s. Sterling.
Franks, about the fineness of Almain-Ducats. Once I received ten thousand of
them of one Merchant, at a prefixed rate; for their value is uncertain.

In the second place observe, That the Silver in Persia is good, whether it be
in Bars, or in Plate, or in Money, and it is taken for its goodness. For when
a Page. 51.* The money of the King of Persia.
Travels in India.
N.3.
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

N.1.
depiction of coin

N.4.
depiction of coin

N.4.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.7.
depiction of coin

N.7.
depiction of coin

Merchant enters into Persia, whether it be at Erivan or Tauris, where the
Money is coined, he is obliged to tell what Silver he carry's, to the end it
may be melted down and stamped with the King's Stamp; under a great Penalty, if
discovered to be a concealer. But if a Merchant's affairs will not permit him
to stay at Erivan, or at Tauris; and that he think it better to carry his Money
to the Mint of Ispahan; it is but taking a Note from the Master of the Mint
either at Tauris or Erivan, to attest that he has declared the truth of what he
carries, and it is excuse enough.

But they that can cunningly carry their Silver to Erivan, when the Season is
to go to the Indies, make a great profit of the Real; for the Merchants that go
to the Indies will give them thirteen and a half, or fourteen Shayez a piece,
for as many as they have. But there are few Merchants that carry their Silver
to Ispahan; in regard the Masters of the Mints upon the Frontiers will be sure
to present them with a good piece of Silver Plate, rather than let them carry
away their Bullion to Ispahan, to have the benefit of Coynage themselves.

They that traffic into Guilan for Silks carry their Silver to Teslis, where
the Master of the Mint gives them 2 per Cent. profit for their Silver. The
reason is, because that which he gives them for it is a little sophisticated;
but it passes current all over Guilan.

In the third place, you must observe, That upon the pieces of Silver, as well
for the King's Duty as the Coynage of the Money, there is required 7 per Cent.
But upon the Copper Money, not above one half, or 1 per Cent. at most. Whence
it comes to pass, that when a Workman has need of Copper, rather than lose time
in going to buy it, he will melt down his Casbeke's.

There are four several pieces of Silver Coin; Abassi's, Mamoudi's. Shaet's,
and Bisti's: but as for the Bisti's, there are very few at present.

The Copper pieces of Coin are called Casbeke, of which there are single and
double.

The single Casbeke is worth five Deniers and a Halfpenny of our Money.

The double Casbeke is valued at eleven Deniers.

Four single Casbeke's, or two double ones, make a Bisti.

Ten single Casbeke's, or five double ones, make one Shayet in value.

Two Shayet's make a Mamoudi.

Two Mamoudi's make an Abassi.

The Real or Crown of France is worth three Abassi's and one Shayet; and
counting a Real at sixty Sous, an Abassi is worth eighteen Sous, six Deniers.
Though to say truth, three Abassi's and one Shayet make three Halfpence more
than the Crown.

Number 1, and Number 2. Are two pieces, which upon one side bear the Names of
the twelve Prophets of the Law of Mahomet, and in the middle this Inscription,
La I^lah allah Mahomet resoul Allah, Ali Vaeli Allah: on the backside, The
Conqueror of the World, Abas II. gives us permission to coin this Money in the
City of Cashan.

Number. 1. Makes five Abassi's; and counting our Crown at thirteen Shayet's, it
comes to four Liveres, twelve Sou^, six Deniers.

Number. 2. Makes two Abassi's and a half of our Money, or forty-six Sous and one
Farthing.

Number. 3. Is an Abassi, which comes to eighteen Sous, six Deniers.

Number. 4. Is a Mamoudi, worth nine Sous and a Farthing.

Number. 5. Is a Shayet, worth four Sous, seven Deniers, one Halfpenny.

Number. 6. A Bisti, worth one Sous, ten Deniers.

Number. 7. The Copper Coin, called Casbeke, worth five Deniers, one Halfpenny.

These Coyns, unless it be the Casbeke, bear no other Inscription, but only the
Name of the King reigning when they were coined; the Name of the City where
they were coined; with the Year of the Hegyra of Mahomet.

Though all Payments are made in Abassi's, as well at Ormus and other parts of
the Gulf belonging to the King of Persia, as in the Island* of Bahren, where is
the great Fishery and Market for Pearls; yet there is no mention made but only
of Larins.

The Larin is described in the Money of Arabia. Eight Larins make an Or; four
and twenty made a Toman.

An Or is not the name of a Coin, but of a Sum in reckoning among Merchants.
One Or is five Abassi's.

A Toman is another Sum in payment: For in all Persian Payments they make use
of only Tomans and Ors; and though they usually say that a Toman makes fifteen
Crowns, in truth it comes to forty-six Livres, one Penny and.

As for pieces of Gold, the Merchant never carries any into Persia, but
Alman-Ducats, Ducats of the Seventeen Provinces, or of Venice; and he is bound
to carry them into the Mint so soon as he enters into the Kingdom; but if he
can cunningly hide them, and sell them to particular persons, he gets more by
it. When a Merchant goes out of the Kingdom, he is obliged to tell what pieces
of Gold he carries with him; and the King's people take a Shayet at the rate of
a Ducat, and sometimes they value the Ducat at more. But if he carrie's his
Gold away privately and be discovered, all his Gold is confiscated.

The Ducat usually is worth two Crowns, which in Persia justly comes to
twentysix Shayets; but there is no price fixed in that Country for Ducats. For
when the season is to go for the Indies, or that the Caravan sets out for
Meccae, as well the Merchants as the Pilgrims buy up all the Ducats they can
find out, by reason of their lightness; and then they rise to twenty-seven, and
twenty-eight Shayets, and sometimes more, a piece.

The end of the Roads from Paris to Ispahan, through the Northern Provinces of
Turkey.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PERSIAN TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: Containing the
several ROADS From PARIS to ISPAHAN, the Capital CITY of PERSIA; Through the
Southern Provinces of TURKEY, and through the DESERTS.
CHAP. I.
The second Voyage of the Author from Paris to Ispahan: and first, of his
Embarking at Marseilles for Alexandretta.
THE Road from Constantinople to Erivan, which with all those other Roads
through the Northern Provinces of Turkey, the first time I traveled into
Persia, I have amply described. It behooves me now to treat of the Southern
Provinces, and of those through the Deserts, where there are several Emirs, or
Arabian Princes, of which several are very potent: For there are some of them
that can bring 30000 Horse into the Field, five of which I have had the honor
to discourse, and to oblige them with small Presents; in recompense whereof
they sent me Rice, Mutton, Dates* and Sherbet, as long as I staid among them.

I embarked at Marseilles in a Holland Vessel that carried five and forty Guns,
from thence we set sail for Malta. At Malta we staid twelve days to carine the
Vessel, and to take in fresh Victuals. Among the rest we bought two thousand
Quails, for there are a prodigious quantity in the Island: but in two or three
days we found five or six hundred of them destroyed by the Vermin that pestered
the ship.

From Malta we set sail for Larneca, a good Road in the Island of Cyprus, to
the West of Famagofta, which is not above a days journey from it by Land. As we
were making into the Road, about two or three hours after midnight, we
perceived a Vessel close upon us, and both the Ships Company began to cry out,
for fear of f^lling foul one upon another; but the Vessel sheer'd clear without
any harm on either side.

In the morning we cast Anchor, and went-ashear. It is a good half League from
the Road where the Consuls and Merchants, both English, Hollanders, and French,
live in a very pitiful Village. However there is a little Monastery of
Capuchins, who officiate in the Chapel of the French Consul; and another of
Religious Italians, that depend upon the Guardian of Jerusalem. We staid but
two days at Larneca; the Captain having nothing to do but to inform himself
what business they might have for him at his return; it being usual then to
take in spun and unspun Cottons, together with course Wool for Mattresses.

From Larneca 'till we came in view of the Coast of Syria, we had the Wind very
favorable; but at length coming to prove a little contrary, instead of
carrying us to Alexandretta, it cast us to the Northward, two or three Leagues
higher, upon the Coast of Cilicia, toward a Town called Paiasses. Half a League
from that City ly^s a vast Rock, and between that Rock and the Land runs a very
high Sea: And here it was that the people of the Country believe that the Whale
cast up Jonas again; though the common Opinion reports it to have been done
near Joppa in Palestine. All along that Coast from Alexandretta to Paiasses,
and farther, the way is so narrow and straightened by the Mountain, that in some
parts the Camels and Horses must dip their Feet in the Sea: and yet you must
pass that way of necessity, traveling from Syria to Constantinople. Between
Alexandretta and Paiasses it was, that the Chevalier Paul, in a Vessel that
carried only three hundred Men, missed but little of surprising the Caravan
that every Year carries the Tribute of Egypt to Constantinople, which since
has never been sent by Sea for fear of the Maltesi. This Knight had landed his
Men, and laid them in Ambuscade; but unfortunately his Design was discovered,
so that the Caravan, that might have been easily surpised, stood upon their
Guard.

We were near the Coast, when we discovered a Skiff with fifteen or sixteen
Turks, that were sent by him that commanded four Galleys of Rhodes to demand
the Customary Present from our Captain. Those Galleys then anchored at
Paiasses, and had there discharged themselves of their Provisions of War for
Bagdat, which the Grand Signor was going to besiege. And it is the custom, that
when the Great Turk's Galleys are out at Sea, that whatever strange Vessel
passes by them must send them a Present, either willingly or by force. When the
Basha of the Sea, who is the Admiral of the Turks, is in Person at Sea, the
Vessel which he meets is not excused for 2000 Crowns: so that when he sets out
from Constantinople to cruise, the Vessels of the Franks do all they can to
avoid him. There are some that will seek to escape in sight of the Galleys, but
it has cost them dear. And it happened, that one day the Wind slackning, they
boarded a Vessel of Marseilles, the Captain and Notary whereof were both
seized, and drub'd 'till their Bodies were almost bruised to a Gelly, and they
had like to have died upon it, without being the better in their Purses; for
the rudeness of the Chastisement did not excuse them from paying the Money
which was demanded. Whether our Captain knew any thing of this Example, or
whether it were out of his natural heat of Valor, he laughed at the Skiff-men,
bidding them be gone, and telling them he had no Presents for them but
Cannon-Bullets. Thereupon the Men returned to their Galleys, who soon delivered
us from the true fear we were in, that the gallantry of the Captain had drawn
us into an inconvenience. For while we kept the Sea close by the Coast, to
observe the Countenances of the Turks, they weighed Anchor, and turned their
Prows toward Rhodes. However, before they left us they sent us a Broadside,
and our Captain, whatever we could say, sent them another, which rendered us
more guilty. For the Turks pretend that when their Navy is at Sea, or only one
Squadron, and that a strange Vessel is in sight, she is bound to come as near
as the Wind will permit her without being haled, for which they will otherwise
make the Commander pay very severely. The Consuls and Merchants of Aleppo
understanding what had passed very much blamed the Captain, fearing a worse
consequence of the business* But by good fortune the miscarriage was stifled
and never went farther.

The same day the Wind veering to the West-North-West, we sailed into the Road
of Alexandretta, where we came to an Anchor, about a quarter of a League from
the Land. Upon the advice which they have out of Christendom, so soon as they
of Alexandretta discover a Vessel, and know what Colors she carries* the
Vice-Consul of the Nation to which the Vessel belongs, fails not to advertise
the Consul of Aleppo, by a Note which is carried in four or five hours, though
it be more than two or three days journey on Horseback. For they tie a Note
under the Wing of a Pigeon, who is taught what to do, and she flies directly to
the place whence she was brought. For more surety, they usually send two, that
if the one should miscarry i*the dark, which has many times happened, the other
may supply the defect.

Alexandretta is nothing else but a confused heap of paltry Houses, inhabited
by the Greeks, who keep little Fudling-schools, for the Mariners and others,
the meaner sort of the people: for the Merchants lie at the Vice-Consuls of the
Nation. There were but two then, the English Vice-Consul and the French; who
had each of them a very convenient dwelling. However* they must be men who love
Money at a strange*rate, that accept of those Employments. For the Air, like
that of Ormus, is generally so bad* especially in the Summer, in so much that
they who do not dye, cannot avoid very dangerous Distempers. If there be any so
strong that they can hold out for three or four Years, and can accustom
themselves to a bad Air, they do well to stay there; (...) for them to betake
themselves to a good Air, is to hazard their Lives. Mr. Philips the English
Consul has been the only Person that ever lived two and twenty Years at
Alexandretta: but you must know he was a brisk merry Man, and of an excellent
temper of Body; and yet for all that he had been forced to be cauteriz'd. That
which renders the Air so bad, is the great quantity of standing Pools and
Plashes in the neighboring Plains, extending to the East and South; but when
the great Heats begin to approach, the most part of the Inhabitants retire to a
Village called Belan, upon the next Mountain to the City, where there are very
good Waters and excellent Fruits. They come also thither from Aleppo, when
there is an appearance of a Pestilence; and yet there are few people in this
Village who are not troubled with a sort of Fever, that makes their Eyes look*
yellow and hollow; which they never can remedy as long as they live.

About half a League from Alexandretta, on *the right hand of the High way,
just against the Mersh on the other side, is a Tower whereon are to be seen the
Arms of Godfrey of Bulloign. In all likelihood it was built for the defense of
the Highway, which is enclosed between these two Merches, whose Exhalations
are ^ery noxious.

It is but three little days journey from Alexandretta to Aleppo, and some well
mounted have rid it in two. The Franks are not permitted to go thither on Foot.
For before that Prohibition, in regard the way was short, every Seaman that
had a hundred Crowns, more or less, went on Foot to Aleppo, and got easily
thither in three days, with little expense. Now because they had but little
Money to spend, and were willing to dispatch their business, they would not
stand to give Four or Five in the Hundred extraordinary for what Goods they
bought, which was of dangerous consequence to the Merchants. For you must
observe, that when the Ships arrive, the first man that either out of rashness
or ignorance, gives two Sous more for a Commodity that is not worth a Crown,
sets the Price, and causes all the whole Commodity to be sold at that rate. So
that the Merchants that lay out ten or twelve thousand Crowns together, are
very careful lest those Saylors should get before them, and enhance the Price
of the Market.

To remedy which inconvenience, the Merchants obtained an Order, That no
Strangers should be permitted to go a-foot from Alexandretta to Aleppo, but
that they should be bound to hire Horses, and to give for every Horse six
Piasters thither, and six back; which expense would soon eat out the Profit of
a poor Mariner's small Sum.

Usually you stay at Alexandretta three or foor days, as well to rest your
self, as to make some little Provisions for your Journey to Aleppo. For though
you meet with good Stages at Evening, yet the Janisaries will be very glad to
eat by the way.

Setting out from Alexandretta, we traveled over a Plain to the foot of a
Mountain which is called Belan. There is a wide Gap in the midst of this
Mountain, which giving liberty to the North-East Wind, when it blows hard, does
so enrage the Road of Alexandretta, which is otherwise very calm, that no Ship
can ride there at that time. In so much that all Ships that happ'n to be there
when the Wind rises, presently weigh, and get out to Sea, for fear of being
cast away. Almost at the top of the Mountain you meet with an Inn; but though
it be very fair one, with Fountains round about it, yet Merchants never stop
there, but go on a little farther to a Grecian that speaks good Italian, and
whose entertainment is indifferent good, considering the Country. When you go
away, you give him a Crown for your accommodation, which is the manner at other
Stages, by a custom, which the Franks themselves having established, will never
be left off.

Descending down the Mountain you discover the City of Antioch, built upon a
Hill. Formerly the Road lay through that City* but the Janissaries of the place
exacting a Piaster from every person that traveled that way, that Road is now
disused. Antioch once made more noise in the World, being fallen to ruin ever
since the Chanel, that ran from the City to the Sea, where Galleys might ride,
has been stopped up by the Sands that have encroach'd upon the Mouth of the
Haven.

When you are at the bottom of the Hill toward the North, you discover a Castle
built upon a Hill standing by it self, from whence you have a prospect over a
good part of the Plain of Antioch. It is about fifteen Leagues long, and three
broad, in that part where the Road lies. Somewhat more than half the way, you
meet with a long Causey parted by several Bridges, by reason of certain
Rivulets that cross it, without which the Road were hardly passable. The
frequent Revolts of Baegdat and Balsara, which the Grand Signor has been forced
so often to besiege, caused the Grand Vizier in the Reign of Achmat to
undertake this Causey, which together with the Bridge was finished in six
Months, that was looked upon as a Mi^acle. This was done for the more easy
passage of the Artillery, and other Provisions of War, that were brought out of
Romania and Greece to the Siege of Baegdat, which could never have been done,
but for this Causey. At the end of this Causey stands a Bridge, very long and
strongly built, under which runs a River, which, with the other Rivulets that
wind about the Plain, forms a Lake toward the South, that is called the Lake of
Antioch.^ This Lake affords a great Revenue, by reason of the Eels that are
caught there, which are taken two Months beofre Lent, and transported to Malta
Sicily, and other parts of Italy.

This Plain is very full of Olive Trees; which produces that great Trade of
Soap, that is made at Aleppo, and transported into Mcsopotamia, Chaldea,
Persia, and the Desert; that Commodity being one of the most acceptable
Presents that can be made to the Ar^bians. Sallet Oil is also in great esteem
among them: so that when you make them a Present of it, they will take off
their Bonnets, and rub their Heads, their Faces, and their Beards with it,
lifting up their Eyes to Heaven, and cry in their Language, God be thanked.
Therein they have lost nothing of the ancient custom of the Eastern People, of
which there is often mention made in Holy Scripture.

About a League and a half beyond the Plain, you meet with a Rock, at the foot
whereof is a little deep Lake, wherein they catch a world of Fish that are like
our Barbels. I have killed them with my Pistol; and found them to be of an
excellent taste; though they are not regarded at Aleppo.

Two hours after you fo^d a River which is called Afrora; though if it have
happened to rain, you must stay 'till the Waters are fallen. Having past the
River, upon the Banks whereof you stay to feed your self and your Horses, you
come to lie at a poor Village called Shaquemin, where there is an Inn. Here the
Country People bring Provisions of Food to the Travelers; and whether you eat
or no, you must pay a Piaster, according to the custom which the Franks have
established. After you have passed the Plain of Antioch as far as Shaquemin,
the Horses in Summer are so terribly tormented with a sort of great Flies, that
it were impossible to travel three or four hours together, were it not for
going out of the Road, either to the right, or to the left, and riding through
the Fields, which are full of those Burrs that our Clothworkers make use of:
For in regard they grow as high as the Crupper of the Horse, they keep the
Flies off from stinging and tyring the Ho^^es.

Leaving the Village of Sh^q^^e^^in, the Road lies among Stones; and for half
this tedious way, for two or three Leagues round about, you see nothing but the
Ruins of ancient Monasteries. There are some of them which are built almost a^
of Freestone; and about half a days journey toward the North, quite out of the
Road, stands the Monastery of St. Simeon the Stylite, with the remainder of his
so The Prospect of Aleppo.

Page 1*

famous Pillar, which is still to be ^een. The Franks that travel to Aleppo,
usually go out of their way to see that place. That which I find most entire
and worthy observation among the Ruins of those Monasteries, is the number of
arch' Cisterns of Freestone, which time has not defaced.

From Shaquemin you come to dine at a Village called Angare, where every
Traveller is entertained for his Piaster, as at the other Stages. Between the
other Villages it is ten hours journey; but between the Angare and Aleppo, but
three. We alighted at the French Consul's House, at what time the Customers
came presently to search our Cloak-bags; after which we went to the Quaiss^ry,
which is a place where all Strangers are at the expense of half a Crown a day
for themselves, and a quarter so much for every Servant, and are well
entertained.

CHAP. II.
The Description of Aleppo, now the Capital City of Syria.
ALeppo is one of the most famous Cities in all Turkey, as well for the bigness
and beauty of it, as for the goodness of the Air, and plenty of all things;
together with the great Trade which is driven there by all the Nations of the
World. It lies in 71 Degrees. 41 Min. of Longitude, and 36 Degrees. 15 Min. of
Latitude, in an excellent Soil. With all the search that I could make, I could
never learn how it was anciently called. Some would have it to be Hierapolis,
others Beroea: And the Christians of the Country agree with the latter. The
Arabian Historians that record the taking of it, call it only Aleb, not
mentioning any other name. Whence this Observation is to be made. That if the
Arabians call it Aleb, others Alep; the reason is, because the Arabians never
use the Letter P in their Language. This City was taken by the Arabians in the
fifteenth Year of the Hegyra of Mahomet, which was about the Year of CHRIST
637, in the Reign of Heraclius Emperor of Constantinople.

The City is built upon four Hills, and the Castle upon the highest that stands
in the middle of Aleppo, being supported by Arches in some places, for fear the
Earth should tumble and moulder away from it. The Castle is large, and may be
about five or six hundred Paces in compass. The Walls and Towers, though built
of Freestone, are of little defense. There is but one Gate to enter into it
from the South, over a Drawbridge, laid over certain Arches cross a Moat about
six or seven Fathom deep. There is but one half of it full of Water, and that a
standing Puddle to boot; the rest is a mere dry Ditch; so that it cannot be
accounted a wholesome place. However there is Water brought into the Castle
through a large Pipe from the Fountains in the City: and there is a strong
Garrison kept in it.

The City is above three Miles in circuit, and the best half of it is unmoated;
that Moat there is not above three Fathom deep. The Walls are very good, and
all of Freestone; with several square Towers, distant one from the other about
fourscore Paces; between which there are others also that are less. But these
Walls are not all of them of an equal height, for in some places they are not
above four Fathoms from the Ground. There are ten Gates to enter into the City,
without either Moat or Drawbridge; under one of which there is a place that
the Turks have in great veneration; where they keep Lamps continually burning,
and report that Elisha the Prophet lived for some time.

There is no River that runs through Aleppo; and but only a small one without
the City, which the Arabians call Coic. However, though indeed it be but
properly a Rivulet, yet it is very useful to water the Gardens, where grows an
abundance of Fruit, particularly Pistaches, much bigger, and better tasted than
those that comes from the parts near Casbin. But though there be no River, yet
there are store of Fountains and Receptacles of Water, which they bring from
two places distant from the City.

The Edifices, neither public nor private, are very handsome, but only
withinside; the Walls are of Marble of several colors, and the Cieling of
Foliage Fret-work, with Inscriptions in Golden Letters. Without and within the
City there are six and twenty Mosquees, six or seven whereof are very
magnificent, with stately Duomo's, three being covered with Lead. The chiefest
and largest of all, was a Christian Church which they called A^hha, or Listened
unto: which is thought to have been built by St. Helen. In one part of the
Suburbs also stands another Mosquee, which was formerly a Christian Church; in
that there is one thing worthy observation. In the Wall upon the right side of
the Gate there is a Stone to be seen two or three Foot square, wherein there is
the figure of a handsome Chalice, and a Sacrifice over the hollow of it, with a
Crescent that covers the Sacrifice, the two Horns whereof descend just upon the
brims of the mouth of the Chalice. One would think at first that those Figures
were in Mosaic. Work: but it is all Natural, as I have found with several other
Franks, having scraped the Stone with an Iron Instrument, when the Turks were
out of the way. Several Consuls would have bought it, and there has been
offered for it 2000 Crowns; but the Basha's of Aleppo would never suffer it to
be sold. Half a League from the City lies a pleasant Hill, where the Franks are
wont to take the Air. On the side of that Hill is to be seen a Cave or Grotto,
where the Turks report that Haly lived for some few days; and for that there is
an ill-shap'd figure of a Hand imprinted in the Rock, they farther believe it
to be the Hand of Haly.

There are three Colleges in Aleppo, but very few Scholars, though there be
Men of Learning that belong to them, who have Salaries to teach Grammar, and
their odd kind of Philosophy, with the Grounds of their Religion, which are the
Principal Sciences to which the Turks apply themselves.

The Streets of the City are all paved, except the Bazar's, where the Merchants
and Handicraft-Tradesmen keep their Shops. The chiefest Artists, and the most
numerous are Silk and Camlet-Weavers.

In the City and Suburbs there are about forty Inns; and fifty public Baths,
as well for Women as for Men, keeping their turns. It Is the chiefest Pastime
the Women have to go to the Baths; and they will spare all the Week long to
carry a Collation, when they go at the Weeks end to make merry among
themselves, in those places of privacy.

The Suburbs of the City are large and well peopled, for almost all the
Christians have their Houses and Churches there. Of which Christians there are
four sorts in Al^ppo, I mean of Eastern Christians, that is to to say, Greeks,
Armenians, Jacobites or Syrians, and Maronites. The Greeks have an Archbishop
there, and are about fifteen or sixteen thousand in number; their Church is
dedicated to St. George. The Armenians have a Bishop, whom they call Vertabet;
and are about twelve thousand in number; their Church is dedicated to the
Virgin. The Jacobites being about ten thousand, have a Bishop also; and their
Church is likewise dedicated to the Virgin, as is that of the Armenians. The
Maronites depend upon the Pope, not being above twelve hundred; their Church
being consecrated to St. Elias. The Roman Catholics have three Churches,
served by the Capuchins, Carmelites, and Jesuits. They reckon that in the
Suburbs and City of Aleppo there are about 250000 Souls.

There is a vast Trade at Aleppo for Silks and Camlets, but chiefly for
Gall-Nuts, and Valanede, which is a sort of Acorn-shell without which the
Curriers cannot dress their Leather. They have also a great Trade for Soap, and
for several other Commodities; the Merchants repairing thither from all parts
of the World. For not to speak of the Turks, Arabians, Persians, Indians, there
are several English, Italians, French, and Hollanders, every Nation having
their Consul to carry on their Interests, and maintain their Privileges.

Nor does this place happ'n to be so great a Mart, through the convenience of
the two Rivers of Tigris and Euphrates, as some have writt'n; by which they say
such vast quantities of Commodities are transported and imported out and into
the City. For had that been, I should never have crossed the Desert, coming
from Bagdat to Aleppo; nor at another time, going from Aleppo to Balsara. And
as for Euphrates, certain it is, that the great number of Mills built upon it,
to bring the Water to the neighboring Grounds, have not only rendered it
unnavigable, but made it very dangerous.

I must confess, that in the year 1638 I saw a great part of the Grand Signor's
Army, and several Boats full of Warlike Provisions fall down the Stream, when
he went to besieg^ it: but when they were forced to ta^e away all the Mills
that are upon the River; which was not done without a vast trouble and expense.
As for Tigris, it is not navigable 'till beyond Babylon down to Bal^ara, where
you may take Water, and be at Bal^ara in nine days. But the Voyage is very
inconvenient, for at every Town which the Arabs have upon the River, you must
be haled, and be forced to leave some Money behind you. Som^times indeed the
Merchants of Moussul and Bagdat; and others that come out of Chaldea to T^ade
at Bal^ara, carry their Goods by Water from Bagdat; but in regard the Boats are
only to be towed by Men, it takes them up a Voyage of seventy days. By this you
may judge of the time and expense of carrying Goods by Water up the River
Euphrates to Bir, where they are to be unlad'n for Aleppo.

In short, if the convenience of Morat-sou (for so the Turks call Euphrates)
were to be had, and that Goods might be transported by that River, the
Merchants would never take that way: for the Arabian Princes, with their People
and their Cattle lying all the Summer long upon the Banks of the River, for the
sake of the Water and the Grass, would make the Merchants pay what Toll they
pleased themselves.

I saw an Example of this, coming one time from Babylon to Aleppo. In all which
Road we met but with one of those Arabian Princes, who lay at Anna: yet he made
us pay for every Camel's Load forty Piasters. And which was worse, he detained
us above five Weeks, to the end his Subjects might get more of our Money by
selling us their Provisions. The last time I passed the Desert, I met another
of these Arabian Princes together with his Brother, both young Men: He would
not let us go a step farther, unless we would exchange two hundred Piasters in
specie for Larins, the Money of the Country; and he forced us to take them what
ever we could urge to make it appear how much we should lose by them. And
indeed we said as much as we could, for the dispute lasted two and twenty days
to no purpose; might overcoming right. By this you may guess what the other
Arabians would do, who are not a jot more civil; and whether the Merchants
would get by taking the Road of Euphrates.

The City is governed by a Basha, who commands all the Country from
Alexandretta to Euphrates. His Guard usually consists of three hundred Men, and
some years ago he was made a Vizier. There is also an Aga or Captain of the
Cavalry, as well within the City as without, who commands four hundred Men.
There is another Aga who has under him seven hundred Janisaries, who has the
charge of the Gates of the City; to whom the Keys are carried every Evening,
neither has he any dependence upon the Basha. The Castle is also under another
Commander* sent immediately from Constantinople, who has under him two hundred
Musketeers, and likewise the charge of the Cannon; of which there are about
thirty Pieces; eight great Guns, the rest of a small size. There is also
another Aga or Captain of the City, who commands three hundred Harquebuzes;
beside a Son-Bashi, who is a kind of Provost of the Merchants, or Captain of
the Watch, going the round every Night with his Officers though the City and
Suburbs. He also puts in Execution the Sentences of the Basha, upon Criminal
Offenders.

In Civils there is a Cadi, who sits sole Judge, without any Assistants, of all
Causes as well Civil as Criminal; and when he has condemned any Man to Death,
he sends him to the Basha, together with his Accusation, with whom the Basha
does as he pleases. This Cady makes and dissolves all Contracts of Marriage;
all Acts of Sale and Purchase pass in his presence. He also creates the sworn
Masters of every Trade, who make their inspection that there may be no deceit
in the Work. The Grand Signor's Duties are received by a Tefterdar, or
Treasurer-General, who has under him several Receivers in diverse places.

In matters of Religion, the Muf^i is the Chief, and the Interpreter of the
Law, as well in relation to the Ceremonies, as in all Ecclesiastical
differences. Among these Interpreters of the Law there is a Chieke or Doctor,
appointed to instruct those that are newly converted to Mahumetanism, and to
teach them the Maxims and Customs of their Religion.

Three days after I arrived at Aleppo, Sultan Amurat made his Entry, going to
his Army, which was upon its march to the Siege of Babylon. Now you must take
notice, that nor far from Aleppo, toward the East, there stands a House
inhabited by the Dervies, which are a Religious Order among the Turks; though
it formerly belonged to the Monks of St. Basil, and was a fair Covent. It is
still in good repair, the Walls of the Chambers, Halls, and Galleries being all
Marble. All the Dervies of this House went half a League from the City, as far
as Mount Ozelet, to meet the Grand Signor; and the Superior, at the Head of
the rest, having made a Speech to his Highness, two Dervies came and made their
obeisance in particular. Which being performed, from that place to the Castle
of Aleppo, for half an hours march together; they went just before the Grand
Signor's Horse, turning round continually with all their might, 'till they
foamed again at the Mouth, and dazzled the Eyes of those that beheld them. There
are some of these Dervies that will turn in that manner for two hours together,
and glory in that which we account folly.

While the Grand Signor staid at Aleppo, the Basha of Cayro came thither with a
thousand Janisaries: And indeed, there never was a sight of Men more active, or
better ordered. Every one of them had Scarlet Breeches that reached down to
their Ancles, with a Turkie-Robe of English Cloth, and a Wast-coat of Calicut
painted with several Colors. The most part had Buttons of Gold and Silk; and
as well their Girdles as their Scimitars were adorned with Silver. The Basha
marched at the Head of this Magnificent Regiment in a modest Garb; but the
Harness of his Horse was as rich as his Habit seemed to be careless, having
spared for no Cost to appear before the Grand Signor in a stately Equipage.

There is a necessity for a Man to stay some time at Aleppo, as well to dispose
of his Affairs, and in expectation 'till the Caravan be ready, unless he will
venture himself alone without a Guide, which I have done more than once. And
thus much for Aleppo, next to Constantinople and Cayro, the most considerable
City in all the Turkish Empire.

CHAP. III.
Of several Roads in general from Aleppo to Ispahan, and particularly of the
Road through the great Desert.
THere are five principal Roads from Aleppo to Ispahan, which being added to
those other Roads which I have discrib'd through Natolia, make seven Roads into
Persia, parting from Constantinople, Smyrna, or Aleppo.

The first of the five Roads, setting out from Aleppo, is upon the left hand,
toward the Summer-East, through Diarbck and Tauris. The second directly East,
by Mesopotamia, through Moussul and Amadan. The third upon the right hand,
toward the Winter-East, through Bagdat and Kengavar. The fourth somewhat more
to the South, crossing a little Desert, through Anna, Bagdat, and Balsara. The
fifth through the great Desert, which is an extraordinary Road, never traveled
but once a year, when the Merchants of Turkey and Egypt go to buy Camels. Of
these Roads I intend to treat distinctly, and in several Chapters. And first of
the Road through the great Desert.

The Caravans that go to Balsara this way never set out 'till the Rains are
fallen, that they may not want Water in the Desert: and the Rain seldom holds up
'till December. This Caravan, with which I traveled, set out upon
Christmas Day, consisting of about six hundred Camels, and four hundred Men,
Masters and Servants together: the Caravan-Bashi being only on Horseback, and
riding before, to find Water, and convenient places to lodge in.

I must confess I had the convenience my self to ride my own Horse, which I
kept all the while I was at Aleppo. A liberty permitted the Franks only at
Constantinople, Smyrna, and Aleppo* for at Damas, Seyde, or Cayro, none but the
Consuls are suffered to keep Horses: others can only keep or hire Asses, which
stand ready in the public Streets at all times.

The next day we dislodged by daybreak, and by noon we came to a place where
there were five Wells, about five hundred Paces distant one from the other. The
Water was excellent, and caused us to replenish our Boracho's: and about four a
Clock in the Afternoon we lay at a place where there was no Water.

The next day near noon we met* with two Wells, but the Water was not good, and
only the Camels drank of it, there we also lodged that night.

Having now traveled two days in the Desert, I will describe it in a few words.
You begin to enter upon it two or three Leagues from Aleppo, where by degrees
you meet with nothing but Tents instead of Houses. It stretches out to the
Winter-East, all along the Euphrates to Balsara, and the Shore of the Gulf of
Persia; and upon the South to the Chain of Mountains that divides it from
Arabia Petr^a and Arabia the Happy. These Deserts are almost quite thorough
nothing but Plains of Sand, which in some places lie looser than in others; and
are hardly passable till the Rains are but newly ^al'n, and have knit the Sands
together. It Is a rare thing to meet with a Hill or a Valley in these Deserts;
if you do, there is as surely Water, and as many Bushes as will serve to boil a
little Rice. For thoughout the whole Desert there is no Wood to be found; and
all the Bavins and Charcoal that you can load upon Camels at Aleppo, will not
last above eight or ten days. Therefore you must take notice, that of six
hundred Camels that pass through the Desert, there are scarce fifty laden with
Merchandise, which is generally course Cloth, some little Iron Ware, but
chiefly black and blew Calicuts, which the Arabians make use of without ever
whitening them. All the other Camels are only laden with Provision, and all
little enough; so many People being to travel for so many days through so long
a Tract of Ground where there is nothing in the World to sustain Life and Soul
together.

For the first fifteen days travel we met with Water but once in two days, and
sometimes not above once in three days. The twentieth day after we set out from
Aleppo, the Caravan lay at a place where there were two Wells, and the Water
very good. Every one was glad of the convenience of washing his Linen, and the
Caravan-Bashi made account to have staid there two or three days. But the News
that we received, caused us to alter our Resolutions. For we had no sooner
given order to dress our Suppers, when we saw a Courier with three Arabs, all
mounted upon Dromedaries, who were sent to carry the news of the Taking of
Babylon to to Aleppo and other Cities of the Empire. They stopped at the Wells
to let their Beasts drink; and immediately the Caravan-Bashi, and the principal
persons of the Caravan made them a small Present of dried Fruits and Granates.
Who thereupon were so kind as to tell us, that the Carriage which carried the
Baggage belonging to the Grand Signor and his Train being tired, his Officers
would be sure to seize upon ours, if they should chance to meet with us: they
advised us moreover not to come near Anna, lest the Emir should stop us.

Upon this news, we departed three hours after midnight; and keeping directly
to the South, we put our selves into the midst of the Desert.

Eight days after we came to lie at a place where three Wells, and three or
four Houses. We staid there two days to take fresh Water, and we were just
setting forward again, when thirty Horsemen well mounted came from one of the
Emirs, to tell the Caravan Bashi that he must stop his Caravan. We staid
impatiently for him three days; and at length he came, and was presented by the
Caravan-Bashi with a piece of Satin, half a piece of Scarlet Cloth, and two
large Copper Cauldrons. Now although those Cauldrons could not but be very
acceptable to an Arabian Prince, who most certainly had none such in his
Kitchen, vet he did not seem contented with his Present, and demanded above
four hundred Crowns* We contested seven or eight days to have kept our Money in
our Pockets, but in vain, so that we were forced to rate one another, and to
raise him his Sum; which being paid, he treated the chief of the Caravan with
Pilaw, Honey, and Dates, and when he went away, give them five or six Sheep
ready boiled.

Three days after we had lest this Arabian Prince, we met with two Wells near
certain old decayed Brick Buildings. The Water of those Wells was so bitter,
that the Camels would not drink it: however we filled our Boracho's, thinking
it would have left its bitterness by being boiled: but we found the contrary.

From those two Wells that were good for nothing, we traveled six days before
we met with any Water, which with their three days before, made nine; and all
that time the Camels never drank, as I have hinted already. At the end of nine
days we crossed a Hilly Country for three Leagues together, at the feet of
three of which Hills there were three standing Pools. The Camels, that smelt
the Water half a League off, put themselves upon their great trot, which is
their manner of running, and no sooner came to the Pools but they crowded in
all together, which caused the Water to be thick and muddy. Thereupon the
Caravan-Bashi resolved to stay there two or three days together, 'till the
Water was settled. Here we had also the opportunity to boil us some Rice, there
being good store of Bushes that grew about the Lake. But above all, the People
were over joy'd that they had an opportunity to make Bread, which they do after
the following manner. First they dig a round Hole in the Ground, half a Foot
deep, and two or three in diameter, which they crowd full of Bushes, and then
set them on fire, covering them with Bricks or Stones 'till they are red hot.
In the mean while they prepare their Dough upon a Sofra, or round piece of
Copper, which serves at other times for Table and Table-Cloth to eat upon. Then
they take away the Ashes and Bricks, and making the Hole very clean, put in
their Dough, and covering it again with the hot Bricks or Stones, leave it so
'till the morning. The Bread thus baked is very well tasted, not being above
two Fingers thick, and as big as an ordinary Cake.

While we stayed at the three Ponds, I spent my time in killing Hares and
Partridge, of which there was very great plenty in those parts. The night
before we departed we filled our Baracho's again, the Water being very good and
clear; though it be nothing but Rain water preserved in those Cavi^ies, which
in the Summer are dry again.

But now the Caravan-Bashi, seeing we had traveled already nine days without
finding any Water, resolved to leave the South, and to keep to the West; and if
he met not with Water in two or three days, to take to the North-East, or
Winter-East, in quest of the River Euphrates.

Two days after we had changed our Road, we passed between two little Hills,
where we met with a Pond, near to which were two Arabians, each with his Wife
and Children, tending a Herd of Goats and a Flock of Sheep. They told us they
were going toward Moussul, and put us in the best Road to find Water; and
indeed, from that place to Balsara, we never traveled three days together, but
we met with enough.

Five days after we had left those two Arabians, we discovered a large Palace
all of Brick; which showed some probability, that the Country had been formerly
sowed, and that the Bricks had been bu^nt with the Straw. To the Palace
belonged three large Courts; in every one of which were fair Buildings, with
two Stories of Arches, one upon another. Though this large Pile was standing,
yet no body lived in it, nor could the Arabians, (very ignorant in Antiquity,)
tell us by whom it was built. Before the Gate of the Palace there is a Lake
with a Channel, the bottom whereof is brick'd, as also the Arch, which is even
with the Ground. This the Arabians believe to have been a conveyance of Water
from Euphrates: which surely could never be, in regard that Euphrates is above
twenty Leagues distant.

From that Palace we kept to the North-East, and after we had traveled five
days, we arrived at a pitiful Town, formerly called Cufa, now Meched-Ali, where
Ali, Mahomet's Son in-law lies buried in a plain Mosquee. Generally there stand
four Tapers lighted about the Tomb, and certain Lamps burning over-head, which
are fastened to the Roof.

Though the Persians have Ali in so much veneration, yet they rarely go in
Pilgrimage to his Tomb. The reason is, because that there being no way to come
at it, but through Bagdat, which is under the Dominion of the Great Turk, there
is a demand of eight Piasters from every Pilgrim; which is an Imposition that
no way pleases the King of Persia. Sha-Abas scorning that his Subjects should
be tributary to the Turks, endeavored to divert them from this Pilgrimage by
another sort of Devotion, which he set up at Mesheed, upon the Road from Tauris
to Candahar. Nor have the Kings his Successors been less unwilling to give
their Subjects leave to visit their Prophet Ali, taking it for an Affront to
pay Tribute to the Grand Signor. Which is the reason that this Mosquee is no
more enriched by the Persians. For besides the Lamps and Tapers that burn
continually, there are only two Moullah's that read the Alcoran according to
custom. In this Town there are only three or four bad Wells of brackish Water,
and a dry Chanel, which they say Sha-Abas made to bring the Water of Euphrates
to the Town for the benefit of the Pilgrims. As for Food, we met with nothing
but Dates, Grapes, and Almonds, which the People sold at a dear rate. When any
Pilgrims come thither, which is very rare, and that they want Victuals, the
Sheck causes a distribution to be made among them of Rice boiled with Water and
Salt, and a little Butter poured atop. For there is no Pasturage for Cattle,
and by consequence there can be no store of Food.

Two days journey from Ali's Town, by nine of the Clock in the morning we met
two young Arabian Lords, that took upon them the name of Sultans. They were two
Brothers, one of the age of seventeen years, the other of thirteen: and as we
pitched our Tents, they pitched theirs close by us; which were of a very fine
Scarlet Cloth; and among the rest there was one covered with Purple Velvet,
laced with a rich Galoon-lace. So soon as they were settled in their Tents, the
Caravan-Bashi and I went to wait upon them; who understanding that there were
Franks in the Caravan, asked me whether I had any Curiosities to sell them; but
when I made them answer that I had nothing worthy their Purchase, they would
not believe me, and therefore commanded the Caravan Bashi to fetch my Trunks,
that they might be opened in their presence. While the were opening, one of the
chief persons about those Princes would not suffer any of the rest of the Arabs
to come near, for though most of the Arabs are great Thieves, yet some of them
are persons of great integrity. Now I had in my company a young Painter, who
had in his Chest several engraved Cuts, part Landskips, part Figures, together
with the Pictures of certain Courtisans drawn to the Wast. The young Lords made
choice only of twenty of those Courtisans, which I would have presented to
them, but they gave me to understand, that they knew how to pay for what they
had, and especially the youngest, who seemed to be very generous; him I pleased
in an extraordinary manner; for his Teeth being very foul, I ordered a
Surgeon that I carried along with me at the same time to clean them, which
he did to the great satisfaction of the young Prince. Thereupon they sent me
and my Train, of their best Victuals they had. The Caravan Bashi presented them
with half a piece of Scarlet, and two pieces of Tissue of Gold and Silver. When
we were ready to go, the young Sultan gave me twelve Ducats for my Pictures,
and sent the Caravan-Bashi and my self two Frails of the best Dates that we had
met with since we left Aleppo.

About midnight the Princes dislodged, and took to the North toward Euphrates.
We set forward after them, driving Northward toward the same River. After we
had traveled four days we met one of the most potent Emirs of Arabia, who
coming from the South, and going Northward, was to cross the Road that we kept.
He was about fifty years of age, well made, and of a comely presence. He had
not then above two thousand Horse, of thirty thousand which we heard had passed
by some days before. Behind the two thousand Horse were fifty Camels that
carried his Women; their Cajavas being covered with Scarlet-cloth fringed with
Silk. In the midst of these Camels there were six encompassed with Eunuchs, the
Fringes of the Cajavas being Silk, Silver, and Gold. The Arabians do not seem
to be jealous of their Wives, as in Turkey and other places; for they led their
Camels by our Caravan, never requiring us to retire, as is the custom in other
places. They lodged a quarter of a League off, where we thought to have
pitched, for the convenience of two or three Ponds, which they deprived us of.
This Arabian Prince had a great number of lovely Horses richly harnessed:
others he had that were neither sadl'd nor bridled, yet the Riders would turn
them with a Wand which way they pleased, and upon a full gallop would stop 'em,
by only holding them by the Hair. He had some Horses of an excessive price; and
this is to be observed, that they are never shod.

The Caravan-Bashi believing he could not escape scot-free from so powerful a
Prince, among the Merchants of the Caravans found out a rich Saddle, with
Bridle and Stirrups, which were all set out and garnished with massy Silver,
with an embroidered Quiver full of Arrows, together with a Buckler, the whole
coming to about eleven or twelve hundred Livers; and adding to these of his own
a piece of Scarlet, four pieces of Tissue of Gold and Silk, and six pieces oi
Tissue of Silver and Silk, made a Present of all together to the Emir. But he
refused all, demanding only two bundred thousand Piasters for Larins: which
exchange being no way for the Merchants profit, raised a great dispute. But at
length, considering that it was in his power to stop and starve us there, we
only endeavored a Composition; which was obtained. Thereupon he took the
Present, which perhaps he would not else have done. For two days that we staid
to weigh the Money, he sent Provisions to the chief of the Caravan; and at our
departure, he sent u^ twelve Frails of Dates, and four young Camels that might
be worth about forty Crowns a-piece.

Two days after we met a Schek, who among the Arabians is one of the chief of
the Law. He was going to Mecca, cross some part of Arabia the Happy, with a
Train of ten or twelve Camels. He staid all night with us, and one of his
Servants having been dangerously wounded about two days before with a
Musket-bullet, my Surgeon dressed him, and gave him Salve and Tents, for which
he was extremely thankful. He sent me to Supper a great Dish of Pilaw, and the
next day a whole Sheep. The Caravan-Bashi likewise presented him with two Else
of Scarlet.

The next we met with nothing worth observation, but the day following we met
another Emir, of about Five and Twenty years of age* who came from Euphrates,
and was traveling into the Happy Arabia. He had with him about five hundred
Horse, and three hundred Camels that carried his women. He presently sent to
know what Caravan it was, and understanding that it consisted of many Franks,
among whom their was a Surgeon: He sent again to desire the Caravan Bashi to
follow with the Caravan, to the place where he intended to pitch his Tents,
which was not far out of the way. We did not think to have gone so far that
day, but he led us to the best water in all the Desert. The Princes Tent being
set up, he sent for my Surgeon, with whom I went along to know what his
pleasure was. He had upon his left Arm a Tetter, with a most filthy Scab as
broad as a Crown piece; and this went and came at certain times in the year. He
presently asked the Surgeon whether he could cure him? to whom the
Surgeon made answer, that the cure was not impossible, provided he knew
where to get such remedies as were convenient: For had he said, he could have
absolutely cured him, the Emir would have carried him away with him, without
any farther Ceremony. Thereupon he would have given the Surgeon five hundred
Crowns to have bought Medicines. But I made answer, that the cure would not
cost so much, and that if the Surgeon could meet with proper Drugs, I would
lay out the Money my self. The Emir content with that answer, sent one of his
chief People to Balsara, to come back with the Surgeon, when he had bought
his Medicines. He himself staid there three days in expecttion of him; but
after we had pretended to seek for what we wanted, up and down the Town (for we
inquired for such things as we knew were not to be had) we sent him back word
that we could not find what we looked for, and desired his excuse, in regard
the attendance of the Surgeon would be of no use, where he had not proper
remedies; which was the only way we could think of, to get cleverly rid of him.

The next days Journey after we had left the Arabian Prince, was through a
Country altogether uninhabited; but the day following, which was the sixtyfifth
and last day of our being in the Desert, we met after some time, with the
ruins of some houses on both sides the way; which made us conjecture, that
some great City had stood formerly in that place.

At length we came to Balsara, which I shall describe in another place.

While I stayed at Balsara, which was about three weeks, an Ambassador from the
Great Mogul arrived there, who from Constantinople went to Bagdat to
congratulate the Grand Signor for the Conquest of that City, which he had taken
in so short a time. The Emperor presented him with three sately Horses, and a
little Watch, the Case whereof was set with Diamonds and Rubies. But the
Ambassador not knowing what belonged to that little Engine, winding it up the
wrong way, broke the string. Coming to Balsara he sent to the Carmalites to
desire them to mend his Watch; for he feared the loss of his head, should he
return to his Master, and not show him the Watch entire. It was at their House
that i then lay; and therefore not knowing what to do with it, they desired* me
to show my skill: Thereupon I put on a new string. But the Ambassador, when he
understood to whom he was beholding, though it were but a trifle, profer'd me
all the service and kindness imaginable. Thereupon the Carmelites and Augustine
Friars desired me to request of the Ambassador in their behalf, that he would
obtain the Great Turks protection for them, in case he took Balsara, that their
Houses and Churches might be preserved; which I did, and obtained by his means
full protection from the Grand Vizier. But they had no need of it, for the
Turks did not make any attempt upon Balsara, hearing that the Persians were
advancing; besides that the rainy season was at hand, which will not permit an
Army to keep the Field: So that had Bagdat held out eight days longer, the
Grand Signor would have been constrained to have raised the Siege.

Having spoken of the Arabian Horses, I must needs say, that there are some
that are valued at a very high rate. The Mogul's Ambassador gave for some
three, four, and six thousand Crowns, and for another he offered eight thousand
Crowns, but the Horse would not be sold under t^n, and so he left it. When he
was got home into the Indies, and had presented the Mogul those Horses which he
had carried along with him, being very lovely Creatures; he told his Master how
he had offered eight thousand Crowns for a Horse more beautiful than any of
them; but because the Owner would not let him go under ten, he left him. The
King incensed that his Ambassador has stood for so small a Sum, when it was for
one of the greatest Monarchs in the World, upbraided the poorness of his
Spirit, and banished him for ever from his presence, into a Province far
distant from the Court. Thereupon the King wrote to the English to buy him the
Horse, who accordingly did so, and brought him to Surat, where the
Governour-repaid them their Money. But the Horse died at Brampour.

Nor must I forget, that while I was at Balsara, twice there flew by such a
prodigious number of Locusts that a far-off they appeared like a Cloud, and
darkn'd the Air. They pass by Balsara four or five times in the year, the Wind
carrying them into the Desert, where they alight, and most certainly dye.
Should they not be thus wind-driv'n, there could nothing live upon the Earth in
some parts of Chaldea. They swarm all along the Persian Gulf, and when the
Vessels come to Ormus at the time of the year, there are little Shops where
people sell Locusts fried in Butter to those that love that sort of Diet. Once
I had the curiosity to open the Belly of a Locust six Inches long, and found
therein seventeen little ones that stirred; whenee it is easy to guess how
those Infects come to be so numerous, especially in hot Countries.

There are several Barks that go from Ormus to furnish both of the Persian
Gulf, where the people eat neither Bread nor Rice. I agreed with the Master of
one of these Barks, and made my agreement that the Bark should not be above
half laden; for generally they lade them too deep, and in foul weather they are
forced to throw half the Freight overboard, to* save the rest.

From Balsara to the mouth of the River Euphrates, it is reck'nd to be twenty
Leagues of Fresh Water. We staid seven whole days for a Wind, which proving
favorable, we came to Brander-ric, in forty-eight hours. This is the place
where you must land, if you intend for Persia, unless you are bound for Ormus.
Branderric consists only of five or six little Fishers Hutts; which Hutts are
only Hurdles set one against another, and covered over, where they and their
Families live. To the same place come Asses lad'n with Dates, which I was
forced to hire for want of Horses.

We were six days upon the Road from thence to Cazerom. This is a Mountainous
Country, where there is Wood enough; but you must lodge in the Fields, for
there are no Inns upon the Road. The way is pleasant in some places, along the
Banks of several Rivulets, and through verdant Groves stored with great
quantities of Turtles. We killed a good many; which we eat, part with Pilaw,
instead of Henns; some we roasted, making Sticks to serve for Spits.

Cazerom is a little Gity ill built, where there is but one Inn, and that none
of the most inviting to Strangers neither.

From Cazerom to Schiras it is five days journey. The Road lies over very
craggy Mountains, which had been impassable, but for the Liberality of Ali
Couli-Kan, Governor of Schiras. He made Ways where there were none before, and
joined Mountains together by Bridges, in Countries which otherwise had been
inaccessible. In the midst of the Mountains is a wide gap or discontinuance,
from whence a Plain extends it self of about twenty Leagues in circuit. It is
inhabited by Jews only, who are Silk-Weavers. In these Mountains you met with
Tents, where the Chaldeans sojourn, that come for cool Air and Pasturage in the
Summer.

Coming to Schiras, I took Horse there for Ispahan, which I arrived in nine
days. The Country over which you travel, between these two Cities, is part
Plains, part Mountains; part wild, and part manured. Three days journey from
Schiras you pass the Mountain of Mayen, a little City where there is nothing
worthy observation. Two days journey from thence you enter upon the Plains of
the Province of Cuscuzar, where the King of Persia keeps his Race-Horses. The
next day I arrived at Yesdecas, where the best Bread in Persia is made. This is
a little City upon a Rock, wherein there is a very fair Inn: at the foot
whereof runs a little River that glides into the Valley, wherein grows that
excellent Corn which is uttered in Bread from that City.

In three days I went from Yesdecas to Ispahan. This was the first Road from
Aleppo to Ispahan.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Road from Aleppo to Ispahan, through Mesopotamia and Assyria, which I
traveled in my third Voyage to the Indies.
I Departed from Paris in my third Voyage to the Indies upon the sixth of
December 1643, and went to Ligorn, where I found the D^^^h Fleet ready to set
Sail for the Levant. The Vessel wherein I embarked seeming* rather a Man-of-War
than a Merchant-Man. We passed through the Chanel of Messina, and lay there at
an Anchor four days before the City. From thence passing by the Morea, we
entered into the Archipelago, where the Fleet parted, according as every Ship
was bound. Our Ship sailed directly for the Port of Alexandretta, but though
the Wind were favorable, we were stopped for some time by a Pirate that met
with us off the Eastern Point of Candy. We endeavored to have got clear of
him; but the Pirate gaining upon us, we made ready. Thereupon the Pirate gave
us three Broad-sides, that went over the Ship without doing us any harm: which
we answered by as many from our Ship, the first whereof brought his Foremast
by the Board; and the third Shot went through the Fore-castle and killed him
some Men, as far as we could discern. At that very instant one of our Mariners
cried out from the Top-mast-head, A Sail from the South. Thereupon the Pirate
left us, and made Sail after her: and we, glad of such an escape, pursued our
Voyage to Alexandretta, where we happily arrived; from whence I took Horse for
Aleppo, as I have already described.

The sixth of March I departed from Aleppo in the company of two Capuchin
Friars, Father Raphael and Father Yves, and the Venetian whose name was
Dominica de Sanctis.

From Aleppo to Bir, where you cross the Euphrates, it is four days journey for
the Horse- Caravan. The Country is well wooded, and well manured.

The seventh of March the great Rains that fell hindered us from getting to the
usual Stage, so that we could not gain Telbechar, another Town, where there is
no Inn: which constrained us to stop a League on this side, and to go to a Cave
that was able to contain three hundred Horse. This is a Cave where the Bedouins
or Feeders of Cattle thereabouts often retire, who live after the manner of the
Arabs, either in Rocks or in poor Hutts. The Cave has been hollowed from time
to time, there being several Niches in it like little Chambers. Our
Caravan-Bashi fearing some Ambuscade, rode thither before to view the place,
but finding it empty and free, we rested there that night, and the next came to
lie at M^zara, which is only a small Village without an Inn: Neither was there
any thing remarkable upon that Road. Only that near the Cave, in the Mountain,
there is very good Water: And formerly upon the Mountain stood a Castle, of
which some ruins are still remaining. From the top of the Mountain there is a
fair Prospect as far as you can see, over very fair Plains on every side, and
in several places very good Land, watered by diverse Channels which are brought
from the River Euphrates. All the Rivolets also that you cross from Aleppo to
Bir come from the same River.

The fourth day after we parted from Aleppo, being the ninth of March, we came
to the banks of Euphrates. Bir is on the other side of the River; and because
that sometimes the Goods cannot be unladen all in a day; their is a fair and
large Inn, to defend the Merchants from the Bedouins, which would else disturb
and rob them, were not they and their Goods in that manner secured*

You cross the Euphrates in large Ferry Boats, and as soon as you are got over
the other side of the River, the Customer and his Officers comes and tells the
Bales, and writes down the names of the Merchants to whom they belong. The
Caravan does not lie in the Town, which is built like an Amphi^he^tre upon the
brow of a very craggy Mountain, but passes forward over a scurvy Road on an Inn
upon the top of the Mountain. Near the Inn there are several Chambers cut out
of the Rock, where they that cannot get room in the Inn are forced to lie. That
Evening the Custom-Officer comes to receive his duties, being two Piasters upon
every load of Goods, whether upon Horse or Mule, though the Mules carry more
than the Horses; and half a Piaster for every Beast that carries Provisions.
But for Saddle Horses or Mules there is nothing demanded.

The Bir, or Berygeon, as the Natives call it, is a large City for an Eastern
City, situated upon the brow of a Hill. Below upon the River stands a Castle
that declares its Antiquity; it is half as long as the City, but narrow, and
without any other Fortification, saving only a Tower that scours the River, in
which there are eight or nine pitiful Culverins. In the highest part of the
Town stands another Castle where the Governor resides, who is an Aga, whom
some call a Basha, having under him two hundred Janisaries, and four hundred
Spahi's. The City (...) ill built* as are the most part of the Cities of
Turkey: But there are an extrordinary plenty of all things, excellent Bread,
good Wine, and great store of the best sort of Fish.

The tenth day after we had traveled elev'n hours in the first Lands of
Mesopotamia* that lie between the two Rivers Euphrates and Tigre, which at
present they call Diarb^k, we came in the evening to Sharmley. This is a very
good Town, with a fair Inn, and Baths round about it. About twice Musket Shot
from thence, stands a Mountain alone by it self, like Montmartre near Paris:
Round about it are Plains, and at the top of it stands a Fortress, with a
Garrison of two hundred Spahi's, by reason that the Arabs sometimes cross
Euphrates, and make incursions upon that side. In the year 1631, the Grand
Vizier returning from Bagdat, where he had lost the greatest part of the Grand
Signor's Army, not being able to take the City; fearing the loss of his head if
he returned to Constantinople, and knowing himself to be in great esteem among
the Soldiers, resolved to quarter himself upon this Mountain, and to erect a
Fortress to secure himself from the tempest that threatened him. No doubt but
if he could have brought about his design, he might have made himself Master of
all Mesopotamia, and would have put the Grand Signor to a great deal of
trouble. For if you intend for Aleppo, whether it be from Tauris, Mossul, or
Bagdat, unless you travel thorough the Desert, you must pass through Sharmley,
under the command of this Fortress, for Provision and Waters sake. The work was
gone so far forward, that there was a good defense raised, and the Vizier had
already enclosed all the Mountain together with the Inn, with a Wall almost
twenty foot thick, and three fathom high, when he was strangled by those in
whom he most confided, the Grand Signor having gained them either by threats or
by rewards.

The eleventh, after a Journey of ten hours we came to Ourfa, where the Caravan
usually stays eight or ten days; for here it is that they live that hire the
Horses and the Mules, who have always some business in this place. We lay at an
Inn three or four hundred paces distant from the City toward the North. When
the Inn is full, the rest retire into the Grotto's which are near at hand, and
are very good quarters. Here the Toll-gatherer presently comes and counts the
Bales without opening them. They that carry any Sacks must pay for half a Load;
if not, he op'ns the Sack to see if there be any Merchandise therein, for then
the Merchant must pay the whole duty.

Ourfa is the Capital City of Mesopotamia, built as they say, in the same place
where Abraham lived, and where stood the ancient Ed^ssa, where the people of
the Country report, that King Abdgarus generally kept his Court. There are
still to be seen the ruins of a Castle; from whence they add, that the same
King sent to CHRIST for his Picture, and offered him his Kingdom and his people
to defend him against the Jews; whom he understood to be his Enemies. The
Chronicles of the Armenians report, that Abagarus was their Countryman, and
that in his Reign they began to be Christians, and to be Baptized by the hands
of an Apostle, whom CHRIST sent to that Prince after his Resurrection. Neither
is this Castle yet so far ruined, but that there is still to be seen a spacious
Hall, and three or four handsome Rooms with some relics of Mosaic work. I was
curious to see what ever was remarkable in this City. And first they led me to
a large Fountain which resembles a Fish Pond, the Spring whereof is under the
Foundations of the principal Mosquee, which was built in honor of Abraham. The
Christians of the Country say, that it was in that place where he prayed,
before he went about to Sacrifice his Son Isaac, and that two Springs of Water
arose from the two places where he rested his knees, which now feed the large
Fountain I have made mention of. It is paved with Freestone, and so full of
Fish, that if you throw them in a little Bread, they will follow you from place
to place as you walk by the side of the Pond. There is no meddling with them;
for the Turks have a great veneration for those Fish, which they call Abraham's
Fish. Besides that, the place about the Fountain where the water wid'ns it self
to water all the City, is covered with very fair Carpets, for about twenty
paces in breadth. This Fountain at length falls into a little River that runs by
the Walls. As for the Grotto where the two Springs rise, there is no going into
it before you have pulled off your Shoes, and it is a great favor for a
Christian to see it; such a favor as cost me six Piasters. I also saw the
Church, under the portal whereof, they say, St. Alexis lived seventeen years a
private life. It stands in the middle of a Churchyard, in the highest part of
the Town, in the possession of the Armenians. But their principal Church is
about a quarter of an hours walking from the City, built by St. Ephren, who is
there buried. The Monastery stands yet entire, enclosed with fair Walls. In the
Church I saw a large Bible in Armenian Characters. The Sepulcher of St. Ephren
is in a Cave at the foot of the Mountain, to which there also belongs a
Chapel, where they keep three or four Lamps continually burning. There are
other Grotto's up and down the Mountain, where are to be seen very ancient
Sepulchers of the Christians. The City of Ourfa is seated in a good soil, very
well manured, which extends it self out of sight toward the East. There are
several pleasant Gardens near the walls, watered by little Channels brought
thither by Art. The soil produces good Wine, so that a man may live as well at
Ourfa, as in any part of Turkey. While I stayed there, I killed abundance of
Feldfares in those Gardens; and indeed there is great store of wild Fowl all
the Country over. The Walls of the City are of Freestone, with Battlements and
Towers; but within, the houses are small, ill built, and ruinous: And there are
several void spaces in the City, which makes Ourfa to look rather like a Desert
than a Metropolis. The City is Governed by a Basha, who has under him a hundred
and fifty Janisaries, and six hundred Spahi's, standing more in need of Cavalry
than Infantry, by reason of the Incursions of the Arabians, especially in
harvest time. In short, Ourfa is the place where they dress such great
quantities of Cordovan Skins, by reason of the waters particular to the
Country, which give them that peculiar beauty. The Yellow Skins are dressed at
Ourfa, the Blew at Tocat, and the Red at Diarbequir.

The twentieth of March, we set out of Ourfa, and after a Journey of six hours,
we lay at a pitiful Village where the Inn was fallen all to decay. There is a
Fountain of excellent water by it, which is all the convenience of the place,
for there is no Provision to be had.

The twenty-first we traveled nine hours, and came to lie near several Caverns
which are very deep; at the ^ntry whereof there are little Rooms, which are
supposed to be the places where the People of the Country lived that fed their
Cattle thereabouts. There is also Rainwater to be had in some of the
Concavities of the Rock. Half this days journey you must pass over Rocks, where
it is almost impossible, and very dangerous to keep your Horses back.

The twenty-second, having traveled elev'n hours, we lodged near a Cavern,
having forded a River that runs at the foot of it. There are two great Grotto's
on each side, where Travelers take up their Quarters, and whither the Natives
of the Country bring Provisions both for Horse and Man. The Toll-gatherers,
coming from a Fort about three Leagues distant from these Caverns, here exact
two Piasters and a half for every Horse and Mules Load; and search your Sacks,
to see if there be no Merchantable Goods therein. About half the way of this
days journey you meet with a City quite deserted by the Inhabitants; and about
an hours march after that, with Tombs of Stone, in the middle whereof stands a
Cross, with Armenian Characters.

The twenty-third we traveled elev'n hours, and lay at Dadacardin. This appears
to have been a great Town, but is all ruined: nor is there any thing remaining
but a long Stone ^ridge very well built, under which runs a River that is very
broad when it overflows. The People of the Country have no other Habitations
than the Hollows of Rocks; yet they bring to the Travelers Hens, Butter,
Cheese, and other Provisions; which they sell very cheap.

The twenty-fourth we traveled nine hours, and lay at a place called Cara,
built upon a Hill. The Caravan lay at the Inn; but the two Capuchins and I lay
at a private Christian's House, who carried us to the Church, where was then
the Vertabet or Bishop of Merdin. It was a pitiful poor Church, where they had
nothing but two Planks supported with four Sticks instead of an Altar* They
dare not leave any Furniture in it, but as soon as the Priest has said Service,
he must have a care to take away every thing, as well the Planks as the
Covering of the Altar, which was only a Painted Cloth: For the Turks that
travel that way, if it be foul weather, will break open the Door, put their
Horses there, burn the Altar, and take away whatever they find.

In the Village where we lay, there was a Pond, the sides whereof were
surrounded with fair Free-stones, which were fetched from the Christian
Churches, and the Tombs of the Christians thereabouts. Among the rest, there
was one very large Stone, with an Epitaph upon it in large Latin Letters;
whereby we knew it to be the Tombstone of a Norman Gentleman, who had been a
Captain of Foot. The Bishop informed us, that it is recorded in the Armenian
Stories, that the French were a long time in this Country, at what time the
Christians were Masters of Syria. This Country is all a large Plain, about
twenty Leagues in length; which might be well manured, and make the Inhabitants
rich, did not the Tyranny of the Turks, and the Incursions of the Arabs, reduce
them to the utmost degree of Poverty.

The twenty-fifth, after we had traveled eight hours, we lay at a Village
called Cousasar, where there was no Inn. There were formerly three great
Monasteries, a quarter of a League one from the other. The Turks have ruined
two, all but the Steeples of the Churches that belonged to them. The third,
which stands all entire, and is the fairest Pile of Building, serves for a
Mosquee. They have made Shops round about the Cloisters, in the middle of which
is a fair Spring of Water.

The twenty seventh we lay still at Cousasar, being the place where you must
pay the Customs of Diarbequir, which is not above two days journey off,
amounting to two Piasters and a fourth part, for every Load of Merchants Goods.

Merdin is not above two Leagues from Cousasar. This is a little City seated
upon a Mountain, with good Walls, and a fair Fountain replenished from the
Castle; which stands upon the North-side, in a place yet higher, that commands
the City; where there lives a Basha, who has under him two hundred Spahi's, and
four hundred Janissaries. Merdin is the place where was born the Lady Maani
Gioerida, the first Wife of Pietro de la Valle, so well known for his famous
Travels.

As for Cousasar, which is a large Village, it is inhabited for the most part
by Armenian Christians and Nestorians. The Armenians perform Divine Service in
their own Language; the Nestorians in the Chaldaic. The latter showed me two
Bibles in a large Volume, in the same Language, writt'n in Vellum, all the
Capital Letters being in Gold and Azure. They seemed to be very old; and one of
their Priests told me, that it is 937 years ago since one of them was writt*n;
the other not above 374 since. When Service is done, they put them in a Chest,
and hide them under Ground. I would have given 200 Piasters for the oldest, but
they durst not sell it, in regard it belonged to the Church, and was not at
their disposal.

The twenty-seventh, after we had traveled nine hours, we arrived at Karasara,
which had been formerly a great Town, and no doubt inhabited by Christians; as
appears by seven or eight Churches half ruined, though the Steeples are little
the worse. They stand at a good distance one from the other; and upon the
North*side of one of those Churches there is a Gallery, at the end whereof,
through a little Door you descend about a hundred Steps, every Step being ten
Inches thick. When you come under the Church, you meet with a larger and bigger
Vault, supported with Pillars. The Building is so contrived, that there is more
light below than in that above; but* of late years the Earth has st^p'd up
several Windows. The great Altar is in the Rock; on the right side whereof is a
Room, which receives the light from several Windows contrived in the Rock. Over
the Gate of the Church was a great Freestone, wherein were certain Letters
that I could not read. On the North-side of the same Church under Ground are to
be seen two great Cisterns, each four hundred and fifty Paces long; with two
great Arches, sustained with several Pillars. Every year they fill them with
the Water that falls from the next Mountain, and makes a kind of a River. A
quarter of a League from the Church, you descend the Mountain for above a
hundred Paces together among the Rocks, on each side whereof are Rooms cut out
of the Rock. Upon every Door there is a Cross; and in every Room as it were a
Bench, and a Table, with a little place about the length of a Man, like a
Bedsted, all cut out of the Rock. At the bottom of the Rock is a Hall, round
about the Wall whereof is a Bench to sit on. The Roof is all plain, without any
Arch; in the middle whereof there is a Hole to the top of the Mountain: but in
regard it gives no light, it is very probable 'twas only made to let out the
Smoke when they dressed their Meat; or else to let in the fresh Air, as I have
seen in many Villages upon the Persian Gulf. Upon the highest of those
Mountains stands a paltry Village, where they buy their Victuals. But before
the Caravan arrives, certain Merchants ride before to inform themselves from
the Herdsmen, whether they know of any Thieves in the Grotto's, that often hide
themselves there in expectation of Prey.

In the year 1638, Sultan Amurat going to besiege Babylon, marched this very
way, as well to see these Ruins, as to give order for the demolishing a Fort
that stood not above two Leagues off of Karasera, which the Thieves of the
Country made their place of retreat. He also at the same time caused the Road
to be cleared for four days journey, by ord'ring the Stones to be picked up and
laid in heaps, all along the Road. He also built a Bridge over the River. And
indeed, that March of the Grand Signor was very advantageous to all Travelers
that pass this way.

The twenty-eight we traveled eight hours, and came to Nesbin, anciently
Nisibis. Two or three hours travel on this side, near the Road, is a kind of
Hermitage, being a small Room enclosed with Walls, the Door whereof is so low,
that a Man must creep upon his Belly to get in. Three or four Jews went and
performed their Devotions at this Hermitage, believing it to be the place where
the Prophet Elisha was buried.

The Country from Cousasar to Nesbin is a large Plain, where for the first days
journey you shall see no other green Herb upon the Ground but only Pimpernel;
the Roots whereof are so large, that there are some a Foot and a half in
diameter. The next day, the Fields are covered with a large thick Leaf, the
Root whereof is bulbous, and as big as an Egg. There are also great store of
yellow, red, and violet Flowers, Tulips of several colors, Emonies, and single
Daffadillies. But in general Mesopotamia is a very barren Country, and there
are very few places that can be bettered by Art or Industry.

Nesbin is only the Shadow of the ancient Nisibis, being now only a large
Village; the Inhabitants whereof are Christians, both Armenians and Nestorians.
Our Caravan lodged a little beyond, in a Churchyard adjoining to one of the
Armenian Churches. The next day, hearing people sing, I went to the Church with
the two Capuchins, where I saw an Armenian Bishop, with his Miter, and a wooden
Crosier, accompanied with several Priests and a good Congregation. When Service
was done, after some few Compliments between us, he led us down un^er the
Church into a Chapel, where he showed us the Sepulcher of St. James Bishop of
Nisibis. In the Churchyard is a Stone about a Foot thick, and six high; upon
which were laid several Candles of Wax and Tallow, which the Poor offer in
their Necessities, but especially in their Sicknesses. They believe that Stone
to have been the Pedestal for the Statue of some Saint, which the Turks have
defaced: so that they give the same Honor to the Pedestal, as they would have
given to the Statue. There arc also some Roman Characters to be seen, but half
worn out, and spaces brok'n off in some parts: so that I could not learn, in
Honor of whom that Statue was erected. Half a League from Nisbin runs a River,
which you cross over a Stone Bridge. In the way to the River are several pieces
of Wall, with an Arch, which made me conjecture, that formerly the City
extended as far as the River.

Twice Musket Shot from the River you meet with a Stone half buried, upon which
are written certain Latin Words; whereby it appears that it was the Tombstone
of the General of an Army that was a Frenchman: but I could not read his Name,
which time had defaced. The same Bishop informed us, that formerly the Moors
having besieged City, there came such a prodigious company of strange Flies,
and did so torment both Men and Horses, that they were forced to strange the
Siege. You must pay the same Toll at Nisbin as in other places, that is, two
Piasters and a half for every Mule or Horses Load. We lay there three days
together, to furnish our selves with Provisions 'till we came to Moussul, which
is five days journey from Nisbin; the Country between being altogether desert
and uninhabited. There is no Water to be sound but in two places, and that not
very good neither; near to which you shall see some few Herdsmen grazing their
Cattle.

The first of April we departed from Nisbin; and after we had traveled eleven
hours, we lay near to a River, whither certain Shepherds brought us Hens to
sell.

The second we traveled ten hours, and lay at a paltry Town, where we met with
nothing to eat.

The third we traveled thirteen hours, and lodged by a pitiful Fountain, the
Water whereof was hardly good enough for our Horses.

The fourth we traveled ten hours, and came to lodge by the Bank of a little
River, near to which appeared the Ruins of a Bridge and a Castle.

The fifth we traveled eleven hours, to reach Moussul, which is not far from
the ancient Niniveh.

Moussul is a City that makes a great show without, the Walls being of
Freestone; but within it is almost all, ruined having only two blind
Marketplaces, with a little Castle upon the Tigris, where the Basha lives. In
a word, there is nothing worth a Man's sight in Moussul, the place being only
considerable for the great concourse of Merchants; especially the Arabians and
Curds, which are the Inhabitants of the ancient Assyria, now called Curdistan,
where there grows great plenty of Galls, and for which there is a great Trade.
There are in it four sorts of Christians, Greeks, Armenians, Nestorians, and
Maronites. The Capuchins had a pretty Dwelling upon the Tigris; but the Basha
laying a Fine upon them, because they went about a little to enlarge it, they
were for'd to quit it. The City is governed by a Basha, that has under him,
part Janissaries, part Spahi's, about three thousand Men.

There are only two scurvy Inns in Moussul, which being full when we came, I
caused my Tent to be set up at the Meydan, or great Marketplace.

Now to say something in general of the difference of the two Rivers, Tigris
and Euphrates, in reference to their Course and Waters: I observed that the
Water of Euphrates appeared somewhat red; and that the Stream was not so swift
as that of Tigris, which seemed to be whitish, like the Loire. As for its
Course, Euphrates runs a far longer way than Tigris. But now let us cross the
Tigris, over a Bridge of Boats, to view the sad Ruins of a City that has made
such a noise in the World; though there be now scarce any appearance of its
ancient splendor.

Niniveh was built upon the left Shore of the Tigris, upon Assyria-side, being
now only a heap of Rubbish extending almost a League along the River. There are
abundance of Vaults and Caverns uninhabited; nor could a man well conjecture
whether they were the ancient Habitations of the people, or whether any houses
had been built upon them in former times; for most of the houses in Turkey are
like Cellars, or else but one Story high. Half a League from Tigris stands a
little Hill encompas'd with Houses, on the top whereof is built a Mosquee. The
people of the Country say 'twas the place where Jonas was buried; and for that
place they have so great a veneration, that no Christians are suffered to enter
into it, but privately, and for Money. By that means I g^t in with two Capuchin
Friars; but we were forced to put off our Shoes first. In the middle of the
Mosquee stood a Sepulcher, covered with a Persian Carpet of Silk and Silver,
and at the four corners, great Copper Candlesticks with Wax Tapers, besides
several Lamps and Ostridge-Shells that hung down from the Roof. We saw a great
number of Moors without, and within sat two Dervi's reading the Alcoran.

About a Musket Shot from Moussul toward the North-East, stands a great Ruined
Monastery, enclosed with high Walls, the greatest part whereof is still to be
seen.

We stayed ten days at Moussul, and having provided all things ready for the
rest of our Journey, we set forward for Ispahan.

CHAP. V.
A Continuation of the Road from Nineveh to Ispahan: Together with the Story of
an Ambassador, called Dominico de Santis.
HAving passed the Tigris, we stayed three quarters of an hours Journey from
Nineveh for some Merchants that were to go along with the Caravan. The way
which we took was not the usual Road to Persia; but it was a way wherein there
were less Duties to be paid; and besides, it was a short cut, the Caravan
making but fifty-eight days Journey between Aleppo and Ispahan. From the very
banks of the River to the place where we Lodged that Evening, we saw nothing
but continued Ruins, which makes me believe, it was the place where the
ancient Nineveh stood.

We staid two days near the Mosquee, where according to the tradition of the
Turk, Jonas was buried, and made choice of a Curd, or Assyrian, for our
Caravan-Bashi, though the people are generally Thieves, and must be carefully
looked after. But it was a piece of Policy, because we were to cross the
ancient Assyria, now called Curdistan; the Language of which Country is a
particular Speech.

In the two first days Journey we crossed two small Rivers that fall from the
Mountains, and empty themselves into Tigris. Our first Journey was through a
plain Country all along by the side of a little River; and the second Evening
we lodged by the side of a great River that falls from the Mountains toward the
North, and running to the South, discharges it self into Tigris It is called
Bohrus, being a very rapid Stream, full of Fish, but more especially excellent
Trouts. The Caravan was two days passing that River, by reason there were no
Boats. For the people are forced to tie long Perches four five together one
upon another, which the Natives call a Kilet. They make it apiece, and put
underneath it about a hundred Goat Skins full of wind, to the end the Kilet may
not touch the water. Besides the Merchant must be careful to spread good store
of thick Felts over the Kilet, of which he must be provided to keep off the
Water, lest the Bales that sink the Kilet should take wet. At the four corners
are four Perches that serve for Oars, though they avail but little against the
force of the Tide; so that you must be forced to hale the Kilet four or five
hundred Paces a'this side up the River, and then row down the Stream to the
place where you intend to Land the Goods. When the Goods are Landed, the men
are forced again to draw the Kilet by main strength out of the water, to take
away the Goat Skins which are then to be lad'n upon the Mules appointed to
carry them. As for the Horses, Mules, and Asses, as well those that carried the
Goods, as those upon which the men ride; so soon as the Herds men thereabout
see a C^ravan coming, they flock to the Riverside. Those people that wear
nothing but a course piece of Linen or a Goat-skin to cover their nakedness,
take off their Clothes and wind them about their Heads, like a Turbant. Then
every one ^yes a Goat skin blowed up under his Stomach; and then two or three
of the most expert mounting the same number of the best Horses, which are
brid^'d, put themselves first into the Water, while others follow them
swimming, and drive the Horses before them; holding the Beast by the Tail with
one hand, and switching him with the other. If they find any Horse or Ass that
is too weak, they tie a Goat-skin under his Belly to help him. Considering
which difficulties, it cannot take up less time than I have mentioned to get
over a Caravan of five or six hundred Horses.

The Caravan being thus got over, for two or three days has but a very bad
Road. The first days journey the Horses were continually in the Water up to the
mid-leg; and the second, and part of the third we traveled through a very
desert Country, where we met with very little food for our Horses, and only a
few Brakes to boy^ our Rice. Having got over this bad way, we came to a River
called the great Zar^e, over which we passed upon a Stone Bridge of nine
Arches. They report that this Bridge was built by Alexander the Great, in his
March against Darius. A quarter of a League to the South*East, two Rivers meet,
which empty themselves into Tigris. Leaving the Bridge, we came to a Town
called Sherazoul, built upon a rising Ground, upon three Redoubts. There
resides a Basha, who must be bribed with a small Present to let the Caravan
pass; we lay by the Banks of a River, and staid there two days. From thence we
traveled one days journey over dry Mountains, not finding any Water. But the
next day we came into a pleasant Plain, stored with Fruit Trees. This was the
Plain of Arbele, where Alexander defeated Darius; containing about fifteen
Leagues in all. It is watered with several Rivulets, and in the middle of the
Mountain rises a little Hill about half a League in circuit. It is all over
covered with the fairest Oaks that ever were seen; and on the top are the
Ruins of a Castle, that seems to have been a sumptuous Structure. The
Country People say that Darius staid there while his Captains gave Battle to
Alexander. Three Leagues from thence, near a great Mountain toward the North,
are to be seen the Ruins of another Castle and several Houses, where they add,
that Darius secured some of his Wives when he lost the Battle. This Castle is
seated in a most lovely Prospect. At the foot o^ the Mountain rises a Spring,
which a quarter of a League off swells into a River that bears good big Boats.
It runs winding about the Mountains to the Southward; so that two days journey
from the Hill, you cross it near a Town called Sherazoul, over a fair
Stone Bridge of nine Arches, whereof the Great Sha-Abas caused three to be
brok'n down after he had taken Bagdat.

This City of Sherazoul is built after another manner than any other of the
Cities in those parts, being all cut out of a steep Rock for a quarter of a
League together; so that you must go up to the Houses by Stairs of fifteen, or
twenty steps, sometimes more, sometimes less according to the situation of the
place. The people have no other Doors to their Houses than only a thin round
Stone, like a Mill stone, which they will roll away when they go in or out, the
sides of the Wall being so cut as to receive the Stone like a Case, being level
with the Rock.

The tops of their Houses are like Niches in the Mountain, where the
Inhabitants have contrived Caves to keep their Cattle in: So that we judged it
to be built for a place of safety to secure the Inhabitants from the Incursions
of the Arabians and Bedouins of Mesopotamia.

We came to Sherazoul upon Easter-Eve, and staid there three days to refresh
our selves, after a Lent which we had kept very sparingly. Here I found certain
Springs that rose up in large Bubbles, which after I had mixed with two Glasses
of Wine and drank up, I found to have a Purgative quality, having a kind of
Mineral ^ast. These Springs boil up near the side of a River called Altun sou,
or, The River of Gold, that falls into the River Tigris, three days journey on
this side Bagdat.

The next day we lay at a pitiful Town, upon the Frontiers of Turkey and Persia.

The next day, being the fifth after we set out from Nineveh, we passed over
several Fens and hot Waters, that part the two Empires. Entering thus into
Persia, we met with a high Mountain covered with fair Oaks, which bear the
Gall-Nuts, so high, that the Caravan was some hours ere it could get to the
top. As we ascended, but especially when we were up, we heard several Muskets
go off. At first we thought the people had been hunting the wild Boars or
Stags, of which the Mountains are full: but the report of the Guns being too
loud and too thick for Hunters, we stood upon our guard; and I believe we
should have mended our paces, had we known what was intended us. Besides, I
remembered that the Country people would not sell any thing but for Powder and
Bullet, which the Caravan-Bashi advised me not to let them have, for fear they
should make use of it against our selves. From the Mountain we descended into a
fertile Plain, watered with several Rivers; and night approaching, we set up our
Tents, not fearing any thing, because we were in the Dominions of the King of
Persia, where there is so much security in traveling. After that we sent our
Servants to the Tents of the Countrymen, but they brought us nothing but Bread
made of Acorns, than which the poor people thereabouts eat no other. This Acorn
is about the bigness of our Nuts; and once I met with a Branch that had thirty
Acorns, and twenty-three Gall-Nuts, all at one time growing upon it.

The Province which we traveled through then, composed the greatest part of the
ancient Assyria. But now to come to the Story of Dominico de Santis the
Venetian. He had Letters of Credence from the Pope, the Emperor, the King of
Poland, and the Republic of Venice, to the King of Persia; and he went in the
Caravan through the Grand Signor's Territories, never discovering himself who
he was; but coming into Persia, he took upon him without fear the Title of
Ambassador from the Commonwealth of Venice.

From the Plain where we lodged, it is two days journey to a good ^^g Town, to
which belongs a Fortress, where the Governor of the Province has a Lieutenant,
with about two thousand Horse under his Command. The Fortress is upon the right
hand toward the South, after three hours riding upon the Highway. To this
Lieutenant, the Caravan-Bashi was according to duty bound to give notice of the
Arrival of the Caravan, and an account of the Persons and their Merchandise.
This Venetian was a person ill fitted for the quality of an Ambassador, being a
person of no Parts; which made me wonder that such great Princes, and so wise a
Commonwealth, should send such a person upon a Concern of that importance. For
the Grand Signor then assailing Candy, he was sent to excite the King of Persia
to engage him in a War against the Turk, thereby to keep off the Storm that
threatened Christendom. Thereupon I told the Ambassador, that it was necessary
for him to give the Commander of the Fort first notice of his coming, to the
end he might give advice thereof to Solomon Kan Governor of the Province,
whose duty it was to advertise the King. Thereupon he requested me to send my
Interpreter, which I did. Upon whose intelligence the Lieutenant of the Fort
came to Compliment the Ambassador on the behalf of the chief Commander, and to
conduct him to the Castle.

Thereupon the Ambassador, my self, and my Interpreter, together with some
Armenian Merchants went with him, traveling for three hours over the
Mountains. By that time we came half the way, as we passed through a Wood, we
heard as it were some person give a Whistle; at which when the Lieutenant
perceived us to be somewhat startled, he carried us to the place from whence
the Whistle came, where we saw a Serpent about as big as a Man's Thigh, and
about twelve Foot long, whose head was squeezed between two Trees, that put him
to pain. From that Mountain we descended into a pleasant Plain, where the
Commander of the Fortress staid for us under his Tent. He had set it up by the
side of a River, under the shade of several great Walnut-trees. So soon as he
saw us, he rose from his great Silk Tapestry Coverlet, and saluted us in a most
civil manner, telling us, that assuredly Sha-Abas, his Master, would be very
glad to hear that the Monarchs of Christendom had sent him an Ambassador, and
that be would write to Solomon Kan, whose duty it was to advertise the
Emperor. Thereupon he wrote and dispatched away a Messenger, giving him order
to tell the Deroga, or Judge of the Town, through which we were to pass, that
he should make Provision for us and out Horses 'till we came to the Governor.
After he had asked us several Questions concerning the War between the Grand
Signor and the Venetians, how many thousand men he had as well by Sea as Land,
and what number of Galleys and Ships? wherein we satisfied him according to the
best of our knowledge. After he had civilly treated us, he sent his Lieutenant
back with us again to the Caravan. About ten a Clock the next night we
dislodged, and the Lieutenant and six Soldiers attended upon us* who told us
he had order not to leave us, 'till he had brought us to Solomon Kan.

The next night we lodged between two Hills, among several Tents of Herds-men.
Here it was that the Commander had ordered that we should be treatrd by the
Deroga. A Deroga, as I have said, is the Judge of a Village: But this Deroga
was chief of many Families, some of which were of Mesopotamia, others of
Arabia. These are all Herdsmen that never live in Houses, but retire with their
Ca^tle to the holes in the Rocks, where partly Nature, partly Art, have
contributed to make them convenient Habitations.

So soon as we were alighted, four ancient men came and led the Ambassador and
my self to the Deroga's Tent. It seemed to consist of many Rooms, with a Hall
in the middle, spread with Persian Carpets. He caused us to sit down upon
Cushions, and then presented us with a Pipe of Tobacco, and Water to wash our
Feet. After he had nobly treated us, and that we were upon taking our leaves,
the Deroga was very much troubled that we had made a small Present to his Son;
telling us, that it was a crime for him to take any thing of the King's Guests,
especially from Strangers that had come so long a Journey.

The next day we lodged in a place where there was such a prodigious quantity
of Lillies that the Ground was almost covered with them. There were none that
were white, being for the most part of a fair Violet color, with a streak of
Red in the middle of every leaf; they are like our Lillies, but much bigger.
And to drink the infusion of the Roots of these Lillies, especially those whose
Leaves are blackest, for fifteen days together, is a most Sovereign remedy
against the ^ox. Not long after came a Person of a goodly Aspect, who seemed to
be an Arabian, but he spoke the Persian Language, whom Solomon Kan had sent to
Compliment the Ambassador. He carried us to the Tent which the Governor had
caused to be set up in a Garden near the Town, where he also Lodged the
Capuchins. The Ambassador also sent to Compliment the Kan by my interpreter;
an^ when the hour was come that we were to set forward, he gave order to six of
the Captains of his Cavalry to accompany the Ambassador. The House where the
Governor lived in, was one of the most beautiful in Persia. And as for the
Governor himself, we found him in a Gallery that looked upon the Garden, the
Floor being all spread ^ver with Tapestry of Gold and Silk, with large Cushions
of Cloth of Gold all along the Wall. After some Questions and discourse
concerning the Affairs of Europe, they served in Supper, which consisted of
several Dishes; but no Wine was to be had; our drink being only Sherbet and the
juice of Granates, with Sugar for those that desired it. We were a long time at
Supper, for it is the custom of Persia that when one man rises, another takes
his place and falls too, in so much that the Master of the Feast must have the
Patience to stay 'till several have taken their turns; and when every one has
done, the Cloth is taken away without any more to do. Here the Ambassador
committed an absurdity; for there are no Silver or Gold Spoons in Persia, but
only long Wooden Ladles that reach a great way. Now the Ambassador reaching his
Ladle to a Purslane-Dish full of Pottage that was scalding hot, clapped it
presently into his mouth; but finding it so hot that he could not endure it,
after several scurvy faces, he threw it out of his mouth again into his hand,
in the presence of all the Company.

After we had stayed five days at Sneirne, the Caravan-Bashi signified his
desire to pursue his Journey. Thereupon the Ambassador took his leave of the
Governor, presenting him with a Watch and a pair of Pistols; who in
retaliation presented the Ambassador with a stately Horse, and a Colt of two
years old. The next day we dislodged, and* pursued our Road to Amadan, which is
not above three days Journey from Sneirne.

Amadan is one* of the largest and most considerable Cities of Persia, seated
at the foot of a Mountain, where do arise an infinite company of Springs that
do water all the Country. The Land about it abounds in Corn and Rice, wherewith
it furnishe^ the greatest part of the neighboring Provinces. Which is the
reason that some of the Persian Statesmen hold it very inconvenient for the
King of Persia to keep Bagdat, as well by reason of the vastness of the Charge,
as also for that it draws from Amadan that which should supply other Provinces.
On the other side, it is easy for the Grand Signor to hold it, by reason of
the neighborhood of Mesopotamia, Assyria, and the Arabs, Enemies to the
Persians: by which means Provisions are very cheap, which the people would not
know where to put off, if the King of Persia were Lord of Bagdat.

We staid at Amadan about ten days, by reason of the Rains; during which time
the Caravans cannot travel. While we tarried there, we were visited by several
Babylonian Christians, who were glad to see that we had escaped the Clutches of
the Basha of Bagdat, who had given order to the Basha of Karkou, and the Bey of
Sharaffou that commands the Frontiers of Turkey, to seize us, and carry us back
^o Bagdat. For which we might have thanked the Ambassador, and a malicious
Rabbi, that came along with us in the Caravan from Aleppo^* who finding the
Feast of the Tabernacles to be at hand, and that we had a great way to Ispahan*
left us at Niniveh, to keep the Festival with the Jews of Babylon. Where that
he might insinuate himself into the Basha's favor, he informed him that there
was a Fringuiz in the Garavan, whom he looked upon as a Spy, and that he was an
Envoy into Persia from the Commonwealth of Venice; for he carried no
Merchandise, but had three Chests full of rich Habits, and several other
things, which he took for Presents to the Persian King. For out of vanity or
folly, the Venetian had several times opened his Chest and exposed his
Gallantry to view. And yet he was so clutch-fisted and niggardly in every
thing, that when there was any occasion to reward the Kan's Servant, or any of
the Countrymen that brought us the Dainties of the place, it came all out of
my Pocket. So that I left him to my Interpreter and the two Capuchins; and with
three Servants and a Guide, after I had staid at Amadan three days, I took
Horse for Ispahan.

When I came there, the Nazar or Master of the King's Household hearing I had
left an Ambassador behind me with the Caravan, inquired of me what manner of
Person he was, but I pretended I had but little converse with him, unwilling to
discover his mean Spirit. The Evening before his Arrival the Nazar sent to give
the Fringuiz notice in the King's Name, that they should be ready to go meet
the Ambassador the next day; which we did, and brought him into the City and
through Ali's Gate, that joins to the King's Palace. Now it is the custom for
all Ambassadors to salute that Gate, by reason of a white Marble Stone made
like an Asses back, and which serves for a Step: being, as they report, brought
anciently out of Arabia, where Ali lived. So soon as you have strid over that
Stone without touching it, which were a great crime, you enter into a kind of a
Gallery, where there are Rooms on each side, which serve for a Sanctuary for
Criminals, which the King himself cannot fetch out of that place. That day that
the new King receives his Ensigns of Royalty, he goes to stride over that
Stone; and if by negligence he should chance to touch it, there are four Guards
at the Gate, that would make a show of thrusting him back again.

But now the Master of the Ceremonies being ready to conduct the Ambassador to
the Apartment allotted him, as an Ambassador that came from three great
Monarchs, and a potent Commonwealth, he desired to lodge at the House of one
Pietro Pentalet, descended from Venetian Parents; whereupon the Master of the
Ceremonies conducted him thither, and caused his Dinner to be brought him.
While we were eating, I counted thirteen Languages spoken at the Table; Latin,
French, High Dutch, English, Low Dutch, Italian, Portuguez, Persian, Turkish,
Arabic, Indian, Syriac, and Malaye, which is the Language of the Learned, that
is spoken from the River Indus to China and Japan, and in all the Islands of
the East, like Latin in Europe; not reckoning the little Moresco or Gibbrish of
the Country. So that it is a difficult thing to observe what is talked in one
Company, where the Discourse begins in one Language, is pursued in another, and
finished in a third: and for the Turks and Armenians, they never speak above
three or four Languages at most.

Now to show you the Civility of the Persians; the Master of the Ceremonies
came to the Ambassador and told him, that if he did not like the Cookery of the
Persians, he had Order from the (...) who is as the Grand Vizier in Turkey, to
offer him Money instead of Diet, to the end he might dress his own Meat as he
pleased himself. Upon which the covetous Ambassador accepted his offer, and
two hours after there was a Bag brought him of 50 Tomans. which amount to about
800 Crowns. The Franks being offended at his baseness, slighted the Ambassador,
and left him to keep House by himself, which was poor enough God knows; an
Onion or A Turnep serving his turn for a Meal. Some days after, he had audience
of the King, to whom he presented his Letters Credential from the Pope, the
Emperor, the King of Poland, and the Commonwealth of Venice. Those from the
three last were well received, because the Seals were of Gold, and for that the
Paper was embelish'd with curious Flourishes; but the Pope's Letters were
rejected with scorn because the Seals were only of Lead, as the Bulls are
usually sealed; and for that the Writing was very plai^* For the Kings of
Persia, who are very nice, love things that are gay to the Eye; otherwise they
look upon themselves to be affronted. Dominico de Santis had better have taken
upon him the meaner quality of an Envoy, than the title of an Ambassador,
unless he had known better how to behave himself; especially being so eclipsed
as he was by a real Ambassador that arrived at Ispahan some time after. All the
Franks went forth to meet him, and the Master of the Ceremonies made him the
same proffers as he had done to the Venetian: but he nobly answered, That
whatever it were that the King of Persia ^ent him, he should take it for a very
great Honor: otherwise, if he would have eaten Gold, the King his Master would
have allowed him 30 M^les Load. Such persons as behave themselves with decency
and at good grace, are the persons that the Christian Princes should send into
Persia, who are the most refined Wits, and the best Politicians of all Asia.

To conclude the Story of the Venetian, I will give you his Character. An
Indian naturally of a good Wit having embraced Christianity and an
Ecclesiastical Life, went to Rome to complete his Studies which he had begun at
Goa; whether, the Pope, taking an affection to him, sent him afterward as his
Vicar. Dominico de Santis being* then at Rome, put himself into his service,
and followed him into the Indies, where I saw him the first time I went, in a
mean condition. Upon his return to Venice, where he was in no credit before, he
made people believe that he understood the Trade of Asia; whereupon some
particular Merchants trusted him with some Goods, which were cast away at
Seide. Thus poor and bare he returned to Goa, where he got 800 Crowns by a
charitable Contribution. From thence he traveled to Ispahan, where he fell into
the acquaintance of Father Rigordi a Jesuit, with whom he went into Poland:
where making his brags of the great knowledge he had of the Affairs of Persia,
the King gave him that Commission which I have already mentioned. The Emperor
followed his Example, and the Commonwealth of Venice did the same: and to give
the more luster and authority to his Embassy, they got the Pope to join with
them. But alas! both Dominico de Santis, and all such persons as he, that go
into Asia without Brains and good Behavior, do but prostitute the Reputation
of the Princes that send them. Such another was Father Rigordi, who after he
had been thrust out of Goa by the Portugals, went to Ispahan, where he
insinuated himself by a Proposition which he made of Marrying the King of
Persia, who was then a very young Prince, to the Duchess of Orleance. Under
which pretense he was well received and treated by the King; from whom he also
received some Presents by virtue of that Proposal, which was good sport to the
Duchess when she heard of it.

As for the Venetian, the Atemadoulet, who was very glad to be rid of him,
desired the Muscovite Ambassador, who was then upon his return home, to take
him along with him, which he did as far as the Caspian Sea, where they take
Shipping for Astracan; but there the Muscovite told him he could carry him no
further: thereupon he was forced to come back to Ispahan, and so to travel to
Goa, whence the Portugals shipped him home for Charities sake. But when he came
to Venice, he was so far from being well received, that the Senate had like to
have punished him severely for giving so bad an account of his Negotiation.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Road which the Author kept, when he Traveled the fourth time into
Asia, to go from Paris to Ormus. And first of his Voyage from Marseilles to
Alexandretta.
I Set out from Paris in the company of Monsieur d' Ardiliere the eighteenth of
June, 1651. and arrived at Marseilles the sixteenth of July. On the
twenty-sixth of August we set Sail, with a favorable North-West Wind that blew
very briskly the two next days; but at length it grew so very slack, that
coming about to the North North-East, we made for Sardinia. Upon the second of
September by Sun*rising, we discovered the Western Coast of Sardinia, six
Leagues from the Land. About Noon the Wind chopping about again to the North
West, we held on our first Course; and upon the third of September, we descried
the Island Galita upon the Coast of Africa. On the fourth we discovered the
Island of Zambino before Tunis, and about Evening Cape Bon, which is the most
Southerly Point of all Africa. The fifth we had a sight o^ the Isl^nd of
Pantalaria, and the Coast of Sicily. The sixth we discovered the Island of
Goza, and the seventh the Castle that bears the same name.

We landed at Malta upon the day of the Nativity of the Virgin, which is a
great day among the Maltesi, upon which they give thanks to God, for that the
Turks raised their Siege upon that day.

The Grand Master goes to the Church of St. John, accompanied with all the
chief Commanders in their Robes of Command, and the greatest part of the
Knights. All the Countrymen and Citizens are up in Arms upon that day, and
march to the Inn called the Auvernian*house, with the Knight that goes to fetch
the Standard. This Knight is clad in a Cassock of Crimson Velvet, with a Cross
of the Order, before and behind. He wears a Helmet upon his head, and carries
the Standard upon his shoulders; and by him marches the Grand-Master's Page,
who carries a Sword in one hand, and a Dagger in the other, both very richly
Embellished, and given the the Order by CHARLES the fifth. The Page that
carried the Sword and Dagger was the youngest Nephew of Pope Innocent the
tenth. The Soldiers and Citizens marching before to the Church door make a
Lane for the Knight and the Page to pass on to the Altar, where the Knight
makes three bows, and having done as much to the Grand-Master, places himself
on the right hand of the Grand-Masters Chair, and the Page on the lest. Then
the Mass and the Music begins, and while the Gospel is reading, the
Grand-Master takes the Sword and the Dagger out of the Page's hand, and holds
them with the points upward all the remaining part of the Mass. During the
Elevation of the Host, the Knights repeats the ^ame Ceremony as at the
beginning; and then the Bells ring, the great Guns go off, and the Soldiers
give three Vollies. Mass being ended, the Grand-Master retires, accompanied as
before, only that he is then attended by all the Ecclesiastical persons of the
City, and coming out of the Church, he proceeds with all the Infantry marching
before him toward our Lady's of Victory, where they all go in procession. While
they make a stand in that place, the Soldiers give another Volley, which is
answered by all the Canons in the Town, as also from the Ships and Galleys.
After that they return to St. John's; and the Infantry Guard the Standard back
to the Inn, while the Grand-Master goes to his Palace.

The ninth we viewed the Fortifications, which are stored with very fair pieces
of Canon.

The tenth we saw the Pages perform their Exercises before the Grand-Master,
which are generally vaulting and handling their Arms, both Musket and Pike.

The elev'nth we viewed the Arsenal, where I was assured that there were Arms
for twenty thousand men, being in good order, and rarely well looked after.

The next^ day we visited the Infirmery, where the sick are served in Plate, as
well the poor as ric^.

The twentieth we set Sail, having the Wind at West-South-West, and a fresh
gale; so that upon the twenty-third we discovered the Coast of the Morea, to
which we approached so near, as to descry Navarin. In the Evening we saw the
City of Coron, where there is a great Trade for Sallet-Oyl. From thence it was
that the Great Turk Embarked for Candy in the year 1645.

The twenty-fourth the Wind was at East*North-East. In the Morning we
discovered the Cape of Matapan, which is the most Southern Point of Land in
Europe, lying in the Morea, and at Noon the Island of Chergigo.

The twenty-fifth we drew near Cyprus, and descried a Mountain in that Island
called Cam^liere, with some other Promontories toward the South.

From the twenty-seventh day 'till we came to Alexandretta, we perceived the
Sea to be all over covered with Pumice-stones, which happened from an
Earthquake that had for some time before swallowed up the Island of Santorini.
Some think that it proceeded from the abundance of Sulphur, of which that
Country is full, which took Fire, and was the death of above 750 of the
Islanders, that were partly buried in the Ruins, and partly died out of fear.
They that remained alive became black like Charcoal; and the Vapors that
ascended out of the Abyss sullied all the Silver as far as Constantinople; the
noise of the Earthquake being heard as far as Smyrna.

The twenty-ninth by break of day we discovered the Island of Cyprus.

The first of October by eight in the Morning we came to an Anchor before
Salines, which is one of the Ports of Cyprus, where our Consuls live. Here I
asked several of the Christians of the Country, how they did to live and pay
their Carage? Who told me that it was with a great deal of difficulty, in
regard the Island was very bare of Money; which was the reason that many
Christians turned Mahometans, to avoid paying their Carage, which is a Tribute
that the Grand Signor lays upon all Christians throughout his Dominions. He
exacts from the poorest fix Piasters a Head; but there are some that pay a
hundred, or a hundred and fifty: and this Tribute is due so soon as ever they
come to be eighteen years of age.

The Island of Cyprus is one of the most considerable in the Mediterranean Sea,
more to the East than any of the rest; bearing the title of a Kingdom, as being
500 Miles in circuit. It is not all of the same breadth, being of a triangular
form, the sides whereof are very unequal. To it there belong several Capes or
Promontories, the principal whereof are St. Epiphanio, toward the West; Cape de
Gate, toward the South; Cape Diegrega, toward the North-East; Cape Cormachiti,
toward the North; and Cape St. Andrew, upon the most Eastern Point of the
Island. The principal Roads are that of Salines or Larneca, that of Paphos, and
that of Cerines or Cerigni. The Haven of Famagosta signifies nothing as to
great Ships, there being none but small Vessels that can ride there. The
Venetians had formerly made a small Mole there to harbor their Galleys; but it
is now quite ruined. The Road of Cerines is that where the Barks and Galliots
lie that come from Caramania, and Payasses; and where the Basha's land that are
sent as Governors of the Island from Constantinople, who reside generally at
Nicosia. That City is almost in the middle of the Island, and was formerly a
very large one, as appears by the compass of the ancient Walls. The new Walls
are well terrass'd within-side, and in a good posture of defense. There are
three Gates belong to the City; that of Famagosta, that of Paphos, and that of
Cerines. The City it self is no uncomely place; the Venetians having adorned it
with many fair Palaces, which the Turks demolish every day, out of hopes to
find hidd'n Treasure therein, and sell the Stones to build new Houses. The
Cathedral that goes by the name of Santa Sophia is an ample and fair Structure,
of which the Turks have now made a Mosquee, together with one more, which was
formerly a Monastery belonging to the Austin*Fryars. The Greeks have there four
Churches, and the Franks two; that is to say, the French Missionary Capuchins,
and the Italian Missionary Soccolans. The first have a Church didicated to St.
James, the others another, which is called Holy Rood Church. The Armenians also
have another belonging to them, which is a very neat Building, which was
formerly a Monastery of the Carthusians. There it is that there is a Tomb,
adorned with several Sculptures of Religious Nuns, especially an Abbess with a
Cross in her Hand, the Writing about the Stone being in French Characters. The
City is seated in a temperate Air and a fertile Soil, abounding with Water. It
extends more in length than breadth, having been anciently nine Miles in
compass; but the Venetians to make it stronger, reduced it to the circuit of
three. The Work of the Fortification was so neat, and such a proportion
observed in all things, that the most famous Engineers esteemed it one of the
most stately Fortresses in the World, when Selim the Second sent an Army
against it, under the Command of Mustapha his Grand Vizier.

Famagosta is a Sea-Town upon the East Side of the Island, and the chief
Bulwark of it. It is kept in good repair, the Castle within being in form of a
C^ttadel. The Turks have converted into Mosquees the Churches of the
Christians, who are not suffered to dwell in the City. They have only the
liberty to come thither in the day, and to open Shops, which they shut up again
at night, and then go home to their Houses in the neighboring Villages. The
City is governed by a Bey, who has no dependence upon the Governor of the
Island, who is obliged to maintain a Galley for the guard of the Coast.

Cerines is another little City, but without any defense, the Walls thereof
being all tumbled to ruin. Only there is a Fortress toward the Sea, well
built, with a Garrison in it. There is also a handsome Monastery of Religious
Greeks, built somewhat after the French manner; wherein there are some of the
Cells which stand so upon the Sea, that they can fish out of the Windows. The
Fields about it bear Cotton, which is the chief Revenue of the Monastery. There
is only the Fort of Cerines upon the North, where the Island does not lie so
open as toward the South and East; which besides by that of Famagosta, are
guarded by the Forts of Salines, Limisso, and Paphos. The Inhabitants of the
Island are for the most part Greeks, especially in the Villages. They are clad
after the Italian manner, both Men and Women; the Men wearing Hats like the
Franks, and retaining their ancient Customs as much as is po^^ible for them to
do. The Trade of the Island lies in Cotton wool, which is the best in all the
East; and some Silk, which is neither good, nor very plentiful. However the
Island is fertile enough, did it not want Inhabitants enough to till it. As for
Bread, Wine, Cheese, and Milk, they are all very cheap, and there is Oil enough
to serve the Island. But for the Wine, it is transported out of the Island to
all the places of Trade not far distant. The best grows at the foot of Olympus,
and is a delicious fort of Drink. The Country between Nicosia and Famagosta
produces Cotton, of which there grows also some between Paphos and Limisso. The
chief place where the Silk is made is called Cytherea, a large Town watered
with a fair River that runs from the Mountain of Venus. The River turns several
Mills, which are the chief Revenue of the Island. There is Silk also made
between Paphos and Limisso; upon the Road between which two places you meet
with a Town called Piscopi, where are to be seen several Aquaeducts, that
carried the Water into the Rooms and Magazines were the people formerly made
Sugar. But since the Island was taken from the Venetians, one of the Basha's
that was sent as Governor, burnt up all the Sugarcanes in the Country. Toward
the Sea shore near Limisso, is to be seen one of the fairest Gardens of Cyprus,
which they call Shiti; to which there belongs a magnificent House, and a Grove
of Orange Trees. It was built by a rich Venetian, who had a good Estate in
Lands thereabouts.

In Cpprus the people take a vast number of Birds as big as a Lark, especially
near the Mountain of the Holy Cross. In the Months of September and October the
Country People of the adjacent Villages make themselves little Hut^s in the
Fields, where usually those Birds are wont to light, and feed upon the Seed of
an Herb that grows there; which when it is dry, the people daub over with Lime
twigs. But this they never do but when the North-West Wind blows, and that the
weather be very cold; for with a Southerly Wind they never take any. These
Birds are accounted great Dainties by the Venetians, who make no great Feasts
in Carnival-time wherein they do not set these Birds upon the Table, pil'd up
in Dishes like a Pyramid. They buy them up every year; being first prepared fit
for exportation by the people, who having pulled off their Feathers, parboyl
them, and pickle them up in Barrels with Vinegar and Salt. When they are to be
eat'n, they are set upon a Chasing dish, between two Dishes. Sometimes there
are above a thousand Barrels exported out of the Island; and indeed, were it
not for this Trade, the poor people would see but very little Money.

Upon the Mountain of the Holy Cross stands a Church of the same name; upon
which the report of the Country goes, that St. Helena returning from Jerusalem
left a piece of our Savior's Cross with the Christians of Cyprus, who built a
Church there, by means of the Liberality of the same Princess. Afterward those
of the Town of Leucara took it from hence, and carried it to their Church,
where I saw it. The piece is as big as the Palm of a Man's Hand, set in a great
Cross of Latten, embossed with several Figures.

In the Kingdom of Cyprus that there is an Archbishop, and three Suffragans.
The Archbishop takes upon him the Title of Nicosia; to which Famagosta belongs
with all the Country between Nicosia and Famagosta, with the Territories of
Nicosia and all the Villages round. He has a House about a League from Nicosia,
where the chiefest of his Revenue lies. Some years since he caused the high
Altar of the Church to be painted and gilded, being a neat piece of
Workmanship. Thus the Archbishop has under his Jurisdiction all the middle part
of the Island, and some part toward the East. The Bishops are the Bishops of
Paphos, Larneca, and C^rines.

The Greeks are very much addicted to the observation of their ancient Customs
and Ceremonies; and generally their Masses are very long. Upon Sundays and
Holy Days they rise between one and two of the Clock in the Morning to sing
Mattens. To which purpose there is a Clerk that goes from door to door and
knocks with a Hammer, to wake the people, and then cries out with a loud voice,
Christians go to Church. The men and old women fail not to go as being more
zealous; but the maids and young women never go out of doors in the night for
fear of the Turks. There are seven or eight Villages, the I^habitants whereof
are Maronites, who came from Mount Libanus, and speak Arabic at home, but Greek
among the Islanders. They follow the Romish Religion, and have their Churches
peculiar to themselves.

The Island of Cyprus is no wholesome Air, being subject to the spoil of a sort
of Locusts, that some Summers destroy all their Fruit and Corn During the heats
they hover in the Air, which they will darken with their number like a thick
Cloud; but when the North Wind blows, it carry's them into the Sea, where they
perish.

There are in Cyprus three sorts of colored Earth, a Gray black, a Red, and a
Yellow; of which the Venetians fetch away great quantities for their courser
sort of Painting. There Is also a Mine of White Alome, which is the stone called
Damiantlius. It Is thought that the Ancients had a way to spin this Alome into a
kind of Cotton, and so to make out of it a certain sort of Cloth that would
not consume in the Fire, but only be the more perfectly whitened thereby. The
Indians formerly buried the dead bodies of their Kings deceased in Shrouds of
this kind of Linen, and then putting them into the Fire, found the bodies all
reduced to ashes, but the Cloth whole; out of which they took the ashes, and
carefully put them into an Urne, which was prepared for their preservation.

When the Basha of Cyprus has a mind to view the Fortress of Famagosta, he
sends to give the Bey, who is Governor thereof, notice of it. For it is at the
Governors choice whether he will give him admission or no. The Basha
Hali-Giorgi, being a comely old man of above a hundred and two years of age,
setting out of Nicosia in his Litter with about two hundred Horse, when he was
come within half a League of Famagosta, the Governor of the place sent his
Lieutenant with a hundred Horse to Compliment him, and to conduct him to the
Town. Immediately they took upon them the Guard of the Basha's Litter, who was
not permitted to tak^ along with him above eight or ten of his principal
Officers. The Canons roared at his entry, and he was treated magnificently, but
he lay not in the Town, being conducted back by the same party to the place
where they met him in the Morning.

Upon the third day of October we set Sail about three a Clock in the Morning
with a West-North-West Wind, and about Noon we were within sight of Famagosta,
into which place we could by no means be admitted, by reason of the Wars
between the Turks and Venetians. But as far as I could discern a far off, there
is no easy access to the Port, and for the City I could descry no part of it.

The fourth by break of day we got sight of the Coast of Syria, Cape Canger,
and the Gold of Antioch, and about Evening we arrived in the Rood of
Alexandretta.

From thence we went to Aleppo, and stayed there from the seventh of October to
the thirteenth of December.

On the thirteenth we set forward for Nineveh, and with little variation of the
Road which I have already described in my third Voyage from Paris. We arrived
the second day of February at Moussul or Nineveh, where we stayed 'till the
fifteenth, 'till the Kilets or Boats of the Country could be got ready. Our
Kilet carried thirty Passengers, and sixty hundred of Aleppo Weight, or thirty
three thousand pound of Paris Weight, upon which the Tigris bore us from
Moussul to Babylon.

CHAP. VII.
A Continuation of the Road which the Author kept in the Fourth Voyage into
Asia, and particularly of his passage upon the Tigris from Nineveh to Babylon.
THE fifteenth of February we put off from Moussul, and after we had swam six
hours, we came to lie near a hot Bath, about a Musket Shot from the Tigris. It
was thronged with Sick people that came thither for their Recovery. We kept our
selves upon the Watch all night; but for all we could do, the Arabs stole two
Coverlets from a Merchant, and a Turk's Clothes that was gone into the Bath.

The sixteenth, after we had rowed about five hours, we came to a huge Dam; it
is 200 Foot wide, and makes a fall in the River of about 20 Fathoms steep. The
Arabians said that Alexand^r the Great made it to turn the course of the River;
others will have it, that Darius caused it to be made to hinder the passage of
the Macedonians by Water. However, we were forced to land our selves and our
Goods, and to lade them upon Horses which the Arabs brought us.

The passing this Dam is worthy observation. For it is a thing of wonder to see
the Kilet all of a sudden fall above sixscore Foot, and yet to be kept by the
Leather-Bottles still above Water. The Watermen that guide the Boat, tie
themselves and their Oars fast to a Perch bent like a Semicircle, to defend
themselves from the force of the Water. And indeed this is the Dam that renders
Tigris unnavigable.

The Kilet being come to the place where we expected it, we put our Goods
aboard, and lay in the same place upon the Bank of the River. For the Arabs, if
they perceive the Merchants asleep, cut the Cords of the Kilet, and setting it
a drift, swim after it, and rifle away what they please.

The seventeenth, after three hours rowing we met with the River Zab, that
empties into the Tigris, upon C^aldea*side. Half a League above the River
stands a fair Castle of Brick upon a little Hill; but no body dwelling in it,
it runs to ruin. We were twelve hours that day upon the Water, and came to lie
at a place which was full of Wood, where we made great Fires, and shot off our
Muskets often in the night to scare the Lions.

The eighteenth we were upon the Water eighteen hours, and lay upon the Bank of
the River, upon Assyria-side. That Evening the Arabs brought us Milk-Meats, and
fresh Butter. They swim from the other side of the River with a Boracho under
their Stomachs, and another upon their Heads, wherein they bring their
Commodities; for which they will have no Money, but only Tobacco, or Biscuit, or
Pepper.

The nineteenth, in four hours time we met with a River called Altum-sou, or
The River of Gold. It flows from the Mountains of the Medes, and I traveled by
the side of it for threee days together, returning from Tauris to Aleppo, and
passing the Tigris to Mesia. The Water of the River is of an excellent taste,
and it falls into Tigris upon Assyria-side. All along the Tigris, on the same
side, are great store of Bituminous Springs, and other Streams of hot Water
that smell of Sulphur. All that day we saw none but Arabs and Curds marching
along the Banks of the River, the Curds upon Mesopotamia side, and the Araebs
upon Assyria side. They were at War, and both sides marched in very good order.
The Young men went foremost with Bows and Arrows, and some Muskets, but several
Half-Pikes. Next to them their Wives, Virgins, and Children, with their Cattle,
Herds, and Camels; after which marched the Old men in the rear. As well the
Curds as the Arabians sent out Horsemen to scout upon the high Grounds; for as
soon as they find any advantage, they presently swim their Horses over the
River and sall on. Now because we would not trust those sort of People, we
rowed nineteen hours to avoid 'em.

The twentieth we were eleven hours upon the Tigris, and came to lie at a Town
called Tigris, upon Mesopotamia side. There belongs to the Town a Castle half
ruined, and yet there are still some handsome Chambers to be seen. Upon the
North and East, the River serves for a Moat; but upon the West and South it has
a deep Artificial one paved with Freestone. The Arabians say that formerly it
was the strongest place in all Mesopotamia, though it be commanded by two Hills
not far from it. The Christians dwelt half a League from the City, where the
Ruins of a Church and part of a Steeple are still to be seen, whereby it
appears to have been a a considerable Pile of Building.

The twenty-first, after we had rowed three hours, we met with a Town upon
Assyria side, which was called Am^t-el-tour, from the name of a person that
lies interred in a Monastery, whom the people account to be a Saint. Therefore
is it a place of great Devotion among them, so that great numbers of Votaries
go thither in private. That day we were twelve hours upon the Water, and lay
upon the Banks of the River.

The twenty second, having been upon the Waters two hours, we met with a great
Chanel cut ou^ of Tigris to water the Lands, which runs up as far as just
overagainst Bagdat, and there falls into the Tigris again. Coming thither, we
landed upon Chaldea side, by reason that there were certain Turks with us, who
would of necessity perform their Devotions at a place called Samatra. In the
same there is a Mosquee not above half a League from the River; to which many
Mahometans pay their Devoirs, especially Indians and Tartars, who believe forty
of their Prophets to be buried there. When they knew us to be Christians, they
would not permit us, no not for Money, to set our Feet in it. About five
hundred Paces from the Mosquee stands a Tower very ingeniously built. There are
two Stair-cases without, that belong to it, made twirling like a
Periwinkle-shell: one of which Stair-cases was built deeper into the Tower than
the other. I would have taken better notice of it, could I have been permitted
to have come nearer it. Only I observed that it was made of Brick, and that it
seems to be very ancient. Half a League from thence appear three great Portals,
that look as if they had been the Gates of some great Palace. And indeed it is
not improbable but that there was some great City thereabouts; for, three
Leagues all along the River there is nothing to be seen but Ruins. We were
twelve hours that day upon the Water, and lay upon the Banks of Tigris,
according to custom.

The twenty-third, we were twenty hours upon the Water, and all the day long we
saw nothing upon either side of the River but pitiful Hutts made of the
Branches of Palm Trees, where live certain poor people that turn the Wheels, by
means whereof they water the neighboring Grounds. We also met that day with a
River called Odoine, that falls into Tigris upon the side of the ancient
Chaldea.

The twenty-fourth, we were twenty two hours upon the Water together, never
stirring off from the Kilet. The reason is, because the Merchants having taken
out os the Kilet, all their Money and the best part of their Merchandises, give
them to the Country people* who carry them very faithfully to Bagdat, whither
they to sell their own Commodities: which the Merchants do, to avoid the
payment of Five in the Hundred, in the City. I trusted them also with several
things of which they gave me a very good account, as they did to others, being
contended with a small matter for their pains.

The twenty-fifth, about four of the Clock in the Morning we arrived at Bagdat,
which is as usually called Babylon. They open the Gates by six, and then the
Customers come to take an account of the Merchandise, and to search the
Merchants themselves. If they find nothing about 'em, they let the Merchants
go: but if they have any thing about 'em which ought to pay, they carry the
persons to the Custom-House, where they write down the quantity of the Goods,
and let them go. All the Merchandise upon the Kilet is carried thither also,
which the Merchant fetches away again in two or three days, paying the Custom:
All which is done in very great order, without any noise or disturbance in the
least.

Though Bagdat usually bear the name of Babylon, yet it is at a great distance
from the ancient Babylon, whereof in due place. But now for Bagdat, as it
stands at this day.

Bagdat is a City seated upon the River of Tigris, on the Coast of Persia, and
separated from Mesopotamia by the same River. It lies in 33 Degrees. 15 Min. of
Elevation. The Chronicles of the Arabians report that it was built by one of
their Calisfs named Almansour, in the year of the Hegyra of Mahomet 145, and of
Christianity 762, or thereabouts. They call it Dar-al-sani, that is, the House
of Peace. Some say it derived its name from a Hermitage that stood in a Meadow
where the City now stands, whence it was called Bagdat, or, a Garden
bequeathed. About forty years ago digging up the Foundations of an Inn, the
Workmen found a Body entire, habited like a Bishop, with a Censor and Incense
by him. And in the same place several Cells of Religious Houses showed
themselves: which makes it very probable, that where Bagdat is built there was
anciently a great Monastery, with several Houses where the Christians
inhabited. The City is about fifteen hundred Paces long, and sev'n or eight
hundred broad, and cannot possibly be above three Miles in circuit. The Walls
are of Brick, and terrass'd in some places, with large Towers like Bastions.
Upon all these Towers there are mounted about sixty pieces of Cannon, the
biggest whereof carries not above a five or six Pound Ball. The Moats are wide,
and about five or six Fathom deep. There are not above four Gates; three upon
the Land-side, and one upon the River, which you must cross, over a Bridge of
thirty-three Boats, distant one from the other about the breadth of one Boat.
The Castle is in the City, near to one of the Gates called El-Maazan, upon the
North side. It is partly built upon the River, encompassed only with a single
Wall, terrass'd in some places; and adorned with little Towers, upon which are
planted about a hundred and fifty Cannon, but without Carriages. The Moat is
narrow, and not above two or three Fathom deep, neither is there any
Drawbridge before the Gate. The Garrison consists of three hundred Janisaries,
commanded by an Aga. The City is governed by a Basha, who is generally a
Vizier. His House is upon the side of the River, making a fair show; and he has
always ready at command six or seven hundred Horse. There is also an Aga that
commands three or four hundred Spahi's. They have besides another fort of
Cavalry which is called Ginguliler, that is to say, Men of Courage, commanded
by two Aga's; and usually there are about three thousand in the City and the
Towns adjoining. The Keys of the Gates of the City and the Bridge-Gate are in
the custody of another Aga, who has under him two hundred Janisaries. There are
also six hundred Foot men, who have their particular Aga, and about sixty
Cannoneers, who were at that time commanded by an expert Artist that went by
the name of Signor Michael, who passed for a Turk, though he were born in
Candy. He put himself into the Grand Signor's service, when he went to besiege
Bagdat, in the year 1638. Though the Turk had the good fortune to carry the
City in a small time; not so much by virtue of the Breach which Signor Michael
had made in the Wall, as the Sedition and Revolt that happened at the same
instant, the Story whereof was thus in short.

The Kan that sustained the brunt of the Siege at first, was originally an
Armenian, and his name was Sefi-couli*Kan. He had commanded the City a long
time, and had defended it twice from the Army of the Turks, who were not able
to take it before. But the King of Persia having sent one of his Favorites to
command in his room, who had entered upon his Command before the Cannon had
made the Breach, the old Kan finding himself displaced by the Commission of the
new Governor, rather chose to dye, than survive the Affront which was put upon
him. To which purpose he sent for his Servants, the Officers of the Army, his
Wife and Son* and taking three Cups of Poison in his Hand, he commanded his
Wife, if ever she loved him, now to show the marks of her affection by
generously dying with him. He gave the same exhortation to his Son; and so all
three together drank up the Poison, which procured their speedy death. The
Soldiers, who had a great love for their Governor, having beheld so dismal a
Spe^^acle, and knowing the Grand Signor was preparing for a general Assault,
would not obey their new Kan, but began to act like Revolters; and to that
purpose they agreed to deliver up the City, upon condition they might march
away with their Arms and Baggage: but the Turks did not keep their words. For
so soon as the Turks were got into the City, the Basha's told the Grand Signor,
that to weak'n the force of the Persian, it was necessary for him to put to the
Sword all the Soldiers that were in the City: and thereupon there were above
twenty thousand massacr'd in cold Blood. The Turks had seized upon the
Capuchins Mansion, but Signor Micha^l chief of the Canonneers, got it to be
restored them again.

As to the Civil Government of Bagdat, there is none but a Cady, who does all,
acting even the Musti, with a Skiekelaston or Tefterdar, who receives the
Revenues of the Grand Signor. There are in it five Mosquees, of which two are
indifferently well built, and adorned with Duomo's covered with varnished Tiles
of different colors. There are also ten Inns, all ill built, except two, which
are reasonably convenient. In general, the City is ill built; there being
nothing of beauty in it but the Bazars, which are all arched; else the
Merchants would not be able to endure the heats. They must also be watered
three or four times a day; for which office several poor people are hired upon
the public charge. The City is full of Trade, but not so full as it was, when
in the hands of the King of Persia: for when the Turk took it, he killed most
of the richest Merchants. However there is a great confluence thither from all
Parts; whither for Trade, or for Devotions sake, I cannot tell: because they
that follow the Sect of Haly, do believe that Haly lived at Bagdat. Besides,
all they that are desirous to go to Mecca by Land, must pass through Bagdat,
where every Pilgrim is forced to pay four Piasters to the Basha. You must take
notice that there are in Bagdat two sorts of Mahometans, the first are called
Rafedi's, or Heretics; the second, Observers of the Law, in all things like
those at Constantinople. The Rafedi's will by no means eat or drink with a
Christian, and very hardly with the rest of the Mahometans: o^ if they do
happen to drink out of the same Cup, or to touch them, they presently wash
themselves, as believing themselves unclean. The others are not so scrupulous,
but eat and drink and converse with all the World. In the year 1639, after the
Grand Signor had taken Bagdat, a Rafedi who was a Carrier of Water not only
refused to give a Jew to drink, who desired it of him in the Marketplace, but
abused him also in words. Thereupon the Jew complained to the Cady, who
immediately sent for him, and caused his Boracho and his Cup to be brought
along with him; when he came before him, he asked for his Cup, and gave the Jew
to drink, and then made the Porter drink also out of the same Cup: After that,
he ordered the Rafedi to be Bastinado'd, and this Lesson to be taught him while
he was chastising, That we are God's Creatures, as well Mahometans, as
Christians and Jews. This has made them less zealous in their Superstition,
though they are the chiefest part of the Inhabitants of the City.

As to their Funerals, I have particularly observed, that when the Husband
dies, the Wife pulls of all her Head*gear, and lets her Hair fall about her
Ears; then she all besmears her Face with the Soot of a Kettle, and having so
done, frisks and leaps about after such a ridiculous manner, as from others
would rather produce laughter than tea^s. All the kindred, friends and
neighbors meet at the House of the deceased, and stay for the Celebration of
the Funeral. At what time the Women strive to outvie one another in a thousand
Apish tricks, clapping their Cheeks, yelling like mad people; and then of a
sudden setting themselves to dance to the sound of two Drums, like those which
the Tabor-and-Pipe*men carry, upon which the Women beat for a quarter of an
hour. Among them there is one more accustomed to this fool'ry than the rest,
that fills your Ears with mournful Dinns; to which other Women make answer, by
redoubling their Cries, which may be heard at a great distance. It would then
be a vain thing to seek to comfort the Children of the deceased; for they seem
to be so much beside themselves, that they are not in a condition to hear any
thing. And they are obliged to carry themselves in that manner, unless they
intend to run the reproach of not having any kindness for their Parents. When
the Corpse is carried to the Grave, abundance of poor people go before with
Banners, and Crescents at the ends of Sticks, singing most dismal Dirges all
the way. The Women are not to be at the Interment, who are not to go abroad but
only upon Thursdays, when they go to the Sepulchers to Pray for the Dead. And
because that by their Law the Husband is* obliged to lie with his lawful Wife
upon Thursday-night or Fryday-night, upon Wednesday-morning the Women go to the
Baths, where they perfume their Heads and Bodies with a sweet Water. They may
go abroad sometimes at the other seasons, when their Husbands give them leave
to visit their Kindred; but then they are to be wrapped up from Head to Foot,
that it is impossible for their Husbands themselves to know them if they meet
'em in the Streets. By the way take notice, that the Persian Women, unless they
be such as are very poor, would rather stay within all the days of their Lives,
than go abroad without a Horse. And it is a certain sign to know a Curtisan
from an honest Woman; for that the Curtisans put their Feet in the Stirup, and
the honest Women only in the Stirup-leathers. The Women of Bagdat are very
richly habited, after their fashions; but they are not contented to wear their
Jewels about their Necks and Wrists, for they hang them like Bracelets about
their Faces, and will bore holes in their Ears to put in a Ring. The Arabian
Women only bore the separation between the two Nostrils, where they wear hollow
Rings, as well to spare cost as for lightness; for some are so big, that you
may almost thrust your Fist through them. Beyond all this, the more to
beautify themselves, they make a round Ring about their Eyes with a certain
sort of Blacking: And as well Men as Women, in the Desert, put the same near
their Eyes, to preserve them, as they say, from the heat of the Sun.

Of Christians there are three sorts: Nestorians, who have a Church; Armenians
and Jacobites, who have none, but go the Capuchins, who administer the
Sacraments to them. The Christians go in Devotion to a Chapel, about a short
quarter of a League from the City, dedicated to a Saint whom they call
Keder-Elias, paying a small Fee, for admission, to the Turks, who keep the
Keys. Two days journey from the City stands another ruined Church in a pitiful
Village, where they say, that St. Simon and St. Jude were both Martyred and
Buried. If a Christian dies, all the rest come to his Burial, and returning
home, find a Supper prepared to welcome them; the next day they return to the
Grave, and pray for the deceased; and the third day there is a Dinner for all
comers and goers. Sometimes there will be a hundred and fifty persons at a
Burial. They repeat the same Ceremonies for the seventh, fifteenth, thirtieth
and fortieth days afterward; having a great veneration for the Dead, for whom
they pray too often. This custom of Feasting is very inconvenient for the Poor;
for they being desirous to imitate the Rich, run themselves sometimes so far in
Debt, that they are forced to sell their Children to the Turks to discharge
themselves.

There are several Jews also in Bagdat, but more that come every year in
Devotion to visit the Sepulcher of the Prophet Ezekiel, which is a day and a
halfs journey from the City. In short, since the taking of Bagdat by Sultan
Amurat, the number of Inhabitants cannot be less then fifteen thousand Souls;
which shows that the City is not peopled according to its bigness.

About a day and a halfs journey from the Point of Mesopotamia, at distance
almost equal between Tigris and Euphrates, there appears a vast Heap of Earth,
which the people call to this day Nemrod. It stands in the midst of a wide
Plain, and may be discovered a great way off. The vulgar sort believe it to be
the Remains of the Tower of Babel; but there is more probability of the
Arabians Opinion, who call it Agartouf, and believe it to have been built by an
Arabian Prince, who always kept a Beacon at the top to assemble his Subjects
together in time of War. This Heap of Earth was about three hundred Paces in
circuit; but it is not easy to guess at the ancient height, the rest being
fallen to ruin, but *only eighteen or twenty Fathom. It is built of Brick
dried in the Sun, every Brick being ten Inches square, and three thick. The
Building is thus raised. Upon every row of Canes or Reeds bruised to pieces and
mixed with Wheat-straw, and spread an Inch and a half thick, lie seven orders
of these Bricks with a little Straw between each; then another Bed of Reeds,
and six rows of Bricks; then a third with five rows, decreasing in that manner
'till you come to the top. The form of it seems to have been rather square than
round; and in the highest part of that which remains there appears a Hole like
a Window; if it were not rather an Outlet for Water, or a Hole for the
Scaffolding. In short, according to the Description of Moses there Persian
Travels Page 87

THE PLATFORM OF BAGDAT

The Suburbs in Mesopotamia

is no likelihood that this should be the Remains of the ancient Tower of Babel.

The Plane of the City of Bagdat, which is to be compassed, as well by Land as
by Water, in two Hours.
A. The Ground-Plot. B. The Fortress. C. The Gate called Maazan-capi. D. The
New Bulwark* E. The Port where the Grand Signor erected his first Batt'ry, Anno
1638. F. The Old Bulwark. G. The Gate in the Wall. H. The Old Bulwark. I. The
Place where Amurat raised his second Batt'ry, when he made the Breach, and took
the City. K. The Gate in the Wall. L. The Old Bulwark. M. The The Old Bulwark.
N. Cara-capi, or the Black Gate. O. The Old Bulwark. P. Sou-capi, or the
Watergate.
CHAP. VIII.
A Continuation of the Road from Bagdat to Balsara; and of the Religion of the
Christians of St. John.
THE fifteenth of March we hired a Bark from Bagdat to Balsara. And we
observed, that a little beyond Bagdat the River Tigris divides it self into two
Arms; the one which runs through the ancient Chaldea, the other keeps its
course toward the Point of Mesopotamia; these two Arms making a large Island,
crossed by several small Channels.

When we came to the place where Tigris divides it self, we beheld as it were
the compass of a City that might have formerly been a large League in circuit.
There are some of the Walls yet standing, upon which six Coaches may go
a*brest. They are made of burnt Brick, every Brick being ten Foot square, and
three thick. The Chronicles of the Country say, that these were the Ruins of
the ancient Babylon.

We followed that Arm of Tigris that runs along the Coast of Chaldea; for fear
of falling into the hands of the Arabs, who were then at War with the Basha of
Babylon, denying to pay the ordinary Tribute to the Grand Signor. We were ten
days upon the Water in our passage from Bagdat to Balsara, and lay every night
upon the Water, dressing our Victuals in the Bark. For when we came to any
Villages, we sent our Servants a shore to buy Provisions, which we had very
cheap. Now the Towns we met with upon the Shore were these* Amurat, where there
stood a Fort of Brick baked in the Sun; Mansoury, a great Town* Magar, Gazer,
and Gorno. At this last place Euphrates and Tigris meet together: where are
also three Castles to be seen; one upon the Point where the two Rivers meet,
which is the strongest, and were the Son of the Prince of Balsara then
commanded; the second upon Chaldea side; and the third upon Arabia side. Though
the Customs be there exactly demanded, and paid, yet they never search any
person. The Tides come up to that place: so that having but fifteen Leagues to
Balsara, we got thither in sev'n hours, having both Wind and Tide.

All the Country between Bagdat and Balsara is inter-cut and parted by Dikes,
like the Low Countries; the two Cities lying a hundred and sixty Leagues one
from the other. It is one of the best countries in the possession of the Grand
Signor, being stored with large Meadows and excellent Pasturage, where are bred
infinite numbers of Beasts, especially Mares and Bufalo's. The Female Bufalo's
go twelve Months, and yield so much milk, that there are some that will give
two and twenty Pints. And there is so large a quantity of Butter made, that in
some Villages upon the Tigris, we saw sometimes five and twenty, sometimes
twenty Barks lad'n with Butter, which the people sell all along the Gulf of
Persia, as well upon Arabia, as Persia side.

Half the way betwixt Bagdat and Balsara, we perceived several Pavilions set up
in the Meadows along by the side of the River. Upon enquiry we heard that the
Tefierdar was come from Constantinople to gather the Grand Signor's duty's. For
from Bagdat to Gorno, for all the Bufalo's as well Male as Female, there is to
be paid a Piaster and a quarter for every head once a year; which is worth
yearly to the Grand Signor a hundred and fourscore thousand Piasters. Every
Mare also pays two Piasters, every Sheep ten Sous; which if the Country people
were not very cunning would be worth fifty thousand Piasters more than it is.

After this we came to Gorno, a Fortress upon the point where the two Rivers
meet, besides two other small Castles upon each side, so that there is no
passing without leave. Upon the Fort of Gorno, which was well furnished with
Cannon, we saw the Prince of Balsara's Son, who was Governor of the Fort. And
here it is that the Account of the Customs is taken. But though they are very
exact in searching the Barks, they are very civil, for they search no body.
However lest any Goods should be hid between the Planks of the Ships, over
which they generally throw Fagots and Canes, the Customers bring a great
Piercer, with which they bore the sides of the Bark quite through for the
discovery of concealed Goods. The Goods are Registered at Gorno, but the
Customs are always paid at Balsara, according to the account given from the
Fort.

The same day entering into the Chanel that is cut out of Euphrates to Balsara,
we met the chief of the Holland Factory taking his pleasure in a Boat covered
with Scarlet, who took me with him to Balsara.

Balsara stands upon the side of Arabia deserta, two Leagues from the Ruins of
a City, which was formerly called Beredon, and anciently stood in the Desert,
to which the Water was formerly conveyed out of Euphrates in a Brick Chanel
still to be seen.

By the Ruins it appears to have been a great City, from whence the Arabians
fetch away the Bricks and sell them at Balsara. The City of Balsara is half a
League from Euphrates, which the Arabians in their Language call Shetel-arch,
or the River of Arabia. The Inhabitants of the City have made a Chanel to it
about half a League long, which bears Vessels of 150 Tuns; at the end whereof
stands a Fort, so that no Vessel can get into the Fort without leave. The Sea
is above fifteen Leagues upward beyond Gorno. The Country is so low, that were
it not for a Dam that runs along the Sea-shoar, it would often be in danger of
being drowned. The Dam is above a League in length, and built all of Freestone
so strong, that the fury of the waves can do no injury, though it lie open to a
Boystrous Sea.

It is not above a hundred years since Balsara belonged to the Arabians of the
Desert, and had no commerce with the Nations of Europe. For those people were
contented to eat their own Dates, having so great a quantity, that they only
live upon them. It Is the same thing all along the Gulf on each side; for from
Balsara to the River Indus for above six hundred Leagues together, and all
along the Coast of Arabia to Mascate, the poor sort of people know not what it
is to eat Rice, but live upon Dates and Salt-fish dried in the wind. The Cows
eat no Grass, and though they go abroad in the fields, they find little or
nothing among the bushes which is proper for them to eat. But every Morning
before they drive them to the Field* and when they return home, they give them
heads of fish and Date-nuts boiled together.

The Turks having had War with the Arabians took Balsara; and yet because the
Arabians always hovered about the Town, and made booty of all they could lay
their hands on, they were forced to come to an agreement with them, that the
Arabs should quietly enjoy all the Desert, 'till within a League of the City;
and that the Turks should remain peaceable Masters of the City, where they have
a Basha for Governor. But this Treaty endured not long; for in the middle of
the City there is a Citadel, called Aushel Basha, or the Basha's Court, which
the Turks built; so that the Garrison being Turks and the Inhabitants Arabians
who could not endure to be curbed, they oft-times quarreled with the Turks and
came to blows. Thereupon the Arabians of the Desert came to the relief of the
Citizens and besieged the Basha in the Fortress. At length because there could
be no such agreement made, but that one party or other took an occasion
presently to break it, there was one Basha whose Name was Aiud, who after many
contests and revolts which had almost tired him* resolved to rid himself of the
trouble, and sold his Government for forty thousand Piasters to a rich Lord in
the Country, who presently raised a sufficient number of Soldiers to keep the
people in awe. This great man took upon him the name of Efrasias Basha, being
the Grandfather of Hussen Basha, who was Governor at the time when I passed
through before. This Efrasias threw off the Turkish yoke, and took upon him the
title of Prince of Balsara. As for the Basha that sold his Government, he no
sooner arrived at Constantinople, but he was strangled. But after Amurath had
taken Bagdat, the Prince of Balsara was glad to feed him continually with
Presents that chiefly consisted in Horses, which are very beautiful in that
Country. The Great Sha-Abas having taken Ormus, sent a powerful Army under the
Command of Inian-Kouli-Kan Governor of Shiras, to take in Balsara. Whereupon
the Prince finding himself too weak to resist so great a Power, made an
agreement with the Desert Arabians to break down the Dam that stops the Sea.
Which being performed, in came the Sea tumbling fifteen Leagues to Balsara, and
four Leagues beyond it, which constrained the Persians, surrounded with water,
and hearing at the same time of the death of Sha-Abas, to raise their Siege.
Since that inundation, several Lands and Gardens have been utterly barren, or
have born very little, by reason of the Salt which the Sea has left behind.

The Prince of Balsara has entered into Leagues with several strange Nations,
so that whencesoever you come, you may be welcome. There is so much liberty and
so good order in the City, that you may walk all night long in the Streets
without molestation. The Hollanders bring Spices thither every year. The
English carry Peper and some few Cloves; but the Portugals have no Trade at all
thither. The Indians bring Calicuts, Indigo, and all sorts of Merchandises. In
shor^ there are Merchants of all Country's, from Constantinople, Smyrna,
Aleppo, Damascus, Cairo, and other parts of Turkey, to buy such Merchandises as
come from the Indies, with which they lade the young Camels which they buy in
that place; for thither the Arabians bring them to put them to sale. They that
come from Diarbequir, Moussul, Bagdat, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, send their
Merchandises up the Tigris by Water, but with great trouble and expense. In
regard the Boats are to be towed by men, that cannot go above two Leagues and a
half in a day, and against the Wind they cannot stir, which makes them
oft-times between Balsara and Bagdat to be above sixty days, nay there have
been some that have been three months upon the Water.

The Customs of Balsara amount to five in the hundred, but generally you have
some favor showed you, either by the Customer or the Prince himself, that the
Merchant does not really pay above four in the hundred. The Prince of Balsara
is so good a Husband, that he lays up three millions of Livers in a year. His
chiefest Revenue is in four things, Money, Horses, Camels, and Date-trees; but
in the last consists his chiefest wealth. For all the Country from the meeting
of the two Rivers to the Sea, for the space of thirty Leagues together, is all
covered with these Trees* nor does any one dare to touch a Date, 'till he has
paid for every Tree three fourths of a Larin, or nine Sous French. The profit
which the Prince makes upon money, proceeds from this, that the Merchants that
come from abroad are obliged to carry their Reals to his Mint, where they are
Coined and converted into Larins, which is worth to him eight in the hundred.
As for his Horses* there is no place in the world, where there are more fit for
travel, or handsomer shaped; for there are some that will travel thirty hours
together and never draw bit, especially the Mares. But to return to the
Palm Trees it is worth observation, that there is more Art to bring up those
Trees than any other. The Natives dig a hole in the ground* wherein they heap a
great quantity of Date-nuts in a Pyramidical form, the top whereof ends in one
single Nut, which being covered with Earth produces the Palm Tree. Most of the
people of the Country do say, that in regard there is among the Palm Trees the
distinction of Male and Female, that therefore they must be planted one by
another, for that otherwise the Female Tree will bear no Fruit. But others
affirm that nicety to be unnecessary; and that it suffices, when the Male is in
Blossom to take a Flower from the Male, and put it into the Heart of the Female
a little above the Stem; for unless they should do so, all the Fruit would fall
off before it came to maturity.

There is at Balsara a Cady that administers Justice, and who is established by
the authority of the Prince that commands there. In the City are also three
sorts of Christians, Jacobites, Nestorians, and Christians of St. John. There
is also a House of Italian Carmelites; and there was a House of Portugal
Austin-Friars, but they have forsak'n the Town ever since their Countrymen
quitted the Trade.

The Christians of St. John are very numerous at Balsara, and the Villages
thereabouts; who anciently lived by the River of Jordan, where St. John
Baptized; and from whom they took their Name. But since the time that Mahomet
conquered Palestine, though Mahomet *formerly gave them his Hand and his
Letters of Privilege that they should not be molested, nevertheless they that
succeeded the false Prophet resolved to extirpate them all; to which purpose
they ruined their Churches, burnt their Books, and exercised all manner of
cruelties upon their persons: which obliged them to retire into Mesopotamia and
Chaldea, and for some time they were under the Patriarch of Babylon, from whom
they separated about a hundred and sixty years ago. Then they removed into
Persia and Arabia, and the Towns round about Balsara; as Souter, Despoul,
Rumez, Bitoum, Mono, Endecan, Calafabat, Aveza, Dega, Dorech, Masquel, Gumar,
Carianous, Balsara, Onezer, Zech, Loza. Nor do they inhabit City or Village by
which there does not run a River. And many of their Bishops have assured me,
that the Christians in all the foregoing places make above five and twenty
thousand Families. There are some among them who are Merchants; but the most
part of them are Tradesmen* especially Goldsmiths, Joyners, and Lock-smiths.

Their Creed is full of fables and foul errors. The Persians and Arabians call
them Sabbi, a People that have forsak'n their own Religion, to take up a new
one. In their own Language they call themselves Mendai Jahia, or Disciples of
St. John, from whom, as they ascertain us, they have received their Faith,
their Books, and their Traditions. Every year they celebrate a Feast for about
five days, during which time they go in Troops to their Bishops, who Baptize
them according to the Baptism of St. John.

They never Baptize but in Rivers, and only upon Sundays. But before they go to
the River they carry the Infant to Church, where there is a Bishop who reads
certain Prayers over the Head of the Child; from thence they carry the Child to
the River, with a Train of Men and Women, who together with the Bishop go up to
the knees in Water. Then the Bishop reads again certain Prayers out of a Book
which he holds in his Hand, which done he sprinkles the Infant three times,
saying, Beesmebrad er-Rabi, Kaddemin, Akreri, Menbal el gennet Alli Koulli
Kralek; or, In the Name of the Lord, first and last of the World and of
Paradise, the high Creator of all things. After that, the Bishop reads
something again in his Book, while the Godfather plunges the Child all over in
the Water; after which they go all to the Parents House to feast. If any tax
their Baptism for insufficient, in regard the Three Persons of the Divinity are
not named therein, they can make no rational defense for themselves. Nor have
they any knowledge of the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, only they say that
Christ is the Spirit and Word of the Eternal Father. They are so blind as to
believe the Angel Gabriel to be the Son of God, begotten upon Light; yet will
not believe the Eternal Generation of Christ, as God. Yet they confess he
became Man, to free us from the Punishment of Sin: and that he was conceived in
the womb of a Virgin without the knowledge of Man, by means of the Water of a
certain Fountain which she drank of. They believe he was crucified by the Jews;
that he rose the third day; and that his Soul ascending up to Heaven, his Body
remained on Earth. But like the Mahometans they corrupt their Faith, by saying,
that Christ vanished when the Jews came to take him, and that he deluded their
cruelty with his Shadow.

In the Eucharist they make use of Meal or Flower, kneaded up with Wine and
Oil: For, say they, the Body of Christ being composed of the two principal
parts, Flesh and Blood, the Flower and the Wine do most perfectly represent
them; besides, that Christ at his Supper made use of Wine only, and not of
Water. They add Oil, to signify the benefit we receive by his favor of the
Sacrament, and to put us in mind of our Love and Charity toward God and our
Neighbor. To make this Wine, they take Grapes dried in the Sun, which they
call in their Language Zebibes, and casting Water upon them, let them steep for
so long a time. The same Wine they use for the Consecration of the Cup. They
make use of Raisins, in regard they are more easy to be had than Wine; the
Persians, especially the Arabians, under whose Government they live, not
permitting, nor indeed allowing them the use of it. Of all people that follow
the Law of Mahomet, there are none so opposite to other Religions, as these
Persians and Arabians about Balsara. The words of their Consecration, are no
other than certain long Prayers, which they make to praise and thank God, at
the same time blessing the Bread and Wine, never making mention of his Body and
Blood; which they say is not at all necessary, because God knows their
intentions. After all the Ceremonies are ended, the Priest takes the Bread, and
having eaten some of it, distributes the rest to the People.

As to their Bishops and Priests, when any one dies, who has a Son, they choose
him in his place; and if he have no Son, they take the next akin that is most
capable and best instructed in their Religion. They that make the Election, say
several Prayers over him that is elected. If he be a Bishop, after he is
received, and that he go about to Ordain others, he ought to fast six days,
during which time he continually repeats certain Prayers over him that is to be
ordained Priest, who also for his part fasts and prays all the said time. And
whereas I say the Father succedes the Son, it is to be observed, that among the
Christians in those Parts, both Bishops and Priests marry, as do the rest of
the people; only if their first Wife dye, they cannot marry another unless she
be a Virgin. Moreover, they that are admitted to Ecclesiastical Function, must
be of the race of Bishops or Priests; and their Mothers must have been always
Virgins when they were married. All their Bishops and Priests wear their Hair
long, and a little Cross wrought with a Needle.

When there is any Wedding to be, the kindred and persons invited go together
with the Bridegroom, to the House where the Bride lives. Thither comes the
Bishop also, and approaching the Bride, who is sitting under a Canopy, he asks
her if she be a Virgin. If she answer that she is so, he makes her confirm it
by an Oath. After which he returns to the Guests, and sends his Wife with some
other skilful Women to make an inspection. If they find her to be a Virgin, the
Bishop's Wife returns and makes Oath of it; and then they all go to the River,
where the Bishop re-baptizes the Couple to be married. Then they return toward
the House, and making a stop before they come quite near it, the Bridgroom
takes the Bride by the Hand, and leads her seven times from the Company to the
House, the Bishop following them every time, and reading certain Prayers. After
that they go into the House, and the Bride and Bridegroom place themselves
under the Canopy, where they set their Shoulders one against another, and the
Bishop reads again, causing them to lay their Heads together three times. Then
opening a Book of Divination, and looking for the most fortunate day to
consummate the Marriage, he tells them of it. But if the Bishop's Wife do not
find the Bride to be a Virgin, the Bishop can proceed no farther, so that if
the young Man have still a mind, he must go to some meaner Priest to perform
the Ceremony. Which is the reason that the people take it for a great dishonor
to be married by any other than the Bishops; for when a Priest marries, it is an
infallible sign that the Bride was no Virgin. The Priests also, in regard they
take it to be a great Sin for a Woman to marry not being a Virgin, they never
marry any such but by constraint, and to avoid ensuing inconveniences; for
sometimes in despite they will turn Mahometans. The reason of the Inspection
is, that the Husbands may not be deceived, and to keep the young Girls in awe.

As to what they believe touching the Creation of the World, they say, that the
Angel Gabriel undertaking to create the World according to the command which
God gave him, took along with him three hundred thirty-six thousand Demons, and
made the earth so fertile, that it was but to Sow in the Morning and Reap at
Night. That the same Angel taught Adam to Plant and Sow, and all other
necessary Sciences. Moreover that the same Angel made the seven lower Spheres,
the least whereof reaches to the Center of the World, in the same manner as the
Heavens do, all contrived one within another. That all these Spheres are of
different Metals, the first next the Center is of Iron, the second of Lead, the
third of Brass, the fourth of Laten, the fifth of Silver, the sixth of Gold,
and the seventh of Earth. The seventh is that which contains all the rest, and
is the chiefest of all, as being the most fruitful and profitable to Man, and
the most proper to preserve Mankind, whereas the rest seem rather to be framed
for its destruction. They believe that over every Heaven there is Water, whence
they conclude that the Sun swims in a Ship upon that Water, and that the Mast
of his Ship is a Cross, and that there are a great number of Boys and Servants
to guide the Ships of the Sun and Moon. Besides, they have the Picture of a
Barque, which they say belonged to the Angel Bacan, whom God sends to visit the
Sun and Moon, to see whether they move right or no, and keep close to their
duty.

In reference to the other World and Life to come, they believe there is no
other World, but where Angels and Devils, the Souls of good and bad reside.
That in that World there are Cities, Houses, and Churches, and that the Evil
Spirits have also Churches, where they pray, singing and rejoicing upon
Instruments, and Feasting as in this World. That when any one lies at the point
of death, three hundred and sixty Demons come and carry his-Soul to a place
full of Serpents, Dogs, Lions, Tygres, and Devils; who, if it be the Soul of a
wicked man, tear it in pieces; but being the Soul of a Just man, it creeps
under the bellies of those Creatures into the presence of God, who sits in his
seat of Majesty to judge the World. That there are Angels also that weigh the
Souls of Men in a Balance, who being thought worthy, are admitted immediately
into Glory. That the Angels and Devils are Male and Female, and beget Children.
That the Angel Gabriel is the Son of God engendered upon Light, and that he has
a Daughter called Souret who has two Sons. That the Angel Gabriel has several
Legions of Demons under him who are instead of Soldiers, and others that are
his Officers of Justice, whom he sends from Town to Town, and from City to
City, to punish the wicked.

In reference to Saints, they hold that Christ left twelve Apostles to Preach
to the Nations. That the Virgin Mary is not dead, but that she lives somewhere
in the World, though there be no person that can tell where she is. That next
to her St. John is the chiefest Saint in Heaven, and next to them Zacharias and
Elizabeth, of whom they recompt several Miracles and Apocryphal Tales. For they
believe that they two begat St. John only by embracing; that when he came to be
of age they Married him, and that he had four Sons which he begat upon the
waters of Jordan. That when St. John desired a Son, he prayed to God, who drew
him one out of the water; so that St. John had no more to do with his Wife but
only to give her the Child to bring up. That he died a natural death, but that
he commanded his Disciples to Crucify him after his death, that he might be
like Christ. Lastly, that he died in the City of Fuster, and that he was buried
in a Crystal Tomb, brought by miracle to the City, and that this Sepulcher was
in a certain House near the River Jordan.

They highly honor the Cross, and sign themselves with it; but they are very
careful of letting the Turks observe them; and during their Ceremonies, they
set a Watch at their Church doors for fear the Turks should enter, and lay some
unjust Fine upon them. When they have adored the Cross, they take it in two
pieces, which they never put together again, 'till their Service re-begins. The
reason why they so adore the Cross is drawn out of a Book which they have,
Entitled The Divan. Where it is written that every day early in the Morning,
the Angels take the Cross and put it in the middle of the Sun, which receives
his light from it, as the Moon also does hers. They add, that in the same Book
are Pictured two Ships, one of which is named the Sun, the other the Moon; and
that in every one of these Ships there is a Cross full of Bells: And moreover,
that if there were not a Cross in those two Ships, the Sun and Moon would be
deprived of Light, and the Ships would suffer Shipwreck.

Their chief Festivals are three. The one in Winter, that lasts three days, in
memory of our first Parent and the Creation of the World. The other in the
Month of August, that also lasts three days, which is called the Feast of St.
John. The third which lasts five days, in June, during which time they are all
re-baptiz'd. They observe Sunday, doing no work upon that day. They neither
Fast nor do any penance. They have no Canonical Books, but a great number of
others that treat of nothing but Witchcraft, in which they believe their
Priests to be very crafty, and that the Devils are at their beck. They hold all
Women to be unclean, and that it is not at all available for them to come to
the Church.

They have one Ceremony, which they call the Ceremony of the Hen, of which they
make great Account, which is not lawful for any to perform but a Priest Born of
a Virgin at the time of her Marriage. When a hen is to be killed the Priest
puts off his ordinary habit, and puts on a Linen Cloth, girding his waste with
a second, and throwing a third about his shoulders like a Stole. Then he takes
the Fowl, and plunges it in the water to make it clean; after which he turns
toward the East and cuts off the head, holding the Body in his hand 'till it
has bled out all the blood. While the Hen bleeds, with his Eyes lifted up to
Heaven, as if he were in an ecstasy, he repeats in his own Language these words
following: In the name of God, may this flesh be profitable to all that cat of
it? They observe the same ceremony when they kill Sheep. For first, they
cleanse the place very carefully where the Sheep is to be killed, washing it
with water, and strewing it with boughs, nor is the number of people small that
assists at this Ceremony, as if it were at some solemn Sacrifice. If you ask
them why it is not lawful for the Laity to kill Fowls? They answer that it is
no more lawful for them to kill than to consecrate them; and that is all the
reason which they bring. They eat of nothing dressed by the Turks; and if a Turk
ask them for drink, so soon as he has drank, they break the Cup. And to make
the Turks more hateful, they Picture Mahomet like a great Giant, shut up in
Prison in Hell with four more of his Parents; and they say, that all the Turks
are carried into the same place full of wild Beasts to be there devoured.

They pretend all to Salvation. For, say they, after the Angel Gabriel had
framed the World by the command of God, he thus discoursed him. Lord God, said
he, behold I have built the World as thou did command me. It has put me to a
great deal of trouble, and my Brethren also, to raise such high Mountains that
seem to sustain Heaven. And who indeed was able to make way for Rivers through
Mountains without vast, labor, and to give every thing its proper place?
Moreover, great God, by the aid of thy powerful Arm, we have brought the World
to so much perfection, that men cannot think upon any thing needful for them,
which is not to be found therein. But instead of that satisfaction which I
ought to have for having accomplished so great a work, I find no reason but to
be altogether grieved. When God demanding the cause, the Angel Gabriel
answered: My God and Father, I will tell you what afflicts me; because that
after the making of the World as I have done, I foresee that there will come
into it a prodigious number of Jews, Turks, Idolaters, and other Infidels,
Enemies of your Name, who will be unworthy to eat and enjoy the Fruits of our
Labors. To whom God thus replied: Never grieve, my Son, there shall live in
this World which thou have built, certain Christians of St. John who shall be
my friends, and shall be all saved. Upon which the Angel admiring how that
should be! What, said he, will there not be several Sinners among those
Christians, and by consequence will not they be your Enemies? To whom God thus
concluded: That at the day of Judgment the Good should Pray for the Wicked, and
by that means they should be all forgiven, and obtain Salvation.

These Christians have a strange Antipathy against the Blew Color called
Indigo, which they will not so much as touch. For certain Jews dreaming that
their Law should be abolished by St. John, told it their Countrymen. Which
they understanding, and seeing that St. John prepared to Baptize Christ, in a
great rage, fetched a vast quantity of Indigo, which they call Nill in their
Language, and flung it into Jordan. They add also that those Waters continued
unclean for some time, and had hindered the Baptism of Christ, had not God sent
his Angels with a large Vessel of water, which he caused them to fill out of
Jordan before the Jews had defiled it with Indigo; for which reason God
particularly Cursed that Color.

CHAP. IX.
A Continuation of the Road from Balsara to Ormus.
THe tenth of April we set out from Balsara for Bandar-Congo, for which passage
we hired a Terrade or a Barque for the purpose; for they which are laden with
Dates are generally so overcharged* that if a Storm rises, they are in danger
of being overset. The River of Balsara is very dangerous, by reason of the
Sands which also lie up and down the Persian Gulf, and are very prejudicial to
Navigation in that place. On both sides the Gulf that separates Persia from
Arabia the Happy, live a sort of poor people that follow no other Trade than
fishing; so poor, that when they bring fish to your Vessel, they require
nothing for it but Rice; and not the best neither, but such coarse stuff as we
feed our Hens and Pigs withal. I gave them a Sack of thirty or forty pounds,
and bid them make merry with it, but they told me, they must be careful how
they spent such Rice as that, unless it were for their Sick, or at their
Weddings; so that if the rest of Arabia the Happy be like that, assuredly it is
rather a most unfortunate Country.

There are several Isles in the Persian Gulf, but the chiefest of all is the
Isle of Baharen, where they fish for Pearls, of which I have spoken in its
proper place.

Near to the place where Euphrates falls from Balsara into the Sea, there is a
little Island, where the Barques generally come to an Anchor, in expectation of
the wind. There we stayed four days, whence to Bandar-Congo, it is fourteen
days Sail, and we got thither the twenty-third of April. This place would be a
far better habitation for the Merchants than Ormus, where it is very unwholesom
and dangerous to live. But that which hinders the Trade from Bandar-Congo is,
because the Road to Lar is so bad, by reason of the want of Water, and craggy
narrow ways, which only Camels can endure; but from Ormus to Lar the way is
tolerable. We stayed at Bandar-Congo two days, where there is a Portugais
Factor, who receives one half of the Customs by agreement* with the King of
Persia. By the way take notice, that they who will go by Water from Ormus to
Balsara, must take the Natives for their Pilots, and be continually sounding
besides.

The thirtieth, we hired a Vessel for Bander-Abassi, and after three or four
hours Sailing, we put into a Village upon the Seaside, in the Island of
Keckmishe.

Keckmishe is an Island three Leagues about, and about five or six from Ormus.
It excedes in Fertility all the Islands of the East, that produce neither Wheat
nor Barley; but at Keckmishe is a Magazine of both, without which Ormus would
hardly subsist, in regard it furnishes that City with most of their Provision
for their Horses. There is in the Island a Spring of good Water, for the
preservation of which, the Persians have built a Fort, lest the Portugals when
they held Ormus, should get it into their Possession.

In 1641. and 1642. the Hollanders falling out with the King of Persia about
their Silk Trade, besieged this Island. For the Ambassadors of the Duke of
Holstein coming into Persia, the Dutch were jealous that they came to fetch
away all the Silk; and thereupon enhanc'd the Market from forty-two to fifty
Tomans. When the Ambassadors were gone, the Dutch would pay no more than
forty-four, which was two Tomans more than they were used to do. The King
netl'd that they would not stand to their words, forbid that they should make
sale of their Goods 'till they had paid their Customs, from which 'till that
time they were exempted. Thereupon the Hollanders besieged the Fortress of
Keckmishe, but the Heats were so intolerable, that they were forced to quit
their design with great loss of their Men; and at length by great Presents to
the chief Courtiers, they obtained to pay no more than forty-six Tomans.

Larec is an Island nearer to Ormus than Keckmishe, well inhabited, and so
stored with Stags and Hinds, that in one day we killed five and forty.

From Keckmishe we Sailed for Ormus, where we arrived the first of May. I had
put my choicest Goods in a Chest directed for the Holland Commander at Ormus,
by which means I got the Custom free.

The Persian Gulf is the most dangerous Gulf I know, by reason of the
shallowness and sharp Promontories that point out into the Sea; and therefore
the best way is to take a Pilot at Ormus or Bander-Congo, and the most proper
Pilots are the Fishermen, who are only skilled in that Sea and no farther. The
Soil about the Persian Gulf is dry Sand and without Water, so that it is
impossible to Travel by Land from Ormus to Balsara. The Merchants would be glad
to find a way through the Coast of Arabia to get to Mascate* whence there might
a cut be made to Sindi, Diu, or Surat, which are the three chief Ports of
India. During the difference between the King of Persia and the Hollanders, the
Emir of Vodana an Arabian Prince, offered to show them an easy Road from
Mascate to Balsara. But the Hollanders fearing to break with the King of
Persia, where they vended above fifteen or sixteen hundred thousand pounds of
their Pepper, and paid therewith for all their Silk, did not think it worth
their while t^ quit Ormus to settle themselves at Mascate.

Had it been yielded to, the way had been from Balsara to Elcatif a Sea-Town in
Arabia the Happy, where there is a Fishery for Pearls that belongs to the Emir
of Elcatif. From Elcatif to Mascalat, another City of Arabia, and the residence
of another Emir. From Mascalat to Vodana, a good handsome City seated upon the
meeting of two little Rivers that carry Barques to the Sea, and run together by
the single name of Moy^sur. The Soil about Vodana produces no Corn, and very
little Rice; but it abounds in Fruits, especially Prunes and Quinces, which are
not so sour as ours, and are eaten by the Natives as Pears. There are
extraordinary good Melons and great Store of Grapes, of which the Jews, who
inhabit the best part of the City, are permitted to make Wine. From Vodana to
the Gulf, the Country of each side is full of Palm Trees, the Dates being the
Food of the common people, who have not Money to buy either Corn or Rice. From
Vodana to Mascate it is but fifteen Leagues, though by the Maps, which are
Erroneous, the way is described to be much longer.

Being at Ormus, the Emir of Vodana showed me a Pearl transparent and perfectly
round, that weighed seventeen Abas, or fourteen Carats and seven Eights; for in
all the Pearl Fisheries of the East they use no other weights but Abas, which
make seven Eights of a Carat. I offered him 300000 Piasters, or 60000 Roupies
for the same Pearl, but the Emir refused to take it, telling me that he had
been offered more Money for it by several Princes of Asia, who had sent to him
to buy it, but that he was resolved never to part with it.

CHAP. X.
Of the Authors first Voyage, and the adventure of four Frenchmen.
I Departed out of Paris in the year 1657, and Embarked at Marscilles for
Ligorn.

We set Sail from Ligorn seven Vessels together, two bound for Venice, one for
Constantinople, one for Aleppo, and three for Smyrna, in one of which being a
Dutch Vessel I Embarked. But before I leave Smyrna, to begin my Journey from
Tauris, give me leave to relate the story of four Frenchmen, the various
accidents whereof will much enlight'n the Reader into the Customs and Manners,
as well of the Turks as Persians.

While I stayed the departure of the Caravan, which could not be ready in five
or six Weeks, as also upon the advice of a rich Jew and a Merchant of Jewels at
Constantinople, who had several Pearls to sell, as well for their beauty as
their bigness, the best Commodity a man can carry to the Indies, I sent to
Constantinople a person that I carried along with me, one that was well versed
in that sort of Commodity. There was a Norman Gentleman named de Reville then
at Smyrna, who would needs accompany my Factor, so that they went both together
in a Vessel that carried the French Ambassador and his Lady to Constantinople.
This Gentleman had two or three thousand Ducats in his Purse, wanting neither
wit nor courage, besides a good presence; but perhaps he was more hasty in his
proceedings than the reserv'dness of that Country required. He had left the
Service of the Muscovites, thinking to find an employment in the Service of the
Venetians at Candy* but failing in his expectations, he resolved to travel into
Persia. While he was at Constantinople, the Jews, who lay hold upon all
opportunities of gain, soon found out my Factor; and besides the Pearls which
he desired to see, they showed him several other rich Stones to try whether
they could draw him in; for he had refused the Pearls because they held them at
too high a Rate. The Norman Gentleman fell into their acquaintance; and picking
out the richest, told him, that being resolved for the Indies, he had a mind to
lay out four thousand Ducats in Pearls, He added also, that he would pay him
half in Money, half in Goods, and at the same time showed the Jew two thousand
Ducats, which the Jew had already devoured with his eyes. Some four days after,
the Jew brought the Gentleman four fair Pearls with some Emraulds; and you may
be sure they easily agreed upon the price, in regard the Gentleman had a design
to put a trick upon the Jew. Thereupon he shows his Ducats a second time, which
the Jew, who thought he had a Cully, presently told out as his own. After that
the Jew desiring to see the Goods, which made up the other part of the payment,
the Gentleman without any more ado told him, that all the Merchandise which he
had to pay him, was a good strong Quartan Ague which had held him a long time,
and indeed such a one, that he could not possibly meet with a better, but that
he would not over-rate it, in regard he asked but two thousand Ducats for it.
The Jew who was rich and in great credit at Court, was so incensed at his
raillery, that he had like to have made a wicked stir about it. For as he had
heard him say, that the Gentleman was going into the Indies and Persia, he
might have easily caused him to have been apprehended for a Spy. But in regard
the Jews can do nothing in point of Trade without the assistance of the French
Merchants, he adviz'd with some of them, who persuaded him that it was an Act
of folly, which it better became him to excuse, and desired him to take his
Goods again, and put up the business; which with much ado they persuaded him to
condescend to* The Gentleman fearing lest the Jews underhand should do him a
private mischief, stole away with what speed he could, and returned to Smyrna.

De Reville being thus returned to Smyrna, put himself into an Almadier, which
is a small Vessel of War, that generally touches at Chio and Rhodes, being
bound for Cyprus, from whence there is always some convenience or other to get
to Alexandretta. From thence he went to Aleppo; and while he stayed there he
met with two Frenchmen, the one whose name was Neret, the other Hautin, who
was an Accomptant. They had four Wooden Chests full of false Stones ready set,
by which they flattered themselves to be great gainers in Persia. They went
from Marseilles to Seyde, from Seyde to Damas, hearing that there was an
opportunity to Travel to Bagdat with the Topigi-Bashi. This Topigi-Bashi or
chief of the Engineers, was he that assisted Amurath in the taking of Bagdat;
in recompense whereof the Grand Signor gave him a Timar, or Lordship in Damas
worth four thousand Crowns a year. Now it was his custom every year to visit
Bagdat, and to stay there during the Season, that there was any probability of
the King of Persia's besieging it; which Season not lasting above three or four
Months, when that was over, he returned to Damas. He usually had about thirty
Horse with him, with which he never made it above eighteen or twenty days,
taking the shortest cut directly through the Desert, where the Arabs are
commanded to bring him Victuals upon the Road. And he is willing at any time
when he has this opportunity, to conduct the Franks that desire it that way, in
regard they are never ungrateful to him for it. These two Franks therefore
having desired that they might be taken into his Company, the Topigi-Bashi*
readily consented; provided they could stay 'till he went, which would not be
'till two or three Months; with which answer they were well satisfied* But the
two Franks had not stayed at Damas above seven or eight days but they fell
acquainted with a Spahi, a Kenegado of Marseilles, who proffered to carry them
through the Road of Mesopotamia, so that they should be at Ispahan before the
Topigi-Bashi, set out from Damas. Thereupon they privately departed out of
Damas without acquainting the Topigi-Bashi, who understanding they were gone
after the courtesy he had offered them, was so enraged at their uncivility,
that he sent two of his Arabian Servants directly through the Wilderness to the
Basha of Bagdat, to give him advice of two Franks that were to pass that way,
who were most certainly Spies, describing them withal from head to foot.

In the mean while the two Franks being arrived at Ourfa, the Spahi, as he had
contrived his own design at Damas, goes to the Basha of Ourfa, and informs him
that he had conducted thither two Franks, who could be no other than Spies.
Thereupon the Basha seized upon them and all their Goods, among the rest he
laid his paws upon seven hundred Piasters, of which the Spahi no doubt had his
share. And this may serve for instruction to Travelers to have a care how and
with whom they Travel in Turkey.

While the two Frenchmen were in hold at Ourfa by one sort of Treachery, the
Norman Gentleman and his Companion arrived at Bagdat. But they had no sooner
set their feet upon the shore, when the Basha verily believing them, to be the
persons, of whom the Topigi-Bashi had given him notice, caused them to be
brought before him, and seized upon their Goods and Letters, of which they had
several for the Consul of Aleppo, and other rich Merchants for Persia. The
Basha sent for the Capuchins to read those Letters, but not believing them, he
sent for a Sicilian Physician which he had in his Service, and his Treasurer
who had been a Slave taken in Candy. But neither Physician, Treasurer, nor
Capuchins would interpret any thing in prejudice of the Frenchmen; yet all
that could not preserve them from being shut up in a Stable full of dung, and
from being threatened to be Shot out of a Cannon's mouth if they would not
confess the truth. Thereupon the Capuchins and the Cadi begged him to suspend
his Sentence 'till the Arrival of the chief of the Cannoniers, to which he
readily consented.

When the Topigi-Bashi came, the Basha commanded the Prisoners to be brought
before him. But when the Topigi-Bashi denied them to be the persons, the Basha
grew into such a rage, that he no less reproached the Topigi-Bashi for
Treachery, than he had accused the others. Which so incensed the Topigi-Bashi
on the other side, that he never left till he had obtained the release of the
two Frenchmen; yet not so, but that the Basha would have his due; so that
Reville was forced to leave some of his Ducats behind which the Jew should have
had.

But now to return to Smyrna where I expected the Caravan for some time in
order to my Journey into Persia. Every thing being provided, we set forward in
the Road for Tauris, which I have at large described, nor was there any thing
worthy observation all the way. I Will only take notice, that when we departed
from Tocat, in regard the heat was so extreme, we left the common Road toward
the North, and took the way through the Mountains, where there is always a
fresh Breeze and store of shady Lanes. In many of which high Mountains we met
with Snow, and abundance of excellent Sorrel; and upon the tops of some of
those Mountains, we met with several sorts of shells, as it had been upon the
Sea shore, which is very extraordinary. From Erzerom we went to Cars; from Cars
we came to Erivan. The Kan was not there then, being retired during the heat
into the Mountains, a days Journey from the City. His Lieutenant telling me
that I could not well pass farther without paying my duty to the Kan; I
followed his advice, and found him in his Tent in a fair dale, where there was
a great quantity of Snow: and where when it began to melt, appeared several
beautiful Flowers, so that Summer and Winter seemed to lodge both in the same
place. The Kan entertained both me and all my Company most nobly for ten days.
I drove also a small Trade with him. For I durst not show him the rarities I
had, being designed for the King. For as in India, so in Persia, neither will
the King look upon any thing which his Subjects have seen before, nor will the
Subjects buy any thing which the King has seen* it being an affront to present
any thing to the King which he had formerly viewed, and the Subject buys
nothing rare but what he intends to present.

Being past Erivan you may leave your Caravan when you please, by reason of the
security of the Roads in Persia. And indeed I intended to have visited the Kan
of Geng^^, but finding the Road so full of Rocks and Precipices, where a man
was continually in danger of breaking his Neck, I turned my Horses head and met
the Caravan at Nacksivan in the Road to* Tauris.

From Tauris to Ispahan I met with nothing worthy observation. When I came to
the Court I was well received by the King, and I sold him as many Jewels and
other Goods of great value, as came to sixty-two thousand Crowns. But of this
more in another place.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE PERSIAN TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: CONTAINING The
AUTHOR'S Sixth and Last VOYAGE, And the ROADS Through TVRKY into PERSIA,
through the Northern Provinces of EVROPE.
With a Description of several Countries lying upon the Black, and Caspian SEAS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Authors sixth and last Voyage from his setting out of Paris, to his
Landing at Smyrna.
I Set out of Paris in the year 1663. for Lions, with six several Servants of
several professions, which I thought most proper for my business. I carried
with me the value of about four hundred thousand Livers, part in Jewels, part
in Goldsmiths work and other curiosities, which* I designed for the King of
Persia and the Great Mogul. Being at Lions I bought a Steel Mirror round and
hollow, about two foot and a half in Diameter, would immediately melt a
Half-Crown by the heat of the Sunbeams: and if you set a Candle by it in the
night, you might read two hundred Paces off in your Bed by the reflection.

From Lions I rode to Marseilles, and set Sail for Ligorn the tenth of January,
1664. in a small Bark, but being scared by a great Vessel that we saw off at
Sea, we came to an Anchor in the Port of Agaie, two Leagues from Frejus, where
there stood a pitiful Fort with two or three Houses. There we also went ashore
and saw a Garden, the Alleys of which were distinguished with rows of Citron
and Orange Trees, which looked as Green in the depth of Winter as in the midst
of Summer, with several other curiosities after the mode of Italy. We were no
sooner got aboard again, but we perceived another Vessel making into the same
Port with full Sail. It was a Vessel which the Masters of the Foreign Office at
Toulon, had set out to force all Ships that were bound into Italy to pay
certain Customs, which those of Marseilles would not pay when they came into
the Port of Toulon. Thereupon foreseeing that there would be mischief done. I
called for my little Chests that contained my Goods of greatest value, carrying
some part my self, and giving the rest to one of my most trusty Servants,
thinking to have skipt into a Genoa Bark that lay hard by us; but instead of
leaping a-board, I fell into the Sea: where by reason of the Tumult I had
perished without relief, had I not by good fortune laid hold of a Cable and
redeemed my self. At what time one of my Servants, luckily coming to my aid,
with much ado drew me up safe again.

Having escaped this danger, I got a-shoar with such of my Servants as I had
about me, and meeting with a Bark of Frontignan that carried Languedock-Wine to
the Coast of Italy, I hired him for Ligorn; and setting Sail, we first touched
Villafranca, and afterward at Monaco.

At Monaco I went a-shoar, and went to wait upon Madam the Princess, who showed
me the Rarities in the Castle; among the rest, several pieces of extraordinary
Painting, several pieces of Clock-work and Goldsmiths-work. But among all her
Curiosities she showed me two pieces of Crystal, about the bigness of two Fists
each, in one of which there was above a Glass full of Water, in the other a
good quantity of Moss; which were closed in by Nature when the Crystal first
congealed.

Monaco is a Castle situated upon a steep Rock, advancing out into the Sea;
which advantage, together with others which it receives from Art and Nature,
renders it one of the most considerable Forts in Italy.

The next day finding the Frontignan-Vessel to be deep-laden, and that it made
little way, I took a Faluke, and kept along by the Shore, which was most
pleasantly adorned with beautiful Villages and Houses, as far as Savona; where
I changed my Faluke, to complete the rest of the way which I had to Genoa. Half
the way we did very well, but the Wind rising, we were forced to put into a
great Town, where we landed; and from thence, having but nine Miles, I got in
good time by Horse to Genoa. There can be no Prospect certainly more pleasing
than that nine Miles riding. For on the one side you see nothing but a
continued Row of magnificent Buldings and lovely Gardens; on the other a calm
Shore, upon which the Waves seem not to beat, but lovingly to kiss.

Arriving at Genoa, I met with the rest of my Servants; and at the end of two
days I embarked for Ligorn, where we arrived in four and twenty hours.

From Ligorn I went to the Court of Florence, to wait upon the Grand Duke. By
whom I had the honor to be admitted into his Chamber, where I found no body
attending but one Mute, who had a long time served his Highness: and I observed
that they understood one another by Signs, as perfectly as if the Mute had had
his Speech and Hearing. So that when ever the Duke sent him into his Closet for
any Papers or other thing whatsoever, he never failed to bring the right.

After I had taken my leave of the Duke, he sent me a noble Present of Wine and
Fruits; but that which I valued more than all the rest, was a Case of
Medicaments and Counter-poysons, in the composition whereof the Italians are
very exquisite. And yet they did me no service; for when I came into the hot
Countries their fermentation was so strong, that all the Oils and Treacles
broke their several Boxes, that I could save nothing of that precious Present.

The next day, being the twenty-sixth of March 1664, I embarked with all my
Servants in a Dutch Vessel called The Justice.

The twenty-seventh we staid in the Road, expecting the rest of the Fleet,
consisting of eleven Ships, two Men of War, and nine Merchantmen; four of
which were bound for Smyrna, there for Ancona, and two for Venice. About seven
that evening we set Sail, and all that night the Wind was favorable, but blew
hard and veer'd often; which was the reason that two of our Fleet separated
from us, steering between the Isle of Elbe and Corsica, while we kept on
between the Isle of Elba and Italy.

The twenty-eighth by eight in the Morning we found our selves between Porto
Ferraro and Piombino, and it being fair Weather, we had a pleasant prospect of
those two places. From thence we steered between two Islands, the one called
Palmajola, the other being nameless. About six hours after we saw Portolongone,
afterward at a distance we descried Monte-Christo. An hour after Noon we
discovered Ca^tiglon-sere, all the rest of the day we coasted by the Islands of
Gigio and Sanuti.

The twenty-ninth, with the same Wind at North-West, by Morning we discovered
the Islands of Pontia and Parmerola, and about Evening those of Ventitione and
Ischia. Night approaching, and there being no news of the Ships we had lost,
instead of making the Pharo of Messina, it was resolved that we should steer a
Course round about Messina, where we expected to overtake them. At eleven a
Clock in the Evening we had but little Wind at North-North-West, so that we
made not above fourteen Leagues of way.

The thirty-first the same Wind continued, with a high Sea; but about nine at
Night the Wind chopping about to the West, we kept our former Course.

The first of April, by eight of the Clock in the Morning we discovered the
three Islands that lie before Trepano, Levanzo, Maretima, and F^vagna.

The second and third the Weather was ill, and the Wind unconstant, so that we
made but little way.

The fourth, by break of day we discovered the Island of Pantalarea.

The fifth by Morning we found our selves within a League and a half of the
Coast of Sicily, just against Cape Passaro, at what time, the Weather being
fair, we had a view of Mount Gibello, all covered with Snow. Doubling the Cape
in the Afternoon, we discovered the Coast of Saragossa. The sixth we had little
or no Wind. But the seventh in the Morning, the Weather being fair, we
discovered Cape Spartivento; and the same Wind continuing all that day, toward
Evening we sailed in view of other Islands of Calabria.

The eighth we found our selves near to Cape Borsano, and all the rest of the
day we sailed in view of Cape Stillo and Cape delle Colonne.

The ninth we made little way. But on the Tenth in the Morning the Wind coming
about to the South, we found our selves at the entry of the Gulf of Venice,
between Cape St. Mary and the Coast of Greece, where the Mountains were covered
with Snow. About ten of the Clock we tacked to our own Course, while the Ships
that were bound for Venice and Ancona entered the Gulf.

The tenth by Morning we saw two little Islands, the one called Fauno, the
other Merlera, and were in sight of Corfu. About Noon, the Wind being at East,
we kept out at Sea: and about Evening abundance of little Birds lighted upon
our Cordage, of which we caught enough to make a lusty Fricasie. We also caught
four Falcons, Owls, and good store of Turtles.

The eleventh and twelfth the Wind being at East, we lay hovering about the
Shore, without making any way.

The fourteenth and fifteenth having the Wind at North-West, we were two days
without seeing Land, yet we caught good store of Birds.

The sixteenth the same Wind continuing, we found our selves near the Island of
Zant. From eight in the Morning 'till three in the Afternoon we were becalmed;
but then a good brisk West Wind carried away all our little Birds.

The seventeenth and eighteenth we were becalmed.

The nineteenth in the Morning, the Wind being at North-West, we discovered
Cape Gullo, between Modon and Coron, in the Morea.

The twentieth, with the same Wind that blew fresh, we found our selves by
Morning within two Cannon-shot of Cape Matapan, which is the most Southern Cape
of all Europe. About Noon the Wind coming full West, in three hours we passed
by the Point of the Island Cerigo.

The twenty-first in the Morning, we discovered the Islands of Caravi and
Falconera on the one side, and Cape Schilli on the other hand. Two hours after,
having a fresh Gale at South-West, about Evening we were in view of the Island
of St. George.

The twenty-second though the Wind slackn'd, yet we made some way; for in the
Morning we found our selves between the Island of Zea and the Morea, near to
another Cape delle Colonne: afterward we discovered the Island of Negropont,
and doubled the Cape three hours after Noon, having left sight of the Island of
Andros by ten in the Forenoon.

The twenty-third the Wind blowing fresh all the night, by morning we found our
selves near the Island of Ipsera. At noon we made the Point of the Island of
Chio, near to the Land; and that night we came to an Anchor near the Castle,
being becalmed.

The twenty-fourth the Wind rose at North-West, which blew us into the Port of
Smyrna.

The twenty-fifth we went a-shoar, having had a quiet as passage as ever I had
in my Life for twenty days together.

CHAP. II.
A Continuation of the Author's sixth Voyage, as he traveled from Smyrna to
Ispahan.
WE staid at Smyrna from the twenty-fifth of April to the ninth of June; during
which time there happ'nd so terrible an Earthquake; that I had like to have
tumbled out of my Bed.

The Caravan being ready to set out for Tauris, I took with me three Armenian
Servants, besides those that I carried out of France to serve me upon the Road.

We set out of Smyrna upon Monday the ninth of June at three a Clock in the
afternoon. The Caravan rendevouz'd at Pont-garbashi, three Leagues from the
City, consisting of six hundred Camels, and almost the same number of Horse. We
set out the next night, two hours after midnight. As for the Road I shall say
nothing, only relate some Passages that fell out by the way.

Being come to Erivan, the fourteenth of September we encamped in a pleasant
green place between the Castle and the old Town; for we would not lie in the
Inn, because we heard that several sick people lodged there. We staid there two
days; during which time I resolved to wait upon the Kan, I found him in a Room
made in one of the Arches of the Bridge which is built over the River, which I
have described already, with several Captains and Officers about him: when he
had asked me whence I came, and whither I was traveling, he caused a Glass of
Liquor to be filled me. After that I presented him with a Prospective-Glass,
six pair of ordinary Spectacles, twelve other pair of Spectacles that cast
several Reflections, two little Pistols, and a Steel to strike Fire, made like a
Pistol. All which pleased him extremely well, especially the Spectacles, for he
was sixty years of age. Thereupon he commanded a Lamb, Wine, Fruit, and Melons
to be carried to my Tent, and that I should want nothing. After that we sat
down to Dinner, but I observed the Kan himself drank no Wine, though he pressed
me to it. The reason was, because he was an Agi^, that is, one that had made
his Pilgrimage to Mecca; for then it is not lawful to drink Wine, or any other
inebriating Drink. After Dinner, finding him in a pleasant humor, I resolved
to complain to him of one of the Custom-Officers about an injury he had done
me. For it is usual with the Customer in this place to open the Chests of all
the Merchants, both Turks and Armenians, to the end that if they have any thing
of Rarity the Kan of Erivan may see it: for many times, he buys what pleases
him best to send to the King. This Officer would not excuse me for his Custom,
and therefore at my very first arrival he would have me to open my Chests; and
because I did not do it according to his Orders, he asked me very rudely why I
had not obeyed his Commands: I answered him as surlily, that I would open my
Chest no where unless it were in the presence of the King, and that as for him,
I knew him not: Upon that he threatened me, that if he did not find my Chests
open the next day, he would open them by force; thereupon I said no more, but
bid him have a care I did not make him repent of what he had done already. This
was the ground of the Quarrel, and I was about to have complained to the Kan;
but his Nephew entreated me for the love I bare him, not to say any thing of
it, and promised to send the Customer to me to beg my Pardon, which he did, and
the Customer was forced to crave it heartily. To avoid the same inconvenience
for the future, I desired the Kan to give me his Pasport, to the end I might
pass Customfree through the Territories of his Government, which he freely and
courteously granted me: Come, said he, and dine with me to morrow, and you
shall have it.

The twenty-sixth of September we departed from Erivan, and the ninth of
November we came to Tauris, taking the ordinary Road.

At Erivan two of my Servants, the one a Watch-maker, the other a Goldsmiths,
died; I left them sick there, but caused them to be buried in the Churchyard
belonging to the Armenians. One of them died in fifteen days, of a Gangrene,
which eat out his Mouth and Throat; being the Disease of the Country. Though
had the Armenians known that one of them had been a Protestant, they would
never have allowed him to have been buried in their Churchyard.

Here observe the exact Justice, wherewith the Persians preserve the Goods of
Strangers. For the Civil Judge hearing of the death of the Watch-maker, caused
his Chamber to be sealed up to the end the Goods might be preserved for the
kindred of the deceased, if they came to demand them. I returned to Tauris a
twelvemonth after, and found the Chamber close sealed up.

We staid twelve days at Tauris: during which time I resolved to attend the Kan
of Shamaqui, a frontier Town of Persia toward the Caspian Sea; but I found him
not there, in regard it was Harvest season, at what time he goes to gather the
King's and his own Duties.

Two days journey on this side Shamaqui you pass the Aras, and for two days
journey you travel through a Country all planted with white Mulberry-Trees; the
Inhabitants being all Silk-Weavers. Before you come to the City, you must cross
over several Hills: But I think I should rather have called it a great Town,
where there was nothing remarkable but a fair Castle which the Kan built
himself, I speak of the time past: For as I returned from this present Voyage
of which I now write, when I came to Tauris I understood, that there had
happened such a terrible Earthquake in the Town as had laid all the Houses in a
heap; none escaping that dismal subversion, but only one Watch-maker of Geneva,
and one more who was a Cameldriver. I had several times designed to return into
France through Muscovy; but I durst never adventure, being certainly informed
that the Muscovite never permitted any person to go out of Muscovy into Persia,
nor to come out of Persia into Muscovy. So that it was by particular connivence
that that favor was granted to the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors. This last
time I was resolved to have tried whether I could have opened a Passage from
Persia through Muscovy into France, but the Ruin of Shamaqui deterred me.

We departed from Tauris the twenty-second of November, from whence to Cashan
we met with nothing considerable, but only one of the Muscovite Ambassadors
upon his return into his own Country, with a small Retinue of sixty, his
Companion dying at Ispahan.

Upon Sunday the fourteenth of December taking Horse by three of the Clock in
the morning, the Ice bearing very well, we came to Ispahan about noon: but in
regard it was slippery before day, and very plashy after the Sun was up, the
Journey was both tedious and troublesome.

CHAP. III.
The Road from Aleppo to Tauris through Diarbequir and Van.
THere are two Roads more remaining to be described; one through the North part
of Turkey, the other through the South. The first through Diarbequir and Van,
and so to Tauris; the second through Anna, and the small Desert leading to
Bagdat.

I will describe the first of these Roads, and make a skip at the first leap to
Bir, whither I have already led you in the Road from Aleppo.

From Bir or Beri, you travel all along the River Euphrates to Cacheme.

From Cacheme you come to Milesara, where you pay the Customs of Ourfa, when
you do not pass through the City, which amounts to four Piasters for every
Horse-load.

From Milesara you come to the River Arzlan-chaye, or, the Lion River, by
reason of the rapidity of the Stream which falls into Euphrates.

From Arzlan-chaye you go to Seuerak. This is a City, watered by a River, that
also falls into Euphrates. It is environed with a great Plain to the North, the
West, and South. The way which the Horses, Mules, and Camels keep is cut
through the Rock like a Channel, two Foot deep, where you must also pay half a
Piaster for every Horse-load.

From Seuerak you come to Bogazi, where there are two Wells, but not a House
near; and where the Caravan usually lodges.

From Bogazi you come to Deguirman-Bogazi, and from Deguirman-Bogazi to
Mirzatapa, where there is only an Inn.

From Mirzatapa you come to Diarbequir, which the Turks call Car-emu.

Diarbequir is a City situated upon a rising ground, on the right side of
Tigris, which in that place forms a Half Moon; the descent from the Walls to
the River being very steep. It is encompassed with a double Wall; the outward
Wall being strengthened with sixty-two Towers, which they report were built in
Honor of the sixty two Disciples of JESUS CHRIST. The City has but three
Gates, over one of which there is an Inscription in Greek and Latin, that makes
mention of one Constantine. There are in it two or three fair Piazza's, and a
magnificent Mosquee, which was formerly a Christian Church. It is surrounded
with very decent Charnel-houses, near to which the Moullah's, Dervi's,
Booksellers and Stationers do live, together with all those other people that
concern the Law. About a League from the City there is a Channel cut out of
Tigris, that brings the Water to the City: And in this Water are all the red
Marroquins washed that are made at Diarbequir, surpassing in color all others
in the East: which Manufacture employs a fourth part of the Inhabitants of the
City. The Soil is very good, and yields according to expectation; there is
excellent Bread and very good Wine, nor is there any better Provision to be had
in any part of Persia: more especially, there is a sort of Pigeons which in
goodness excel all the several kinds that we have in Europe. The City is very
well peopled, and it is thought there are in it above twenty thousand
Christians. The two thirds are Armenians, the rest Nestorians, with some few
Jacobites. There are also some few Capuchins, that have no House of their own,
but are forced to lodge in an Inn.

The Basha of Diarbequir is one of the Viziers of the Empire. He has but an
inconsiderable Infantry, which is not much requisite in that Country; the Curds
and Arabs which infest that Country being all Horsemen. But he is strong in
Cavalry, being able to bring above twenty thousand Horse into the Field. A
quarter of an hours riding on this side Diarbequir there is a great Town with a
large Inn, where the Caravans that go and come from Persia rather choose to lie
than at Diarbequir; in regard that in the City-Inns, they pay three or four
Piasters for every Chamber, but in the Country-Inns there is nothing demanded.

At Diarbequir, you cross the Tigris, which is always fordable unless when the
Snow and Rains have swelled it; for then you must go a quarter of a League
higher, and cross it over a great Stone Bridge. Half a League on the other side
of Tigris stands a Village, with an Inn, which is the Rendevous of the whole
Caravan, and where they that first come have time enough to provide themselves
for a Journey of nine or ten days, as far as Betlis. For though you may find
Towns and Inns thick enough upon the Road, yet there is no good Bread to be met
with.

When the Caravan proceeds, the first days journey is fourteen hours on
Horseback, and you come to lie at Shaye-batman, where you must pay a Piaster
for every Horse-load.

From Chaye-batman you come to Chikaran.

From Chikaran to Azou, which you leave half a League from the great Road,
where the Toll-gatherers take their Toll, which is four Piasters upon every
Horse-load.

From Azou you come to Ziarat; from Ziarat to Zerque, where you pay a Duty of
two Piasters for every Horse-load.

From Zerche to Cochakan.

From Cochakan, to Carakan, a bad Inn; where you enter among the Mountains,
that being full of Torrents reach as far as Btelis.

From Carakan to Betlis, a City belonging to a Bey or Prince of the Country,
the most potent and most considerable of all the rest for he neither
acknowledges the Grand Signor nor the Persian: whereas all the other Beys are
Tributary either to the one or the other. And it is the Interest of those two
Potentates to correspond with him; for it is an easy thing for him to stop up
the passage from Aleppo to Tauris, or from Tauris to Aleppo; the Streights of
the Mountains being so narrow, that ten Men may defend them against a thousand.
Coming near Betlis you must travel a whole day among high steep Mountains, that
reach two miles beyond, with Torrents on each side; the way being cut out of
the Rock on each side, where there is but just room for a Camel to pass. The
City stands between two high Mountains, equally distant one from the other, and
about the height of Montmartre. It is built like a Sugar Loaf, the ascent being
so steep on every side, that there is no getting to the top, but by wheeling
and winding about the Mountain. The top of all is a Platform, where stands a
Castle well built, at the Gate whereof is a Drawbridge. Then you pass through
two great Courts, and then into a third, opposite to the Bey's Apartment. It is
very troublesome to get up to the top of the Castle, and a Man must be very well
Horsed that does it. There is no other person but the Bey and his Esquire, who
is permitted to ride up on Horse back. There is one Inn within the City, and
another as it were without, in which the Merchants rather choose to lie than in
the other, by reason that it is ready to be overflown when the Torrents swell,
that run throngh every Street. The Bey, beside the strength of his Passes, is
able to bring above five and twenty thousand Horse into the Field; and a very
considerable Body of Foot, composed of the Shepherds of the Country, who are to
be ready at a Call. I went to wait upon the Bey himself, and made him a Present
of two pieces of Satin, the one streakt with Silver, and the other with Gold:
two white Bonnets, such as the Turks wear, very fine, and adorned with Silver
at the top; together with a suit of Handkerchiffs, streaked with Red and
Silver. While I staid with the Bey, who sent for Coffee for me according to the
custom, a Courier came to him from the Basha of Aleppo, to desire him that he
would deliver up into his hands a French Surgeon that was his Slave, having
been taken in Candia; complaining withal, that he had run away from him with
the value of three thousand Crowns. The Bey, who understood what belonged to a
Sanctuary, and was resolved to protect the Frenchman, schooled the Messenger
so severely, that he threatened to put him to death if he did not get him gone
presently; charging him to tell his Master withal, that he would complain to
the Grand Signor of his insolence; and that if he were strangled, he might
thank himself. And indeed it behooved the Great Turk to keep fair correspondence
with him; in regard that if the Persians should at any time besiege Van, the
Grand Signor must march through the Bey's Country to relieve it; who has Forces
enough to oppose him if he should be his Enemy.

But to travel through the Country of the Curds is very pleasant: for if on the
one side the ways are bad, and difficult to be traveled, in other places you
have a prospect of several sorts of Trees, as Oaks and Walnuts, and not a Tree
which is not embraced with a wild Vine. Below the Mountains, in the Level,
grows the best Wheat and Bailey in all the Country.

From Betlis, where you pay five Piasters for every Horse-load, to Taduan,
where you pay two.

Taduan is a great Town within a Cannon-shot of the Lake of Van, in such a
port, where Nature has made a Hav'n, sheltered from all the Winds; being closed
on all sides with high Mountains, the entry into which though it seem narrow,
is very free. It is able to contain twenty or thirty great Barks; and when it
is fair Weather, and that the Wind serves, the Merchants generally Ship off
their Goods from thence to Van: from whence it is but four and twenty hours
sail, and a very good passage; whereas by Land from Taduan to Van it is eight
days journey on Horseback. Returning back, you mayalso take Water at Van for
Taduan.

From Taduan to Karmoushe.

From Karmoushe to Kellat.

From Kellat to Algiaoux, a small City, where you pay one Piaster for every
Load.

From Agiaoux to Spanktiere.

From Spanktiere to Souer.

From Souer to Argiche.

From Argiche to Quiarakierpou.

From Quiarakierpou to Perkeri.

From Perkeri to Zuarzazin.

From Zuarzazin to Souserat.

From Souserat to Devan, where two Piasters are gathered for every Horse-load,
or else you must pay at Van.

From Devan to Van, where there is a Duty of two Tomans and four Abassis to be
paid for every Horse-load. For though Van be in the Territories of the Grand
Signor, yet the Persian Money is better liked than his own Coin.

Van is a great City upon the side of a wide Lake of the same name. There is a
good Fortress belongs to it, that is seated upon the top of a high Mountain
which stands by it self. There is but one sort of Fish in the Lake, a little
bigger than a Pilchard, of which they take great store in the Month of April.
For about a League from the Lake there is a great River that is called
Bendmahi, which descending from the Mountains of Armenia, empties it self into
the Lake. Now in March when the Snow melts and swells the River, vast numbers
of these Fish come down the River into the Lake; which the Fishermen
observing, so stop up the Mouth of the River that the Fish cannot go back; for
else they would not stay above forty days; at which time they catch 'em up in
wide-mouthed Baskets at the Mouth of the River, thinking to return; it being
lawful for any man to fish. The people drive a great Trade in these Fish,
transporting them into Persia and Armenia; for, the Persians and Armenians
both, drinking Wine at the end of their Feasts, they then bring this Dish to
the Table for a Relishing-bit. The people of Van tell a Story, how that there
was a certain rich Merchant who farmed the whole Fishery, paying a good sum of
Money for it to the Basha; who thereupon strictly forbad any to fish but the
Merchant; whereas before it was free for any man. But when the Fishing-season
came, and that the Merchant thought to have caught his Fish, he met with
nothing but Serpents. So that after that time the Fishery was never more
farmed. And there sems to be something in it; for the Basha's, who are a sort
of people that will lose nothing they can get, would be certain to farm the
Fish again and again, were there not some strange reason to hinder it. There
are two principal Islands in the Lake of Van; the one called Adaketons, where
there stand two Covents of the Armenians, Sourphague and Sourp*kara: the other
Island is called Limadasi, and the name of the Covent is Limquiliasi, all which
Armenian Monks live very austerely.

From Van to Darcheck.

From Darcheck to Nuchar; it stands in the Territories of a Bey of Curdistan,
being a paltry Village consisting of two or three little Houses. These Bey's
are a kind of particular Lords, upon the Frontiers of both the Empires of
Turkey and Persia, who care for neither: for they lie so secure among the
Mountains, that there is no assaulting them by force. The Curds in general are
a brutish sort of people; who though they style themselves Mahometans, have
very few Moullah's to Instruct or teach them. They have a particular veneration
for black Greyhounds: so that if any person should be seen to kill one of
them, he would be knocked of the Head immediately. Neither does any one dare to
cut an Onion with a Knife in their presence; but it must be squeezed between
two Stones by him that intends to make use of it; so ridiculously superstitious
they are.

The Bey to whom Nuchar belongs has his Toll-gatherers in that place, who exact
sixteen Abassi's for every Horse-load, besides a Present which the
Caravan-Bashi is obliged to present him, which comes sometimes to seven or
eight Tomans: sometimes more: for otherwise the Bey would be sure to watch the
Caravan at some scurvy place, and plunder it to some purpose. As once it
happened to a Caravan, with which my Nephew went along in the year 1672; though
he had the good luck to lose nothing more than one Camel laden with English
Cloth, and another with his Provision. The Basha of Van and the Kan of Tauris
took the Field with an intention to remedy these disorders: especially the
Basha of Van, who perceiving that the Merchants would forsake that Road by
reason of the Injuries they daily received, was resolved to make the Basha
restore some part of his Goods which he had taken from the Merchants; and for
the future to leave two of his Subjects in Tauris, and two in Van, that should
be responsible for what mischief should be done to the Caravan. For otherwise
the Merchants like this way best, as being the nearest from Aleppo to Tauris,
and where they pay less Duties.

From Nuchar to Kuticlar, is a long Journey through the Mountains, by the side
of several Torrents, which are to be crossed in several places. This bad way
brings Fifty in the Hundred profit to the Bey of Nuchar; for were the Caravan to
travel through Plains, or a level Country, one Horse or Camel would carry as
much as two or three, and the Merchant would pay Custom for no more. Here
therefore the Caravan-Bashi and the Merchants must understand one another, and
agree as cunningly as they can together.

From Kuticlar to Kalvat.

From Kalvat to Kogia.

From Kogia to Darkavin.

From Darkavin to Soliman-Sera: all which four places are very convenient Inns.

From Soliman-Sera to Kours: in that City resides a Bey, who is tributary to
the King of Persia. He lives in an ancient Castle about half a League-off,
where the Caravan pays nine Abassi's for every Horse-load, besides a Present.
But that Present consists only in Sugar-loaves, Boxes of Treacle, or Marmaled;
for he stands so much upon his Honor, that he scorns to take Money. The Wine
of Kours is sweet and tart.

From Kours to Devogli.

From Devogli to Checheme. About half way between these two places you cross a
Plain, which upon the South extends it self a League to the Mountains, but upon
the North-side enlarges it self out of sight. Upon the Highway, on the left
hand stands a Rock three hundred Paces in compass, and about fourscore Foot
high; round about it were to be seen several Dens, which most certainly had
been the Habitations of those that fed their Cattle thereabouts. Under the
Rock, which is hollow, appears a Fountain of clear cold Water, wherein there
was great store of Fish; thousands of which would come up to the top of the
Water, when a man threw any Bread into it. The Fish had a great Head, and a
large Mustache. I shot a Carbine into the River charged with Hail-shot, upon
which they all disappeared, but presently five or six returned wounded to the
top of the Water, which we easily took. The Armenians laughed at me for
shooting, believing it had been impossible to catch them in that manner; but
they admired when they beheld them again turning up their bellies at the top of
the Water. The Turks and some of the Armenians would not eat of them, believing
them to be defiled: but the Armenians that had been in Europe laughed at their
Superstition, and fell to, when they were dressed.

From Checheme to Davashiler.

From Davashiler to Marand; a City where you must pay sixteen Abassi's for a
Camel's-load, and eight for a Horses.

From Merand to Sefian.

From Sefian to Tauris. These are the two biggest days journies throughout the
Road.

Returning out of Persia this way, we could not get Bread for Money, so that we
were forced to give the Women some Trifles which they loved better. Through the
People are Mahometans, yet they will not spare to drink lustily.

CHAP. IV.
Another Road from Aleppo to Tauris, through Gezire and other places.
FRom Aleppo to Bir or Beri, where you must cross Euphrates, days 4 From Bir to
Ourfa, days 2 From Ourfa to Diarbequir, days 6 From Diarbequir to Gezire, days
4 Gezire is a little City of Mesopotamia, built upon an Island in the River
Tigris; which is there to be crossed over a fair Bridge of Boats. Here the
Merchants meet to buy Gall-nuts and Tobacco. The City is under the Jurisdiction
of a Bey. Having past the Tigris, all the Country between that and Tauris is
almost equally divided between Hills and Plains; the Hills are covered with
Oaks that bear Galls, and some Acorns withal. The Plains are planted with
Tobacco, which is transported into Turkey, for which they have a very great
Trade. One would think the Country were poor, seeing nothing but Galls and
Tobacco; but there is no Country in the World where there is more Gold or
Silver laid out, and where they are more nice in taking Money that is in the
least defective either in weight or goodness of Metal. For Galls being a
general Commodity for Dying, and no where to be found so good as there, bring a
vast Trade to the Country; wherein there are no Villages, yet it is overspread
with Houses a Musket Shot one from another; and every Inhabitant has his
quarter of his Vineyard by himself, where they dry their Grapes: for they make
no Wine. From Gezire to Amadie, days 2 Amadie is a good City, to which the
Natives of a great part of Assyria bring their Tobacco, and Gall-nuts. It is
seated upon a high Mountain, to the top whereof you cannot get in less than an
hour. Toward the middle of the Rock three or four large Springs fall down from
the Cliffs, where the Inhabitants are forced to water their Cattle and fill
their Borachio's every morning, there being no Water in the City. It is of an
indifferent bigness, and in the middle is a large Piazza, where all sorts of
Merchants keep their Shops. It is under the Command of a Bey that is able to
raise eight or ten thousand Horse, and more Foot than any other of the Beys, by
reason his Country is so populous. From Amadie to Giousmark, days 4 From
Giousmark to Alback, days 3 From Alback to Salmastre, days 3 Salmastre is a
pleasant City upon the Frontiers of the Assyrians and Medes, and the first on
that side in the Territories of the Persian King. The Caravan never lies there,
because it would be above a League out of the way: but when the Caravan is
lodged, two or three of the principal Merchants with the Caravan-Bashi
according to custom go to wait upon the Kan. The Kan is so glad that the
Caravan takes that Road, that he presents the Caravan-Bashi and those that go
with him, with the Garment of Honor, or the Calaat, the Bonnet, and Girdle;
which is the greatest Honor that the King or his Governor can do to
Strangers. From Salamastre to Tauris, days. 4

In all thirty-two days journey this way from Aleppo to Tauris. But though this
be the shortest cut, and where they pay least Customs, yet the Merchants dare
hardly venture for fear of being ill used by the Beys.

Teren, whose Capital City the Persians call Cherijar, is a Province between
Mazandran and the ancient Region of the Persians known at this day by the name
of Hierac, to the South-East of Ispahan. It Is one of the most temperate
Countries, that has nothing in it of the contagious Air of Guilan, where the
King goes for the purity of the Air, and for his sport of Hunting; besides,
that it produces excellent Fruits in many places. The Capital City whereof,
which some call by the name of the Province, is of a moderate compass, but
there is nothing worthy observation in it: only a League from it are to be seen
the Ruins of a great City, which had been two Leagues in Circuit. There were
abundance of Towers all of burnt Brick, and Pieces of the Wall standing. There
were also several Letters in the Stones which were cemented into the Walls; but
neither Turks, Persians, nor Arabians could understand them. The City is round
seated upon a high Hill, at the top whereof stood the Ruins of a Castle, which
the Natives say was the Residence of the Kings of Persia.

CHAP. V.
The Road from Aleppo to Ispahan through the small Desert, and through Kengavar.
I Will describe this Road as if I were to return from Ispahan to Aleppo. This
Road lies through Kengavar, Bagdat, and Anna, where you enter into the Desert,
which I call The little Desert, because you get over it in far less time than
the great Desert that extends Southwards to Arabia the Happy, and where you may
often find Water, all the whole Journey being not far distant from the River
Euphrates. A man that is well mounted may ride this way from Ispahan to Aleppo
in three and thirty day, as I have done, and perhaps in less, if the Arabian,
whom you take for your guide at Bagdat, knows the shortest cut through the
Wilderness.

The Horse Caravans traveling from Ispahan to Kengaver are fourteen or fifteen
days upon the Road; but being well mounted ten or twelve in a Company, you may
Ride it in five or six days. The Country through which you travel, is very
fertile in Corn and Rice, it produces also excellent Fruits and good Wine,
especially about Kengavar, which is a large Town well peopled.

From Kengavar to Bagdat I was ten days upon the Road. The Country is not so
fertile but very stony in some parts. And it consists in Plains and small
Hills, there being not a Mountain in all the Road.

Now for a man that travels quick, the Road lies thus:

From Ispahan to Consar.

From Consar to Comba.

From Comba to Oranguie.

From Oranguie to Nahouand.

From Nahouand to Kengavar.

From Kengavar to Sahana.

From Sahana to Polisha, or the Bridge-Royal, being a great Stone Bridge.

From Polisha to Maidacht.

From Maidacht to Erounabad.

From Erounabad to Conaguy.

From Conaguy to Caslisciren.

From Caslisciren to Iengui-Conaguy.

From Iengui-Conaguy to Casered.

From Casered to Charaban.

From Charaban to Bourous.

From Bourous to Bagdat.

There are some, who instead of passing through Kengavar, take Amadan, one of
the most considerable Cities of Persia in their way, and so from thence to
Touchere; but the way is longer; and according to the Road which I have set
down you are to leave Amadan to the North upon the right hand.

Between Sahana and Polisha you leave the only high Mountain in all the Road to
the North. It is as steep and as straight as a Wall, and as high as you can
see; you may observe the Figures of men clad like Priests, with Surplices and
Censors in their hands, and yet neither can the Natives tell you, nor any
person imagine the meaning of those Sculptures. At the foot of the Rock runs a
River, over which there is Bridge of Stone.

About a days journey beyond the Mountain you meet with a little City, whose
situation, the Streams that water it, the good Fruits that grow there, and
particularly the excellent Wine which it affords, render a most pleasant
Mansion. The Persians believe that Alexander when he returned from Babylon died
in this place, whatever others have writt'n that he died at Babylon. All the
rest of the Country from this City to Bagdat is a Country of Dates, where the
people live in little Hutts, made of the Branches of Palm Trees.

From Bagdat to Anna you ride in four days, through a desert Country, though it
lie between two Rivers.

Anna is a City of an indifferent bigness, that belongs to an Arabian Emir. For
about half a League round about the Town, the Lands are very well manured,
being full of Gardens and Country-houses. The City for its situation resembles
Paris; for it is built upon both sides of the River Euphrates; and in the midst
of the River is an Island, where stands a fair Mosquee.

From Anna to Mached-raba is five days riding, and from Mached-raba to Taiba,
five days more.

Mached-raba is a kind of a Fortress upon the point of a Hill, at the Foot
whereof springs a Fountain like a large Vase, which is very rare in the
Deserts. The place is encompassed with high Walls, defended by certain Towers,
and in which are little Hutts where the Inhabitants keep their Cattle, of which
there is great store, but more Mares and Horses than Cows.

Taiba is also a fortified place in a level Country, or a high Bank of Earth
and Brick baked in the Sun. Near to the Gate a Fountain springs out of the
Earth, and makes a kind of a Pond. This Road is most frequented by those that
travel through the Desert from Aleppo or Damas to Babylon, or from Damas to
Diarbequir, by reason of this Fountain.

From Taiba to Aleppo is but three days journey; but these three days are the
most dangerous of all the Road for Robbers, in regard that all the Country is
inhabited only by the Bedouins, or Arabian Shepherds, who make it their
business only to plunder and steal.

Now to take the same Road from Aleppo to Isaphan, it lies thus: From Aleppo to
Taiba, days 3 From Taiba to Mached-raba, days 5 From Mached-raba to Anna, days
5 From Anna to Bagdat, days 4 From Bagdat to Bourous, days 1 From Bourous to
Charaban, days 1 From Charaban to Casered, days 1 From Casered to Conaguy, days
1 From Conaguy to Cassiscerin, days 1 From Cassiscerin to another Conaguy, days
1 From Conaguy to Erounabad, days 1 From Erounabad to Maidacht days 1 From
Maidacht to Sahana, days 1 From Sahana to Kengavar, days 1 From Kengavar to
Nahouand, days 1 From Nahouand to Oranguie, days 1 From Oranguie to Comba, days
1 From Comba to Consar, days 1 From Consar to Ispahan, days 1

So that whether you travel from Aleppo to Ispahan, or from Ispahan to Aleppo
you may easily ride it in thirty days.

From whence I make this Observation, That a man making it but two days more
from Alexandretta, and finding a Ship ready there to set sail for Marseilles,
with a fair Wind he may travel from Ispahan to Paris in two months.

Another time, having an occasion to go from Aleppo to Kengavar, and so to
Bagdat; and from thence, so through the Desert; at Bagdat I met with a Spaniard
that was traveling the same way, with whom I luckily met to bear half the
Charges of the Guide; which as soon as we had hired for sixty Crowns, we set
forward from Bagdat; the Spaniard, and I, and our Arabian, who was afoot,
walked about a Pistol Shot before our Horses. From thence to Anna we met with
nothing remarkable, but only that we saw a Lion and a Lyoness in the Act of
Generation: Whereupon our Guide, believing we had been afraid, told us, that he
had met them oft'n, but that he never found them do any harm.

The Spaniard according to the humor of his Nation, was very reserved, and
contenting himself with an Onion, or some such small matter at meals, never
made much of his guide; whereas I was mightily in his favor, in regard there
was never a day passed wherein he did not receive of me some good business or
other. We were not above a Musket Shot from Anna when we met with a comely old
man, who came up to me, and taking my Horse by the Bridle; Friend, said he,
come and wash thy feat and eat Bread at my House. Thou art a Stranger, and
since I have met thee upon the Road, never refuse me the favor which I desire
of thee. The Invitation of the old man was so like the custom of the people in
ancient times, of which we read so many Examples in Scripture, that we could
not choose but go along with him to his House, where he Feasted us in the best
manner he could, giving us over and above Barley for our Horses; and for us he
killed a Lamb and some Hens. He was an Inhabitant of Anna, and lived by the
River, which we were obliged to cross to wait upon the Governor for our
Passports, for which we paid two Piasters apiece. We staid at a House near the
Gate of the City to buy Provisions for our selves and our Horses; where the
woman of the House having a lovely sprightly Child of nine years of age, I was
so taken with her humor, that I gave her two Handkerchiefs of Painted Calicut,
which the Child showing her Mother, all we could do could not make her take any
Money for the Provisions we had agreed for.

Five hundred paces from the Gate of the City, we met a young man of a good
Family, for he was attended by two Servants, and rode upon an Ass, the hinder
part of which was Painted red. He accosted me in particular, and after some
Compliments that passed, Is it possible, said he, that I should meet a
Stranger, and have nothing to present him withal? He would fain have carried us
to a House in the Country whither he was going; but seeing we were resolved to
keep our way, he would needs give me his Pipe, notwithstanding all the excuses
I could make, and though I told him that I never took any Tobacco; so that I
was constrained to accept of it.

About three Leagues from Anna, we were going to eat among the Ruins of
certain Houses, and had thought to have lain there 'till midnight, when we
perceived two Arabians sent by the Emir, to tell us that he had some Letters
which he would put into our own hands to the Basha of Aleppo, to which purpose
he had order to bring us back. There was no refusing, so that at our coming
into the City the next day we saw the Emir going to the Mosquee, mounted upon a
stately Horse, and attended by a great number of people afoot, with every one a
great Poniard stuck in their Girdles. As soon as we saw him we alighted, and
standing up by the Houses, we saluted him as he passed by. Seeing our Guide,
and threatening to rip up is Belly; Ye Dog, said he, I will give ye your reward,
and teach ye to carry Strangers away before I see them. Carry them, said he, to
the Governors House 'till I return from the Mosquee. Returning from the
Mosquee, and being seated in a spacious Hall, he sent for us and our Guide,
whom he threatened again for carrying us out of the Town without giving him
notice. But the Governor pleaded his excuse, and appeased the Emir. After that
he sent for Coffee for us, and then caused us to open the Budget that we
carried behind our Horses, to see whether there were any thing that pleased him
or no. In my Budget were two pieces of Calicut exquisitely painted, for two
Coverlets of a Bed; two pieces of Handkerchief of Calicut; two Persian
Standishes beautified with Japon Varnish; two Damascene Blades, one inlaid with
Gold, the other with Silver. All which he liked, and made me give him. In the
Spaniards Budget he found nothing but a few old Clothes: But afterward being
known to have had some Diamonds about him, the French Consul at Aleppo
sentenced him to pay me half the charges of what I gave the Emir.

The Prince satisfied with what he had taken, gave order that we should be
furnished with all necessary Provisions for our selves and our Horses: but
being provided before, we only took three or four handfuls of excellent Dates,
to show that we did not flight his kindness.

Between Anna and Mached-raba is the Guide to take special care so to order his
Stages, as to come every morning to the Wells by break of day, for fear of
meeting the Arabs, that come to fetch Water there by that time the Sun is up,
who are apt enough to be injurious to Travelers.

At Mached-raba I saw one of the most beautiful Virgins that ever I beheld in
my life.* For I had given a Piaster to an Arab to get me some Bread, and going
to see whether it were baked, I found the Virgin putting it into the Oven, who
being alone, made me a sign to retire. There I also saw a Colt of that
wonderful shape, that the Basha of Damas had offered three thousand Crowns for
it.

Coming to Taiba, we did not go into the Town, but lay without under the Walls.
Only our Arab went in and brought us chopped Straw for our Camels. The Governor
of the Town came along with him, and demanded twenty Piasters of every one, for
certain Duties which he pretended payable to him. We knew there were but four
due, and refused to pay any more; but the Arab having a mind to put a trick
upon the Spaniard, gave me a wink, intimating to me that I should not trouble
my self: Thereupon the Governor incensed goes back to the Town, and by and by
returns with an Iron Chain; and had certainly carried the Spaniard fettered to
the Fort, had he not laid down the twenty Piasters. For my part, I was
discharged for my four Piasters, according to custom.

Drawing near to Aleppo, the first Houses that we came at bordering upon the
Desert were the Houses of the Arabs and Bedouins; the second of which being the
Habitation of a Friend of our Guide's, I delivered my Horse to the Guide, to
whom I had sold it before at his own earnest request; for I was resolved to go
a-foot to Aleppo: and therefore that I might save the Custom of a parcel of
Turquoises that I had about me, I put them in the Pouches which I carried
behind my Horse, and threw the Pouches into a little Chest, as if they had been
things of no consequence; and desired the Man of the House to keep them a day
or two. The Arab told me, that were it all Gold it should be safe; and indeed
when I sent for them within a day or two after, I found nothing missing.

When I came to Aleppo, the English Consul asked me what news from Ispahan: I
made answer, that he must of necessity know better than I, in regard the
English President there had sent away an Express to him while I was there; and
that he went away with two Capuchins and an Arabian Guide. There upon the
Consul mistrusting some mischief was befal'n them, requested the Basha to lend
him some of his Soldiers; who readily granted him eight Men, part Arabians,
part Bedouins. These the Consul ordered to disperse themselves upon several
Roads in the Wilderness, to see if they could meet with any tidings upon the
Way. In a short time two of them returned with two little Pouches, in one of
which was the Packet of Letters. They reported also, that in a by-place between
Taiba and Mached-raba they saw the Bodies of four dead Men lying upon the Sand.
One of them which was in black Clothes, being hacked and mangled in a most
miserable manner; but the Bodies of the other three were entire, though run
through in several places. Some time after the persons themselves that did the
fact told both at Diarbequir and Damas, how it came to pass. For certain
Merchants of Damas going to Diarbequir, perceived four Men early in the morning
at certain Wells where they were to stop; whereupon they sent two of their
Company before to know who they were. But the Austin-Frier having a little
parcel of Diamonds about him, and believing them to be Thieves, inconsiderately
let fly his Gun and killed one of them immediately upon the place: the
Merchants seeing one of their companions dead, fell all at once upon the other
three, cut the Austin-Frier to pieces, and flew the rest; and so without
rifling them pursued their Journey.

From Aleppo I went to Alexandretta, and there embarked in a Vessel of
Marseilles, with a favorable Wind, 'till we came to make the Coast of Candy,
where we were becalmed for two days. One morning by break of day we discovered
a Pickaroon, whereupon seeing we could not avoid being fetched up by him, we
made ready. He made two or three shot at us, which did us no other harm but
only touched the Beak-head of the Ship. Our Gunner made a shot at him, which
brought down his Top-gallant; asecond went through and through the great
Carbin, and caused a great disorder in his Ship, as far as we could discern
with our Prospective-Glasses. But when the Wind began to blow fresh, the
Pirate, who had enough of us, and had discovered another Vessel which perhaps
he thought better prize, made all the Sail he could from us toward the other
Vessel. Thereupon we pursued our Voyage with a fair Gale, and came to Malta.

From Malta we departed seven or eight in company, in two of the Pope's
Galleys, staying three days at Syracuse, and one at Messina; where our Company
increasing, we hired a Feluck for Naples. But as we were coasting by the Shore
to the Port of Naples, so terrible a Tempest surpised us near to Paolo, that
we were forced to put in there upon Palm Sunday. The next day we went to see
the Covent of St. Francis of Paolo; the way to it lying between a high Mountain
on the right, and a Precipice on the left hand. This Mountain leans so, that it
seems to be tumbling down; and there is a good height upon the Rock the seeming
print of a Hand, which as the report goes, was the print of St. Francis's Hand,
who sustained it a whole day, and kept it from falling. From Paolo we went to
Naples, where we arrived upon Easter-eve; and as we entered into the City, the
great Guns went off round the City, in honor of the Resurrection. At Rome we
all separated, according as our Business led us.

CHAP. VI.
Another Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, by the Euxin or Black Sea; with
some Remarks upon the principal Cities thereabouts.
THere are three Roads yet remaining, leading out of Europe into Persia or the
Indies. That of Constantinople, all along the Coasts of the Black, Sea; that of
Warsovia, crossing the same Sea at Trebisond; and that of Mosco, down the
Volga, which has been amply described by Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy of
the Duke of Holstein. In this and the next Chapter I shall describe the Way
from Constantinople, all along the Black Sea, and that from Warsovia, not
knowing any person that has hitherto mentioned any thing upon this subject. And
first of all I will give a short Description of the principal Places that lie
upon that Sea, as well upon the side of Europe as of Asia, with the just
distances of one Place from another.

The principal Cities upon the Black Sea, on the Coast of Europe.
From Constantinople to Varna they count it two hundred Miles, four of which
make an Alman League; miles 200 From Varna to Balshike, miles 36 From Balshike
to Bengali, miles 70 From Bengali to Constance, miles 60 From Constance to
Queli, miles 25 Near to this City of Queli the great Arm of Danow throws it
self into the Black Sea. Here is the grand Fishery for Sturgeon. From Queli to
Aquerman, miles 50 The City of Aquerman belongs to a Kan of the lesser Tartary*
but it is not the place of his residence, for he keeps his Court at
Basha-Serrail, twenty-five miles up in the Land. From Aquerman to Kefet or
Kaffa, miles 350

This is a great City, and a place of great Trade, wherein there are above a
thousand Families of the Armenians, and about five hundred Greeks. They have
every one their Bishop, and several Churches. St. Peter's is the biggest, very
large and very beautiful; but it falls to decay, because the Christians have
not Wealth enough to repair it. Every Christian above fifteen years of age,
pays a Piaster and a half tribute to the Grand Signor, who is Lord of the City;
and he sends a Basha that lives in the ancient City called Frink-Hesser.
However the Kan of the Lesser Tartary extends his Jurisdiction as far as the
Gates of Kaffa.

From Kaffa to Assaque, miles 70

Assaque is the last City in Europe, belonging also to the Grand Signor. By it
runs a great River of the same name, the other side being in the Territories of
the Duke of Moscovy. Down this River come the Cossacks that do so much mischief
to the Turks. For sometimes they come with threescore or fourscore Gelia's
which are a kind of Brigantines, the bigger sort of which carry a hundred and
fifty men, the less a hundred. Sometimes they divide themselves into two parts,
one of which makes Havoc toward Constantinople, the other Ravages the Coast of
Asia, as far as Trebizond.

The Coast of Europe bord'ring upon the Black Sea is 861 miles in length.

The chief Citys upon the Black Sea on the Coast of Asia, which is 1170 miles
in length.
From Constantinople, to Neapoli, miles 250

In this City are made the greatest part of the Galleys and Vessels that belong
to the Grand Signor.

From Neapoli to Sinabe, miles 250 From Sinabe to Ouma, miles 240 From Ouma to
Kerason, miles 150 From Kerason to Trebisond, miles 80 From Trebisond to Rise,
miles 100 From Rise to Guni, miles 100

The City of Guni belongs half to the Grand Signor, and half to the King of
Mengrelia, with whom he keeps a good Correspondence, because the greatest part
of the Steel and Iron that is spent in Turkey comes out of Mengrelia through the
Black Sea.

The only good Ports upon the Black Sea from Constantinople to Mengrelia, are,

Quitros, Sinabe, or Sinope, Onnye, Samsom, Trebisond, Gomme.

The Haven of Quitros is very deep, and the Vessels lie sheltered from the
winds. but the entrance into it is very bad, which only the Pilots of the
place, or they who have often accustomed themselves to that Trade can only find
out. It seems that anciently there had been most stately Buildings round about
the Port; and several noble Pillars are to be seen all along the shore, not to
speak of those which have been Transported to Constantinople. Near the City
toward the South stands a high Mountain, whence there flows good store of
excellent Water, which at the bottom gathers into one Fountain.

To go from Constantinople for Persia by Sea, you must embark at Constantinople
for Trebisond, and many times for Rise or Guni, which are more to the North.
They that Land at Trebisond go directly to Erzerom, which is nor above five
days Journey off, and from Erzerom to Erivan to Tunis. But there are few that
will venture upon this Sea where there is no good Anchorage; besides that it is
subject to prodigious Tempests, from which there are very few good Ports to
desend them; which is the reason it is called Cara-denguis, or the Black Sea:
The Eastern people giving to all things, mischievous and dangerous, the Epithet
of Black.

They that are Bound for Rise or Guni, go to Teflis the Capital City of
Giorgia, and thence to Erivan, for though the way be bad yet it is far better
and smoother than the Road to Tauris.

The principal places from Teflis to Erivan are these, together with their
respective distances.

From Teflis to Soganlouk, leagues 3 From Soganlouk to Senouk-kupri, leagues 7
From Senouk-kupri to Guilkae, leagues 7 From Guilkae to Dakrou, leagues 6 From
Dakson to Achikent, leagues 6 From Achikent to Dillou, leagues 6 From Dillou to
Yazegi, leagues 6 From Yazegi to Bicheni, leagues 4 From Bicheni to Erivan,
leagues 2 From Erivan you keep the ordinary Road to Tauris.

CHAP. VII.
The Road from Warsow to Ispahan, over the Black Sea, and from Ispahan to
Mosco; with the Names of the principal Cities and Islands of Turkey according to
the vulgar pronunciation and as they are called in the Language of the Turks.
FRom Warsow upon the left hand of the Vistula, the ordinary residence of the
Kings of Poland, to Lublin, days 6 From Lublin to Iluove, days 5 There all the
Bales are opened, and the Customers take Five in the Hundred for their
Merchandise. From Iluove to Jaslovieer, days 12 This is the last City of Poland
toward Moldavia, where if you sell any quantity of Goods you must pay Five per
Cent. From Jaslovieer to Yashe, days 8 This is the Capital City of Moldavia,
and is the Residence of the Vaywood which the Grand Signor sends to govern in
the Country. There they open all the Bales, and there is a Roll of what every
Merchant ought to pay, which may amount to Five per Cent. From Yashe to
Ourshaye, days 3 This is the last City of Moldavia, where there is no Custom to
be paid. From Ourshaye to Akerman, days 4 Here they never open the Bales, but
they take Four in the Hundred. From Akerman to Ozou, days 3 Here they never
open the Bales, but the Custom amounts to two per Cent. From Ozou to Precop,
days 5 Neither do they here open the Bales, but trust to the Merchant's word,
and the Customs amount to Two and a half per Cent. From Precop to Kaffa, days 5
Nor are the Bales opened here, but the Custom comes to Three per Cent. Thus
from Warsow to Kaffa the Journey takes up one and fifty days, in the Wagon,
which is the manner of Carriage in those Countries. All the Customs amount to
Eighteen and a half per Cent. to which you must add the Carriage, and Passage
by Sea to Trebizond: where you pay three Piasters for every Mules-load, and
four for every Camels-load. Observe by the way, that the Armenians do not
usually take shipping at Trebizond but go to another Port more to the West,
upon the same Coast, where they never, pay above a Piaster and a half for a
Camels load. This Port, called Onnie, is a very good Haven; and there is
another a little farther off, called Samson, which is no bad one, but the Air
is unwholsom and dangerous. There is also another Road from Warsow to
Trebizond, shorter by three days journey. From Warsow to Yashe, according to
the Road already set down, days 31 From Yashe to Galas, days 8

All merchandise is Taxed at this place, and the Duties are taken at Galas,
according to the Note which the Merchant brings from Galas. Galas is a City of
Moldavia.

From Galas to Megin, days 1 The Bales are not opened here, but the Merchant
pays three and a half, or four per Cent. From Megin to Mangalia, days 8 This is
one of the four Ports to the West upon the Black Sea, and the best of all. The
three others toward the South upon the Coast are Kavarna, Balgik, and Varna. At
Mangalia they demand but half a Piaster for every Bale. Crossing from thence to
Trebisond you have five days Journey to Erzerom. Now to the Road of Muscovy;
which having been exactly described by Olearius, going into Persia, I will
describe it returning out of Persia. Having led the Reader to Shamaqui, I will
return home from thence. From Shamaqui to Derbent, days 7 Derbent, which the
Turks call Demir-Capi, is the last City within the Jurisdiction of the
Persians; by which there runs a River which is called Shamourka. From Derbent
to Tetarck, days 8 By this Town runs a River which is called Bocan.

From Tetarck to Astracan they hire small Barks with a dozen Oars. All along
the shore the Osiers grow so very thick, that they afford shelter for the Barks
in fowl weather. If the Wind serve they will put up a little Sail and be at
Astracan in four or five hours; but if they only Row, they cannot be there in
nine.

When you Embark upon the Caspian Sea, where you only creep along by the shore,
you must provide your self with Water for the three first days, in regard the
Water is bitter and ill tasted all along the Coast all that while; but for the
rest of the Voyage it is very good. If you carry heavy Goods, you may hire
large Boats to save Charges.

When you come to Astracan you unlade your Goods; at what time the Officer
comes, and sealing up every Bale, causes them to be sent to the Merchants
Lodging. Three days after the Customer comes to open the Bales, and takes five
per Cent. If the Merchant happ'n to want money, and takes it up at Astracan, to
pay again at Moscow, he pays sometimes thirty per Cent. according to the Rate
of Gold Ducats.

If a Merchant have any Diamonds, or any other Jewels, and let it be known, he
pays five per Cent. But if a Merchant have any Jewels, or any other Rarities,
and tells the Governor that he intends to carry them to the Grand Duke; the
Governor sends a Convoy with him either by Land or Water, that costs him
nothing: and moreover sends a Courrier before to the Court, to give Notice of
his coming. There is very good Wine at Astracan; but better at Shamaqui, where
I advise the Traveller to provide himself.

From Astracan to Moscow, you take Shipping in great Barques, that make use
both of Oars and Sails, rowing against the Tide, and weigh whatever you put
Aboard, to a very Coverlet. Generally you pay for every pound fourteen Caya,
and three Abassi's and a half, and an Abassi makes eighteen Sous and three
Deniers.

In Muscovy, they reckon the way neither by Leagues nor Miles, but by
Shagerons, five of which make an Italian Mile.

From Astracan to Courmija, Shagerons 300 From Courmija to Sariza, sha. 200
From Sariza, to Sarataf, sha. 350 From Sarataf to Samarat, sha. 200 From
Samarat to Semiriskat, sha. 300 From Semiriskat to Coulombe, sha. 150 From
Coulombe to Casan, sha. 200 This is a great City with a stout Fortress From
Casan to Sabouk-sha, sha. 200 From Sabouk-sha to Godamijan, sha. 120 From
Godamijan to Niguina, sha. 280 Niguina is a large and well Fortified Castle
From Niguina to Mouron, sha. 300 From Mouron to Casin, sha. 100 From Casin to
Moscow, sha. 250 So that from Astracan to Moscow they count it sha. which makes
590 Italian miles. 2950 At Sarataf you may go ashore, and so by Land to Moscow.
When the Snow is gone you travel in Wagons, but when the Snow lies, in Sledges.
If a man be alone, and that his Goods weigh not above two hundred pounds Paris
weight, they put them into two Bales; and laying them upon the Horses back set
the man in the middle, paying for Carriage as much as from Astracan to Moscow.
From Sarataf by Land to Inserat, days 10 From Inserat to Tymnek, days 6 From
Tymnek to Canquerma, days 8 From Canquerma to Volodimer, day 6 Volodimer is a
City bigger than Constantinople, where stands a fair Church upon a Mountain in
the City, having been formerly the residence of the Emperors themselves. From
Volodimer to Moscow, days 5 In all, days 35

Observe by the way that they never go ashore at Serataf but in case of
necessity, when the River begins to be Frozen. For from Serataf to Inserat is a
Journey of ten days, in all which time there is nothing to be had, either for
Horse or Man. The Custom is the same at Moscow as at Astracan, that is Five per
Cent. All the Asiaticks, Turks, Persians, Armenians, and others, lodge in a
sort of Inns: but the Europeans lie in a place by themselves altogether.

The Names of some Cities and places belonging to the Empire of the Grand
Signor, as they are vulgarly called, and in Turkish.
COnstantinople after it was taken by Mahomet the second, the twenty seventh of
May, 1453, was called by the Turks Istam-Bol; Istam signifying Security, and
Bol, Spacious, large, or great, as much as to say, Great Security.

Vulgar, Turkish. Adrianople, Edrene. Burse, Brousa. Belgrade, Beligrade. Buda,
Boudim. Grand Caire, Mesr. Alexandretta in Egypt, Iskendrie. Mecca, Meqquie.
Balsara, Basra. Babylon, Bagdat. Nineveh, Moussoul. Nisibis, Nisbin. Edessa,
Oursa: Tiqueranger, Diarbequir. Eva-togea, Tokat. Teve Toupolis, Erzerom.
Shamiramager, Van. Jerusalem, Koutsheriff. Damas, Came. Tripoli in Syria, Came
Taraboulous. Aleppo, Haleb. Tripoli in Barbary, Taraboulous, Tunis, Tunis.
Algier: Gezaiir. Candy, Guirir. Rhodes, Rodes. Cyprus, Kebres. Chio, Sakes.
Methelin, Medilli. Smyrna, Izmir. Troy, Eski Istamboul Lemnos, Limio. Tenedos,
Bogge-adasi. Negropont, Eghirbos. The Dardanels, Bogaz-ki. Athens, Atina.
Barut, Biroult. Seyde, Saida. Tire, Sour. St. John of Dacres, Acra. Antioch,
Antexia. Trebizond, Tarabozan. Sinopus, Sinap.

In the Fortress of Sinopus, at the lower part of the Wall there is a Stone to
be seen, where there is an Inscription in Latin abbreviated, with the word Rome
in it; whence some conjecture may be made that the Romans built it.

The Mediterranean Sea, Akdeniis. The Ocean, Derijay Mouhiit. The Black Sea,
Kara-Deniis.

CHAP. VIII.
Remarks upon the Trade of the Island of Candy, and the principal Isles of the
Archipelago, as also upon some of the Cities of Greece adjoining; with a
particular Relation of the present Condition of the Grand Signor's Galleys,
belonging as well to the Isles as to the Continent.
Of the ISLAND of CANDY.
OUT of the Island of Candy Strangers export great store of Wheat and
Sallet-Oyl, all sorts of Pulse, Cheese, yellow Wax, Cottons, Silks, but more
especially Malmsey, wherein consists its chiefest Trade. When Vintage draws
near, the Country People that are to gather the Grapes wrap their Feet in a
piece of a Boar's Skin, which they tie together upon the upper part of the Foot
with a piece of Pack-thred, to preserve their Feet from the violent heat of the
Rocks upon which they are to tread. Those Skins are brought out of Russia by
the Russes, that bring Botargo and Caviare to Constantinople, where they have a
vast vent for it all over Turkey, Persia, and Ethiopia; where they that follow
the Greek and Armenian Church, eat little or nothing else all the Lent. By the
way take notice, that the Turks make a certain Glue out of Sturgeon, which is
the best in the World, so that whatever is fastened with it, will rather break
in another place than where it is glew'd. They make it thus: When they have
caught a Sturgeon, they pull out his Guts, and then there remains a Skin that
covers the Flesh; this Skin they take off from the head to the belly. It is
very clammy, and about the thickness of two Sheets of Paper, which they roll as
thick as a Man's Arm, and let it dry in the Sun. When they use it, they beat it
with a Mallet, and when it is well beat'n they break it into pieces, and steep
it in Water for half an hour in a little Pot.

When the Venetians were Masters of Candy, they that had committed any Crime
which deserved Death, if they could get out of the Island before they were
apprehended went directly to Constantinople, to beg their pardon. For you must
know, that no person but the Ambassador of the Commonwealth of Venice had the
Privilege to pardon Crimes committed in Candy. For example, when Signor
Dervisano was Ambassador for the Commonwealth of Venice at Constantinople, a
Candiot having a desire to lie with a Woman by force, she told him she would
sooner eat her Child's Liver than yield to his Lust. Whereupon, the Villain
enraged he could not compass his design, took his opportunity, killed the
Child, cut out the Liver, and made the Mother eat it, and then slew the Mother
also. Upon this he fled to Constantinople, to beg pardon of the Ambassador, and
obtained it there: But the Ambassador at the same time wrote word to the
Governor of Candy to put him to death at his return; having only granted him
his Pardon, to preserve his Privilege. And indeed, to speak truth, the
Candiots are the most wretched people under Heaven.

Of the ISLAND of CHIO.
THE City of Chio, which gives the Island its Name, contains about thirty
thousand Inhabitants; where there are little less than fifteen thousand Greeks,
eight thousand Latins, and six thousand Turks.

Among the several Greek and Latin Churches, the last of which has continued
ever since the time that the Genoeses possessed the Island, there are some
indifferent handsome Structures. The five principal Latin Churches are the
Cathedral, and the Churches belonging to the Escolantines, the Dominicans, the
Jesuits, and the Capuchins. The Turks have also their Mosquees, and the Jews
their Synagogue.

Four Miles from the City, near to the Seaside is to be seen a vast Stone,
which was cut out of some Rock; it is almost all round, only the upper part,
which is flat, and somewhat hollow; round about the upper part, and in the
middle, are places like Seats, cut into the same Stone; of which there is one
higher than the rest, like a School-master's Chair; and Tradition reports that
this was Homer's School, where he taught this Scholars.

In this Island there is such an infinite number of Partridges that the like is
not to be found in any part of the World. But that which is a greater Rarity is
this, that the Natives breed them up, as we do our Poultry, but after a more
pleasant manner; for they let them go in the fields all the day long, and at
night every Countryman calls his own severally home to Roost by a particular
Note, whither they return like a Flock of so many Geese.

There are great quantities of Damasks and Fustians wrought in the Island of
C^i^, which are transported to Grand Ca^o, and to all the Cities upon the Coast
of Barbary, Natolia, and particularly to Constantinople.

Three Leagues from the Island of Chio, upon a Mountain to the South there
grows a peculiar sort of Trees; the Leaves are somewhat like a Myrtle, their
Branches so long that they creep upon the ground; but which is more wonderful,
that when they are down, they rise again of themselves. From the beginning of
May to the end of June, the Inhabitants take great care to keep the Earth under
the Tree very clean; for during those two Months there issues out a certain Gum
from the joints of the Branches, which drops upon the ground; this is that
which we call Mastick, and the Turks, Sakes, according to the Name which they
give the Island. The Island produces great store of this Mastick, which is
spent in the Seraglio of Constantinople, where the Women continually chew it,
to cleanse and keep their Teeth white. When the Mastick Season draws near, the
Grand Signor every year sends a certain number of Bestangi's to take care that
it be not exported, but be preserved for the use of the Seraglio. If it be a
plentiful year for Mastick, the Bestangi's that cull out the lesser sort to
sell, put it into little Bags and seal it up; which Bags being so sealed, are
never questioned by the Custom-house Officers. The Island also yields very good
Turpentine.

Of the ISLAND of NAXIS.
THere is not one Port belongs to this Island; the Vessels that are Bound
thither for Trade, being forced to stay in the Haven of the Isle of Paros,
called Derion six miles from Naxis, which is one of the best Havens in the
Archipelago, able to contain a thousand Ships. There are the ruins of a Wall
still to be seen that made a Mole, where four or five Galleys might ride. There
are also the ruins of several Houses of the ancient Dukes, the Stables
standing almost whole, all Arched, and built of Marble. These Dukes were also
Lords of twelve other Islands. As for the Island it self, it is well stored
with Villages, and has three good Cities, Barequa, Qusa, and Falet.

Near this Island within a stones throw, there is a curious piece of Antiquity
still to be seen. It is a flat Rock, as big about in compass as the ancient
Court of the Louvre. In the middle of this Rock it was that the Temple of
Bacchus was built all of Marble, of which there is nothing but the Foundations
that remain. The Gate is still standing made of three Stones, whereof two make
the sides, and the third lies across. From the Isle to this Rock there is a
fair Stone Bridge of Freestone, upon each side whereof are to be seen the Pipes
that conveyed the Wine into the Temple, that was drank at the Feast of Bacchus.
Naxis also is the Island that produces the best Emeril.

As to the Inhabitants themselves, if the Husband or Wife happens to dye, the
Surviver never stirs out of the House in six Months after, upon any business
how urgent soever, no not to hear Mass. There are both Latins and Greeks in the
Island, but the latter are the most numerous. There is a Latin Archbishop, and
Canons belonging to the Metropolitan Church, with two Religious Houses, one of
Capuchins, and the other of Jesuits: The Greeks also have their Archbishop.

The Island of Naxis is sixscore miles in compass, being one of the fairest and
pleasantest Islands in the Archipelago. The ancient Dukes made it their
residence, whence they command the greatest part of the Cyclades. There is
great plenty of White Salt made in Naxis, and it produces excellent Wine both
White and Claret, which caused the Inhabitants* to build a Temple to Bacchus,
who according to their ancient Tradition chose that Island for his Habitation.
The Island produces excellent Fruits, feeds great store of Cattle, and abounds
in several other things necessary for human support. There are also in it large
Woods full of small Deer, and frequented by a great number of Eagles and
Vultures.

Here follow the names of the Cyclades, as the people of the Country Pronounce
them.

1. Delos or Sdilis. 2. Giaroa. 3. Andros. 4. Paros. 5. Nicaria. 6. Samoa. 7.
Pathmoa. 8. Olearoa. 9. Sitino. 10. Rhena. 11. Miconoa. 12. Tenoa or Tino. 13.
Sciroa or Sira. 14. Subiuma. 15. Syphnus or Sifanre. 16. Nixcia. 17. Chios or
Scio. 18. Astypaleo. 19. Amorgus or Amorgo.
Of the Islands of Zea, of Milo, of Paros, and other Islands of the Archipelago.
ZEA is an Island wherein there is nothing remarkable, and from whence there is
nothing to be Exported but Valanede, to dye Leather withal. Neither are there
any Goods Imported into it but what the Pirates bring in, which are very few,
in regard the Islanders are careful to provide themselves otherwhere.

Milo affords nothing but Millstones to grind Wheat, which are carried to
Constantinople.

Paros where there is no Trade neither, has nothing remarkable in it but one
Greek Church, very well built all of Marble, called Our Lady's Church.

As for the Islands of S^fante and Miconoa, in regard there is nothing of Trade
in either but only with the Pirates, who sometimes touch there, if there be any
Consuls that live there, it is only to buy their stolen Goods.

Of the City of Athens, Corinth, Patras, Coron, and Modon.
THE City of Athens is about four miles distant from the Sea, and contains two
and twenty thousand Inhabitants, twenty five thousand Greeks; five or six
thousand Latins, and a thousand Turks. Among all the Antiquities that yet
remain, those in the Castle are the best preserved. The Castle stands upon a
Hill, upon the North descent whereof some part of the City stands. It encloses
a very fair and spacious Temple, built all of white Marble from the top to the
bottom, supported by stately Pillars of black Marble and Porphiry. In the front
are great Figures of Armed Knights ready to encounter one another. Round about
the Temple, except upon the Roof, which is all of flat Marble Stones well
ordered, are to be seen all the famous Acts of the Greeks in small carving*
every Figure being about two foot and a half high. Round about the Temple runs
a fair Gallery, where four persons may walk a-brest. It is supported by sixteen
Pillars of white Marble upon each of the sides, and by six at each end, being
also paved and covered with the same Stone. Close to the Temple stands a fair
Palace of white Marble, which now falls to decay. Below the Castle, and at the
point of the City toward the East, stand seventeen Pillars, the remainder of
three hundred, where anciently, they say, stood the Palace of Theseus first
King of the Athenians. These Pillars are of a prodigious bigness, every one
eighteen foot about. They are proportionable in height, but not all of a piece,
being thwarted most of them by Stones of white Marble, one end whereof rests
upon one Pillar, and the other upon that which follows it; which was the
support of the whole building. Upon the Gate, which is yet entire, are to be
seen these words upon the front without. (...). The City of Athens was
assuredly the City of Theseus.

Within-side of the same City these other words are Engraved. (...). The City
of Athens is the City of Adrian, and not of Theseus.

There are in Athens several other pieces of Antiquity which are well worthy to
be seen.

Corinth, which formerly made such a noise in the world, is now a Village of
some five or six and twenty houses, but all of them the Habitations of rich
Greeks. The Town lies at the foot of the Castle, which is seated upon an
inaccessible Rock guarded by the Greeks, commanded by an Aga. Corinth Exports
great quantities of Currants.

Patras does the same, which is all the Trade of those two places.

Coron and Modon drive a Trade in Sallet-Oyl, which is so good and so
plentiful, that several English, Dutch, and other Ships are load'n away with it
from thence every year.

There are Consuls in Athens, Patras, Coron, Modon, and Napoli of Romania.

The Athenian Merchants buy up Tissues, Velvets, Satins, and Cloth, with which
they serve other Countries adjoining. The Commodities which Foreigners export
from thence, are Silks, Wool, Sponges, Wax, Cordivan-Leather, and Cheese. Which
is all that can be said in few Words, of the Trade of all these places.

A Particular Relation of the Galleys belonging to the Grand Signor, as well at
Constantinople, as in the Isles and other Parts of the Empire.
FOrmerly there lay in the Road of Constantinople above a hundred and fifty
Galleys: But the Grand Vizier perceiving that so great a number did but cause
confusion, and that the Captain- Basha could not conveniently take so great a
burden as to look after such a number, he gave order that no more than
twenty-four should lie in the Port of Constantinople; sending the rest to other
Ports, as well of the Continent, as the Islands.

At present the Number of the Grand Signor's Galleys is fourscore, thus
distributed under the Command of their several Beys or Captains.

At Constantinople, twenty-four under the Command of the Captain- Basha, or
Admiral of the Sea; who when he goes out upon any Expedition, sends to the rest
to meet him according to Orders. When he goes in person to Sea, he gives to
every one of his Slaves besides their ordinary Habit a kind of Cassock of Red
Cloth, and a Bonnet of the same color. But this is only in the Admiral's
Gally, and at his own Cost. His Gally carries usually 366 Slaves, and to every
Seat of the Rowers, a Bonne Vole. These Bonne Voles are certain Volunteers that
freely offer themselves to the Service of the Admiral, and there is great care
taken for their being well paid. Their Pay is 3500 Aspers for their Voyage,
which generally continues seven or eight Months. They feed as the other Slaves;
but if they Row negligently or lazily, they are beaten worse than the Slaves;
for the Volunteers have nothing to do except it be to Row: But the Slaves are
put to several other Duties. Take notice also that the Volunteers that serve in
the General's Gally, have 500 Aspers more than those in the other Galleys, that
is to say, 4000 Aspers for their Voyage, which comes to 40 Crowns.

The Reer-Admiral carries Two hundred and fifty men, as well Slaves as
Volunteers. That Galley and the great Tefterdar's or Treasurers, are the best
provided of any in the whole Fleet: For the Reer-Admiral Basha has his choice
to take four of the best men out of every Galley for his own, or else to
receive 3500 Aspers for every man, which is paid by the Captain of the Galley;
which makes him the richest of all the Beys.

The great Tefterder's Galley is one of the Twenty four Galleys of
Constantinople, and he sends a particular Treasurer, in the quality of a
Lieutenant, to command her. That Command is very much contested for, in regard
that Galley is very well provided with all things; and for that all the
Captains Court the Tefterdar, who, when the Galleys return to Port, rewards
them according to their Merit.

The Janizary-Aga's Galley is of the same number; but he never goes to Sea,
always sending one in his room.

The Bey of Rhodes, that takes upon him the Title of Basha, has eight Galleys.

The Bey of Stancho, an Island about an hundred Miles from Rhodes, Lieutenant
to the Bey of Rhodes, has one Galley.

The Bey of Sussam, a small Island near Scio, has one Galley, and his
Lieutenant another. These Galleys are generally appointed to watch the Maltesi,
and Ligorn.

The Bey of Scio formerly had but three; but since the War with Candy, he has
had six.

The Lieutenant of the Bey of Scio has two Galleys. There be also three other
Beys in the Island of Scio, who have no dependence upon the Basha of Scio, but
buy their Provisions where they can find it best cheap.

The Bey of Smyrna and his Lieutenant have two Galleys; but they can do nothing
without the Orders of the Bey of Scio.

The Bey of Metelin has two Galleys.

The Bey Cavale, a small Bay, twelve Miles on this side the Dardanells, upon
the Coast of Europe, has one.

The Bey of Nestrepont, seven.

The Bey of Napoli in Romania, five.

The Bey of Coron, one.

The Bey of Modon, one.

The Bey of Famagosta, six.

The Bey of Alexandria in Egypt, five.

The Bey of Canee, two Galleys.

The Bey of Castel-Tourneze or Navarin, two Galleys.

All these Galleys make up the number of Fourscore.

The light Galleys carry not above 196 men; the four men that are wanting of
two hundred, being the Bey's profit.

Every Captain is allowed thirteen thousand Piasters for his Provision; and
every Christmas he gives to every Slave a pair of Breeches, and a Cassock of
course Cloth, with a scantie kind of a Cloak.

Every Slave has every day a pound and a half of good Bread, and nothing else.
But upon Friday which is the Mahumetans Sunday, they have hot Pease, or Beans,
or Lentils boiled in Butter. They receive also sometimes the Alms of the
Greeks, when they lie in any Port. But at Constantinople they fare somewhat
better; for twice a week, as well the Turks, as the Greeks and others, come to
the Bains, and bestow their Charity of Rice and other good Victuals. The Bains
is the name of the place where the Seamen are kept when they are not at Sea.

Sometimes when they are to go Sea, they will counterfeit themselves sick or
lame; but they are so narrowly observed, that it serves them to no other
purpose than to procure to themselves the more Blows.

CHAP. IX.
A Relation of the present State of Georgia.
GEORGIA, which others call Gurgie, or Gurgistan, extends Eastward to the
Caspian Sea; and upon the West is bounded by Mountains that part it from
Mengrelia. Formerly it was a Kingdom, all the Inhabitants whereof were
Christians, of the Armenian, and of the Greek Church; but of late the
Mahometans have got footing among them. And the King of Persia having filled
them full of Divisions, has made two Kingdoms of it, which he calls Provinces;
over which he has placed two Governors. They are generally Princes of the
Country, who must turn Mahometans before they can be admitted to that Dignity.
When they are advanced, they take upon them the title of Kings; and while they
have any Issue, the King of Persia cannot dispossess their Children.

The most Potent of these two Kings, is he that resides at Teflis, who in the
Language of the Country is called the King of Cartele. The present King is the
last that has continued a Christian, with his four Sons; the Eldest of which,
the King of Persia having enticed to Court, partly by Promises, and partly by
Presents, has won to Mahumetism. Immediately thereupon, he caused him to be
declared King of the other Province.

These two Kings have each of them a Guard of Mahumetan Horsemen under their
own pay; and at present I believe there are in both Kingdoms near upon 12000
Mahumetan Families.

The King of Teflis coyns Money in the King of Persia's Name; and the Silver
which he coyns, is in Spanish Reals, French Crowns, and such other Money, which
the Armenians bring out of Europe for their Goods. As to the Justice of the
Country, neither the King himself, nor the Mahometans have any thing to do
with it. A thief is acquitted, paying sevenfold what he has stole; two parts
whereof go to the Party robbed, one part to the Judges, and four parts to the
King. If the Thief has not wherewithal to make restitution, he is fold: If the
Product do not yet equal the Sum, if he have a Wife and Children, they first
sell the Wife, and if that will not do, then they sell the Children: But if the
Party robbed be so merciful, as to forgive the Thief his share, then neither
the King nor the Judges can demand any thing for their share. If any man commit
a Murder, they condemn him to die, and deliver him up into the hands of the
Kindred of the Party slain, to do Execution as they please themselves. However,
it is in their power to pardon him, if he be able to give sixty Cows or more to
the next akin to the Party killed. In matter of Debt, a Creditor has Power to
seize upon all the Estate of the Debtor; and if that will not satisfy, he may
sell his Wife and Children.

The Christians of Georgia are very ignorant, especially in Matters of
Religion. They learn that little they know, in the Monasteries, as also to
write and read; and generally the Women and Maids are more knowing than the
Men; not only because there are more Religious Houses for Women than for Men,
but also because the Boys are bred up to labor, or sent to the Wars. For if a
Virgin grows up, and happens to be handsome, some one or other presently
endeavors to steal her, on purpose to sell her into Turkey, Persia, or the
Territories of the great Mogul. So that to prevent their being stolen, their
Fathers and Mothers put them very young into Nunneries, where they apply
themselves to study; wherein, if they attain to any proficiency, they usually
stay as long as they live: After that, they profess, and when they come to a
certain Age, they are permitted to Baptize, and to apply the holy Oils, as well
as any Bishop or Archbishop can do.

The Georgians are very great Drinkers; and Nature has fitted them a Country
that produces good store of Wine. They love the strongest Drinks best; for
which reason, at their Feasts both men and Women drink more Aqua vitae than
Wine. The women never eat in public with their Husbands; but when the man has
invited his Friends, the next day the Woman invites her She-companions. And it
is observable that at the Women's Festivals there is more Wine and Aquavitae
drank than at the men's. The Guest is no sooner entered into the Dining Room,
but he is presented with 2 or 3 Dishes of Sweetmeats, and a Glass of half a
pint of Aquavitae to excite his Appetite. They are great Feeders upon Onions
and Herbs, which they eat raw out of the Garden. The Georgians are also great
Travelers, and very much addicted to Trade; they are very dext'rous in
shooting with Bow and Arrows, and are accounted the best Soldiers in all Asia.
They compose a great part of the King of Persia's Cavalry, who keeps them in
his Court at peculiar pay, and relies very much upon their fidelity and
courage. There are several also in the Service of the Great Mogul. The Men are
very well complexion'd and very well shaped; and for the Women, they are
accounted the fairest and most beautiful of all Asia; and therefore out of this
Country it is that the King of Persia chooses all his Wives, being not
permitted to marry a Stranger. Teflis, where the Women have more liberty than
in any part of Asia, is the Capital City of Georgia, well situated, large and
well built, where there likewise is a great Trade in Silk.

CHAP. X.
A RELATION of the present State of Mengrelia.
MEngrelia extends from a Chain of Mountains, that separates it from Georgia to
the Black-Sea, and is now divided into three Provinces (every one of which has
their King.) The first is called the Province of Imarete, or Bassa-Shiouk, the
king whereof pretends to a superiority over both the other, which is the reason
they are often at War, and that with so much cruelty, that when they have taken
any Prisoners of either side, they sell them into Turkey. They are so accustomed
to sell one another in this Country, that if a man or his wife have any
occasion for money, they will go and sell one of their Children, and many times
they will exchange a Child for Ribands or other Toys at the Mercers Shops.

The second Province is that of Mengrelia, and the King of this Province is
called the King of Dadian.

The third is the Province of Guriel, the King of which Province is called the
King of Guriel.

The Province of Mengrelia was formerly subject to the King of Bassa-Shiouk,
who sent thither a Governor, which is called in their language Dadian.

One of those Governors being a person of wit and courage, gained so far upon
the affection of the People, that they chose him for their King.

The chief of the Province of Guriel, seeing how the Dadian had obtained the
Kingdom, following the Example of Mengrelia, shook off the Yoke of the King of
Bassa-Shiouk, and chose another King among themselves, who keeps his
Sovereignty to this day, by the support of the Grand-Signor. For when the
Dadian rebelled he entr'd into an Alliance with the Grand-Signor, and obliged
himself to furnish him every year with such a certain quantity of Iron, upon
condition that if the King of Bassa-Shiouk should war upon him, he should
furnish him with twenty thousand Horse. Of which the Turk was very glad,
finding thereby the Country of Mengrelia divided, which being united, was able
at any time to have disturbed him with an Army of fifty thousand Men.

The King of Bassa-Shiouk coyns money of the same bigness and weight with that
of the King of Persia. But in regard it is not so fine metal as that of the
King of Persia, he would have much ado to make it pass in the trade between his
Subjects and the Persians, which is very great, had he not found an expedient
by putting the King of Persia's name upon the Coin as well as his own, which
makes it pass without any difficulty. He would also put the Grand-Signor's Name
upon his Coin, but that the Turk coyns none but small money, or Aspers,
excepting only some Ducats which he coyns at Cairo. The King of Bassa-Shiouk,
as well as the King of Teflis coyns all sorts of foreign money.

These three Kings of Bassa-Shiouk, Mengrelia and Guriel, are Christians also.
And when they go to war, all the Ecclesiastical Persons attend them;
Archbishops and Bishops, Priests and Monks: not so much as to fight as to
encourage the Soldiers.

Being at Constantinople the first time I traveled into Persia I saw there an
Ambassador from the King of Mengrelia, whose behavior gave all the Franks
occasion of laughter. The present which he made the Grand-Signor was in Iron
and Steel, and a great number of Slaves. The first time of his Audience, he had
a train of above 200 Persons. But every day he sold two or three to defray his
expenses; So that at his departure, he had none but his Secretary and two
Vassals more left. He was a man of presence but no wit: and every time he went
to visit the Grand Vizier, he presumed to wear the white Bonnet which all the
Franks wondered at; when they saw that the Grand-Visier winked at it. For
should any other Christian have done so, he had been most certainly put to
death, or constrained to turn Mahumetan. By which it was apparent how much the
Grand Signor valued the Friendship of the King of Mengrelia, and how careful he
is of offending those that are sent from his Court. He knew those People suffer
no affronts, but upon the least word presently draw; besides that there is
nothing to be got by provoking them.

This Ambassador going once upon a visit into the Country, returning home was
surpised with a Storm, whereupon he pulled off his Boots and carried them
under his Coat, choosing rather to go barefoot to his lodging, then to spoil
his Boots.

Another time, it being the custom of all Catholic Ambassadors to go to Mass
to the Covent of Gray Friars in Pera, upon St. Francis's day, the Mengrdia^
Ambassador after Mass was done, coming out of the Church, and seeing several
baubles which the Pedlers expose in the Cloister upon that day, bought a Tin
Ring, two or three small Looking-Glasses, and a Pipe, which he put in his mouth
and went piping all the way in the Street, as Children do coming from Fairs.

But to return to the matter, you must take notice that there are not only Iron
Mines, but also Mines of Gold and Silver in two places five or six days Journey
from Teflis, the one called Souanet, the other Obetet. But the mischief is, the
people can hardly be got to work there, for fear the Earth should tumble down,
and bury them in the Mine, as it has many times happened.

There is also a Mine of Gold near to a place which is called Hardm^nshe, and a
Mine of Silver at Gunishe-Kone. five days Journey from Erzerom, and as many
from Trebisond.

As for the people themselves both* Georgians and Mengrelians, they never
trouble themselves about the ignorance and viciousness of their Priests, or
whether they be able to instruct them or no. The richest among them are they
which are in most credit, and absolutely give Laws to the poor. There are also
some heads of the Church, that assume such a jurisdiction over the people, as
to sell them both to the Turks and Persians, and they choose out the handsom'st
Children, both Boys and Girls, to get the more money, by which authority also
the great men of the Country enjoy Married Women and Maids at their pleasure.
They will choose out their Children for the Bishops while they are yet in their
Cradles; and if the Prince be dissatisfied at it, all the Clergy joins with him
that makes the choice, and then together by the Ears they go. In which
Skirmishes they will carry away whole Villages, and sell all the poor people to
the Turks and Persians. And indeed the custom of selling men and women is so
common in that Country, that a man may almost affirm it to be one of their
chiefest Trades.

The Bishops dissolve Marriages when they please, and then Marry again after
they have sold the first. If any of the Natives be not Married to his fancy, he
takes another for such a time as he thinks fit, for which he pays her all* the
while as the Turks do. Very few of these people know what Baptism means. Only
two or three days after the woman is brought to Bed, the Priest comes and
brings a little Oil, mumbles over a few Prayers, and then anoints the Mother
and the Infant, which they believe to be the best Baptism in the World. In
short, they are a people of no Devotion at all, neither in their Ceremonies nor
in their Prayers. But there are great store of Nunneries, where the young Maids
apply themselves to their Studies, and after such an age, whether they stay in
the Nunneries or betake themselves*to the Service of any of the great Lords,
they Confess, Baptize, Marry, and perform all other Ecclesiastical Functions,
which I never knew practiced in any other part of the World beside.

CHAP. XI.
Of Comania, Circassia, and of certain people which they call Kalmouchs.
COmania is bounded toward the East by the Caspian Sea; Westward by the
Mountains that divide it from Circassia; Northward it lies upon Muscovia; and
Southward it is bounded by Georgia. From the Mountains that bound upon the
North-East to Tercki, which is the River that parts Moscovia from Comania, it
is all a level Country excellent for Tillage, and aboundding in fair Meadows
and Pasturage. However it is not over-peopl'd, which is the reason they never
Sow twice together in one place. The Climate is much the same as between Paris
and Lion, where it Rains very much; and yet the Country people have cut several
Channels from the Rivers to water the Grounds after they have Sowed them, which
they learnt from the Persians. Those Rivers fall from the Southern Mountains,
being not at all taken notice of in the Map. There is one among the rest a very
large River, which can be forded at no time. They call it Coyasou, or The thick
water, in regard it is continually muddy, the stream being so slow, that they
can hardly discern which way it runs. It falls gently into the Caspian Sea to
the South of the mouth of Volga. Not far from this River, in the months of
October and November, all along the Shore of the same Sea, you may see vast
shoals of fish about two foot long. Before, they have two legs, like a Dog's
legs, behind instead of legs they have only claws. Flesh they have none, but
only fat with a bone in the middle. Now in regard they are but slow paced, when
they come upon Land the Country people easily knock them on the head, and make
Oil of them; which is the greatest Trade they have.

The people of Comania, commonly called Comouchs, dwell for the most part at
the foot of the Mountains, because of the Springs so plentiful in those places,
that in some Villages you shall have above twenty or thirty. Three of these
Springs meeting together, make a stream strong enough to drive a Mill. But this
is not the sole reason, for there is Water enough in the plain. But in regard
they are a people that only live upon the spoil and plunder of their Enemies,
and of one another, as they are in continual fear of being set upon, they love
to dwell near the refuge of the Mountains, whither they fly with their Cattle
upon any occasion of danger. For all the people round about, as Georgians,
Mengrelians, Cirkassians, Tartars, and Muscovites, live altogether by rapine,
and continual In-roads into one another Countries.

There are another sort of people which are called Kalmouchs, that inhabit upon
the Coast of the Caspian Sea between the Muscovites and the Tartars. The men
are strong, but the most deformed under Heaven. Their faces are so flat and
broad, that there is the breadth of five fingers between each Eye. Their Eyes
are very small, and that little Nose they have is so flat, that there is
nothing to be seen but two little holes instead of Nostrils. Their Knees also
and their* Feet turn inward. When they go to the Wars, they carry their Wives
and their Daughters, if they be twelve years of age, along with them, who fight
as courageously as the men themselves. Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, and Skains,
with a great wooden Mace at the Pummel of their Saddles; their Horses being the
best in all Asia. Their Captain is of some ancient Family, but they more
particularly choose him for his valor. The Duke of Muscovia sends them
presents every year, to preserve their friendship, which presents consist in
Cloth. And he grants them free passage through his Territories, when ever they
have a mind to invade the Mengrelians, Georgians, or Cirkassians, at which
sport they are much more dextrous than the lesser Tartars. Sometimes they
advance into Persia, as far as the Province of the Vsbekes, which is a part of
Great Tartary, ranging up as far as Caboul and Candabar. Their Religion is
particular to themselves, but they are great Enemies to the Mahumetans.

As for the Comouchs or people of Comania, they are Mahumetans, and very
precise ones too. They are under the protection of the King of Persia, who
makes great account of them, in regard they defend the Passes into his Country
on that side against the Kalmouchs. They are habited both men and women like
the Lesser Tartars, fetching all the Silk and Calicut which they use out of
Persia; for as for Cloth, they are contented with what they make in their own
Country, which is very course.

Circassia is a pleasant good Country, and full of variety. There are Plains,
Forests, Hills, and Mountains abounding in Springs, some of which are so
large, that some of them will serve seven or eight of the neighboring
Villages. But on the other side, in all the Rivers that proceed from these
Springs, there is not a fish to be seen. Flowers they have in abundance,
especially fair Tulips. There is a sort of Strawberry also with a short stalk,
of which five or six grow in a bunch; the least are as big as a small Nut, of a
pale yellow Color. The Soil is so fertile, that it brings forth without any
great trouble a vast plenty of all sorts of Fruits. Nor do the people need any
other Gardens than their Fields which are covered with Cherry-trees,
Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Walnut-trees, and all other useful Trees of the same
nature: but their chiefest Wealth consists in Cattle, but especially in
well-shap'd Horses, not much unlike the Spanish Gennets. They have also an
abundance of Goats and Sheep* whose Wool is as good as that of Spain; which the
Muscovites fetch away to make Felts. They neither sow Wheat nor Oats, but only
Barley for their Horses, and Millet to make Bread; nor do they ever sow twice
in the same place: not but that the Land is good enough to bear Wheat, but
because they love Bread made of Millet better. They have very good Fowl, and
Venison, and Wild-Fowl more than they know what to do withal; which they never
hunt with Dogs, nor fly their Hawks at; for their Horses are so swift and so
good, that they will tire the Beast, and force him to lie down and yield. Every
Horseman has a Rope with a sliding-knot ready at the Pummel of his Saddle,
which they are so dextrous to throw about the neck of the Beast that begins to
be weary, that it is twenty to one if they miss him. When they have killed a
Deer, they cut off the legs, and breaking the Bones, eat the Marrow, which they
say is the best thing in the World to strengthen the Body. When they go to
steal Cattle, they carry along with them great Cows-horns stuffed with boiled
Tripes cut in small pieces; then watching their times when the Herdsmen are
asleep, when the Dogs begin to bark, they throw to every one a Horn, with which
the Dog presently runs away: and so while the Shepherds are asleep, and the Dog
is busy to get the Meat out of the Horn, which is there ramm'd in on purpose,
the Thieves drive away what they please.

The Drink of the Sherkes is Water and Bosa. Bosa is a Drink made of Millet as
intoxicating as Wine, which they want in the Country.

The Men and the Women, Boys and Girls go habited all alike, and their Habit is
a colored Robe of Fustian, with a kind of large Petticoat underneath; with
this they wear a little pink'd Wastcoat that reaches down to their Thighs; and
over that a Cassock of course Cloth that reaches down to their Knees, girt
about their Wastes with a Cord. The Sleeves of the Cassock are open below and
above, and sometimes they pin them behind their Backs. They wear no Beards
'till they are sixty years of age. And as for their Hair, neither Men nor
Women, Boys nor Girls, ever wear it longer than the tips of their Ears. The
Men, both young and old, shave the middle of their Heads about the breadth of
two Fingers from the Forehead down to the Nape of the Neck: and then in stead
of Hats or Head-clothes, both Men and Women wear only a little Bonnet of the
same Cloth as the Cassock, made like a Nightcap. It Is true, when the Maids
come to be married there is some distinction upon their Heads; for then they
fast'n to the hinder part of their Heads a round piece of Felt, which they
cover with a white Veil very artificially pleated. Their Breeches are tied
below their Knees, and reach to their Ancles; their Shoes, which are of
Cordovan, both upper and under Leather, have but one seam upon upper part of
the Foot, being light, and cut like a pair of Pumps.

As for their Beds, they take several Sheepskins and sow them together, and
then stuffing them full of Millet-leaves, make a kind of Quilt. Now when they
beat the Millet, the Leaf comes to be as small as the Chaff of Oats; so that
when the person rises off from the Quilt, the Quilt rises and swells again of
it self. Their Cushions are of the same Make, only sometimes they are stuffed
with Wool.

The People are neither Christians nor Mahometans, all their Religion
consisting in some Ceremonies which they perform with the greatest Solemnities
which they can imagine: for at that time old and young of all Ages and Sexes,
and all the whole Town must be there at the place appointed, unless impotency
or sickness excuses them. I call them Villages, for in all these Countries
there is neither Fortress nor City, and as for their Villages, they are all
built after the same Model, round, with a Piazza in the middle, according to
the Figure,

^ge. 129.

Persian Travels.

A little gate at which the people of the Village go in and out for water to
the well ^^ch is in that place.

All this great round is taken up by ^ houses of the Inhabitants, right against
which their Cattle comes in and goes out evening and morning (...) they go a*
field and return from thence and these houses are all equal

This minor round is for the stables of their horses and for their other Cattle

The wells.

The great gate which is the Lords house, al-ways guarded by his People

THE PLATFORM OF ONE OF THE VILLAGES OF THE COMOUKS


CHAP. XII.
Of the Ceremonies and Customs of the People of Comania and Circassia.
THe Principal of all the Feasts which the Comouchs and Sherkes or Cirkassians
make, is that which they make at the end of Autumn, after this manner. Three of
the ancientest of the Village are appointed to manage it, and to discharge
themselves of a Duty imposed upon them in the company of all the people. These
three old men take a Sheep or a Goat, and having muttered certain Prayers over
the Beast, they cut the throat of it: after they have dressed it very clean, they
boil it whole, all but the Gathers, and them they roast* The Sheep being
boiled, they set it upon a Table, and carry it into a large Barn, where the
People are appointed to meet: There the three old men stand upright before a
Table, and all the People, Men, Women and Children behind them. When the Table
upon which the Meat stands, is brought in, two of the three old men cut off the
Legs and the roasted Gathers, and hold them up above their heads, and the third
holds up a great Cup of Bosa in the same manner, to the end the people behind
may see them. When the people see the Meat and Bosa so lifted up, they
prostrate themselves upon the ground, and so continue till all the rest of the
Meat be set upon the lesser Table, and that the old men have said some few
words. Then the two old men that held up the Meat, cut off two little pieces,
and give each of them a piece to him that holds the Cup, which being done, they
take each of them a piece for themselves. When they have all three eaten of the
meat, the old man that holds the Cup, drinks first, then gives the two old men
to drink, first to him upon the right hand, next to him upon the left, never
letting go the Cup all the while. This first Ceremony being thus accomplished,
the two old men turn toward the Assembly, and go and present both of the Meat
and the Drink, first to their Chief or Lord, then to all the people, who
equally eat their share, both men and women. That which remains of the four
feet, is carried back to the Table, and the three old men eat it. This done,
they go and place themselves at the Table, where the Mutton is set, where the
oldest of the three taking the Head, eats a little Morsel; after him, the
second, and next to him, the third does the fame. Then the first old man
commands the rest to be carried to the Lord, who receives it with a great deal
of respect, and after he has given it to his next akin, or the Friend whom he
loves best, the Head is gi'vn from one to another, till it be eat'n up. This
being done, the three old men begin to eat of the Mutton a bit or two, and the
Lord of the Village is called, who comes with his Bonnet in his hand, in a
trembling posture; to whom, one of the old men presenting a Knife, he cuts off
a piece of Mutton, and eats; and having drank a Cup of Bosa, he returns to his
Seat. After him, all the people, according to their turns in quality, do as
much; and then, for the Bones the Children go together by the ears among
themselves.

They have another Feast before they begin to Mow their Meadows; at which time
all the people of the Village, that have wherewithal, take every one a Goat,
(for in their Ceremonies they esteem Goats better than Sheep) and for the poor,
they join eight or ten together for a Goat. Let them be Goats, Sheep or Lambs,
when they are all brought together, they cut their Throats and then flea off
the skin, leaving the four feet and the Head in it. Then they stretch the Skin
with sticks that cross from one foot to the other, and set it upon a Pole fixed
in the Earth, the top whereof enters into the head of the Beast, as is to be
seen in the Figure of the Village; and as many Beasts as there are killed, so
many Poles are planted in the midst of the Village, with every one a particular
Skin upon it; to which, every one that passes by, makes a profound obeisance.

Every one having boiled his Goat, brings it into the void place in the middle
of the Village, and sets it upon a great Table with the rest. There is the Lord
of the Village with his Servants, and sometimes the Lord of some other Village
is invited. Now all this Victuals being upon the Table, three of the oldest men
of the Village sit down and eat a Bit or two: Then they call the Lord of the
Town, and if there be any other Lord, they come both together, with some other
of the Seniors of the Parish; who being set down, eat up one of the Beasts,
which the old men had set apart for them; the rest is divided among the people,
sitting upon the ground.

There are some Villages where you shall have fifty Goats and Sheep, or Lambs
and Kids, killed together at one time. As for their Bosa, there are some that
bring above 200 Pints; others more or less, according to their quality. All the
day long they eat and drink, and sing and dance to their Flutes a dozen
together, which are in some measure harmonious, as consisting of several parts,
and decreasing proportionably from the Treble to the Base. When the old men
have solac'd themselves with eating and drinking, they go home, and leave the
young people, Men and Women, Boys and Girls to be merry by themselves: They
stay as long as there is any Drink; and the next day they go early to Mowing.

They have other Ceremonies particular only to their Families. Once a year in
every House they make a Cross after the Form of a Mallet, about five Foot high,
the two Sticks that compose the Cross, being as big as a man's Arm. This the
Master of the House sets in the Evening near the Door in his Chamber, and
calling all his Family together, gives them every one a lighted Wax-Candle.
Then first he fixes his own to the Cross, next his Wife sticks hers, and so all
the Children and Servants: If the Children be so young, that they cannot do it
themselves, the Father and Mother do it for them. If one of the Candles burn
out before it be put out, it is a Prognostic that he or she that fixed it
there, shall not live out their year. If the Candle falls, then he whose Candle
it was, shall be robbed, or be forced to fly for his Life.

If it thunders, all the people run out of the Village, and the young people of
both Sexes let themselves to singing and dancing in the presence of their
Elders: And if any one be Thunderstruck, they bury that person honorably,
believing him to be a Saint. Besides that, they send over all the Country for a
white Goat, which they breed up and keep in the Village where it happened to
thunder, having it in great veneration, till thundering in another place, the
people send for it thither also. If the Thunder fall upon any of their Houses,
though it kill neither Man, Woman, Child, nor Beast, all that Family shall be
kept upon the public stock all that year, without being tied to any Labor but
of Singing and Dancing. These people, during that time, go from Village to
Village Dancing and Singing at peoples Doors, but never going into their
Houses; for which the Inhabitants are bound to bring them out something to eat.

There is a day in the Spring, when all that have been struck'n with Thunder,
meet together in the Village where the white Goat is kept; who has always a
Cheese hanging about his Neck as big as a Parma*Cheese. This Goat they take and
carry to the Village of the chief Lord of the Country. They never go in, but
the Lord with all the rest of the Village coming out, they all together
prostrate themselves before the Goat. Having said some Prayers, they take away
his Cheese, and immediately put another in its place. The Cheese which was
taken away, is at the same time cut into little pieces, and distributed among
the people. After that, they give the Strangers to eat, and bestow their Alms
upon them; so that by this wandering from Village to Village, they get good
store of Money.

They have among them but only one Book; and it is as big as one of our largest
Eolio's, and it lies in the hands of an old man, who has only the privilege to
touch it. When that old man is dead, they choose another old man to keep the
Book; whose Duty it is to go from Village to Village, where he hears of any
sick people. He carries the Book with him, and after he has lighted up a
Wax-Candle, and put the people out of the Room, he lays the Book upon the
Stomach of the sick person, opens it, and reads in it, then blows over it
several times, so that the Breath passes toward the mouth of the Party: Then he
causes the party diseased to kiss the Book several times, and as often lays it
upon his head, which is a Ceremony of half an hour. When the old man goes
away, one gives him a Beef or a Heifer; another gives him a Goat; every one
according to their Quality and Estate.

They have also Old Women that take upon them to cure the Sick. These women
feel the body of the sick party, all over, but more particularly they handle
and grope that part where the distemper lies: during which time they let go
several belches out of their mouths, and the more sick the party is, the louder
and thicker, they fetch their belches. The standers by hearing them belch in
that manner and fetch such vilanous sighs from their stomachs, believe their
friend to be dangerously ill, and that the louder the Women belch, the more
ease and comfort they receive; but whether they do or no, the women are well
paid for their pains. When any one feels a pain in the Head, they send for
the Barber, who, gives two cutts upon the Head across with the rasor, and then
pours Oil into the wound. For they believe the Headache proceeds only from a
wind between the flesh and the bone, for which the Incision opens a passage to
let it out.

At their Funerals they that are the near Relations or Friends of the dead,
some cut their faces, and other parts of their Bodies with sharp flints, others
prostrate themselves upon the ground, and tear their hair; so that when they
return from the Burial, they are all of a gore blood: However, notwithstanding
all this affliction, they never pray for the Dead.

As to their Marriages: When a young man has seen a Virgin which he has a
liking to, he sends one of his friends to agree with her Parents or her Tutor,
what he will give for her. Commonly the gift consists in Horses, Cows or some
other sort of Cattle. When the agreement is made, the Parents and Kindred of
the party thereby contracted, together with the Lord of the place, go to the
House where the Virgin lives and bring her to the Bridegrooms House, where
there is a Feast ready prepared; and after they have made merry, and sung, and
danced for a while, the Bridegroom and Bride go and lie together, without any
other Ceremony. If the man and Maid are of two Parishes, the Lord of the
Village where the Man lives accompany him and his Kindred to the next Village
all together, to fetch the Bride from thence.

If a Man and the wife have no Children, he is permitted to take several wives
one after another till he have Issue. If a married woman have a Gallant, and
that the Husband should come and find his wife abed with him, he goes away
again without saying a word, and never takes any further notice of it. The
woman also in the same case, does the like by the man. Nay, the more Gallants a
woman has, the more she is respected: And it is a common custom when they fall
out, to taunt one another, that if they were not ugly, or ill natured, or
diseased, they would have more Admirers than they have. The People are of an
excellent Complexion, especially the women, who are extremely fair, and finely
shaped, and keep their beauty till five and forty or fifty years. They are very
laborious, and work themselves in the Iron Mines, which they melt afterward
and forge into several Tools and Implements. They make abundance of Embroidery
of Gold and Silver for their Saddles, their Quivers, and their Pumps, as also
upon the Calicut of which they make their Handkerchiefs.

If the man and the woman happen to quarrel often together, so that they cannot
be reconciled: the Husband complaining first to the Lord of the Place, He sends
for the Woman, and having given order to sell her, gives the Man another. But
if the Woman complain first, the Man is served the same sauce. If a man or
Woman be a disturber of their Neighbors, if the Neighbors complain to the
Lord, he presently causes the party to be apprehended and sold to the merchants
that buy Slaves, for they are resolved they will live in quiet.

They that take upon them the quality of Gentlemen, fit still, do nothing and
speak very little. In an evening they ride out, and meet some twenty or thirty
together to go a stealing. Nor do they rob only their Enemies, but their
Neighbors, from whom the chief prey which they take are Cattle and Slaves. All
the Country People are Slaves to the Lord of the Village where they live, whom
he imploys to till his Land, and cut wood for him upon occasion, of which they
spend vast quantities. For not being very warm clad, they keep fire all night
in the places where they sleep.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the lesser Tartars, called Nogaies, bord'ring upon Comania.
THE lesser Tartars have a very ancient race of Horses, which they breed up
even to Superstition; so that it would be among them an act of Sacrilege to
sell them to strangers, as being not a little curious how they sell them to one
another. These are the Horses which they ride, fifty or sixty in a Troop
together when they go a thieving; and sometimes a hundred together, when they
design any Incursion upon their Enemies. When the old Men come to be infirm and
impotent, if they know any stout young Man that is a Soldier, they will lend
him one of their Horses (if he have none of his own) to make an Incursion, upon
condition to have half of the Booty. Many times they run up as far as Hungary,
near to Comora and Javarin. These Horses, partly by nature, partly by early
custom, will travel four or five days together with a handful of Grass given
them once in eight or ten hours, and a little Water every four and twenty
hours. But they never go a robbing with them 'till they come to be seven or
eight years old: besides that, they must undergo a very severe education ere
they make use of them in those hardships. Their Bit is only a piece of Iron
with a Buckle on each side, to which they fast'n the Bridle and Head-stall. For
eight days together they put under the Saddle a bag of Gravel or Earth. The
first day the Sack is a Horse-man's weight; and so they add to it every day,
'till it come to be double the weight at the end of the eight days. As they
increase every day the weight upon the Horses back, they abate every day the
Horse's Provender and Drink. During these eight days, they get up and walk the
Horse two or three Leagues. The next eight days, they abate every day of the
weight, 'till the Sack be quite empty. Proportionably also they abate him of
his Meat and Drink as in the first eight days, and every day take up the Girt a
hole shorter. The three or four last days they afford the Horse neither
Provender nor Drink, according as they find him able to endure hunger and
thirst, and the labor which he is to undergo. The last day, they work him
'till he be all over of a Sweat; then they unbridle and unsaddle him, and pour
upon him the coldest Water they can meet with. That done, they lead him into a
field, and tie him by the leg with a Cord, at such a length as they intend he
shall feed; yet still from day to day allowing him more Rope, 'till at last
they let him loose, and feed with the rest of the Horses. This terrible fasting
and labor, during which time, that little which they do eat and drink, they
eat and drink with the Bit in their mouth, brings them to be so lean and out of
flesh, that their very bones are ready to start out of their skins: So that if
any one should see them in that miserable condition, that does not know the
nature of the Horses, would think they would never be fit for good service. The
hoofs of these Horses are so hard that they never shoe them, and yet they will
leave the prints of their feet in the Earth, or upon the Ice, as if they had
been shod. These Tartars are so curious in having Horses that will endure
labor, that so soon as they see any handsome Colt in their Breed, they
presently take him up, to school him as I have related: but hardly ten in fifty
endure the tutoring.

As for their Diet, it is a great advantage for these Tartars to ride a Mare, in
regard they Drink the Milk. They that ride Horses, carry along with them a
little Bag full of pieces of Cheese dried in the Sun; they have also a small
Boracho of Goat-skin, which they fill with Water where they meet with it, into
which they put two or three bits of their hard Cheese, which softens with the
motion of the Horse, the Boracho being tied under his Belly: and thus the Water
becomes a kind of sour Milk, which is their ordinary Drink.

As for their Instruments of Cookery, every Horseman has a large wooden Ladle
hanging at the Pummel of his Saddle, out of which the rider drinks himself, and
gives his Horse likewise to drink. They that encounter them, can hope for no
better Booty than their Horses; but they are very hard to be taken; for when
one of these Horses perceives that his Rider is slain, he follows those that
fly with all the swiftness imaginable. Beside that, those Horses being carried
into other Countries, are presently spoiled, and come to nothing.

Their Clothing is only a Sheep-skin, which in Winter they wear with the wool
next their Bodies; in the Summer turning the other side. They that are the
Nobility of the Country, wear Wolves-skins, with a kind of Shirt, and Breeches
of course Fustian of diverse Colors, which the Tailor gets little credit by
shaping.

Their Women are very white and well proportioned, but their Faces are broad,
and their Eyes little, so that by thirty years of Age they become very
deformed. There is not a man but has two or three Wives, which they never
choose but out of their own Tribe. Every Tribe has a Chief; who is one of the
Nobility of the Country, and carries for his Banner a Horse-tail fastened to a
half-Pike, and died into the Color belonging to the Tribe. When they march,
every one knows where to place himself, and how much ground they ought to take
up for their Tribe and their Cattle; one Tribe never encroaching upon another.

The Women and Maids are generally clad in a large Shirt that reaches down to
their feet. Upon their Heads they wear a large white Vale, their Foreheads
being bound about with a large black Handkerchief tied in five or six Rolls.
The Noble sort of Women and Maids wear over this Vail a Bonnet open behind,
which comes down upon their Foreheads like a three-corner'd Cap: One of these
Points stands up in the midst of the Forehead, lined with Velvet, Satin, or
Cloth of Gold, and set with small pieces of Gold and Silver, and false Pearls,
of which they also make themselves Bracelets: Their Breeches are of
single-colour'd Cloth, and for Shoes and Stockings, they only wear a Cordovan
Boot of what Color they please, neatly sewed.

When a young man intends to marry, it behooves him to give the Father and the
Mother of the Maid a certain quantity of Horses, Bullocks or Cows, or other
Cattle, which is done in the presence of the greatest part of the ancientest of
the Tribe, and a Moullah beside. When the Agreement is made, the young man has
the liberty to see his Mistress, but not till then: For before, he has only the
information of her Mother, his Sisters, or such Women as were his own Friends.
Besides the three Wives which the man is allowed to take, he may keep several
female Slaves; but the Children are still slaves, and can never inherit. These
Tartars are of a very hot constitution, though not so hot as the women. Both
the one and the other are very fair-hair'd; but the men have little or no
Beards: So that if there be any one that has more Beard than ordinary, and can
but write and read, they make him a Moullah.

These people have no Houses, but live in Tents, or in Wagons which are drawn
after them wherever they go. The Tents are for the old people and little
Children, with their Slaves that attend them. The young women ride in Wagons
closed up with Boards, and to let in the Air, upon one side they open a Window
that is made like a Lattice. In the Evening they are permitted to spend a
little time in the Tents. When the Girls have attained to the age of ten or
twelve Years, they never stir any more out of their Wagons till they are
married, not so much as for the necessities of Nature; but in the middle of the
Wagon there is a Plank to be taken up; and if it be in a place where they
stay, a Slave presently comes and cleanses all underneath. The Maidens Wagon
is easy to be known, as being painted with Flowers; and generally there is a
Camel tied to the Tail of it besmeared with several colors, and several
Nosegays or Posies of Flowers stuck about the Head of the Beast.

The young men have also every one their Charlot, wherein they only carry a
Boracho of Horse-skin, containing about 38 Quarts, which they usual filly with
Mares-milk, which is very sour. They have also every one another Wagon next to
that wherein they ride themselves; wherein they carry several Boracho's full of
Cows-milk, which is very sour. At Meals they drink this Milk: But before they
power it out, they stir it in the Boracho with a great Stick, that the Curd may
mix with the thin Milk. But the Mares-Milk is only for the Master and Mistress,
though before they drink of either, they mix it with water. When a Friend comes
to see them, they fetch out their dried Cheese, which they call Kourout, and
breaking it into little Bits, eat it with fresh Butter. At their Feasts they
sometimes kill old Sheep, sometimes old Goats. But for their Horses they never
kill them but at the Funerals of their Kindred, at the Birth of a Child, or at
their Marriage-Feasts, or lastly, when their Friends return laden with Spoil
from any incursion, and are stored with Slaves. They never drink any thing but
Mares-Milk or Cows-Milk, and when they can get neither, they will endure thirst
for three or four days together before they will drink water, being always
gripped with a terrible Colic when they drink it. They never eat any Salt,
being of an opinion that it is naught for the Eyes. They live long, and are
very strong, and seldom sick; nor do they refuse any Diet but Swines-flesh.

Their Country is very level; only for some few Hills in some places. They
have great store of Pasture-grounds, and every Tribe has their peculiar Wells
to water their Cattle. In the Winter they lodge upon the banks of great Rivers,
near to Woods and Marshes, suffering their Herds to feed at liberty. When the
Snow is very deep, the Cattle scrape it away with their feet to come at the
Grass, though they meet with very little else but Reeds and Bushes. In the mean
while the men cut down the Woods, make great Fires, and employ themselves in
Fishing. There are some parts of these Rivers where the least Fish they take is
about four or five foot long; and some there are above ten or twelve foot in
length. Some they dry in the wind, and preserve against Summer; some they smoke
in holes which they make in the Earth: As for the smaller sort, they boil them,
and eat them without Salt or any other seasoning. When they have eat'n their
Fish, they scoop up a large wooden Ladel full of the Fish-water and gulp it
down. As for Bread, there is no talk of it in their Country.

When they are not at Wars, or are but newly returned from any Incursion, they
spend their time in Hunting, but cannot endure any other Hounds except
Greyhounds: So that he must be a very poor Tartar indeed that does not keep a
Greyhound. Take notice however by the by, that these petty Tartars, concerning
whom I have last discoursed, are certain people adjoining to Comania, which the
Turks, Persians and Mengrelians call Nogaies; who may be well reckoned among
the number of the petty Tartars, in regard they are all under one Prince, whom
the Grand Signor appoints King over all Petty Tartary, and who receives his
investiture at Constantinople.

These Tartars are all Mahumetans. Nor have they any Physician among them;
making use only of certain Simples of which they have a traditional knowledge.
When the sik person lies in any extremity, they send for a Moullah, who comes
with the Alcoran, which he opens and shuts three times, saying certain Prayers,
and laying it upon the sick person's face. If by chance the sick person
recover, they attribute his recovery to the Sanctity of the Alcoran, and
present the Moullah with a Sheep or a Goat: If he die, all his Kindred meet and
carry him to the Grave with great Testimonies of Sadness, crying continually
Alla, Alla. When he is interred, the Moullah mutters certain Prayers over the
Grave, and is paid for his pains according to the wealth of the Heirs. For the
poor he generally spends three days and three nights in that exercise; for the
rich he as usually spends a Month, never stirring all the while from the Grave;
and sometimes sev'n or eight.

When any one of them is wounded, they use no other Salve but only boiled
Flesh, which they apply hot to the wound. If the wound be deep, they thrust in
a piece of Fat as hot as the wound can endure it; and if the person be able to
kill a Horse, the wound is cured so much the sooner; for the Flesh and Fat of a
Horse are much more medicinable than the Flesh of any other Creature.

Were it not the Custom of the Tartars to buy their Wives when they marry,
there would be fewer Whores. But in regard there are an abundance of poor young
men that have not wherewithal to buy Wives, they never marry at all. This is
that which makes so many Soldiers among them, and emboldens 'em to invade
their Neighbors, and to get something whereby they may be enabled to buy them a
Wife. For the Virgins they are never to be defiled, being always shut up in
their wagons: But for the women they are oft'n debauched, appointing their
private Meetings, when they go to fetch water for their Cattle, when their
Husbands are a hunting, or looking after their Herds. Nor is it a hard thing to
conceal it from their Husbands, in regard the Tartars are not in the least
prone to Jealousy.

By the way take notice, that the Nogaies, though they live almost after the
same manner as the Tartars, and are under the same Prince, yet they perfectly
hate them; reproaching them for effeminate, because they live in Houses and
Villages, whereas the true Soldier should live in Tents as they do, to be
ready upon all occasions.

They that run a-foot, as well in these Countries, as in Persia, when they are
weary, take Walnuts and bruise them, and then rub the Soles of their feet with
them before the fire as hot as they can endure it, which presently makes them
fresh again.

Having thus done with all the several Roads; here follows an Alphabetical
Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes of all the Principal Cities of the whole
Empire of Persia.

THE LONGITUDES and LATITUDES OF THE Principal Cities of PERSIA, according as
the Geographers of those Countries place them.
A.
A Amoul is in 72 Degrees, 20 Min. of Longitude, 36 degrees. of Latitude. The Lands
about this City abound in Prunes.

Abeber, in 74 degrees. 20 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. 12 Leagues from Casbin,
a small City; but the Land is good about it.

Absecun, in 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 10 min. Lat. A small City in an
excellent Soil.

Abdehil, in 60 degrees. 20 min. Long. 36 degrees. 24* min. Lat. The Inhabitants are
most Christians, and there are many ancient Churches in it. It depends upon
Sultany.

Ahwaz, 70 degrees. 15 min. Long. 31 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A small City half ruined, in
the Province of Belad Cowreston, in a Soil that yields excellent Fruits.

Arbella, 69 degrees. 50 min. Long. 36 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A small Champaign City,
where Provisions are Cheap.

Ardevil, 62 degrees. 30 min. Long. 38 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Ardeston, 77 degrees. 10 min. Long. 33 degrees. 7 min. Lat. Famous for the Copper
Vessels that are there made.

Arion, 74 degrees. 32 min. Long. 32 degrees. 25 min. Lat. One of the three places
where Olives grow in all *Persia.

Assed-Abad, 63 degrees. 40 min. Long. 34 degrees. 50 min. Lat. A small City toward
Amadan.

Ava, 75 degrees. 10 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat. This is a very small place.

Azadkar, or Yevin, 82 degrees. 15 min. Long. 36 degrees. 32. min. Lat. A City in a
great Plain, where there are above four hundred Channels under ground.

B.
Bab El Abab, or, the Gate of Gates; called also Demir-capi; or, the Gate of
Iron. The Tartars call it Monjou: 75 degrees. 15. min. Long. 45 degrees. 15 min. Lat.
it has been formerly a strong place.

Badkeist, 85 degrees. 32 min. Long. 35 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A small, but most
pleasant City, and well built.

Baste, 80 degrees. 15 min. Long. 29 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A City in the Province of
Kerman, where in Summer the Mornings are very cold, the Afternoons hot; yet the
Air very good.

Bafrouche, see Mahmeter.

Beylagon, 63 degrees. 52 min. Long. 41 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A City toward the Caspian
Sea, in a Country abounding in Corn and Fruit.

Balk, 91 degrees. 36 min. Long. 38 degrees. 10 min. Lat. Three days journey from
Moultan.

Bem, or Bembe; 74 degrees. 15 min. Long. 28 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Thought to have been
built by Caliph Mouktadar, near the great Desert of Bersham.

Berdoe, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 35 degrees. 30 min. Lat. It lies surrounded* with
Pasture-grounds, which breed great store of Cattle.

Berzende, 63 degrees. 14 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Here are made a sort of
course Druggets for ordinary people.

Beston, 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 20 min. Lat. It lies in a Country
abounding in Corn and Fruits.

Bimoncheer, 74 degrees. 10 min. Long. 37 degrees. 30 min. Lat. Here is great Trade for
Silk.

Bost, 91 degrees. 28 min. Long. 32 degrees. 16 min. Lat. A great City, to which
belongs the fairest and strongest Castle in all Persia.

Bourou-Jerde, 74 degrees. 30 min. Long. 34 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Famous for Saffron,
and for being the native City of many Learned Men.

C.
Chemkon, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 41 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Chiras, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 29 degrees. 36 min, Lat.

Chirvan, or Erivan; 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 38 degrees. 32 min. Lat. Here all the
Silk- Caravans rendevous; and it is one of the richest Kanats or Governments in
Persia.

D.
Dankon, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 30 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A bad Town, in a bad Soil.

Darabguired, 80 degrees. 15 min. Long. 30 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In several ports round
about this City they meet with* Salt of several colors, as red and green,
black and white. Here they also make long-neck'd Glass-Bottles, which are very
curious work; nor are they without Sider to fill those Bottles, in regard of
the great plenty of Apples thereabouts. Near to the City there is a
Sulphur-Mine, and great store of Mummy, very much esteemed in Persia.

Debeston, 80 degrees. 15 min. Long. 38 degrees. 15 min. Lat. This is not properly a
City, but a great many Villages joined together.

Deras, 79 degrees. 30 min. Long. 31 degrees. 32 min. Lat.

Devinmaat, 62 degrees. 5 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Din Ver, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 35 degrees. Lat. A City in a fruitful Soil, stored
with Mosquees.

Doulad, 74 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 50 min. Lat* The Country about is full
of black Mulberry-trees.

Dourak, 74 degrees. 32 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Here they make the loose
Cassocks without Sleeves which the Arabians wear. Near to this City the Rivers
Tigris and Euphrates, meeting at a place called Hell*d, make a Marsh, where
grow the Reeds of which the Eastern people make their Pens.

E.
Elelbetem, 87 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Eltiib, 70 degrees. 15 min. Lon. 32 degrees. 15 min Lat.

Enderab, 93 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Erivan, see Chirvan.

Espharaien, 81 degrees. 40 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15 min. Lat. The Country about it
abounds in Pears and Apples.

Estakre, 78 degrees. 30 min. Long. 30 degrees. 15 min. Lat. The ancient City in the
Province of Fars, properly* Persia; in a Soil abounding in Vines and Date-trees.

Esterabat, 75 degrees. 35 min. Long. 36 degrees. 50 min. Lat.

F.
Ferah, 18 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Built by Abdalla the Son of
Taher, in the time of Maimon Reshid, Caliph of Berni-Abbas.

Feronzabad, 82 degrees. 32 min. Long. 30 degrees. 10 min. Lat. Anciently called
Hourbecthion.

G.
Girefte, 73 degrees* 40. min. Long. 31 degrees. 10 min. Lat. One of the biggest Cities
in the Province of Kerman. The Trade of the City consists in Honeys and Wheat.

Gir readegon, vulgarly Paygon, 75 degrees. 35 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Goutem, 74 degrees. 46 min. Long. 37 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A little City, full of
Silk-Twisters.

H.
Hamadan, 75 degrees. 20 min. Long. 34 degrees. Lat. The Country about it breeds great
store of Cattle.

Hasn-Eltaf, or, The Center of Beauty; 72 degrees. 32 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min.
Lat. At this day almost ruined.

Hawas, 75 degrees. 40 min. Long. 33 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Heaye, 74 degrees. 35 min. Long. 31 degrees. 50 min. Lat.

Helaverde, 91 degrees. 30 min. Long. 35 degrees. 15 min Lat. Built by Abdulla before
mentioned.

Herat, 85 degrees. 30 min. Long. 36 degrees. 56 min. Lat. A City in the Province of
Carassan, where Sultan Henssein-Mirza founded several Colleges for Youth.

Hesn-Medi, 78 degrees. 45 min. Long. 32 degrees. 5 min. Lat.

Hessne Ebneamoae, 70 degrees. 45 min. Long. 26 degrees. 20 min. Lat.

Hurman, 85 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 30 min. Lat. A small City, in a bad Air.

I.
Jemnon, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat. The Trade of it is in
Copper Manufactures.

Jend-Babour, 75 degrees. 5 min. Long. 31 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A very strong place,
famous for the Tomb of Melek-Yakoub-Sha, King of Schiras.

Irson, 80 degrees. 35 min Long. 36 degrees. 50 min. Lat.

Ispahan, or Hispahan; 86 degrees. 40 min. Long. 32 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

K.
Kaar, 78 degrees. 40 min. Long. 42 degrees. 32 min. Lat.

Kashan, 76 degrees. 15 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Kafre-Chirin, 71 degrees. 50 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Built by
Noushirevon-Aadel, surnamed the Just; and upon the acts and deeds of this King
is all the Morality of the Persians founded.

Kaien, 83 degrees. 20 min. Long. 36 degrees. 32 min. Lat. Said to breed the choicest
Wits of all Persia.

Kalaar, 76 degrees. 25 min. Long. 37 degrees. 25 min. Lat. One of the chiefest Cities
in Guilan.

Kalin, 87 degrees. 5 min. Long. 35 degrees. 35 min. Lat. In an excellent Soil for
Cattle and Fruit.

Karkoub, 74 degrees. 45 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Kasbin, 75 degrees. 40 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Kasre-le-lehous, or Kengavat, 76 degrees. 20 min. Long. 33. degrees. 35 min. Lat.

Kazeron, 88 degrees. 30 min. Long. 28 degrees. 30 min. Lat. The Country about produces
Oranges, Limons, and Cypress-trees.

Kerah, 86 degrees. 40 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Kerman, or Kirman, 81 degrees. 15 min. Long. 29 degrees. 50 min. Lat.

Kervak, 87 degrees. 32 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Kirmonsha, 63 degrees. 45 min. Long. 34 degrees. 37 min. Lat.

Kom, 75 degrees. 40 min. Long. 35 degrees. 35 min. Lat.

Kouh de Mavend, 74 degrees. 15 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. the smallest now
which was once the largest City in Persia.

Koucht, 83 degrees. 40 min. Long. 33 degrees. 20 min. Lat. In a soil excellent for
Corn and good Fruits.

Koy, 60 degrees. 40 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Kevachir, or Verdechir, 80 degrees. 30 min. Long. 28 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

L.
Lahijon, 74 degrees. 25 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15 min. Lat. The Trade of the Town
consists in Stuffs, half Silk, half Cotton, called Tafsile.

Loussek, see Toussea.

M.
Maameter, or Barfrouche, 77 degrees. 35 min. Long. 36 degrees. 50 min. Lat.

Mehrouyon, or Behbehon, 75 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 35 min. Lat.

Meraque, 71 degrees. 20 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat. It stands in one of the
Gardens of Persia.

Merend, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 37 min. Lat.

Mervasae, 87 degrees. 32 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In a fertile Country for
Corn and Fruit.

Merverond, 88 degrees. 40 min. Long. 34 degrees. 30 min. Lat. in a fertile Country.

Mesched, look Touss.

Moukon, or Derbent, 20 Leagues from the Caspian Sea, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37
degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Mourjan, 84 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A City well peopled,
wherein there are several Mosquees, and fair Piazza's.

N.
Nacksivan, or Nachevan, 61 degrees. 32 min. Long. 39 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Natel, 77 degrees. 40 min. Long. 36 degrees. 7 min. Lat. in a fertile Country for
Pasturage.

Nehavend, or Nahouand, 73 degrees. 45 min. Long. 34 degrees. 20 min. Lat. The Country
people aver this City built before the Loufon, or the Flood.

Neher-Terij, 75 degrees. 00 min. Long. 32 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Nessah, 84 degrees. 45 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Nichabar, 80 degrees. 55 min. Long. 36 degrees. 20 min. Lat.

O.
Oujon, 61 degrees. 35 min. Long. 32 degrees. 24 min. Lat. To this City finely seated
belongs a fair Castle.

R.
Rachmikdon, 87 degrees. 34 min. Long. 35 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Rem-hormous, 74 degrees. 45 min. Long. 31 degrees. 45 min. Lat. In this City Selmon,
Haly's Foster Father was born.

Rey, 76 degrees. 20 min. Long. 35 degrees. 35 min. Lat. In the best Soil of all
Persia, for Wheat, Fruit, and Pasturage.

Roudbar, 75 degrees. 37 min, Long. 37 degrees. 21 min. Lat. in the Province of Guilan.

Royon, 71 degrees. 36 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. in the Province of Mazandran.

S.
Saassour, 86 degrees. 20 min. Long. 35 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Saron, 76 degrees. 20 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In the Province of Guilan.

Sary, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long, 36 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Seated among the Copper-Mines.

Sebzevoar, 81 degrees. 5 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Near this City the people
gather great quantities of Manna.

Semiron, 71 degrees. 30 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat. A pleasant City stored
with good Water and Fruits.

Serijr-el*lan, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 45 degrees. 50 min Lat.

Serkess, or Serakas, 85 degrees. 35. min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A pleasant
City for Situation, and plenty of Waters.

Sermeghon, 87 degrees. 37 min. Long. 37 degrees. 32 min. Lat. In a fertile Soil, yet
not very plentiful.

Serveston, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 29 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In a Soil abounding with
Gardens.

Servon, 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat, In a Soil abounding with
Wine and Dates.

Surjon, 74 degrees. 40 min. Long. 30 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Where the best Persian
Carpets are made, and Shaads, or Girdles of Goats Hair curiously wrought.

Sohreverede, 73 degrees. 36 min. Long. 36 degrees. 5 min. Lat.

Ssouss, 73 degrees. 45 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Sultanie, 76 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Where the Mornings and
Evenings are very cold; all the rest of the day very hot.

T.
Taberon, 80 degrees. 34 min. Long, 35 degrees. 20 min. Lat.

Talikon, 88 degrees. 15 min. Long. 36 degrees. 32 min. Lat. In a Country plentiful in
Corn, Fruit, and good Water.

Tauris, otherwise called Ssernerdehi, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 10 min.
Lat.

Tebess, 80 degrees. 40 min. Long. 38 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Teflis, 60 degrees. 15 min. Long. 43 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Toukon, 82 degrees. 45 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Touss, or Meshed, 82 degrees. 30 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min. Lat.

Toussea, otherwise called Loussek, 85 degrees. 40 min. Long, 37 degrees. 50 min. Lat.

Y.
Yesd, 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat.

Yevin, see Azadkar.

Z.
Zemma, 89 degrees. 14 min. Long. 38 degrees. 35 min. Lat. In a Country abounding in
all sorts of Cattle.

Zenjon, 73 degrees. 36 min. Long. 36 degrees. 5 min. Lat. Famous for its antiquity and
formerly the Persian University.

Zertah, 79 degrees. 30 min. Long. 32 degrees. 30 min. Lat. The biggest City in the
Province of Belad-Ciston, abounding in Wine and Shell-fruit.

Zour, 70 degrees. 20 min. Long. 35 degrees. 32 min. Lat. A City in the same province.

Zouzen, 85 degrees. 15 min. Long. 35 degrees. 39 min. Lat. In the Province of
Mazandran.

Zourend, 73 degrees. 40 min. Long. 31 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In the Province of Kerman,
where there is great store of curious Potters ware; where also grows the Root
Hanna, with the juice whereof the Persians dye their Nails, and the Breasts and
Tails of their Horses.

The End of the Third BOOK.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR* TAVERNIER: BEING, A DESCRIPTION OF
PERSIA.
CHAP. I.
Of the Extent of PERSIA, and its division into Provinces.
PERSIA, according to the present State of the Empire, to the North is bounded
by the Caspian Sea; Southward, by the Ocean; Eastward it joins to the
Territories of the Great Mogul; Westward, to the Dominions of the Grand Signor;
the two Empires being parted by the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates.

But that you may the better understand the full extent of the Dominions of the
Persian King you are to know, That this great Monarch, besides that Tract of
Ground which is properly called Persia, possesses a vast part of the ancient
Assyria and the great Armenia, the ancient Kingdoms of the Parthians and Medes,
the Kingdom of Lar, the Kingdom of Ormus, and all Eastward of Persia beyond
Candahar, almost as far as the Kingdom of Scindi.

But because those Europeans that have Traveled before me, either were not so
curious, or had not perhaps the opportunity to learn the true number of the
Provinces that compose the whole Continent of Persia, I have undertak'n, though
the Persians themselves are ignorant enough, to give the best account I can,
finding it necessary for the better satisfaction of the Reader, to take some
notice of the Names of Places according to the ancient Geography.

The first is the Great Armenia, which our Maps without any ground or reason at
all call Turcomannia; in regard they might have more properly called it
Ermenick in general, since the Inhabitants are the greatest part Armenians.
That part whereof which is situated between the two Rivers of Araxes and Cyrus,
at this day called Aras and Kur, by the Natives is called Iran, or Cara-bag,
being one of the most beautiful, and richest pieces of Land in all Persia; the
principal Cities of which are Erivan, Nacksivan, Zulpha, and Van.

The second is Diarbeck, formerly Mesopotamia, between Euphrates and Tigris;
the chief Cities whereof are Bir, Car-Emir or Diarbequir, Ourfa, Moussul,
Gezire, Merdin, etc.

The third is Curdistan, formerly Assyria, extending all along the East Side of
the River Tigris, from the Lake Van to the Frontiers of Bagdat; the principal
Cities are Niniveh, Sherisoul, Amadie Sneirne, Betlis, and Salmastre.

The fourth is Hierak-Arabi, otherwise the Country of Babylon or Chaldea; the
principal Cities whereof are Felougia upon Euphrates, Bagdat upon Tigris,
Mershed-Ali, Gourno, and Balsara; and in the Country of Bourous, S^araban,
Eronnabat, etc.

The fifth is Hierak-Agemi, or the ancient Parthia; the principal Cities
whereof are Hispahan, Toushercan, Hamadan, Cashan, Kan, and Casbin; and perhaps
Yesd, if it be not rather in Kerman or Sigistan.

The sixth contains Shirvan, all along the Caspian Sea, where stand the Cities
of Derbent in the Persian Tongue signifies a Strait Gate, and Demir-Capi in the
Turkish, a Gate of Iron; near to which place were the ancient Caspian Gates, or
Caspiae Pylae of the Ancients.
Derbent or Demir-Capi, Baku, and Shamaki; and the Province of Edzerbaijan;
wherein stand the Cities of Tauris, Ardevil, and Sultany. Which two Provinces
comprehend the ancient Media within a very little, extending to the very Shore
of the Caspan Sea.

The seventh contains Kylan and Mazandran, lying likewise upon the Caspan Sea,
formerly Hyrcania; wherein are the Cities and Towns of Firuzouh, Sukar-abad,
and Mionikielle at the entry of the Mountains; Giru, Talara-pesct, and Saru, in
the Plain; Ferh-abad, Ciarman, and Gscref, toward the Sea.

The eighth is Estarabad, formerly Margiana, which extends to the River
Ruthkhane-kurkan, which the Ancients called Oxus; the principal Citis whereof
are Estarabad, Amul, Damkam.

The ninth contains the Province of the Vsbeck-Tartars, comprehending all the
ancient Sogdiana and Bactriana; the chief Cities whereof are Balk, Samarcand,
and Boccara, etc.

The tenth is Corassan, formerly Aria, with some part of Bactriana; the chief
Cities whereof are Eri, Meshed, Nisabur, Thun, etc.

The eleventh Sablestand, formerly Peloponnesus; the principal Cities whereof
are Beksabat, Asbe, Bust, Sarents; the Territory and City of Candahar being
also comprehended within the extent of this Province, together with Duki and
Alunkan, upon the Frontiers of the Great Mogul's Dominions.

The twelfth is Sigistan, formerly Drangiana; the principal Cities whereof are
Sistan, Shalack, and Kets.

The thirteenth comprehends all the Territories of the ancient Arachosia,
bord'ring upon the Kingdom of Scindi, not having any Cities that we know of.

The fourteenth is the Province of Makran, lying all along upon the Sea of
Mogostan, formerly Gedrosia; the chief Cities whereof are Makran, Firhk,
Chalak, and the Port of Guadel toward Guzerat.

The fifteenth Kerman, formerly Caramania, extending as far as the Gulf of
Ormus; the chief Cities whereof are Kerman, Bermazir, the Port of Kuhestek, and
the Cape of Jasques.

The sixteenth is Farsistan, or that part of Persia so properly called; the
chief Cities whereof are Schiras, Caseron, Benarou, Firus-abat, Darab-guier,
etc. To which you may add the little Province of Laraston, with the City of
Lar, just against Ormus. But this Province formerly extended no farther than
Benarou, two days journey from Lar, before Sha-Abas conquered the Kingdom of
Lar, and then the Kingdom of Ormus. Now they are both united; though they have
both several Governors, as they had distinct Princes before. The Ports in this
Province upon the Persian Gulf are Bander-Abassi and Bander-Congo.

There are two other little Ports in the Persian Gulf, about thirty hours sail
from the Mouth of Euphrates, but not capable of receiving any other than small
Barks; which are very much to be admired; for in regard the Inhabitants are
ignorant of the use of Iron, it is strange to see their Boats made so handsome
and strong withal; the Planks being only tied together with a Cord, which is
made of a kind of Hemp taken from the outside of the Coco-nut.

The last is the Province of Cursistan, formerly Susiana, which Euphrates and
Tigris joining together separate from Chaldea; the principal Cities whereof are
Suster, anciently Susa, the Capital City of the Empire of King Ahasuerus,
Ahawas, Scabar, Ramhormus, etc.

The temper of the Air in Persia varies according to the variety of situation.
The Country of Edzerbaijan is very cold, but very healthy. The Air of
Mazandran is very unwholsom; for being a low fenny Country, and full of
Insects, when the Waters dry up in the Summer, the Insects also dye and infect
the Air. Sometimes those bad Waters overflow the Country; in so much that the
Inhabitants receive a tincture in their Complexions from the color of the
Earth. The Province of Guilan is included in the Province of Mazandran; and the
Air is so unwholsom, that the People cry of him that is sent to command there;
Has he robbed, stolen, or murdered, that the King sends him to Guilan?

At Ispahan, which is almost in the middle of Persia, there are six months of
hot, and six months of cold weather. The Snow falls three or four times in a
season, and sometimes so very thick, that there is hardly any traveling upon
the Road. About a League from the City, toward the Mountain, there stands a
Stone about two or three Foot high, which when the Snow hap'ns to cover,
prognosticates a plentiful Year; and the first Countryman that carries the
news thereof to the King, receives a hundred Tomans. As for Rain, there is very
little falls there, unless it be in April, and then it sometimes rains very
hard.

In the Southern Provinces, the heats are very excessive, and kill abundance of
our Europeans, especially those that are given to drink.

All Persia is watered with little Rivers; but there is not one navigable River
through the whole extent of it, unless it be Aras, or the Araxes of the
Indians, which carries some few flat-bottom Boats. The other Rivers, instead of
growing bigger, the farther they keep their course from the Springs, grow
shallower for want of Water, by reason of the infinite number of Kreises or
Channels, which they cut out of the Rivers to water the Lands, which would not
bring forth so much as only Grass without the help of those Cuts; unless it be
in the Province of Mazandran, which from September to March seems a kind of
Terrestrial Paradise, through the pleasing variety of Herbs and Fruits.
However, Persia in general being thus watered is a most fruitful Country:
though it be true, that many of their Springs and Channels are lost and brok'n.
And Mirza-Ibrahim Governor of the Province of Edzerbaijan told me one day,
that in the very Territory of Tauris, there were above two hundred Springs
utterly lost, either by accident or negligence.

As for their Gardens, they water them with Well-water, by the help of a Wheel
and an Ox; but the running Water is much better, as not being so cold, and more
fatning to the Earth. And therefore the Fruits that grow in the Mountains which
are only watered by the Rain or by the Dews, are much better tasted, and keep
longer.

Persia is a mountainous Country, but for the most part the Mountains are very
dry and barren. As for Woods, there are none in all the Country. Travelers are
also forced to go a great way out of their Road to find a Spring; and sometimes
they shall ride ten or twelve Leagues, before they meet with any Water but what
they carry in their Bottles. There are some Mountains out of which they dig
Salt, as Stones out of a Quarrey. There are also Plains where the Sand is
nothing but Salt, though it be not so savoury as our Northern Salt.

Of late several Copper-Mines have been found out, of which the Natives make
all sorts of Kitchin-Housholdstuff. Their Lead comes from Kerman; their Iron
and Steel from Corasan and Kasbin, though not so good as that of Spain. Their
Steel is very fine, with a smooth grain, and grows very hard in the Water, but
it is as brittle as Glass. Neither will this sort of Steel agree with the Fire:
so that if the Fire have not more than a double heat when the Steel is forged,
it will look just like a piece of burnt Charcoal. The Steel which we call
Damas-Steel comes from the Indies, and the Persians call it Gauherder.

There are also some Mines of Gold and Silver in Persia, wherein it appears
that they have anciently wrought. Sha-Abas also tried again, but found his
expense to be more than his profit: whence it is become a Proverb in Persia,
Nokre Kerven dehkrarge nohhassel; The Silver-Mine of Kerven, where they spend
ten to get nine, which is the reason that all the Gold and Silver of Persia
comes out of Foreign Countries.

CHAP. II.
Of the Flowers and Fruits of Persia, of Turquoises and Pearls.
THE Flowers of Persia are nothing comparable to our European Flowers, neither
for variety nor beauty. For having passed the Tigris in the Road to Persia, you
meet with nothing but Roses and Lillies, and some other Fruits peculiar to the
Country.

As for Roses, they have great store, which they distill, as they do
Orange-flowers, and transport the Waters into all the Eastern parts of Asia.

I never left the Court of Persia, but some of the Lords, especially four of
the white Eunuchs, begged of me to bring them some Flowers out of France; for
they have every one a Garden before their Chamber Door: and happy is he that
can present the King with a Posie of Flowers in a Crystal Flower-Pot.

There are in Persia Apples, Pears, Oranges, Granates, Prunes, Cherries,
Apricots, Quinces, Chestnuts, Medlers, and other sorts of Fruit, which is not
generally so well-tasted as ours.

Their Apricots indeed, especially the lesser sort, are better than ours. When
you open this Apricot, the Stone cleaves in two, and then the Kernel, which is
only a small Skin, as white as Snow, is more pleasing to the taste than if it
had been preserved.

As for their Melons, they are most excellent, and very plentiful, neither is
it so dangerous to eat them to excess, as ours. There have been some that have
eat'n six and thirty pound in a day, and have never been the worse. There is a
prodigious quantity of them sold in Ispahan, where they are brought to Market,
from midnight 'till four a Clock in the afternoon. Those Melons which are first
in season, and are called Guermez, are insipid, and taste of nothing but Water.
However the Physicians advise you to eat them, saying that they plump up the
Flesh, and renew the habit of the Body. The next to the Guermez, are better
than they, and they increase in goodness 'till they come to be quite out of
season; the last of which they keep all the Winter long.

Though they have such vast plenty, yet they never leave but one Melon upon a
stalk, and when it is as big as a Nut, the Gardener, or his Wife, or his
Children, lie down upon the ground and lick off the Down, which they say keeps
the Melon from being sweet, and ripening kindly.

The Persians have also a particular sort of Quince-Pipin, but not so good as
ours, which they fry unpar'd, casting great store of Salt in the Pan to excite
thirst, and then present them to their Friends at their Collations. They have
also Almonds and Figs, but few Small-nuts or Wall nuts.

Oil they have none, but in the Provinces of Mazandran and Guilan, which
furnish all the rest of Persia; but the Olives are rotten, black, gravelly, and
not worth any thing, compared with Province-Olives.

Armenia, Mengrelia, Georgia, and Media abound in Vineyards. They bury their
Vines all the Winter, and take them up again in the Spring by reason of the
cold. In the hotter Countries they dress their Vines as we do, without any
under-propping them. There are three sorts of Wines in Persia. That of Yesd is
very delicate; that of Ispahan but ordinary: that of Yesd is transported to Lar
where there lives a great number of Jews, who care not to live but where they
may have good Wine, and that at a cheap rate. It is also carried to Ormus,
where it is sold half in half cheaper than the Wine of Schiras. As for the Wine
of Schiras, it is made of one only Grape, sweet in taste, but which heats the
Mouth extremely. This sort of Grape is called Kichmishe; it is a white Grape,
without any stone, as vulgarly believed; but however it has a stone, though it
be hardly to be perceived, which nevertheless will appear in new Wine, when it
frets like a little Ligament. They say that the Wine of Ispahan is cold upon
the Stomach, but that it fumes into the Head. For its coldness upon the Stomach
I can say little, but I know it will warm the Head, if a man takes too much of
it. In Persia they never keep their Wine in Tuns, but in great earthen Vessels
baked in an Oven, either glazed, or else smeared over with the fat of a Sheeps
rump, stopped up with wood'n Covers, covered over again with a great piece of
red Calicut, that lies over all the lids of the Pots.

The King and his Lords have other sorts of Cellars for magnificence, where
they treat such as they invite. These are four square Rooms not above three or
four steps deep, with a Well in the middle, the floor being spread with Turkey
Carpets. Now at the four corners of the Well stand four great Bottles
containing twenty Pints apiece, the one of White, the other of Claret. Between
the great Bottles stands a row of lesser Bottles filled, a Bottle of White, and
a Bottle of Red. In the Cellar-wall are several niches one above another, and
in every nich a Bottle, still varied Gules and Argent; a very pleasant sight to
good Companions in a Room, which is as light as day.

As for Herbs and Roots they have very good in Persia, but above all, most
excellent Roman Lettuce. But there is no sort of Pulse, nor can they find a way
to make Pease grow among them. The Carmelites carried Asparagus, Artichoaks,
and Succory, which were never seen there before, but now begin to thrive very
well.

As for Turquoises and Pearls I shall speak thereof in my discourse of Jewels,
toward the end of my Indian Travels.

CHAP. III.
Of the Beasts of Service; of the Fish and Fowl of Persia.
THe Beasts for service in Persia, are Horses, Mules, Asses, and Camels. The
Horses of Persia are but of an ordinary stature, less than ours, very narrow
before, but very swift and light. They carry their heads very ill in running,
by reason of the Custom to which the Persians use them. For they have got a
trick of managing their Horses, yet never getting upon their backs; they teach
them to Amble by tying their feet with two Cords of an equal length, to the
middle whereof are fastened two other Cords that are fastened to the Saddle,
which *two Cords keep their feet so, that they cannot stir but at such a
distance; and so they deal with their Mules upon which the old men generally
covet to ride. The Horses of Persia are very docible, and easily brought up.
They give them nothing else from one Evening to another but a Sack full of
chopped Straw, with a measure of Barley which they mingle together with the
Straw, to the end they may eat both together. When the Barley is newly eared,
they give it them for fourteen or twenty days together to purge their Bodies,
as we for the same end put our Horses to Grass in the Spring. The Persian
Horses hold out very well 'till eighteen or twenty years of age; but they never
cut their Stone-Horses in that Country. In the Winter, they never take off
their Shoes, but only Frost-nail them. Their Furniture is very light and
handsomely made. And this is further observed, that whereas we keep Goats in our
Stables and Inns, the Persians keep Hogs.

There are two sorts of Asses in Persia. Those that are bred in the Country
only serve to carry burdens; but there are a sort of Arabian Asses that are
swift and very handsome, excelling in price the common sort of Horses. The
Merchants of Ispahan keep these Asses in their Country Houses, taking it for a
great piece of Grandeur to Ride every Morning to their Shops.

Some parts of Persia are perplexed also with wild-Beasts, as Lions, Bears, and
Leopards, but there are but very few; nor have we heard that ever they did any
great mischief. Porcupines they have also; and I my self saw brought before the
King two men, the one of which was Shot through the Thigh, and through the Leg
with a Porcupine's Quill. The second was killed, the Porcupine having darted
his Quill a little above his right Pap through his Breast. As for their Fish,
there are an abundance of Carps, Trouts, and Pikes in the River Aras: but in
all the other Rivers of Persia there is but one sort of Fish, which is a kind
of Barbel. In the subterranean Channel which they bring to water their fields
there is another sort of Fish very plentiful of bones, and as little as can be
eaten.

Where the white Mulberies grow by the River side, so soon as they begin to
bear fruit, it is very good pastime to see the Crabs, as big as the Palm of a
man's hand, come out of the River after Sunset, and climb the trees to eat the
fruit, and then by break of day return into the River again. They are delicate
food, far beyond Creyfish, but a hot provocative Diet, as the Physicians well
observe.

During the Frost they bring from the Caspian Sea great store of Salmon or
Salmon-Trouts, four or five Foot long. The Province of Media is well stored
with Sturgeon from the mouth of the River Araxes. In the same Sea there is a
certain Fish like a Carp, which they salt and dry like our Herrings. From the
Persian Gulf comes nothing but Salt-fish, which is transported over all the
Kingdom.

Their Fowls are much the same that we have in Europe, only I do not remember
that I ever saw any Quails in the Country. As for their Pigeons, they fly wild
about the Country; but only some which they keep tame in the City, wherewithal
to decoy the rest: which is a sport the Persians use in hot weather as well as
in cold. Now in regard the Christians are not permitted to keep these Pigeons,
some of the vulgar sort will turn Mahometans to have that liberty. There are
above three thousand Pigeon-houses in Ispahan. For every man may build a
Pigeon-house upon his own Farm, which yet is very rarely done; all the other
Pigeon-houses belong to the King, who draws a greater Revenue from the Dung
than from the Pigeons: which Dung, as they prepare it, serves to smoke their
Melons.

Poultrey is very plentiful in Persia; and the Armenians brought out of Europe
the way how to Fat Capons; the first so fatted they presented to the King, who
liked them so well, that he ordered that the richest of the Armenians should be
commanded to provide him such a number every year. There are no Turkeys in all
Asia; but the Armenians trafficking to Venice carried some from thence, which
when the King had tasted, he liked so well, that he ordered the Armenians to
breed him up such a number, and to stock the Kingdom with them. But the
Armenians, seeing the King would impose a new Tribute of Turkeys as well as
Capons, grew negligent, and suffered the Chickens to dye as soon as they were
hatched. Thereupon the Persians suspecting the fraud, commanded the Armenians
to keep the dead Turkeys, that they might be Judges how they came by their
deaths: And it was my wonder to see so many young Turkeys hanging against the
Walls of some Houses in Zulpha, that occasioned this Story to be told me.

All sorts of Waterfowl are as plentiful in Persia, as with us.

Upon the Frontiers of Media and Armenia, at a certain season of the year are
to be seen a great number of Birds, much like to our Owzils. Much about the
same time the Corn begins to appear, but then is the ground covered with such
infinite swarms of Locusts, that the Armenians are forced to betake themselves
to their Processions, and to water the ground with a Water which they fetch a
great way off, whereinto the Bodies of several martyred Christians were thrown.
Three days these Processions and waterings of the ground continue, and after
that, whether it be that the forementioned Birds do eat the Locusts, or only
drive them away, in two or three days the Country is clear of them.

As for Birds of prey, the Country wants none, Falcons, Sparrow* Hawks,
Lanerets, etc. of which the King of Persia is very well provided, having above
eight hundred belonging to his Game. Some of these Birds are taught to fly at
the wild Boar, or wild Ass, or wild Goat; others at Cranes, Herons, wild Geese,
and Partridg. The chiefest of which Birds are brought from the Southern
Mountains extending from Schiras to the Persian Gulf.

The King takes great delight to hunt the Boar and Heart; and if it come to pass
that the Game outrun the Dogs, then they let fly one of their Hawks, who
presently seizes the head, and while she is continually pecking and disturbing
the Beast, the Dogs are presently at his heels. The Hawks are taught to stop
like a Horse at full speed: else they would never quit their prey, which they
presently do, as soon as ever the Falconer shows them their reward. Now their
way of ord'ring or making the Hawk is this. They take the skin of a Heart, head,
body, and legs, and stuff it with Straw, to the end it may be like the Beast
which they intend to represent in the nature of a Quarry. When they have set it
in the place where they usually train up the Hawk, they lay meat upon the head,
or in the holes of the eyes, to the end the Bird may be sure to seize those
parts at his downcome. Being accustomed to feed in this manner for some days
together, they fix the Beast upon a Plank with four Wheels, and cause it to be
drawn with long Cords by certain men, that mend their pace every day, 'till at
length it is drawn by a Horse at full speed, whereby the Bird is accustomed by
degrees not to forsake her prey. After the same manner they counterfeit all
other sorts of Quarrys to enter their Hawks, as well wild Boars, wild Asses, as
Hares and Foxes. Some there are that will order a Crow with the same industry
as you would make a Hawk. They have also a certain Beast which they call Once,
which has a spotted skin like a Tiger, but which is nevertheless very gentle
and tame; this a Horseman will carry behind him, and when he sees a wild Goat,
he sets down the Once, which is so nimble, that in three leaps he will be upon
the back of the wild Goat; though the wild Goat be a very swift Creature. The
Once immediately strangles him with his sharp teeth. But if by accident the
wild Goat get from him, the Once will stand still in the same place abashed and
troubled, so that an Infant may take him and kill him, without the least
resistance made in his own defense.

The Kings of Persia take great delight in Hunting, and in that sport it is
that they love to show themselves magnificent: Insomuch that Sha-Sefi desirous
to treat all the Ambassadors then at his Court, which at that time were the
Tartarian, Muscovite, and Indian, carried them along with him into the field,
and having taken a great number of Hearts, Fallow dear, Hinds, and wild Boars,
he caused them all to be made ready to be eat'n the same day; And while he was
feasting, an Architect had order to raise a Pyramid of the heads of those
Beasts in the middle of Ispahan, of which there are some remains to this day.
When the Architect had raised it to a considerable height, he came very
pleasantly to the King, and told him he wanted nothing but one head of some
great Beast to finish the Work. The King, whether in his Wine, or to show the
Ambassadors how absolute he was over his Subjects, turning briskly toward the
Architect; Thou say well, said he, nor do I know where to meet with a Head
more proper than thy own. Thereupon the miserable Architect was forced to
submit his own Head, the King's Command being presently put in execution.

CHAP. IV.
Of the manner of Building in Persia.
IN regard there is little Wood or Stone in Persia, all the Cities, except some
Houses, are generally built of Earth; but of an earthen, or rather a kind of
Potter's Clay, so well wrought, that you may cut it like Turf, being wrought to
a just consistency. The Walls are made with lays of Earth, according to the
proportion intended, and between every lay of Earth, three Foot high, two or
three rows of Bricks baked in the Sun. These Bricks are made in a square Mold
three fingers thick, and seven or eight inches broad: and for fear they should
cleave with drying in the Sun, they lay over them pounded Straw to keep them
from chopping in the heat. They never lay the second lay 'till the first be
dry, nor is the second lay to be so broad as the lowermost. Those Buildings
which are made of Brick baked in the Sun are very handsome; and after the Wall
is raised, the Mason plasters it over with a Mortar made of Potter's Clay
mingled with Straw; so that the defects of the Building being covered, the Wall
appears very firm and close. Then the Workman plasters the Mortar over again
with a Lime mixed with Muscovy-Green, which he pounds with a certain Gum, to
render the Lime more glutinous: and then rubbing the Wall over with a course
Brush, it becomes as it were damask'd and silvered, and looks like Marble. The
poor are contented with only bare Walls, or some course daubing that costs
little. The middle of the House consists of a large Portico, twenty or thirty
Foot square; and in the middle of the Portico a Fountain full of Water. It is
all open upon one side; and from the Portico to the Pond or Fountain all
covered with Carpets. At every corner of the Portico is a Room to sit and take
the fresh Air; and behind another large Room, the floor whereof is spread with
Carpets, Mattresses, and Cushions, according to the quality of the Master of
the House. Upon the two sides of the Portico are two other Chambers, and doors
to go from one Chamber to another: and thus are the Houses of the great Lords
built, but only they are more spacious. For their Houses consist of four great
Parlours, that look toward the four corners of the World, and every Parlour has
two Chambers upon each side, which make eight Chambers, that surround a great
Hall in the middle. The King's Palace is also built after the same fashion: and
generally the Persians Houses are very low, it being a rare thing to see one
three Stories high. Yet all their Chambers and Rooms are arched, wherein the
Persian exceeds us. For without all that trouble and time that we spend, they
will presently raise an Arch so broad and high as easily demonstrates the skill
of the Work man. The tops of their Houses are flat and terrass'd; being
plaster'd with Earth mixed with Straw chopped very small, and well tempered; which
they bind together with a layer of Lime beat'n for seven days together, which
makes it as hard as Marble, and if they want Lime, they pave the Terrass with
square Tiles baked in an Oven, so that the Rain can do no harm. But they are
very careful to shovel off the Snow, for fear it crack the Terrass with lying.
Without the Houses show nothing, but within they are curiously painted with
Birds and Flowers, wherein the Persians are no bad Artists. They take great
delight to have several little Chambers, with several Doors, and
Lattice-windows, the quarrels whereof are of Glass of various colors. This
sort of glazing serves generally, and indeed more properly, for the Apartment
where the Women may come. For they might have Crystal-windows if they pleased,
but they glaze the void spaces in this matter, that their Women may not be
seen; after they have framed the open place that gives light, like a Flower-Pot
with several Flowers in it, which the Glass of several colors imitates to the
life; whereby it is impossible that the Windows should be peer'd through;
besides, that it is pleasant to the Eye. The Doors of their Houses are of
Tehinar-Wood, which is very noble, and their Wainscoting is as neat. The
Persians that love ostentation, always display their rich Carpets, Mattresses,
Cushions, Coverlets, and all the most costly Furniture they have, in the fore
part of their dwellings: For the Haram, or the Women's Quarter is but meanly
adorned, in regard they are never visited by any men but their Husbands. In
some of their Rooms they have very narrow Chimnies; for the Persians set all
their Wood upright which they burn, because of the Smoke; besides, they make
but small Fires, in regard they have so great a scarcity of Wood. When they
would go to sleep, they lie down upon a Plank covered with a Carpet, and wrap
themselves in a quilted Blanket. In the Summer they sleep in the open Air, upon
their Terrasses; and in regard the Women lie there too, there is an order
obtained, that the Moullahs that sing upon the Mosquees shall not presume to go
up in the morning, because it might be their hap to see the Women as they lay;
it being one of the highest pieces of infamy imaginable for a Woman to be
discovered with her Face open.

There are some Houses that belong to great Lords, that have a square place
before their Doors, where they that come to visit them may put their Horses, to
the end the Street should not be pestered. If you look upon the Front of their
Houses, there is little ornament to be seen, unless it be upon some which have
been lately built.

CHAP. V.
A Description of Ispahan, the chief City of the Kingdom and Dominions of the
King of Persia.
ISpahan, Sphahan, or Sphaon, as the Persians pronounce it, which some
Travelers have too unwarily affirmed to be a fine City, lies in the Province
of Hierac, which composes some part of the ancient Kingdom of the Parthians. It
is the Capital City of all Persia, and a very large place, where the King
usually keeps his Court. The Records of the Persians declare that formerly it
was two contiguous Towns, one part whereof belonged to Haider, and the other to
Neamed-Olahi, two parts of Ispahan still retaining those two names, which has
occasioned great quarrels and debates among the people, while they have both
been eager to prefer their own quarter. Nor indeed could Ispahan be accounted
other than a Village, before Sha-Abas had conquered the Kingdoms of Lar and
Ormus. But then observing so fair a Situation, where he might as well be near
the Provinces which he had newly conquered, as for the design which he had to
extend his Dominions to the East and West, as he had enlarged them to the
South, he quitted Casbin and Sultany to reside at Ispahan, as in the center of
his Empire.

This City is seated in a vast plain, which extends it self three ways fifteen
or twenty Leagues. Upon the South about two Leagues from Ispahan rises a very
high Mountain, on the top whereof toward the West are to be seen the remains of
a very strong Fortress, where Darius kept himself, when Alexander gave Battle
to him in that Plain. In the side of the Rock is a Grotto, either natural or
artificial, or both, out of which issues a natural Spring of excellent Water,
where a Dervis usually inhabits.

The Circuit of Ispahan, taking the Suburbs all in, is not much less than that
of Paris; but the number of Inhabitants is ten times greater at ^rris than at
Ispahan. Nor is it a wonder that a City should be so large and yet so ill
peopled, where every Family has its particular House, and every House its
particular Garden. What ever way you come to it you may discover first the
Towers of the Mosquees, and then the Trees that environ the Houses, so that
Ispahan seems rather a Forest than a City. The Plain being fertile is well
inhabited, but there are no Villages in it, only three or four Houses in a
place together.

The Walls of Ispahan are of Earth, to which do belong some pitiful Towers
without Battlements or Platforms, Bastions or Redoubts, or any other
Fortification. The Moats also are as bad, neither broad nor deep, but always
dry. In some places also the people have beaten down great gaps in the Wall, to
get the nearest way into the City; yet they reckon ten Gates, which are but of
Earth however, and of no defense; the chief of which are Der-Vasalsehab, not
far from the King's Palace, Der-Tokshi, Der-Mark, Der-Vasal-Lembon,
Der-Nasan-Abad, Der-Sha, and Der-Dekt. The Gates are made of Planks rudely
joined together, and covered with plates of Iron four fingers broad, and as
thick as a Crown, fastened with flat-headed Nails. The Keys are never carried
to the Governor, but left with a silly Porter that op'ns and shuts the Gates
as he pleases himself; for indeed there is no necessity of shutting the Gates
when there are so many other ways into the City.

The City of Ispahan is ill laid out; for the Streets are narrow and unequal,
and for the most part dark, because of the Arches that go from one House to
another, so that a man is forced sometimes to feel his way for two hundred
paces. Moreover the Streets are many times annoyed with Loads of Ordure and the
Carcasses of dead Beasts, which cause a most filthy stench, and would be very
infectious certainly, but for the wholesomness of the Air. In the most part of
the Streets are Wells, which are stopped up in Summer, and opened in the Winter
to carry away the Rain and the Snow into the Arched Channels which run under
Ground through the middle of the Street. There are also before every Door
certain Troughs to receive the filth and ordure of every Family, which the
Countrymen come and carry away to Dung their Grounds. Every morning the
Countryman comes with his Ass to lade Dung; and it is observable that he is
more diligent to carry away the Dung of the Armenians, Franks, and Jews that
drink Wine, than of the Persians that drink none. And this is the profit of the
Servants of the House that sell an Asses Load of Dung for five, and sometimes
for ten or twelve Kasbeshe.

The Streets of Ispahan, as of all the rest of the Cities of Persia are not
paved, which makes them very incommodious both Summer and Winter. For in Summer
the dust puts out your Eyes, unless it be in the Streets where the great
Merchants live, and about the Meydan, where there are people hired to water the
Streets Morning, Noon, and Night. Those people go about the Streets also with a
Boracho full of Water, and a Glass, with Ice in a Bag, to give them drink that
desire it: Nor do they take any money, being paid out of the Legacies left by
persons deceased for that purpose. In the Winter this dust turns to mire half
the leg deep; though it be very true that there are very few people to be seen
then in the Street; for in regard of the vaulted Channels that run through
every Street, should the Soaked Earth chance to fall under the Horse, it might
endanger a Limb. Besides, the Persians are so superstitious, that they will
hardly receive a man within their doors with a spot of Dirt upon his Clothes,
for fear of being defiled by him.

You shall also meet with little Holes against the Walls of the Houses in the
open Street, where the Persians are not ashamed to squat and Piss in the face
of all the World. If there be any running Water in the Street, they take a
little in their Hands and wash their Member with it; or if there be no Water,
they rub it against a Stone or the Wall, which they take for a great piece of
gentility and modesty.

That which farther contributes to the nastiness of the Streets of Ispahan, is,
that the Butchers throw the Blood and Excrements of the Beasts which they kill
into the Streets. If a Horse or a ^^le, a Camel or an Ass dye, they presently
throw him into the Street. True it is, that there are people who come presently
to buy it of the Owner; who make Harisse, which they sell to the poor Workmen.
This Harisse is thus prepared; they boil the flesh of the dead Beast with Corn,
and after it is well boiled they mash it together, 'till it becomes like a
Pottage. They also make Harisse of good Mutton; both which sorts they sell in
the Marketplace, or great Meydan of the City.

Though the City of Ispahan be dirty, yet there is a way for persons of Ability
to avoid it; for they never stir but on Horseback, with two or three Lackeys,
called Chatres, that run before to make room. For the Men are all upon the
false Gallop in the Streets, without any fear of hurting the Children: by
reason that the Children are not suffered to play in the Streets like ours, but
as soon as ever they come from School, they sit down by their Parents, to be
instructed by them in their Profession.

These Valets or Footmen make a Trade of Running; of which the King and the
Lords have several in their service; it being a piece of grandeur to keep a
great many. They serve from Father to Son, undergoing an Apprentiship in
Running. From six to seven years of age, they only set themselves to walk
slowly. The next year they run a League at a time upon a handsome trot, the next
year after they run two or three Leagues, and so proportionably for the rest.
At eighteen years of age they are allowed a Scrip of Flowr, with a flat piece
of Copper to bake their Bread upon, and a Bottle of Water; all which they carry
about them when they run. For these people when they are sent Post never take
the Caravan-Road but the shortest cuts through the Deserts, and must therefore
accustom themselves to carry their Provision. The King and the Lords have no
Chatres, but what are Masters; which degree they are not to arrive at without
some Ceremony and performing a Race, like our Jemmy and the Butcher of Croyden.

If he be a Lord that owns the Chater who desires to be a Master, he sends for
all his Friends, sets up a Scaffold in the Meydan, provides a Collation, and
sends for the Curtisans to divert the Company. Now there is not one of these
Guests that does no bring something to give this Chater after the Race is run,
either a Bonnet or a Girdle, or some other thing, part of which the Chater
gives to his fellows. Then the Chater appears with his Legs greased, his Thighs
bare, only a slight short pair of loose Breeches, and a Girdle with three
little bells hanging upon his Belly. Thus accouter'd he starts from Ali-Capi,
and between Sunrising and Sunsetting he runs backward and forward to a Stone
a League and a half from the City toward the Mountains; running in that time
six and thirty of our common Leagues, or a hundred and eight Miles. While he
runs, there is Kourouk in the Meydan, and upon all the Road where he runs, and
three or four Horsemen that continually ride to and fro, to see that there be
no deceit in the Chater's Race; who when he approaches near the City, ride
before to give notice of his coming. Every time he starts and returns, the
Drums and Trumpets sound; at the end of the Race there stand several persons
with Arrows in their Hands, and every time he comes to the Stone they give him
an Arrow, which he carries back every course to Ali-Capri. Every time he
returns, the Curtisans rub him and make much of him. All the time he runs, he
eats nothing, but drinks Sherbet now and then. If he acquit himself well, which
appears by the number of Arrows brought back, he is admitted a Master by the
approbation of the King's Footmen, who are superior to all the rest. The Kans
or Governors of Provinces run their own Chaters with the same Ceremonies, and
in the sa^e manner.

The Fortress of Ispahan is nothing at all considerable. It joins to the Wall
upon the South side of the City, and is twice as long as broad, but without any
defense in the World, unless it be of some pitiful Towers made of Earth. Here
it is that the King keeps all the Rarities which he has purchased, or that has
been presented to him. For as to his main Treasure, I believe it consists
chiefly in Gold-Plate. Within the Fortress there is a large Field, sowed every
year with Rice and Corn; hard by which stands the House of the Capuchin-Friars.

Ispahan in general, unless it be the Meydan and some few arched Streets where
the Merchants live, is more like a great Village than a City; the Houses
standing at a distance one from the other, with every one a Garden, but ill
looked after, not having any thing in it perchance but only one pitiful Tree:
true it is that they begin to build better of late days, but it is without the
City. As for the Women, it is not a pin matter whether they live out of the City
or within, in regard they never stir out of ^oors, and as seldom go a-f^oo.

The Meydan or great Piazza of Ispahan was the contrivance of the great
Sha-Abas, who had never done it, if a great Prince of the ancient Race of the
Kings of Persia had not refused him the old Meydan, with several Privileges,
and the House that stood by it. Thereupon he designed this new Piazza, to draw
off the Merchants* and to spoil the old Marketplace, by their departure from
that quarter of the City which is less inhabited at this day. It is not far
from this old Meydan, that the Austin-Friars on the one side, and the
Carmelites on the other have their Habitations. There are also two sides of
that Meydan entire, under the Portico's, where sit only such People as sell
Herbs, Fruit, and Victuals; the other two sides are almost fallen to decay; but
when it was all standing, it was as handsome as the new one: and it is to be
wondered, that the Prince, who built it, did not choose the place where
Sha-Abas has built his, as being near the Water, and consequently far more
convenient.

The great Meydan then is a place about seven hundred Paces long, and between
two and three hundred broad. It has Buildings upon all the four sides; it lies
in length directly North and South; the Fronts are every one Portico'd, and
Terrass'd at the top; and on the City-side are little Chambers nine or ten Foot
high, which fall very* much to decay, being only built of Brick baked in the
Sun. They are inhabited, the greatest part of them, by the most infamous
Curtisans of the City. At some Paces distance from the Portico's, is a Channel
which is paved with stone, and runs round about the Piazza; Sha-Abas caused
several Trees to be planted by the side of it, but both the Channel and the
Trees being altogether neglected, are fallen to decay; besides, that the smell of
the Water in the Summer time is very noysom.

In the midst of the Piazza stands a kind of a May Pole, or Mast of a Ship,
where the People exercise shooting at Birds. When the King comes to shoot, they
set a Cup of Gold upon the top of the Mast, which he is to strike down with an
Arrow. To which purpose he must ride full speed, nor is he permitted to shoot
'till after he has past the May Pole, turning himself upon the crupper of his
Horse: a remain of the ancient custom of the Parthians, that killed their
Enemies flying.

The Cup belongs to him that strikes it down; and I have seen Sha-Sefi,
Grandfather of the present King, in five Courses strike down three Cups.

From this Mast or May Pole down to the great Mosquee, they sell nothing but
Wood and Charcoal: from the same Pole to the Sun-Dial upon the North-side, are
none but such as sell old Iron-Tools, old Harness for Horses, old Coverlets,
and other Brokery-ware, as in our Long-Lane.

From the Pole to another Mosquee, to the South, just again the Sun-Dial, is
the place for all the Poulterers. The rest of the Piazza toward the Palace, is
always kept clean, without any Shops, because the King comes often abroad in
the Evening to see Lions, Bears, Bulls, Rams, Cocks, and all other sort of
Creatures fight which are brought thither.

The people of Ispahan, as in many other Cities, are divided into two parts,
the one called Hedari, the other Nametlai; and upon all the Combats of Beasts
beforementioned, there are always very considerable Wagers laid between these
two Tribes. The King, who is a neuter, gives to the Master of the Beast that
gets the upper hand sometimes five, sometimes ten, sometimes twenty Tomans,
according to the value of the Wager laid; and he that wins the Wager, presents
the Master of the Beast likewise. They have also a Sport at breaking of Egg, by
knocking the ends one against another, some of which Eggs come to three or four
Crowns. The Hens that lay them are bred in a Country which they call Sausevare,
about a hundred leagues from Ispahan, toward the Province of Karasan; the Cocks
of which Country are bigger and stronger than other Cocks, and cost some of
them a hundred Crowns. There are a sort of Tumblers also, that after Dinner set
up their Stages in the Meydan, and toward the Evening, they that play the
Maid-Marians come and encompass a square place with a course piece of Calicut;
and then through another very fine Cloth, the Wenches show a thousand tumbling
Tricks and antic Postures. When they have done, they come and ask the
Spectators for Money, who give them every one what they think fit. Every
Friday, which is as it were Market Day, the Country-folks bring to Town what
they have made in the Villages, as Doors and Windows fitted to be hung up,
Window-frames, Locks, and other things of that nature. Upon that day also they
sell Mules, Horses, Camels, and Asses, which brings a great confluence of
people from all parts.

Upon the West Side, where stands the Gate of the Palace, and Ali's Gate,
between the Canal and the Portico's are ranged some seventy Pieces of Cannon
upon their Carriages. These Guns, together with the Sun-Dial, were brought from
Ormus by the Great Sha-Abas, of which the English ought to have had their
share; for without their assistance he never could have taken the Town.

From the corner of that Front, which touches upon the Eastern Front of the
Mosquee, in the middle, are all Sadlers Shops; and from that Mosquee to another
corner that touches upon the Western Front, live the Booksellers,
Book-binders, and Trunk-makers. In the middle of the Southern Front stands a
Portal, with a Tower upon each side, which leads to a Mosquee, the Gate whereof
is covered all over with Plates of Silver, and is certainly the neatest Portal
and fairest Entrance into any Mosquee of Persia.

At the other end of the same Front, where it joins to that upon the West,
there is a great Portal that leads to a false Gate of the King's Palace; near
to which* as soon as you are entered* you meet with the Apartment of the Great
Treasurer, who is a white Eunuch, and having the Keys of the Chamber where the
Money lies, takes care to pay whatever the King orders him. Through that false
Gate all the King's Provisions are carried into the Palace. This way also enter
they that are entertained for the Manufactory of the King's Tissues, Silks,
Sattins, Coverlets, and the like. In the same Enclosure also the Franks, who
are under the King's Wages, and live at Zulpha, come every day to work; as also
all the most particular and eminent Artists that the King hires.

The Western Front, which makes one of the two lengths of the Meydan, is thus
appointed; from the Southern angle that touches the Trunk-maker's quarter, live
all your Pedlers that sell all the small Commodities of Norimberg and Venice.

As for the King's Palace, I cannot make any handsome description of it, in
regard there is nothing of Beauty either in the Building or in the Gardens. I
think I have been as far in the House as a man could go, every time I was sent
for by His Majesty; but excepting only four Rooms which they call Divans, I saw
nothing but pitiful low Galleries, and so narrow that hardly two men could pass
a-brest in 'em. In one of those Galleries I had audience of the King, in the
Garment of Honor which he had bestowed upon me. But In regard I have spok'n of
two of them in another place, and that the other two are much alike both
Building and Furniture, I shall say no more of them here.

From the King's Palace Gate to Haly's Gate live the Goldsmiths, Lapidaries,
and Gravers of Stones for Seals: Haly's Gate is a plain Gate, naked of Work: of
which I have already spok'n.

Between Haly's Gate, and the other angle of the same Western Front, stands a
great Gate which leads into a Bazar, where all the Armenians that live at Zulfa
keep their Shops, and sell all sorts of Cloth that comes out of Europe, and
other the choicest Wares of Persia. At the end of that Bazar stands a fair Inn
two Stories high, which the Mother of Sha-Abas the second caused to be built.
In the middle stands a great Fountain with four great Gates, which lead into
four other Inns. Here by the way let me give a Traveller and a Trader in Persia
this advice; that if his Goods be not very heavy, he never hire a low Chamber,
as being three times dearer than those above: For the Chambers which the Sun
lies upon most in the Summer, are the Chambers which cost least. Not but all
the Chambers in the Inn are Taxed at the same rate by the King; but the Host
for his profit will find some pretense or other to raise his price, pretending
those Chambers be hired already which you desire, especially if they be corner
Chambers, which are the largest and most commodious. And indeed without this
collusion Chambers would be very cheap. The best convenience of those Inns is,
that a man is more secure in one of them then in a private House: For there if
it happ'n that a piece of Goods be stolen; or that your Chapman prove insolvent
for Goods bought, the Innkeeper is to make all good* being by the Law to
receive so many blows aday 'till he pays the sum demanded. The Merchant also
gives two in the hundred for every thing that he sells, and when the Market is
done they presently go to the Host, who sets down in his Book the quality of
his Goods* and the names both of buyer and seller. If he knows not the buyer,
he is bound to go and enquire after him, and if he be not solvent, the Merchant
takes his Goods again. Sometimes the Merchant to save the two in the hundred,
combines with the Purchaser to carry away some of his Goods without the
knowledge of the Host, which is done by greasing his Deputies fist, who will
presently shut his Eyes. But then if the Purchaser proves insolvent, the
Merchant dares not complain, because his Goods are not Registered in the King's
Book, whom he has defrauded of his Custom.

No less secure are the Bazars or Marketplaces, where the Merchants shut up
their Shops very slightly, the Bazars being strongly guarded both within and
without all night long. As for the petty Stalls in the Meydan, every one puts
up his Ware in a Box Padlock'd up, and then lay them down at one end of the
place one by another. As for the course sort of Ware, as Tents, Cords, Ropes,
and such other things they only heap them under a large Coverlet fastened at
the four corners by four sticks, for the Meydan also is as strongly guarded as
the Bazar.

Between Haly's Gate and that which leads to the Bazar where the Armenians keep
their Shops* live all those that deal in Russia Leather, making Borachio's to
tie under the Horses Bellies* little Buckets, and Furniture for Horsemen, as
also Bowyers, Fletchers, and Forbishers. From the last Gate to the end of the
Gallery, live all the Druggists and Apothecaries.

At the Angle upon the two fronts upon the East and North, there is a Gate that
leads to the Great Bazar; next to that live only your Salls-men that sell whole
Habits for men, as Shirts, Sheets, Hose, and the like. There be also those that
sell Leather Shoes for men and women; which Shoes are always worn by persons of
quality.

Out of this Bazar you go into another full of men that work in Copper, such as
make Pots, Plates, and other Uten^ils for the Kitchen. Here also live those
that make Files, and the blades of Sythes. The rest of the Bazar is possessed
by Dyers of Calicut; and at the end of the Bazar is a fair Inn, where all the
Merchants live that sell Musk, Russia Leather, and Fu^rs.

I have in another place observed that the King has a great Revenue out of the
Bazars and Inns which he has caused to be built, which is particularly laid out
in provision for his Table. For the Law of Mahomet forbidding Princes to impose
Taxes or Customs upon the People, they do not believe that the money which
arises from thence is fit to be employed or laid out for the necessaries of
life, believing that their food so purchased would do them no good. By virtue
of this prohibition of Mahomet it is, that the Merchants take all the liberty
they can to deceive the King of his Customs, believing that they cannot offend
the Prince, while they transgress not the Law. Besides, that if they should pay
all the King's Duties, the price of Goods would rise so high, so as to spoil
the whole Course of Trade and Commerce. Neither would the Revenue of the
Caravansera's, Bazars, and Gardens suffice for the Kings Kitchen, were not the
several Kans or Governors of Provinces obliged to supply that expense every
Week in their turns, whereby those expenses cost the King little or nothing.

Upon the North-Front of the Meydan, are made under the Portico's separations
for Chambers, that look upon the Piazza, where people go to smoke Tobacco and
drink Coffee. The Seats of those Rooms are placed as in so many Amphitheaters,
and in the midst of every one stands a large Vessel full of running Water,
wherewith their Pipes be cleans'd when they are over-foul. All the Persians
that have any spare time, fail not every day to resort to those places between
seven and eight in the Morning, where the Owner of the Room presently brings
them every one their Pipe and their Dish of Coffee. But the Great Sha*Abas, who
was a man of a great understanding, finding those places were only so many
Meeting Houses, where men assembled to talk and prattle of State Affairs, a
thing which no way pleased him; to break the neck of those petty Cabals, he
ordered that a Moullah should be sure to be betimes at every place before the
rest of the People came thither, and that he should entertain those
Tobacco-whiffers, and Coffee-quaffers, sometimes with a point of the Law,
sometimes with History, sometimes with Poetry. This custom is still observed:
so that after this entertainment has lasted two or three hours, the Moullah
rising up, cries to every one in the Coffee-Room, Come my Masters, in good time,
let us all now retire every man to his business. Straight every one retires upon
the Moullah's words, who is liberally entertained all the while by the Society.

In the midst of the North-Front stands a great Portal, with a large Dial over
it, which Sha-Abas brought from Ormus when he took it from the Portugals. But
the Dial is of no use, nor is ever like to be. Round the Tower of that Portal
runs an open Gallery, with a kind of a Cieling over head supported with
Pillars; from whence every Evening about Sunset, and at Midnight, a noise of
Drums and Trumpets is to be heard through the whole City. Though the truth is,
the Music would never charm a curious Ear. Out of some parts of the Gallery
are contrived little Dormitories, where the chiefest of the Court lie. In all
the Cities where the Kans reside is the Custom of making this rattling noise of
Drums and Trumpets observed, and not elsewhere.

On each side of the Portal, under the Horologe, are five or six Banks of
Jewellers, who there put to sale certain parcels of Pearls, Emralds, Granats,
and Turquoises, which are not of any great value: every parcel being set by it
self in a Dish, and the whole Stall covered with a silk Net, to preserve the
Stones from being stolen.

Just against the same Portal, going toward the South-Front, you meet with two
little Goals five or six Foot high, and sev'n or eight distant one from the
other. Here the men play at Pall-m^ll on horseback, the Horseman being to
strike the Ball running at full speed, between the two Goals.

Through that Portal you enter into an Enclosure much like the place where the
Fair of St. Germans is kept, and there it is that the Merchants of Gold and
Silver-Tissues and other rich Stuffs, with all your finest sorts of Calicuts
and Linnens, keep their Shops.

The Court side of the Meydan, which is upon the East, and which answers to the
grand Front where the King's House stands, is thus appointed. In the middle
stands a Duomo covered with a kind of baked Earth, and as well the Duomo as the
Portal, which is very high, are all varnished over. You ascend nine or ten
steps, the Port of Haly facing it on the other side of the Piazza. From the end
of the Portico's that touch the North-side of the Mosquee, live the
Shopkeepers that sell sowing-Silk, and small Manufacturers of Silk, as
Ribands, Laces, Garters, and other things of the same nature. From the Mosquee
to the other end, are all Turners, that make Cradles for Children, and
Spinning-Wheels. There are also some Cotton-beaters, that make quilted
Coverlets. Without the Portico's are none but Smiths, that make Scyths,
Hammers, Pincers, Nails, and such like things; with some few Cutlers.

This is all that can be said of Ispahan, and that great Piazza, which some
perhaps have set out in better colors. But I have represented all things as
they are, as being one that have seen them oftener, and beheld them a longer
time than ever any Frank that Traveled into Asia.

CHAP. VI.
Of Zulpha, a little City, separated from Ispahan by the River Senderou.
ZVlpha, which others call Julpha and Giolpha, is distant from Ispahan toward
the South half an hours walk, the River Senderou running almost at an equal
distance between the two Cities. The way that leads from one City to another is
a Walk some fifteen hundred Paces long, and seventeen broad, almost equally
divided by the River. It begins from a Pavilion or Tabernacle forty Foot
square, which joins to the hinder part of the King's House, with a double
Story, to which several Windows give light, closed with wooden Lattices very
artificially wrought. None but the King and his Household pass that way into the
Walk. For they that go from Ispahan to Zulpha, find the way into the Walk
through a Ga^e which is close adjoining to the Tabernacle. This Walk is called
the Street of Tcharbag, or the Street of Four Gardens.

A Channel ^uns all along the Walk from the Tabernacle, where a little Rivulet
falls into it, and fills it as far as the great Bridge. The two sides of the
Channel which are pi^'d with Stone, and are two or three Foot broad, makes one
way which Passengers may* and many times do take; for the usual way both for
Horse and Foot, lies upon each side of the Walk, behind the Trees, which are
panted in a straight line to the very Walls of the King's Gardens, which close
the Alley on each side. It is a kind of a Causey of Freestone, somewhat
raised, and four or five Foot broad. There is but one row of Trees on each
side, straight and high, called Tchinards, with one tuft at the top. The space
between the Channel and the Trees is not paved, but lies common, and is
sometimes sowed. About two hundred Paces from the Tabernacle or
Banqueting House, the River falls into a great Pool, about thirty or
thirty-five Foot in diameter; and in that place, as also in others somewhat
beyond it, where there are also other Pools, the Walk is crossed by a Causey
paved and raised, ten or twelve Foot broad, as the rest are. Upon the left hand
of the first Pool stands another Tabernacle or Banqueting House, much alike in
structure and bigness to the former; in which place, in a low arched Room with
a Fountain of Water in the middle, you may go and drink Coffee. From that house
to the Bridge the Walk descends, and the Water makes some falls.

All the Gardens on each side of the Walk, both on this side and beyond the
Bridge belong to the King. But you must not imagine that these Gardens, or that
of Hezardgerib, which is the fairest of all Persia, are so curiously set out,
nor so well kept as ours in Europe. For they have no such lovely Borders, nor
such close Walks of Honeysuckles and Jasmin as are to be seen in the Gardens of
Europe. They suffer the Grass to grow in many places; contented only with a
good many great Fruit Trees, tufted a-top, and planted in a line, which is all
the grace of the Gardens of Persia.

In each side of the Walls between which the Walk runs, at a true distance of
space, are gates neatly contrived, and over each a little Room. Almost in the
middle of the Walk between the great Banqueting House and the Bridge, upon the
left hand, stands a House of the Dervi's, to whom the King has given one of his
Gardens to build upon. There they keep the Relics of Haly, or some other
Prophet; for you shall see them standing under a certain Arch, before which the
Persians make a most profound Reverence. These Dervi's come every Afternoon
about three or four a Clock into the Bazars of Ispahan, every two, an old one
and a young one, choosing his quarter. They go from Shop to Shop, instructing
the People upon some Point or other of the Law: the young Dervi's answering the
old ones at certain times. Their Habit is only two Sheepskins or Goat Skins,
the one hanging before, the other behind, with a great leathern Girdle, four or
five fingers broad, garnished with several great Plates of Latten. They throw
another Sheep-skin cross their Shoulders, which they tie before, under their
Chins. Upon their Heads they only wear a little Lamb-skin in form of a Bonnet,
letting the feet hang down to their Necks, over their Cheeks. They carry a
great Club in their hands, as the Painters represent John the Baptist in the
Wilderness. Between their Girdles and their wastes they stuff a company of
pitiful Flowers, or else a sort of Herbs, which after Exhortation, both the
young, and the old Dervi's bestow upon the Merchants and Tradesmen, from whom
at the same time they receive Alms. Toward the evening they go home again; and
I forgot to tell you, that before the door of the house, stands always a large
Vessel of water, with several little Cups, and Ice in the Summer, where all
passengers may drink upon free-cost.

The River of Senderou, which, as well as the rest of the Rivers of Persia,
except the Aras, is not able to carry a Boat, is a very great relief to
Ispahan. Behind the Mountains of the South beyond Zulpha is another River,
called Abkuren, which about five or six Leagues above Ispahan, runs within a
League and a half of Senderou. Sha-Abas the first attempted to have joined the
two Rivers together, to which purpose he went about to have removed certain
Rocks that stood in his way; but not being able to compass his design, his
Successors laid aside all the thoughts of attempting any more. Could it have
been done, the Campaign of Ispahan would have been one of the most fertile and
delicious places in the world; whereas now the River is of no use, running
through desert Countries and Plains of Salt. As for the River of Senderou, in
Winter it over-flows, but in Summer it has very little water, being oftener
foarded than crossed over upon Bridges. About four Leagues above Ispahan they
are constrained to force it into their Lands, to water their Fields and
Grounds, which else would produce nothing at all. Wells they have a great many
in several places; but besides that, they are not able to furnish that great
quantity of water which is necessary; the River Water is much better to fatten
the Land. Now you must observe, that their Channels never return to the River,
being wasted upon the Ground; so that the River of Ispahan being very much
wasted before it comes to the City, by reason that it is still lessened by so
many Channels, about ten or twelve Leagues from thence, it ends as it were
quite spent in a few Mershes. This scarcity of water which is so general over
all Persia, is the reason that they are extraordinary Husdands of it, and buy
it very dear. Therefore is the Superintendent of the water, which brings the
King in a very considerable Revenue, one of the most contended-for employments
in the whole Court. For every Garden is taxed more or less according to its
bigness, for the water it requires once a week; which water is let go into the
quarters which have need of it; every Garden having a particular Channel,
whence they have their water by turns. But you must have a care of attempting
to bring this water in before your turn; for should it come to be known, an
easy Fine would not excuse the matter. I knew two Franks, who, because they
presumed to take in water in the night time before it was their turn, had like
to have lost all their Land by Confiscation, had it not been for the particular
Favor of the King to the Franks; and yet all that favor did not excuse them
from being soundly amerc'd.

There are four Bridges a quarter of a Leagues distance one from another, that
cross the River of Senderou to Ispahan. That which crosses the walk, bears the
name of Alywerdi-Kan, who caused it to be built, being also called the Bridge
of Zulfa. It is built of good Brick, joined together with Freestone, and very
level, not being higher in the middle than at either end. It is not above three
hundred and fifty paces long, and twenty broad, being supported by several
small Arches of Stone, which are very low. Of each side there is a Gallery
eight or nine foot broad, which runs from one end to the other, several Arches
twenty five or thirty foot high supporting the Platform, where, when the heat
is not extreme, they that please may walk for the sake of the fresh Air. But
the most usual passage is under the Galleries, where there are several out-lets
upon the River, to let in the fresh Air. For the Galleries are very high, from
the level of the Bridge, to which you ascend by easy steps, the middle of the
Bridge not being above twenty five foot broad, serving for Wagons and
Pack-horses. There is also another way all along by the water side, where there
are several Stones laid to step upon, to keep you from being wet-shod. It
crosses through all the Arches of the Bridge, through little doors made in
every Arch from one end to the other, descending from the Bridge by a little
pair of Stairs, taken out of the thickness of the Arches supporters. There is
another Staircase to ascend up to the Galleries of about two fathoms broad,
with Stays or Rails on both sides. This Bridge is truly a very neat piece of
Architecture, if I may not say, the neatest in all Persia.

There are also three other Bridges upon the River, one above the Bridge of
Zulfa, and two below. The first but meanly built, but very commodious for the
Armerians, when they travel Westward, who would else be forced to go a great
way about, through the whole City of Ispahan.

The first of the other two Bridges below the Bridge of Zulfa, was built by
Sha-Abas the second, Father of the present King. It is almost equal to it in
Structure; but it has one particular beauty, which is a hexagonal place in the
middle of the Bridge, which causes the Water to fall in that part with a
pleasing noise. For that being the deepest part of the River, Sha-Abas resolved
to build a Bridge there; partly for the Gaurs sake, to the end, they might not
come through the walk of Tcharbag, and that going from Ispahan they might have
a shorter cut home. The Habitation of the Gaurs is only a large Village, the
first Houses whereof are but a little way from the River; though the walk that
goes from Ispahan to the King's Bridge is both longer and broader than that of
Tcharbag, planted on both sides with a row of Trees, but no Channel in the
middle.

Before each of the Avenues to the Bridge, stands a House that belongs to the
King for his divertisement. That upon the left side of the River toward Ispahan
was by the great Sha-Abas given to the Capuchins. For as soon as they came to
Ispahan, upon their Examination, the King was extremely taken with their
behavior. He asked them how they lived, and whether they took any money? To
which the Capuchins making answer, that they never handled any money, but
contented themselves with Alms; the King believing his Subjects, would give
them very little, bestowed that House and Garden upon them. But they stayed not
long there, because it was too big for them to repair, and too far from the
City, so that the Roman Catholics in the Winter could not get to their
Chapel. Now they have built themselves a very handsome House not far from the
King's Palace, at the Cost of Father Joseph, one of their own order.

There is another old Bridge a quarter of a League below the Gaurs Bridge,
which is upon the Road from Ispahan to Schiras.

But to return to the long-walk of Tcharbag, which continues above eight
hundred paces beyond the Bridge of Zulfa to the Garden of Hezardgerib. The
Rivulet that passes that other part of the walk, comes from the same River
which they have cut three or four Leagues above Ispahan. When you have walked
about four hundred paces, you met with a fall of Waters that tumbles into a
Pool, from whence there are twelve steps to ascend to the end of the Alley. The
walk is fronted by the great House which stands before the Garden of
Hezardgerib, or the thousand Acres. The House consists but only of one great
Hall over the Gate, and four small Chambers at the four corners of it.

Hezardgerib is the fairest Garden in Asia, though it would be accounted
nothing in Europe. However as it lies upon the descent of a Hill, it consists
of sixteen Terasses, sustained by a Wall sixteen or seventeen foot high. There
is but little Water in any of the Wells; but that which has most is in the
fourth Terrass. That is a great Octagonal Pool about a hundred and twenty foot
in Diameter, round about which are several Pipes that throw up the Water about
three foot high, and there are three steps down to the Water. A Channel paved
with Stone runs through the principal Alley, which goes no farther than the
building. This Channel is as wide as that of the Channel of Tcharbag, whence it
is supplied as being right opposite to it. In the tenth Terrass you meet with
another Fountain of the same bigness and form with that in the fourth; and in
the last which terminates the Grand Alley and the length of the Garden, there
is another Channel which crosses all the Alleys which* like the great one
compose the leng^h of the Alley. Besides this, there are open Rooms to take the
fresh Air, some falls and murmurs of Water, but for borders and close Alleys,
and Arbours, you must expect no such thing, either in Hezardgerib, nor in any
other part of Persia.

Having walked in the great walk of Tcharbag, you meet upon the right hand with
a Street between two Walls of the Gardens that belong to the King, which Street
leads you to Zulfa, not above two or three Musket Shots distance off.

Zulfa a Colony of Armenians which Sha-Abas brought from Zulfa, a City of
Armenia, is so much increased for some years since, that it may now pass for a
large City, being almost a League and a half long, and near upon half as much
broad. There are two principal Streets which contain near upon the whole
length, one whereof has on each side a row of Tchinars, the roots whereof are
refreshed by a small Channel of Water, which by a particular order the
Armenians bring to the City, to water their Gardens. The most part of the other
Streets have also a row of Trees, and a Channel. And for their Houses, they are
generally better built, and more cheerful than those of Ispahan.

See the Description of Zulpha.
How they came to be settled here, I have already described: And now the number
of Inhabitants is strangely increased by the accession of several other
Christians of diverse Sects, as Jacobites, Cophtes, and Nestorians, who formerly
lived in the Suburbs of Ispahan. Neither was Sha-Abas so cruel in transplanting
the Armenians away out of their own Country, for they were all at that season
poor laboring men, who knew not at all what belonged to Trade. Since that time
they are grown very rich: so that the Armenians have no cause to be covetous of
the Habitations of their Ancestors. And now I will tell you how they came to be
such great Proficients in Trade.

Sha-Abas, who was a man of a great Genius, and a person of great undertaking,
considering that Persia was a barren Country, where there was little Trade,
and by consequence little Money, resolved to send his Subjects into Europe with
raw Silks, so to understand whence the best profit would arise, to bring Money
into his Country. To which purpose, he resolved to make himself Master of all
the Silk in his own Country, by purchasing it himself at a reasonable rate,
taxed by himself, and to reap the gains by his Factors: and withal, thought it
necessary to seek an Alliance with the great Kings of Europe, to engage them on
his side against the Turk. He first sent to the King of France, Henry the
Fourth. But he dying before the Ambassador arrived, answer was made the
Ambassador, That if the King of Persia had any thing to say to the King of
France Lewis the Thirteenth, he must send a new Ambassador, which was never
done.

Three or four years after he sent an Ambassador to the King of Spain,
accompanied with a Persian Merchant of Ispahan, putting into their hands a
considerable quantity of Bales of Silk. He also sent along with them a
Portuguez Austin-Friar, to be their Guide and Interpreter. The Persian Merchant
would have sold the Silks, as was the King's order, and have bought a Present
more becoming. But the Ambassador overruled by the Friar, resolved to present
the King of Spain with the Bales of Silk. The Merchant not able to oppose the
Ambassador, returns home forthwith to give an account to the King, who approved
his management. The Ambassador proceeds, and coming to the Spanish Court,
presents his Bales of Silk to the King, who asked the Ambassador, whether his
Master took him for a Woman, that he had sent him so many Bales of Silk to
spin; and immediately sent away the Present to his Queen, presenting the
Ambassador but very meanly: who thereupon seeing the Error he had committed,
made have home; but upon his return, the Persian King having notice of the ill
success of his Negotiation, caused his Belly to be ripped open in the public
Marketplace.

About fifteen years after, he trusted a considerable quantity of Silk with a
Merchant's Son of Ispahan, and sent him to Venice: who when he came there, took
a stately Lodging, and spent his Money at a strange rate, especially among the
Courtisans; to maintain which expense, he continually sold great quantities of
Silk. The Venetians seeing a private man live so splendidly among them, and not
believing so great a quantity of Goods could belong to one single Merchant, but
rather imagining him to be a Factor for some Company who suffered for his
folly, wrote to all the Ports of the Levant, and having intelligence who he
was, the Senate thought fit to seize his Person and his Goods, before he had
consumed all; at the same time giving a civil account to the King of Persia,
what they had done. To which the Persian King returned a most obliging Answer
of Thanks, sending withal an intelligent Persian Merchant to take an account of
what was left, to whom the Venetians were very punctual. As for the Prodigal
Persian, who thought it not his wisest way to return into Persia, what became
of him is not material to this Story.

Sha-Abas by these Experiments observing the little inclination of his Subjects
to Trade, who were naturally addicted to Pride and Expense, which is no part of
a Merchant's business, cast his Eyes upon the Armenians, men able to endure the
labor of long Journeys, sober persons, and great Husbands, and such who being
Christians, might more freely Trade among the Christians; and made choice of
them, as being most proper and fit for Trade. Whereupon, picking out the most
Judicious among them, he delivered to every one so many Bales of Silk,
according to their Capacity; for which they were to pay at their return, a
reasonable Rate taxed by the King, who allowed them what more they got for
their Expenses and Gains. Those people in a short time became so expert, that
there is not any sort of Trade which they will not now undertake; for now they
run as far as Tunquin, Java, and the Phillippines, and indeed over all the
East, except China and Japan. But if they do not thrive, they never return; as
being a place where they must either give an exact Account, or else suffer the
quick and severe Justice of Drubbing, which never fails those Factors that are
ill Husbands for their Masters.

And indeed the Armenians are so much the more fit for Trading, because they
are a people very sparing, and very sober; though whether it be their virtue or
their avarice, I know not. For when they are going a long Journey, they only
make provision of Biscuit, smoked Bufalo's flesh, Onions, baked Butter, Flowr,
Wine, and dried Fruits. They never buy fresh Victuals, but when they meet with
Lambs or Kids very cheap in the Mountainous Countries; nor is there one of them
that does not carry his Angle to fish withal, when they come to any Ponds or
Rivers. All these provisions cost them little the Carriage. And when they come
to any Town where they are to stay, they club five or six together, and lie in
an empty Chamber which they furnish themselves; every one carrying his
Mattress, his Coverlet, and his Kitchin-Instruments, which is a great piece of
Thrift. When they travel into Christendom, they carry along with them Saffron,
Pepper, Nutmegs, and other Spices; which they exchange in the Country-Towns for
Bread, Wine, Butter, Cheese, Milk-Meats, and other Provisions which they buy of
the poor Women. When they return out of Christendom, they bring along with them
all sorts of Mercery-ware, and Pedlery-ware of Noremberg and Venice; as little
Lookingglasses, trifles of Tin enameled, false Pearls, and other things of that
nature; which pays for the Victuals they call for among the Country People.

In the beginning of their Trade, there returned very few Caravans into Persia
without two hundred thousand Crowns in Silver, beside English and Dutch
Clothes, fine Tissues, Looking-glasses, Venice Pearls, Cochenel, and Watches;
which they thought most proper for the Sale of Persia and India.

At length those Armenians became so exquisite in Trade, that several of them
have left Estates of two, some twenty thousand Tomans. But the richest among
them was Cotgia, or Monsieur Petrus, who left forty thousand Tomans in coined
Money, besides his Horses, Furniture, and Lands in the Country, his Jewels and
Plate; all which are never reckoned a Merchant's Estate, but only the ready
Cash with which he trades. Cotgia Petrus was very much esteemed for his
Charity, and the great Church which he built, which is a kind of Covent, with a
Bishop and Monks. Nor is the fair Marketplace, all environed with Shops, a
little beholding to his Generosity.

The Armenians of Zulpha have this advantage over all the Christians of the
East, that they enjoy Lands and Privileges, the King not permitting the least
injustice to be done them, nor that any Mohammedan should live at Zulpha. They
have also the privilege to be as well clad as the Persians, and to make use as
they do of Bridles of Gold and Silver. Their Wives also are very richly
habited, in stripped Sattins purfl'd with Gold, and other rich Europaean Silks.

The King names whom he pleases among the Armenians to be their Chief; whom
they call Kelonter, who judges all their differences, and taxes them to make up
the Sum which they are to pay to the King every year.

The Language of the Armenians is either vulgar or learned: the learned is only
used by the Ecclesiastics, in reference to their Religion. They write like us,
from the left to the right, having found out peculiar Characters about four
years since. They have three Languages very natural to them, which however are
very different: the Armenian, which is their ancient Country speech, which they
have preserved from Father to Son; the Persian, which is the Language of the
Country where they live; and the Turkish, of which they make very much use in
course of Trade. As for their Women, they speak nothing but the Armenian, as
having no converse with strangers, and never stirring out of their houses.
There are some Armenians speak Italian and French, as having learnt it in
Europe.

There are in Zulpha fifteen or sixteen Churches and Chapels of the Armenians,
among which you are to count two Nunneries for Women. There are in Ispahan
Austin-Friars, Carmelites, and Capuchins, and in Zulpha Jesuits. The Jesuits
that came last have but a little House, but to make them amends they have a
large Garden. Though the number of the Religious Teachers is far greater then
the number of Hearers: for in all Ispahan and Zulpha, take the Franks that come
out of Europe, or born in Persia, as well Men as Women, there are not six
hundred persons that profess the Catholic Religion. As for the Armenians, they
are so obstinately fixed to their own Religion, that they will hear of no
other; and nothing but Money has sometimes caused them to feign the embracing
of another. Friar Ambrose a Capuchin staid a while at Zulpha, to whom several
of the principal Armenians came to School to learn French, in hopes of
establishing a Trade with France. But the Armenian Archbishop and Bishops
fearing lest the Children should be infected with some other Religion,
excommunicated all Fathers that sent their Children to School. And finding that
they little regarded the Excommunication, they shut up the Church doors, and
stirred up the People against the Religious Franks; so that Father Ambrose was
forced to leave Persia, and retire to Surat.

Moreover there are in Ispahan both Jews and Indian Idolaters. Nor are the Jews
so miserable and beggarly, as they seem to be* they intrude, according to
custom, into all Business; so that if any has a mind to buy or sell any rich
Jewel, he need do no more but speak to them. In the Reign of Sha-Abas, the
Athemadoule^ persecuted them so grievously, that either by force or by cunning
he caused them to turn Mahometans; but the King understanding that only power
and fear had constrained them to turn, suffered them to resume their own
Religion, and to live in quiet.

There are about ten or twelve thousand Banians in Ispahan, who are known by
their yellow Complexions, or rather by a yellow Mark made with Saffron upon the
top of their Foreheads. Their Turbants are less than usual, and their Shoes are
almost like ours, embroidered with Flowers a-top. They are all Bankers, and
very knowing in Money. The greatest part of the Money of the principal Moneyed
men of Ispahan is in their hands for improvement sake. So that if you want a
considerable Sum, you may have it the next day upon good Security, and paying a
severe Interest, which those Banians will squeez up sometimes to 18 per Cent.
But if it be not very privately exacted and paid, the Law of Mahomet, which
forbids the taking of Interest, lays hold upon the whole Sum, and confiscates
it every Penny.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Religion of the Persians; of the great Feast of Hocen and Hussein, and
the Camel-Feast.
THE difference among the Mahometans, does not consist in the different
Explanations which they put upon the Aleoran; but in the several Opinions which
they hold concerning the first Successors of Mahomet, from which have aris'n
two particular Sects entirely opposite; the Sect of the Sunnis, and the Sect of
the Schiais.

The first, who are of the Turkish belief, maintain that Abou-baker succeeded
immediately to Mahomet, as his Vicar or Vicegerent; to him Omar; to Omar Osman*
to Osman Mortuz-Ali, Nephew and Son-in-law to Mahomet by Marriage of his
Daughter. That Osman was Secretary to Mahomet, a person of Courage, as well as
the other three* and that they were all valiant Soldiers, and great Captains,
who extended their Conquests more by force of Arms than by Reason. And thence
it comes that the Sunnis will not allow of Disputes, but propagate and maintain
their Religion altogether by force.

The Schiais, who are of the Persian belief, detest Abou-baker, Omar, and
Osman, as Usurpers to the Succession of Mahomet, which only belonged to Haly,
his Nephew and Son-in-law. They hold that this succession consists in elev'n
High Priests descendants from Haly, who makes the twelfth in this order. 1.
Haly, Son of Aboutaleb. 2. Hocen, eldest Son of Hali. 3. Hussein, his second
Son, who suffered death in defense of his Father's Succession. The place where
the Sunnis gave him battle and slew him, is called Kerbela near to Babylon, and
is a holy place in high veneration among the Persians. 4. Iman-zin-el-Abedin.
5. Mahomet-el Baker. 6. Iaferel-Scadek, who introduced the Law into Persia,
that if any Christian, Jew, or Idolater turned Mohammedan, he should be declared
general Heir to his Family to the exclusion of Brothers and Sisters, and that
he might allow what he pleased to his Father and Mother. Whence arose two
mischiefs, that some Armenians, Christians, and Jews turned Mahumetans, to get
the Estate of the Family, and others turned Mahumetans, to keep their
possessions. 7. Moussa-Katzem. 8. Hali-el-Rezza, whose Tomb at Meshed is sa
highly venerated among the Persians, as Mahomet's among the Turks. 9.
Mahammet-el-Iouad. 10. Hali-el-Hadi. 11. Hocen-el-Askeri. 12. Mouhemmet
el-Mouhadi Shaheb-zaman. The Persians hold the same belief as to the last Iman,
as we do of Enoch and Elias* which is the reason that several people leave them
in their Wills Houses ready furnished, Stables full of stately Horses, and
other necessaries for them to make use of when they return to Earth again. They
attribute to this Iman the Surname of Zaheb-zaman, or Lord of Time.

These two Sects of Sunnis and Schias overrun the three principal Kingdoms of
India, viz. the Great Mogul's, the King of Golconde's, and the King of
Visapour's. The first and last being Sunnis, that is to say, both the Kings and
Lords of the Court; for their Subjects are most of them Idolaters. Some Schiais
there are in the Courts of both Kings, in regard the Officers of the Army are
for the most part Persians, though in outward show they may follow the Religion
of the Prince. But the King of Golconda Koutoub-Sha is a zealous Schiais.

I come now to the Grand Festival of the Persians, which is the famous Feast of
Hocen and Hussein.

Eight days before the Festival begins, some of the more zealous sort black all
their Bodies and their Faces, and go naked in the Streets with only a covering
about their secret parts. They carry two Flints, one in each hand, which they
knock one against another, wrything their Bodies, and making a thousand antic
Faces; and all the while crying out, Hussein, Hocen; Hocen, Hussein; which they
act and speak with so much Labor, 'till they foam again at the mouth. In the
Evening, the devout people admit them into their Houses, and feed them very
well. During those days, as soon as the Sun is set, you shall see at the
corners where several Streets meet, Pulpits set up for certain Preachers, who
prepare the people that flock to hear them to the devotion of the Feast. Now in
regard all Ages, and Sexes go, there is no time in all the year so favorable
for the Women to meet their Gallants.

In the year 1667. the third of July, I saw the Festival by the favor of the
Nagar, who appointed me a place just against the Dela where the King sat. This
Dela is a Room built with a jetting upon that side of the Meidan next the
Palace Gate, one story high. Several Pillars sustain the flat bottom or floor
of the Dela, enriched with a Grotesco work of Gold and Azure, in the midst
whereof there was a Fountain that was filled with Water by the contrivance of a
Pipe. The Stage or Dela was open upon three sides, the longest side jetting out
upon the Piazza. Upon the Wall of the opposite side, which was close, were to
be seen several English and Hollanders, both men and women pictured with
Bottles and Glasses in their hands, as if they were drinking to one another.
Sha-abas the second caused this Painting to be drawn by a Hollander.

About sev'n a Clock in the Morning Sha-Sephi the second, who since has changed
his name to Sha-Soliman the second, came and seated himself upon his Throne set
up in the midst of the Dela, all his Nobility standing about him. So soon as
he was sat down, the Great Provost appeared at the end of the Piazza mounted
upon a fair Horse, attended by certain young Lords, who caused the People,
consisting of the Companies of the two quarters of the City, which are twelve
in all, to advance to the places which were designed them. For formerly the
Companies would strive for the way; and therefore the King to prevent disorder,
ordered there should be a Provost, or Master of the Ceremonies to place them
without disturbance. As he was about his duty, a Horseman entered the Piazza,
armed with a Bow, a Quiver, and a Scimitar, followed by seven Men that carried
every one a Pike upright in their hands, with every one a Man's Head at the
top. Those were the Heads of certain Vsbeck-Tartars, the neighboring and
mortal Enemies of the Persians, which those men had cut off from the shoulders
of their conquered Foes. The King caused five Tomans a piece to be given to
them that carried the Heads, and ten Tomans to their Leader. After them entered
three hundred Turks, which were fled from the Borders of Turkey* from whence the
Country People were taken by force, and sent to the Wars of Candy. They
complained, that whereas they were wont to be sent to their Winter Quarters
about the middle of October, the Turk kept them to the same hard service in
Winter as in Summer. All these were ordered to advance into the middle of the
Piazza, where they made their obeisance to him three times, and then humbly
besought him that they might dwell in his Kingdom, with their Wives, their
Children, and their Cattle. The King ordered Money to be distributed among
them, and that they should have Lands assigned them to manure. Then the Provost
caused the Companies to advance, every Company having the Thill of a Wagon
carried before him; upon every of which Thills was a Bier three or four Foot
high, the Wood of the Thill being painted with a Grotesco of Gold and Silver,
and the Bier covered with Satin. When the first Company had order to march,
three Horses were led before, richly harnessed; when they were come about a
hundred Paces forward into the Piazza, in view of the King, they that led the
Horses caused them to gallop, and then all the Company ^ell a running and
dancing about with the Bier. Besides that, every one flung up his short
Cassock, his Girdle, and Bonnet, put their fingers in their mouths, to whistle
as loud as they could. While the naked people, with their Flint-stones in their
hands, ran knocking their Stones together, crying out, Hussein Hocen, Hocen
Hussein, 'till they foam at the mouth again* not omitting to wryth their
Bodies* and to make all the scurvy Fac^s as before described. The three
Companies succeeding one another in the same Formalities, by and by came two
Companies more with a little Bier upon their Thills, and in each Bier a little
Child that lay as if dead. They that accompanied these two Biers wept and
sighed most sadly. These two Infants represented the Children of Hussein, who
when the Prophet was slain, were taken by Yerid, Caliph of Bagdat, and put to
death.

Upon this occasion you shall see a great number of Curtisans that come to the
Ceremony fall a weeping, who thereby believe their Sins are forgiven.

When all the people were come into the Pi^zza, notwithstanding all the care
and good order that was taken, there were several that went to Sharps,
accounting it a great honor to fight smartly in the Kings presence; and
farther believing, that if any one be killed upon that occasion, he shall be
Sainted; as indeed every one gives something toward his Inter^ment. The Grand
Provost seeing the Quarrel grow hot, and fearing more mischief, sent for five
Elephants, which ceased the Combat, by drawing the Eyes of the Spectators upon
them. The Elephants marched one before another, according to their Pay that was
allowed them, and their skill in War. Not that the King of Persia makes any use
of them in the Field, but only for State, keeps such as the Indian Princes
present him withal. Those five Elephants were covered with Houses of Cloth of
Gold, with a Fringe of the same round about. And upon the first, which was the
highest and the biggest, sat two Men, the one upon the neck, who guides the
Elephant; the other upon the crupper, carrying the King's Arm's in a Standard
fixed to a half-Pike. Upon the other four sat only one Man a-piece, who were
the Governors. When they came before the place where the King sat, they were
all ranked five a-bre^^, at what time the biggest, which was in the middle,
stretched out his two forelegs forward, and his two hinder-legs backward,
'till his belly almost touched the ground; after which manner the Elephant
makes his obey^ance. The other four did the same. Then laying their Trunks upon
the ground, and raising them again over their heads three times more, they were
made to stand with then heads where then ^ayls stood; and their Houses were
turned up, to the end the King might see in what condition they were, and
whether well looked after or no: which being done, they were led away again.

Upon one side of the (...) where the King stood, a little Scaffold was set up,
covered with Tap ^^y, some five Foot lower than the Kings. In the middle of the
Scaffold stood a g^^a^ ^^^ow-Chair covered with black Velvet, where sat a
Moullah with six other Moullah's round about him. The Moullah made a Discourse
upon the Death of Hussein and Hocen of about half an hour long, which being
ended, the King caused a Calaat or Habit of Honor to be given him, as also to
the others, though not so rich. When they had all put on the Habit, the same
Moullah returned to his Chair, and made a Prayer for the health of the King,
and the prosperity of his Kingdom.

All these Ceremonies lasted from seven in the Morning 'till Noon, at what time
the King retired into his Haram. As for the People, they carry their Biers up
and down the City, and wherever two Companies meet, whether it be for the
upper hand, or to get foremost, they presently fall together by the Ears, and
knock one another down: For they are not permitted to carry any other Arms than
good big Clubs, almost as big as Levers.

Some time after the Feast of Hussein and Hocen, the Persians celebrate another
Festival, which they call the Feast of the Camel, in remembrance of Abraham's
Sacrifice. They have a great reverence for this Festival, saying that it was a
Camel and not a Ram which God sent to reprieve Ishmael (affirming that Ishmael
was to have been sacrificed, and not Isaac.) They choose out for this Ceremony
one of the fairest Camels they can meet withal, and adorn and dress him up with
several Plates of counterfeit Gold and Silver, and then lead him without the
City to a place which is before a Mosquee on the other side of the River of
Ispahan, upon Zulpha side; the Deroga or Provost accompanying the people. The
King was formerly wont to be at this Feast, accompanied with his Nobility, and
I have seen him there; but of late years he never goes, the Deroga supplying
his place.

When the King went thither, several Moullahs prayed for half an hour, after
which the King took a kind of a Javelin and darted it against the Camel: but
now in the absence of the King, the Deroga gives the first stroke. At the same
time they fling the Camel to the ground, with Ropes tied to his legs, and
cutting off his head and neck together, they divide the rest of the Body into
eleven parts more, to the end all the twelve Companies may have every one their
share. Every Company carry their share to the Master of the Companies House,
who is generally the ancientest among them. Which part is kept and salted up
'till the next Feast, and the piece the year before, so 'till then preserved,
is then boiled with Rice, and is the foundation of the Feast for the chief of
the Company, who take it for an honor to eat of it: For the rest, they boil
Rice with Mutton and Hens, and besides that, distribute large Alms to the Poor.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Religion of the Gaurs, the Relics of the ancient Persians, adorers of
Fire.
THere are no men in the world so scrupulous of discovering the Mysteries of
their Religion, as the Gaurs; so that I was forced to frequent their company
very much in most of my Travels, to pick out what I have here to deliver.

Of the present Condition of the Gaurs.
AFter the Persians began to persecute the Gaurs, great numbers of them retired
to Surat, and others into the Province of Guzerat. Now the King of Persia lets
them live in quiet; and there are now above 10000 in Kerman, where I staid
three Months in the year 1654. All that live in India are Tradesmen, and for
the most part Turners in Ivory; those in Kerman deal in Wool. Four-days journey
from whence stands their principal Temple, where their Chief Priest resides;
whither they are once in their lives obliged to go in Pilgrimage. There are
some of these Gaurs live near Ispahan.

Of their Original, and their Prophets.
THey say that the Father of their Prophet was a Frank by Nation, whose Name
was Azer* and a Carver by Trade. That he left his own Country to live in
theirs, which at that time was the City of Babylon; where he took a Wife who
called her self Dogbdon. That one night his Wife dreamt that God had sent an
Angel from Paradise to visit her, who brought her very rich Clothes, which she
put on. That a Celestial Light presently overspread her Face, and rendered her
as beautiful as the Sun; and that when she waked she found her-self with Child,
which Child proved to be the Prophet Ebrahim-zer-Ateucht. That the Astrologers
of that time, by their skill in the Stars knew of the Birth of that Infant sent
by God, who was to govern Men, and reign in their Hearts. That those
Astrologers went and declared the same thing to the King, telling him that
there was a Child suddenly to be born, that would one day reprive him of his
Crown. Whereupon the said King, called Neubrout, and a great Tyrant, caused all
the Women with Child to be put to death, through the whole extent of his
Dominions.

But by a Miracle the big Belly of the Mother of their Prophet not appearing,
she remained undiscovered, and brought forth a Son. Her Husband, who knew
nothing of this Mystery, fearing he should lose his head if he did not discover
the business to the King, before he found it out another way, went and
confessed that he had a Child born, but that he knew nothing of her being with
Child.

Now you must know, that contrary to the custom of other Children, that cry so
soon as they come out of the Mothers womb, this Child laughed so soon as he was
born. For being to triumph over the Hearts of the people, he was to show signs
of joy; so that the people began already to rejoice in their future felicities.
This being signified to the King, he called his Astrologers together, to tell
him the meaning of so extraordinary a thing, and what would become of the
Infant. But the Astrologers not being able to satisfy him, he sent for the
Infant, and would have slain him with a Sword with his own hand, but God dried
up his Arm immediately, so that he could not. However, not terrified with so
great a punishment, transported with Choler, he caused a great Fire to be
kindled, and commanded the Infant to be thrown into it. But by the power of
God, the Fire which he had prepared to consume the Infant turned into a Bed of
Roses, where the Child most sweetly reposed.

They who from that hour began to honor the little Prophet, took away some of
that Fire, which has been preserved to this time. They keep it, say they, in
honor of so great a Miracle; and they have it in great veneration, because it
discovered the merit of their Prophet.

Nevertheless the King stopped not there, but still obstinate in his impiety,
notwithstanding all these Miracles, he prepared new torments for the little
Infant; but God chastis'd his incredulity and that of his people very severely,
by sending such an infinite number of Flies, and that of such a pestiferous
nature, that who-ever were stung with them died without remedy, unless they
immediately came and worshipped the Prophet, and kissed his Feet, in testimony
of their repentance. As for the King, who still continued in his impenitency,
an exemplary fate befell him. For one or those Flies stinging him in one of his
Ears, he died a most tormenting death.

His Successor was Sha-Glochtes. He also at the beginning of his Reign began to
persecute the little Infant, who now began to increase in years and virtue. The
King imprisoned him: but he was astonished when he heard that one of his
Horses, which he always confided in when he went to Battle, as being assured of
Victory when he rode him, had lost his four legs. Thereupon, wiser than his
Predecessor, and acknowledging from whence so dire a Correction proceeded, he
sent for the Prophet ou^ of Prison, asked pardon for his incredulity, and
prayed him by his intercession to restore his Horse his legs again. The Prophet
willing to do him that favor, prayed to God four times, and every time he
prayed one leg returned to the Horse again. The King beholding such a Miracle,
was half converted; but being desirous to be farther convinced, he desired the
Prophet to throw himself into a B^th of melted Silver, which he would provide
for him* promising if he came out safe, that he and all his People would
receive him as one sent from God, and be obedient to his Precepts in all
things. The Prophet resolutely undertook his offer, and the Bath being ready,
cast himself fearlesly into it; and as he went in, so he came out without the
least harm. Then the King and all the people that were present adored him for a
real Propher* and gave him the name of Zer-Ateucht, or Washed in Silver.

The Prophet perceiving that all the people had him in so much veneration,
w^thdrew himself, and would not be seen any more. Nor do they justly know what
became of him; which makes the greatest part of the Gaurs believe, that he was
taken up into Paradise both Soul and Body together. Others say, that having
found an Iron Coffin upon the Road near Bagdat, he put himself into it, and was
carried into Heaven by the Angels. They allow their Prophet three Children, who
are not yet come into the world, though their names be already given them. They
say that this Prophet Ebrahim walking one time upon the River without a Boat,
three drops of his nature fell from him upon the water, which are still
preserved there. That their God will send a Virgin, very much beloved by him,
upon the same River, who by the receptien of the first drop shall become big of
the first Child, whom they call beforehand Ouchider. He shall come into the
world with authority, and shall cause his Fathers Law to be received, and
confirm it, not only by his eloquent Preaching, but by many miracles. The
second, whose name is Ouchiderma, shall be conceived after the same fashion; he
shall assist his Brother, and by causing the Sun to stand still ten years,
shall convince all the world of the Truth of his Doctrine. The third shall be
conceived by the same Mother, and shall be called Seno^et-hotius: He shall come
with more authority than his two Brothers, and shall perfectly reduce all
people to the Religion of their Prophet. After which shall be the universal
Resurrection, at what time all the Souls, either in Paradise or Hell, shall
return to take possession of their Bodies. Then say they, shall all the
Mountains, and all the Minerals in the world be melted, and shall fill up the
great Chaos of Hell, whereby the Mansion of the Devils shall be utterly
destroyed? After this the world shall be levelled, and be made fit to inhabit,
and men shall have every one their apartment answerable to the degree and
quantity of the good which they did in their life time: but that their chief
delight shall be to behold and praise God and Ebrahim their Prophet. They add
that before the Resurrection, those that are in Paradise do not behold the face
of God, no not the Angels themselves, except only one, who is always attendant
on him to receive and execute his commands. They also say that God will have
pity upon the Damned, and that they shall go into Paradise, as having suffered
enough already for their sins. By which it appears, that the Paradise of the
Gaurs ^s less remote from sense than that of Mahomet's invention; and that they
have a confused knowledge of the mysteries of Christian Religion.

Of the Books of the Gaurs.
EBrahim-zer-Ateucht being taken up into Paradise, they received by his means
seven Books of Laws, which God of his goodness sent them to instruct them in
the way of their Salvation. They also received seven others, containing an
Interpretation of all the Dreams that could be Dreamed. Lastly, seven others,
wherein were written all the secrets of Physic, and all the possible means for
the long preservation of health. They say that fourteen of these Books, which
contained the explication of Dreams and secrets of Physic are lost; for that
Alexander the Great carried them away, as esteeming them a vast treasure; and
for the Books of their Religion, because they were written in a language that
none but the Angels understood, Alexander for madness caused them to be burnt:
for which rashness of his God punished him, and afflicted him with that
terrible sickness whereof he Died. Some Doctors and Priests that had hid
themselves in the Mountains to save their lives from his ^utchery, after
Alexander was Dead, met again together, and composed one Book by the strength
of their memories. I saw that Book which is a good large one, and written in a
different Character, either from the Arabian, Persian, or Indian. Their Priests
themselves that read in that Book hardly understand what they read, but they
have other Books that explain what is contained therein. When they read in that
Book, as also when they pray, they tie a Handkerchief about their mouths, as if
they were afraid their words should mix with the Air and receive any impurity.

Of the manner of their Baptism.
THe Gaurs never use Circumcision, but at the Birth of their Children practice
something like our Baptism. For some days after the Child is born, they wash it
with Water wherein certain Flowers are first boiled; and during that dipping,
the Priest, who is present, makes certain Prayers. If the Child dye without
that Washing, they do not believe but that it goes to Paradise; but they hold
that the Parents shall give an account for their neglect of the Infant, because
that Washing increases his favor and his merit in the fight of God.

Of their Marriages.
THe Religion of the Gaurs permits them to have five Wives, if they can
maintain them; nor is it laudable to repudiate any one but in case of an
evident Adultery, or that she turn Mohammedan; besides, it behooves her Husband
to stay a whole year, to see whether she will repent or no. If she come and
acknowledge her fault to the Priest, he enjoins her Penance for three years;
after which he remarries them, and they become man and wife again.

As to the Ceremony of Marriage, the Priest, when the Couple come to him, asks
the Man and the Woman in the presence of Witnesses, whether they both consent;
then taking a little Water he says a few Prayers over it, and then washing both
their Foreheads he pronounces certain words, and there is all. But they are not
to marry within the third degree; nor do they know what it means to desire a
Dispensation.

But you must observe by the way, that though they are allowed five Wives,
there is but one which can be truly said to be married, with whom they are
obliged to lie at least two nights in a week, Friday and Saturday, and she
always goes before the rest. But if she have no Children in seven years, the
man is allowed to marry another, but not to repudiate the other, whom he is
bound still to maintain according to his quality.

So soon as Women or Maids perceive the custom of Nature upon them, they
presently leave their Houses, and stay alone in the Fields in little Hutts made
of Hurdles or Watlings, with a Cloth at the entering in, which serves for a
Door. While they are in that condition, they have Meat and Drink brought them
every day; and when they are free, they send according to their quality, a Kid,
or a Hen, or a Pigeon for an Offering; after which they go to the Bath, and
then invite some few of their Kindred to some small Collation.

Of their Fasts, Feasts, and principal Ceremonies.
THe Gaurs drink Wine both men and women, and eat Swines*flesh, provided it be
of their own breeding and feeding. They are very careful lest their Hogs eat
any ordure; for should they perceive that they had devoured any thing of
nastiness, they are strictly forbid'n to eat them. They never pare their Nails;
so that if by way of disgrace, or by any misfortune they are constrained to cut
their Nails or their Hair, they carry that which they cut off to some place
appointed without the City for that purpose. Five days in a year they abstain
from Meat, Fish, Butter, and Eggs; and three other days they fast altogether
'till Evening. They have also thirty Holydays in honor of thirty of their
Saints, which they keep very strictly, no man daring to work. But the day of
the Birth of their Prophet is celebrated with an extraordinary Pomp; besides
that then they bestow large Alms.

There is one day in the year when all the Women of every City and Village meet
together to kill all the Frogs they can find in the fields; and this is done by
the Command of their Prophet, who was one day very much annoyed by them.

Their Priests have several Books full of small Pictures in Watercolors, ill
done, representing how the several Sins of Men shall be punished in Hell,
especially Sodomy, which they abominate.

Of their Funerals.
WHen the Gaurs are sick they send for their Priests, to whom they make a kind
of Confession; whereupon the Priests enjoin them to give Alms, and other good
Works, to gain pardon of their Sins.

They neither burn nor bury their dead, but carry the Corpse without the City,
into a walled place, where are abundance of Stakes seven or eight Foot high,
fixed in the ground, and tie the dead Corpse to one of the Stakes, with his Face
toward the East. They that accompany the Corpse fall to their Prayers at a
distance, 'till the Crows come; for those Cemitaries draw the Crows to them. If
the Crow chances to fasten upon the right Eye of the deceased, then they
believe the person to be happy, and for joy they give large Alms, and make a
Feast in the field. But if the Crow fixes upon the left Eye, then they take it
for an ill Omen, return home sad, without speaking to one another; give no
Alms, nor eat nor drink.

Of their Adoration of Fire.
THe Gaurs would not be thought to give Honor to Fire under the title of
Adoration. For they do not account themselves Idolaters, saying that they
acknowledge but only one God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, whom they only
adore. As for the Fire, they preserve it and reverence it, in remembrance of
the great Miracle, by which their Prophet was delivered from the Flames. One
day being at Kerman, I desired to see that Fire, but they answered me, they
could not permit me. For say they, one day the Kan of Kerman being desirous to
see the Fire, not daring to do otherwise, they showed it him. He it seems
expected to see some extraordinary Brightness; but when he saw no more then
what he might have seen in a Kitchen or a Chamber-fire, fell a swearing and
spitting upon it as if he had been mad. Whereupon the Sacred Fire being thus
profaned, flew away in the form of a white Pigeon. The Priests considering then
their misfortune, which had happened through their own indiscretion, fell to
their Prayers with the People, and gave Alms; upon which, at the same time, and
in the same form the Sacred Fire returned to its place: which makes them so shy
to show it again. When they put any persons to their Oaths, they Swear them
before this Fire; for they think no person so impious, as to swear false before
that Sacred Fire, which they take for the Witness of their Oath. Their Priests
put them in dread of very great punishments, and threat'n them that the
heavenly Fire will forsake them, if they prove so wicked as to swear falsely
before it.

Of their Manners and Customs.
THe Language of the Gaurs is different from the Persians as is their Character
and manner of Writing. They love to feast, and to eat and drink well, being
very profuse of their Wine and Strong-water. They never eat Hares, because they
have their monthly Purgations, like Women: for the same reason they never eat
Mulberries, believing that they partake of the nature of Women and Hares.

If, when they comb their Hair or their Beards, any one hair happ'ns to fall
upon their clothes, those clothes must be washed in the stale of a Cow or an Ox
to purify them again. If by chance they happ'n to touch any ordure or
nastiness, when they come home they must wash themselves in the same Urin. If
one of their Priests meet a dead Corpse in the Highway, and chances to see it,
he is obliged to wash himself in Cows-Piss, which they hold to be a good
Purification: an Opinion held in some parts of India also. I asked one of their
Priests how they came to understand the virtue of this Urin; who answered me,
that a certain person who was contemporary with the first Man, having his Arm
bruised and very black, by reason of some accident that befell him through the
malice of the Devil, fell asleep in the fields, and as he lay, an Ox staling, a
drop of the Urin flew upon his Arm, and presently healed that part which it
wet, and restored it to its former whiteness: which the man perceiving when he
waked, presently followed the Ox, and staid by him 'till he stal'd again, and
then receiving the Piss upon the whole wound, was perfectly cured. They also
preserve it, and compound it with a Water, which they cause them to drink who
have committed any Sin, after they have been at Confession for it. They call
that Water the Cazi's Water; which Urin ought to be preserved forty days, with
an infusi on of Willow-Bark, and certain Herbs. When any person is confessed of
his Sin, if it be a crying Sin, the party is bound to stay ten days in the
Cazi's House, and not to eat or drink but what the Priest gives them. And in
order to Absolution, the Priest strips him naked, and ties a little Dog to his
right great Toe, which he leads with him about the Cazi's House wherever he
goes, sometimes a whole day, sometimes longer, according to the hainousness of
the crime. In that posture he desires the Cazi to purify him, telling him that
for his part he believes himself to be purified. The Priest makes answer that
it is the Dog that must purify him, and not he. After that he powrs the
compounded water seven times upon his head, then gives him a draught to drink,
and so he is absolved. This Penitence costs the criminal Sauce, who is
afterward bound to feast all his friends at the Cazi's House. Being surpised
at this superstition, I asked whether the women were shrifted thus by the Cazi;
but I found that the Cazi's Wives confess and absolve the women and maids.

One more strange custom they have, that when a man is upon the point of death,
they take a little Dog and set it upon the expiring parties breast. When he is
just breathing his last, they put the mouth of the Dog to the mouth of the
person dying, and cause him to bark twice in that posture, that the Soul of the
deceased may enter into the Dog, who they say will deliver it into the hands of
the Angel appointed to receive it. Moreover when any Dog happ'ns to dye, they
carry him out of the City, and pray to God for the Carrion, as if the Beast
received any kindness after death by their Prayers.

Of the Beasts, which they love or hate.
THere are some Beasts which the Gaurs do mightily respect, and to which they
give a great deal of Honor. There are others which they as much abhor, and
which they endeavored to destroy as much as in them lies, believing that they
were not created by God, but that they came out of the body of the Devil, whose
ill nature they retain.

The Beasts which they principally admire are the Cow, the Ox, and the Dog.
They are expressly forbid to eat of the flesh of a Cow or an Ox, or to kill
them. The reason why they so esteem these Creatures is, because the Ox labors
for man, and Ploughs the Ground that produces his food. As for the Cow they
more dearly affect her for the Milk she gives, but especially for the purifying
quality of her Urine.

The Creatures which they abhor are Adders, Serpents, Lizards, Toads, Frogs,
Creyfish, Rats, Mice, but above all the rest Cats; which they say are the
resemblance of the Devil, who gave them so much strength that a man can hardly
kill them; so that they rather suffer the inconveniency of Rats and Mice, than
ever to keep a Cat in their Houses.

As for the other Animals beforementioned, if any of the Gaurs fall sick, they
hire poor people to go and find those Creatures out and kill them; which they
reck'n in the number of those good works that comfort the Souls of the
deceased. The reason why they hate them so, is, because they believe the Devils
make use of them to torment the Damned; and therefore they do a work of charity
that destroy them, whereby they mitigate the pains and torments of Souls in
Hell.

The last King of these Gaurs was Sha-Iesherd, who was driven out of his
Country by Omar the second, successor to Mahomet.

Of the RELIGION of the ARMENIANS, and of their Principal CEREMONIES. CHAP. IX.
How the Armenians Consecrate and Administer the Sacrament.
SInce the Armenians Traded into Europe and began to be Travelers, their
Churches are better set out then they were heretofore. They spare no cost to
adorn the Choir and the Altar; you tread upon rich Carpets, and for the
structure and embellishments of it, they employ the best Workmen and the
choicest Materials they can meet with. From the body of the Church to the Choir
there is usually an ascent of five or six Steps. Nor is there above one Altar
in any Church, upon which they set the Consecrated Bread, before they set the
Chalice where the Wine is. When the Mass for the Ceremony is said by an
Archbishop, at the reading of the Gospel they light an abundance of Wax
Tapers, which Tapers are like Torches. After tbe Gospel is read, several of the
Noviciates take sticks in their Hands about five foot long, at the end whereof
are Latten Plates with little Bells hanging about them, which when they are
shak'd, imitate the sound of Cymbals. Other Noviciates there are which hold a
Copper Plate in their Hands hung about with Bells, which they strike one
against another: and at the same time the Ecclesiastics and Laity sing
together indifferent Harmoniously. All this while the Archbishop has two
Bishops of each side of him, who are in the room of a Dean and a Sub-dean; and
when it is time, he goes and unlocks a Window in the Wall on the Gospel side,
and takes out the Chalice where the Wine is. Then with all his Music he takes
a turn about the Altar, upon which he at length sets down the Chalice, saying
certain Prayers. After that, with the Chalice in his hand, and the Bread upon
the Chalice, he turns toward the People, who presently prostrate themselves
upon the Ground, beat their Breasts, and kiss the Earth, while the Archbishop
pronounces these words; This is the Lord who gave his Body and Blood for you.
Then he turns toward the Altar, and eats the Bread dipped in the Wine; for they
never drink the Wine, but only dip the Bread in it. That done, the Archbishop
turns once more toward the people with the Bread and Chalice in his hand, and
they that will receive, come one after another to the bottom of the Choir,
whither it is not lawful for any Lay-person whatsoever to ascend; to whom the
Archbishop gives the Bread dipped in Wine that is in the Chalice, which Bread
is without leven, flat, and round, about as thick as a Crown, and as big as the
Host of the Mass, being Consecrated the day before by the Priest, whose Office
it is. They never put Water in their Communion-Wine; affirming that Water is
for Baptism, and that Christ when he instituted the Holy Supper drank it pure,
without any mixture of Water.

When the Armenians come to the Communion, the Archbishop or the Priest says
these words: I confess and believe that this is the Body and Blood of the Son
of God, who takes away the sins of the World, who is not only ours, but the
Salvation of all Mankind. The Priest repeats these words three times to the
people, to instruct them and to teach them to what end they receive the
Sacrament. Every time the Priest says the words, the people say after him word
for word; and when the Priest serves the people, he breaks the Host into little
bits which he dips in the Wine, and gives to every one of the Communicants.
That which I most wonder at is, that they give the Communion to Children of two
or three months old, which their Mothers bring in their Arms; though many
times, the Children put it out of their mouths again. They never administer the
Sacrament all the time of their Lent, for then they never say Mass but upon
Sunday noon, which they call Low-Mass, at which time they never see the Priest,
who has a Curtain drawn before the Altar, and only reads the Gospel and Creed
aloud. Sometimes upon Thursday in the Passion week they say Low-Mass about
noon, and then they Confess and administer the Sacrament: But generally they
stay 'till Saturday, and then the Communicants, after they have received, are
permitted to eat Fish, Eggs, Butter, Oil, or any thing else except Flesh. Upon
Easter day, by break of day, the Priest says Low-Mass, Confesses, and
Administers, after which it is lawful to eat Flesh. But the Beasts must be
killed upon Easterday, and not so much as upon Easter-eve. They have four other
Feasts in the year, wherein they observe the same Ceremony, eating neither
Flesh, Fish, Eggs, Butter nor Oil for eight days: which four Feasts are
Christmas, the Ascension, the Annunciation, and St. George's. Before this last
Feast they stretch their devotion to the utmost, for some will fast three days,
some five, one after another.

CHAP. X.
Of the ordination of their Priesthood; and their Austerites.
When a Father designs his Son to the Priesthood, he carries him to the
Priest, who puts the Cope, open on both sides, about his Shoulders; after which
the Father and Mother take him home again. This Ceremony is repeated seven
times in several years, according to the years of the young Child, 'till he
come to be of age to say Mass. If he be not designed for a Monk, but for the
Priesthood, after the fourth time of putting on the Chasuble or open Cope, they
marry him; for their Priests marry once, but if that Wife dye, if they intend
to marry again, they must give over saying Mass. The six first Ceremonies being
over, when the Youth comes to the age of 18 years, at what time they are
capable of saying Mass, as well those who are designed for Monks, as those who
are married Priests, they proceed to the seventh and last Ceremony, which must
be performed by an Archbishop or a Bishop; who invests the young Priest with
all the Habits which the Priests wear that say Mass. That being done, he goes
into the Church, out of which he is not to depart for a whole year; during all
which time he is altogether employed in the service of the Church. The Priest
who is married, must be five days after he has said Mass before he returns home
to eat or drink, or lie with his Wife. And as well the Monks as Priests, when
they intend to say Mass again, must remain five days in the Church, without
either going to bed or touching any thing with their hands, unless it be the
Spoon wherewith they eat their meat: not daring all the while to spit or blow
their noses. The next five days after they have said Mass, though such days
upon which they might otherwise eat Flesh and Fish, they are obliged to feed
upon nothing else but Eggs without Butter, and Rice boiled with Water and Salt.
The morning before they celebrate Mass, if the Priest have by chance swallowed
a drop of Water, he must not say Mass.

Their Austerities are such, that many of their Bishops never eat Flesh or Fish
above four times a year; but more then that, when they come to be Archbishops,
they only live upon Pulse. They have six months and three days in a year
wherein they keep Lent, or particular Fasts, which you please to call them; and
during all that time, as well the Ecclesiastical persons as the Laity, feed
only upon Bread, and some few Herbs which grow in their Gardens. There was an
Armenian of Zulpha whose superstition was so great, that he made his Horse to
fast with him, allowing him but very little either to eat or drink for a whole
week together. As for the poor laboring people, they only feed upon Pulse,
boiled in Water and Salt: for during their chief Lent, they are permitted no
more then others, to eat either Butter or Oil; nay though they lay a dying, it
is not lawful for them to eat Flesh upon those days wherein that diet is
forbidd'n. They may only eat Wall-nuts or Small-nuts, Almonds or Pistaches, or
some such other Fruit that affords no Oil; and they have this farther liberty,
to pound them, and put them among their Pulse or their Herbs, and boil them
with Rice.

CHAP. XI.
Of their Baptism.
IT IS the custom of the Armenians to Baptize their Infants upon Sunday; or if
they Baptize any upon the week days, it is only in case of necessity when they
think they will not live. The Midwife carries that Infant to Church, and holds
it in her arms, 'till either the Archbishop, the Bishop, or the Priest has said
some part of the Form of Baptism. Then he that baptizes takes the Infant which
is naked, and plunges it in the Water, and then taking it out again, puts it
into the hands of the Godfather, and goes on with the Prayers. While he reads
them, with the Cotton which he has in his hand he twists a string about half an
Ell long. He makes another also of red Silk, which is flat; then twisting those
two strings together, he puts them about the Child's neck. They say, that these
two strings, one of white Cotton, and the other of red Silk, signifies the
Blood and Water which flowed from the Body of CHRIST, when he was wounded with
the Lance upon the Cross. Having tied the cord about the neck of the Child, he
takes the holy Oil and anoints the Child in several parts of the body, making
the sign of the Cross in every place where he drops the Oil; every time
pronouncing these words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. He first anoints the Forehead, then the Chin, then the Stomach,
the Arm-holes, the Hands and Feet.

As to the making this Oil, you must know, that every seven years, upon the Eve
of our Lady in September, against which day they observe a small Lent of eight
days, tke Patriarch makes this holy Oil; there being no person but he who has
power to make it. He uses all sorts of fragrant Flowers, and Aromatical Drugs;
but the principal Flower is that which the Armenians call in their Language
Balassan-Jague, we in ours, the Flower of Paradise. When the Oil is made, the
Patriarch sends two Bottles to all the Covents of Asia, Europe, and Africa,
without which they cannot baptize.

The Ceremony of Baptism being over, the Godfather goes out of the Church with
the Infant in his arms, and a Taper of white Wax in each hand. According to the
quality of the person, when the Child is carried out of the Church, the
Trumpets, Drums, Hautboys, and other Instruments of the Country make a hideous
noise and go before the Infant to the Parents House, where being arrived, the
Godfather delivers the Child to the Mother. She prostrates her self at the
same time before the Godfather, kissing his feet; and while she continues in
that posture, the Godfather kisses her head. Neither the Father nor the
Godfather names the Child, but he that baptizes gives him the Name of the
Saint whose Festival falls upon the Sunday on which the Child is baptized. If
there be no Saint's day that Sunday in the Almanac, they take the next Name
whose Festival succeeds the Sunday of Baptism; so that they have no affected
Names among them. Upon the return of the Godfather with the Child home, there
is a Feast prepared for all the Kindred and Friends, and him that baptized the
Infant, with whom all the Priests and Monks of the Covent, at least of the
Parish, go along. The poor people were wont to be so prodigal at these Feasts,
as also upon their Marriages and Burials, that the next day they had not
wherewithal to buy Victuals, much less to pay what they have borrowed for so
needless an expense. But now the poor Armenians are grown so cunning to avoid
the Bastinado's which are gi'vn to Debtors upon the soles of the Feet, when
they cannot pay, according to the custom of Persia; that they carry the Child
to Church upon the weekdays: without any Ceremony, with tears in their eyes,
pretending it to be sickly and like to dye, and so make no Feasts at all.

If the Women lie in fifteen or twenty days, or two months before Christmas,
they defer the baptizing the Infant 'till the Festival, provided the Infant be
healthy. Then in all the Cities and Villages where the Armenians live, if there
be any River or Pond, they make ready two or three flat-bottom'd Boats, spread
with Carpets to walk upon, in one of which upon Christmas Day they set up a
kind of an Altar. In the morning by Sunrising all the Armenian Clergy, as well
of that place as of the parts adjoining, get into the Boats in their Habits,
with the Cross and Banner. Then they dip the Cross in the Water three times,
and every time they drop the Holy Oil upon it. After that they use the ordinary
form of Baptism, which being done, the Archbishop or the Minister plunges the
Infant in the River or Pond three times, saying the usual words, I Baptize,
etc. and the same anointings as before: though it seems a wonder to me that the
extremity of the weather does not kill the Child. The King of Persia is many
times present at this ceremony when it is performed at Ispahan, riding on
Horseback to the side of the River with all his Nobility. The Ceremony being
over he goes to Zulpha to the Kelonter's House, where there is an entertainment
prepared for him. Neither is there any place in the World where a King may be
entertained with less charge than in Persia. For if any private person invite
the King, and that His Majesty pleases to do him that Honor, it is but for the
inviter to go to the chief of the Officers, and to carry him twenty Tomans, or
three hundred Crowns, and to tell him withal, that the King has promised to
accept of a small Collation with his Slave. For then the Governor is obliged
to send to the House of him that treats the King all things necessary for the
entertainment. Else it were impossible to be done, in regard the King eats in
nothing but in Gold Plate. At the end of the Feast the King is always presented
with some European Rarity, not less worth than four or five thousand Crowns. Or
if the person have no Rarity to present, it suffices to offer in a Basin the
value in Venetian Ducats of Gold, with all the submission imaginable. Besides
all this, some Presents must be given to some of the Lords and principal
Eunuchs of his train; and others sent to the Queen Mother, if living, and to
the Sultaness, his Wives and Sisters. Thus though the entertainment may be made
with little trouble, yet otherwise it proves somewhat expensive; though the
Armenians of Zulpha are well enough able to bear the charge. I was twice at
this Ceremony upon Christmas day in Ispahan. The first time I saw Sha-Sefi, and
the second time Sha-Abas the second, who drank both so hard, that in their
Drink they committed those crimes that very much stained their memories: For
Sha-Sefi returning home stabbed his Wife, the Mother of Sha-Abas* Sha-Abas
another time returning home in drink, would needs drink on, and force three
women to drink with him; who finding he would not give over, stole out of his
Company. The King perceiving them gone without taking leave, in a mad humor
sent his Eunuchs for them, and caused them to be thrown into the Fire, where
the poor women were burnt; for there is no resisting nor examining the Kings
command.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Marriages of the Armenians.
THE Armenians Marry their Children before either party have seen each other,
nay before the Fathers or Brothers know any thing of it. And they whom they
intend to Marry must agree to what their Fathers or Parents command them. When
the Mothers have agreed among themselves, they tell their Husbands, who approve
what they have done. Upon this Approbation, the Mother of the Boy, with two old
Women and a Priest come to the House where the Mother of the Daughter lives,
and present her a Ring from him whom they intend to betroth. The Boy appears
afterward, and the Priest reads something out of the Gospel as a blessing upon
both parties; after which they give him a sum of Money according to the quality
of the Father of the Girl. That done, they present the company with drink, and
this is called a betrothing or affiancing. Sometimes they agree a Marriage when
the Children are not above two or three years old; sometimes two women that are
friends being both with Child at one time together, will make a match between
the two Children before they are born, if the one be a Boy and the other a
Girl. So soon as they are born the Contract is made; and when once the Boy has
given the Ring, though it be twenty years after before they are Married, he is
bound every year upon Easter Day to send his Mistress a new Habit with all the
trimming belonging to it according to her quality. Three days before the
Celebration of Marriage, the Father and Mother of the Boy prepare a Feast,
which is carried to the house of the Father and Mother of the Girl, where the
kindred of both parties meet. The Men are in one place by themselves, and the
Women in another; for they never eat together at public Feasts. The Evening
before the Nuptials the Bridegroom sends a Habit to the Bride; and some time
after he comes to receive what the Mother of the Bride has provided for him, on
her part. If the Bride has no Mother, some ancient Woman next akin dresses the
Bride. At length the Bride gets upon one Horse, and the Bridegroom upon
another, each Horse being sumptuously harnessed, with Bridles and Saddles of
Gold and Silver, if the persons be rich: those that are poor, and have not
Horses of their own, repair to the Great men, who willingly lend theirs upon
such an occasion. As they set out from the Virgins habitation, the Bridegroom
goes before with a Veil of Carnation-Tiffany upon his Head, or else of Gold and
Silver Network, the Meshes whereof are very close, that reaches below the
Stomach. He holds in his Hand one end of a Girdle some three or four Else long,
and the Bride that rides behind holds the other. She is also covered with a
large white Veil from head to foot, that spreads also a good way over the
Horse. Under which Veil, that rather seems a large white Sheet, the Bride is
hid in such a manner, that there is nothing to be seen of her but her Eyes. Two
Men walk on either side of each Horse; and if they be Children of three or four
years old (for so young they marry) there are three or four Men to hold them in
the Saddle, according to the quality of their Parents. A great Train of young
Men, the kindred and acquaintance of both parties, follow after, some a
horseback, some a-foot, with Tapers in their hands, as if they were going in
Procession: and besides all these, the Drums, Trumpets, Hautboys and other
Instruments of the Country, all attending to the Church-door. When they are
alighted, every one makes way for the Bridegroom and Bride, who advance up to
the foot of the Altar, still holding the Girdle in their hands. Then the
Bridegroom and the Bride meet, and lean forehead to forehead. Then comes the
Priest, and turning his back to the Altar, lays his Bible upon their Heads,
instead of a Desk, a weight sufficiently heavy, as being a thick ponderous
Folio. There he lets it lie while he reads the form of Matrimony, which Office
is most usually performed by a Bishop or an Archbishop. The Form is very much
like ours. The Bishop demands the Bridegroom, Will thou have such a one to thy
Wife? then to the Bride he says, Will thou have such a one for thy Husband? to
which they both answer with a nod of the Head. The Matrimonial Benediction
being given, they hear Mass; which being ended, they return both together to
the Daughters habitation, in the same order as they set out. These Nuptials
last three days: where the Women drink more than the Men. The Man goes to Bed
first, the Woman pulling of the man's Breeches, though she does not lay aside
her Veil 'till the Candle be put out. Let it be what time in the year it will,
the Woman rises before day. So that there be some Armenians that in ten years
after they are married never saw their Wives faces, nor ever heard them speak.
For though her Husband may speak to her, and all the rest of her kindred, yet
she never answers but with a Nod. The Women never eat with their Husbands; but
if the Men feast their Friends to day, the Women feast theirs the next Day.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Armenians Bury their Dead.
SO soon as any person dies, one appointed for the Services of the Dead runs
immediately to the Church to fetch a Pot of Holy Water, which he presently
pours into a great Vessel full of Water, into which they put the dead Corpse.
This man is called Mordichou, or the person that washes the Dead, which
Mordichou's are so much detested among the people, that it is an ignominy to
eat or drink with those sort of people. Whatever the party deceased has about
him at the time of his death belongs to them, though it be any excellent ^ewel;
for it is the custom of the East to lie in their Breeches, Shirt, and Wastcoa^,
in regard they never make use of Bed clothes. So soon as the Corpse is washed,
they dress it with a clean white Shirt, a pair of Breeches, a Wastcoat* and a
Bonnet, all new, never having been worn before. Then they put the Body in a
linen Sack, and sow up the mouth of it. That being done, the Priests come and
take up the Body to carry it to Church, which is attended by all the kindred
and friends of the deceased, with every one a Taper in his hand. Being come to
Church, they set down the Corpse before the Altar where the Priest says certain
Prayers; and then setting up lighted Tapers round about the Corpse, they leave
it so all night. The next day in the morning a Bishop or an ordinary Priest
says Mass, at the end whereof they carry the Body before the door of the
Bishop's house, attended as before; at what time the Bishop comes forth and
says a prayer for the Soul of the deceased. Then eight or ten of the poorer
sort that are next at hand, carry the Body to the Church-vard. All the way they
sing certain Dirges* which the Priests continue, while the Body is let down
into the Grave. Then the Bishop takes three handfuls of Earth, and throws them
one after another into the Grave, pronouncing these words; From Earth thou
came, to Earth thou shall return, and stay there 'till our Lord comes. These
words being said, they fill up the Grave. Those of the kindred and friends that
will go back find a Collation ready; and if any other persons will go along,
they are not refused. For seven days also they allow Dinners and Suppers to
certain Priests and poor people, if they are persons of ability: believing no
Soul departed can be saved, unless the survivors are at that expense. Whence it
comes to pass, that so many of the poor people are so miserable, and Slaves to
the Mahometans, by borrowing Money to defray those expenses, which they are not
able to pay again.

When an Archbishop or a Bishop dies, they add this farther Ceremony, that an
Archbishop or a Bishop writes a little Note, and cutting open the Sack puts the
Note into the Hand of the deceased, wherein are these words; Remember thy self,
that from Earth thou came, and to Earth thou shall return.

If a Slave dye before enfranchiz'd, when the Body is brought into the Church,
the Master writes a Note, wherein are these words; Let him not grieve, I make
him free, and give him his liberty. For they believe that he would be
reproached in the other World for being a Slave, for which his Soul might
suffer tribulation. If the Master be dead, the Mistress does the same. If an
Armenian makes away himself, they never carry the Body out of the door of the
house, but make a hole in the wall, where they can most conveniently, and carry
him to his Grave without any Ceremony.

The night preceding the Feast of the Holy Cross, Men, Women, and Children go
to the Churchyard, whither they carry good store of Food, not forgetting their
Wine. Immediately they fall a weeping over the Graves of the dead, and after
they have spent some time in that doleful Exercise, they all fall to eating and
drinking; thus passing the whole night by turns, in blub'ring, eating, and
bubbing.

As for the poor people, they would think themselves undone, and the most
unfortunate in the world, should they want Provision and Wine to go to the
Churchyards, the night before the Feast of St. George, where they go to
frolic it, rather then to pray for the Dead.

There may be some few Armenians that embrace Mahometanism for worldly
Interest, but they are generally the most obstinate persons in the world, and
most firm to their superstitious Principles.

CHAP. XIV.
Examples of the Constancy of the Armenians, in maintaining their Religion
against the Persecutions of the Mahometans.
IT is the custom of the Armenians, that when any one of them apostatizes, and
desires to return again to the Church, he cannot have Absolution but at the
same City or Village where he first abjured his Religion.

Now it happened that a young Armenian being sent to Smyrna with a very
considerable quantity of Goods, and falling to debauchery, turned Mohammedan, to
the end he might defraud his Father and his Brethren of their Estate, according
to Haly's Law, already mentioned. But after he had spent good part of the Goods
in Debauchery, he returned to the Three Churches, where the Grand Patriarch
lived, to be absolved from his Fault; but the Patriarch telling him he must go
to the Bishop of Smyrna, he went accordingly; and in some few days after he had
undergone the Penance enjoined him, he went to the Cadi, and with a great
Resolution, Sir, said he, you know that some years since I turned Mohammedan;
now I come to declare before ye that I have repented, and do repent of the foul
Crime I committed, when I denied the Savior of the World, and embraced your
wicked Law. The Cadi, who thought it had been at first only some evaporation of
Extravagance, endeavored to reclaim him by fair words and promises; but when
he heard him persist in his resolution, when he heard him curse and blaspheme
Mahomet, he caused him to be carried to the Piazza, where he was cut to pieces
immediately. For no persons go with more courage and joy to suffer for their
Faith, then the Armenians.

In the year 1651 there happened to be a Wedding between a young Turk and a
Virgin of the same Nation. To this Wedding was invited an Armenian Lady, who
was a great friend of the Bridegroom's Mother. The Armenian had an only Son of
about twelve years of age, that earnestly desired to go along with her; at
first she refused him, knowing that after the age of five or six years, no
Youth is permitted to be in company with the Turkish Women or Maids. But the
Boy still pressing his Mother, and being seconded by an Aunt, who to please her
Nephew, told her she might let him go in Girls Apparel; at last the indulgent
Mother, overruled by the importunity of the Child, took him along with her in
a female dress. Three days the solemnity of the Turkish Weddings last: but the
very first day, an old Gipsy-Turk casting her Eye upon the young Armenian, and
finding him too sparkish and too nimble for a Girl, suspected his Sex; and
calling his Mother aside, told her, that by all the gestures and actions of the
Child, she could be no Girl, but a Boy in disguise. The Mother not only denied
the matter, but also seemed highly offended at the old Woman's suspicion; who as
much incensed to have her judgment questioned, decoyed the Child among the
Eunuchs of the Family, and caused him to be searched; and finding herself in
the right, spread it presently about the house. Immediately the people cried
that the Chambers were defiled, that the Armenian Lady had done it in derision
of their Law; and seizing Mother, Aunt, and Youth, carried them all before the
Basha, demanding Justice. The Basha dismissed the Mother and the Aunt, but kept
the Youth six or sev'n days, hoping the rage of the people would be over. But
in vain he strove to plead for the Child, though the Father offered them half
the weight of him in Gold, for the Basha was forced to deliver him up into the
hands of the married Woman's kindred; who carried the Child to the Marketplace
of the City, where they stripped him stark naked; and first they flayed him from
his Neck behind down to the Wast, and so left him with a Guard upon him all
night. The Cadi and Moullah's exhorted the Child to turn Mohammedan, and they
would preserve him from further mischief. His Mother begged him to have pity
upon her and himself, and to turn Mohammedan to save his life. But neither
tears, nor all the tender words that grief and affection could inspire, could
shake the constancy of the Infant, who with a resolute utterance answered, that
he had hitherto suffered, and still would suffer patiently; and that nothing
grieved him, but that his Mother should exhort him to deny his Savior. Next
day the pitiless Turks came and flayed all his Breast and his Stomach, and so
left him all night under a Guard, intending to have flayed him part by part
every day. But the Basha abhorring their Cruelty, came the next day with his
Guards, and caused his Head to be cut off.

Van is a City peopled as well with Armenians as Turks; so that it is a usual
thing for the Armenian and Turkish Boys to play together. One day it
unfortunately fell out, that the Boys playing one among another, and flinging
Stones at each other, an Armenian Boy hit a young Turk full upon the Temples,
and struck him dead. Presently the other Turkish Boys and the Rabble seized
him, and carried him to the Basha; the Father and Mother of the Child slain
followed with hideous outcrys, bawling for justice, or that the Boy should turn
Mohammedan to expiate his fault. The Armenian Parents offered a large sum of
Money to redeem their Chi^d; but the adverse party obstinate against all
accommodation, the Basha was constrained to deliver the Child, giving sentence
that the young Armenian should endure the same death the Turk had suffered, and
no other. Immediately the Turks hurried the poor Child to the place where he
had unfortunately slain his play-fellow; and after the Parents of the young
Turk had had the two first hits, he was presently brained by a shower of Stones
from the Rabble. Yet as near death as he knew himself to be, without any
disturbance at all, he exhorted his weeping play-fellows to stand firm to the
Faith of Jesus Christ, for which he was going to dye.

Another time an Armenian Merchant coming from the Indies to Grand Cairo, went
to the Coffee-house according to custom, being a rendezvous of all the
Merchants in the Town. There falling into discourse, by reason of the heat of
the weather, he took off his Bonnet made after the Armenian fashion of diverse
Colors, and laid it behind him, keeping his black Cap only upon his head. When
the Moullah came about to hasten the people to go away according to the custom,
which I have already declared, the Armenian hastily rising up, a Turk,
concealing the Merchant's Bonnet, clapped his own Bonnet upon his head. Upon
that all the Turkish Merchants that were there came and congratulated the
Armenian Merchant, telling him, how glad they were to see that he had embraced
the good Law. At which words the Armenian surpised, takes off the Turbant,
throws it to the Ground before all the Company, and stamped it under foot. This
action of contempt so enraged the Turks, that they carried him before the
Basha, before whom it was in vain to justify himself, or to affirm that the
Turbant was maliciously put upon his head; for the Turks swore the contrary,
and that he took it of his own accord, and therefore he must either turn Turk
or dye for it. Upon his refusal they put him in Prison, and in a few days the
sentence was brought him from the Mufii and Cadi, that he must either turn or
be burnt alive. The severity of the sentence overpowr'd him at first to embrace
the Mahumetan Law. But four or five years after returning from the Indies to
Cairo, he came where the Basha was sitting in Council with the Grandees of the
Country, and getting as near the Mufti as he could, and throwing his Turbant in
his face; There Dog, said he, Thou were the cause that I have worn it so long,
of which I have repented, and do repent from the bottom of my heart; for I know
that neither thou nor thy Law are worth a Straw. At the same time the crowd
laid hold of him, and dragged him to the Piazza, where he died in the midst of
the flames with an admirable constancy.

A rich Merchant of Zulpha, called Cotgia Soultenon, was so well beloved by
Sha-Sefi, that he often went to Dine at his house. But one day it fell out that
the King having eat and drank to excess, upon his return home fell crop-sick,
upon which the report ran that the Armenian had poisoned him. Which report
coming to his ears, fearing left the King should dye, and himself be put to
cruel Torments, he took a dose of Poison and died. Which when the King, who was
well again the next day, understood, he was very much troubled for his death.

The same Cotiga Soultenon had a Cafer sent him from Melinda for a Slave; who
being young and very apprehensive, soon learnt the Persian and Turkish
Languages, and was instructed in the Christian Religion, and Christened by the
name of Huzod or Joseph. After his Master's death he turned Mahumetan, and so
continued twenty years. At the end whereof returning to Zulpha, he begged pardon
of the Church; and all the rest of his days so crucified himself with Fasting,
that every one pitty'd him; and when the Armenian Bishops told him he had done
well, he made no other answer, but that he was not worthy to live upon the
Earth who had denied his Savior, only he hoped that he would have mercy upon
him; and so continued his austere penance 'till he died.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Author's reception at the Court of Persia in his sixth and last Voyage,
and what he did there during his stay at Ispahan.
I Arrived at Ispahan the 20 th of December, 1664. So soon as the Nazar was
informed of my arrival, he sent the Kelonter or chief of the Armenians with
seven or eight more to congratulate my arrival, and to assure me of all the
kind Offices he could do me. The next day he sent the same Armenians with four
Horses; and to tell me that the King had a desire to see what I had brought;
for which purpose the Kelonter had order to furnish me with men. Thereupon I
took Horse, accompanied by all the Franks that were at Zulpha. When I came to
Court, I was brought into the place where all the great Ambassadors had
audience, where I found attending the Nazar, and Father Raphael superior of the
order of the Capuchins, ready to deliver me my Box of Jewels which I had left
with him in the Covent for more security. After I had exposed my Goods upon a
fair Table covered with a Carpet of Gold and Silver, and that the Nazar had
disposed every thing in order with his own hand, the King entered, attended
only by three Eunuchs for his Guard, and two old men, whose office it was to
pull off his Shoes when he goes into any Room spread with Gold and Silk
Carpets, and to put them on again when he goes forth. The King had nothing on
but a single pair of Drawers of Taffata, checkered red and white, which came
half way the Leg, his feet being bare; a short Cassock that came but half way
his body, with a large Cloak of Cloth of Gold with hanging-sleeves down to the
Ground, furred with Sable Martin. The first thing I showed was a large
Candlestick of Crystal of the Rock, the richest piece of that nature that ever
was seen. The next was a suit of Tapestry hangings held up by several men, as I
had appointed. The Nazar then caused me to advance and do my obeisance to the
King, who presently knowing my Face again; Oh, said he to the Nazar, This is
the Fringui Aga who sold me so many Rarities about six years ago, when Mahomet
Beg was Athemadoulet. After that the Nazar showed him all my Rarities as they
lay in order. Among the rest I besought His Majesty by Friar Raphael, to accept
of a great Steel Mirror, which when he looked in, he wondered to see his Face
so big. But when Friar Raphael had told him the nature of it, he caused it to
be held to one of his Eunuchs, which had a monstrous Hawk Nose, the sight
whereof held him in laughter and divertisement for above a quarter of an hour.
After that the King retired, leaving me alone with the Nazar* and Friar
Raphael. As for my Jewels I put them up my self, and had a place assigned me to
Lock them up and keep the Key, but for my large pieces of Goldsmiths work, the
Nazar committed them to the trust of one of the principal Officers of the House.

The next day early in the morning the Nazar sent for me and Father Raphael,
and made his Secretary write down the price of every thing, according to his
demands. He had also his own Artists to prize them; but that I did not value,
in regard I knew the price much better then they. After he had showed the
Jewels, price and all to the King, we were several times before we could agree;
but at length he told me, that the King would give me Twenty-five in the
Hundred profit for all the Stones; leaving me the Pearls, which he thought I
might put off at a better price in the Indies; which was an offer I could not
refuse, and therefore I signed the Agreement according to the Nazar's desire:
Which when his Majesty had seen, he bid the Nazar tell me I should be his
Jeweller in Ordinary, and that for my sake all the Franks should be the better
used within his Territories, and that I should have any favor of him that* I
desired. I besought his Majesty to give me his Patent with his Seal affixed,
whereby I might be priviledg'd to Trade in his Dominions, without paying Custom
for such and such Merchandise, and in such manner as I should think fitting. I
also besought him graciously to grant his Protection to a Nephew of mine, whom
I had left at Tauris to learn the Language, that he might be serviceable to his
Majesty when I was dead and gone. Thereupon he caused my Nephew to be enrol'd
presently as one of his Domestic Servants* and ordered the Nazar to take
particular care of him.

The next day after my agreement with the Nazar, the King gave audience in the
great Hall of the Palace to the Ambassador of the Vsbeck-Tartars. All the Lords
and Officers of the Crown s^ood in the Court where the Ambassador was to pass:
there were also nine stately Horses, whose Furniture was very rich, and all
different. Two Harnesses were covered with Diamonds, two with Rubies, two with
Emralds, two with Turquoises, and one embroidered with fair Pearls. Had he been
an Ambassador from a Monarch for whom the King of Persia had had a greater
esteem than he had for the Cham of Tartary, there had been thirty Horses: for
according to the value which the King puts upon the Prince that sends to him,
he either augments or abates of the number of his Horses of State. Every Horse
is tied by the Reins to a Nail of Gold fastened in the Ground, with a Hammer of
Gold lying by. There was another Nail of Gold behind, with a Cord tied to it,
that held their hinder legs. They set also before every Horse a Caldron of
Gold, out of which they draw up Water into a great Manger; though all this be
only for State, for they never water their Horses in that place.

Out of the first Court the Ambassador entered into a large Gallery, between a
long File of Musketeers on each side. Thence he entered into a Garden through
an Alley about eight Fathom broad, all paved with great Marble Stones, in the
middle of which runs a Channel of Water four Foot wide, with several
Waterworks that spurted out of the Channel at equal distances. On each side of
the Walk to the Hall where the King sat, there is a Pond almost as long as the
Walk, and in the middle of the Pond another sort of Waterworks. Several
Officers of the Army were ranged all along the Alley; and at the end of one of
the Ponds were four Lions tied; and at the end of the other, three Tigers
couchant upon Carpets of Silk, having Men to guard them with Half-pikes in
their hands. The Hall took up more ground in length then in breadth, being open
every way; the Cieling was sustained by sixteen wooden Pillars, of eight
pannels every one, and of a prodigious thickness and height. As well the
Cieling as the Pillars were all painted with Foliage-work in Gold and Azure,
with certain other Colors mixed therewith. In the middle of the Hall was a
Vase of excellent Marble, with a Fountain throwing out Water after several
manners. The Floor was spread with Gold and Silk Carpets, made on purpose for
the Place: and near to the Vase was a low Scaffold one Foot high, twelve Foot
long, and eight wide, covered with a magnificent Carpet. Upon this Scaffold
sat the King upon a apiece Cushion of Cloth of Gold, with another Cushion
behind him covered with the same, set up against a great Tap'stry-Hanging,
wrought with Persian Characters, containing the Mysteries of the Law. On each
side of the King stood several Eunuchs with Muskets in their hands. The King
commanded the Athemadoulet and four others to sit down by him, and the
Athemadulet made me a sign to sit down; but the King knowing how little the
Franks care for sitting cross-leg'd, ordered me to be told that I might stand
upright, if I thought good. The King was clad in a Silk streaked with Gold: His
Cloak was a Gold-ground with Flower of Silk and Silver, Furred with a Martin
Sable, the blackest and most glis^'ring that ever was seen. His Girdle was very
rich, and upon his Bonnet he wore a Plume of Herons Feathers fastened with a
transparent Jewel; in the middle of the Jewel was a Pear-fashion'd Pearl, set
with great Topaze's and Rubies.

About half and hour after the King was sat, the Nazar and the Master of the
Ceremonies brought the Ambassador, who neither himself nor any of his Train
were very well clad, and caused him to stay at the foot of the steps into the
Hall from the Garden. When the Ambassador had ascended the steps, he prostrated
himself before the King, then advancing nine or ten paces he did the same
again; after which the Master of the Ceremonies caused him to sit down, leaving
between him and the King space enough for eight men. After that I observed that
the Nazar went often between the King and the Ambassador, and between the
Ambassador and the King; but I could not tell what they said. So that I being
by that time quite tired, made my obeisance to the King, and went home to my
Lodging.

The next day the Nazar signified to me that it was the King's pleasure to
favor me with a complete Cal^at, or Habit of Honor; and to pay me my money.

Page. 178.

This is the God worthy to be praisd

Persian Travells.

The Kingdom belongs to God

the God most high*

The God of mercy to the Compassion al^

O mahomet O* Haly:

the Prophets.

These great Caracters with those that are upon the side of the names of the 12
Prophets signify.

To the name of God.

God who is the aid of mahomet.

The King who has all power.

Se^erat* ^afar* Elfeteseni, Elmaussi*

These are the names of the four Prophets that have followed the Doctrine of
Haly.

This Contain the names of the 12 Prophets without their surnames.
Aly Hassen Hossein Alizein Maham Jafar Moussa Aly Mahome^ Haly Hassen mahome^

That which is under the names of the ^2 Prophets signifies as follows.

He who at this time enjoyes the Kingdom The Victorious Abas the second.

Page* 179.

Persia Travells.

God is my Sufficiency

He that is not for Haly is no friend of mine

He that is not at his door as the dust though he were an Angel the dust be on
him*

The Slave of Haly King of the Country A^as the 2d. 1509.

this is that* which is on the Kings seal

mahomet methi son of Hali Bala of the race of Sophi.

This is that. (...) is Contained in the seal of the Aemadoulet or first
Minister of State and the seal in the Original is set behind, noe man
dareing to fix his seal on the. side of the Kings.





The next day in the Morning being sent for to the Court, I found the Nazar,
the Grand Treasurer, and several other great* Officers expecting me in the
Treasury, where the Money lay ready in sealed Bags. My Sum amounted to three
thousand four hundred and sixty Tomans, of which the Treasurer would have
abated me a hundred and sixty for Fees. After a long contest, I gave him half,
and carried away my Money; having first weighed two Bags Toman by Toman, and
then weighed the rest of the Bags, Bag by Bag.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Honors and Presents which the Author received from the King of Persia.
THE day following one of the Nazar's principal Officers brought me the
complete Calaat* consisting of Vest, Tunick o^ Super-Vest, Girdle, and Bonnet.
He also delivered me three Patents, sealed by his Majesty and the Athemadoulet,
which exempted me from paying any Customs within his Kingdom. Another to the
Kan of Schiras, with a little Seal or Signet, commanding him to let me have
three Loads of good Wine when I traveled that way. A third with his Signet, in
favor of my Nephew at Tauris; wherein the King declared that he owned him as
his Domestic Servant, and that he was under his Protection.

The First PATENT ran thus.
THE Command of him whom all the Universe obeys has been made, That the
Beglerbegs of High Nature, the victorious and great Lords, Ornaments of the
Kingdom, Possessors of Honor, the Judges in high place, practisers of Justice,
the Visiers who preserve Reason, and have in their thoughts the removal of
Vice* and the Commissioners who action affairs and difficulties of the Palace,
the Overseers of the Roads, and the Conservators of the good Customs of the
well-ordered Kingdoms of Kragon (which God preserve from all misfortune) MAY
KNOW, That whereas the choicest of his Resemblers and Companions, * Aga
TAVERNIER, French Merchants has brought so many Rarities of all sorts to the
presence and view of the Lieurenant of the Eagles, who has all things according
to his wish, has found the degree of favor and good will. And whereas We have
commanded him to perfect some Business for Us, which so soon as he has
finished, ^e is to bring to the holy and pure view. Therefore through what
soever Road or Coast of Our Thrice-spacious Kingdom the above-named, shall have
a desire or occasion to pass, Let not the Receivers of the Palace, out of any
seeming expectancy from the above-named, give him any trouble or molestation.
But let them know, that it is necessary for them to give him all honor, and to
make much of him, that he may go where he pleases. And whereas the Seal of High
Nature, the Light of the Universe of Kragon, of thricenoble extracton, the
Master of the Age, has illuminated and adorned this Writing, Let them rest
there, and give Credence to it. By the thrice-high Command. etc.


Kragon: A King of China, so renowned for his Justice, Victory, and Magnanimity
that sometimes the Kings of Persia assume that Title in their Patents, and
sometimes, in honor of him, style themselves his Lieutenants. Receivers of the
Palace, are Farmers of the Customs and other Subsidies.


The Second PATENT.
To the Governor of Schiras,
THE Command of Him whom all the World ought to obey, is such, That the
Illustrious and High Lord, whose Office ought to be honored, the Governor and
Prototype of Visiers and Grandees, Mirza-Mahomet-Sadee, the Vizier of Fars may
be assured of Royal Favors when he understands the Contents of this Command.
He shall give three Loads of Wine, of that which he has in his custody, to the
Cream of his Equals, Aga TAVERNIER, French Merchant, and you shall take an
Acquittance. All the Grand Visiers, and Officers of Customs, and Guarders of
Passes also let them not molest him at all, let them take nothing from him, let
them permit him to go and come as he pleases, and let them obey him.

Given the Month of Jamady-Elaker, in the Hegyra of Mahomet 1075. January,
1665.

The Cream, is the Character of an honest man among the Eastern people.


But to return to the Calaat. You must take notice, that the Persians call a
Calaat, any Present which one person makes to another inferior to him in
dignity* sometimes a Vest alone, sometimes a Tunick with the Girdle only,
sometimes a Turbant, or a Horse, with Bridle and Saddle; to those in the Army
the King sends a Sword or a Dagger, and all these go by the name of Calaat's.
Secondly, you must take notice, that when the King sends a Calaat to a
Governor of a Province, he names himself the person, that is to carry it. For
both in Turkey and Persia, the Receiver of the King's Present is obliged to pay
the Messenger, in so much that sometimes they hardly escape for a thousand
Tomans. But when the Calaat is sent to any private person, the Nazar chooses
out of his Domestic Servants one to carry it. I gave twenty-five Tomans into
Father Raphael's hand, who ordered his business with so good a grace, and so
advantageously for my Purse, that he complemented away the Messenger very well
satisfied with half.

The next day the Nazar sent to me to put on my Calaat, and to come and do my
obeisance to the King, who was that day to go abroad. Thereupon I summoned
together all the Franks, and ordered the Trumpets and Drums to be made ready as
I rode from the Palace home. For then the people come out to see who the King
has honored that day, who is always known by his Habit, which is still the
newest and gayest of all the rest.

It happened, that the King being indisposed did not go away that day; however
I applied my self to the Nazar, and told him how much I was obliged to the King
for the honor he had done me, and that I was resolved to show my self before
the greatest Monarchs in Europe in the Habit he had bestowed upon me; that they
might behold the beauty and richness of my Calaat. The Nazar failed not to
repeat my Compliment to his Majesty; who thereupon ordered me the Persian
Cloak, with hanging-sleeves, and faced with sable Martins.

Two or three days after the Nazar sent for me again to Court, whither I went,
accompanied by the Zulp^ian Franks, as before. I was no sooner come to the
Palace, but the Nazar met me in the great Hall, attended by two Officers, who
carried the Cloak which the King had appointed for me, and presently taking the
Cloak out of their hands, he put it about my shoulders, saying these words, It
is the King's pleasure to honor thee entirely. It was a most magnificent piece
of Silk, and very richly furred, having been valued at eight hundred Crowns. In
this I was particularly beholding to the Nazar, who might have sent me my Cloak
home to my Lodging as well as the Calaat; but he was pleased to put it upon my
back in the Palace with his own hands, to spare me the charges of a new
Present. After this the Nazar took me by the hand, and led me to the Hall,
where the King was sitting upon a large Cushion, having no more than twelve
Eunuchs for his Guard; some with Bows and Arrows, and some with Muskets. By
that time I had advanced two or three paces in the Hall, the Nazar ordered me
to fall upon my knees, and touch the Ground with my forehead; then taking me by
the hand, he led me within two or three paces of the place where the King was
sitting, where I was ordered to make the same obeisance as before; after that
he caused me to retire seven or eight paces, and there to stand. And then it
was that His Majesty was pleased to tell me, that he had contrived the Models
of several pieces, which he would have made in France; and asked me whether I
would carry them along with me, or whether I would presently send them into
France to be made up while I dispatched my business in the Indies? I told His
Majesty, that so soon as he would be pleased to deliver them to me, I would
send them for France. After this and some other discourse I made my obeisance,
and retired toward the door of the Hall. Having thus done my duty to the King,
I went and kissed the Nazar's hand; and then taking Horse at the Palace-Gate,
with the rest of the Franks that accompanied me, we rode home with the Trumpets
and Drums of the Country before us. When we came to Zulpha* with our Torches
before us, for it was three hours after Sunset, the Men and old Women came out
of their Houses to see us pass along, and several presented us with Fruits,
Sweetmeats, and Wine, obliging us to drink almost at every House 'till we got
home.

CHAP. XVII.
How the King was pleas*d to divertise himself in the Author's Company.
ABout two days after betimes in the Morning I was sent for to the Court in
that have, that I had ^^arce time to make me ready. When I came to Court, I
found the Nazar, Father Raphel, and two Hollanders, upon whom the Nazar had
began to cast a particular eye of favor all together. After we had stayed a
while, the Nazar brought us to the Room where the King was, sitting upon a low
Pallet, with two Mattresses covered with a rich Carpet. He leaned his back
against a large Cushion four foot long, having before him eight or ten Plates
of Fruits and Sweetmeats. Before him also stood two Bottles, with long round
necks of Venice Crystal stopped with Pitch, full of Schiras Wine, with a Cup of
pure Gold; upon one side a kind of a very small Fat and with a handle, within
three or four Fingers sull of the same Wine, with a Gold Ladle that held a good
Chopine of Paris. The Bottles were for the King's drinking; that in the Fat for
those that the King did the Honor to drink with him. After we came in and had
made our several obeysances; said the King to Father Raphael, Raphael, bia,
bia, that is, come bither, come ^ither, who thereupon rising, and falling upon
his knees when he came near the King; Raphael, continued the King, if thou will
drink Wine, stay here, if not, be gone. The Friar unaccustomed to drink Wine,
replied that since His Majesty did him so great an Honor, he was willing to
drink a little. It Is very well, answered the King smiling, go then and take thy
seat. Thereupon the King commanded one of the Dutchmen to fill some Wine,
which he did, but with a trembling hand Heaven, knows, as never having been at
such a Festival before. And I observed that having laid his Hat upon the
Carpet, the King commanded him to put it on, it being a very ignominious thing
in Persia to be bare-headed. Thus the great Ladle went about very smartly,
considering it was but early in the Forenoon: But at length the King bethinking
himself that the Franks were not used to drink without eating, gave such order,
that immediately they spread before us a Sofra of Cloth of Gold instad of a
Table-Cloth; and over that a Leather Covering of the same length and breadth,
and over that a sort of Bread as long as the Sofra; for had the Sofra been ten
Else long, the Bread must have been as long. This Bread is no thicker then a
piece of Paper, and folds like a Napkin. It is made with a Rolling-pin, and
baked upon Plates of T^^n'd Copper. This Bread is nev^r eat'n, but only serves
for a Table-Cloth to preserve what falls from the Dishes, and what* every man
leaves particularly upon his own Pla^e, which is all wrapped up in the Leather
and given to the poor. Next to that they set upon one end of the Sofra a sort
of most excellent Bread two foot long and one broad, then which never was
better eat'n in the World. By and by followed Boiled and Roast flesh and fish,
with two Chests of Limons of Mazandran, and Granates from Schiras.

After we had made a large Breakfast, the King was pleased to put me upon a
discourse of my Travels into the Indies, and asked me what Princes I had had
access to, and how many I knew by their faces? Then causing a Satchel to be
brought him, he opened it himself, and showed me several portraitures in
Miniature. Presently I knew Sha-Gehan, Aurenge-Zebe, and three of his Sons; the
King of Golconda and Visapour; Sha-Est-Kan, and two Raja's. Among the rest he
showed me a Persian Lady's Picture and gave it me; to the end, said he, that
your French Ladies may see how our Persian Ladies are clad. After that he
showed me the Pictures of two Venetian Curtisans, the one a Widow, and the
other a Virgin, with a Parrot upon her hand clad after the French mode. Upon
which the King putting the question to me which I liked best? I replied that
she pleased me best who had the Parrot upon her fist. And why not the other,
said the King? Because, answered I, she looks like one that had renounced the
world. Thereupon the King falling into a laughter, and turning toward Father
Raphael; Patri, Patri, said he, is it possible that such a Lady as this should
have renounced the World? This led us into a discourse of beauty, wherein when
the King demanded my opinion, I told him that Women's beauty depended very much
upon the Custom of the Country; for that in Japan Women with broad faces were
most in request; in China small feet were admired; in the Isles of Borneo and
Achen, Women the blacker their Teeth were, the more they were beloved; that in
the Island of Macasser, to make their Women lovely, they pull out four of their
Teeth when they are young, to put in four of Gold in their room; as I have seen
a Captain of Java, who pulled out four of his fore Teeth, and set four Diamonds
in their place. In short, I told his Majesty that in his own Dominions full
Eyebrows which meet together were highly esteemed; whereas the Women of France
pull them up by the Roots. But which, said the King, do thou like best, the
black or the fair? Sir, continued I, were I to buy Women as I purchase
Diamonds, Pearls, and Bread, I would always choose the whitest. With that the
King fell alaughing, and ordered me a brimmer in his own Cup, which was a great
Honor indeed. From hence we fell into a more serious discourse concerning the
present State of Europe, speaking very low, and the rest of the Company
retiring all the while out of hearing. Only I observed that there was one Lord
middle aged, and clad after the Georgian mode, who stood within five or six
paces behind the King, and that many times as the King drank, he only wet his
Lips, and gave the rest to that Lord to drink, which when he had done, he
reti^'d again to his place. Upon inquiry I found he was the King's Uncle by the
Mothers side.

While we were talking of serious things the Curtisans were bid to retire out
of the Hall, which they did, into a Gallery that looked upon a Garden, where
they sat, where immediately a Sofra was laid before them covered with Fruits
and Sweetmeats, and one of their Society continually powered out the Wine which
they drank round without intermission: One would have thought they should have
been fuddl'd; yet when they came in again, no man could perceive they had been
drinking. After they had Danced a while, they were ordered to retire again, and
the King sent for his Music, which was both Vocal and Instrumental; his
Instrumental Music consisted of a kind of a Lute, a Guittar, a Spinet, and two
or three Base Flutes. He had also in the Gallery where the Curtisans were, a
large Ebony Cabinet eight foot high, adorned with several Silver figures, which
proved to be an Organ that went alone. It was part of the present which the
Muscovite Ambassadors made the King, which he ordered to be set a going, that
we might hear it as we sat. No sooner had the Organ stopped, but the Curtesans
were called in again, and the King caused the Gold Ladle to go round,
commanding that no man should leave a drop. When every man had done, the King
was pleased to ask me which of the Curtisan's I thought to be handsomest?
Thereupon I rose up, and taking a Wax*Candle in my hand, I went and viewed them
all. The King laughed, and being very glad to see my face among theirs, Bring
hither, says he, her to whom thou have most a fancy. In obedience to which, I
picked out the eldest, as I thought, and led her to his Majesty, who caused us
to sit down by him. Then the King pointing to another, And why, says he, did
you not choose yonder Girl, which is younger and handsomer; commanding them
both to kiss me one after another, that I might understand the difference
between the Caresses of one and the other. But I replied, that were I to choose
again, I would make the same choice, believing prudence to accompany age.
However I besought his Majesty to consider, that it was not for me to look upon
elder or younger* and that though he had given me the liberty to send the elder
home to my Lodging, yet it was not in my power to accept of his favor, in
regard I had a Wife, to whom I never had been unfaithful.

We had thus droll'd together 'till eleven a Clock at night* when the King
started another Question, Whether any one present knew how to Sing? It happened
that there was one Monsieur Daulier there, that Played upon the Virginals, and
pretended to Sing, who immediately began a Court-Air. But his Voice being a
high-pitch'd Voice, and for that the Persians are altogether for Bases, the
King did not like him. When I *perceived that, being in a merry vein, though I
knew not a Note, yet having a good deep voice, and clear, I sung an old Air
that came into my head, which begins,

Fill all the Bowls then, fiill 'em high,
Fill all the Glasses there, for why
Should every Creature drink but I?
The King was so pleased, that he cried out, Baricala, Baricala, as much as to
say, Oh the works of God! an expression of admiration usual among the Persians.

By this time it was very late, and the King growing sleepy, gave us leave to
depart; which we did very willingly, having had hard labor for seventeen hours
together.

The next night the King fell a drinking again, and there was in his presence
an Agi or Pilgrim newly returned from Mecca, and consequently obliged never to
drink Wine after that. While the Agi staid, there was one of the Persian Lords
got so impertinently fuddl'd, that he twice stru^k the Agi's Turbant from his
head, refused to drink when the King commanded him, played the fool with the
Curtisans when they were dancing, and committed so many other acts of folly,
that the King incensed at such a continuation of Buffonry, in a great fury,
This Rascal, said he, has lost all his respect, and thinks he is no more my
Slave; drag him out by the feet, and throw him to the Dogs to eat. Immediately
four or five of the King's Officers came and dragged him out of the Hall by the
feet, and every body wondered he was not thrown to the Dogs, according to the
King's Command; but it is thought that some of the King's Woman begged for him,
so that his punishment was changed.

There was one of the Curtisans that gave one of her Companions a box on the
ear, not in the King's presence, but in the Gallery where they were drinking
together. However she did not strike so softly, but that the King heard the
noise of the blow. Whereupon he commanded her that had given the blow to be had
before the Deroga or Judge of the Town, whom he ordered to expunge her out of
the number of Curtisans, and to put another in her place; that she should have
a hundred Tomans given her, and that the Deroga should cause her to be married.

The next day I waited on the King, and received those Models which he had
bespoke me to send into France. They were the Patterns of certain Drinking-Cups
and Trenchers, with the Model of a Dagger drawn with his own hand: for he had
learnt to draw of a couple of Dutchmen that were in his Service. The Dagger
was to be Goldsmith work enameled. When I had received his Instructions, I took
my leave of his Majesty: and then going to wait upon the Nazar at his
Country House, I took leave of him also, who assured me of his affection upon
all occasions, and did me several kindnesses at my departure.

The End of the Fourth BOOK.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE PERSIAN TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: BEING A Politic
and Historical Description of PERSIA: With the ROADS FROM ISPAHAN to ORMVS.
CHAP. I.
The Genealogy of the Kings of Persia, of the last Race.
AFter that Tamerlane had extended his Conquests into Asia, and defeated the
Army of Bajazet, whom he took Prisoner, together with his Wife, he returned
into Persia, where at that time lived a Cheik, whose name was Aidar, a Person
in high reputation for his Holiness, He was a Person of great wit, and the
first in the dignities of the Law, which gained him great authority and belief
among the People. He gave great honor to Tamerlane, and showed Eminent
kindnesses to all the Officers of his Army; in recompense whereof, Tamerlane,
who was a generous Prince, and full of gratitude, made a Present to the Cheik
of a great number of Captives, which he brought along with him out of Turkey.
The Cheik planted one part of these Slaves about Ardevile, and seated the other
near his own residence. Now in regard he assumed to himself to be descended in
a direct line from Mahomet, he covered his head after another manner then all
the rest of the Persians, wearing a kind of flat Bonnet, growing broader and
Broader to the top, and so pleighted, as to make twelve pleights of a Ruff, in
honor of the twelve Prophets. In the middle, a kind of a Pyramid about a
fingers length seemed to rise out of the Bonnet, but was indeed sowed to it.
Such a Bonnet as this the Cheik appointed all the Slaves to wear that Tamerlane
had given him, and this is that which at this day distinguishes their
Successors from the other Persians. And it is the custom, where Kans or
Governors of Provinces reside, that all the Sophies both in the City and the
neighboring parts, meet in the Piazza every Friday in the afternoon, where
they pray to God for the health of the King and the Kan, and for the prosperity
of the Kingdom; after which the Kan sends them Victuals to eat, not without
some other effects of his Liberality.

The Cheiks Sons considering of what a number of Slaves they were Masters* and
that the greatest part of the people, preposses'd in favor of their Father,
out of the opinion they had of his Sanctity, took their part; the more
powerfully to engage them, showed themselves liberal to all, and when they
found themselves strong enough, revolted against Alamout King of Persia, their
lawful Sovereign. After many Skirmishes, at length they gave him Battle near to
Tauris, wherein Azimout was defeated, and slain by the hand of Ismael Sophi,
the Cheiks third Son, who is properly to be accounted the fist King of that
Race: I mean of the Race of them that did not embrace the Alcoran, but
according to the Interpretation of Haly, Mahomets Son-in-Law.

To Ismael Sophi succeeded Sha-Tammas his Son, and to Sha-Tammas Sha-Ismael the
second, who reigned but a short while; for his cruelties constrained the
Nobility of the Country to set up in his room Mahomet-Coda. bend his Brother;
though little skilled in the affairs of Government or War, Many thought he was
blind, but he was only dim-sighted, through the application of a hot Iron to
his eyes, by the Command of his unnatural Brother in the beginning of his
reign. He was the Father of Sha-Abbas, that succeeded him, who settled the
affairs of Persia in a very good condition.

Sha-Abbas the first, by his Valor and good Conduct gained the name of Great.
When he came to his Throne, upon the North and West side he found nothing in
his power but the City of Casbin; but afterward, as he was a personage of
great wit as well as courage, partly by policy, and partly by force, he
recovered several Provinces to the West, and conquered the Kingdoms of Lar,
Ormus, and Candahar.

Of many Sons that Sha-Abbas had, not one survived but only Sophi-Mirza, a
Prince of great wit, and dextrous at his Arms. All the people loved him, which
made his Father jealous of him, that he waited for his death to ascend the
Throne. And that which augmented his jealousy was, for that one day being a
hunting, Sophi-Mirza drew the first arrow at a Boar; it being a capital crime
in Persia to shoot before the King. However Sha-Abbas for the time concealed
his displeasure, unwilling to fly out in fury against the Prince, in regard he
had no more Sons. But Sophi-Mirza having had a Son by a Slave, which pleased
him, Sha-Abbas's joy increasing as the Child grew, his jealousy also daily
increased against the Father of the young Prince; so that being no longer able
to dissemble his fear, he caused his eyes to be put out. Nay his jealousy went
a great way farther; for he now feared the blind Prince, and having therefore
resolved his death, he commanded a Lord of the Court to bring him his head. The
Lord in an astonishment refused to obey the King, and besought him rather to
take away his life, than to constrain him to embrue his hands in the blood of
his Prince. The King offended at him for his refusal, banished him his Court;
and the next day gave the same command to another Lord, who without any scruple
put it in execution, and brought him the head of his Son in a Basin of Gold.
That object of pity brought him to himself; so that not being able to look upon
so sad a spectacle without tears in his eyes, upbraiding the villainy of the
Lord, he expelled him from his sight, forbad him his presence for ever, and
sequesterd all his estate, only allowing him a Mamoudi, or nine French Sous
aday. The other Lord, who had so generously refused to aid him in so bloody an
act, the King recalled from Exile, and bestowed upon him one of the best
Governments of the Empire.

Ever since that time all the Male Children of the Blood Royal are shut up in
the Women's Haram, where they are bred up in ignorance, having only two or three
Eunuchs to teach them to write and read, and to keep them company in their
recreations, whether it be in shooting with a Bow, or riding about the Gardens
upon an Ass; for they never allow 'em a Horse: besides that all that time they
are never permitted to see the people. In this manner it was that Sha-Abbas
bred up his little Grandson, many days causing him to take Opium to render him
more stupid. So that when he came to the Throne, after his Grandfathers death,
the Physicians thought it convenient that he should drink Wine, to restore his
natural heat, and renew his vigor. Sha-Abbas reigned forty years, and died at
the end of the year 1628. Before he died, he gave command, that he should be
buried in some place unknown to all the world, and that they should set his
Grandchild upon his Throne, and give him the name of Sha-Sefi.

So soon as Sha-Abbas's eyes were closed, the General of the Horse, and the
chief Captain of the Harquebusses, with whom the Commands were left, rode in
all haste to Ispahan, and coming to the Palace, desired to speak with the
Mother of the Child. The Mother was in a sad affright, believing that they came
to put the young Prince to death. But when they had dissipated her fears, and
that she understood that they came to set him upon the Throne by the command of
his Grandfather, she embraced the young Prince, and returned him into the
hands of the Eunuchs. When he was come out of the Haram, the two Lords,
attended by several others, saluted him King, and acknowledged him for their
Sovereign. At the same time they took off his Clothes and tore them, which in
Persia is a mark of mourning; and according to custom, put him on another plain
Garment, which he wore till midnight. Then they disrobed him again, and put him
on his Royal Robes, and set him upon the Throne, where all the Lords came and
did him homage, and the next day he was acknowledged by all the Acclamations of
the People. For when the Royal Habit is put upon the new King, the Drums,
Trumpets, Timbals, Haut boys, and other Instruments, make a din in a peculiar
place of the Meydan appointed for that purpose. Which is the Signal to give
notice to the people to meet the next morning, to acknowledge the new King.
Sha-Sefi for many years was a Novice in the art of Government. But time opening
his eyes the first remarkable thing which he did, being at Casbin, was to cut
off the head of Ali-Kouli-Kan, that great Captain who had conquered the
Kingdoms of Lar and Ormus for Sha-Abbas; and the heads of three of his Sons.
After that, returning to Ispahan, he cut off the heads of seven of the
principal Lords of his Court; and by little and little took the Government into
his own hands. Of those Lords whom Jam-Kan was the chief.

For it is thought that Sha Abbas had left a private order with Mirza Take, and
the Dowager Sultaness to rid themselves of those Lords so soon as Sha-Sefi
should be settled in his Throne, and that they had placed Governors in all
places wherein the King might confide. These Lords having smoked the private
order of Sha-Abbas, and believing that the time of execution drew near,
prevented the Athemadoulet Mirza Take; for meeting one morning before the
Palace-door, they killed the Porter, and entering his Bedchamber, stabbed him
before he could rise. After this execution, they went to the King, whom
J^ni-Kan boldly told, that they had slain Mirza Take. The King at that time
dissembling his anger at so bold an enterprise, and an attempt upon the Royal
Authority, answered him, that he had done very well, and that he had prevented
those orders which he intended to have given him. The Sultaness his Mother then
governed the Kingdom, together with the Athemadoulet, from whom she received
four hundred Ducats in Gold every day for her little pleasures; and held a
private Council with him in her Haram, where he had free admission, as being
cut close. In this Council it was, that these two persons over threw in the
night whatever the Lords concluded in the day; changed the Kings mind, and
overruled his thoughts as they pleased themselves, by virtue of that power
which they had over him. Eight or nine days after, as these Lords were sitting
in Council with the King, an Eunuch entered, which was the signal for the King
to get out of the way; and as soon as the King was gone, the Chamber was filled
with Eunuchs, that rushing in immediately fell upon Jani-Kan and his
Accomplices, and cut off their heads. Their heads and bodies were immediately
exposed to the view of the people in the Meydan; and for that it is not the
custom in Persia to take any cognizance of what the King does, the most part of
the people spurning the heads with their feet, cried one to another, See the
heads of those Dogs that have disobeyed the will of the King.

I told ye, that Mirza Take was clean cut, which occasions a particular story:
He was Governor of Guilan in the Reign of Sha-Abbas, and having abused one of
his Pages, the young Lad stole secretly to Ispahan, and made his complaint to
the King; who having heard it, immediately sent him to b^ Governor of Guilan,
in the place of Mirza Take, and ordered him to send him his head by one of the
Officers, which he dispatched along with him. The King also, in regard the Page
was very young, appointed him a person able to advise him in his affairs. In
the mean while Mirza Take missing his Page, and making no question but he was
gone to make his complaint to the King, which would of necessity prove his
ruin, if not prevented; he resolved to divert the storm by punishing himself,
and caused that part to be cut clean off that committed the crime. At the same
time, and in that bad condition wherein he then was, he caused himself to be
put into a Litter, and taking his Surgeon along with him, he gets to Ispahan
by another way which was not usually traveled, for fear of meeting the Page,
and causing himself to be carried into the Palace in that pitiful and
languishing estate, desired to speak with the King, who was surpised at his
arrival. But the Kan having presented him in a plate of Gold with the undoubted
marks of his repentance, besought his Majesty's pardon. Whereupon the King
considering the rigor and extraordinary punishment which he had inflicted upon
himself sent him back to his Government, and recalled the Page, whom he
otherways gratified. And this was the man whom Sha-Abbas upon his Death*bed
ordered that Sha-Sefi should make Athemadoulet, as being the fittest for the
employment of any person in his Kingdom.

Sha-Sefi not content to have rid himself of the Lords that had presumed to
invade his Authority, was resolved to have the head of Ali-merdan-Kan,
Governor of Candahar; of whom he was jealous, by reason of his vast riches,
his Plate being all Gold, and his House as magnificently furnished as the
Kings. But the King could not bring about his design; for the Kan being press't
to come to Court, and believing it was only to take away his head, to free
himself from the danger, delivered Candahar to the Great Mogul, by whom he was
kindly entertained, and highly cafess'd. Neither was Ali-merdan-Kan's wealth of
his own getting, but left him by inheritance, as being descended from the
ancient Kings of Candahar, who were originally Tart^rs. Now whatever favors or
advancement the Great Mogul bestowed upon Ali-merdan-Kan, the same did the
Persian King bestow upon his two Sons: whereas all the world believed, that
after such a piece of Treason committed by their Father, the King would have
ripped up their bellies. This piece of policy of Sha-Sefi was very advantageous
to Sha-Abbas the second, when he besieged Candahar with fifty thousand men. For
the greatest part of the Mogul's Army being composed of Persians, they
remembering how kindly Sha-Sefi had used the two Sons of Ali-merdan-Kan, made
little resistance against the King of Persia, who entered Candahar in a small
time. The Great Mogul troubled at the loss, asked Ali-merdan-Kan, by what means
he might retake Candahar; who presently made answer, that it would be very
easy, if he could find such another Traitor as he had been.

But to return to Sha-Sefi; his Reign was very violent, of which I will give
you this Example:

One day the King returning from the Kelonters House in Zulpha, having drank to
excess, commanded that the Sultaness should come to him; who understanding that
he was in drink, made no great haste, so that the King in the mean time fell
asleep* But waking again soon after, and not seeing the Queen, he called for
her a second time^ of which when she had notice, she came immediately: When she
came into the Chamber, she perceived the King asleep, and in expectation of his
waking, hi^ her self in a Nick behind the Hangings; where generally the
Mattresses and Coverlets are laid by. The King waking, and not yet perceiving
the Sultaness, in a great ch^se demanded why she was not yet come. The
Queen Mother, who was a Georgian Slave; and mortally hated the young Sultaness,
who was the Daughter of the King of Georgia, and therefore disdained by her,
took an occasion to put her out of the Kings favor; and having first spoken
ill of her, made a sign to the King to let him understand that the young Queen
was hid in such a Nich. Upon that the King rising in a great ^ury, stabbed the
poor Princess with his Dagger four or five* times in the belly, and hardly
knowing what he had done, went to bed again. The next day, forgetful of the
Fact, he called for the Queen; but when they told him what had happened, he
began to be deeply sensible of his error, and sorrow'd excessively; and at the
same time sent an express order through his Territories, that no man should
drink Wine, and that the Governors should break all the Wine-Vessels wherever
they found any, and spill the Wine. But this order did not last above a year.

During the Reign of Sha-Sefi, the Kan of Erivan sent him a Colt, which I saw,
which was begot by a Mule. Not long after the King died of a Surfeit, with
excess of drinking, after he had reigned fourteen years.

Sha-Abbas the second was set upon the Throne at Casbin, with the usual
Ceremonies, at the end of the year 1642, and made his entry into Ispahan in the
beginning of the year following. Upon the day of Solemnity all the Citizens
were ordered to be in Arms, and to march out of the City, where they were filled
off upon each side of the Road. In the same manner were all the standing
Infantry and Cavalry ranged for five Leagues together, All the Road for two
Leagues together without the City was covered with Tissues of Gold and Silver,
with Carpets of Silk, and other rich Stuffs; all which costs the King nothing.
For the Sha-Bander, who is like our Mayor, takes care to tax every one what he
is to furnish toward that Solemnity. The English and Hollanders went also forth
to meet the King; among whom I was one. When we came near the King, Jani-Kan,
General of the Cavalry, gave the King notice who we were. Whereupon we all
alighted, and the King holding his Leg stretched out of his Stirrup, we all
kissed his Boot. When he came where the way began to be spread with rich
Carpets, he found the Grand Mufti and the Grand Cadi, attended by a great
number of Moullahs, who made a Prayer after their manner. Prayers being ended,
the King rode on, the Athemadoulet being on the left hand, which is the most
honorable, and the General of the Cavalry on the right, yet not even with him,
but so as that their Horses heads reached to the Crupper of his. There was no
person but the King that rode over the Tissue, that Honor belonging to him
alone; nor is the way spread above the breadth of the Stuff; and as soon as the
King is passed over it, the people fall to scrambling, and carry away every one
what they can get for themselves.

About a quarter of a League from Ispahan is a Garden, with a Great Room over
the Gate, where the King made a halt, thinking to have made his Entry into the
City. But an Astrologer came to him, and told him, that the hour was past, and
that he must tarry three days before the hour would prove propitious again. So
that he was constrained to betake himself to the Garden of Hezardgerib till the
time came, whither the Nobility also were all forced to come betimes in the
morning, and to stay till the evening. The day that the King made his Entry,
the way from the Garden to the City was also spread with Carpets. For three
days together the Fireworks played in the Meydan; and round the Piazza from
top to bottom were lights hung out; and in the principal Inns, the richest
Merchants, had adorned the Doors and Windows of their Chambers, according to
the Mode of the Country; and I believe it cost the Chief of the Holland
Company, above nine hundred Tomans.

In the year 1643, came the Prince of the Vsbecks in person to desire aid of
Sha*Abbas against his Children, who had caused his own Subjects to rebel and
make war against him. His eldest Son first took Arms, and getting the advantage
of a Battle, the other Brother treacherously took part with him; which nothing
dismayed the Father, to whom the chief of the Nobility still adhered. Toward
the end of the year 1642, the Prince lost another Battle and his left, eye,
which was shot thorough with an Arrow; which constrained him, so soon as he was
cured of his wound, to come and crave succor from the King of Persia; which he
easily obtained. Sha-Abbas designing to receive him honorably sent above ten
thousand Horse as far as Cashan; which is four days journey from Ispahan, and
five or six thousand Foot two days journey from thence to meet him. Every day
he was attended by different Officers. Every day they set him up a new Tent,
and spread new Carpets; and every day changed the twelve Horses that were led
before him, whose furniture was all over covered with Jewels. For a League and
a half from the City the way was spread with all sorts of Silk Stuffs to the
very Palace; and the King of Persia went himself to meet him, as far as where
the Stuffs were begun to be laid. Though Sha-Abbas was very young, yet he was
resolved to show, that he looked upon himself as a potent King in the peaceable
possession of his own Dominions, and that he went to meet a dethroned Prince,
that came to desire his Aid. For so soon as he perceived the King of the
Tartars, he made a show of spurring on his Horse; and being come up to his
Horses head, he put his foot out of the Sturrup, as if he intended to have
alighted, but did not. The Tartarian Prince, as old as he was, presently leap't
to the ground from his Saddle to salute the Persian King, who returned him some
^light Compliments about his having alighted; at which time the Athemadoulet
and other Lords remounting him, the two Kings rode together upon the Silks, the
King of Persia giving the left hand to the Tartar. The King of Persia very
generously lent him a considerable assistance of 15000 Horse* and 8000 Foot,
and sixty thousand Tomans in Money. The Tartar in Exchange gave him one of his
Provinces bordering upon Persia, which yielded him a very good Revenue, in
regard the Inhabitants were all Shepherds, or Tureomans, that breed an infinite
number of Cattle, wherein the wealth of that Province consists.

While he reigned, he had a Present made him from the Governor of Schiras, of
a Wild Ass, whose Skin was as red as Scarlet, having a Horn growing out of his
forehead about a foot long.

Sha-Abbas reigned about twenty-four years, and died at Te^zon, of an
inflammation in his throat, which came by excessive drinking. His body by his
own order was buried at Kour. So soon as he was dead, the Lords that were about
him, sent advice of his death to the Prince that now reigns, by the
Topigi-Basha, who is General of the Musketeers, and Mirza Bayad the Chief of
the Astrologers. So soon as they came to the door of the Haram, they desired to
speak with the Mother and the Son; who believed them come upon some dismal
design. But they presently confirmed them to the contrary. For as soon as the
Prince came forth of the Haram, they sell at his feet, and saluted him King,
declaring the death of his Father. Whereupon the Prince immediately tore his
Garment according to the custom. And indeed they have another custom, that as
soon as the new Prince comes after much entreaty out of the Haram, he throws
himself to the ground, at the door of the Haram, and then rising and sitting
upon his heels, one of the Lords that are sent, girds the Scimiter about his
waste, saying these words, May it please your Majesty to remember your Slave,
that had the Honor to gird you with this Scimiter. Which done, he goes and
sets the Trumpets a sounding, and the Drums beating, whereupon all the people
in the morning come running to the Gate of the Palace, crying out, Patsha
Salamalek, I salute thee Emperor. Which is all the Ceremony used when any King
of Persia ascends the Throne. For I never saw any Crown set upon the head
either of Sha-Abbas or Sha-Sefi. Only in Persia they gird on the Scimiter, as
in Turkey they put on the Bonnet of the Sophi's, which is very richly set with
Jewels, but has not the least resemblance of a Crown. The same Ceremony of
girding on the Scimiter, is used to the Mogul, the Kings of Visapour and
Golconda; and they also put the Bonnet upon their heads, which is set with the
richest Jewels in the possession of those great Monarchs.

Sha Sefi the second, some time after his coming to the Throne, fell
dangerously sick, not having ever enjoyed a perfect health before. Now it is
the custom in those Countries, that upon such an occasion all the Lords of the
Court, and Governors of Provinces, give a sum of money, according to their
willingness and liberality. This sum is usually in Gold, which they put into a
Basin very richly set with precious Stones, and bear it three times over the
King's he^d, pronouncing these words, Patsha Bashena Olson, This money is
sacrificed for the health of the Kings head. If the King recover all that money
is given to the poor, to which the King and his Haram add very liberally. But
if the King dies, the money is put into the Treasury, and the poor have
nothing. The twentieth of August 1667, was the critical day of his distemper,
and every one thought he would have died. Upon which all the Grandees of the
Court seeing him in that condition, went to the Mosquee called Babaron, which
is without the City, to pray for his health, and altogether gave near a
thousand Tomans to the poor. The next day they commanded the Christian
Armenians to pray for the recovery of the King. Whereupon as well the
Ecclesiastics as the Laity went to their prayers upon the side of the River
which is between Ispahan and Zulpha. They also sent their Kelonter, with fifty
Tomans in Gold, to bear over the Kings head; though the Armenians pronounce not
the same words as the Persians, saying only, Ber^i te Sadduk, destined for Alms.

Thus the danger being over in a few days, they made it their business to
recover him to a perfect habit of health; but in regard the King continued in a
languishing condition, and for that the Physicians could not discover the cause
of the distemper, the King began to believe that it proceeded from the
ignorance of the Physicians; for which reason some of them had received none of
the best entertainment already. At length it came into the thoughts of some
others of the Physicians, who were afraid for themselves, that in regard Persia
was thus doubly afflicted, with Famine and Sickness of the King, both at one
time, it must of necessity be the Astrologers fault, that missed the favorable
hour when the King should have ascended the Throne. Thus being troubled at
their disgrace, pretending to have no less skill in future knowledge than the
Astrologers, who had not chos'n a true time for the King to ascend the Throne,
they concluded that for the perfect recovery of his health, and the restoring
of plenty to the Nation, it was necessary to renew the Ceremony at a lucky
hour, and to change his name. This proposition pleased the King and his
Council. The Physicians and Astrologers joining together, observed the first
unlucky day, which would certainly be followed by another that would prove
fortunate. Now there being among the Gaures, some that pretend themselves
descended from the Rustans, who were ancient Kings of Persia and Parthia, that
very morning one of those Gaures setting himself upon the Throne, with his back
against a wooden Figure which represented him to the life, all the Grandees of
the Court came and did him homage as their King, as he had ordered them to do.
This action lasted till the favorable hour was come, which happened a little
before Sunset. Then it was that an Officer of the Court came behind and cut
off the head of the wooden Figure, while the Gaure immediately took his heels
and fled. Presently upon that the King appeared in the Hall, upon whose head
when they had put the Bonnet of Sophi, and re*girt him with the Scimitar, he
ascended the Throne, and took the name of Soliman. He was forced to act this
Comedy to satisfy the Law, which contrived that he should change his Name, and
take a new possession of his Throne, by ejecting a Usurper that had wrongfully
clam'd it. For which reason the Gaure was set up as Pretender, as laying claim
to the ancient Lineage of the Persian Kings, and being of a different Religion.
From that time the King recovering, and the Famine decreasing, the Physicians
were in great repute, and the Astrologers were cast out of favor, except two
or three of the most skilful.

Sha-Soliman before his coming to the Crown, had conversed with none but Women
and black Eunuchs; from whom he could not learn the art of Ruling. At present
he only divertizes himself with his Wives in going a hunting, very rarely
troubling himself with business but relying wholly upon his Ministers of State.
He will not be seen for ten or twelve days together; all which time there are
no Petitions to be preferred, nor Complaints to be made.

CHAP. II.
Of certain particular Actions which denote the Virtues and Vices of the Kings
of Persia, from Sha-Abbas the first to Sha-Soliman the present King. And first
of Sha-Abbas the Great.
SHa-Abbas, who was a passionate Lover of Honor, sought all ways imaginable to
furnish his Empire with the supports of wealth and good Government. He would
not suffer any Indian or Banian to live as a Tradder in his Dominions; they
having crept in since under the Reigns of Sha-Sefi the first, and Sha-Abbas the
second, who came very young to the Throne. Neither had Sha-Abbas any reason to
permit them to trade in his Kingdom; for they are worse Usurers than the Jews,
and seldom it happens, but that they have all the Money in the Nation, which
they take up at nine or ten in the hundred, and let out again upon pawns at two
and a half per Cent. a month. From such devouring Pests and Vipers as these,
Sha-Abbas thought it but reasonable to preserve his people; so that before
these Vermin crept into Persia, the Money was all in the hands of the Armenians
of Zulpha. And indeed those Banians have been the ruin of many poor people, of
which I will only bring one example among many.

I was at Ispahan in the year 1662, when one of those Banians lent six or seven
Tomans per Cent. a month to a poor Persian, who had uttered several pieces of
Linen upon the place. Those Banians will have their Interest paid every month;
but the Persian had slipped three or four, having no Money to pay, in regard his
Debtor could not pay him. Thereupon the Banian dunn'd him perpetually, and
threatened to have him drub'd till he paid it, according to the Persian
custom. The Mother of the Persian troubled to see her Son haunted in that
manner, one morning as he was going to the Meydan, bid him, if he met the
Banian, that he should be sure to bring him home, and she would pay him his
Interest, and some of the principal, with some Money that she had saved of her
one. Toward evening the Banian met his Debtor, whom he readily followed home
upon promise of payment. The Mother desired him to set upon the Caursi, which
is the place where they make their fires, it being cold snowy weather, and set
fruits before him to eat. While he thus eat and warmed himself, night came on
apace, and the woman putting him in hopes of payment, spun out the time so
long, that the Banian not being unaccustomed to cold weather and late hours,
was easily persuaded to stay all night at the Persians House. When 'twas time
to go to Bed, the Banian threw himself upon one Quilt, and the Persian upon
another. About two hours after midnight, the Mother comes softly into the
Chamber, with a sharp Razor in her hand, intending to have cut off the Banians
head; but unfortunately mistaking, killed her own Son instead of the Banian.
The Banian having had such an escape, stole cunningly out of the House, and
declaring the murder to the Divan-beque, or the Chief Justice, He caused the
woman to be apprehended, and brought before him; who confessing the fact, he
commanded her to be tied to the tail of a young Mule, and to be dragged about
the City till the Mule had kicked her to death.

In the year 1667, eight or ten days before I departed from Ispahan, there was
a Banian found buried in a Street near the Capuchins house; they had cut off
his arms and legs, and so put him into the hole; but buried him so shallow that
the Dogs scraped away the Earth, and discovered him; but who committed the
fact, was not then known.

Sha-Abbas was not only willing that all the trade should be in the hands of
his Subjects, to make profit thereby, and to draw the Money into his Kingdom,
but he would not suffer it to be transported when it was brought in. He saw
that the Pilgrimages of his Subjects to Mecca, their Expenses and Presents
carried out abundance of his Ducats of Gold; therefore more politic than
religious, he strove to hinder those Pilgrimages as much as in him lay; and
going himself in person to Meshed in Pilgrimage to the Tomb of Iman-rez already
spoken of, over which one of the Legs of Mahomets Camel hangs as a great
Relict; and upon his return relating and giving out strange Miracles of
Iman-rez, on purpose to divert his Subjects from going to Mecca.

Among the rest of the cunning knacks that Sha-Abbas made use of, to know how
squares went in his Kingdom, without trusting too much to his Ministers, he
oft'n disguised himself, and went about the City like an ordinary inhabitant,
under pretense of buying and selling, making it his business to discover
whether Merchants used false weights or measures or no. To this intent one
evening going out of his Palace in the habit of a Countryman, he went to a
Bakers to buy a Man of Bread, and thence to a Cook to buy a Man of Rost-meat,
(a Man is six Pound, sixteen Ounces to the Pound.) The King having bought his
Bargains returned to Court, where he caused the Athemadoulet to weigh both the
Bread and the Meat exactly. He found the Bread to want fifty-seven Drams, and
the Meat forty-three. The King seeing that, fell into a great chafe against
three or four of them that were about him, whose business it was to look after
those things; but especially against the Governor of the City, whose Belly he
had caused to have been ripped up, but for the intercession of certain Lords.
Besides the reproaches that he threw upon them for being so negligent in their
Employments; and for their little affection to the public good, he laid before
them the injustice of false weights; and how sadly the cheat fell upon poor
men, who having great Families, and thinking to give them eight hundred Drams
of Bread, by that fraud deprived them of a hundred and forty three. Then
turning to the Lords that were present, he demanded of them, what sort of
justice ought to be done those people? When none of them daring to open their
mouths, while he was in that passion, he commanded a great Oven to be made in
the Piazza, together with a Spit long enough to roast a man; and that the Oven
should be heated all Night, and that they should make another fire to be
kindled hard by the Oven. The next morning the King caused the Baker and the
Cook to be apprehended, and to be led quite through the City, with two men
going before them, who cried to the people, We are going to put the Baker into
a red hot Oven made in the Piazza, where he is to be baked alive, for having
uttered Bread by false weights; and the Cook is to be roasted a live, for
having sold meat by false weights. Thus those two men served for an example not
only to Ispahan, but to all the Kingdom, where every one dreaded the severe
justice of Sha-Abbas.

CHAP. III.
Of what fell out most memorable in the Reign of Sha-Sefi the first; and
particularly of the death of Iman-Kouli-Kan, and his three Sons.
IMan-Kouli-Kan was the last Kan of Schiras, whose Government extended over the
Province of Lar, to the Golf of Persia, under the Reign of Sha-Abbas these Kans
being the most potent in all Persia, Iman-Kouli-Kan was he who in the Reign of
Sha-Abbas conquered the greatest part of the Kingdom of Lar, and the Kingdom of
Ormus, with all the Coast of the Persian Golf, from Cape Jasques to Balsara.

This Iman-Kouli-Kan was prodigiously rich, beloved and respected by all the
world; besides he was wonderfully magnificent, his expenses almost equalling
the Kings; which occasioned Sha-Abbas, who discoursed with him one day
particularly upon that Subject, to tell him, that he desired him to spend every
day one Mamoudy less than he, that there might be some difference between the
expenses of a King and a Kan.

The noble qualities of this Iman-Kouli-Kan had gained the affections of the
people; for he was magnificent and liberal; highly recompensed brave Soldiers
and Students; he loved Strangers, and had a particular care to cherish Arts and
Sciences. To which purpose he built a fair College at Schiras, for the
instruction of Youth; and several Inns, as well in the City as upon the Roads;
for the Travelers. He caused Mountains to be cut thorough to shorten the way;
and joined others by Bridges, of such an advanturous Structure, that it is hard
to conjecture how such prodigious Arches could be made over such vast
Precipices and Torrents.

Now in regard Iman-Kouli-Kan* was strick'n in years, he seldom went to Court,
choosing rather to continue in his Government, where he was beloved and
respected by all men. But the King being young, and the Government of the
Kingdom in the hands of the Queen Mother and the Athemadoulet, who were
extremely jealous of the Kan, those two persons linked together in Interest for
the maintenance of the Kings Authority and their own, fretted to see the Kan's
Court almost as splendid as the Kings; and that nothing of the Revenue of
Schiras, Lar, Ormus, or any part of the Persian Golf came to the Kings Coffers,
as being solely at the disposal of the Kan; but that on the contrary, the King
was obliged to send him Money to pay the Army. But that which troubled the
Queen Mother most of all, was the pretention of the Kan's eldest Son to the
Crown, who was also a person of a daring and ^mbitious courage. For the Kings
of Persia esteem it a great Honor to bestow upon any Kan or great Lord, one of
their Wives out of their Royal Haram; and Sha-Abbas had given to Iman-Kouli-Kan
one of his own proper Wives, whom he loved extremely. It Is thought that when
she left the Haram she was three months gone with Child by Sha-Abbas, for
somewhat above six months after she was bedded by the Kan, she lay-in of a Son,
of which the King was the reputed Father, and who being born before Sha-Sefi,
pretended a right before him to the Throne. By virtue of this claim, contrary
to the will of Sha-Abbas in favor of Sha-Sefi, this ambitious Lord, who only
passed for the Kan's eldest Son, vehemently solicited his Father to seize upon
Sha-Sefi, and to make himself King, or at least to open a way for him to the
Throne. Now it happened, that one day being a hunting with the young King near
Schiras, the impatient young Lord coming to his Father; Sir, said he, see now
the opportunity that offers you the Throne; for I will go presently and bring
you Sha-Sefi's head. But the Kan holding his Son by the Arm, told him, that he
would never consent to the death of his King; protesting to him, rather to dye
a thousand deaths; adding withal, that it was the Kings will to appoint
Sha-Sefi to succeed him, as being the Son of his Son, and consequently his
lawful Heir: that the young Prince was recommended to his care, and in regard
he had promised and sworn, he was so far from falsifying his trust, that he
would maintain his possession to the last gasp.

This generous resolution of the Kan broke the young Lords design upon the
Kings person. However the Sultaness being not ignorant of the train that was
laid for the young King, and against the repose of the Kingdom, thought it her
wisest way to prevent the blow, and to rid her self o^ such persons as had
conspired the death of the King. The Kan's two other Sons took part with him
they called their elder Brother. And as for the Kan himself, though he were
upright in his Loyalty, yet his power, his wealth, his reputation among the
Soldiery, and the affection that the people bare him, concurred together not
only to render him suspected, but guilty. The Sultaness and the Athemadoulet
took counsel together, which way to divert the storm that threatened the Kings
head, to whom they represented, that he was not safe in his own person so long
as Iman-Kouli Kan and his three eldest Sons lived. The King easily believed
them, and resolved to be rid both of Father and Sons together, but the
difficulty was to get 'em to Court, wherein opportunity it self assisted them.
For at that time Amurath the Great Turk at the head of a vast Army, was already
advanced within ^he Confines of Persia, had taken Erivan, and had ruined
Tauris. Upon the first news of this march, the King sends for all the Kans and
Governors to attend his person, with all the Forces under their command. Among
the rest, the Kan of Schiras received the same orders; who thereupon assembled
all his Troops, both Horse and Foot, who were not only the most numerous, but
the best disciplined and stoutest Soldiers of all Persia. As he was upon his
march to Casbin with his three Sons, the eldest having well considered of
affairs; Sir, said he, We are making have to the King, to the end our heads may
the sooner fall at our feet. Perhaps my Son, replied the Kan, thou may speak
the truth; but to this day I never was a Rebel against the King, I have done
whatever he commanded, and whatever may happ'n I will obey him till death. The
Kan arriving at Casbin, was by the King welcomed with great demonstration of
joy. Some days after, he took a general Muster, and then made a great* Feast
which lasted three day, to which all the great Lords and Kans that were at
Casbin were called. The three Sons of Iman-Kouli-Kan were of the number; but
the Father excused himself, as well by reason of his age, as also representing
to his Majesty, that it better befitted him to employ his time in taking care
of his affairs, and in praying for his Majesty; however if it were his
Majesty's express command, he would not fail to obey; to which the King
returned for answer, that the Kan of Schiras was at his liberty to do as he
thought fit. The third day of the Feast the King rose from his Seat, and going
out of the Hall, without speaking a word to any person, went into a Room hard
by. Half an hour after, three sturdy resolute Fellows with some other
Ragamuffi^ attendants entering the Hall with their Scimeters drawn, seized upon
the Kans ^hree Sons, and cut off their heads. They were put* into a Gold Basin,
and presented to the King; who commanded the Fellows to carry them to their
Father, and as soon as he had seen them, to take off his head to make the
fourth. The Assassinates found him at his prayers; but being interrupted to see
the heads of his three Sons, he desired leave only to conclude, which having
done, with a countenance undisturbed, and without any other words or
expressions in his mouth than what is usually said among the Persians, Let the
Kings will be done, he submitted to a death which he might have easily avoided.
The four heads were brought back to the King, to be sent into the Haram to his
Mother. So soon as he had taken off the heads of the Father and the three Sons,
the King dispatched away certain Chappars or Courriers, with order to the
Lieutenant of the Kan, to put to death all the rest of the Children. The
command was obeyed, and they were all put to death, but only two that were at
Nurfe whom their Nurses so well concealed, that never any tidings could be
heard either of the Nurses or of the Children.

After the death of Iman-Kouli-Kan, the Province of Schiras, with its
dependances, has been governed by a Vizir, who agrees with the King what Rent
to pay him yearly. In the years 1665 and 1666, the Vizir gave him fifty
thousand Tomans a year. But in the year 1667, the King abated him eight
thousand Tomans, in regard he had taken from him a small part of his Government
to pleasure a Favorite.

Besides what the Government of Schiras pays to the King in ready Money, he is
obliged every year to send him a present of all the rarities that grow or are
bred in the Province. These Presents consist in Horses, of which there is the
best breed of any Province of Persia. In Granates, Oranges, and Lemons, sweet
Oils and Waters of several sorts, especially Oil of Roses, with which the women
rub their bodies and heads; and the water of a certain Flower that grows upon a
tree not much unlike our Willows, which water is called Arak-Bilmitshe, which
is a great refreshment to those that use it; besides other Oils and Essences
which the Governor is obliged to present. Yet were he only obliged to present
the King, the expense might be born well enough; but for fear of being
displaced by any other Favorite, he is constrained to make Friends of all the
other great Lords and Favorites at Court; which there is no way to do, but by
continual presents. Whereas the ancient Kans, who were a kind of pretty
Sovereigns in their Governments, were only wont to send a few Baskets of new
Fruits in their season for the service of the Kings Table. To defray this
expense, the Governors are forced to tyrannize over the people; who when they
come, as many times they do, two or three Villages together, to complain to the
King, are forced after long waiting, to return with empty Purses home again, by
reason that they who should give them admission, are the only persons that
debar them from it; and patiently to submit to the Extortions of the Vizar;
which is a piece of policy practiced likewise by all the other Kans and
Governors of the Persian Provinces. As for Sha-Sefi himself, he was very
severe, and one whose punishments oft'n amounted to acts of cruelty. One day
being a hunting, a poor Country man appeared from behind a Rock, with a Paper
in his hand, being deputed by the Village to make some complaint to the King.
But while the poor man cried for justice, the King without making any answer,
shot two arrows into his body and slew him. That which moved Sha-Sefi to this
act of cruelty, was because he had some of his Wives with him in company. For
then there is no mercy to those poor people that happ'n to be in the way where
the King chances to pass by: no not for them that are in the Country round
about, where the Eunuchs have order to kill all men they meet. When the King
gives notice of his intention to carry his Wives into the Country, this is
called Courouk; and there is nothing more troublesome nor more inconvenient in
the world to the poor people that live in the Villages through which these
women are to pass; for upon notice given them, they must leave their Houses for
a League or two of either side. When there is a Courouk at Ispahan, let the
weather be never so bad, the people must leave their Houses, and if they have
no Friends in some distant quarter to retire to, they have no way but to repair
to the Mountains. Such is the excess of the jealousy of the Kings of Persia;
which indeed derives it self to all his Subjects, who will not permit their
women to be seen by any but their own Husbands.

The Persians both men and women are so addicted to take Tobacco, that to take
Tobacco from them, is to take away their lives. So that if the King should
prohibit *Tobacco for any time, he would lose a good part of his revenue.
However Sha-Sefi in a humor having once forbidd'n Tobacco to be taken in any
part of his Dominion, his Spies (that are in every City) found in the Indian
Inn two rich Merchants of that Nation smoking their noses. Immediately they
were seized, bound, and carried to the King, who commanded forthwith that
Justice should be done upon them in the Meidan, which was, that they should
pour melted lead down their throats till they were dead.

The people thought the King had only intended to have scared them, and would
have reprieved them upon the place. Insomuch that four Banians went to the
Athemadoulet, and offered* to pay two thousand Tomans into the Kings Treasury,
so that he would be pleased to spare the two Merchants lives. The chief
Minister made the proposal, but the King falling into a passion, and asking the
Athemadoulet, whether those Indian Dogs thought that a King of Persia would
sell Justice, sent a second order for the execution of the Merchants without
delay.

The same Sha-Sefi having given command that the Eyes of a young Lord of the
Court should be put out, one of the principal Officers of the House being
present, and seeing the Executioner prick the eyes of the unfortunate young man
with the point of a small knife, shut his own eyes and turned away his head, as
abhorring such a spectacle. The King perceiving it, and vexed to fee those
signs of pity, and a dislike of an act that he approved; What, said he in a
fury, art thou afraid to punish the wicked? And at the same time commanded his
eyes to be pulled out of his head.

It is a custom, that if any man points at the King as he passes along in the
Street, or upon the Road, he must lose his hand. One day Sha-Sefi being in the
Country, two Merchants of Constantinople were upon the Road, where the King and
his Train were to pass. They stopped to see the King, and when he came near,
one of the Merchants prayed his Friend that oft'n had seen him, to show him
which was he. The other knowing that only the King wears the Heron tops in his
Bonnet, innocently lifted up his hand to distinguish him, by pointing, from the
rest of the Lords that followed him. For which act two Horsemen came presently
to him, and cut off his hand with a Sc^miter.

CHAP. IV.
The tragical and memorable Story of Ralph Sadler, Native of Zurich, in the
Reign of Sha-Sefi, who had retained him in his Service.
RAlph Sadler, born in Zurich, was a Watch-maker by Profession, who put himself
into the service of the Emperors Resident at the Ottoman Court, with whom he
went to Constantinople. This man I desired to take along with me into Persia;
and coming to Ispahan, he set himself to work, and made a small Watch about the
bigness of half a Crown; which being a neat piece of work, the English would
needs buy, to present it to Iman-Couli-Kan, paying the price demanded, which
was two hundred Crowns. Iman-Couli-Kan presented it to the King; who was
mightily pleased with it, in regard it was the least striking Watch that ever
had been seen by the King, who therefore carried it hanging about his Neck
under his Clothes, in a Gold Chain. One day the King happening to wind up his
Watch, and turning the Key the wrong way, broke the Fusil, for which he was so
much troubled, that he sent for the Watch-maker from Ispahan to Casbin; whither
when Ralph came, he presently made the Watch as good as ever. The King thus
satisfied in his work and in his person, ordered him a Pension of thirty
Tomans, and Diet for him and a man, and provision for two Horses: commanding
him withal to make some new pieces of work. Now a skilful workman in the
service of the Persian King, has this advantage, that if he pleases the King,
besides his Wages that are duly paid, the King out of his liberality bestows on
him a present, which usually amounts to a third part or half his Wages; or else
his Wages are raised, which is more advantageous than a present.

Ralph was obliged every morning to wait upon the King at his rising, to wind
up his Watch; and was so much in the Kings favor, that every morning when he
came out of the Kings Chamber, he had a Glass of Wine presented him, as a mark
of esteem. And indeed the King had such an affection for him, that to retain
him in his service he often solicited him to turn Mohammedan.

The Ambassador of Holstein coming to Ispahan, and seeing Ralph so much in
favor with the King, endeavored to gain his Friendship.

Thus Ralph oft'n keeping company with the Ambassadors, and having one time
tarried till late at night upon the debauch with them, returning home to his
Lodging, where he kept a young Nestorian girl, in the Court of the House met a
young Persian, Brother to one of the Kings Porters. The Persian knowing himself
guilty, and surpised to see Ralph so soon returned, skip't over the Wall into
the Garden and fled. The next day Ralph (who knew who he was) told his Brother
of it, and desired him to speak to the young Persian not to come any more to
his House; for if he did, he must expect what followed.

Some days after, the Ambassadors treated all the Franks; when Ralph beginning
to be warm, called the young Persian to mind, and slipping home without taking
his leave, opened the door softly, and found the young Persian again with his
Mistress. Thereupon Ralph calling his Slaves to help him, bound his arms, and
tied him to a Tree in the Court; and so leaving him there* went to bed. By and
by one of Ralph's Servants, who knew the Persian, sell a jeering him; which so
incensed the Persian, that he having his feet at liberty, and the fellow within
his reach, gave him such a kick upon the bottom of his Belly, that he first
swooned away, and then died. The other Slaves seeing him fall, wakened Ralph
with cries, who thereupon snatching up a Pistol that was charged with a brace
of Bullets, shot the Persian into the head. The Persian being thus slain, Ralph
went in the morning to wind up the Kings Watch; and being asked by the King, as
he was wont to do, what news in Ispahan, told him plainly what he had done, and
the reason why. The King upon his report told him, he had done well according
to the strictness of the Country.

The Athemadoulet at that time was Mirza Take, who hated Ralph. For the
Armenian Merchants having presented the Athemadoulet with several Watches at a
time, it happened that once he sent to Ralph about thirty Watches together to
be mended. For which the Athemadoulet, to gratify him, and knowing that he
kept four or five Servants, and seven or eight Horses, sent him fifteen or
twenty Camels load of Straw and Barley for his Horses. But Ralph slighting such
a present as that, Go (said he to the Athemadoulets Servant) tell thy Master,
that I am neither a Horse nor an Ass, and therefore let him eat his Present
himself. Which message so provoked the Athemadoulet, that he studied (...) but
revenge.

Thereupon the Athemadoulet, whose business it is to attend (...) being when he
rises, and to report to him the news of the Town, told him among the rest, what
Ralph had done. The King replied, that Ralph had confe^s'd it to him already,
and that he had pardoned him, in regard (...) had reason to do as he did. But
the Athemadoulet made answer, that Ralph had minced the matter; and represented
the story to the King far otherwise than it was making the worst of it he could
upon Ralph's side; and the more to incite the King, he put him in mind of the
fair occasion he had to force him to turn Mussulman, there being no way to
expiate his crime, but by turning Mohammedan, or suffering the Law. The King
thus overruled, sent for Ralph, told him, he was now better informed of the
crime he had committed, and that he must either turn Mohammedan or dye.
Thereupon the King sent him to Prison. Eight days after, the King (who had a
great love for him, and therefore troubled that he must be constrained to put
him to death, unless he would turn Mahumetan,) sent for him again, and offered
him two thousand Tomans, after a powerful persuasion by words, but all
signified nothing. Upon that he sent him back again to Prison. But yet
remembering that he had once approved the fact, he sent for Ralph a second time,
and offered him ten thousand Tomans, and a Wife out of his Haram, with all her
Jewels; which Ralph refused, with the same resolution as before. The King
incensed at the fierceness of his resolution, delivered him to the Brother of
the party slain, to execute the Law upon him. The Holstein Ambassadors were
resolved to have begged his life; but the Athemadoulet, smelling their design,
would not permit them Audience. However, the King commanded all the Franks, and
all the Armenian Clergy to be present at the Execution, to save all his blood,
and put him in a Coffin; he commanded also, that he should be buried at Zulpha
in the Armenian Churchyard, and have a Tomb made over him.

Thereupon Ralph was led to the Meidan, with that triangular Instrument of Wood
which the Persians call a Palenk, about his neck. This Palenk was the cause
that the Brother of the deceased, who was to be the Executioner, not only
missed his first blow, but wounded himself in the Leg, while his Skain being
born off by one of the sides of the triangular Instrument, by the force of the
blow lighted upon himself. Whereupon the people making a great shout hindered
farther execution for that time. The King being advertised thereof, remanded
him to Prison, and after a few days sent for him a third time into his
presence; but though the King offered him a thousand Tomans, and that the Lords
urged him to turn, though it were but for a while, and in outward appearance;
yet neither threats nor promises could move the Zurickian, who was thereupon
executed at the end of October, 1637.

All the Franks willingly contributed to raise him a Tomb; which was covered
with a small Duomo, supported with four Pillars, ten or twelve foot high. The
Armenians have made him a Saint; so that when they are sick of a Fever, they
come and make their devotions at this Tomb; and every time they come they carry
away a piece of a Stone; so that the Tomb wants repairing every year.

The Athemadoulet, to the end the King might be the less sensible of the want
of him, had told the King, that his Majesty would find no great miss of him, in
regard he had a Servant who was almost as good as himself. But some few days
after, the Kings Watch that he always carried about him, being out of order,
and Ralphs Apprentice not being able to remedy the fault; the King for madness
that he had been the Watchmakers death, threw the Watch at the Athemadoulets
head. There, cried he, Dog as thou art, by thy advice I put Ralph to death, the
most skilful man of his Profession that ever will come into my Kingdom. Thou
deservest for thy counsel, to have thy belly ripped up. But I swear by my Throne,
that from this time forward I will never put a Christian to death for his
Religion. And I question whether any of you would have had the same courage to
have died for the Law of Haly. And indeed they have been very cautious ever
since; nor has any of the Franks been put to death, though they have flown out
before the King in words and actions rash enough.

CHAP. V.
Of some particulars under the Reign of Sha-Abbas the second.
SHa-Abbas the second, Son of Sha-Sefi, was no less cruel then his Father; and
would be no less punctually obeyed.

He had two Sisters, which he married to two of the richest Lords of his
Kingdom, though of a very mean extraction. Some time after, the King
understanding that they were both with-Child, ordered Physic to be given them
to destroy the fruit of their Wombs. About three months after, he was told that
they were big again; then he suffered 'em to be brought to bed; but commanded
that they should not give the Children any nourishment, but let 'em starve to
death.

The same Sha-Abbas caused the tongue of one that filled him Tobacco to be cut
out for a word spok'n idly. For the King calling for Tobacco, one of the Pages
ran hastily for it to him that had it in charge, and bid him dispatch; who
answered him briskly, Gebenneme sabreijte, that is, to Hell, have a little
patience. The King being informed of it, commanded his tongue to be cut out.
The poor man desired him that was the Executioner, to cut it as deep as he
could in his throat, and to leave it very short; by which means he spoke some
words muffling,

The people cried out against the Nazar, who being a person of low extraction,
and advanced to that high dignity in a short time, grew so proud that he
contemned all the Lords of the Court. There was no dealing with him about any
business, unless he were first presented; and he paid no body without making
some advantage of it. Every body had reason to complain; yet no person knew how
to come at the King to make their complaints. At length they bethought
themselves of making their application to two black Eunuchs, who had the Kings
ear in the night. One was called Aga-Saron, who was the Meter or Master of the
Wardrobe; and the other Aga-Kafour, or high Treasurer. These two Eunuchs seeing
the King in a good humor one night, let fall certain words concerning the
Nazar, and his management of affairs and thence slid into a discourse of his
injustice, that caused the people to cry ^ut against him, and speak evil of his
Government. Now it happened one morning that the King intending to go a
hunting, the Grand Master, who had always a large train attending him, coming
to the Kings Tent, the Meter denied him entrance. About the same time the King
came forth, and seeing the Nazar, commanded his Officers to take off the Bonnet
from the dead of that Dog that took Gifts from his people; and that he should
sit three days bareheaded in the heat of the Sun, and as many nights in the
Air. Afterward he caused him to be chained about the neck and arms, and
condemned him to perpetual imprisonment, with a Mamoudy a day for his
maintenance; but he died for grief within eight days after he was put in prison.

Jafer-Kan, being a generous Lord, and one that kept a magnificent train, was
Governor of Asterabat. At first he was very mild, but at last he began to
exact such sums from the people, that his oppressions were very heavy; nor were
these violences of his concealed from the Kings ear, who being one day drinking
with some of his Lords, and seeing the Master of his Music in the Room, who
was a merry droll, and had always some pleasant news or other to tell the King;
his Majesty was pleased to ask him, what the people said of Jafer-Kan; adding
withal, that he had made him Governor of several Provinces, and had never
heard any complaint of him before, but that now he was accused of strangely
tyrannizing over the people. The Music Master being a mere flatterer, and
knowing that Jafer-Kan was extremely beloved by the King, confidently averred,
that the Governor was falsely accused, and that he had always known him apter
to give then to receive. There was at the same time in the Room, an Agis called
Manouchar-Kan, lately returned from a Pilgrimage to Mecca; him the King also
asked, what was his opinion of Jafer-Kan, and his Government, being a person
that had been long aquainted with him; to whom the Agis, thinking to please the
King, returned the same answer, that the Music Master had given. Whereupon the
King, who had been well informed of the Kans behavior, turning toward the
Lords that were present, what think you, said be, of these two Flatterers, that
absolutely know the contrary to what they speak? And at the same time commanded
two of the Music Masters teeth to be pulled out of his mouth, and to be driven
into the head of the Agis; which had like to have cost him his life, being a
very old man. As for Jafer-Kan, he was disgraced for a time, but being a Person
endowed with noble qualities, valiant, generous and pleasing in conversation,
he was recalled to Court, and knew so well how to make his tale good, that his
Majesty gave him the Government of Shemeloubostan, of which Semeran is the
Capital City. Shemeloubostan signifies a Country manured to bear fruit. Nor is
there any Province in Persia that so abounds in Pastures and Castles, that
daily fall to ruin.

Jafer-Kan being restored to favor, the King sent for several Lords of the
Court to come and drink with them. He also commanded five French Artificers
which he had in his service to wait upon him, a Goldsmith named Sain, two
Watchmakers Lagis and Varin, and two Musket-makers Marais and Bernard. After
they had heated themselves a little with Wine, the King drew a Ruby out from
off his finger, which I sold him for a hundred Tomans, and a Diamond Jewel
worth thirteen or fourteen hundred Tomans, which he gave to Jafer-Kan, with
whom he was whispering at the same time. Now though the Nazar were at a
distance, yet without doubt somewhat of the discourse was heard; insomuch that
the Wine emboldning him, he told the King aloud, that if he would let him have
but four thousand Horse, he would cut all that Rabble to pieces. The King bid
him hold his tongue and go to sleep; testifying his displeasure at his
discourse. For the Nazar conjectured that the King was talking to Jafer-Kan
about the incursions which the Vsbeck Tartars often made from Meshed side. As
for the Franks three of the five were gone home to sleep, Sain, Lagis, and
Bernard: Maras and Varin stayed behind in the Room. But Marais being of a humor
that when he was drunk he could not hold his tongue, and having heard what the
Nazar said, he likewise* took upon him to tell the King, that if the King
wanted a General, there was none fitter to make a General then Jafer-Kan, and
presently began a long repetition of his praises. The King commanded him to
hold his tongue, which he did for a while, but then falling again into his
former impertinencies, the King commanded him to be dragged out of the Room by
the feet, and that they should rip up his belly. Thereupon Marais was seized
upon by the Meter, who having a great kindness for the Franks, and knowing that
the King had a singular love for Marais, delayed the execution of the Kings
command, pulling his Clothes off very slowly; and finding that the King did
not rise to go into his Haram, which is the sign of no pardon to be given, he
caused him to be dragged as near the person of the King as he could, thereby to
try whether the King would have compassion on him or no; while certain Lords
took the boldness to implore the Kings mercy in his behalf. At last when the
King saw him dragged along, he commanded the Officers to let him go, and
withal ordered him to put on his Clothes again, and resume his place.

The King of Persia's eldest Son comes very raw to the Throne; and his first
divertisement is to make short journeys into the Provinces, thereby by little
and little to gain the knowledge of such things as concern him. Above all things
he never fails to visit the principal Church of the Armenians at Zulpha. That
which makes him so curious, is his desire to see the Armenian women, who are
very handsome; being also further incited thereto by the Sultanesses, who are
glad of any recreation. And then he has a Courouk through all Zulpha, at what
time all the men must retire to Ispahan, or to their Friends at a distance.
Sha-Abbas the second went several times in that manner to Zulpha; and one day
among the rest, upon the report of the beauty of the Wife of the Kelonter
Gorgia Safras, Son of Kelonter Gorgia Nazar, the King having seen her, liked
her very well, and desired her to go along with the Sultanesses, who carried
her into the Haram, where she continued fifteen days, and then returned home
with a fair Neck-Lace of Pearls, which the King gave her when she went away.

To say the truth of Sha-Abbas the second, he was a man too much given to
drink, and too much governed by his passion, otherwise he was a lover of
justice, and very magnificent and generous to Strangers.

CHAP. VI.
Of the misfortune of Mahomet Beg in the reign of Sha-Abbas the second.
MAhomet Beg was born at Tauris, the Son of a Tailor, who bred him a Scholar.
He had a quick apprehension, and was naturally inclined to virtue; and being
desirous to advance himself in the world, he had the good luck to obtain the
employment of Major-Bashi, or chief of the Essayers and Refiners of Money, who
has a power to visit all places where money is coined. After that, he became
acquainted with the Aila Verdi Beg, or Mr. Godsgift, the Kings chief Huntsman,
by the title of Mert-Shekar-Bashi, who gladly presented him to the King, to
whom the King was very thankful, so soon as he had found the noble Qualities of
the person he had presented. Thereupon so soon as Mahomet Ali-Beg, grand Master
of the Kings House died, the King bestowed that Employment upon Mahomet Beg,
who not only gained the favor of his Majesty, but the good will of all the
Lords of the Court. He had a great respect for them all, without meddling with
any of their employments, and suppressed his revengeful spirit, not finding it
seasonable as yet to disclose his passions.

Kalife Sultan at that time Athemadoulet happening to dye, the King conferred
that place upon Mahomet Beg, who at first behaved himself in that employment to
the satisfaction of all men. He applied himself particularly to the searching
out of Mines; for there had a report ran among the people for many years, that
if certain mountains nine or ten miles from Ispahan toward the West were well
dug into, there might be found store of Gold, Silver and Copper. To which
purpose he made use of a Norman, whose name was La Chapelle de Han, who vanted
at that time to have great skill in Chemistry, Mines and Minerals, for which
reason he was recommended by the Governor of Ispahan to the Athemadoulet then
at Casbin with the King, who presently sent him back again to the Governor to
furnish him with all things necessary for his Expenses, and for the work which
he undertook in the Mountains. Thither went La Chapelle, and after fifteen days
toil returned to Ispahan with two or three hundred weight of earth, and set up
furnaces to draw out the metal. The Athemadoulet was so wise as to give order
to the Governor of Ispahan, and three or four more persons of Quality to
overview the Norman, to see that he played no foul play. But though there was
not so much as a half penny worth of silver in all the earth from the bottom to
the top, though the Persians watched him so narrowly as they did, he made a
shift to shuffle in an Abassi among the earth, as it was in the furnace without
being perceived. Nevertheless the Athemadoulet, to whom it was carried,
presently found out the cheat, though he took no notice of it, hoping to make
better use of the Norman in other things; only he forbad him to dig any more in
that place, in regard the expense would exceed the profit.

La Chapelle, who was very skilful at putting off his merchandise, and one who
knew to make the best use of the least smackering that he might perhaps have in
Mechanics, and the power of Motion, had the cunning to amuse the Athemadoulet
for ten years together, being a passion ate Lover of new Inventions; and the
better to infinuate himself into the Kings favor assumed to himself the
Invention of several Rarities which he showed the King, who thereupon allowed
him a very handsome pension. Thus encouraged, he undertook to cast Canons,
bring the water to the top of the Kings house, and several other things, yet
when all his designs failed for want of Art, and that he found he could do no
more good in Persia, resolving for India, he died at Ormus.

The Athemadoulet missing of Gold and Silver Mines, applg'd himself to the
discovery of Copper Mines, wherein he was more fortunate; for in those Mines he
also found veins of Azure, of which there is a great quantity consumed in
painting the Grotesco Flourishes upon the Ceilings and Arches of their Houses.
He also found out a Mine of Lead near Yerde: and being still upon new
discoveries, he found out a Mine of Talk, Stone, Alum, and Coals, but of
neither so good as in other Countries. He was so obstinate in the search of
Metals, that if any person had an occasion to speak with him, let him be never
so busy upon never so important affairs, it was enough to bring him some
stones of a supposed Mine, or someting rare either for Color, Figure or
Weight. He also gave full power to them that brought him any tidings of a Mine
to go to the place, and to press the Countrymen from their labor to dig in the
Mountains and break up rocks: and if they found nothing he cast the fault upon
the ignorance of the Laborers.

He also applied himself to the study of Mechanic Motions. He would have found
an Invention, whereby the half Vail that hangs in the Kings Megeler, or Council
Chamber, and is drawn to and fro by certain Officers in the Summer, to gather
the cool Air, should have bin made by Engine-work. Then he took a fancy for
water Engines, the most necessary thing in the world for Persia to relieve the
drowth of the Country, but wanting necessaries, as Beams, Rafters, Wheelwork,
Cordage and Iron, he could not begin those Engines, the figures whereof La
Chapelle had left him in a Book.

But as Mahomet Beg was studious in these things, so was he Ambitious and
Revengeful to that height that he could not observe a moderation in his
resentment against those that had given him any distaste. In his height of
Passion he caused several Kans to be deprived of their Provinces, and by
confiscating their Estates reduced them to utmost necessity.

The Kan of Erivan had a Son who was a lovely and a well proportioned
Gentleman, and always attended at the Kings Elbow. One day that the King was
drinking with some Lords, he commanded the Kan of Erivans Son to carry a Gold
Cup full of Wine to the Athemadoulet, who perceiving that he had enough
already, made a sign with his eye to the young Lord to return it back. The
young Lord passing by the King told him ingeniously that the Athemadoulet had
no desire to drink, whereupon the King commanded him to go and power the Wine
into his besome. As the one was obliged to obey; the Athemadoulet was forced to
suffer, and to permit the young man to open his bosom and power down the Wine;
for not daring to show his anger, he was forced to dissemble the best he could
for that time. But having resolved to revenge the affront upon the Kan of
Erivan Father of the young Lord, who had only done what the King commanded him,
he resolved to lay hold upon the opportunity that presented it self, knowing
that there were several complaints come against him from the Armenians of
Erivan. Thereupon the Athemadoulet sends for the Kelonter, encourages him in
his suit, and gives him instructions how to proceed. To this end Mahomet Beg
appoints him to meet him such an hour at the Kings Stables, whither the King
presently coming, the Kelonter threw himself at the Kings feet, and besought
him for Justice against the Kan of Erivans oppressions: while Mahomet Beg
failed not to heap up aggravations against the Governor, and the King, though
he had heard but one side, as easily condemned him upon the Accusation of the
Kelonter and his Prime Minister. Thereupon an Officer of the Kings, called
Negef-Couli-Beg, a man of a quick and active spirit was commanded to go in all
haste, and seize upon the Person of the Kan. Who being come to Erivan found him
upon his seat of Justice, confiscating and condemning to fine and Corporal
punishment a near Kinsman of the Kelonters. The Messenger boldly entered into
the Megeler or Council Chamber, goes directly to the Kan, told him he was the
Kings prisner, and gave him a blow with his fist upon the neck, about which he
was to wear the Triangle of great thick pieces of wood already described, into
which the neck is enclosed, while the Arms and Hands of the Prisner are put
through another piece of wood that crosses the Triangle, which is a great pain
to the Prisner. Thus was the Kan carried night and day to Ispahan, but when he
came there the King showed him more mercy, and allowed him his house for a
prison, yet not suffering him to go to the Bath, nor to shave his hair, nor to
stir out of the Apartment where his women were. These are penalties imposed
upon those that fall into disgrace at Court, whom the King shuts up in their
houses, intending no severer punishment. For the Kan being beloved by the King
was restored to his favor, and to his former charge of superintendant of the
Kings Mosquee.

Neither did this fright'n others from bearing up against the Power of Mahomet
Beg, though every one had not the same success. For ill it fared with the
Governor of Schiras, who was called Mirza Haddi. He was a person of great
wealth and knowledge, and one day in Council took upon him to tell Mahomed Beg,
that he was not of his opinion, and withal to lay before him his defects, and
ill conduct. But the Prime Minister so deeply laid to heart the boldness of
Mirza Haddi, that he resolved to revenge himself by all means imaginable. He
suborned false witnesses, and other persons to make complaints before him of
the Governor of Schiras. There was a necessity for the party accused to appear
before Mahomet Beg as his Judge, but the Governor trusting to his Innocence,
nere minded the rage of his adversary, not believing he could receive any
injury from him. In the mean time Mahomet Beg informed the King what he pleased
himself, and overpow'ring him by his authority, confiscated all Mirza Haddi's
Estate, and sent him to prison to the House of the Nazar, who was called Ismaet
Beg. When he came there they hung him upon Tenter-hooks by the feet against the
wall, and drub'd him so long; that he was forced to be carried into another
Room upon a Slaves back. His Lieutenant and an Eunuch, that had bin his
Treasurer, were served in the same sauce, and all three put into a high Chamber
that served instead of a prison. His Vizier or Lieutenant was released in a
short while, but Mirza Haddi and his Eunuch were still kept close.

Nor is the manner of his revenging himself upon Mir-Kassem-Beg, the Deroga, or
Provost of Ispahan less remarkable. While Mahomet Beg was only Majer-Bashi,
there was some gold Plate stoll'n out of the Kings Kitchen. Thereupon the
Deroga sent his Officers to seize upon all the Goldsmiths in Ispahan, that knew
nothing of the matter, as being utterly Innocent of the Robbery. In the mean
time he put them all in prison, and locked them close up, intimating to them
that he was resolved not to release them without a good sum of money. The poor
Goldsmiths thus ill used, applied themselves to the Majer-Bashi; who sent his
Officers to entreat the Deroga to consider that the Goldsmiths were innocent
of the Robbery, and that being in some manner under the Jurisdiction of the
Mayer-Bashi, as being Artificers in Gold and Silver, he ought not to refuse to
discharge them at his request. But the Deroga not seeing the money come, bid
the Officers of Mahomet Beg tell their Master that he knew what belonged to his
employment, and further, said he, Let the Tailors Son meddle with his own
business; tell him withal, added he, that if he pleases I will show him his
Sister's drawers. For a little before the Deroga had by his Spies surpised her
toying in a Garden with two young Lords, from whom he squeezed a considerable
sum of money. Mahomet Beg not powerful enough then to prosecute his revenge,
let it sleep, but when he came to the height of preferment, he remembered the
Deroga, and bethought himself which way to ruin him. Nor was it long ere an
opportunity offered it self. For there being a report that the Enemy appeared
about Candahar, a Frontier Town of Persia upon the Mogulls Territories, the
Athemadoulet advised the King to raise a good number of Soldiers about
Ispahan, as being lusty nimble fellows and used to labor, and to send them to
Candahar, to be ready against all accidents. The King having an entire
confidence in the Athemadoulet, ordered him to lose no time, but to commit the
management of the Levies to such persons as had perfect knowledge of the plain
Country. Then Mahomet Beg, studying his revenge, told the King that there was
no person fitter for the employment than the Deroga, Mir Kassembeg, who
according to his cruel and covetous humor, soon abused his Commission, the
thing which he, who had procured it, chiefly desired. For whereas the King
intended that none should be enrolled but those that were willing, the Deroga
forced every body, especially the Sons of the richest Farmers, who rather than
part with their Sons gave the Deroga his own demands to spare them. When
Mahomet Beg had got matter enough against the Deroga, he underhand stirred up
the Country people to make their complaint, giving them to understand that it
was contrary to the Kings intention to have them tormented in that manner; that
his Commission was only to list those that would go of their own accord. The
Villages easily encouraged, sent their Deputies to Ispahan, whom he kindly
received and presented the same hour to the King. His Majesty having heard
them, and Mahomet Beg having seconded their complaint, the King ordered that
they should make an exact list of what the Commissioners of the Deroga had
robbed them of. Mahomet Beg lost no time, but by virtue of his Authority and
the Kings command, sent his Officers into all the Villages to take the Oath of
every Countryman to the end they should declare the truth, under the penalty
of a Fine and Corporal punishment, of what had been exacted from them to the
utmost Shayet. This Oath was to be put in Paper, signed by every one that made
it, in these words, Let my head be confiscated to the King, and my goods to his
Divan, if I do not punctually the Order of his Majesty. The account being made
of all the money for which they had compounded with the Deroga, it was
presented by Mahomet Beg, who aggravated the Tyranny of the Deroga, and
represented to his Majesty that for thirty years he had thus devoured the
Territories of Ispahan. Thereupon by the command of the King, who was then at
Ispahan, the Deroga was to be carried into the Meydan, and being tied up by the
heels to receive a certain number of Bastinado's upon the feet for so many
Fridays one after another; and moreover the nerves of his heels were to be cut,
and his ankles to be boar'd thorough. The Kings command being thus sealed,
Mahomet Beg committed the execution thereof to his trusty Instrument
Negef-Couli-Beg, who coming to Ispahan assembled the chief of the City,
together with the Vizir or Governor, and the Deroga or Provost, who thought of
nothing; being met, before they broak open the Kings Seal they made a public
Prayer for the prosperity of the King; which being ended, the Vizir opened the
Letter and read it with a loud voice. When the Vizir came to read the Sentence
against the Deroga, he was seized with astonishment, at what time
Negef-Coult-Beg coming to the Deroga, and striking him upon the Neck with his
fist, threw him down under his Horses feet, and caused him to be bound
according to custom. Immediately he was hurried to the Piazza, where he
received so many Bastinado's upon the soles of his feet that his nayls fell
off. The next Friday they brought him to the same place, where they repeated
the same Execution, and boar'd his ankles. The Deroga being very ancient, his
pains put him into such a condition as moved Negef-Couli-Beg himself to
compassion, who wrote presently to Court, that the continuance of so much
torment, would infallibly be the death of the old man. Upon that the King
ordered that there should no more be done to him; only that he should be shut
up in the inner part of his House with his Wives, depriving him of his
employment, but leaving him his Estate.

But Mahomet Beg, not having yet completed the revenge he sought, was resolved
after he had thus tormented him to deprive him, also of his Estate. To which
purpose he advanced to the Office of Deroga, a Georgian Renegado who was called
Padada-Beg, whom he taught all the tricks imaginable to pick the
peoples-pockets. The design of Mahomet Beg in this, was to let the King
understand, that if the new Deroga could heap up such a sum of money in five or
six months, what a prodigious sum must Mir-Kassembeg have heaped up in so many
years. In short, the new Deroga instructed and encouraged by Mahomet Beg,
levied unjustly such a vast number of fines, committed so many extortions and
rapines upon the people, that at the end of six months the people began to
tumult at the Palace gate. The Divan-Bequi, who is the first Minister of
Justice, took the peoples part; whereupon Mahomet Beg perceiving he had been
too hasty in his design to be revenged upon the Divan Bequi, who had crossed
his designs, one morning caused several files of Musketeers to be drawn up at
the Kings Haram. The King surpised at the sight, Mahomet Beg told him that his
Majesty was not safe so long as the Divan Bequi stirred up the people to
Rebellion: which so incensed the King, that he caused the Groom Porter to go
immediately and pull out the Divan Bequi's eyes, which was immediately done;
nor did the old man say any more, but with his face all besmeared with his own
goar, desired the servant upon whose arms he leaned, to turn him toward Mecca
that he might pray for the prosperity of the King. All his goods were
confiscated and brought into the Treasury; but Mer Kassem-beg still enjoyed
his, thought he was forced to spend the remainder of his days in his own house.

Thus Mahomet Beg preserved himself still in the Kings favor, and had removed
all those persons from the Court that had no kindness for him, and was
indifferently safe, till Mir-Tchekar-Bashi another favorite, whom the King
highly loved, began to make head against him. These two haughty spirits would
not give an inch one to another: and both equally strove to possess the Kings
favor, to have the disposal of Affairs. Mir-Tehekar-Bashi, who had brought
Mahomet Beg into Favor, being the elder pretended a respect due to his years,
and Mahomet Beg pretended more due from him by reason of his place. During this
contest ran a report of a rebellion upon Georgia side. Whereupon the
Athemadoulet persuaded the King to fend Mir-Tehekar-Bashi, lately made Koular
Agasi or General of the Slaves toward Georgia, that so he might remove his
Rival from Court. The Favorite sets forward with a flying Camp, but not
finding any Enemy that opposed him, wrote back to the King that he saw no
appearance of an Enemy, and that therefore it was a needless* thing to tire the
Soldiers in a Country where there was no face of War, and begged his Majesty's
leave to return. The Athemadoulet on the other side labored to hinder his
return by preaching to the King the advantages of the stay of those forces in
those parts.

In this interim the Vsbek Tartars had made inroads upon the Frontiers of
Carassan, and had slain several of Manoutcheks people, who was governor of the
Province. Mahomet Beg who was his Kinsman, gave the King to understand that the
Kan of Corassan had behaved himself valiantly, but concealed the defeat of the
Kan. On the other side the Koular Agasi sent Letter upon Letter to the King,
but perceiving that none of them came to the Kings hands, he sent to Ispahan
one of his discreetest and most trusty servants, who coming to Court intermixed
himself among the rest of the Lackeys. The Athemadoulet spying an unknown face,
and being always mistrustful, demanded who he was? To whom the Messenger
answered that he was a poor Soldier upon the frontiers of the Kingdom, who
because he could not get his pay there was come to Court to see if he could
there get any recompense for his service: upon which reply the Athemadoulet
took no farther notice of him. Presently after, the young man meeting the Meter
told him he had Letters of importance to deliver into the Kings own hard, of
which the Meter giving notice to the King, the messenger was immediately called
in. The King having read the Letters which discovered to him what the
Athemadoulet had concealed from him touching the no necessity of keeping forces
upon the Frontiers of Georgia, and the loss which the Kan of Korassan had
received, transported with choler against his prime Minister, sent for him, and
after he had most bloodily reviled and reproached him, he was within a little
of killing him with his own hands. But the Nazar and some other Lords
there*present took the boldness to represent to the King the long services
which Mahomet Beg had done the Kingdom, and that since his Majesty had raised
him from the dust to the highest honors of the Kingdom, it would not be for
his honor to destroy at one blow a person that he had loved, and might still
be useful to him. This discourse somewhat appeased the King, so that he only
gave him in custody to the Nazar. Three days after the King exiled him to Kom,
with all his Family, not permitting him to shave himself* go to the Bath, or to
come abroad. This Exilement lasted for several years. But my Letters from
Persia in the year 1674. enform'd me that Sha-Solyman, the present King, has
restored him to his Primier Dignity, and that he still governs as Athemadoulet,
the King finding no man more capable than himself.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Rebellion of the Prince of Jasque, a Vassal to the King of Persia, in
the reigns of Sha-Sefi I. and Sha-Abbas II.
BEtween Cape Jasque, and Cape Guadel which are the two most Southern points of
Persia, there lies a mountainous and mershie Country, which extends it self
from the Ocean toward the Province of Kerman, and in several places is
inaccessible. It is possessed by three petty Princes, the one a Mahumetan, the
other two toward the East both Idolaters. The first is the most potent of the
three, and nearest to the Province of Ormus. He also assumes the title of
Prince of Jasque, as his Ancestors did before him. Now after Sha-Abbas the
first had conquered Ormus, he went about to have made himself master of all the
coast that extends it self beyond Cape Jasque; but meeting with resistance, he
only obtained that the Prince of the Country should acknowledge the King of
Persia for his Lord, and that as his Vassal he should pay him an annual
tribute. And indeed during the reign of Sha-Abbas, who knew how to make himself
feared, the Prince of Jasque paid his tribute very orderly. But Sha-Sefi
succeeding his Grandfather very young, this tributary Prince shook off his
yoke, and refused to pay. Which not being regarded in the reign of Sha-Sefi,
the Prince of Jasque thought to do the same in the reign of Sha-Abbas the
second. But at length after he had refused to pay for some years, the Kan of
Ormus pretending the Country to be under his Jurisdiction, and that the Kings
honor was concerned in the Princes refusal, incited Sha-Abbas to send forces
against him to reduce him to obedience. The King granted the Commission to him
that had undertaken the business: who presently gathering together an Army of
20000 men, the most part Horse, thought to have surpised his Enemy. To which
purpose that he might take the nearest way, he marched directly toward Cape
Jasque. But as it was the shortest cut, it was the most dangerous* insomuch
that the Kan, who hunted all the way he marched, according to the custom of
Persia, had the misfortune to fall into a bogg, where he was stifled, together
with 20 or 30 horsemen more. The death of the Kan being divulged, the Army
retreated back again: but as soon as the King received the news, he sent the
Brother of the deceased Kan to succeed him. In the mean while the Rebel Prince
believing within himself, that he was not to be thus at quiet, and expecting to
be attacked by the new Kan, stood upon his guard. And indeed the new Kan
marched with all the speed he could, and entered the territories of the
rebellious Prince, but being beat'n was forced to make more haste back again to
Ormus, with the loss of an abundance of men.

The Prince of Jasque puffed up with this success, did not believe that the
Persians would be so hasty to come again: and thereupon he resolved upon a
Voyage for Mecca to give the Prophet thanks for his Victory. To which end he
embarked at the nearest place he could to Cape Jasque, thence to make sail
toward Arabia. But the Governor of Kan understanding his design by his spies,
waylaid him by Sea, took him and*brought him to Ormus. At that time the heats
being excessive, the Governor was retired, according to custom, to the
Mountains some ten or twelve Leagues from the City, whither the Prince was
carried and brought to the Kans tent. But while the Kan was expecting the
return*of the Messenger which he had sent to the King for orders what to do
with the Prisoner, the Princes wife hearing of her husbands misfortune, and
being a woman of a manlike courage, taking along with her about five or six
hundred horse, with little noise and by long marches she at length fell
unawares upon the Kan about midnight, killed him with her own hand, cut in
pieces the greatest part of his men, whom she found asleep, carried away ten or
twelve of his wives, and set her husband at liberty in spite of the Persians,
who had not time to rally themselves.

The news of this defeat coming to Court, the King being highly incensed, sent
away the third Brother to be governor of Ormus, with special command to the
Governors of Schiras, Lar and Kerman forthwith to raise 30000 horse to revenge
the affront and reduce the Rebel. The Kan of Ormus marched at the head of that
Army, and gave Battle, but the Prince being succored by the other two
Idolatrous Princes his neighbors, the Persians were again beaten. Only the
Prince of Jasque lost his Lieutenant General, a valiant Captain, and a very
good Soldier.

The King understanding that the Lieutenant General was the Kans Prisoner, gave
him leave to do with him what he would, in revenge of his Brothers death: who
thereupon devised the most cruel torments that ever were heard of. For he first
caused the body of the Lieutenant General to be larded with lighted Candles,
and then setting him upon a Camel ordered him to be led softly about the
streets every day in the very heat of noon. A torment almost insufferable,
which the heroic Indian nevertheless endured with an invincible courage. After
the Kan had tormented him in this manner three days together, the chief of the
Holland Company and other strange Merchants abhorring so much cruelty, begged
of the Kan to surcease his rigor, who readily granted them their request.

CHAP. VIII.
Observations upon the reign of Sha-Soliman the present King.
ALi-Couli-Kan had bin three or four times exiled from the Court, for speaking
with two much liberty. For he was bold and could not keep his tongue between
his teeth. For which reason he was called the Kings Lion, who was wont to chain
him up when he had no occasion for him, and to let him loose when he had any
business for him to do. The last time he was exiled, he was kept five or six
years in a Fortress out of which he had never stirred: But one day, having a
smooth tongue, he over-perswaded the Commander to give him leave to go a
hunting with him. When he returned, with the help of some of his servants, he
fell upon the Commander, and gave him so many Bastinadoe's upon the feet, that
he had like to have killed him: telling him withal, that it was to teach him
his duty, not to let a man go that the King had committed to his charge.
Sha-Sephi, though very young, hearing of this, and desirous to see
Ali-Couli-Kan, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Grandees to hinder his
return, commanded him to be set at liberty, and that he should have a better
allowance to live upon. Two or three days after, the King sitting in Council,
the whole Assembly was amazed to see Ali-Couli-Kan enter, who approaching his
Majesty with a profound reverence, told him, that the Lion being now let loose
was humbly come to kiss his hands. Thereupon the King fell a laughing, and
casting a favorable glance upon him told him he had done well. Nor was it long
ere the King finding him no less pleasant in conversation, then a valiant and
expert Captain, made him Generalissimo of his Armies, as he had bin in the
reign of Sha-Abbas.

When the Court saw Ali-Couli-Kan so well received, every one then labored to
testify their joy for his return. They sent him Horses, Mules, Camels, rich
Carpets, and every thing fit to furnish a Lords house. But all this while he
wanted money, which because he could not meet with among the Persians, he was
forced to have recourse to the Armenians, of whom he desired to borrow sive or
six hundred Tomans. As for the Kalemer he would have had the sum lent, but the
rest would not. Thereupon the King taking a walk to Zulpha, Ali-Couli-Kan put
it into his head to go and see the great Cathedral belonging to the Armenians,
where several Bishops with several Monks reside. The King entering into the
Church, where the Bishop stood ready at the head of the Clergy to receive him,
and seeing all things new and strange, as coming but lately out of the women's
Haram, asked his favorite what sort of people those were clad in such an
extraordinary manner. Ali-Couli-Kan told him they were Devils, Devils! said the
King, What! added he, do bring me into a house of Devils? The King thus
incensed against the Armenians, resolved to force 'em to turn Mahumetans. But
Ali-Couli-Kan, being a Georgian, repenting that he had raised the Kings
indignation to so high a pitch, and not believing it would be any advantage to
him for the Armenians to turn Mahumetans, contented himself only with frighting
them, which was enough to bring the Armenians upon their knees, and to make
them come and beg the Intercession of his authority. Which favor, as he
ordered it, cost the Armenians ten thousand Tomans to the King, and four or
five thousand Tomans to his Favorite.

The 23. of September 1677. the King made a Cavalcade, then which there could
be nothing imagined more magnificent. All the richest Furniture was brought out
of the Exchequer into the Meydan. The golded buckets to water the Horses. The
golden Fat out of which they take the water, together with buckles, harness and
nails of gold, to which the Horses are tied. After the King had played at Mall,
as I have already described, and had also shot at the Goblet upon the top of
the Mast in the middle of the Meydan, he went and sat in the Divan, which is
over the Gate called Ali Capi, where he had the pastime to see Lions, Bulls,
Bears, Tigers and Rams fight. But that which was most admirable, was to see a
man stand upright upon the Saddle while the horse ran full speed, which he did
three times the whole length of the Meydan. The first time, it is true, he fell
but the two last times he stood firm.

One day the same Ali-Couli-Kan*presented two handsome Youths to the King, which
had both delicate voices. The King hearing them sing, was very much troubled
that he could not make use of them in his Haram, which Alli-Couli-Kan
observing, sent for a French Surgeon, and promised him a great reward if he
could cut the youths and save their lives. The Surgeon for lucre of a large
recompense, cut them both and cured 'em very well. Which done, Ali-Couli-Kan,
presented the two youths to the King, who was surpised to see them, but was
well pleased that he had got two such new attendants in his Haram. But see the
reward of such a wicked action. Ali-Couli-Kan died soon after. The Surgeon
never was paid: and being advised to present a Petition to the King by the
Meter, the Meter asked him whether he would turn Mohammedan: which when the
Surgeon denied to do, the Meter bid him be gone like a Rascal, telling him
withal that he did not think the Religion of the Christians had permitted such
acts of villainy. The two youths were born at Cashan, and had both Fathers and
Mothers, and were promised in Marriage. When their Parents heard of it, they
came to Ispahan, to weep over their Children. Which the King observing, to
appease their sorrow, gave them a Pension during life.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Government of Persia.
THE Government of Persia is purely Despotick or Tyrannical. For the King has
the sole power of life and death over all his Subjects, independent from his
Council, and without any Trials or Law-proceedings. He can put to what death he
pleases the chief Lords of the Kingdom, no man daring to dispute the reason,
nor is there any Sovereign in the world more absolute then the King of Persia.

The King deceasing and leaving Male Issue behind him, the Eldest ascends the
Throne, while his Brothers are kept in the Haram, and their eyes are put out:
and if there be the least suspicion of any contrivance against the King, they
are forthwith put to death without any farther examination. And not only they,
but the Children also of the Kings Brothers and Sisters. I remember when I
first traveled into Persia, they were not so rigorous, but were contented to
move a red hot iron to and fro before their eyes. But Sha-Sefi perceiving his
command had been negligently executed, and that the poor unhappy Princes had
some sight left them he ordered their eyes to be dug out of their heads.
Sha-Sefi's cruelty went yet farther, for he spared not his Eldest Son
Sha-Abbas, the lawful Heir to his Throne, ordering one of his Eunuchs to move
an Iron before his eyes, no man being able to tell the reason. But the Eunuch
compassionating the young Prince, did indeed move an Iron, but not a red hot
Iron before his Eyes, and teaching him to counterfeit himself blind, preserved
his sight till his Father lay upon his deathbed: at which time his Father was
very penitent, for having put out the eyes of his Eldest Son, to whom the
Throne of right belonged. The Eunuch seeing the King so sadly afflicted and
ready to give up the ghost, assured him that he would restore the Prince to his
sight, and to comfort him at his death, brought the Prince with perfect eyes to
the bed side. The sight of which prolonged the Kings life till next day; and
gave him time to command all the Grandees of the Court to obey Sha-Abbas his
Eldest Son, as his lawful Successor and their King.

But to return to these blind Princes; There were several at Ispahan when I was
there: and I knew one particularly, who is still alive, and is a person of
excellent natural parts, As blind as he is, he is a great lover of Curiosities,
and has built him a House in Ispahan, which is worthy a man's sight. He is
overjoyed when any person brings him any rarities out of Europe, feeling them
in his hands, and causing his Eunuchs, which are very apprehensive, to tell him
the meaning of every thing. He is a great admirer of Clock-work and Watches,
and can tell by his finger when a Watch is right in the Case. To know what a
Clock it is, he has little points set up in the Dial-plate, and a half hand, to
the end he may not be deceived which part of the hand points to the hour. By
means of certain figures which he makes of soft wax, and sets in order upon a
Table, he will cast up an account very exactly. Several other good qualities I
admired in him; and it grieved me to see a man reduced to that miserable
Condition, only because he was of the blood Royal of Persia.

Though the Employments of the Kingdom generally fall from Father to Son, yet
the King if he pleases may bequeath the Governments of Provinces or any other
dignities to any of his Goulams which are his Slaves, if he find them capable,
and thinks they may be fit for his service. The Father to leave the Employment
to his Family, labors by degrees to introduce his Son, and to obtain the
Survivorship for him. But if the Father dye, and leaves the Survivorship to an
Infant, there is generally a person of Age and Experience sent along with him.
Some there are also that obtain employments by presenting the Favorites at
Court.

The State of Persia is distinguished like most of the European States, into
three Bodies. The first is that of the Sword, which answers to the Nobility,
and comprehends the Kings household, the Kans, and all the Soldiery. The second
is that of the Quill, comprehending all those that belong to the Law and the
Courts of Justices. The third is composed of Merchants, Handicrafts-men and
Laborers.

CHAP. X.
Of the first of the three Orders or States of Persia, which comprehends the
Kings Household, the Kans or Governors of Provinces, and the Soldiery.
THE Primier Minister of the Kingdom is called Athemadoulet, or the support of
Riches. His office is the same with the Grand Vizir's in Turkey, and may be
compared to the ancient Mayors of the Palace in France. In regard all the
affairs of the Kingdom pass through his hands, he ought to be rather a Gownman
then a Soldier: and herein he only differs from the Grand Vizier, who is
always to be at the head of the Army, and for every slight fault or distaste is
subject to be strangled by the Grand Signior. Whereas in Persia where the
Government is milder, the Prime Ministers generally dye in their beds, or if
they are Deposed, they are only exiled to some frontier City, where they live
as private men.

When the King is young, the Prime Minister has a hard game to play, for then
the Favorite Eunuchs and the Sultanesses disannul and cancel in the night
whatever orders he makes in the day time.

The Nazar or Seer has the charge of all the Kings goods, of his breeds of
horses, of his movables, of his Clothes and Plate: much like the grand Master
of the Kings House in France.

The Mehter, who is always a white Eunuch, is the first Gentleman of the Kings
Chamber, and follows the King with a kind of bag hanging by his side full of
handkerchiefs. And as he is always at the Kings elbow, if he have the Kings
ear, it is easy for him to befriend or do unkindnesses, as his inclination
leads him. During the minority of the King, some of these Mehters have been
known to govern the Kingdom.

The Mir-Akhor-Bashi, or Grand Esquire, has the Charge of the Kings Stables,
which as well as the Gate of Ali-Capri, are a place of Refuge, and whoever
saves himself therein, let it be for Murder or Debt is safe. All the Horses in
the Kings Stable are marked with a hot iron upon the left hip, and those that
belong to private persons upon the right. Those that the King gives to them
that serve in his Armies, have the Kings mark, and are not to be sold, but they
may be chaffer'd away. If any of those Horses happens to dye in a Horse-mans
hands, he must flea off the Kings mark, and carry it to the under Officers of
the General of the Cavalry, to have a another, otherwise he would be forced to
buy another at his own expenses. Those people by laying the skin in the water,
know, though by what art I cannot tell, whither the Horse died of age or
sickness, or whither he were maliciously killed. For in times of Peace there
are some Horsemen that will kill their Horses, to save the Charges of keeping
any more than themselves: then at the next Muster they bring the skin of their
Horse, with the mark on, to the Officers, and get another, unless they be found
out. Nor are their Horses only marked, but their Scimitars, Muskets, Bows and
Quivers, all which they must show to the Commissioners every Muster.

Sha-Abbas, the second being at Casbin in the year 1654, took a general view of
his Cavalry, which lasted for ten or twelve days. For the King sitting in the
Portal of one of his Gardens, with his Officers standing about him, every day
caused so many troopers to ride by him: which were all stout active men and
well mounted. Every Soldier galloped singly by him; and coming just under the
King, he shot an Arrow against a Butt of Turf that was thrown up upon his left
hand, and when the Muster was over, the King advanced the Pay of every
Horseman, who according to the sentence of the Judges had shot nearest the
mark.

I was then at Casbin, and I remember one Soldier, who quite contrary to what
the other Horsemen did, walked his Horse along by the King, and never-shot,
but only laid his hand upon his breast, and then upon his forehead, which is
the Ceremony of Salutation used by the King. He was a very homely fellow, with
a flat tawny countenance: so that his behavior and his presence offending the
King, in a chafe he commanded that ^lack rascal to be cashiered out of his
service. Immediately they took away his Horse and his Arms, and were going
about to have drubb'd him, but that the General of the Cavalry made them a sign
to let him alone. Immediately the General gave the King to understand that he
was one of the best Soldiers in the Army: as he had signally made it appear at
the Sieges of Erivan and Candahar. Upon that the King caused his Horse and Arms
to be restored him again, and commanded him to ride by him as the rest of the
Soldiers had done. When he came against the Butt, instead of obeying the Kings
command, he turned his Horse to the right and left, without saying a word. The
General fearing he would offend the King again, bid him shoot. What shall I
shoot at? Sir said he. Against the place where all the rest have shot, answered
the General. Then the Soldier shaking his head and smiling, It Is not my way,
said he, to spend my Arrows against a wall; for I know how to make use of 'em
better against the body or head of the Enemies of my King. I would then shoot
thrice before another could shoot once. At the same time he draws out two
Arrows out of his Quiver, one of which he held in his mouth, and put the other
to his bow: and then setting spurs to his Horse he out-rid the Butt for the
nonce, to shoot backward, which he did, and hit the very middle of the white,
then turning his horses head and passing the Butt as before, he shot the second
Arrow into the same hole, whence they had pulled the first Arrow. Then the
General approaching near the King, told him that by what he had heard and seen,
he might well believe that Horseman to be as brave a Soldier as any in the
Army: which his Majesty confessed, and from three Tomans advanced his pay to 15
Tomans.

The Mir-Shikar-Bashi, or the Grand Master of the Hunt, who is also employed as
Grand Falconer. He has under him a thousand Officers, and a great number of
Birds of prey, and managed Hawks.

The Seguan Bashi receives the orders of the Grand Master of the Hunt. He has
charge of the Dogs, Lions, Leopards, and other Beasts for Chase.

The Kindar Bashi, who has charge of the Kings Saddles.

The Zinkan-Courlshisi is the chief of the Querries, that hold the Kings
stirrup, when he gets a Horseback.

The Kelege-Courlshisi carrys the Kings sword.

The Oriaje-Courlshisi carrys his Bow and Arrows.

The Vakanviez is as it were the chief Secretary of State: an employment never
conferred but upon a Favorite. He also reads all Petitions and Papers that are
represented to the King.

The Kasnadar-Bashi is he that keeps all the Money which is in the Kings
Coffers, whom we call the High Treasurer.

The Ishik-Agasi-Bashi is the Grand Master of the Household, who has several
Officers under him.

The Mehmender-Bashi is the Master of the Ceremonies.

The Hakim-Bashi is the Kings chief Physician, by whose allowance all the
Physicians of the Kingdom are licensed.

The Munedgin-Bashi is the chief of the Astrologers.

The Divan-Bequi is the chief Justiciar, as well in Civil as in Criminal
causes, and he keeps his Court either in Ali Capi, or in the Kings House, where
his Majesty sometimes presides himself when he pleases. Before him as being and
Officer of great Authority, all the Criminals in the Kingdom make their appeal,
and he makes out process against the Kans and other Grandees of Persia.

The Deroga is much like the Lieutenant Criminal in France, from whom it is
lawful to appeal before the Divan-Bequi. He has an eye upon Robberies,
Batteries and Murders, and he has power to suppress Houses of Debauchery. If
he catch any debauched persons, he has power to give them the Bastinado, or to
fine them: and most commonly he spares corporal chastisement to punish their
purses.

The Sofragi-Bashi is he that spreads the Sofra before the King.

The Chirakgi-Bashi is he that has charge of the Wine: chiefly the Schiras
wine, which is particularly kept for the King, who seldom drinks any other. Nor
can any particular person in Schiras make Wine till the Court be first served,
and that with the leave of the Chirategi-Bashi; there being none but the Franks
and Jews that make it.

The Mesheal-Bashi is the chief of the Torch-bearers; who furnishes the Court
with Candles, which are all of Wax. To this Mesheal-Bashi belong all the fines
of those that play at Cards or Dice, the Law of Mahomet forbidding all Games of
hazard. This Officer has several inferior Officers under him, who go from place
to place to spy where they can find any persons at play: and he has power to
break open any house, unless the Master be of great Quality.

The Kahuergi-Bashi is he that has care of the Kahue, the Rose Water, and other
distillations which the Persians drink; as Bilmishe, made of the buds of brown
Sallows.

The Kara-Setashe is the King's Surgeon, or Barber, who lets him Blood, and
shaves his Head; and cannot part with his place to another.

The Capigi-Bashi is the great Porter, who has under him several other Officers.

The Melikultugagear is he that has charge of the Stuffs for the King's
Household, and puts them out to the Tailors. He takes an account of the shreds
and old habits, which serve to make Clothes for the Soldiers, deducting for
them out of their pay.

The Gelander-Bashi is the chief of the Footmen.

The Mir-ahe, or the Prince of the Seals, is the Superintendent of the Seals*
and for profit, is one of the best employments in the Kingdom. He has the sale
of the Canal-water to the Countrymen; for which he makes the Farmers pay a
severe rate.

The Karkrone is the House for the Royal Manufactures, where the Gold and
Silver-Carpets are made, as also those of Silks and Worsted, together with
Tissues, Velvet, and Taffeta's. There are other Workmen that make Coats of
Mail, Bows, Arrows, Scimitars, and other Arms. In other Apartments are Limners
that paint in Watercolors; Lapidaries, and Goldsmiths, that only make
Silver-Rings. For in regard the Persians cannot say their Prayers when they
have any Gold about 'em, they never wear Jewel or Ring of Gold, because it
would be troublesome to pull 'em off, and lay 'em up so many times a day. And
therefore the King of Persia causes all his Jewels to be set in Silver, as we
set all our Stones in Gold. As for working Goldsmiths, they have none in
Persia; all their Gold and Silver-Plate being wrought by the Copper-smiths in
round figure, for they have not the art to frame an Oval.

The Nakkashe-Bashi is the Serjeant-Painter, who only works in miniature; they
cover their Pictures with a Varnish made of Mastich steeped in a certain Oil
that distills from a Rock that points upon the Caspian-Sea not far from
Shamatri. It distills out of the Rock at first like water; but afterward it
thickens till it become as thick as Sallet-Oil, preserving still its whiteness.
There are also three other Rocks not far from the former, from whence this Oil
distills; but it is thicker, and of darker color.

The Negeach-Bashi is the chief of the Joyners.

The Embardar-Bashi has the charge of the King's Granaries, and other
Provisions, having several Officers under him.

The Odondar-Bashi is the Master of the Wood-yard.

The most part of these Officers have their diet in the King's House, or else
an allowance of Diet from thence.

The Tushemal-Bashi is the Clerk of the Kitchen. He orders what shall be served
up to the King, and when the Table is cleared, he sticks his Knife in the best
dish, and orders it to be carried home to his own House.

Now for the Officers of War, the principal are; First, the Sepeh-Salar,
Generalissimo of the King of Persia's Armies, who is never constituted but in
time of War; which being ended, his employment ceases. His place in Council is
immediately next to the Athemadoulet.

Now in regard the Militia is divided into three sorts, there are also three
Generals. The three Bodies of the Militia are the Corschis, the Goulams, and
the Tufenlegis.

The Corschis are descended from a foreign race, which have still a great
repute for their Valor. These people live in Tents, like the Turcomans; and
they send their Youth betimes to the King. They furnish their Youth also with
all necessaries, and maintain them till they come to be taken notice of by the
King. They are all Horsemen, well paid, and well looked to, and are many times
advanced to the Supreme Dignities of the Kingdom. They are generally called
Kesel-Bashi, or Red-heads, because that formerly they wore red Bonnets. It is
said that the King has about 22000 of these Corchis in pay, all good Soldiers,
that do wonders in Battle. Sha-Abbas the first did what he could to abolish
this Militia, and to set up the Goulams in their stead. His hatred against them
was only because he thought them too powerful; for he was wont to say to his
Favorites, that nothing but the Puissance of the Corchis, could oppose the
Royal Power, Thereupon he took away some of their Privileges, and gave them to
the Doulams; but he could not bring about his design any farther.

The General of the Corchis is called Corschi-Bashi, and ought to be one of
their Body; nor can the King impose another upon them. The Mim-Bashi commands a
thousand Men, the Yux-Bashi commands a hundred, and the Om-Bashi commands ten.
The Corschi-Bashi has 150 Tomans a year; the Mim-Bashi sixty-two; the Yuz-Bashi
thirty, and the Om-Bashi fifteen. The pay of every Horse man is from nine to
fifteen Tomans a year. Besides, every year the King makes a general Muster, and
then he gives to the Corschis a third part more than their usual pay; however,
to some more, to others less, either according to favor or merit. When the
King has resolved to put a great Man to death, he commits the execution of his
command to a Corschi.

The Gouler-Agasi is General of the Goulams, or Slaves. For indeed they are
either Slaves, or the Sons of Slaves of all sorts of Nations, who do the King
very good Service. They are for the most part runnegade Georgians; and there
are about 18000 of these Goulams, being all Horsemen whose pay is from five to
eight Tomans a year. The Corschis are very good Husbands; but the Goulams, as
soon as they have received their pay, fall a drinking and swaggering; whereas
the other, if he has a Piaster to spare, will buy a Sheep with it: For in
regard they live in Tents, their Riches consists in Flocks. The greatest part
of the Court of Persia is made up of these two Bodies. The Goulams have this
peculiar to themselves, that they are very rarely known to revolt. For being
all Slaves, and of different Nations, there are no ties of Affection or Kindred
between them: And if the King has an occasion to punish any of them, the chief
of their Body is to execute his orders. The Goulams carry no other Arms besides
a Bow and Arrows, with a Skain. Though some wear Coats of Mail, and
Head-pieces: others Vambraces and Battel-Axes. These Horsemen never entrench
in the Field like ours in Europe, nor have they any Field-Marshals to assign
them quarters. For after the chief have taken up the best places, the rest set
up their Tents as near as they can to the Pavillion of the General.

The Tufenkgiler-Agasi is the General of the Tufenkgis, who compose the third
Body of the Militia. This part of the Soldiery was but lately instituted,
being composed of men taken from the Plough, as being most fit for labor. They
are Footmen with only a Scimiter and a Musket. But when they march, they have
a Horse or a M^le between three or four, to carry their Baggage and Provisions.
Their pay is not above four or five Tomans a year. And for their Officers,
their pay is more or less according to their Quality and Command. They are in
no, great reputation, being laughed at by the old Soldiers, as being a company
of poor Contrymen, that dare not look an enemy in the face. Not but that the
Infantry of Persia is able to do good service; though, as numerous as they are,
the King never makes use of them, but in case of necessity. When he marches in
person, he sends for eight or ten thousand, which he sends for out of what
Province best pleases him, and they prove very useful to the Army, as Sutlers.
This Infantry is composed of the Contrymen that live in Tents, abiding in
the Mountains all the hot Summer, and betaking themselves in the Winter to the
hot Countries. Every Tribe or Family knows how many men it ought to set out.
And there is not a Footman that has not his new-Suit in his Chest, and his
Musket and Scimiter in very good order. They are well trained, and well
disciplined; for every three months the Governor of the Province takes a view
of all the Soldiers in his Province, and causes them to be exercised in his
own presence. They are ordered to shoot at a mark, and they that hit it, are
sure to have some reward from the Governor. When the King sends for any part of
his Infantry, they presently know who is to lead 'em; and they are lusty, and
well cl^^, never putting on their best Clothes but when they muster, or march
into the Field. They pay to the King little or nothing: for of all their Cattle
great and small, they pay but one in the hundred to him, and one Abassi, or 18
Sous of our Money.

The Eshek-Agasi, or chief of the Keshekshi's, who are the King's Guards, and
carry a Musket with a very wide bore. They were but lately instituted by the
Athemat-doulet, when he intended to destroy the Divan-begui. This Officer has
about 2000 men under him, of which he disposes every night a certain number,
round about the Palace. When the King sits in Council, he stands there with a
Battoon in his hand, and throws himself to the ground when the King beckons to
him to come and receive any command from his mouth. The Topigi-Bashi is the
Master of the Ordnance, and chief of the Sea-affairs, but he has little to do
in either employment. For, as for the Cannon, there are only some two or three
pitiful Guns in some of the Frontier-towns: And for Ships, there are none in
Persia but what come from Europe or the Indies to Ormus or Balsara. The
Persians themselves have no other Ships than some few large Barks in the
Persian-Gulph, and in some parts of the Caspian-Sea, where they keep a Fleet
against the Vsbeck Tartars, the Kalmoukes, and other people.

As for the Kans or Governors of Provinces, they are generally chosen out of
the body of Corschi's and Goulams; who are handsome persons, and generally much
more Valiant than the natural Persians. For the natural complexion of the
Persians is not good, as may be seen by the Gaures, the original, Inhabitants
of the Country, who are for the most part tanned, and ill-shap'd. So that
there is hardly a Persian, from the King to the meanest of his Subjects, who is
not a Georgian, or sprung from the loins of Georgians, For they fetch a great
number of Slaves out of Georgia; by the frequent Marriages of which women, the
Georgian Valor and Beauty are become Natives of Persia.

The Kans or Governors of Provinces are as so many petty Kings, feared and
respected by all the people. And when they are settled, they are never deposed,
but upon repeated complaints of their excessive Tyranny. There are some of
these Governments that yield the Kan seven or eight thousand Tomans. But they
are bound to present the King every year at Nourons, or New-year-tide.

Under the Kans there are also Governors of lesser quality, who are also
immediately preferred by the King, and cannot be deposed by any person but
himself. If they abuse their Authority, the complaints brought against him are
first carried to the Kan, which, if they concern the Government of the Kingdom,
the Kan is bound to inform the King thereof. But if the complaints are not
considerable, then the Kan may do Justice himself, and make the Sultans know
their duty.

There is yet a third sort of Governors, called Asephs, who are the King's
Lieutenants in places where he had Kans in former times; or where he ought to
have them still, but only to save charges. For in the Provinces where Kans
Govern, they and their Officers, almost equalling in name and number the
Officers of the King's Household, devour all the profits of the Province, but
what the Kan is obliged annually to pay.

By what I have wrote as well concerning the King's Household, the Governors of
his Provinces, and the Officers of his Army, it may be easily concluded that
the King of Persia's Court is the most magnificent and glorious of all the
Courts of Asia; and besides, that it is the most Polite and Civil of all the
Orient.

CHAP. XI.
Of the second Order, containing all those that belong to the Ecclesiastical
Law, and their Courts of Justice; and, in general, of all the Gown-men; such as
are chiefly the Officers of the Chamber of Accounts.
THE second of the three Estates of Persia comprehends the Gown-men, such as
are the Doctors of the Law, the Officers of Justice, and those of the Chamber
of Accounts.

As the Athemat-doulet is the Prime Minister in Temporals, the Sedre is the
Prime Minister in Spirituals, and the High Priest of the Law. However, he does
not pretend to take place before the Athemat-doulet either in Council, or in
the public Ceremonies. There is this difference between the Sedre and the
Mufti in Turkey, that in Persia, Ecclesiastical Dignities are no bar from Civil
Employments; so that the Sedre is many times made Athemat-doulet.

The Dignity of Sedre is not limited to one single person, but may be divided
between two, in regard there are two sorts of Legacies, the one from the King's
of Persia, the other from particular persons. Therefore for the more careful
Superintendency over these two sorts of Legacies, there are sometimes two
Sedres appointed. The one is called Sedre-Kras, particular or peculiar Sedre
who manages all the Revenues of the Royal Foundations, and distributes them to
the Mullaks and Students according to their merit. The other is called
Sedre-el-mankoufat, who has the management of private Foundations. In the year
1667 the King created two Sedres, and married them to two of his Sisters.

The Sedre has two men under him, whose Authority is almost equal to theirs.
The one is called Sheik-el-selom, and the other Cadi: and these are they that
decide all controversies in Religion, judge of Divorces, make Contracts and
public Acts. These two Dignities are in the King's nomination: and in all the
principal Cities of the Kingdom there are two of these Ecclesiastical Judges
for all matters that concern the Law.

To every Mosquee there belongs a Pichnamaz, who is always first there before
Prayers begin; and he teaches the people to Pray by learning of him, having
their eyes always fixed upon him to that end. This Pickanmaz is the same with
him whom the Turks call Iman. The Moullah's are the Doctors of the Law, as are
the Hodgia's in Turkey, and they are well paid out of the Legacies given to the
Mosquees, for reading every Friday, and interpreting the Alcoran to the people.
He that reads, sits in one Chair; and he that interprets, in another, somewhat
lower upon the left hand of the Reader. They are also bound to teach the
Sciences to all those that require it: And as a mark of Sanctity, they wear a
great white Turbant, with a single Chamlet-habit of the same color. Their gate
is grave, and their discourse very serious; yet all this is but pure hypocrisy.
When they light into any considerable company of people, they presently rise,
and exhort 'em to go to Prayers. At the same time they wash their heads, their
hands, and their feet, and spread a felt upon the ground, or if they are poor,
a single mat. Upon this, at one end, the Maulla kneels, at the other lies a
flat Stone about the bigness of the palm of a man's hand, which was brought
from Mecca. Which Stones the Moullah's always carry about 'em; for being
commanded while they are at their devotions often to kiss the ground, they
rather choose to kiss a Stone brought from so holy a place, than the profane
Earth. They have a kind of a Mariners compass, which directs them punctually
where Mecca stands, to the end they may know which way to turn when they say
their Prayers. The Prayer which the Moulla's make, seems to be accompanied with
a great deal of zeal, and they take great notice all the while whether the
company be attentive or no. Some Persians are so superstitious, that a Vizir of
Schiras suffered his leg to rot off, because he would not let a Christian
Surgeon touch him, for fear of being defiled.

There belongs also to every Mosquee a Monteveli, who looks after the repairs
of the Building, and the Provision of what belongs to the Mosquee; together
with a Mouazen, who cries morning and evening from the top of a Tower, That
there is but one God, and that Mahomet is his Prophet.

Colleges, the Persians call Medrese; where there are a great number of
Scholars bred up at little charge, out of the Legacies left to the Foundations.
They allow them a Chamber without any Furniture, they being to provide a
Coverlet and a Mattress for themselves, They have no certain Masters, but
sometimes they go for their instructions to one, sometimes to another, seldom
to the Principal of the College, who is called Monderes, and is generally the
greatest Blockhead of them all. But there are several other persons in every
good City that are forward to teach the Sciences to purchase honor to
themselves. For which reason they are very liberal, to get a great company of
Followers together, who are as so many Trumpets to publish the wisdom of their
Akroom or Doctor. But when their Liberality ceases, the Trumpets want breath at
the same time.

Now as to their manner of studying, the Student first reads two or three
lines, and then the Doctor Expounds. Then another reads two or three lines
more, and so one after another; every one rising up out of respect after he has
done reading, and standing upright till the Doctor bids him sit down again. One
of these Doctors shall teach all manner of Sciences in one day; for he is not
learned that cannot talk of all. And certainly had the Persians those
advantages of Books, and that method of study which we have in Europe, they
would prove to be men of great understanding: for with those little helps they
have, they will give a good account of their own Theology, of Logic, Physic,
and the Mathematics, wherein they strive to reach the bottom of things as deep
as they can. Their Books are for the most part the works of an ancient Persian
Author, whose name was Kodgia Nesir in the City of Thouss, in the Province of
Korassan. It Is very probable he was well skilled in the Greek and Arabic,
having translated into Persian several Books out of those two Languages. They
have some pieces of Aristotle which are accounted the best in the West: The
Almagestes of Ptolemy, which they call Magesti, some tractates of Euclide, some
fragments of Archimedes: the Optics of Ehne, Heister, and other excellent
Books. Some have affirmed that they have been skilled in the doctrine of Sines
and Tangents for above this 800 years: and indeed they are very curious at this
day in Mathematical Instruments. They have also a great inclination to Poetry,
the chief grace whereof they believe to consist in design of accidents, and
high comparisons observing thime as we do. As for Physic, they have Galen,
whom they call Galenous; Averroes, whom they call Aboualt, or great Father; and
Hermes Trismegistus, whom they call Ormous. The most considerable of their
Historians is Ronze el Sapha, who wrote a Chronology from the Creation of the
World to his time; wherein there are abundance of fables, but little truth. He
says that the World was inhabited by Devis for an infinite number of years
before the Creation of Adam, and that God for their enormities deprived them of
their power upon earth, and gave it to man to manage. Their Books, though deer,
are very common, and every Tradesman buys 'em, being very ambitious to learn
the Sciences themselves, and to encourage their children to do so too. They
send them betimes to the School, which they call Meklebe, of which there are
several in every Quarter. They make a hideous noise in their Schools, repeating
their Lessons altogether aloud, while the Master corrects every Boy that does
not keep along with the Cry. As for the children of persons of Quality, they
have Tutors at home, never stirring out of doors till they are 18 years of age,
unless it be to go a hunting or a shooting now and then. Hence it comes to
pass, that the Children are discreet, civil and modest; so that you shall never
hear an ill word come out of their mouths.

In the Chamber of Accounts are many Officers, whom I look upon as Gownmen. All
the Books and Registers pass through their hands, particularly such Papers as
concerned the King's Revenue. All which are registered in the Chamber of
Accounts at Ispahan, which is called Defter Krone. As to the Fee-Lands called
Moulkerbar, which belong to particular persons, they owe to the King a certain
annual Rent, which the Governors of Provinces exact with a severe extortion.

The Mestempti and the Memaleck are they that value the Rent of all Lands in
Demesh, which is one of the principal charges of the Defter Kroon. They also
take cognizance of all the King's Farns, Quit-Rents, Provisions and Expenses of
Receivers and Collectors. There is also a Mestempti to value Legacies.

The Nazar controuls the Mestempti and the Memalek, and his hand is required to
all Papers of dispatch.

The Deroga or Provost of the Defter-Kroon is to prosecute and punish all that
are guilty of false Receipts, or of Exaction.

Into this Office are delivered all the Grants and Assignations of the wages of
the King's Officers. Every man comes and receives his own, or sends for it to
those places upon which this Money is assigned.

In every Village or Borough there is a Reis, or chief of the place, to whom
the Officers apply themselves for their Money: For should they terrify the
Countryman, he would run quite away, and pay nothing. The greatest cheat in
this Chamber of Accounts, is, that in regard the Officers keep the Roll of the
Officers wages, they will give them diverse Bills to receive little parcels at
several places distant from one another, till the Sum be made up; to which
trouble rather than the Kings servant will be put, he will give a good gratuity
to the Officer to pay him all together. But because the Officers are not able
to satisfy all that come, there are certain Thahsilders or hoarders up of Rent,
who buy for ready Money as cheap as they can, such Bills as private men come to
receive at the Chamber; and when they have got a good number together, they go
and receive them altogether at the Chamber, and make great advantage. By this
misgovernment of the Defter-Kroon, several persons are very much oppressed. For
he that has but 30 Tomans a year, shall be forced to give a good share out of
it to have the rest in ready Money; which has been often the ruin of the
Persian Army, through the abuses and defalcations put upon the poor Soldiers.
During the Reign of Sha-Abbas the 1; and toward the beginning of the Reign of
Sha-Sefi his Son, the Exchequer was better regulated; but when the Persians
come to be at Peace with their Neighbors, the King and his Lords have minded
nothing less then the payment of the Soldiery.

The greatest part of the Lands in Persia belong to the King, and are only
farmed by private persons. The rest of the Lands are measured, and every Land
pays so much a measure. The King also has a vast income by the Merchandises
that pay Custom and Toll. The Port of Bander Abassi alone brings him one year
with another, when least, besides accidents, near upon 20000 Tomans.

CHAP. XII.
Of the third Estate of the Kingdom, comprehending the Tradesmen and Merchants:
as also of the Trades, Manufactures, and Commodities of Persia.
THe Commerce of Persia, as in all other Kingdoms, consists in the Trade of the
Country and Foreign Traffic. Only with difference, that the Country Trade is
in the hands of the Persians and Jews, the foreign Traffic in the hands of the
Armenians only, who are as it were the Kings and the Noble men's Factors to sell
their silk.

As for the Handicraft trades, there are some Corporations that pay a certain
yearly duty to the King, as Shoemakers, Cutlers, Smiths, and others. Some are
free, as the Joyners and Masons; though he get by their labor as much as
others pay him in money. For when the King requires twenty Masons for a work
which is in have, the Marmar Bashi who is their Chief, summons them together,
and they that gave most are excused. For when the King requires twenty, he
summons forty: and thus every man lives by his calling. The practice is the
same with the Chief of the Joyners, and all other Trades, who are Officers
paid by the King, and never work unless they please themselves, commanding all
that are under their Jurisdiction. As for Carpenters and Joyners work, the
Persians know little what belongs to it, which proceeds from the scarcity of
Wood, that does not allow them materials to work upon. So that for Chains,
Tables and Bedsteads, there are no such things to be seen in Persia: the
Joyners business being only to make Doors and Frames for Windows, which they
make very neatly of several pieces of wood joined together, so that a man can
hardly put a Tennis Ball through the holes where they put the glass. Nor can it
be expected that the Persians should work like other Europeans, having no other
Tools then a Hatchet, a Saw, and a Chizzel, and one sort of Plainer, which a
Frenchman brought among them.

Their nobler Arts are Writing, for Printers they know none. All their Books
are writt'n, which is the reason they so much esteem that Art. There was an
Armenian who had set up a Printing-Press at Ispahan, and had Printed the
Epistles of St. Paul, the seven Penitential Psalms, and was going about to
Print the whole Bible, but not having the way of making good Ink, and to avoid
the ill consequences of the Invention, he was forced to break his Press. For on
the one side the Children refused to learn to write, pretending they wrote the
Bible themselves, only to get it the sooner by heart: on the other side many
persons were undone by it, that got their living by writing.

The Persians use three sorts of hands, the first is called Nestalick, or the
Set hand; the second Shakeste or Divanni, which is their Court-hand: the third
Neskre, or the Running-hand, very like the Arabic. They write with small Indian
Reeds; and say, that to write well a man ought to lean so slightly upon his
Pen, that should a fly stand upon the other end it would fall out of his hand.
When they write they hold their Paper in one hand to turn it according to the
motion of the Pen, otherwise they could not make their dashes large and free,
as the Character requires. They make their Paper of Cotton Fustian, very
course, brown, and of no strength, for the least folding tears it. They sleek
it with a sleek stone, and then rub it over to make it more sleek. Their Ink is
made of Galls and Charcoal pounded together with Soot.

The Persians reck'n four Languages among 'em. The Persian called Belick, that
is, sweet and pleasing. The Turkish, called Sciascet, or the Rodomontado
Language. The Arabian, to which they give the Epithet of Feschish or Eloquent:
and the fourth, called Coba^et, or the Speech of the Country people. The
Persian in use among the Gentry is composed almost of all Arabie words: by
reason that the Persian is very barren. But the Gibbrish of the Country people
is so corrupt that they in the City can hardly understand 'em. The Arabian is
the Language of the Learned, in which tongue their Books are written. The
Language of the Court is Turkish, but much more soft and elegant then at
Constantinople. As for the Persian Language, it is spoken in the Courts of the
Great Mogul, and the Kings of Golconda and Visapour, in all which Courts a
Noble man would take it for an affront to be spok'n to in the Indian Language.

As for their Painters they only paint in miniature, and for Birds and Flowers
they will draw them indifferently: But for figures and stories they know not
what belongs to any such thing.

The Persians are most excellent Artists for manufactures of Gold, Silk and
Silver, of which their rich Carpets and Tissues are made: nor do their Gold and
Silver Manufactures ever grow black or lose their luster by long wearing or
lying by. There are abundance that work in Silk stuffs of all sorts, and others
that make Bonnets and Girdles of Gold and Silk. Others there are whose business
it is to fast'n flowers of Gold and Silver to their Taffata's, with gum water,
of which the women make Shifts and Drawers. And now they begin to make such
large quantities of Taffata's, that they care not for the stuffs which are
brought out of India, though they be much finer.

They also make great quantities of Linen Cloth of all sorts of colors, upon
which they fast'n several flowers with gum water, and some figures, though the
Law forbid it. Which they learnt to do upon the Armenians carrying out of
Europe some ill-favored cuts and pieces in distemper which they bought here
without judgment: these pieces they hang before their doors, and those hollow
places in the walls where they put their Quilts and Carpets when they rise.

The Persians are excellent Artists at Damasquing with Vitriol, or engraving
Damask-wise upon Swords, Knives, and the like. But the nature of the Steel
which they make use of, very much contributes to their Art, in regard they
cannot perform the same work neither upon their own nor ours. This steel is
brought from Golconda, and is the only sort of steel which can be damasqu'd.
For when the workman puts it in the fire, he needs no more then to give it the
redness of a Cherry, and instead of quenching it in the water as we do, to wrap
it in a moist Linen cloth: for should he give it the same heat as to ours, it
would grow so hard that when it came to be wrought it would break like glass. I
speak this to undeceive those people who think our Scimitars and Cut-lasses are
made of steel of Damaseus, which is a vulgar error; there being no steel but
that of Golconda that can be Damask'd.

The Persians are also excellent Artists at making Bows and Arrows, and such
other weapons as are used in that Country. As for Bridles and Sadles their
Artists far exceed ours, especially in their sowing, which they do so neatly
and with so much art with a kind of back-stitch, that it looks almost like an
embroidery. There are an infinite number that live by dressing Seal-skins and
Goat Skins, the first to make boots for the Gentry and better sort of
Merchants, the latter for the poor people.

There is also a sort of earthen ware made at Kerman which is very fine, and
being brok'n looks as white within as without. It does not endure heat so well
as Porcellane, which has this quality, that if you power never so hot liquor
into a Porcellane cup, neither the foot nor the brims a-top will be any thing
the warmer.

There are abundance of poor people that get their living by mending glass
Tobacco-pipes, for when they are brok'n they join them together again with a
certain mastic made of lime, and the white of an egg, then with a
Diamond-pointed piercer they make holes in the glass, and bind the pieces
together with a thin Latten-wire.

The most considerable commodities of Persia are the Silks which come out of
the Province of Guilan. But there is not so much transported out of Persia as
men imagine. For formerly great quantities of Velvets, Tissues and Taffata's
were transported out of Persia into these parts, but now we make them better
and cheaper in Europe.

There is also a vast quantity of flat silk transported out of Persia into
Turkey, Muscovy and Poland, which the women use in embroidery: for the Colors
being lively, they embroider their shifts, handkerchers, vails, and other
linen with it.

The Seal-skins and Goat Skins which are dress't in Persia are transported by
the Hollander into India and Japan. Great quantities also of both are
transported into Muscovy and Poland.

The Ronas, that famous Root, of which I have already spoken, is transported
over all India, where there is also a great vent of Persian fruits pickled in
Vinegar, as also of their sweet waters.

Their Pistaches grow in great abundance about Casbin; Almonds from the
Territories of Yesd and Kerman, Raisins from several parts of the Kingdom,
especially from Schirus: And their purgative Prunes, which they call
Alonbacdra, from the Frontiers that border upon Tartary.

Great store of Quinces can died, and boxes of Marmaled made at Balsara, are
thence transported into India, where they are bought up by the Mahometans and
Portugueses. For the Banians will eat none, for fear they should by accident
bury a fly in their stomachs.

Great store of dried Fruits are brought out of the Country of the Medes, and
transported to Tooat, to Diarbequir, Nineveh and Dagdat. Among the rest a sort
of small Apricots, very pleasing to the taste, which being boiled in water make
a pleasant syrrup, and are the only diet for the sick in those parts.

There are also great store of painted Calicuts made in Persia, which being
course, are only worn and made use of by the poor, so that there is very little
transported out of the Country, but what is carried into Turkey.

The Persians also make a great deal of money of their Cattle; and to begin
with their Camels, they sell vast numbers of them into Armenia and Natolia. But
the Governors of the Provinces are very unwilling to part with them; which
very much abates the trade. For the Turks very highly esteem the Persian
Camels, as being stronger than their own. They also sell great store of Horses
and Mules; but that trade is not so considerable, the chiefest part being only
sent into India.

As for their Sheep, it is a wonderful thing to see what prodigious numbers come
out of the Province of the Medes and the Higher Armenia, and the Foreign
Merchants come as far as Tauris and Hamadan to fetch thew away. They drive them
as far as Constantinople and Adrianople, and the greatest part of the Mutton
which is spent in Natolia and Romania comes out of Persia, which very much
enriches Persia with ready money. But when Lamb is in season, as we travel with
the Caravans, we meet at every turn with flocks after flocks, the least of
which consists of a thousand Lambs: and in regard there are some of those Lambs
that are weary, and lag behind, we buy them at a cheap rate, the Shepherds that
are not able to carry them, being glad to be rid of 'em.

Formerly the Merchant Fewellers brought some Turquoises of the old rock out of
Persia; but for these 15 years last past there have bin none found. The last
time I was there I could only meet with three, which were but reasonable. As
for those of the new rock, they are of no value, because they do not keep their
color, but turn green in a little time.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Justice and Policy of the Persians.
THe Justice of the Persians is very exact and very speedy. Suits are
determined upon the place without any need of Advocates or Proctors. Not but
that the Officers of Justice are easy to be corrupted, but in their unjust
exactions, which they carry as secretly as possibly they can, they are sooner
satisfied then the Turks: and if their injustice be discovered, upon complaint
to the King they are punished without mercy.

The Kans do Justice in their Provinces, as representing the Kings person.
Besides that, the King has a Divan Begui in every City, and the Kan places
under him a Deroga, who is like the Lieutenant Criminal in France. He has under
him an Aatas, who is a kind of Captain of the watch; who goes about the streets
in the night to hinder disorders, and carries all people to Prison that he
finds abroad at unseasonable hours, if they cannot give a good account of
themselves. There is also a Kelonter, that is, the chiefest or greatest, who
seems to resemble the Tribune of the People among the Romans, or the Provost of
Merchants in France. The Kelonter is only responsible to the King, who places
one in every City, and it is his business to defend the People from the
injustice and oppressions of the Governors.

Murder is severely punished, nor will money save the Criminal. When the
Murderer is taken, they carry him before the Divan Begui, who makes quick
work. For he delivers him to the Parents or kindred of the person slain, who
carry him to the place of execution, and without any compassion torture him to
death.

I remember the Kan of Schiras had a Favorite, who falling in love with a
young Persian Gentleman, would needs endeavor to have the use of his body. One
day meeting upon the Road together, and lying at night under the same Tent, the
Favorite about midnight came to his bed side, and after many solicitations
would have forced him. But being violently resisted, the Favorite for madness
to see him disappointed, and liable to be discovered, stabbed the young
Gentleman to the heart, and fled to the Mountains. The Murder being divulged,
the Mother, Widow and Sister of the young man repaired to the Kan for Justice,
who willing to save his Minion, offered them money: but they scorning his
proffer, threatened to complain to the King. The Kan being thereupon
constrained to pursue his Favorite, at length took him and sent him to
Ispahan, telling them that he would not judge of the Affair, but refer it to
the King. The Mother, Widow and Sister immediately followed the Murderer to
Ispahan; and demanded Justice of the King with that eagerness, that though the
King had an inclination to have spared the Kan's Favorite for his Masters
sake, he was forced to abandon him, and to bid them pay themselves with his
blood. Immediately he was carried to the Meydan, where the Widow first stabbed
him to the heart with a Dagger, then the Mother took her turn, and after the
Sister; and then holding a Cup to receive his blood, drank every one a cup full
to quench the thirst of their revenge.

Nor are they so exact in the punishment of Murder only; for they punish
disorders in houses of Debauchery with a proportionable strictness, of which I
will give the Reader two examples. A young Hollander, coming to Ispahan,
presently put himself into a Persian habit; and going in the evening to a house
of good fellowship, met with certain Persians, with whom he happened to
quarrel, and being well beaten for his pains, thought it not convenient to stay
any longer where he had bin so ill entertained. Thereupon the Dutch Interpreter
went and complained to the Athemadoulet, who informed the King. The King
immediately sent for the people that had beaten the Hollander, and asked them
why they abused a stranger? To which the others made answer that they saw no
stranger, but only a man clad after the Persian garb. Whereupon the King told
the Interpreter, that if the Dutchman had worn his own Country habit, his
Subjects durst not have abused him, but as the case stood, he had no reason to
punish 'em.

One day it happened that there was a great hubbub in one of those houses of
debauchery, where the woman had prostituted her own Daughter. The King informed
of it, commanded the Mother to be thrown headlong from a Tower: and that the
Daughter should be torn a pieces by his dogs, which he keeps, a purpose for
such chastisements.

Above all things there is an extraordinary care taken for the security of the
Highways. For which purpose guards are set at convenient distances, who are
ready to pursue upon the least noise of a Robbery, and who examine people whence
they come and whither they go. If they answer not as they should, or trip in
their Answers, they carry them before the next Governor. Those Radars are so
possed over all Persia, that you need no more then send to the places where
they keep station, to know what is become of any person that has committed a
crime. For it is impossible to escape, all the Passes are so well guarded. If
any one endeavors to travel through the Mountains or unfrequented roads, then
the Radars who are in all places, seize such persons upon suspicion, for not
taking the direct road.

As the Caravan was one day setting out from Tauris for Ispahan, a poor fellow
took an occasion to rob a Cloak-bag during the hurly-burly of packing up, and
sted cross the fields not knowing his way: the Merchant missing his goods,
complained to the Governor, who having sought for him in vain, sent order to
the Guards of the Highways, to make a strict examination, and to send the
person to him so soon as they had seized him. In a short time the Thief was
constrained to forsake his Cloak-bag and to come a thwart the fields for water.
Who being examined by the Radars why he came alone by such a by way, and not
knowing what to answer, was carried to the Governor. He was soon convicted and
condemned to death, for Thieves find no mercy in Persia. Only they are
variously put to death. For sometimes they are tied to a Camels tail by the
feet, and their bellies rip't open. Sometimes they are buried alive all but
their heads, and starved to death: in which torment they will sometimes desire
a Passenger to cut off their heads; though it be a kindness forbidden by the
Law. But the most cruel punishment of all, is when they set Thief a Horseback,
with his extended Arms fastened to a long stick behind: then larding him with
lighted Candles, they suffer the Candles to burn into his very bowels. Another
and I met two in this misery, who desired us to hasten their deaths, which we
durst not do, only we gave them a Pipe of Tobacco according to their desire.

As for those that steal in Cities, they tie them by the heels to the tail of a
Camel, and rip up their bellies: and then as the Camel drags the poor creature
along the streets, while one goes before him crying, The King has punished him
for such a crime. If yet he be not dead, they hang him upon the next tree.

The Radars have little wages, which makes them use their Rhetoric to get what
honestly they can out of the Travelers, to whom they tell long stories of
their care for the security of the highways.

If it happen that a Merchant be robbed, the Governor of the Province is to
make good to the Merchant whatever he has lost, according as he shall make out
by his Oath or his Book. Nor dare the Governors deny satisfaction, fearing a
complaint at Ispahan. I my self was robbed of two Bales of goods, between Lar
and Schiras, to the value of 1400 Piasters, but upon complaint to the Governor
upon my own oath and showing him my Book, he paid me all my loss in gold, and
gave me a present in wine besides.

The Posts or Shappars are those that carry the Kings dispatches to the
Governors of Provinces. When they are sent any whither, the Kings Esquire
finds them a Horse, and a man that runs to the end of the Stage, to bring him
back again. If these Curriers meet a Horseman upon the road, they have power to
dismount him, if their own be not so good, or be tired: and the Horseman must
either run after his Horse, or send some body to the end of the Stage.
Sometimes these Curriers abusing their power, within a quarter of an hour after
they have changed their Horse, if they meet another better mounted, they will
take away his Horse too. Nor dares the Horseman resist, though he be never so
much too strong, for there is no pardon for them that lay so much as a finger
upon one of these Shappars; at other times they will pretend to take away a
man's Horse only to get money. But they are forbid to deal so by the Franks; and
I have passed by them, when they have said nothing to me.

Their Government in relation to Belly-timber is the best in the world For
there is a Mohteseb, who is the chief of the Government, whose business it is
to set a rate upon all sorts of Provision, being assisted by three or four more
Assessors. Every first day of the week there is a public Proclamation of tax
upon the weight of every thing. Which Assessors in the evening advise together
against the next day whether to raise or abate the price before set. This order
was established by the great Sha-Abbas, and was in his reign more punctually
observed then it has been since. By the by observe, that all provisions of
belly-timber are sold by weight and not by measure: so that you may send a
Child to Market; for if the Commodity be not weight, it is well if the buyer be
satisfied with having his money again. For if the seller be discovered to sell
by false weights, they are led about the streets with a Taktekolas, or a Bonnet
like a Bee-hive upon their heads, and a Bell about their necks to expose 'em
first to the laughter of the people; after that they are fined, and receive so
many drubs upon the soles of their feet.

If this good order were not observed in Persia, the poor would suffer very
much. For the handicraft tradesmen that work all day in shops remote from their
houses, where their wives are continually shut up, eat nothing at noon but a
little fruit in season: and then in the evening when they leave work, they go
to the Market and buy for their Families boiled or roast meat, of which there
is great plenty. Therefore are they so exact, lest so many poor laboring men
should be deceived.

One day a Baker of the City came to the Kan, complaining that the Judge of the
Government had set too low a price upon bread, so that he should be a great
Ioser. To whom the Kan made answer, that 'twas not his business to alter the
price: bidding him go to the Magistrate that was concerned. But the Baker
believing the Kan could do any thing, sent him a present of fifty Tomans. The
Kan seeing the ill design of the Baker to oppress the poor people, and the ill
opinion he had of him as a seller of Justice, commanded him to be carried to
the Piazza, and there to be drub'd upon the soles of his feet till he paid the
other fifty Tomans, which the Kan forthwith distributed to the poor, and caused
the price of bread to be abated instead of raising it.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Manners and Customs of the Persians.
THe Manners and Customs of the people are usually correspondeut to their
Religion. The Persians never preserve the name of their Predecessors, but like
the Jews, for distinction sake, say, such a one, the Son of such a one. When
they Circumcise a Child and give him a Name, they write three or four Names
like Lots in Paper, which are drawn by a Child, and which the Child draws, that
is the Name of the Child. The women that are barren, swallow that which is cut
from the Child, believing it will make them conceive.

The Persians are generally very inquisitive after the time to come, consulting
their Astrologers like Oracles: The King has always two or three by him, to
tell him the good or bad hour. There is an Almanac which is sold every year in
Persia, which they call Tacuim; but is indeed an Ephemerides, containing the
Longitudes and Latitudes of the Planets, the Conjunctions and Oppositions; and
other such things. This Tacuim is full of predictions about War, Sickness and
Famine. It sets the proper seasons to put on new clothes, to let blood, to
Purge, or travel, with many other instructions of the same nature. They give
great credit to this Tacuim, and they that can get one, govern themselves in
all things according to the Rules there set down. Others to know the success of
their affairs, go to a Doctor of the Law, and desire him to open the Al-couran,
and to tell them the Alcouran is the Book of the Law, so entitled for its
excellency, as we say, the Bible.
issue of their busines^* Thereupon the Doctor muttering some strange words,
opens the Book, and if he meets with affirmative commands, he declares the
undertaking shall prosper. If negatives, he disswades from the enterprise. I
remember a Gardener belonging to the Capuchin Friars, would needs go to one of
those Moullah's, to know whether he should get by an Ox that he was about to
buy. Whereupon the Moullah assured him he should reap great profit by his
bargain: but quite contrary, the Ox died upon his hands within three days, to
the great astonishment of the Gardener. When a Capuchin taxed the Moullah for
the falsities of his pretended Art, the Moullah replied, that God knew that the
Gardener would spend his Money upon lewd Women, and therefore took from him the
means and support of his debauchery.

They also use a sort of divination, which is called Rambe, by even or odd, the
Masters of which mystery, called Rammals, keep Shops on purpose to delude the
people. When they see people coming, they have persons suborned on purpose; who
holding out their hands shut, ask the Rammal what he thinks they have in their
hands. The Rammal at first seems to be at a stand; throwing certain Dice,
called Kiabetain, the specks whereof are some even, some uneven; but when there
are people anough gathered together, he tells point by point how many specks
his fellow-Cheat has in his hands. Who counterfeiting astonishment, encourages
the poor silly creatures that stand gazing, to spend something for a lie which
they sell them. They also make use of the Faal; which is to open a Book, and by
numbers even or odd, to prognosticate good or bad fortune. In their
interpretation of dreams, the Interpreter foretells the future to him that
enquires conformable to what he says he saw in his dream. He has a great Book
lying before him, full of little Pictures and Grotesco-work, wherein he strives
to show the people some Fantasm or Apparition, which they will tell you they
saw in the night. These cheats are usually practiced about the Palace, where
all the idle people flock together; as also upon the Road to Zulpha, where they
lie upon the Road to catch the silly Passengers.

The Persians are mightily addicted to ill language, and foul-mouthed
reproaches. So that when two men fall out, instead of fighting with their
fists, they fight with their tongues, and curse one another. But they never
blaspheme God: for if they should hear one swear, or wish themselves at the
Devil, they would cry out in an astonishment, Is not that Fellow a fool to give
himself upon trust to the Devil, and renounce*Paradise? When they would affirm
any thing to be true, all their Oaths are Ser-azire-sha, By the King's beloved
head; or, Erva pigumbir, by the Spirit of the Prophet. I remember once at
Galata, walking with some of the French Embassador's Servants, we saw two Turks
at Cuffs; after they were parted, one of them gave the other a thousand curses;
to which, the other replied no more than only this; I wish, said he, thy Soul
may have no more repose in Paradise, than the Hat of a Frenchman has in this
World, alluding to our manner of salutation, and putting off our Hats so often
as we do.

The Persians are naturally great Dissemblers and Flatterers; and they make it
their study to acquire esteem and applause. They love to give and receive
Presents: more especially to present the King. Which Presents are valued, and
according to the estimate, they must send ten per cent. to the Sergeant Porter,
and five per cent. to his Deputy: which, if they do not pay willingly, they are
forced to pay: which I saw the Deputy of the Holland-Company forced to do.

The Luxury and the Expenses of the Persians is excessive, as I have in several
places observed. And though it be against the Law of Mahomet to make use of
Gold or Silver-plate, which sets aside that metal only for Commerce and for
Money; none but the poor observe that Law, for the rich make no scruple to
transgress it.

The Persians are very much accustomed to make mutual Visits one to another at
their solemn Festivals, and to wish one another good cheer, and a merry season.
The more noble sort stay at home to expect the Visits of their* Inferiors;
after that they get a Horseback, and return their Visits. The Curtisans
continue their Visits all the year long, and going to the Noble-mens Houses,
stay in the great Hall till they come out of their Harams. Whither, when the
Noblemen come, they lay their hands upon their stomachs, and bow, which is
their manner of saluting the Company that tarries for them. After some few
Compliments, they get a Horseback, attended by all their Visitants, who
accompany them to the King's House, in expectation of some kindness, by virtue
of their favor. The favors which the King usually does to such people, is to
send them to the Governors of Provinces with a Hawk or a Culaat, with order
that the said Governors remember the Sergeant Porter.

The Kan being advertised that the Calaat is coming, he rides forth of the City
to meet it, attended by all his principal Officers, the chief of the City, and
the greatest part of the Inhabitants. The Juglers also must give their
attendance, together with the Drums and Trumpets, and all the Musick-makers.
They rendezvous usually in a Garden one or two leagues from the City, where the
King's Messenger stays with the Calaat. So soon as the Governor perceives him,
he makes a low obeisance, and a Prayer for the King; giving God thanks for that
the King is pleased to preserve him in his memory: then he puts on the Calaat,
which is according to the quality of the Governor: sometimes the Robe alone;
sometimes Robe and Cloak: sometimes Robe, Cloak, Girdle, and Bonnet; to which,
if he be a Grandee, are added the Scimitar and Dagger: which method is also
observed toward Ambassadors. When the Kan has put on the Calaat, he returns to
the City with all his Retinue, goes to the King's House; for the King has a
House in every City,) kisses the Columns of the Gate, and makes certain other
Prayers for the prosperity of the King: At length he rides home, where he makes
a great Feast, showing the Calaat to all persons that come to him, who by way
of complement cry Moubarek-bashet, that is, may it be blessed, and prove a good
omen.

The Persians are not much addicted to play: for besides, that the Law forbids
it; the Meshaldar-Bashi has a power to fine and punish Gamesters, as I have
said already. For which reason he has spies, to which the meaner sort of people
dare not refuse entrance into their Houses: but the richer sort laugh at 'em;
and will give 'em nothing. Among the Persian Games, there is one game at Cards
which the Persians call Gengefe. We have but four distinct marks upon ours, but
they have eight. They also play at a kind of Chess, and at Trictrac; which two
Games are most in use. The Shopkeepers play in the Streets with little
Marbel-bowls, not much unlike our Childrens Bowling-stones. But as for
Bowling-greens, or Tennis-Courts, they know not what they mean.

Neither the Persians nor any of the Eastern People accustom themselves to walk
as we do. And therefore when they see us walking to and fro together in a
Garden-Ally for two or three hours together, they are amazed. They only spread
a Carpet in the fairest place of the Garden, and set themselves down to
contemplate the verdure of the place: and if they rise, it is only to pull the
fruit from the trees. For they love to eat what they gather themselves, never
caring for what others have handled.

The Men never dance, only the Women of Pleasure, which are always sent for to
their Feasts; where they dance open-fac'd, and show a thousand postures to
divertise the Company. Their juglers are every jot as good as ours; but whereas
ours make use of Balls, they show their tricks with large Hen*eggs. Their
Dancers upon the Ropes far exceed ours. I have seen some of them that have tied
a Rope to the top of a high Tower, and fastened the other to the ground, and
then walking up to the top with their counterpoises in their hands, have laid
themselves upon the Rope upon their backs, and have slid to the bottom with a
swiftness like lightning.

The Persians are altogether as superstitious as the Turks. Before they say
their Prayers they are obliged to wash: every one having a Reservatory for
water in his own House, which is always full of water. They plunge their heads
in the water, wash their mouths, rub their foreheads; and if a man shows them
any nastiness in the Vessel, there is water enough, they cry, for purification;
though, if it be Pond-water, it must be four or five foot deep. But if it be
Running-water, the least quantity in the World serves to purify 'em, and render
'em fit to pray: while they ground their belief upon this maxim of the Law of
Mahomet, that if it should run through Pishkill, or Camels-dung, it would be
sufficient for purification. There is one sort of washing appointed by their
Law, which is, to go to their Baths after they have been with their Wives; and
there are some so superstitious as to go there every day. These Baths are round
Chambers, so close, that there is no light but what comes from little round
windows made in the top of the roof. In the first place, there is the Krofine,
which is a Chamber seven or eight foot square; where, in the middle of the
Room, is a great Copper plate, in the form of a flat Basin, and underneath they
make a fire of Brushes or Horse-dung: so that the Plate heats all the water
which is in the Chamber: When it is hot enough, a servant belonging to the Bath
goes up to the Terras, and winds a horn, to give notice to them that have a
mind to come. Should a Persian or a Mahumetan miss once in eight days, he would
feel an itching all over his body not to be endured. For the pores, which the
heat of the Bath had opened, coming to be shut, the vapors of the body not
able to get out, prick and tickle the skin. The Men go early in the morning,
and stay till two hours after Sunrising: At the entry of the Bath is the place
where they undress; and when they are stripped all but the secret parts, which
they cover with a napkin, they pour hot water upon their shoulders: and then
comes a man and rubs off all the sweat and filth of the Body with a coarse
Cloth; after which they plunge themselves into a Reservatory of hot water,
which they call Kolletain. But these common Baths are very dangerous, and many
people of both Sexes have got the foul Disease, who were never addicted to
impurity.

There are also in Persia hired people, which they call Saka's, whose business
it is to give water to the people as they go along the Streets. Their Barbers
are very neat, and surpass ours for lightness of hand; for a man can hardly
feel their Rasors. They have also a Knife to pare the nails of the hands and
feet, which they do very dexterously. As for their Beards, those that belong to
the Law cut it with Seissers, but they leave it not so long as the Turks do, by
much. But the Courtiers and Soldiers shave all off, except from their
upper-lips, where they take it for a mark of great honor to wear long
Mustaches, which they say is the ornament of the face.

The habit of the Persians is a Robe which they call Gabaye, that comes down a
little below their knees. This is of very fine quilted Cloth, well cotton'd in
the Winter, but much thinner in the Summer. These Linnens would be very cheap,
but that the Persons of Quality change their Robes every day. Their Sleeves are
long, and close to their arms, and reaching as far as the wrist. The Robe is
fit to their Bodies as far as the Wast; but then it is made wide and loose*
Over this they wear a noble Girdle of Silk, adorned at the end with flowers of
Gold, over which they wear another Girdle of fine Kerman wool. The richer sort
are so vain as to wear three Girdles, two of Silk, and one of Kerman-wool,
which is tied uppermost. Under the Robe or Vast they wear a short Wastcoat of
flowered Fustion quilted, their Shirts being of Silk of diverse colors. They
use as little Soap in Persia as they can* for Soap is very rare in Persia. When
we come out of the Indies, we are forced to bring with us Linen enough to
serve us for six months, and then carry it back again; for they wash much
better in India then in Persia. Their breeches being of Silk, come down to
their Ankles, without any codpieces. Their Sesse, or Bonnet, which we call a
Turban, is made of a piece of fine Silk mingled with Gold, being in form much
like our large Pompions: the top thereof is a little flat; and here it is that
the end of the Silk being garnished with flowers of Gold and Silver, ends in a
kind of Posie. These Bonne^ are very heavy, especially those that are for the
most part nothing but Gold and Silver. The meanest of those is worth 200
Crowns; but there are some which the King and the great Lords wear, that are
worth four or five hundred. You shall seldom meet an Officer of any Quality
that does not wear a rich Jewel in his Bonnet. The Courtiers and Soldiery wear
their Daggars upon their stomachs, stuck in their girdles. The meanest Soldier
inlays the handle and ^heath of his Dagger; but the Grandees have them all
beset with Pearls. There was in the handle of Sha-Abbas the Second's Dagger, a
Diamond of above sixty Carats, which, with some other Stones that belonged to
it, was valued at 13000 Tomans, or 200000 Crowns. Over their Vest they wear a
Justicoar, much like ours. It is fastened at the top with a button: and most
usually they have nine tufted buttons before set by three and three at an equal
distance: but they only serve for ornament. This Justicoar is either of Cloth,
or Tissue; which in Winter is lined with Martins, or else with a gray Lambskin
that comes from Korasan. And indeed the Persians love diversity of colors in
their habits: for their Justicoar is of one color, their Vest of another,
their Breeches of another; and their Shoes, especially the Women's are green,
red, yellow, or violet. The Girdle and Turban are always of stripped Stuff,
unless it be the Moullah's, which are always plain.

Besides all this, in the Winter they wear a long Cloak down to their heels,
with sleeves of the same length, lined with rich Furs. The Persons of Quality,
and some of the meaner sort of people make no more of Cloth of Gold and
Silver, then we do of Druggets. A man that has but seven or eight Tomans a
year, shall spend five in Clothes; which excess in habit is crept down among
the Rabble, so that a man can hardly tell the Servant from the Master. And it
is a Proverb among the Persians, Corbebe Lebas, fine Clothes make Men esteemed
at Court. Neither Sha-Abbas the Second, nor his Grandfather Sha-Abbas the
First, would allow of this disorder, but that Men should go clad according to
their conditions. For one day, seeing one of his Servants with a pair of Cloth
of Gold-breeches, demanded what wages he had? but when he understood that it
was nothing near sufficient to maintain him at that rate; to deter others from
the like vanity, he ordered him so many Bastinadoes upon the soles of his feet,
that he died in a few days. Others say that the Fellow being surpised at the
King's Question, made him answer, that being troubled with the Gout, he had
been advised to wear that sort of Stuff for its warmth. To which the King
replied, that he had been told a very bad remedy, and that he would show him a
better and a shorter way to cure the Gout, and so commanded him to be drubb'd,
as before is related.

In regard it is very cold in Persia, they make use of three sorts of Furs. The
Lamb and Fox's skin for the meaner sort, together with the Cat's and Fox's
skin. But the third sort, which is the Martin's Fur, is for Grandees of the
Court, and other Persons of high Quality. They have also a way to make Cassocks
that will keep out the rain, the wind, and the cold, which are made of
Kerman-wool, as our Felt-makers make their Hats.

And now I have said it is cold, give me leave to tell ye how they warm
themselves. In all Houses there are little Chambers, in the middle whereof
there is a square hole about a foot deep, and three or four foot long,
according to the bigness of the Chamber. Over the hole is a thing like one of
our Tabourets, which covers the hole with a large Carpet, to keep in the heat
of that which is kindled in the hole; so that being placed under the Tabouret
as far as the wast, though as cold as ice before, in a minute you shall be
almost in a sweat, and be ready to fall a-sleep, if you take not a great care.
All the Nobility have Chambers with Chimneys, where they set the Wood upright;
the Mantle-tree comes forward, low, and semi-circular. It is two or three foot
deep, and as many wide, to avoid smoking.

They are full of their Compliments, which they call Travezea: and their manner
of salutation is quite different from ours. For they never uncover their heads,
but bow, and lay their right hand upon their breasts. When they come into the
company of their Betters, they fall upon their knees to set themselves upon
their heels, which is a mark of respect.

The Women in Persia are very richly habited; but their habit is all of a
piece, though little different in shape from the Men's. It is open before and
comes not down below the calf of the leg. Their Girdle is not tied fast, but
hangs carelessly: their Sleeves are also close to their arms, and reach to their
wrists. Upon their heads they wear a little Bonnet raised like a little spire,
and adorned with precious Stones, according to their Quality; from which Bonnet
falls a veil behind, which is very graceful. They wear Breeches like the men,
and their Shoes are almost like theirs. The Women of Ormus wear only a single
pair of Breeches with a shift over them. The Armenian Women wear besides, a
little Justicoar without sleeves, and upon their heads, a fine Linnen-Coi^ tied
under their chins. Their hair is gathered into a long tress, to which they
sometimes add more, which is false, to make a long lock, that is done up in a
Velvet or Sattin-Case embroidered, and hangs behind down to the wast.

Handsome Women are very plentiful in Persia, as well the tawny as the white.
For the Merchants that bring both from all parts, choose the handsomest they
can pick out. The white Women are brought from Muscovia, Poland, Cirassia,
Mengrelia, Georgia, and the Frontiers of Tartary. The black from the coast of
Melinda, and the Red Sea.

The Persian Women are seen by none but their own Husbands. They are very idle
in their Houses, not so much as looking after any thing of Housewifery. Indeed
every thing is at the Husband's disposal, so that the Women are rather Slaves
then Wives. They spend their time in taking Tobacco, after several fashions.
When they go to the Baths, she is the Woman that wears the best Clothes, and
brings the best Collation. They that have Slaves, cause 'em to rub their arms,
their legs, and their thighs, till they fall asleep; having no other
divertisement in their voluptuous Prison. The higher a man is in dignity, the
more he glories in having a great number of Wives and Slaves; and his absolute
power keeps them in order either willingly, or by constraint.

There are two sorts of Eunuchs for the guard of the Sultanesses and the Wives
of the Nobility: Some are white, but they never come near the Women, but are
ordered to guard the first doors of the Haram. The others are black, frightful
to look upon, and flat-nos'd: who attend only upon the Women. If there be a
necessity for a Woman of Quality to go abroad, the Eun^^hs go before and behind
with Battoons in their hands, to make the Corrouk, and drive all the people out
of the way. When the King goes into the Country, if any one be asleep in the
highway, and be perceived before he wakens, he is immediately cut to pieces as
he lies. In the time of Sha-Abbas the Second, one of the Fellows that helped to
set up the Women's Tents, being weary, fell asleep in one of them upon the
ground. When the Women came, they, seeing a man asleep, set up a shrieking;
upon which, the Eunuchs coming in, wrapped up the Fellow in the Carpet as he lay,
and carrying him into the Fields, buried him alive, Carpet and all.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Diseases of Persia, and the manner of curing them.
THE Persian Children are seldom sick of the Smallpox, but in lieu of that,
they are very subject to Scald-pates, till ten or twelve years old. Which, it
may be, proceeds from their shaving so young, and so often: for they shave at
five or six months old, and two or three times a week.

As to the Pox, the Persians would be more troubled with it, but that the dry
Air of the Country is an enemy to it: besides, they never lie twice with the
same Woman, without going to the Bath to sweat out the venom of that distemper.
As for the Gout, or Gravel, the Persians know not what it means: But the
Armenians are troubled with the latter, especially those that in their youth
accustomed themselves to drink more Wine then Water.

To those that are troubled with the Cholick, they usually prescribe the eating
of Horseflesh; and I have seen many cured by that means.

Generally the Persians, especially the rich, or those that have wherewithal to
live handsomely, are much less subject to Sickness then the people of Europe.
Some take the reason to be, because of their China*drink which they drink every
Spring, boiling an ounce in three pints of water, and so continuing the Dose
for ten or twelve days one after the other: all which time they keep a very
moderate diet, and eat no fruit for a month together. This drink causes the
Patient to sweat; and the sweat being wiped off, dies the Linen, nay the very
walls of the Chamber of a yellow color. As for any method of Physic, they
have none in Persia. For the Dysentery, they take sower Curdl'd-milk, with Rice
unbruis'd boiled in water, to which they add a little Rhubarb powdered.

At the beginning of a Disease they forbid Bread, and instead thereof prescribe
Rice boiled in Hen-broath, or sometimes in fair water. For diet is the chief
Remedy which the Physicians prescribe in all Diseases, and account most
sovereign. Indeed the remedy is well prescribed in many distempers; however it
is by them never prescribed according to reason or method, but only according
to custom; whereby it often comes to pass that they forbid that which is good,
and prescribe that which is bad. If the Patient be so poor as not to be able to
send for a Physician, two or three men set him upon an Ass, with a Scarf about
his neck, which denotes him to be a sick person, and so lead him to the
Physician; who presently feels his Pulse, lets him Blood, and by and by taking
his Pen in his hand, in a small piece of Paper prescribes more Hog-wash at one
stroke, then three men's bellys are able to contain.

When a Physician is called to a Consulation, he pretends not to take any
Money: But his Atar or Apothecary finds a way to have the Doctor satisfied for
his pains. They never permit the Sick to change their Linen, how nasty soever
it be. When they come home to the Patient, though they find him ready to
expire, they tell the Servants that he will certainly recover; but then, on the
other side, they go to the Parents or Kindred of the Patient, and tell them
that the Patient is in a desperate condition, and cannot live. By this means
they save their credit; for happen what will, the^ have told truth either of
the one side, or the other.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the division of Time among the Persians.
THE Persians divide the natural day into four parts. The first is from
Sunrising to Noon; the Second from Noon to Sunset: The third from Sunset till
Midnight; and the fourth from Midnight till Sunrise. At Midnight, Morning, and
Sunset, they make a most horrible din in every great City, of Kettle-Drums,
Haut-boys, Latten-Basons, and other Instruments: upon which there are certain
men hired to play for a quarter of an hour together, in some place where they
may be heard all over the City. They have also great Cornets, about seven foot
long, with deep mouths, which may be heard above half a league. But these
Cornets are never used but in Cities where the Kans or Governors reside. These
Instruments are also always employed at their great Solemnities; as also when
the King creates any new Officer or Governor. These Instruments have also a
privilege to play at all Houses where they understand there is a Male-child
born. The meaner sort dare not refuse 'em; but the Nobility value not their
privilege of a straw.

The Persians in the computation of time make use of Lunar-months. The first
Mouharrem, the second Cepher* the third Rebia-el-Avel, the fourth Akner, the
fifth Gemadil-Avel, the sixth Gemadil-Akner, the seventh Regeb, the eighth
Shaabon. the ninth Ramezan, the tenth Shaval, the eleventh Zikade, the twelfth
Zilhagge. And every Month begins from the first appearance of the Crescent.

In their Astronomical Accounts, and the Calculations of the Longitude and
Latitude of the Planets for the composing their Almanacks, they make use of
Solarmonths, thus called: Azar 31 day. Onzon 30 days. Ajar 31. Harizon 30.
Temouze 31. Ab 31. Eiloul 30. Techrion-el-Avel 31. Techrion-el-ilani 30.
Ranon-el-Avel 31. Kanon-Elsani 31. Shaabat 28 or 29, answering to our February.
The first month Azar begins upon our eleventh of March: so that it answered to
our month of March before the Gregorian Reformation. Therefore they call this
month Mah-Roami, or the Roman month. They also make use of the Egyptian months,
which are thus called, Terverdin, Erdi-be-hoct, Kourdad, Tir, Mordad, Sheriver,
Mohre, Abon, Azer, Dei, Bahmen, Espendarmouze. The first month, Ferverdin,
begins with the Vernal Equinox, every month not containing above 30 days,
adding the five which remain to the end of the year, which they call Kramsi
Mousterelze.

The day of the Vernal Equinox is the first day of the year, which they call
Neozonze, and is one of their Principal Festivals. For that day all the
Grandees appear at Court, and present the King according to their quality. If
they can meet with nothing that is rare, they present him in Ducats of Gold,
and there are some that present him to the number of ten Thousand. They also
give God thanks for preserving them to see the new year, and for preserving the
fruits of the Earth from bad seasons, for the Corn is by that time well come
up. Upon this first day of the year, if a Persian has not money to buy him a
new habit, he will go and mortgage his own body to have one. So proud and
luxurious are the Persians from the highest to the lowest.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Feasts and ordinary Diet of the Persians.
THe Persians are nothing eager after delicacies or dainties; both the nobler
and the meaner sort being very temperate in dyer. In regard that wood is so
scarce and dear about Ispahan, they never eat boiled meat above once a day: and
as for their Dinner which they call Shate, it consists of bread, cheese-curds,
milk, burnt wine, melons and other fruits in season, to which the rich add wet
and dry sweetmeats: At night their usual food is Pilaw and roast meat. They buy
their Provision from hand to mouth, especialy the Mahumetans, which is a double
charge. But for the Armenians, they live thriftily, and buy at once a good
quantity of provisions to last for so long time.

Muttons, Kidds, Pullets and Pigeons, are the usual diet of the Persians; for
as for Beef they very rarely eat it. The King and the great Lords will eat a
piece of a Hare sometimes when they have been a hunting: but when they have
killed a wild Boar, they send it always to some Christian, in expectation to be
presented for the honor done him. They have no diversity of Victuals or made
Dishes in Persia, their diet being more proper to satisfie*hunger, then to
please a nice palate. Mutton and Lamb would be very good in Persia, if they
knew how to roast it our way. But the Persians roast only at an oven, which is
a hole made in the ground two foot and a half broad, and five or six foot deep.
They burn nothing but bushes, and a kind of Turf mixed with the dung of Cattle,
and dried in the Sun. There are several roasting Cooks at Ispahan, that roast a
whole Sheep at a time where he that comes to buy may have as much cut out as he
pleases. Other Cooks shops are only for boiled meat or rice: their fruits which
they pickle up in Vinegar being the only sauce which they have.

As for their Bread it is very white, for they have wheat enough to furnish the
whole Kingdom. They bake every day, making up their Dow in the form of a thin
Cake, strow'd over with Sesamum. They bake these Cakes in their Ovens in the
ground, covering the batch over with little round flint stones, that are
quickly hot and retain the heat. At Ispahan they make a great fire in an
earthen pot, and when it is hot they spread the Dow against the sides of the
pot. The Armenians make a sort of bread as thin as Paper, which they bake upon
a thin Iron plate which is as thin as Paper. Their Plate and Dishes are of red
Copper tinned within side. For they are forbid to make use of Silver by the Law
of Mahomet. Nor does the King use any other then Gold Plate, of which he has
great store. They have also a sort of Porcellane made at Kerman. To eat their
broths they make use of wood'n*spoons: for as for their rice, which is thick,
they take it up in their fingers, and wipe their hands upon their handkerchiefs.

The first thing set upon the Table is the Pipe, the Tobacco, and the dish of
Coffee; and indeed thus it is that they begin all their debauches. They suck
and smoke of their Tobacco through water in a long glass bottel, by which means
it comes cool into their mouths: else they would never be able to take it all
day long as they do. They sing very little in their Cups: but they recite a
vast number of wicked Verses, which they rehearse with a great deal of gravity.
They are so accustomed to take Tobacco, both men and women, that a poor
tradesman that has not above five Sous to spend, will lay out three of them in
Tobacco. If they had none, they say that they should not have damaque, that is,
gladness in their hearts. Many will confess that their excessive taking Tobacco
is hurtful; but if you tell 'em of it, they answer in a word, Adedehoud, It Is
the custom.

Besides their Tobacco they have also Opium made of Poppies, cut as they grow,
out of which they draw the juice and make it into Pills. They take no more at
first then the head of a pin, increasing their dose by degrees, till they come
to take the quantity of half a wall-nut. When they are come to that pitch they
dare not give over, for fear of endangering their lives, or addicting
themselves to drink wine. In their youth you shall see these Theriakis or
takers of Opium, with pale pensive and dejected countenances, and the use of
their speech almost lost: If they omit to take for a day together this ill
continued drug that heats their brains, and causes them to act ridiculously and
to talk*idly, when it has done working, they are as cold and stupid as before,
which obliges 'em to take it*again. For this reason they are short lived: or if
they do live till forty, they complain heavily of the pains that proceed from
the cold venom of the herb. They that have a mind to kill themselves, swallow
a large piece, and drink Vinegar after it, to prevent the relief of any other
Counterpoyson, and so they dye smiling.

They have another sort of drink to make themselves merry, which thy call
Kokemaar, composed of boiled Poppy seed. They take it in broth, and there are
particular houses called Kokemaar Krone, where people meet to divertise those
that see the ridiculous postures which that intoxicating drink causes them to
show. Before it works they quarrel with one another, and call one another all
to naught, but never fight. When the drug begins to work, they grow friends;
and some are for making complements, others for telling a long tedious story,
wnich renders them very vain. They have also another sort of liquor, which is
called Bongue, very bitter, being made of the leaves of Hemp and some other
drug mixed with it, It makes those that use it shamefully foolish and
ridiculous, which is the reason the Law has forbid that and not the former. The
Vsbecks have brought into Persia, the Custom of taking in Pipes Tchouherse,
which is the flower or rather the woolly substance which is found in
hemp-closes. This fills the heads with strange conceits, sometimes pleasant and
sometimes furious; those that take it being quite besides their senses for two
or three hours.

Their Feasts are thus ordered: The guests come in the morning to the house
whither they are invited and all the day long they spend their time in taking
Tobacco and telling stories. Between whiles they have Sweetmeats, Coffee, and
Fruits set before them. In the evening the Sofra is spread, and the table
served with boiled and roast. If the person that treats be of any quality, he
has a kind of a Governor of his house, that sits upon his heels with a Ladle
or great wooden spoon in his hand. Then the Inviter makes his complements to
the chief of his guests, assuring him that the entertainment is only provided
for him, only at his command he is ready to let the rest share with him. The
Complements being thus passed, the Governor of the House with his great Spoon
puts rice and meat upon the little plates, which the servants present by equal
portions to every one of the guests. Then they fall to, taking out the rice by
handfuls, and the meat with their fingers. Sometimes they mix curdl'd milk with
their rice and meat, and making up a lump of all together as big as a Tennis
ball, put it all in their mouths at a time, which is the reason they never sit
long at Table; one making room for another till they have all done: for as soon
as one has done, another comes into his place without any farther Ceremony.
They have several Liquors in the room in Porcellain Vessels, but at meals they
only drink to drive down their meat and to prevent thirst. When all is done,
they bring a Basin with an Ewre full of hot water to wash their hands and
faces. After which the Inviter complements his guests, and every one returns
home; at which time the servants are very diligent to bring every man his
shoes, in hopes of some little piece of silver.

The Armenians entertain their friends in the same manner, only that they begin
their Feasts with a cup of strong water, and some sweetmeats, after which they
give a couple of hard Eggs to every one of the guests. The Persians also have
soon done, but the Armenians eat swift, and a long time without drinking, which
they never do till the end of the meal. After they have given thanks and taken
away the cloth, then they fall to drinking to excess. He that gives the
entertainment never thinks he has done well, till his guests are not able to
find the way out of the room, and the more they tumble about the room, the less
he thinks he has spent his money in vain.

To conclude, the Persians are very Gentile, and afford their victuals with a
freewill to all that will come and eat with them at Supper time: admiring at
the custom of the Franks, who shut their doors when they sit down to their
meals.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Marriages of the Persians.
THE Persians betroth their Children very young, that is at nine or ten years;
but among the Armenians there are some married and lie together at five or six.
The Law of Mahomet allows them but four lawful Wives, whom they call Nekha. But
there are others whom they call Amoutha or hired women, and of whom they may
have as many as they can keep, and for so long time as they please, which is
ratified by the allowance of the Judge. They may also enjoy the Slaves whom they
purchase. The Children both of the one and the other are accounted lawful, and
inherit all alike, without the distinction of Elder or Younger; but two
Daughters can have but the share of one boy. When the woman's time that was
hired is out, the man dismisses her, and she is obliged to stay forty days
before she engage again, that it may appear whither she be with Child or no.

The man gives to the woman that he marries a Dowry assigned upon his Estate,
and sends her money and silks to make her clothes. The maid also sends
something to him, but very little, and all by the interposition and intercourse
of the women. For the two parties never see one another. Upon the wedding day,
they send to the Bridegrooms house, by the sound of Drums and Trumpets, certain
Horses and Men laden with the Brides goods, which is many times done out of
vainglory, and more for show then substance. The Bridegroom is led a foot,
attended by several women with Tapers in their hands, and a noise of Drums and
other Instruments marching before them. Being come to the door of the
Bridegrooms House, if he have promised a larger Dowry to the women then he is
able or willing to give, he keeps his door shut. The Parents of the Maid knock,
and he declares he will not have her at that price. But at length after some
contests on both sides they agree, and the Virgin enters with her Mother and
all her Kindred. Then the Moullah reads the conditions of Marriage; which being
done, the women retire into the inner part of the House, the men feasting by
themselves, and the women by themselves.

This is all that is done upon the Wedding Day, but the following days are not
always so pleasing, and it often follows that both parties do not agree, or
that the husband misuses his wife. Then the women that requires separation,
requires the Dowry promised her by her husband: which the man oft-times
refuses, and if she persists in her demand, is many times so severely used by
him, that she is constrained to cry, In The Devils name let me go, I demand
nothing of thee. Then they both repair to the Casi, or Cheit-Lesloon, who is a
Doctor of the Law, and in his presence they discharge one another. This they
may do by their Law three times. After that, the same woman can never return to
her Husband again.

The Children derive their Nobility from the Father, whither he be born of a
Slave, or an Amoutha, or a Legitimate wife. The Nobility of the Persians which
is called Negabet, is founded upon their being descended from Mahomet. They who
claim that extraction, have the title of Mir or Prince: and their Daughters
carry the appellation of Mirza or Princess. They are very numerous and very
poor. But the title of Mir without a good Estate or high Employment signifies
little or nothing.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Death and Burials of the Persians.
It Is the Custom among the Persians, that when the Patient lies very
dangerously ill, they light several fires upon the Terrass of the House, togive
the People notice to pray for him. So soon as the breath is out of his body,
the whole house rings with cries and lamentations, especially of the women who
tear their hair, and show such antic postures, that a man would think them
possessed* In the midst of their tears they make long repetitions of the worthy
actions of the deceased, and every foot they set up a yelling. Then they go and
advertize the Casi, that such a one is dead; to whom the Casi answers Sorchoama
Salamet-Bashet. May your head be in safety. In the mean while he seals a
License to the Mourderehour, to take the body and wash it in a house which is
built on purpose near a running water. After that come a great number of
Moullah's, with the Ensigns of the Mosquee, which are long staffs like Pikes,
at the end whereof are thin plates of Iron and Latten, so weak that they bend
downward with the least motion: the bodies of the staves being wrapped about with
certain pieces of Taffata. These Moullahs tear their throats crying out Alla,
Alla, Alla, repeating nothing else, and dancing sometimes upon one foot and
sometimes upon another; and because they that baul loudest get the most money,
they put their thumbs in their ears with their fingers upon their cheeks, and
tear their throats with all the force they have. The body being washed, the
clothes of the deceased belong to the Mourderchour. When they carry the Beire,
it is the custom that every one that meets it, proffers their shouldiers to
help carry, while the others case themselves; for which the Kindred of the
deceased make some acknowledgment. If he be a person of Quality, all his Horses
are bridled and saddl'd, and others perhaps borrowed: One carries his Turban,
another his Scimitar, another his Bow, another his Arrows, another his Buckler,
and whatever else is of any use to set forth his Quality and his Courage. The
biggest Churchyard that belongs to Ispahan, is Calreston; but there is not one
handsome Tomb in it. The Armenians lay a great stone over the grave, and the
rich set up an Arch with four Pillars, under which they eat and drink in the
shade when they visit the Tombs of their Ancestors.

Their graves are six foot long, six foot deep, and two foot wide, wherein they
lay the bodies with their faces turned toward Mecca; and then they set up two
tiles of each side his face to keep the earth from falling upon it. If he be a
rich man, or have been a stout Soldier, they bury with him his Turbant,
Scimitar, Bow and Arrows, and set Victuals by him; which part of the hole being
made up with bricks, the rest is filled up with earth. The Moulla's alone
return to the house of the deceased, where they have meat set before 'em, and
are also farther paid for their singing and bawling. A while after the Kindred
coming to visit the Heir, discourse him upon the contempt of the world, tell
him that it is but as a Caravan, some of which arrive sooner at their Journeys
end then others. Eight days after the Heir returns their visits. As for the
Grandees they order in their Wills that their bodies shall be either carried to
Mecca or Meshed.

As well the Persians as the Turks* believe that as soon as the grave is
filled, that the two Angels Neguir and Manguer, revive the dead as far as his
wast; ask him the reason of Faith, and which way he said his Prayers, and that
according to his merits they use him well or ill. As for the torment of Souls
before the Resurrection, that only consists in a grief for not having arrived
to those perfections and Sciences to which they might have attained* and
consequently for not having attained to that perfection which God required of
them. Otheres hold that the Souls of the unfortunate are tormented with Dreams
and Visions; but that the Souls of the happy always enjoy the sight of pleasing
objects; till the Saheb-elzaman, or Master of time shall come to confirm the
Law of Mahomet, who shall kill Dedgar, who is like our Antichrist, with his own
hand; at which time all then alive shall dye in an instant, and then shall
happen the general Resurrection, which they call Moavedet-hechre. That the same
Bodies and Souls shall unite to appear at the day of Judgment before the Throne
of the great Judge of the world; and that to go thither they must pass over a
bridge called Polserat, sharper then the edge of a razor, which nevertheless
the Mussulmen shall pass over without any danger with the swiftness of a bird.
But that misbelievers shall fall as soon as ever they set their feet upon it,
and shall fall into a torrent of fire among a thousand Devils armed with Cramp
Irons, Pincers, and tenter-hooks. So that it is a kind of a Proverb among the
Persians, if a man cannot obtain of another the Justice of his bargain, or to
yield to right, Well, says he, before those passest Polserat, thou shall
restore it me double, for I will take hold of thy Coat, and binder thee from
getting over till thou have given me satisfaction; But the craftier sort laugh
at this, and make answer with a smile, Well, well, we will venture stumbling as
we pass over Polserat. The Porter of Paradise whom they call Rursuen shall open
them the gate. There they shall sit upon the banks of the great Kausser, which
is a fountain where their Prophet shall give them of the water to drink out of
a Ladle, and that afterward they shall have a great number of women created on
purpose for them, with all sorts of most delicious food. And for fear of
souling this place of recreation and holiness with the excrements of eating and
drinking, they say, that those things shall always evacuate in a perfumed
sweat, and that they themselves shall always remain in that condition. Others
more refined, and not believing material enjoyments, affirm that Beatitude
consists in the perfect knowledge of the Sciences; and for the senses they
shall have their satisfaction according to their quality.

CHAP. XX.
The Author departs from Ispahan to Ormus, and describes the Road to Schiras.
I Set forth out of Ispahan the 24. of Feb. 1665. in the afternoon, and stayed
a League from the City, in a field whither some of my friends would needs
accompany me. About ten a clock at night, I set forward again, and traveled
till break of day; and then I came to a place where the Radars kept guard half
a league from a great Town called Ispshaneck, which you are to cross. About ten
a clock in the forenoon I came to Mahiar, where there is a very good Inn. But
the Land between this and Ispahan is all very barren and without wood.

The 26 th, three hours after midnight, I set forward through a dry Plain,
which begins to grow more fruitful, about a Leagues from Comshe a great City,
where I arrived by eleven a Clock in the morning. In it are several Inns, and
indifferent handsome ones, considering that they are built only of Earth. This
City is composed of a row of Villages that extend about half a League in
length. About three quarters of a League on this side the City stands a neat
Mosquee with a pond full of fish. But the Moullahs will not permit you to catch
any, saying that they belong to the Prophet to whom the Mosquee is dedicated.
However because it is a shady place in the Summer, Travelers rather choose to
lie by this pond, then to shut themselves up in the City.

The 27 th I traveled from four in the morning till ten in the afternoon,
through a plain sowed with store of grain, and lodged in an Inn called
Maksonb^gui.

The 28 th I departed two hours after midnight, and after eight hours travel
through a barren plain, I arrived at Yesdecas, a little City built upon a rock
in the midst of a great Valley, and lodged in an Inn at the foot of the Rock.
The same day in the morning I passed on to a neat house with fine Gardens
called Amnebad; built by Iman-Kouli-Kan, Governor of Schiras.

The first of March, I departed an hour after midnight, and a little after I
crossed a short mountain, but so rugged and so craggie, that they have given it
the name of Kotel-Innel-tebekeni, that is the Mountain that breaks the Horses
shoes. The next day we passed by a scurvy Castle called Gombessala; then
traveling through a flat Country, I came by ten in the morning to Dehigherdou,
or the Village of Wall-nuts. I endured very sharp weather all the morning, for
all that Country, and that which I traveled the next day, is very cold at some
times of the year.

The second day, I traveled from midnight till ten a clock in the morning,
through the Snow over a barren Plain to come to Cuzkuzar, where there is a new
Inn well built.

The third, I rode a horseback from five in the morning till noon, first over
the same Plain by a Lake side in a very bad way covered with snow that hid the
holes; then passing a tedious long and rugged mountain, I descended to a
Village called Asepas, where there is to be seen an old ruined Castle upon the
point of a Hill. The Inhabitants were all Georgians by descent, but now turned
all Mahumetans. I met with wine and fish, in regard of the many Rivolets, but
the Caravansira is old, and ill provided.

The fourth, setting out by daybreak, I rode over a Plain, which Sha-Abbas the
first gave the Georgians to till, and in eleven hours I came to Ondgiom, a
large Village upon a River, over which there is a fair stone bridge.

The fifth, I got a horseback by two a clock in the Morning, and had two
leagues in the first place of deep miery way; afterward I passed a steep
Mountain, craggy and durty. I passed through a Village called Iman-Shade, from
the name of one of their Prophets that lies buried there, and gave the Mountain
its name, being all covered with bitter Almond-trees. I traveled sometime
between rude and craggy rocks, after which I met with a small River, which runs
to Mayn, a little City where I lodged in a fair Inn.

The sixth, I departed three hours after midnight, and traveled through a
large Plain encompassed with high and rugged Mountains; upon one of which that
is divided from the other, stood a Castle which they say was ruined by
Alexander the Great, of which at present there does not remain the least sign
or footstep. I crossed the river of Main over two stone Bridges, and then came
to Abgherme; a place that stands in a Plain where there is an Inn half built;
so called by reason of a Spring of hot waters that rises not far from it. In
the morning I passed over a fair and long Causey, called Pouligor, being above
500 paces long, and 15 broad divided also by certain Bridges, to give the water
free passage, by reason the Country is very full of mershes. At the end of this
Causey stands an Inn very well built, but the gnats that haunt it will not
suffer it to be frequented. I passed along by the foot of a Mountain, and after
three hours travel, I stopped a while at an Inn that stands at the foot of
another steep and craggie mountain.

I arrived at Schiras about six a clock at night. But here give me leave before
I enter the City, to make two observations, the one touching the Road from
Ispahan to Schiras, the other concerning the ruins of Tche-elminar.

As to the Road from Ispahan to Scbiras, observe that in winter time when the
Snow is fallen, when you come to Yesdecas, you must of necessity leave the
direct road, because it is impossible to pass the streights of those Mountains,
which I have mentioned. Therefore you must keep the left hand road eastward,
through the Plains, taking a guide along with you.

This way, which is the longer by two days journey, was formerly unknown,
because of a River, that in one place beats upon a steep rock, and closes up
the passage, But Iman-Kouli-Kan with a vast expense of time and money, caused a
way to be levelled out of the Rock about 15 or 20 foot above the River, which
he secured to the waterside with a Wall three or four foot high. This way
continues for half a league, and then you come to lie at a great Village in a
Plain, where you take Guides to show you the Fords of the River.

Having past the River, you cross over several fertile Plains watered with great
store of Rivers. Then you ascend a Mountain, from whence you have but a league
and a half to Tche-elminar.

At the point of the Mountain, upon the right hand of the great Road, are to be
seen twelve Pillars still standing, that form a kind of a square. In the spaces
of the Mountain are a great number of Niches, that are opposite to the Pillars,
and were certainly the places where the ancient Persians put their Idols.
Thence you come to Tche-elminar; where are to be seen a great many old Columns,
some standing, and some lying upon the ground, and some ill-shap'd Statues,
with little apiece dark rooms. All which together, easily persuades me,
who have well considered the principal Pagods of India, that Tche-elminar was
only a Temple formerly dedicated to Idolatrous worship. And that which confirms
my opinion, is, that there is no place more proper for an Idolatrous Temple
then this, by reason of the abundance of water. Besides, that the dark Rooms
could be no other then the Chambers for the Priests; and where the Rice and
Fruits that were the feigned nourishment of the Idols, were the better secured
from gnats and flies.

Leaving Tche-elminar, you come to lie at a Village half a league farther,
where is very good Wine. From thence to Schiras is a hard days journey;
especially when the Snow begins to melt: for then the Road looks like a little
Sea.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the City of Schiras.
THE City of Schiras lies in 78 degr. 15 min. of Longitude, and 29 degrees. 36 min.
of Latitude. It is seated in a plain that extends it self about four leagues
from the North to the South, and from the West to the East about five leagues.
Upon the South-east there is a Lake of salt water four leagues in compass:
leaving the Plain as you travel to the South, you pass between two Mountains,
which are not so close, but that they leave room for certain pleasant Valleys a
league and a half wide.

The Soil about Schiras is good, and fruitful; and it is particularly famous
for the most excellent Wines of all Persia. As for the City it self, there is
nothing handsome in it: for it looks rather like a Town half ruined then a
City. Formerly it was begirt with walls of Earth, which are now utterly decaid.
The Houses are of the same Earth dried in the Sun, and whitened over with lime;
so that when it happens to rain, when the Earth comes to be well moistened, the
Houses fall of themselves. Only the College which Iman-Kouli-Kan built, and
some of the Mosquees are of Brick: and the best of those Mosquees is called
Sha-Shiranue, which out of a particular devotion is kept somewhat better in
repair. However, there is nothing in it worth taking notice of. Upon the
Northeast side, the City runs within a quarter of a league of the Mountain: and
from a Stone-bridg, as you go out of the City to the foot of the Mountain, is a
long Street in a straight line, where there stands a Mosquee, built by
Iman-Kouli-Kan. Without, it appears fair enough; but within, it falls to ruin.
There is an Octogonal Piazza before the Gate, and in the middle of the Piazza
an Octogonal Vase, which is filled by a little stream that runs through the
Street from the Mountain. Both sides of the Street from the Mosquee to the
Mountain are walled in: and at certain spaces are great Gates one against
another, with rooms over them; the Windows whereof open into the Gardens behind
the walls: all along by which, runs a row of Cypress*trees in a direct line:
and in the middle of the Street about two hundred paces on this side the
Mosquee, is another Vase, which receives the same water as it ^^ns from the
Mountain. This Street was made by Iman-Kouli-Kan, after he h^d cut the Mountain
at the end of it, to shorten the way from Schiras to Ispahan.

There are in Schiras three or four Glass-houses, where they make great and
small Bottles, to transport the Sweet-waters that are made in the City. There
are also made the several sorts of Vessels wherein they pickle their fruits of
all sorts, which they send in great quantities into India, to Sumatra, Batavia,
and other places.

There is no Silk made, nor any other manufacture in Schiras: only there are
some few Chites or Painted-cloaths made there, which nevertheless are very
coarse, and in use only among the meaner sort.

As you go out of the City upon the North-west side, you meet with a long Alley
or Walk, in three parts whereof are placed three Stones, which they call Mills.
At the end of this walk is a Garden called Bay-Sha, or the King's Garden. Over
the Gate whereof is a great Room half ruined: and at the end of a large Walk
planted with Cypress-trees, stands a neat piece of building, but altogether
neglected. Upon the left hand whereof is a great Pond paved with Freestone,
being all the beauties of the Garden: which, it is true, was full of
Fruittrees, Roses and Jasmins; yet, for want of order, it looked like a
Wilderness.

From the Garden to the Hill is a Plain of two leagues long, and one broad;
which is all but one large Vinyard belonging to several persons. Beyond the
Vineyard rise very high Mountains, from whence fall several little Springs that
form a River, which is called Bend-Emir, from the name of a Town where the
biggest Spring rises. This River of Bend-Emir waters the whole Vineyard of
Schiras; where it never rains from Spring till Autumn: which is the reason that
in the Summer there is no water in the very Channel next the City.

Their Wines are the best in Persia; but there is not so great a quantity made
as people imagine. For, of all this great Vineyard, and in all the places round
about the City for four or five leagues together, good part of the Grapes are
dried, and a greater quantity pickled: and of the Wine, there are many Vessels
full, which are burnt for the benefit of the poor Travelers, and Carriers, who
find it a great refreshment to drink it with water.

Their Wine, as all other things, is sold by weight and not by measure. In the
year 1666, a most plentiful year for Wine, the Provision of the King's House
amounted to 50000 Men's of Keukne* or the ancient Men containing nine pound of
ours, at sixteen ounces to the pound, (being the only weight for Wine,) and the
King allows as much to the Franks, as for his own Household. The Jews of
Schiras, who boast themselves of the Tribe of Levi, made above a hundred and
ten thousand Men's, it being their chiefest livelihood; but the Governor of
Schiras knows how to share with them in their profit. The whole account of Wine
made at Schiras amounts to 200025 Men's, or 4125 Tuns, at three hundred pints
to the Tun.

In Schiras is an ancient Mosquee, wherein is the Sepulcher of a Sadi, whom the
Persians esteem the best of their Poets. It has been a very fair one,
accompanied with a large Building, which was once a College; but it runs to
ruin, as do also many other Edifices within the City. Just against this
Mosquee you descend by a pair of Stairs into a large Well, at the bottom
whereof is a Vase full of Fish, which no body dares to touch, it being
Sacriledg to rob the Sadi of what belongs to him. A little beyond this Mosquee,
upon a high Rock, stand the ruins of a Castle; and upon the top of all the
Rock is a square Well cut out of the Rock. It is very deep, and ten or twelve
foot broad: formerly, they told me, their Adulteresses were all thrown into it.
There is one wonderful Well in this City; which is 15 years rising, and 15
years falling; that is, the water is one fifteen years rising to the top, and
another fifteen years sinking to the bottom.

There are in Schiras two or three Bazars well built, through the midst whereof
the water runs in a Channel.

To the South-west, a good league from the City, there is a little Hill divided
from the great Mountain, upon which Hill are three Gates to be seen, the
remainder of an Idolatrous Tempel. There were four Gates, but the South-Gate is
rumbl'd down: the rest are standing, composed of three Stones: Upon both the
Stones that make the Jaums, there are two figures in half Relief, with their
faces one looking upon another, with their arms extended; one holding in his
hand a Pan, out of which issues a flame of fire; and the other a Towel folded
up. The other Statue holds as it were a Purse in one hand, and a bowl of Fire
in the other; the Figures being as big as the Life, only their faces are
spoiled; and as for the other doors, they are both the same.

Two Musket Shot from thence, in a plain, rises a little Mountain, from the
North-side of which fall many Springs that meet in a large Pond full of Fish.
Some high Trees grow there, to shade the Habitation of a Dervi's that lives
there. The place is pleasant, and all the Springs together fill a Channel large
enough to water the neighboring Fields. Here it was that certainly the ancient
Idolaters came to wash, and thence went to the Temple to say their Prayers, and
make their Offerings.

Half a league beyond, at the foot of a Mountain, is a place about 500 paces in
compass, whence there fall a good number of Springs that meet in a Pond,
environed with high Trees, and full of Fish. In one corner of the Mountain
stand Figures, cut out of the Rock much bigger then the Life. The two which are
uppermost look one upon another; and that upon the left hand carries a large
Turbant, such as the Grand Vizier of Constantinople wears when he goes to the
Divan. From his Turbant to the middle of his Forehead, he was bound with the
Tresses of his own hair, the ends whereof were fastened together with large
Buckles behind in his neck. His habit was a Robe after the ancient fashion,
with a kind of a Cutlace by his side. Nor did the opposite Statue much differ
from this, only instead of a Turbant, he wore a kind of Miter upon his head.
The two other Statues underneath the former, stretched forth their arms one to
the other: the one representing a Man, the other a Woman. The Man seemed to
present the Woman a Nosegay of Flowers; but in truth it was a difficult thing
to discern them, in regard they were both covered with a Fig Tree that grew
just before them out of the Rock.

About two thousand paces farther, there is a Lake of salt water about ten
leagues in compass, which is filled by several Springs that fall from the
Mountains: and here it is that the people make a great quantity of Salt. There
runs into it also a salt River, over which you cross upon a large stone-Bridg
about three miles from Schiras, in the way to Bander-Abassi.

Half a league from the City are two remarkable Wells: the one upon the top of
the Mountain, the other upon the descent, cut out of the Rock: both of an
extraordinary depth. There is no water in either, because they are half full of
Stones, which they that come to see the Wells, throw into 'em. There are also
to be seen the Ruins of a Castle formerly built there for the Guard of the
Highways. But since Iman-Kouli-Kan made the new way, the caused all those
Fortresses to be defaced, as being expensive to the King, and burden some to
the Merchant, from whom the Guards exacted Toll in those places. Now all the
ways are free, and the Merchants travel securely.

About half a league from the City, toward the North, upon the brow of a high
Mountain, stands a little Mosquee, like a Hermitage: and fifteen foot below it
gushes out a fair Spring, which is the best in the places near to Schiras. Near
to it is a little place encompast with a Pale, with four Pillars that uphold a
Ceeling. Here it is that a Dervis sits, and entertains all them that come to
visit him, to whom he presents Tobacco, according to the custom of the
Country. This place is one of the best Prospects in all Syria, from whence you
behold one way all the plain of Schiras, and all the City from one end to the
other, with the Gardens. But people go not thither for the fair Prospect, or to
visit the Dervis, but to admire a Cypress-tree not above three or four paces
from the Prospect, planted among the Rocks; and of that bigness, that four men
can hardly fathom it: it is proportionably high, and is looked upon to be the
fairest Cypress-tree in all Persia, where so many grow besides. This Tree is
fed by the Spring which I have mentioned, falling some eight or ten foot below
into a Cistern, which is always full; whence through a Canal it runs into a
Garden in the plain some seven or eight hundred paces from the Mountain. In
this Garden are to be seen the remains of a Palace of one of the ancient Kings
of Persia: yet what is still to be seen, does not declare it to have been very
magnificent. The King was called Padsha quieshel, the Scald-pated King. A thing
not to be wondered at, in regard there are few Persians but such as either have
or have had scald heads.

Two leagues from Schiras, to the South-west, at the foot of the great
Mountain, stands a Hermitage, called Pir-Bouno, where three or four Dervis
live, as being a pleasant place; for the Dervis always choose out the most
delightful places to pitch their Tents in: where they sit smoking their Pipes
with that gravity, that if the King himself should come by, they would not stir
to give him reverence. That which adds to the pleasure of that Hermitage, is a
fair Spring of water that refreshes the Garden, and the number of fair Trees
that are about it.

About a quarter of a league from the City, toward the West, is to be seen a
Churchyard encompast with Walls; in the middle whereof, looking toward Mecca,
stands a Monument very much frequented by the Dervis, and other devout people,
who say their Prayers there, it being the Sepulcher of Hougia-Hafiz, for whom
they have a very great veneration. The year of his decease is set down upon his
Tomb; being in the year 1381: and he purchased that great esteem among the
Persians, for having composed a great Book of Morality, and for that he was
also one of the best Poets of his time. He has left one great Poem behind him
in the praise of good Wine; which has caused many to aver, that Hougia-Hafiz
was no good Mussul-man, in regard he has so highly praised a thing which is so
strictly forbidd'n by the Law of Mahomet.

Near to the Churchyard is a fair Garden, which men go to see for the beauty
of the Cypress-trees, which are its chief ornament. They are to be admired for
their height and bigness, among which, there is one that was planted by the
hand of Sha-Abbas the Great himself, in the year 1607; and it may well deserve
to have been planted by the hand of a Monarch; for it was bigger then the rest
that had been planted above a hundred years before.

Without the City, upon the North-side, at the foot of the Mountain, is a
Garden belonging to the ancient Kings of Persia, called Bag-Firdous. It is full
of Fruit Trees, and Rose-trees in abundance. At the end of the Garden, upon the
descent of a Hill, stands a great piece of Building, and below a large Pond
affords it water. The rich Inhabitants of Schiras have been formerly very
curious to have fair Gardens, and have been at great expenses to that purpose.
But neither at Schiras, nor at Ispahan, is there any thing that may compare
with those lovely Paradises of France and Italy.

There are many Inns in Schiras, but the Franks generally lodge at the Convent
of the Carmelite Friars; and they that would be more private, lodge at another
House that belongs also to the same Friars, which they would fain sell, as
being a charge to 'em at this time.

CHAP. XXII.
A continuation of the Road from Ispahan to Ormus, from Schiras to
Bander-Abassi.
THE sixth of March, by eight of the Clock in the morning, I departed from
Schiras; and after six hours travel through the plain that continues fertile for
a league together beyond the City, I came to an Inn called Badaadgi. The water
is bad, being as it were lukewarm. Here cold weather begins to cease. The next
day I set out by break of day, and came to a large and well built Inn, only it
stood remote from any Town. It is called Mouzafferi, and is the only place in
Persia where I met with black Saligots, or Water-nuts, as big and as good as
ours in Dauphine. The Country breeds nothing but Goats and Sheep: and about
two leagues off runs a River along by the Mountain to the West.

The 18 th I departed by daybreak, and traveled eleven hours through a
stone-Countrey, covered with bitter Almond and Turpentine-Trees. I lodged in a
fair Inn, called Paira, near to a River that comes from the West, and makes the
Country fertile. There is some Wood in the Valleys, and some Villages appear on
the other side of the River toward the South.

The 19 th I set out by four of the Clock in the morning, and traveled along a
Valley, wherein were many Villages receiving the benefit of the River last
mentioned. About eight in the morning I stopped at an Inn built in an Octogonal
form, a good league from the River, with several Villages between. The name of
the Inn is Kaffer.

The 20 th I set out two hours after midnight, and traveled till ten in the
morning through a dry Valley. By the way I met several Shepherds and Herdsmen,
who were forsaking the hot Countries, and driving toward Schiras for coolness.

They that travel upon their own Horses, and would see one of the richest parts
of Persia, and some Antiquities, setting out from Kaffer, instead of following
the Caravan-road, take the right hand way by the side of the River, that runs a
league and a half from the same Inn. When you have past the River, the way is
very straight, and lies for two leagues together through a steep Rock, the
Mountain upon the right, and the River upon the left, where there is not room
in some places for two Horses to ride a-brest. All along this way, toward the
top of the Mountain, are little paths that lead to Caverns, some of which are
so large, that they will contain two or three thousand men. Having past this
way, you come into a Plain called Dadivan, four or five leagues in circuit; the
greatest part of which is planted with Orange Trees, Citrons, and Granats. Some
of these Orange Trees two men can hardly fathom, being as high as our
Walnut-trees; and this is one of the most delicious situations in all Persia. I
have traveled through it several times, and sometimes only to divertise my
self. The rest of the Plain is sowed with Rice and Wheat. You set up your Tents
under these Trees, and then the Country people bring Provision of several
sorts, especially Partridges, Hares, and wild Goats. The River that crosses the
Plain is full of Carps, Barbels, Pikes, and Crey-Fish. I remember one time a
Countryman carried me down to the water, and before my face took up a Fish
with his hand. He was so nimble at it, that having caught one which he did not
think big enough, he threw it back again, and took up another. Now in regard
that Travelers generally stay about ten or twelve days in that place, the
Tumblers that live there-abouts, fail not to come and give you a Visit, to show
ye some of their tricks, and to taste your Schiras Wine. The English and
Hollanders usually spend the end of the Summer in this Plain, for the benefit
of the River, and the Trees: which become so large and fair, by means of the
River, which the Contrymen bring in by Canals, and shut it up in Ponds,
among the Trees, to water their Grounds; which is all the good this River does
in Persia: for all the rest of its course is through cragged Rocks, and salt
Marshes.

The 20 th of March, by ten in the morning, I came to an Inn which was called
Moushek, which is a-lone-House at the foot of a Rock. There is a Spring about
five hundred paces from it, but the water is hot, and has a sulphury taste; so
that the Ca^tel will hardly drink it. Therefore you must go to a Cistern about
two Musket Shot from the Inn, where there is one newly set up, instead of
another that was there before, into which a Jew once chanced to fall in, and
was therefore broken by the superstitious Mahometans.

Three quarters of a league from Moushetz are two roads that lead to Lar, the
one for the Camels, the other for the Horses and Mules. The first is the
longest by three days journey, and is called the Road of the Desert; for after
you have past a great Town inhabited only by Camel-Masters, where you lie the
first night, between that and Lar, you shall meet with nothing of Houses but
only Herdsmens Tents, that feed sometimes in one place, sometimes in another.
Upon the Camels Road there are another sort of Fowl like the great Partridges
in their bodies, but their legs and feet resemble those of wild Ducks. The
Camels take this Road, because it is impossible for them to pass the Mountain
Jarron, over which the Horses and Mules are hardly able to travel.

I set out from Moushek the 21 th of March, at two in the morning, and having
traveled till eight through a plain, but stony Country, I came to the little
City of Jarron, which is rather to be called a Forest of Palm Trees that bear
excellent Dates. I lodged in an Inn five hundred paces from the City, and
staid there two days.

The 24 th, setting out presently after midnight, I traveled a good hour, and
then I began to mount the steep Mountain of Jarron, which is very high, and
very long; but the descent is the most dangerous that ever I saw in all my
Travels; and besides that, the Moon did not shine. Being at the top, after you
have descended three or four hundred paces, you meet with a Bridge of one Arch,
that reaches from one Mountain to another; a ^old p^ece of Architecture, not
enough to be admired* being raised at the charges of Iman-Kouli Kan for the
benefit of Travelers. Being come to the bottom of this, you must pass two
others as steep in their ascent as in the descent; upon the top of one of which
stands a Cistern, which, though it be very large, is generally emp^^ed by the
end of the Summer. Upon these Mountains there is such an infinite quantity of
Partridg that a man cannot miss that will but shoot. By eight in the Morning I
came to an Inn which is called Shakal, which is a-lone House in a Desert
Country, but stored with bitter Almondtrees, and Turpentine-trees. Appoaching
n^er to the Inn, you meet with two or three Cisterns, which are a great comfort
to Travelers, water being very scarce upon this Rood. There are at Shakal nine
or ten Radars for the Guard of the Road, who are also Masters of the Inn: So
soon as you are alighted, they ask you if you will eat any Kid, being sure of
their blow, and having no more to do but to go to the Mountain and fetch one,
where they swarm. There are store of Partridges, which are almost as big as
Pullets; of which you may easily kill as many as you please.

The 25 th I traveled five hours, from morning till noon. An hour after I took
Horse, I met with a Mountain* the descent whereof was very sleep* They call it
the Mountain of H^shen, at the ^oot whereof is a Fountain of encellent water. A
good league farther you meet with a fair Inn called Mouezere, in the midst of a
pleasant Grove, where there is an excellent Spring of water; but because there
is no food to be had, you must go as far as Detad^mbe, a Village seated in a
plain. A quarter of a league on this side, upon the top of a Mountain, appears
the ruins of an old Castle; the Village it self being surrounded with
Palm Trees. The Inn is a good one, provided with a very good Cistern.

The 25 th I traveled through a plain for three hours, and s^opt at Banarou, a
little City well built at the soot of a high Mountain; upon which appars the
remains of a large Castle. Benarou is the Frontier Town of the Province of
Fars, bordering upon the Province of Lar.

The 26 th I departed an hour after midnight, and traveled till nine in the
morning, partly through the Plain, and partly through the Mountains, where I
saw an old Tower for the guard of the Road. I staid at Bihry, a little City
seated upon a plain, that borders upon a high Mountain. The Inn is new, and
very magnificently built by the Mother of Aimas, Kan of Lar, when the great
Sha-Abbas took this Country from the Gaures, whom he constrained to turn
Mahumetans.

The 27 th I set out at four of the Clock in the morning, and about seven I
past through a Village seated in a small plain. A league from thence I lodged
in an Inn called Pai-Cotali; that is to say, the foot of the Mountain, as being
built at the foot of the Mountain. From thence to Lar is not above four or five
hours traveling; but the way is very bad, and several swift Torrents are to be
past over.

You may take another Road from Bihry, upon the right hand toward the West; it
is the shorter way by two or three leagues: but so bad, and so narrow, that in
many places two Horsemen cannot ride a-brest, being for the most part all Rocks
and Precipices.

Lar is the Capital City of the Province of the same name, which formerly bore
the title of a Kingdom. It is but of an ordinary bigness, enclosed on both
sides with high Mountains, being built round about a Rock, upon which there
stands a Castle of Freestone, wherein the King keeps a Garrison. The whole
Country is very hot, nor have they any water but Rain water, which they
preserve in Cisterns, and which sometimes causes a wide Torrent that runs by
one side of the City, and falls from a Cascade two stories high, made of
Freestone. In the City and parts adjacent, grow a great number of trees,
especially Date trees and Tamarisk. The Gardens also and Mountains are full of
Orange trees.

There are but two Inns in Lar, the one within the City, which is not a very
good one; the other at the end of the City toward Ormus, which would be
convenient, but that it is always afloat when the Rains fall; for which reason
the Franks generally lie at the Hollanders House at the end of the City. And
there is a necessity for staying at Lar, to change the Camels; for the Camels
that come from Ispahan can go no further; every City having their particular
privileges. Which sometimes proves prejudicial to the Merchant, in regard the
Governor will delay the change of the Camels till he is presented.

The Fortress of Lar takes up the whole surface of the top of the Rock; and
there is but one way to climb it up, with great difficulty. It is more long
than broad; and the four corners are fortified with four Bastions, or Bulwarks,
between which are raised several Towers, for the Soldiers Lodgings. That
Fortress is the Royal Prison, whither the King sends such Prisoners as he takes
in war, or surprises by stratagem. I met with two there, one a Prince of
Georgia, the other of Mengrelia. The two Princes had each of them a Toman a day
allowed them, and ten or twelve Servants to wait upon them. Upon one of the
corners of the Castle, toward the West, was built a Banqueting House with
three or four Chambers. In the middle of the Court stands the Magazine, full of
Bows and Arrows, Bucklers and Muskets, enough to arm fifteen hundred men. For
the Inhabitants of the Province, but more especially of the City of Lar, are
accounted the best Musketeers in Persia, and the best at making the Barrels of
Muskets, all but the Breach, which they know not how to order so well as we.
The Governors House answers to the great Road; but there is nothing at all of
neatness without, only before the door there is a good handsome Court, about
sixty paces square, and closed in with Walls, which leads you into two large
Bazars of good Stone, very well arched.

The most part of the Inhabitants of Lar are Jews, who are famous for several
Silk Manufactures, especially for making neat Girdles. The Countrymen wear upon
their heads a kind of a felt of fine wool, and very well wrought. It resembles
a Cap not yet shaped, with four Corners behind, and cut on the sides; and these
sorts of Caps are made at Kerman.

There are an infinite number of Cisterns, as well within the City, as in the
parts adjacent; and all but little enough, in regard that sometimes it does not
rain for three years together. When the Rains fall they do not fill their
Cisterns the first day, but rather cover them quite up, till the earth be well
soaked. Now for the distribution of this water they take an excellent course;
for they never keep open above three Cisterns at a time; and when they do open
them, the Governor or some other person appointed for that purpose, is
present; so precious is water in that place, though never so bad. The water
thus standing in the Cisterns sometimes for many years together, breads worms,
so that whither you strain it, or boil it, there will appear a kind of foulness
in it, which is the seed of these worms. And this corruption it is that breeds
worms in the legs and feet of men; which puts me in mind, that after my return
to Paris, the fifth time of my traveling, I had one came out of my left foot
an Ell an a half long, and another from under the ankle of my right foot half
an Ell long.

The first of April I set out from Lar by five in the morning, and traveled
till three in the afternoon, through a barren stony Country, except it were
only one Village called Tcherkah, near to which I met with some Corn-land, and
several Palm Trees. I lodged at a little Inn called Shamzenghi. It is low,
built like a Cross, with four doors to receive the cool winds every way. All
the Inns are built in this fashion between this and Bander, and near to one
another for the ease of Travelers. As for the Beasts, they lie without, for
they have no Stables. All the Houses from Lar to Ormus are built after one
manner. For there is a kind of a Pipe, like a Chimney, that runs from the
bottom to the top to gather wind.

The second I left Shamzenghi about four in the afternoon, because the heat is
cooled by a gentle breeze toward the evening. Three hours I traveled through a
barren Plain, afterward over most fearful Rocks, and about ten at night I came
to Cormout, a great Village well stored with Palm Trees.

From Lar to Cormout is the worst way in all Persia. For many times there is no
water to be found.

The third, I parted from Cormout a little after midnight; and having traveled
seven hours in very bad way, full of great stones and filthy puddles, I came to
a new Inn called Tenquidalen. In the middle of it is a little vase of running
water, fed by a little stream that falls from the Mountain. But the water being
something brackish, they have since that built a very fair Cistern. They also
broached the Mountain to bring the water into a Plain, which was barren before,
but is now fruitful, and beautified with two good Villages. This was done by a
rich Merchant, whose Children enjoy the Revenues of both.

The fourth, I set forward an hour after midnight, and traveled through an
uninhabited Country, full of wide Torrents when the rain falls. There are but
two small Inns upon the Road, and about eight in the morning I arrived at that
which they call Gourba-Sarghant. It was built with the Money which a Merchant
of Ormus left for that purpose; whose strength failed him in that very place,
for want of a resting place. This Inn is not far from a Village that stands
upon the Mountain to the North.

The fifth, setting out a little after midnight, I traveled till seven in the
morning through a dry and desert Country, yet stored with Lentisk trees, and
lay at a good Village called Cauorestan, where the people were mowing large
Fields of Barley. Here, if the Inn be full, you may lie at the Countrey-mens
Houses, who are accustomed to entertain Travelers, and get well by it. This
place is famous for water-Melons, as big as our Pumpkins; and are the best in
all Persia. The meat is very red, and as sweet as Sugar, which is a great
refreshment to Travelers. The Kelonter of the place gave me two Raddishes, one
weighing 30, the other 45 pounds, and were very good meat.

The 6 th I set out after midnight, and traveled till it was day through
plains of Sand, over which it is impossible to find the way without a guide.
About three a Clock in the morning I crossed over two Bridges joined together
by a long Causey. Before I came to the first, I rode over another for a good
quarter of a league, which Causey runs on a great way to the second Bridge,
under which flows a salt River; the shore of which is full of moving sands; so
that before those Bridges were made, it was dangerous to ^oard it without a
guide.

This Caus^y and the two Bridges were made and built by a Persian, whose name
was Aly; who wanting employment at home, applied himself to the King of
Golconda, who liked him so well, that he made him General of his Army. Being
thus advanced, he also turned Merchant, and trading first with one Vessel, then
with two, got a great Estate. At length, all that he had thus got in forty
years, to get himself a name in Persia, he employed in making this Causey and
the two Bridges.

These Bridges are both built over a River that comes from toward Kerman, and
is swelled by other streams that fall from the Mountains with a great noise and
discharges it self into the Persian Gulf, near to Bander Congo; but becomes
brackish by passing through Mountains that are nothing but Salt.

From the great Bridge to Guitchi is one of the most pleasant Countries in all
Persia, being a continued Grove. Guitchi is a place accommodated with two Inns,
one a very fair one, and convenient; the other very ill seated, by reason of
the dust that continually annoys it standing upon a sandy ground. It stands
near ten or twelve Arabian Tents; so that as soon as you come to the Inn, the
Arabian Women presently bring Milk and Butter, and other refreshments.

A league and a half from Guitchi you meet with two Roads, one upon the
left hand that seems more beaten, the other upon the right. There a man may
easily be deceived that has no guides. For the left hand way is a dangerous
passage, and a kind of a continued Labyrinth among Rocks and Precipices. The
right hand way, which is the best, is all upon the sand to Bander-Abassi, and
is usually a days journey. You meet with two Inns by the way, the last of which
is called Bend Ali, built by the Seaside.

From Bend-Ali to Bander-Abassi, is but a little more then two leagues through
a Country abounding in Palm Trees.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Island of Ormus, and of Bander-Abassi.
ORmus is an Island in 92. d. 42. m. of Longitude, and in 25. d 30. m. of
Latitude. It lies at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, two good Leagues from the
firm Land. There is neither tree nor herb that grows in it: for it is all over
covered with Salt, which is very good and as white as snow. And as for the
black shining Sand-dust of Ormus, it is very much used for standishes.

Before the Portugueses came to Ormus, there was a City where the Kings of
Ormus, who where also Kings of Larr, resided. When the Portugals took it there
were in it two young Princes, Sons of the deceased King, whom they carried into
Spain. Where, in regard they were handsomely proportioned, though some what
swarthy, the King entertained them very kindly, and gave them an honorable
allowance. One day that he had showed them the Esc^^ial, and all the chief
pieces of Architecture in Madrid, the King asked them what they thought of
living in Spain. To whom they answered, that they had seen nothing but what was
worthy admiration, but then fetching a deep sigh, and perceiving the King
desirous to know the meaning of it, they gave him to understand that it was for
grief that they must never more sit under their own Tree. For near to the City
of Ormus was a Bannians tree, being the only tree that grew in the Island.

The Portugals being masters of the Island from an ill-built City, reared it to
that hight of Magnificence which that Nation admires; so that the very bars of
their doors and windows were all guilt. The Fortress was a noble thing, and in
good repair: and they had also a stately Church dedicated to the Virgin, where
they were also wont to walk. For other place of promenading they had none.
Since the Persians took it, the Castle indeed stands in good repair, with a
Garrison (...) it: but the City is gone to ruin; for the Dutch carried most of
the stones away to build Battavia.

Between the Island of Ormus, and the Continent the Sea is not very deep, for
the great ships that sail in and out of the Gulf, pass by the other side of the
Island. As for the Fortress which stands upon a point of the Island, it is
almost ^ncompass'd with the Sea, and lies right over against Persia.

Bander-Abassi, so called because the great Sha-Abbus the first brought it into
reputation, is at present a City reasonably well built, and stored with large
w^^ehouses, over which are the lodgings of the Merchants. While the Portugueses
kept Ormus, though they lived in the City, all the trade was at Bander-Abassi,
as being the most secure Landing-place upon all the Coast. About 15 years ago
it was an open town, but because it was an easy thing then to get into the
Town, and rob the Custom House in the night, it has bin since enclosed with
walls. To this place come all the ships that bring Commodities from India for
Persia, Turkey, or any part of Asia or Europe. And indeed it would be much more
frequented by the Merchants from all Regions and Countries.

But the Air of Bandar is so unwholesome and so hot, that no strangers can live
there, in probability of health, unless it be in the months of December,
January, February and March; though the Natives of the Country may perhaps stay
without prejudice to the end of April. After that they retire to the cooler
Mountains, two or three days journey off, for five or six months, where they
eat what they gained before. They that venture to stay at Gomron during the hot
weather, get a malignant Fever, which if they escape death, is hardly ever
cured. However it bequeaths the yellow Jaundies during life to the party. March
being passed the wind changes, and blowing at west south west, in a short time
it grows so hot and so stifling, that it almost takes away a man's breath. This
wind is by the Arabians called El-Samiel, or the poisonous wind, by the
Persians Bade*Sam^our, because it suffocates and kills presently. The flesh of
them that are thus stifled feels like a glewie fat, and as if they had been
dead a month before.

In the year 1632. riding from Ispahan to Bagdat, I and four more Persian
Merchants had bin stifled but for some- Arabians that were in our Company. For
when they perceived the wind, they caused us to light, lie down upon our
bellies and cover our selves with our Cloaks. We lay so for half an hour, and
then rising we saw our horses were in such a sweat, that they were hardly able
to carry us. This happened to us two days journey from Bagdat. But this is
observable, that if a man be in a Boat upon the water when the same wind blows,
it does no harm though he were naked at the same time. Sometimes the wind is so
hot that it burns like Lightning.

And as the Air of Gomron is so bad and dangerous, the soil is worth nothing:
For it is nothing but Sand, nor is the water in the Cisterns very good. They
that will be at the charge fetch their water from a fountain three leagues from
Bander, called the water of Issin. Formerly there was not an herb to be seen:
but by often watering the ground, Lettice, Radish and Onions have begun to grow.

The People are swarthy, and wear nothing about them but only a single shirt.
Their usual diet is dates and fish. Which is almost the diet of their Cattle,
for when they come home from browsing the barren bushes, they give them the
heads and guts of their fish boiled, with the kernels of the Dates which they
eat.

The Sea of Bander produces good Soles, good Smelts and Pilchards. They that
will have oysters must have 'em caught on purpose, for the people eat none.

Upon Land they want neither for wine of Schiras nor Yesd; nor for Mutton,
Pigeons and Partridge, which are their ordinary diet.

There are two Fortresses, one upon the East, the other toward the West. The
Town increases in trade and building, and fills with inhabitants, who build
their houses with the remaining ruins of Ormus.

The reason why the Trade is settled rather at Bander Abassi, then at Bander
Congo, where the Air is good and the Water excellent, is because that between
Ormus and Congo lie several Islands, which make the passage for ships
dangerous, besides that the often change and veering of the wind is required:
neither indeed is there water enough for a Vessel of 20 or 25 guns. Then the
way from Congo to Lar is very bad. From Bander Abassi, to Lar it is very good,
and provided with good Inns.

From the day that a Merchant takes up money at Gomron, he is bound to return it
in three months, and the change goes from six to twelve per Cent. When the
Goods come to Ispahan or any other place, the Merchant is not to touch them,
till she has paid the money which he borrowed, unless the Creditor will trust
him farther. Some Turkish and Armenian Merchants take up money at Gomron to pay
it at Suratt; where they take up other money for Ispahan; at Ispahan for
Erzerom or Bagdat, paying the old debt with the new sums* which they take up in
each place. The money taken up at Erzerom is pai'd at Bursa, Constantinople or
Smyrna. Money taken up at Bagdat is pai'd at Aleppo.

I always made account, that to take up money at Golconda for Ligorn or Venice,
at change for change, the money returns at the cheapest rate, to 95 per Cent.
but more oftentimes it amounts to a hundred.

Persian Travels

Page 257

the Road over the Montaine

the Road from Ispahan

the Road from Ispahan

Pagod

Pagod

the Inn nere to W is interrd Monseur de Lalin

Bandar Abassi

The Bannians Tree

Bandar Congo

The Island of Guesmich

A Villio

A Villig

the I Will of Ormus

Larec

The Platform of Gomrom or Bandar Abassi of the Island of Ormus and the
Neighboring Isles

THE PERSIAN GOLPHE
A promontorie of the happey

Arabia



CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Road by Land from Casbin to Ispahan to the Frontiers of the Territories
of the Great Mogul, through Candahar.
The Persians count the distances of places by Agats, that* make a large
Province League.
THe most usual road from Ispahan to Candahar, which the Merchants choose in
regard of the plenty of water which they me^t with, lies thus, From Ispahan to
Sakunegi. Agats 7 From Sakunegi to Mouchena de Radar. 10 From Mouchena de Radar
to Nanni. 8 From Nanni to Danaraquie. 15 From Danaraquie to Basabad. 15 From
Basabad to Abiger. 9 From A^iger to Biabanact. 5 From Biabanact to Caseni. 5
From Caseni to Samagi. 10 From Samagi to Sadarou. 15 From Sadarou to
Chechme-cha. 8 From Chechme-cha to Karte. 14 From Karte to Tabas, ville. 4 From
Tabas to Espaque. 7 From Espaque to Teoque. 7 From Teoque to Talkeaue. 6 From
Talkeaue to Cors. 10 From Cors to Tesaitan. 9 From Tesaitan to Berjan. 7 From
Berjan to Moti. 7 From Moti to Sarbicha. 5 From Sarbicha to Mont. 7 From Mont
to Dourat. 12 From Dourat to Chechmeband. 6 From Chechmeband to Zela. 10 From
Zela to Fara, ville. 10 From Fara to Tecourmazetan. 6 From Tecourmazetan to
Siabe. 6 From Siabe to Bacou. 4 From Bacou to Dilaram. 6 From Dilaram to
Chaquilan. 4 From Chaquilan to Dexkak. 4 From Dexkak to Griche, ville. 12 From
Griche to Kouskienogout. 10 From Kouskienogout to Candahar. 12

All this while the Men ride upon Horses, and the goods are carried by Camels.

The City of Candahar is the chief of one of the Conquered Provinces of Persia*
having been often the occasion of war between the Kings of Persia and India. At
length Sha Abbas became Master of it, the Prince that then reigned there,
choosing to put himself under the Protection of the King of Persia rather then
of great Mogull: but upon this condition, that the Governor should be always
one of his race. And therefore Alimerdan-Kan was the Son of the last Prince of
Candahar. That Prince left behind him such a ^ast Treasury, that his Plate was
all of Gold, and he had so much Gold in his Coffers, that when he went to the
Great Mogul he would not accept of any thing for his maintenance, but contented
himself with one of the highest Dignities in the Empire, which he enjoyed till
his death. At Jehanabad he built a most neat House, with a fair Garden upon the
River.

He got his wealth in some measure, for the greatest part came by Inheritance,
by the great advantages which he made of the Caravans that then passed oft'ner
through Candahar then they do n^w adays. For by delaying the Merchants at the
Custom House, and by treating them himself, and receiving treatments from them
again, he caused them to spend their Provisio^* which they were forced to
recruit again at Candahar.

The Grand Sha Abbas left the peaceable Possession of Candahar to Sha-Sefi his
Grandchild. In whose time Alimerdan-Kan delivered it up to the Grand Mogal.
S^a Abbas the Second retook it in the year 1650. Whereupon Sha-gehan sent his
eldest Son to drive him out. But though his Army consisted of three hundred
thousand men, yet the place *was so well defended that he lost the best part of
his Army before it. The next year Sha-jehan sent another Army under the Command
of Sultan-Sujah, but he had no better success then his Brother. Thereupon Begum
Saheb, Sha-jehan's eldest Daughter, and passionately beloved by him even to
Incest, bearing the greatest sway in the Kingdom, and having a Vast Treasure,
raised an Army at her own charges, and made Aurergzeb Commander of it. After
many assaults, Aurengzeb discoursing with his Generals one day who should have
the honor if he took the City, and being told that his Sister would have the
honor in regard she had raised the Army, the Prince either jealous of his
Sister, or else* not loath to give occasion of being envied by his Brothers,
assaulted it no more, and when the rains came, raised his siege.

A. The Principal Citadel. B. Another Citadel. C. The Mountain that reached to
the next Citadle, which Sha Sefi cut away after he took the City. D. The
Governors House. E. The Lodgings for the Officers and Soldiers. F. The Piazza
of the City. G. The great street. H. The two Causeys that lead to the City. I.
The Path that leads from the Mersh to the City. K. The lesser way that leads
from the City to the Citadel.
Thus I have finished the most considerable Observations as well in reference
to Turkey as to Persia. I have been curious to understand things* and have
lo^kt which a strict eye upon them: and I am obliged to inform the Reader, that
he must not travel into Asia, in expectation of mending his experience in any
of the nobler Arts of Painting, Sculpture, Goldsmiths work, or Turning. As for
the Coverlets, Embroideries, Tissues of Gold and Silver, which are made in
Persia, and which we admired formerly in France, all these give place to our
new manufactures. Insomuch that the Persians themselves admire the rich goods
of Europe, and when we carry any thither, they are in mediately bought up by
the King and the Nobility. They neither understand any thing of Architecture:
nor is there any thing in all Asia that equals the Riches and Beauty of the
Loure, or of any other of the Kings houses in France, which infinitely excel
in workmanship all the magnificence of the Eastern Monarchs. Which has made me
with astonishment admire that so many Travelers have ascribed to Persia and
other Regions of Asia, those beauties for which they were never beholding
either to Art or Nature. For if all they have said had been true, those wonders
could never have escaped my sight; and I dare assure the Reader that I have
described the naked truth of things as really they are.

The End of the Relations of Persia: and of the first Part of Asian Travels.
Page. 258. Persian Trauells.
The Platform of the famous Fortress of Candahar which is the Best Place in all
Asia*



THE INDEX TO THE Persian Travels.
A.
ACcident that befell the Author at Balsara. 64, 65. Aleppo described, 57.
Alexandretta, 55. The Road dangerous for Ships, ib. Ali-Kouli-Kan his Story,
218, 219. Allachars, -- vid. Philadelphia. Almanac Persian, 234. Almerdan-Kan
delivers up Candahar to the Mogul, 198. His answer to the Mogul, ib. Amadan
described, 75, Amadie, 108. Amasia, 4. Anna, 111. Antioch, 56. Aphian Carassar,
37. Arabian Princes exact from the Caravans, 59, 61, 63. Aras anciently Araxes,
9. Arbele Plain, 73. Archbishop of Armeni, 16. Ardevol described, 24.
Armenians, their behavior at Church, 13. Removed by Sha-Abbas, 16. Their
Religion, ib. Their custom before meals, 18. Great Traders* 159. Their
Languages, ib. Their Marriages 172* Their Christnings, 171, etc. Their Burials,
173. Artaxate, 13. Asiaticks idle. Asparagus wild, 8. Assaque, 114. Astracan,
116. Astrology admired by the Persians, 234. Athemadoulet, vid. Officers.
Athens, 121. Aydar, 195.
B.
BAgdat described, page 84. Balsara, 88. Baker, how punished, 234.
Bander-Abassi, 255. Bannians expelled by Sha-Abbas, 220. Baptism of the
Armenians, 171. St. Bartholomew, 16, 17. Basha of Cyprus, 81. Bedovins, what;
and how they live, 66. Beauty among the Arabs, 112. Betlis, 105. Bey, what,
105, 106. Bishop Armenian buried, 18. Books Persian. 227, 229. Bread, how made
in the Desert, 62. Bufalo's; -- fighting of Bufalo's, an Armenian sport, 12.
C.
CAchan, page 30. Calaat, how received by the Kans, 236. Camels, their
breeding, nature, and several sorts. Camel-drivers, a rude sort of people, 48.
One killed by a Cafer, ib. Great cheats, 50. Candahar described, 258. Candy,
remarks upon the Trade of it, 118. Carriage what, 11. Where paid, 38. Caravans,
where they set out, 2. Constrained to stop, 8, 9, 11. Caravanseras, the order
among them, 45. Casbin, 26. Cazerom, 65. Ceremony of the Taper among the
Armenians, and the occasion, 12. At the Enthronement of the King, 200, etc.
Chamber of the King's Accounts, 227. Charkliquen described, 6. Children of the
King's of Persia, how bred, 196. Chimneys, how made in Persia, 238. Chio, 119.
Christians of St. John, and their opinions, 90, etc. Chrysostom's Rock, 6.
Churches, the three Churches, 10, 11. The richness of the Armenian Churches,
12, 13. Circassia, 126. Customs of the people, 129. Civility of two Arabians
very remarkable, 111. Coffee-houses inspected by Sha-Abbas, 154. Colleges
Persian, 227. Comania, 126. Customs of the people, 129. Combat between two
Bulls, one called Ali, the other Mahomet, 29. Comouks, their Customs and
Feasts, 128, etc. Constancy of the Armenians in defending their Religion, 174.
Corgia Petrus his Wealth, 159. Corinth, 121. Coron, ib. Corou, 31. Covents
Armenian, 16. Courriers Arabian use Dromedaries for speed, 61. Coins of Persia,
50, etc. Curtisans, how distinguished, 86. Customers of Bagdat, 83. Curdes, a
strange sort of Arabs, 106. Customs of Persia, 234. Cyclades Islands, 120.
Cyprian Birds, 80. Cyprus described, 79.
D.
DAnger of leaving the Caravan, page 6. Darius, 73. Debauchery punished, 232.
Dengbe, 26. Dervichs, the strange reverence they gave to Sultan Amurat, 60.
Desert described, 61. Diarbequir described, 104. Diet of the Persians, 241.
Diseases of Persia, 239. Their Cure, 240. Disposition of the Persians, 235.
Domenico Santis, the story of him, 72, etc. Dromedaries, see Courrier. Duties,
where paid, 9, 10, 14, 18, 20, 59, 106, 107, 112, 115, 116.
E.
ECclisia, 17. Ambassadors expenses born in Persia, 14. Ambassadors Indian, the
story of him, 65. Emirs of Arabia, 63, 64. Ephesus, 34. Erivan described, 13.
Betrayed; retaken by the Persian, 14. Etzerome described, 8. Euphrates, 8, 58,
71. Exchequer Persian, 227. Ezekiel the Prophet, his Sepulcher, 86.
F.
FEast of Hozen and Hussein, 161. St. Francis of Paolo' s Miracle, 113. Franks
in Alexander' s Army, 14. Seat themselves near Erivan, ib. Funerals at Bagdat
described, 85, 86. Inconvenient to the poor, ib. Funerals of the Persians, 244.
G.
GAlleys of the Grand Signior; their demands when out at Sea, 54. Their present
condition, 122. Gaming not allowed, 236. Gaures, their Religion and present
condition, 163. Their Original and Prophets, 164. Their Books, 165. Their
Baptism, Marriages, Feasts, Fasts, and Funerals, 166. Their adoration of Fire,
167. Their Manners and Customs, ib. Beasts which they love or hate, 168.
Genealogy of the Persian Kings, 195. Georgia, the present state of it, 123.
Gezire, 108. Godfrey of Bologne' s Arms, 55. Gorno Fortress, 68. Government of
Persia, 219. Grand Signior's power over his Basha's, 8. Gregory, St. martyred,
13. Gulf Persian, 95. Guni, 114.
H.
HAbit of the Persians, 237. Halicarcara. 10. Haly not much resorted to by the
Persian Pilgrims, and why, 62. St. Helena, 22. Hizargerib the fairest Garden of
Persia, 157. Highways, how secured in Persia, 233. Strangers bound to hire
Horses from Alexandretta to Aleppo, 55. Horses Arabian, 65.
I.
JAfer-Kan, the Story of him, 210. Janizary strikes out an Armenian Bishop's
eye, 10. Jasque, the Prince there of Rebels. Jealousy of the Persians, 239.
Iman-Kouli-Kan, the story of his death, 204, etc. Jonas Whale, 54. Ispahan
fully described, 148, etc. St. Jude, 86. Justice of the Persians, 232.
K.
KAffa the City, 113. Kaguisgan Fort, 10. Kalmouchs, what sort of people, 127.
Kans of Persia, 14. Civil to strangers, ib. 225. Kan of Erivan, betrays the
Town, and teaches the Grand Signor to drink, 14. The Kan of Kerman kind to the
Author, 41. Kan of Kan, his sad end, 30. Kars described, 9. Keckmish, 49.
Besieged by the Hollander, ib. Kerman described, 41. Kilet, 82. King of
Persia's favors, 236. Kom described, 28.
L.
LAke of Antioch, 56. Lance that pierced the side of Christ, 13. Languages used
in Persia, 229. Lar described, 253. Latitudes of the chiefest Cities of Persia,
135. Locusts, 65, 81. Longitudes of the principal Cities of Persia, 135, etc.
M.
MAhomet-Ali-beg, the story of him, 42, etc. He punishes his own Son, 44.
Mahomet-beg, his misfortune, 212. Revengeful, 213, etc. Malta, the great
Ceremony of the grand Muster upon Lady Day, 78. Manners of Persia. See Customs.
Marante, 20. Market-price, how settled, 55, 234. Marriages of the Persians,
243. Meal, the strange nature of Persian meal, 27. Mengrelia, the present State
of it, 125. Messina described, 2. Milo Island, 120. Mirza-Ibrahim, 23.
Mirza-Take, his story, 197. Modon, 121. Money of Persia. See Coins. Monuments
Turkish, 3, 4, 24, 25. Mother kills her own Son instead of a Bannian, 202.
Moulla's, 226. Moussal described, 71. Murder committed in the Desert, 112.
Punished in Persia, 232.
N.
NAcksivan described, 16. Names and Employments of the Officers of the King's
House, 221, etc. Of the Military Officers, 223. Naxis, 120. Nazar; vid.
Officers. Nemrod, or the supposed Tower of Babble, 86. Nibia described, 3.
Niniveh, 71. Noah, where he lived, 16. His Wife, where buried, 20. Nogaies,
their Customs, 132, etc.
O.
OFficers of the King's Household, 221. Military, 223. Ecclesiastic and
Judicial, 226. Ormus, 255. Ozeman, 4.
P.
PAros Island, 12. Passage of the Author from Niniveh to Babylon, 82. From
Bagdat to Balsara, 87. From Balsara to Ormus, 94. Passengers; see Travelers.
Patras, 121. Patriarch of the Armenians, 11. Feasts the Caravan, 12. Pearls of
great beauty and value, 95, 144. Persia, its extent and Provinces, 141. The
Flowers and Fruits and Fruits thereof, 144. The Beasts of service, 145. Fish
and Fowl there, ib. Buildings, 147. Persians, their Superstition, 24. Their
manner of Entertainment, 5. Their Civility, 77. Their extravagancy in Apparel,
238. Their Religion, 160, Their Feasts and Diet, 241. Artists, wherein, 230.
Commodities of the Countries, ib. Their Manners and Customs, 234. Philadelphia
now Allachars. 31. Places of privilege, 24. Plains of Salt, 31, 39. Polia or
Folis, 4. Policy of the Persians, 232. Pointing at the King of Persia, loss of
the hand, 207. Porter of the King of Persia beloved by him for his whiskers,
47. Printing not used; and why, 229. Proverb in Persia about living happy, 44.
Q.
Quitros Haven, 114.
R.
RAdars; what, 233. Rafedi's; what, 85. Severely chastised for Superstition,
ib. Restoration for Robbery, how made, 233. River that peutrifies, 15. Relics
Armenian, 17. Roads from France to Constantinople; ^. From Constantinople to
Ispahan; 3. From the borders of Persia to Erivan; 10. From Erivan to Tauris;
15. From Tauris to Ispahan through Tauris and Casbin; 24. From Tauris to
Ispahan through Zangan and Sultain; 26. From Smyrna to Ispahan; 32. From Kerman
to Ispahan; 41. From Paris to Ispahan another way; 53. From Aleppo to Ispahan
through the great Desert; 60. Through Mesopotamia and Assyria; 66. From Niniveh
to Ispahan; 72. From Smyrna to Ispahan; 102. From Aleppo to Tauris through
Diarbequir and Van; 103. Through Gezire; 108. From Aleppo to Ispahan through
the small Desert and Kengavar; 109. From Constantinople to Ispahan by the
Euxin- Sea; 113. From Warsaw to Ispahan over the black Sea; and Ispahan to
Mosco; 115. From Ormus to Schiras; 245. From Ispahan to Ormus, from Schiras to
Bandar-Abassi; 251. From Casbon to Ispahan, and so through Candahar to the
Frontiers of the Mogul, 257. Robbery committed upon the Author near Tocat, 40.
Robbery; how punished, 233. Rock of a strange nature; 107.
S.
SAdler Ralph; his sad story; 207. Salmastre; 208. Samatra, a place of Devotion
among the Mahumetans, 83. Santorini, a remarkable Island; 79. Sardis; 37. Sava;
28. Schiras; 66. Described: 247. Seal of the King of Persia, 179. Sedre, his
Office, 226. Sefi Kouli-Kan Governor of Babylon; his death, 84, 85. Sem the
Son of Noah, 15. Sexava, 28. Sha-Abbas, 158. Sends to Henry 4 th of France, ib.
To Spain, ib. His answer, ib. He turns Merchant, ib. Kind to the Capuchins;
157. His madness in drink; 172. He punishes the Baker and Cook; 203. Sha-Abbas
the second, 209. Shambe; the Inhabitants mad at 18 years of age; 17. Shappars,
what; 233. Their privileges, ib. Sha-Sefi destroys the Turks Army; 20. His
madness in drink, 198. His cruelty, 206. Shaoux; what they are, 47. Sherazoul,
73. Sidi Fatima, 29. Sinopus, 118. Smyrna largely described; 32, etc. Sophiana;
20. St. Simon; 86. St. Stephens; 17. Story of four Frenchmen; 95. Students
Persian; 227. Sultan Amurat makes his entry into Aleppo; 6. Sultain described;
27. Superstition of the Persians; 236.
T.
TAmerlane; 195. Tartars eat raw Horseflesh; 7. Lesser Tartars; 132. Tauris
described; 20, 21, etc. And the places adjacent; 23. Temple of Ephesus. See
Ephesus. Teren; 108. Thievery punished, 233. Tigris; 71. Time, how divided by
the Persians, 240. Tocat, 5. Tocia, 4. Tower of Babble, vid, Nemrod. Traveling
very secure in Persia, 18, 233. Travelers, how to behave themselves, 47. The
treachery of a Janizary, 35, etc. Turkey, bad traveling in Turkey* 1 Turks,
their Superstition, 9. Turquoises, 144.
V.
VAn, 106. Voyage, The Author' s Voyage from Marseilles to Alexandretta, 78.
The Author' s first Voyage, 95. From Paris to Smyrna, 99.
W.
WAter bitter, 61. Scarce in Persia, 156. Women of Bagdat, 86. Of Arabia, ib.
Of Persia, 239. Wool of Persia very fine, 40. Writing Persian, 229.
Y.
YEsde described, 44. Yesdecas, 66.
Z.
ZEo Island, 120. Zulpha described, 19, 155, 157, etc.
THE SIX TRAVELS OF JOHN BAPTISTA TAVERNIER, BARON of AUBONNE, THROUGH Turkey
and Persia TO THE INDIES, During the space of Forty years.

Giving an Account of the present State of those Countries, viz. Of their
RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, CUSTOMS, and COMMERCE.

AS ALSO The Figures, Weights, and Value of the MONEY and COINS severally
current therein.

The Second Part: DESCRIBING INDIA and the ISLES Adjacent.

Made English by J. P.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1684.

THE FIGURES Of the PIECES of Gold, Silver and Copper: AND OF The Sorts of
Shells and Almonds that pass for MONEY over all ASIA.
The Money of Arabia. Larin, Figure 1. Half-Larin* Fig. 2.
The Author not having given an account of the weight or fineness of the Coins
he treats of, but having only expressed their value in French Livres, it is
thought fit for the better reduction thereof into English Coin, to advertise,
That Three French Livres make a French Crown, which passes in Exchange from 54
pence to 58 pence halfpenny; so that a French Livre may be in value as the
Exchange goes, from 18 pence to 19 pence halfpenny. And twenty Sous make a
Livre.

THIS Money (Fig. 1.) is called Larin, and signifies the same with our Crowns.
The Five Pieces are as much in value as one of our Crowns; and the Ten
Half-Larins as much. Only the Five Larins want in weight Eight Sous of our
Crown. This is that which the Emirs, or Princes of Arabia take for the Coining
of their Money; and the profit which they make by the Merchants that travel
through the Desert, either into Persia or the Indies. For then the Emirs come
to the Caravans, to take their Tolls, and to change their Crowns, Reals, or
Ducats of Gold, for these Larins. For they must of necessity pass that way. And
they must use very smooth words to boot; for there is nothing to be got by
rough Languages. If they see the Merchants will not change their Money, then
will they refuse to take their Toll; but making as if they had not time to cast
up the account, they go a hunting, and leave the Merchants fifteen or twenty
Days without saying any thing more to them; while they in the mean time spend
their Provisions, not knowing where to get more. If the Caravan goes on without
paying their Tolls, these Arabian Princes will either cut them in Pieces, or
take away their Camels, or rob them of all they have, as they have several
times done. In one Journey that I made, one of these Princes kept us one and
twenty days; after which we thought our selves happy to be quit of him, when we
had given him whatever he demanded. If these five Larins did but weigh as much
as the Crown, or Real of Spain, the Merchants would never be much troubled. But
when they come to Persia, or the Indies, they must carry their Money to the
Mint, as I have said in another place, and lose above eight Sous in a Crown,
which amounts to 14 per Cent. As for what remains, the Larins are one of the
ancient Coins of Asia; and though at this day they are only current in Arabia,
and at Balsara, nevertheless, from Bragdatt to the Island of Ceylan, they
traffic altogether with the Larin, and all along the Persian Gold; where they
take 80 Larins for one Toman, which is 50 Abassi's.

The Money current under the Dominions of the Great Mogul.
ALL the Gold and Silver which is brought into the Territories of the Great
Mogul, is refined to the highest perfection before it be coined into Money.

The Roupy of Gold weighs 2 Drams and a half, and 11 Grains, and is valued in
the Country at 14 Roupies of Silver. We reckon the Roupy of Silver at 30 Sous.
So that a Roupy of Gold comes to 21 Livres of France; and an Ounce of Gold to
58 Livres, and 4 Deneer's. This Gold is like that which we buy at 54 Livres an
Ounce. And if you bring this Gold in Ingots, or Ducats of European Gold, you
shall have always 7 and a half profit; if you can escape paying any thing to the
Custom-houses. The Half-Roupy comes to 10 Livres 10 Sous; and the Quarter-Roupy
to 5 Livres 5 Sous. As I have said, you must reckon the Silver Roupy at 30
Sous, though it weigh not above 3 Drams; whereas our pieces of 30 Sous weigh 3
Drams, and half 4 grains; but the Roupy is much the better Silver. In a word,
they that understand Traffic well, and carry hence Gold or Silver to the
Territories of the Great Mogul, get always 7 or 8 per Cent. profit, provided
they take care to shun the Custom-houses. For if you pay them, the 7 or 8 per
Cent. which you might make profit, goes to them; and so the Roupy comes to 30
Sous, the Half to 15, and the Quarter to 7 and a half, the eighth Part to 3
Sous and 9 Deneers.

As for their Copper Money, sometimes it is worth more, sometimes less, as
Copper comes to the Mint. But generally the biggest sort is worth 2 Sous of our
Money, the next 1 Sous, the next to that 6 Deneers.

As for their Shell Money, the nearer you go to the Sea, the more you give for
a Pecha, for they bring them from Mnldi8es. Fifty or sixty of these make a
whcih is that piece of Coin that is worthbut 6 Deneers.

For their Money of Mamoudi's, half Mamoudi's, and Almonds, all that sort of
Money is only current in the Province of Guzeratt, the principal Cities whereof
are Surat, Barocha, Cambaya, Broudra and Amadabat. Five Mamoudi's go for a
Crown, or a Real. For small Money they make no use of these Shells, but of
little Almonds, which are brought from about Ormus, and grow in the Deserts of
the Kingdom of Larr. If you break one of the Shells, it is impossible to eat
the Almond, for there is no Coloquintida so bitter; so that there is no fear
lest the Children should eat their small Money. They have also those little
pieces of Copper which are called Pecha, 6 Deneer's in value. They give 20 for
a Mamoudi, and 40 Almonds for a Pecha; sometimes you may have 44, according to
the quantity which is brought. For some years the Trees do not bear, and then
the price of this sort of Money is very much raised in that Country; and the
Bankers know how to make their benefit.

Fig. 1. The Roupy of Gold. Fig. 2. The Half-Roupy of Gold. Fig. 3. The
Quarter-Roupy of Gold.

Fig. 4. The Roupy of Silver. Fig. 5. Another Roupy of Silver. Fig. 6. The
Half-Roupy of Silver. Fig. 7. The Quarter-Roupy of Silver. Fig. 8. The Eighth
part of the Roupy of Silver.

Fig. 9. Four Pecha's of Copper. Fig. 10. Two Pecha's of Copper. Fig. 11. One
Pecha.

Page. 2. Money of Arabia Larin and half Larin
Travells in India.
Money of the Great Mogull
depiction of currency
N.3.
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.1.
depiction of coin

N.1.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.4.
depiction of coin

N.4.
depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of cowrie shell

depiction of cowrie shell

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin



The Money of a King and two Rajas
N.1.
depiction of coin N.1.
depiction of coin N.6.
depiction of coin N.6.
depiction of coin N.2.
depiction of coin N.2.
depiction of coin N.3.
depiction of coin N.3.
depiction of coin N.5.
depiction of coin N.5.
depiction of coin N.4.
depiction of coin N.4.
depiction of coin

Fig. 12. The Shells. Fig. 13. A Silver-Mamoudi, which is the Money of Guzerat.
Fig. 14. Half a Mamoudi. Fig. 15. The Almond.

I have marked two sorts of Roupies, the one square, the other round. The
square one is as they coined it anciently; the round ones are as they make them
at this day.

The Money of a King and two Raja's, all three Tributaries to the Great Mogul.
MAton-cha is a Tributary to the Great Mogul; yet he has power to coin Money.
When you are at Agra, the Territories of this King lie to the North; and before
you can come at them, you must pass over very high and cragged Mountains. It Is
a good Country, where are all things necessary for the support of humane life,
except Rice, which is a great inconvenience to the Inhabitants, who being all
Idolaters, are deprived thereby of their chiefest delicacies, in regard they
feed upon nothing so heartily as upon Rice. They have excellent Corn and
Grapes, but they make no Wine, though they make some Aqua vitae. They want
neither Oxen nor Cows; but their Horses are little, weak and illshap'd. All the
Trade which these people have with their Neighbors, is in Copper, whereof they
have two extraordinary Mines, from whence they furnish the greatest part of the
Mogul's Territories; out of which they have Salt in exchange, not having any of
their own. This Salt costs them dear, in regard it is four months travel to the
place where they fetch it, that is to say, from the Territories of Maton-cha to
the Indian Coast toward Bacaim. They travel upon Oxen, and the same Oxen carry
their Copper. There must be also some Mines of Lapis-Lazuli and Garnets in that
Country, in regard they bring several from thence.

Fig. 1, and 2. is the Money of Maton-Cha.
Fig. 1. is the Silver-Money, which weighs not above one dram and 19 grains,
and is of the same goodness as the Roupy. The half-Roupy goes for 15 Sous, and
this for 16 Sous, which is six and a half per Cent. more. But certain it is,
that the more Northward you travel that way, Gold and Silver is more scarce.
Fig. 2. These pieces*of Copper go for the value of a Pecha of the Great Mogul;
they are heavier by half, but the Copper is not so good as that of Pegu or
Japan.

Fig. 3, and 4. is the Money of the Raja of Parta Jajoumola.
The Raja of Parta Jajoumola, is one of the great Raja's on the other side of
the Gagens. His Territories are directly North of Patna, nigh to the great
Mogul's to whom he is Tributary, and bordering upon the King of Bantam. He is
bound every year to send an Ambassador with twenty Elephants to the Governor of
Patna, who sends them to the Great Mogul. The greatest part of his revenue
consists in Elephants, Musk and Rhubarb. He lays also a great Imposition upon
Salt, as well that which is spent by his own Subjects, as upon that which is
carried abroad. This is all Seacoast Salt, which comes from the Territories of
the Great Mogul, and is brought from the Seacoast to Ganges, and so over
Ganges is carried as far as the fiftieth and five and fiftieth Degree. They
lade above 150000 Oxen; and for every burden they pay a Roupy at the
Salt Pits, and no more afterward through the whole Kingdom. Had this Raja of
Parta Salt of his own, he would never be Tributary to the Great Mogul.

Fig. 5* and 6. is the Money of the Raja of Ogen.
The Raja of Ogen is also a Tributary to the Great Mogul; his Country lies
between Brampour, Seronge and Amadabat; and it is one of the best Soils in the
Indies. His Silver Money passes nowhere but in his own Country, not being
suffered in the Mogul's. His Silver Money goes for a quarter of a Roupy, at 7
Sous 6 Deneers; but the Silver* is base. His Copper Money goes for 6* Deneers,
and is current in the Mogul's Dominions as far as Agra. For his smaller Money
he makes use of those Shells whereof we have already spoken.

Pieces of Gold called Pagods, which are current in the Territories of the King
of Golconda, the* King of Visapour, the* Great Raja of Carnatica, the Raja of
Velouche, and at the Diamond Mines.
ALL the Pieces of Gold represented in the Plate of Golconda-Money, pass
through all these Countries at the same value, and are about the weight of our
half Pistol; but the Gold is of a baser Metal, so that an Ounce is not worth
above 42 or 43 Livres; not going for more than four Roupies.

Fig. 1. Is one of the ancient Pagods, at the time when the Raja's were Masters
of the Kingdom of Golconda, and they are only stamped upon one side as you see.
They are as heavy as the new ones; and though they be no better Gold, yet some
years since they went at 20, and 25 per Cent. more than the new ones; the
reason is, for that the Bankers being all Idolaters, they are so superstitious
as to believe, that if they melt down that Money, some Calamity will befall
their Country; and they hold this for such a certain truth, That for fear the
King of Golconda should melt it, they paid him for certain Years 20000 Pagods.
But you must observe, that these old Pagods are nowhere current but in the
Kingdom of Golconda. For my part, I think it is more for their profit than out
of any Superstition, that they make use of them in that manner. For in all the
Kingdom of Golconda, in matter of trade, they never mention any but the old
Pagods, though they make their payments in new Pagods, or Roupies; and in this
case they who receive those new Pagods, or those Roupies, play their game so
well, that they gain a fourth part, or a half, and sometimes one per Cent.
alleging for the reason, that those new Pagods are either the King of
Visapour's, or the Raja of Carnatica's, or the Raja of Velouche's, or the
English, or the Hollanders. And they make as much of the Roupies; for there is
no considerable payment made, which is not received by the Cheraff or Banker,
making it good to the Seller, who sometimes has no need of his Money in a Month
or two, and so he receives the interest of it, though it be but for two days.
If the payment be made in old Pagods, and that the sum amount to two or three
hundred, or three or four thousand, the Banker takes them all, and viewing them
one after another, he divides them into five or six parts; and then poising
them all, he says of some, that they are more used than others, and that
having passed through many hands, there is a waste of the metal about one per
Cent. Others, says he, want not above half one per Cent. others but a fourth
part. These Pagods have been bored some half thorough, others a quarter
thorough; and it is a wonderful thing what this boring amounts to. For in
regard these Pagods are very thick, and cannot be clipped, those that are Masters
of the trade, take a Piercer, and pierce the Pagod thorough the side, half way
or more, taking out of one piece as much Gold as comes to two or three Sous.
And provided they be not taken in the fact, they choose rather to follow this
Trade than any other; there being no handycraft Tradesmen among the Indians,
that gain more than three Sous a day. After they have drawn out the piercer,
they knock upon the holes with a little Hammer, and are so cunning in closing
up the holes again, that he must be very skilful indeed, that can discover the
cheat. For this reason, they never receive any payment till they have shown
the Pieces to the Cheraff or Banker; and though he looks only on two or* three
Pieces, he takes a Sous. They have also another cunning Trick, and the more the
Banker is in credit, Page. 5. Travells in India
Pieces of Gold called Pagods.
N.1.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

N.4.
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N 7
depiction of coin

N 8
depiction of coin

N 9.
depiction of coin

N 10.
depiction of coin

N.11.
depiction of coin

N 12.
depiction of coin

N 13.
depiction of coin

N 14.
depiction of coin

N.15.
depiction of coin

N 16.
depiction of coin

N 17.
depiction of coin



English and Holland money.
N.1
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N 3.
depiction of coin

N 4
depiction of coin

N 5.
depiction of coin

N.6
depiction of coin

N 7.
depiction of coin

N 8.
depiction of coin

the more he gains; for if he makes any payment, according to the quantity of
the sum, he puts the Pagods by fifty or a hundred together in little bags, and
seals them up with his Seal, and writes upon the bag the number of the Pagods
within; and so delivers them to him to whom he makes the payment. When the
Party makes use of them, he never opens the bag, but gives them as they are, to
him to whom they are due; who goes to the same Banker that sealed the bags. The
Banker seeing his Seal whole, makes answer, That the Pieces are good, and in
that manner they shall pass all the Year without opening the bags. But when
ever they change the hand, they send for the same Banker, who always will have
so much per Cent. for his Visit. But, as I have said, the Merchant leaves them
in his hand to get Interest; who then pays Eight per Cent. for a Year, and
sometimes Twelve. Thus the Bankers have always the greatest part of the Money
in the Kingdom in their hands, of which they make large profit. It Is the Custom
in that Country, every Month to pay the Soldiery; but for the most part, the
Soldiers, Captains, and other Officers will not stay till the Month be up, but
come to the Bankers, who discount after the rate of Eighteen or Twenty per
Cent. by the Year, besides that they pay them in these Pagods, against which
others would often object. If there be any large Diamond to be sold in any
Country, these Bankers have intelligence of it presently; or if there be any
fair Ruby, it is not long before they have it in pawn; for every Year when the
Merchants return from Pegu, and have any Rubies, most commonly they are in
debt; and in regard it is the Custom to pay within fifteen days after the
Merchant comes ashore, he pawns his best goods he has for payment, as well of
the freight of the Ship, as of what he may have taken up at Pegu. After that he
sells the worst of his goods to pay the Banker, who lent him the Money upon his
arrival. Those that work in the Diamond Mines, or* the Merchants that hire the
Mine, when they have any fair Stones, they sell them to these Bankers, because
there is ready Money; or else they pawn them to the Bankers, till they can find
a Chapman to buy them.

Fig. 1. The old Pagod.

Fig. 2. The King of Golconda's Pagod.

Fig. 3, and 4. The King of Visapour's Pagod.

Fig. 5, and 6. The Raja of Carnatica's Pagod.

Fig. 7, and 8. The Raja of Velouche's Pagod.

Fig. 9, 10, 11, and 12. are the Half-Pagods of those Kings and Raja's.

Fig. 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. are little Pieces of Gold called Fanos, which are
of different value. There are some whereof six go to a Crown; others from ten
to fifteen; and some are very base metal. This is the Money that passes all
along the Coast of Coromandel; from Cape Comorin as far as Bengala. And they
have very little other than that, besides the Pecha of Copper, and the Shells,
which pass for small Money.

The Money which the English and Hollanders Coin in the Indies.
Figure 1, and 2. is the Money which the English coin in their Fort St. George,
or else at Madrespatan, upon the Coast of Coromandel. They call them Pagods, as
those of the Kings and Raja's of the Coutry are (...) They are of the same
weight, the same goodness, and pass for the (...) Value. Formerly the English
never coined any Silver or Copper Money; for in some parts that border upon the
Indians, where they have Factories, as at Surat, Maslipatan, or at Bantam, they
find it more profitable to carry Gold from England, than Silver; Gold lying in
less room, and not being so troublesome; besides, that by carrying Gold they
more easily escape the* paying those Customs, which the Kings impose upon Gold
and Silver. But since the present King of England married the Princess of
Portugal, who had in part of her Portion the famous* Port of Bombeye, where the
English are very hard at work to build a strong Fort, they coin both Silver,
Copper and Tinn. But that Money will not go at Surat, nor in any part of the
Great Mogul's Dominions, or in any of the Territories of the Indian Kings; only
it passes among the English in their Fort, and some two or three Leagues up in
the Country, and in the Villages along the Coast; the Country people that bring
them their Wares, being glad to take that Money; otherwise they would see but
very little stirring, in regard the Country is very poor, and the people have
nothing to sell but Aqua vitae, made of Coco-Wine and Rice.

Fig. 3 and 4. is the Gold Money which the Hollanders coin at Pelicate, which
is a Fort that they possess upon the Coast of Coromandel. Those pieces are also
called Pagods, and are of the same weight with the others; but for the
goodness, I think they are better by two or three in the hundred, than those of
the Kings and Raja's of the Country, or which the English make. I made this
observation, being at the Diamond-Mines, and in other parts of the Indies where
there is any great Trade. For the first thing they ask you is, Whether you have
any Pagods of Pelicate; and if you have, you speed much better in your business.

Fig. 5, and 6. is a Roupy of Silver, which the Hollanders coin at Pelicate,
being of the same weight with those which the Great Mogul, or the Kings of
Golconda and Visapour make. It has in the middle upon one side the makr of the
Holland Company, to distinguish it from others. The Hollanders Roupies of
Silver are quite contrary to their Pagods of Gold, which are more esteemed by
the Indians than those of the Princes of the Country. For they make far less
account of these Roupies of Silver; and if you pay any great sum in these
pieces, though the Silver be as good as the others, you must lose one half per
Cent.

Fig. 7, and 8. is the Hollanders small Copper-Money, wherewith they ordinarily
pay their Soldiers. It has upon one side the mark of the Company. And indeed
the Hollanders, who mind nothing but their profit, had great reason to obtain
leave to coin Money; for bringing only Gold from Japan, from Macassar only Gold
in Powder, and from China Gold in Ingots, and selling all these to the Bankers,
they found that they lost five or six per Cent. which proceeded from the
mistrust of the Changers, and the chief of the Factories belonging to the
Company. Now they shun that loss, and make the same profit which the Bankers
did, coining all these Metals into money. Though in every Voyage which they
make to Japan, they generally lose one Vessel by storm; yet some years they
make sive or six Millions of Livres profit, all freights discharged, and
hazards escaped. But that profit is quite lost, since their loss of the Island
of Formosa.

The Money of the King of Cheda and Pera.
THis Money is of Tin, and is coined by the King of Cheda and Pera. He coins no
other Money than Tin *Some yearssince he found out several Mines, which was a
great prejudice to the English. For the Hollanders and other Merchants buy it,
and vend it over all Asia. Formerly the English brought it out of England, and
furnished great part of Asia, where they consumed a vast quantity; they carried
it also into all the Territories of the Great Mogul, as also into Persia (...)
for all their Dishes are of Copper, which they cause to be Tinned over every
month. Among the meaner sort of people, there is little to be seen but this
Tin-money, and the Shells called Cori; which I have spoken of already.

Fig. 1, and 2. is that great piece of Tin, which weights an ounce and a half,
and in that Country goes for the Value of two of our Sous. But in regard that
Tin is there at 14 Sous a pound, it is not worth above one Sous and Page. 7.
Travells in India
The Money of the King of Beda and Pera.
N 1.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N 5.
depiction of cowrie shell

N.5.
depiction of cowrie shell

N 4.
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

Money of the King of Achen.
N 1
depiction of coin

N 2.
depiction of coin

N 5
depiction of coin

N 6
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

N 4.
depiction of coin

N 7.
depiction of coin

N.8.
depiction of coin

N 9
depiction of coin

N.10
depiction of coin

Money of the King of Siam;
N 1
depiction of coin

N 2.
depiction of coin

N 3
depiction of coin

N 4
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N 7.
depiction of coin

N 8.
depiction of coin

three Deneers. This piece of Tin is only thick in the sides, the middle being
as thin as Paper.

Fig. 3, and 4. is a piece that goes at the value of four Deneers.

Fig. 5, and 6. are their Shells, whereof they give fifty for the little piece
of Tin.

The Money of Gold and Tin of the King of Achen. With the Money in Gold Coined
by the King of Macassar, and the Celebes. And the Silver and Copper Money of
the King of Camboya.
FIg. 1, and 2. is the Money in Gold coined by the King of Achen, in the Island
of Sumatra. In goodness it is better than our Louis; an Ounce being well worth
fifty Franks. This piece weighs 10 Grains, and would be worth sixteen Sous and
eight Deneers of our Money.

Fig. 3, and 4. is the small Money made by the same King, being of Tin, and
weighs eight Grains. The Tin being good, I value it at 16 Sous a pound; and
then 75 of these pieces is worth one Sous of ours.

Fig. 5, and 6. is the Money in Gold of the King of Macassar, or the Celebes.
This piece weighs twelve Grains, and the Hollanders take it for a Florin of our
Money; which comes to 23 Sous and eight Deneers.

Fig. 7, and 8. is the Silver Money of the King of Camboya; being good Silver,
and weighs thirty two Grains. The piece comes to 24 Sous of our Money; nor does
the King coin it at any higher rate. He has a great quantity of Gold in his
Country, but he never coins it into Money; for he trades with it by weight, as
he does with his Silver, according to the custom of China.

Fig. 9. and 10. is the Copper Money of the King of Camboya. The King of Java,
the King of Bantam, and the Kings of the Molucca Islands coin no other Money,
but pieces of Copper after the same form and manner. As for their Silver Money,
they let it pass as it comes out of other Countries, without melting it down.
In Bantam, in all Java, in Batavia, and the Molucca's, there is little other
Money stirring, but Spanish Reals, Rixdollars of Germany, and Crowns of France;
the greatest part being Half-Reals, Quarters and eighth Parts. But in Batavia
they use besides for small Money, Shillings, double Sous and Sous, as in
Holland.

The Money in Gold, Silver and Copper, of the King of Siam.
FIg. 1, and 2. is the Money in Gold, coined by the King of Siam; and weighs 18
Grains more than our Half-Pistol. The Gold is of the same Goodness, and may be
worth 7 Livres and one Sous of our Money. When the Merchants, that trade in
that Country, bring thence either Gold or Silver, it is for want of other
Commodities, as Silk, Musk, Sandal, Wood, Gum, Lake, Elephants teeth, and other
things. For by carrying out Gold or Silver, they reap but two in the hundred
profit.

Fig. 3, 4, 5, and 6. is a piece about the bigness of a large Hazle-Nut,
slatted on the four sides, like a semicircle, three sides whereof are open like
a Horse-shoe; and upon two sides are certain of their own Letters. There is no
Money in the East so strangely coined as this. It weighs three Drams and a
half, and 25 Grains, and is as good as our Silver at three Livres and 10 Sous
the Ounce. It amounts to 32 Sous and 4 Deneers of our Money.

Fig. 6, 7, and 8. is the Copper Money of the King of Siam; and they give two
hundred of these pieces for one piece of Silver. For their small Money, they
make use of certain Shells that are gathered upon the Seashore, which they
bring from Maldives.

The Gold and Silver Money of the Kings of Asem, Tipoura, Arakan and Pegu.
ALL the Silver Money coined by the Kings whom I have named, is in goodness
equal to our Crown, rating it at three Livres ten Sous the Ounce, as we rate
our Crowns here.

Fig. 1, and 2. is the Silver Money of the King of Asem; it weighs three Drams
and four Grains, and comes to 23 Sous of our Money.

Fig. 3, 4. is the Silver Money made by the King of Tipoura Chatermani. In the
language of the Country, he is called Dieu Ara-gari, which is stamped upon one
side of the Money, and upon the other Chatermani Roy de Tipoura. His Country
begins about twelve days journey from Daca toward the North-West. This Money
weighs two Drams and a half, and twenty-two Grains; and is in value twenty-two
Sous.

Fig. 5, 6. is the King of Arakan's Money. It weighs two Drams and a half, and
15 Grains, which makes 21 Sous of our Money. This King coins no Gold; but he
trafficks in Gold uncoin'd. The Metal is very base, and not worth above 14
Carats, a Carat being the third part of an Ounce. The King however holds it at
a high rate, to keep it from being carried out of his Country. In all Bengala
this King is known by no other Name but the King of Mogue.

Fig. 7, and 8. is the King of Pegu's Silver Money, and weighs two Drams and a
half, and twelve Grains, which may come to about 20 Sous, and six Deneers of
our Money.

Fig. 9, and 10. are the King of Pegu's Fano's, or little pieces of Gold, and
weigh not above 7 Grains to boot. Fifteen of these little pieces pass for the
value of a Real, or one of our Crowns, the Gold being coarse.

Fig. 11, 12. are the Kings of Asem's Fano's; they weigh also 7 Grains; but
they are a much baser Metal than those of Pegu, for twenty-two of them amount
but to the value of our Crown.

Lumps or Pieces of Gold and Silver which go for Money in the Kingdom of China,
and the Kingdom of Tunquin.
YOU are first to take notice, that in all the Kingdom of China, and the
Kingdom of Tunquin, there is no Money coined, either Gold or Silver; that their
small Money is Copper, and that they make use in payments only of Lumps or
Pieces of Gold and Silver, which have every one their particular weight, as is
here represented.

The Pieces of Gold marked Fig. 1, and 2. are by the Hollanders called
Goltschut, that is to say, a Boat of Gold, because they are in the form of a
Boat. Other Nations call them Loaves of Gold; and there are but two different
sizes of them. The Gold is of such a goodness, that an Ounce in France would
not be worth less than 42 Franks. The great Pieces come to twelve hundred
Gelders of Holland Money, and thirteen hundred and fifty Livres of our Money.
The other Piece, which weighs but half as much, is in value according to its
proportion.

As for their Pieces of Silver, they are of several sizes, and different
weight. Fig. 3. weighs six Drams and a half, and 23 Grains; and the Silver
being ^age. 8. Money of the King of Asem.
Travells in India.
N.4.
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.4.
depiction of coin

N 12.
depiction of coin

N 11.
depiction of coin

N 10.
depiction of coin

N 9.
depiction of coin

N.8.
depiction of coin

N.7.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

China Pieces
N*1*
depiction of currency

N*2*
depiction of currency

N*3*
depiction of currency

N*3*
depiction of currency

N 4
depiction of coin

Page.9. Travells in In^^^
The Iaponners Call these pieces as well Silver as Gold Coupent.

N.1. Piece of Gold.
depiction of currency

N.2. Piece of Gold
depiction of currency

N 3. Piece of Gold.
depiction of currency

N 4. Piece of Gold.
depiction of currency

N 5.
depiction of currency

N 6.
depiction of currency

N 7.
depiction of currency

very near in goodness to the Parisian, it comes to fifty-nine Sous, and eight
Deneers of our Money. The other Pieces as well great as small, are in value
according to their weight.

In great payments they make use of Ingots, that come to a hundred Franks in
value; and they have little Pieces of Silver that are not worth above a Sous.

When they buy any Commodity, if they have not whole Pieces enough to make up
the sum, they have always instruments ready to cut off so much from a great
Piece as will perfect the Payment.

When the Chinese transport their Golden Loaves, or their Boats, into other
Countries, the Merchants cut them in the middle, not daring to trust the
Chinese, who have often deceived, them and none have been more cheated than
the Hollanders. For they have a way to stuff their loaves of Gold, insomuch
that you shall sometimes find in the middle a third part of Copper or Silver.
In all sorts of Bargains the Chinese are so cunning, that there are few
strangers whom they do not overreach; especially, in Batavia, the Hollanders
when they come first. They carry their weights always along with them, being
like a Roman Beam, or a Stelleer, about eight Inches long, with which they
weigh all the Gold and Silver which they receive. As for the small Money both
in China and Tunquum, it is of Copper. It is made as in Fig. 4. They also
thread these pieces, there being a hole in the middle, 12, 25, 50, and 300 upon
a string; because they will not put themselves to the trouble of telling them,
when the number exceeds a dozen.

The Gold and Silver Money of Japon.
ALL the Gold that comes from Japon, is of the same goodness; somewhat better
than our Louis; and is about that goodness for which we pay about 50 Franks the
Ounce.

Fig. 1. This piece of Gold weighs one Ounce and six Drams, at fifty Franks the
Ounce, comes to 87 Livres and 10 Sous*

Fig. 2, and 3. Every one of these pieces is of Gold, and every one weighs a
third part of the great one; which is half an Ounce, and 48 Grains; and comes
to 29 Livres, 3 Sous, and 4 Deneers.

Fig. 4. This, as it is marked is the backside of the three pieces of Gold.

Fig. 5, and 6. are pieces of Silver of the same weight; every one weighing 4
Grains less than our pieces of 30 Sous, though it go nevertheless for the same
value. As for the Silver, it is the same in goodness with our Money. However,
in the Territories of the Great Mogul, whither the Hollanders carry all their
Silver, their Bars, and Japon pieces, to coin them into Money, sometimes they
sell them to the Bankers, where they have no convenience of coinage, as at
Surat and Agra; and these Bankers, give them from two to three in the hundred
more than they will give for our Crowns, Rixdollars, or Spanish Reals.

Fig. 7. is the backside of the two Silver pieces.

The Portraicture of the Silver Ingots of Japon, which go for Money.
I said before, that all the Silver that comes out of Japon, is equal in
goodness to our Crowns.

Fig. 1. An Ingot of this form weighs seven ounces, at three Livres ten Sous
the ounce: the whole comes to twenty four Livres, and ten Sous.

Fig. 2. Weighs two ounces, three drams and an half: the whole comes to eight
Livres, ten Sous, and seven Deneers.

Fig. 3. Weighs one ounce, half a dram, and twelve grains: the whole comes to
four Livres, five Sous, and five Deneers.

Fig. 4. Weighs one ounce, eight grains: the whole comes to three Livres, ten
Sous, and an eleven Deneers.

Fig. 5. Weighs seven drams, one quarter, and seven grains: the whole comes to
three Livres, eight Sous, and eight Deneers.

Fig. 6. Weighs two drams and an half, and twenty four grains: the whole comes
to one Livre, five Sous, and one Deneer.

Fig. 7. Weighs two drams, twenty four Deneers: the whole comes to one Livre,
nine Deneers.

Fig. 8. Weighs one dram and an half, and twenty four grains: the whole comes
to sixteen Sous, and four Deneers.

Fig. 9. Is the Copper-Money which they thread by fifteen, thirty, fifty, to
the number of 600. which is the value of a Tell in Silver. Over all Japon they
reckon by Tells: and the Hollanders reckon, that a Tell makes three Gelders and
an half of their Money, which comes to four Livres, and five Sous of ours.

Fig. 10. Is the backside of the Copper-piece.

Money that represents the Figures of the twelve Signs; and which were Coined
during the twenty four hours, that Gehan-guir, King of the Indians, permitted
Queen Nourmahall, his Wife, to Reign in his stead.
SVltan Selim, otherwise called Gehanguir Patcha, the ninth King of the
Indians, Father of Cha-gehan, was a great Lover of Women: but he had a
particular affection for one among the rest, which he kept in his Seraglio; and
which he had Espoused, as meriting more than ordinary. She was a Woman of a
Sublime Wit, and very liberal; and she knew so well how to please the King's
humor, and to divertize him, that he could not live without her. She had two
Names; the one was Nour-gehan-begum, which signifies the light of the World;
and this was the Name which was engraven upon her Signet: for as I have
observed in my Relations, they never Sign any thing, but only set their Seals.
The other Name, by which she was called at Court, was Nour-mahall, which
signifies the Light of the Seraglio. She was always a great enemy to the King's
two Sons; more especially to the second, who was called Sultan Kourom: and who
afterward comeing to the Throne, called himself Cha-gehan. He set himself to
oppose all the designs of this Princess: who, for her part, had such an
Ascendant over the King, that she persuaded him to spend the greatest part of
the year in the Country, underhand soliciting certain Raja's upon the
Frontiers to rise against him, that she might engage him in the Wars, and keep
him from the company of his Sons. This Queen, being altogether Ambitious, made
it her business to please the King, that she might the more easily accomplish
her designs; and having a great desire to eternize her Memory, she could not
think of a better way, than to Coin a good quantity of Money in her own Name:
and of a different stamp from that which the Indian Kings were wont to Coin.
For you must take notice, that all the Coins of those Kings have only the
Characters of the Country upon each side of the Piece. But this Queen caused
one of the twelve Signs to be stamped upon each side of Hers, which is contrary
to the Law of Mahomet, that forbids all manner of representations. However, she
had never brought her design about, had Sultan Kourom been at Court. But she
took her time, when the King had caused the eyes of his eldest Son, Sultan
Kosrou to be put out, because he had taken up Arms against him, with an
intention to depose him from his Throne. For after he had obtained that
Victory, he sent his second Son, Sultan Kourom, into Decan, Page. 10. Travells
in India*
Silver Ingots of Iapan.
N ^
depiction of ingot

N.3
depiction of ingot

N.2
depiction of ingot

N.4
depiction of ingot

N 5
depiction of ingot

N.6.
depiction of ingot

N 7
depiction of ingot

N.8.
depiction of ingot

N 9
depiction of coin

N.10
depiction of coin

Money representing the 12 Signs
depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

depiction of coin

with a powerful Army against the King of Visapour, who was in Rebellion. Queen
Nourmahall seeing her self delivered from those that were able to cross her
designs, and particularly from Sultan Kourom, the most Potent, and the most
inveterate of all her enemies, and believing it seasonable to discover her
purpose to the King, set her self to flatter him more than she was wont;
inventing new ways to divertize him, sometimes with Hunting, and sometimes in
the Haram, with Balls and Comedies: One day that the King was extremely
well-pleased, and having drank briskly, began to be very merry; after the Queen
had Danced in his presence, he took her, and set her by him, protesting to her,
that he loved her above all the Princesses in his Court; and that but for her,
he had died for grief, to see that his Son Sultan Kosrou should be so
traitorously bold, as to endeavor to deprive him of his Scepter. The Queen
seeing the King so highly affected toward her, failed not to make use of so
favorable an opportunity. To which purpose, Sir, said she, if it be true that
your Majesty has that kindness for me, of which you would persuade me to assure
my self, I know you will grant me one favor which I have passionately desired
a long time; that I may only Reign as Sovereign the space of twenty four hours.
This request surpised the King, and kept him very sad for some days, being
unwilling to deny her any thing, and yet being as loath to grant her a Boon of
so high a nature. In the mean time the Queen plied the King with pastime and
Divertisements, pretending to take no notice of his melancholy. At length the
fifth day after she had made her Petition, the King no longer able to resist
her Charms, nor the strong Passion he had for her, told her he would retire for
twenty four hours, and that she might assume the absolute Command of the
Kingdom during that time. At the same time he caused all the Grandees that were
then at Court, to be sent for into his presence, and then commanded them to
obey her, and punctually to execute her Orders, as if it were he himself that
spoke to them. It was a long time before that the Queen had made every thing
ready, and that she had secretly hoarded up great quantities of Gold and Silver
in all the Cities where the Mints were appointed, and had distributed the
Stamps as she thought convenient. And indeed it was a wonderful thing, that a
Woman should so politickly carry on so great a design, as to have four and
twenty Stamps engraved, and to keep in a readiness in Gold and Silver above two
Millions in all the Cities, without being discovered to the King, or any of the
Court. There were none but the Mint-Masters that knew any thing of her design,
whom she engaged by large promises, and larger hopes; as believing that she
could certainly obtain her desire one day of the King; and then, if she had her
Materials ready, that she could do her business in twenty four hours. The day
being appointed, she sent away Messengers to all the Cities, commanding them on
that day to Coin Roupies of Gold and Silver, to the value already mentioned.
When the King and the Grandees came to understand the business, they were
strangely surpised; especially Sultan Kourom, the Queens implacable enemy,
who, as some persons of the Country assured me, fainted away at the news, and
did not come to himself in a good while after. The thing was so suddenly done,
especially in the Cities near at hand, that within two hours after she was sat
upon the Throne, she caused several quantities of that Gold and Silver to be
thrown among the people, which during the Reign of Gehan-guir went currantly
for Roupies. But when Sultan Kourom, who took upon him the Name of Cha-gehan
came to the Crown after the death of his Father, he forbad all persons to use
those Roupies upon pain of death, and commanded all that had any of them,
either in Gold or Silver, to carry them to the Mint; where they should receive
the value of them, to the end they might be melted down. For which reason they
are at present very rare, particularly those in Gold; among the rest, two or
three of them are so hard to be found, that an hundred Crowns has been given
for one of them. The Roupies of Gold are worth one and twenty Livres of our
Money: and those of Silver, thirty Sous. The Queen, during her Reign of twenty
four hours, had that respect for the King, that on the backside of the Pieces
whereon the twelve Signs were Engraven, she caused the Name of Gehan-guir to be
stamped with her own, and the name of the place where they were Coined, all in
Arabic Letters.

Perhaps the Reader may be curious to know from whence this Illustrious Queen
of the Indians descended: and therefore for his satisfaction, I will tell him
in a few words. Her Father, a Persian by Nation, a man naturally Ambitious, and
who in his own Country was no more than a bare Captain of Horse, without any
hopes of rising to any higher preferment, traveled into the Indies, to serve
the Great Mogul, who was then Gehan-guir, with an intention of raising his
Fortune in a strange Country. Gehan-guir had then many Enemies, the Kings of
Golconda and Visapour being in Rebellion against him, and several Raja's having
taken their part. So soon as he came to kiss the Kings Hands, the King took a
liking to him, and gave him immediately the Command of the five hundred Horse.
And because he was very well skilled in Astrology, (which is a Science to which
the Asiaticks are very much addicted) the King esteemed him the more, and in a
short time made him General of his Army. But afterward, forgetting his duty,
and the benefits he had received, he joined with Sultan Kosrou, Gehan-guir's
eldest Son; and having gained a great part of the Army, they conspired together
to depose the King, and set up his Son in his stead. There was at that time in
the Court, an Eunuch of great wit, who did more mischief to the Army in his
Closet, than he could have done in the Field. This Eunuch, so soon as
intelligence was brought of the Rebellion, told the King, that if his Majesty
pleased, he would deliver Kosrou and the Persian General into his hands in a
short time, without so much as striking one stroke, or losing one man. He was
as good as his word in part, for he so ordered his business, by his politic
contrivances, that the General was brought to the King, who would not presently
put him to death. Sultan Kosrou escaped that bout, and continued the War many
years against his Father, who at length took him in Fight, and caused his eyes
to be pulled out. The King detaining the General in custody, his Wife and his
Daughter found a way to save his life, as you shall hear. The Daughter of the
Persian General, who was his only Child, was about fourteen years of Age, the
most accomplished Beauty at that time in all the Kingdom; she was most rarely
educated, and could both write and read the Arabian, Persian, and Indian
Languages. The Mother and the Daughter went every day to Court, to hear what
would become of the General; and understanding at length, that the King
intended either to put him to death, or to ban sh him, they came to the Haram,
and casting themselves at his Majesty's feet, they humbly begged pardon, the
one for her Husband, the other for her Father; which they easily obtained; the
King being surpised at the Beauty of the Virgin, to whom he afterward
surrendered his Affections. All the Court was astonished afterward, how the
General and his Wife could keep, so private, a Daughter that was so
incomparably fair, that it should not come to the Kings knowledge. At length he
loved her so tenderly, that not being able to deny her the liberty of Reigning
one whole day in his place, he gave her leave to share with him afterward in
the Government. And she it was, that gave motion to all the most important
Affairs of State; the King excusing himself to the Grandee's of his Court, who
wondered why he let the Queen bear so great a sway, by telling them that she
was fit for the Government, and that it was time for him to take his ease.

Fig. 1, and 2. is as all the rest are, the backside of the Twelve Signs. Fig.
1. is the backside of the Ram, and Fig. 2. of Cancer. Both of them signify the
same thing; it being the Name of the King, Queen, and City where they were
stamped. These two were coined at Amadabat.

The Gold, Silver, and Copper Money which the Portugals coin in the East Indies.
THe Gold which the Portugals Coin in Goa is better than our Louisse's of Gold,
and weighs one grain more than our half Pistol. At the time when I was in Goa,
this piece was worth four Roupies, or six Franks. They hold it up at so Page.
12. 13 Travells in India.
Portugal Money.
depiction of coin

depiction of coin

Muscovie Money.
N.1
depiction of coin

N.2.
depiction of coin

N.3.
depiction of coin

N.4
depiction of coin

N.5.
depiction of coin

N.6.
depiction of coin

high a rate, to the end the Merchants, who come from all the Coasts of India
thither with their Wares, may not transport it out of the Country. This piece
is called St. Thomas. Formerly when the Portuguez had the Trade of Japon,
Macassar, Sumatra, China and Mosambique, which they still preserve; and is the
place whither the Indians bring the Gold of the Abassins and Saba, it was a
wonderful thing to see the quantity of Gold which the Portuguez Coined, and the
several pieces of workmanship which they framed in Gold, and sent into Foreign
Countries, even to the West Indies, by the way of the Philippine Islands. But
now they have no other places but only Mosambique to furnish them with Gold,
they keep up those Pieces called St. Thomass's at a very high rate, lest they
should be carried out of the Country, as I said before. They have also Silver
Pieces, which they call Pardos, which go for the value of 27 Sous of our Money:
As also a great quantity of small Copper and Tin-Money, not much unlike that of
the Kings already mentioned, which they thread upon strings in particular
numbers.

The Gold and Silver Money of Muscovy.
I Have observed in my Relations, that in all parts of our Europe, where they
Coin Money, there are great Sums transported all over Asia, where they go
currantly. But for the Money of Muscovy there is great loss in transporting it
any where else; because the Prince enhances it to so high a value. The pieces
as well of Gold as Silver are very good Metal; for the Gold in worth is
somewhat higher than our Lewis.

Fig. 1 and 2. This piece of Gold weighs 14 Grains; and to take the Gold at 48
Grains the ounce, would amount to 20 Sous, one Deneer, and one halfpenny of our
Money. But going in Muscovy for 24 Sous, there would be nineteen and an half
loss to transport it any where else.

Fig. 3 and 4. Is a piece of Silver that weighs eight Grains; and to take an
Ounce of Silver at three Livres ten Sous, it comes to a Sous of our Money. But
in the Country you have but fifty of these pieces, or at most sometimes fifty
two for one of our Crowns, or a Real of Spain, or an High-German Rixdollar.

Fig. 5 and 6. Is a piece of Silver also which only goes in Muscovy. But I
cannot tell in what Province it is Coined, in regard there are no Arms upon it,
and that the most knowing persons, to whom I showed them, could not tell me
what the Characters meant; which makes me think it is very ancient. The piece
weighs 25 Grains, which comes to three of our Sous, one Deneer, and one
halfpenny.

This is all that I could collect of most certainty, concerning the Money and
Coins of the East, during the long course of my Travels. Nor do I believe that
any person has undertaken, before me, to write upon the same Subject. If any
one of my Readers desires to see the real Pieces themselves, as well in Gold
and Silver, as in Tin, Copper, Shells and Almonds, he may, without question,
obtain the Favor from Monsieur, the first President, to whose Study I devoted
them all, together with certain Medals, of which that Supreme Senator, most
skilful in Antiquity, has great store, being still curious in searching after
what is rare.

The end of the Coins.
The EMPIRE of the Great MOGOL


TRAVELS IN INDIA.
The First Book.
What Roads to take, in Traveling from Ispahan to Agra, from Agra to Dehly and
Gehanabatt, where the Great Mogul Resides at present: And how to Travel also to
the Court of the King of Golconda; to the King of Visapour, and to many other
Places in the Indies.

CHAP. I.
The Road from Ispahan to Agra through Gomron: Where is particularly described
the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Suratt.
IN this Relation of my Indian, I will observe the same Method as in the
Recital of my Persian Travels; and begin with the Description of the Roads,
which lead you from Ispahan to Dehly and Gehanadatt, where the Great Mogul
Resides at present.

Though the Indies stretch themselves front Persia for the space of above 400
Leagues together, from the Ocean to that long Chain of Mountains that runs
through the middle of Asia from the East to the West, and which was known to
Antiquity by the Name of Mount Caucasus, or Mount Taurus; yet there are not so
many ways to travel out of Persia into the Indies, as there are to travel out
of Turkey into Persia; by reason that between Persia and the Indies there are
nothing but vast Sands and Deserts, where there is no water to be found. So
that you have but two Roads to choose, in going from Ispahan to Agra. The one
is partly by Land, and partly by Sea; taking Ship at Ormus. The other
altogether by Land, through Candahar. The first of these two Roads is amply
described, as far as Ormus, at the end of my first Book of my Persian Travels.
So that I am now only to speak of the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Suratt.

There is no Sailing at all times upon the Indian as upon the European Seas:
You must observe the proper Seasons, which being elapsed, there is no more
venturing. The Months of November, December, January, February and March, are
the only Months in the year to Embark from Ormus to Suratt; and from Suratt to
Ormus: But with this difference, that there is no stirring from Suratt after
the end of February; but you may Sail from Ormus till the end of March, or the
fifteenth of April: for then the Western-winds, that bring rain along with them
into India, begin to blow. During the first four Months there blows a
North-eastwind which carries them from Suratt to Ormus in fifteen or twenty
days. Then veering a little to the North, it serves as well for those that are
bound for Suratt as those that are bound from thence. Then the Merchants
generally provide for a Voyage of thirty, or five and thirty days. But if they
would Sail from Ormus to Suratt in fourteen or fifteen days, they must take
Shipping either in March, or at the beginning of April; for then the
Western-wind blows full in their Stern*

The Vessels which Sail from Ormus run within sight of Mascate upon the Coast
of Arabia, bearing off to Sea for fear of coming too near the Persian Coast.
They that come from Suratt, do the same thing, to make the Entry of the Gulf.
But neither the one nor the other touch at Mascate, to avoid paying Customs to
an Arabian Prince, who took that place from the Portugals.

Mascate is a City situate just by the Seaside, over against three Rocks that
make the Entry into the Harbor very difficult, and at the foot of a Mountain
upon which the Portugals have three or four Forts. It is observed that Mascate,
Ormus, and Balsara, are the three places in the East where the heat is most
insupportable. Formerly only the Hollanders and English understood this Course
of Navigation; but some years after the Armenians, Mahometans, Indians, and
Banians, have built them Vessels. But it is not so safe to Embark in them, for
they neither understand the Sea so well, nor are they so good Pilots.

The Vessels that Sail to Suratt, which is the only Part in the Empire of the
Great Mogul, Sail within sight of Diu, and the Point of St. John, and come to
an Anchor afterward in the Road of Couali, which is not above four Leagues
from Suratt, and two from the Mouth of the River toward the North. They
transport their Wares from one place to another, either by Wagons, or in
Boats. For great Vessels cannot get into the River of Suratt till they have
unladen, by reason of the Sands that choke it up. The Hollanders return as soon
as they have landed their Wares at Couali, and so do the English, it not being
permitted to either to enter into the River. But some years since, the King has
given the English a place to Winter in, during the rainy Seasons.

Suratt is a City of an indifferent bigness, defended by a pitiful Fortress, by
the foot whereof you must pass, whether you go by Land or by Water. It has four
Towers at the four Corners, and in regard there are no Platforms upon the
Walls, Guns are planted upon wooden Scaffolds. The Governor of the Fort only
commands the Soldiers in the Fort, but has no power in the City, which has a
particular Governor to receive the King's Customs, and other Revenues through
the Extent of his Province.

The Walls of the Town are only of Earth, and the generality of the Houses like
Barns, being built of Reeds, plaistered with Cow Dung, to cover the void
spaces, and to hinder them without from discerning bet^^^^ the Reeds what is
done within. In all Suratt there be but nine or ten Hou^^ which are well built:
whereof the Cha-bander, or chief of the Merchants, has two or three. The rest
belong to the Mahumetan Merchants; nor are those, wherein the English and
Hollanders dwell, less beautiful; every President, and every Commander, being
careful to repair them; which they put upon the account of their Companies.
However, they do but hire those Houses; the King not suffering any Frank to
have an House of his own, for fear he should make a Fortress of it. The
Capuchin Friars have built them a very convenient Convent, according to the
Model of our European Houses, and a fair Church; for the building of which, I
furnished them with good part of the Money. But the Purchase was made in the
Name of a Maronite Merchant of Aleppo, whose name was Chelebi, of whom I have
spoken in my Persian Relations.

CHAP. II.
Of the Customs, Money, Exchange, Weights and Measures of the INDIANS.
TO avoid Repetitions, which cannot be shunned in the Course of long Travels;
it behooves me to let the Reader understand what belongs to the Customhouse,
Money, Exchange, Weights and Measures of the Indians.

When your Commodities are unladen at Suratt, you must carry them to the
Custom-house adjoining to the Fort. They are very severe, and very exact in
searching the People. Particular Merchants pay from four to five per Cent. at
the Custom-house for all sorts of Ware. But for the English and
Holland-Company, they pay less: But I believe if they did but cast up what it
costs them in Deputations and Presents which they are obliged every year to
send to the Court, they would not pay much less for their Wares, then
particular Merchants.

Gold and Silver pay two in the hundred, and when it is brought into the
Custom-house, the Master of the Mint comes and takes it, and Coins it into the
Money of the Country. They agree with him upon the day wherein he will
undertake to return the new Pieces: And for so many days as he makes them stay
after that, he pays them Interest, according to the proportion of the Silver
which he receives. The Indians are very subtle and crafty in matters of Money
and Payments; three or four years after the Silver is coined, it loses half per
Cent. and goes at the same rate as old Silver; for, say they, it is impossible
but that it should lose in passing through so many hands. You may carry all
sorts of Silver into the D^^inions of the Great Mogul. For in all the Frontier
Cities there is a Mint, where it is purified to the highest perfection, as is
all the Gold and Silver in India, by the Kings Command, and coined into Money.
Silver in Bars, or old Plate, which is bought without paying for the fashion,
is the Silver by which you shall lose least: For as for coined Silver, there is
no avoiding the loss of the Coinage. All their bargains are made, with a
condition to pay in coined Silver within the present year. And if you make
payment in old Silver, you must resolve to lose according to the time since it
was first Coined. In all places far remote from Cities, where the vulgar People
have no great knowledge in Silver: and where there are no Changers, they will
not receive a piece of Silver, without putting it into the fire, to try whether
it be good or no; And this is the common practice at all Ferries and Passages
over Rivers. In regard their Boats are only made of Osier, covered over with an
Ox-hide, and by consequence are very light; they keep them in the Woods, and
will not take them upon their shoulders, till they have received their Money.

As for their Gold, the Merchants have so many cunning tricks to hide it, that
it seldom comes to t^^ ^^owledg of the Customers. They do all they can to shift
off paying the Custo^ and that, so much the rather, because they do not run so
much hazard as at the Custom-house of Europe. For in the Indian Custom-houses,
if a man be caught in the fraud, he is quitted by paying double; ten in the
hundred, instead of five: the King comparing the venture of the Merchant to a
game at Hazard, where he plays quit or double. The King had granted to the
English Captains, that they should not be searched when they came ashore. But
one day one of the English Captains going to Tata, one of the greatest Cities
in India, a little above the Mouth of the River Indou, as he was going to pass
the River, he was stopped by the Officers of the Custom-house, who searched and
rifl'd him, whatever he could allege to the contrary. They found Gold about
him, of which he had already carried off several quantities, at several times,
that he had gone from his Ship to the City; but they quitted him, upon paying
the usual Custom. The Englishman, vexed at such an affront, resolved to
revenge himself; which he did after a very pleasant manner. He caused a
sucking-pig to be roasted, and putting it together with the dripping, and
sauce, in a China-platter, covered with a linnen-cloath, he gave it a Slave to
bring along after him to the City; imagining what would fall out. As it passed
before the Custom-house, while the Governors or the Cha-bander, and the
Mint-Masters were sitting in the Divan, they failed not to stop him; and as the
Slave went forward with the Plate covered, they told his Master that he must
come into the Custom-house, and that they must see what he carried. The more
the Englishman cried, that the Slave carried nothing that paid any Duties, the
less he was believed; so that after a long debate he took the Plate from his
Slave, and carried it himself into the Divan; the Governor and the Cha-bander,
gravely asked him, why he would not be obedient to the Laws? Upon which the
Englishman, replying in a great heat, that he carried nothing which paid any
duty, threw the Pigg among them with such a fury, that the Sauce and Pigg flew
all upon their Garments. Now in regard that Swines-flesh is an abomination to
the Mahometans, who believe every thing defiled that touches it; they were
forced to change their Clothes, take down the Tapestry of the Divan, to pull
down the Divan it self, and build another, not daring to say any thing to the
Englishman; for the Cha-bander, and Mint-Master are very observant to the
Company, by whom they reap a great deal of profit. As for what concerns the
Heads of the Companies, as well English, as Dutch, and their Associates, they
have so great a respect for them, that they never search them at all, when they
come ashore; though they will not stick to conceal their Gold, like particular
Merchants, and to carry it about them. The Trade of Tata, formerly very great,
begins now to decay, because the Mouth of the River grows more dangerous, and
full of shallows every day more than other, the Sand-hills having almost
choked it up.

The English finding they had learned the trick of rifling their Clothes,
studi'd out other little ways and contrivances to conceal their Gold: And the
fashion of wearing Perriwigs being newly come out of Europe, they hid their
Jacobus's, Rose-Nobles, and Ducats in the Net of their Perriwigs, every time
they came ashore.

There was a Merchant that had a mind to convey some Boxes of Coral into
Suratt, without the knowledge of the Customers. He Swam then into the Town,
some days before the Ship was unladen, when it might be done securely before
the Customers had any suspicion of any thing. But the Merchant repented him
afterward, the Commodity being spoiled. For the Water of Suratt River being
always thick and muddy, there clung to the Coral, which had lain a long time in
the Water, a slime like a white crust or skin, which was difficult to be got
off; so that after the Coral was polished, he lost by it above twelve per Cent.

I come now to the Money which goes for current through the whole extent of the
Great Mogul's Dominions; and to all the sorts of Gold and Silver, which is
carried thither in Ingots to make profit thereof.

In the first place you must observe that it is very profitable to buy Gold and
Silver which has been wrought, to melt it into Ingots, and to refine it to the
highest purity: For being refined, you pay not for the Portage of the Alloy,
which was mixed with it before: And carrying the Gold and Silver in Wedges, you
pay neither to the Prince nor to the Mint what they exact for Coinage. If you
carry coined Gold, the best Pieces are Jacobus's, Rose-Nobles, Albertus's, and
other ancient Pieces, as well of Portugal, as of other Countries, and all sorts
of Gold that have been coined in former Ages. For by all those old Pieces the
Merchant is sure to gain. You may also reckon for good Gold, and which is
proper to be carried thither, all the Ducats of Germany, as well those coined
by the several Princes, as by the Imperial Towns, together with the Ducats of
Poland, Hungary, Swedeland and Danemark; and indeed all sorts of Ducats are
taken to be of the same goodness. The Venetian Ducats of Gold formerly passed
for the best, and were worth four or five of our Sous, more than any others;
but about a dozen years ago they seem to have been altered, not going now for
any more than the rest. There are also Ducats which the Grand Seignior Coins at
Cairo, and those of Sally, and Morocco: But these three sorts are not so good
as the others, and are not worth so much as they by four Sous of our Money.

Over all the Empire of the Great Mogul, all the Gold and Silver is weighed
with Weights, which they call Tolla; which weigh nine Deneers, and eight grains
of our Weights. When they have any quantity of Gold and Silver to sell, the
Indians use yellow Copper-Weights, with the King's mark, to avoid cousenage.
And with these Weights they weigh all the Gold and Silver at once, provided it
amount not to above a hundred Tolla's. For the Changers have no other weights,
but from one Tolla to a hundred; and a hundred Tolla's come to 38 Ounces, 21
Deneers, and 8 Grains. As for the Gold and Silver which is not coined, if there
be much, they essay it; and having put it to the Touch, they bid to the utmost
value to out-vye one another.

In regard there are some Merchants that have above forty or fifty thousand
Ducats at a time, the Indians weigh them with a weight which is just the weight
of a hundred Ducats, which is also marked with the Kings Mark; and if the
hundred Ducats weigh less than the weights, they put in so many little stones
till the Scales are even; and after all is weighed, they make good to the
Changer the weight of those little stones. But before they weigh these
Gold-Coins, whether they be Ducats or other Pieces, they put the whole quantity
into a Charcoal-fire, till they be red-hot; and then quench the Fire with
water, and take them out again. This they do to find out them which are false,
and to melt off the Wax and Gum, which is cunningly dropped upon them to make
them weigh the more. But because there are some Pieces so artfully hollowed and
stopped up again, that you cannot perceive it, though they have been in the fire,
the Changers take the Pieces, and bend them; by which they know whether they be
good or no; and those which they suspect they cut in pieces. After they have
viewed them all, they refine those which they do not take to be good, and pay
for so much as proves to be good, as for good Ducats. All this Gold they Coin
into that sort of Money which they call Roupies of Gold; except those Ducats,
which are stamped only upon one side, which they sell to the Merchants that
come from Tartary, and other Northern Parts, as from the Kingdoms of Boutan,
Asen, and other remote parts. With these Ducats the Women of those Countries
chiefly adorn themselves, hanging them upon their Head-attire, and fixing them
upon their foreheads. As for the other Ducats, that have no figures, they are
not so much as inquired after by the Northern Merchants.

As for all the other Pieces of Gold, there are great quantities of them Sold
to the Goldsmiths, to the Gold-wyar-drawers, and in general to all that work in
Gold. For if they could put their Metal unmade into Roupies, they would never
Coin; which they can only do at the Coronation of their Kings, to throw Silver
Roupies among the People; or to sell them to the Governors of the Provinces,
and other Grandees of the Court, who then want great quantities of them to
present to the new King at his first coming to his Throne. For they have not
always Jewels or other things rich enough to present him, as well at that time,
as at another Festival, of which I shall speak in due place, when they weigh
the King every year. At such times I say, they are very glad of Gold Roupies;
as also to present to such Favorites at the Court, by whose interest they hope
to gain higher Commands, and more considerable Governments.

In one of my Travels, I found by experience the virtue of these Roupies of
Gold. Cha-jehan, Father of Orang-zeb who now Reigns, had given to one of the
Lords of his Court, the Government of the Province of Tata, whereof Symdi is
the Metropolis. Now though the very first year of his Government, there were
very great complaints made against him, by reason of the Tyranny which he
exercised over his People, and his great extortions, the King suffered him to
continue four years, and then recalled him. All the People of Tata were over
joy'd* believing the King had called him away, only to put him to death; but it
fell out quite otherwise; for the King caressed him, and gave him the
Government of Halabas, more considerable than that which he had quitted. This
kind reception, which he had at the Kings hands, proceeded from this, that
before he came to Agra, he had sent before him a present of 50000 Roupies of
Gold, and about 20000 Roupies of Gold more to Begum-Saheb, who had then the
whole Power in her hands; as also to other Ladies and Lords at the Court, to
support his Reputation. All the Courtiers are very desirous to have a great
quantity of Gold; because it lies in a little room, and then because they
covet, as a great Honor, to leave vast Sums behind them, to their Wives and
Children, of which the King most not know. For as I shall tell you in another
place, when any great Lord dies, the King is Heir to all his Estate; his Wife
having no more then his Jewels.

But to return to our Roupies of Gold; you must take notice, that they are not
so current among the Merchants. For in regard one of them is not worth above
fourteen Roupies, which make one and twenty Livres of our Money, at thirty Sous
the Roupie, and that there are few of these Roupies of Gold to be had, but in
the Houses of Great Men; when it falls out that they make any payment, they
will put them at a Roupie of Silver, or at least at a fourth part of a Roupie
more than it is worth, which will never turn to the Merchants profit.
Cha-Est-Kan the King's Uncle, to whom I had sold a parcel of Goods at 96000
Roupies, when he came to pay me, asked me what Money I would be content to
take, whether Gold or Silver. Before I could return him an answer, he added,
that if I would leave it to him, I should take Gold Roupies: Nor did he give me
this advice, but because he believed it would turn to his advantage: I told him
I would be ruled by him; thereupon he caused his Servants to tell me out so
many Roupies in Gold, as made up the just Sum which was due: But he would force
me to take the Roupie in Gold for fourteen Roupies and an half in Silver,
though among the Merchants they went but for fourteen. I was not ignorant of
it; but I thought it best to receive my Money according to the Prince's humor,
in hopes he might make me amends another time, either for the whole, or part of
what I might lose. I let him alone two days, after which I went to him again,
and told him I had tried to put off his Roupies at the price I had received
them; so that in the payment of 96000 Roupies, I had lost 3428 and one 16 th.
the Roupie of Gold which he forced me to to take at fourteen Roupies and an
half of Silver, being worth but fourteen. Thereupon he fell into a passion, and
told me he would see as many Lashes bestowed upon the Changer, or
Holland-Broker, whose fault soever it were; that he would teach them to
understand Money; that they were old Roupies, and were worth more by a
sixteenth part of a Silver Roupie, than the Roupies which were coined at that
time. In regard I knew the humor of the Asiatic Princes, with whom there is no
contesting. I let him say what he pleased; but when he came to himself, and
began to put on a smiling look, I desired him that he would be pleased to let
me return the Sum which I had received, the next day; or else that he would be
plea'sd to pay me what was wanting, and that I would take a Roupie at 14 and
one 16 th. since he assured me they were worth so much. The Prince for a while
gave me a scurvy look, not so much as speaking one word. At length he asked me,
whether I had still the Pearl, which he had refused to buy. I told him I had,
and immediately pulled it out of my Bosom, and gave it him. The Pearl was
large, and of a good Water, but illshap'd; which was the reason he refused it
before. When I had given it to him, well, said he, let us talk no more of what
is past; how much will you have, in a word, for this Pearl? I asked him seven
thousand Roupies, and indeed rather than I would have carried it into France, I
would have taken three. If I give thee, said he, seven thousand Roupies for
this Pearl, I shall make thee amends for the loss thou complain'st of in the
first bargain. Come to Morrow, and I will give thee five thousand Roupies, and
that is very fair: Thou shall have also a Calaat and an Horse. I made my
obeisance to him, and desired him to give me an Horse that should be young, and
fit for service, because I had a great journey to take. The next day he sent me
a Robe, a Cloak, two Girdles, and a Cap; which is all the Apparel that the
Princes are wont to give to those to whom they intend any Honor. The Cloak and
Robe was of Satin purfled with Gold; the two Girdles stripped with Gold and
Silver; the Cap was of Calicut, died into a Flame-colour, with stripes of Gold:
The Horse had no Saddle, but was covered with a green Velvet foot-cloath, edged
about with a small Silver-fringe. The Bridle was very strait, with Silver-studs
in some places. I believe the Horse had never been Backed; for so soon as I
brought him to the Holland-House, where I then lodged, a young man got upon his
Back; but he was no sooner on, but the Horse flung and pranc'd at that rate,
that having kicked down an Hutt that stood in the Court, he had like to have
killed the Hollander. Finding that such a Resty-Horse was not for my turn, I
sent him back to Cha-Est-Kan, and relating the Story to him, I told him I did
not believe that he desired I should return into my Country to bring him back
some rarities which I had promised him, as he made me believe he did. All the
while I talked, he laughed, and afterward sent for the Horse which his Father
in his life time used to ride upon. It was a tall Persian Horse, that had
formerly cost five thousand Crowns, but was then twenty eight years old. They
brought him bridled and saddl'd, and the Prince would needs have me get up in
his presence. He had one of the most stately walks that ever I knew in a Horse:
and when I alighted, well, said he, art thou satisfied? I dare say, that Horse
will never give thee a fall. I thanked him, and at the same time took my leave
of him; and the next day, before my departure, he sent me a great Basket of
Apples. It was one of the six that Chajehan had sent him, as they came from the
Kingdom of Kachemir; there was in the Basket also a great Persian Melon: All
this might be worth a hundred Roupies, which I presented to the Holland
Commanders Wife. As for the Horse I rode him to Golconda, where I sold him for
five hundred Roupies, as old as he was, being a good lusty Beast.

To return to our discourse of Money, I will add this to what I have said
already, that you must never carry Louis's, of Gold to the Indies, nor Spanish
nor Italian Pistols, nor any other sort of Money coined within these few years;
for there is great loss by it; for the Indians refine all, and count only upon
the refinings. Lastly, every one strives to steal the custom of their Gold; and
when the Merchant has got the knack of concealing it, he may gain five or six
of our Sous in every Ducat.

I come now to the sorts of Silver Money; which you must distinguish into money
of the Country, and Foreign Money: And first of the Foreign Coins.

The Foreign Silver Coins which are carried into the Indies, are the
Rixdollars of Germany, and the Reals of Spain. The first are brought by the
Merchants that come from Poland, from the Lesser Tartary, and the Borders of
Muscovia. The others by those that come from Constantinople, Smyrna, and
Aleppo, and the greatest part by the Armenians, who sell their Silk into
Europe. All these merchants endeavor to convey their Silver through Persia
without being discovered; for if the Customers find it out, they will be forced
to carry their Silver to the Mint-Masters to be coined into Abassi's, which is
the Kings Coin; these Abassi's being carried into India, are again coined into
Roupies, whereby the Merchant loses ten and a quarter per Cent. as well by
reason of the coinage, as by paying the Kings duties in Persia.

To let you understand in a few words, how they came to lose this ten and a
quarter per Cent. from Persia to the Indies, and sometimes more, according to
the nature of the Reals, which they usually carry into Persia; you must call to
mind, what I have already said concerning the Money and Exchanges of Persia, in
the first Volume. I observed, that a Real in Persia goes for 23 Chaez, which
make three Abassi's, and a quarter; and that sometimes, when Silver is scarce,
they will give a Chaez and a half for one. That the Abassi is worth four Chaez,
and the Toman fifty Abassi's, or two hundred Chaez. If you carry six Tomans and
a half to the Indies, you have for every Toman twenty nine Roupies and a half;
and consequently for six Tomans and a half, a hundred and ninety-one Roupies
and a quarter. If you carry to the Indies Reals of Sevile, for a hundred you
shall have from 213 to 215 Roupies. If you carry Mexican Reals; for a hundred
you shall have no more than 212. So that when for a hundred Reals you have but
two hundred and twelve Roupies, you gain ten Reals and a quarter, in an hundred
Reals; but by the Sevillian Reals you profit eleven per Cent.

There are three or four sorts of Spanish Reals, and they give for a hundred
according to their goodness, from 218 to 214 and 215 Roupies. The best of all
are those of Sevil for when they are full weight, they will give for a hundred,
213 Roupies; and sometimes 215, according as Silver is either scarce or
plentiful.

The Real of Spain ought to weigh three Drams, seven Grains and a half more
than two Roupies. But the Silver of the Roupies is much better. For the Roupy
is in weight eleven Deneers and fourteen Grains; but the Sevil Real, like our
white Crown, is but just eleven Deneers. The Maxican Real goes at ten Deneers
and twenty-one Grains. For the Spanish Real, that weighs seventy-three Vals,
you have four Mamoudi's and a half, and one Mamoudi is worth twenty Pecha's;
but they must be very good, and as I have said already, seventy-three Vals in
weight: eighty-one Vals making an Ounce, one Val coming to seven Deneers.

For the Rixdollars of Germany, in regard they are heavier than the Reals, they
will give you for an hundred, as high as an hundred and sixteen Roupies. Where
you are to take notice, that in giving for an hundred Reals, or an hundred
Rixdollars, two hundred and fifteen, or two hundred and sixteen Roupies, it
seems that every Roupy ought to be worth less than thirty Sous. But if the
Merchant count the Portage of the Silver, and the Customs, he will find that
every Roupy will stand him in more. But that the Merchant may make his profit,
he must take notice, that all the Reals of Mexico, and those of Sevil, are in
weight one and twenty Deneers and eight Grains, that is, five hundred and
twelve Grains; and for those that are no better then our white Crown, they are
to be in weight one and twenty Deneers and three Grains, which makes five
hundred and nine Grains. All Dollars and Reals are weighed, a hundred at a
time, and when they are wanting in weight, they add little stones, as when they
weigh Gold, according to what I shall tell you by and by.

We come now to the Money of the Country. The Indian Money is the Silver Roupy,
the Half, Quarter, Eighteenth and Sixteenth part. The weight of the Roupy is
nine Deneers and one Grain; the value of the Silver is eleven Deneers and
fourteen Grains. They have also another sort of Silver Money, which they call
Mamoudi's, but this goes nowhere but in Surat, and in the Province of Guzerat.

The Indians have also a sort of small Copper Money, which is called Pecha;
which is worth about two of our Liards, a Liard being the fourth part of a
Sous. There is also the Half Pecha, Two Pecha's, and Four Pecha's. According to
the custom of the Province where you Travel, you have for a Roupy of Silver
more or less of these Pecha's. In my last Travels, a Roupy went at Surat for
nine and forty Pecha's. But the time was, when it was worth fifty, and another
time, when it went but for six and forty. At Agra and Gehanabat, the Roupy was
valued at fifty-five and fifty-six Pecha's. And the reason is, because the
nearer you go to the Copper Mines, the more Pecha's you have for a Roupy. As
for the Mamoudi, it is always valued at forty Pecha's.

There are two other sorts of small Money in the Dominions of the Great Mogull,
which are little bitter Almonds and Shells. These little bitter Almonds, which
are brought out of Persia, are only made use of in the Province of Guzeratt; as
I have observed in the first part of my Relations. They grow in dry and barren
places amongst the Rocks, and the Tree, that bears them, is almost like our
Bastard Spanish-Broom. They call these Almonds Baden: Nor is there any
Coloquintida so bitter. They give for a Pecha sometimes thirty five, and
sometimes forty.

Their other small Money are the little Shells which they call Cori; the sides
whereof turn circularly inward: Nor are they to be found in any part of the
World, but in the Maldives Islands. They are the greatest part of the Revenue
of the King of that Island. For they are transported into all the Territories
of the Great Mogull; into the Kingdoms of Visapour and Golconda; and into the
Islands of America to serve instead of Money. Near the Sea they give 80 for a
Pecha. But the further you go from the Sea, the less you have; so that at Agra,
they will not give you above 50 or 55 for a Pecha. As to what remains according
to the Account of the Indians, 100000 Roupies make a Lekke. 100000 Lekks make a
Kraur. 100000 Kraur's make a Padan. 100000 Padan's make a Ril.
In the Indies, the Village must be very small, where there does not reside a
Banker, whom they call Cheraff; whose business it is to remit Money and Bills
of Over all the Empire of the Great Mogull and in other parts of India the
Idolaters, though they differ in their languages, make use of these sort of
Cifers 1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^ 10 ^ 11 ^ 12 ^ 13 ^ 14 ^ 15 ^ 16 ^
17 ^ 18 ^ 19 ^ 20 ^ 21 ^ 22 ^ 23 ^ 24 ^ 25 ^ 26 ^ 27 ^ 28 ^ 29 ^ 30 ^ 31 ^ 32 ^
33 ^ 34 ^ 35 ^ 36 ^ 37 ^ 38 ^ 39 ^ 40 ^ 41 ^ 42 ^ 43 ^ 44 ^ 45 ^ 46 ^ 47 ^ 48 ^
49 ^ 50 ^ 100 ^.. 1000 ^... 10000 ^.... 20000 ^.... 100000 ^...... 1000000
^......


Exchange. In regard that these Bankers hold a Correspondence with the
Governors of the Province, they raise as they please themselves, the Roupie
for the Pecha's, and the Pecha's for the Shells. All the Jews that deal in
Money and Exchange in the Empire of the Grand Seignior, are accounted a most
subtle sort of People. But in the Iudies they would be scarce thought fit to be
Apprentices to these Bankers. They have one very bad custom in making of
Payments: And I have already observed it, in reference to their Roupies of
Gold. When they make any Payment in that sort of Money, they tell ye, 'twas a
great while ago that any Silver Roupie was coined; that they are worth less
than those which are new, or but lately coined; for that by passing through
many hands they wear away, and become lighter. And therefore when you make any
bargain, you must always agree to be paid in Roupies Cha-jenni, that is, in new
Silver; otherwise, they will pay you in Roupies coined some fifteen or twenty
years ago, and upward; whereby you will lose four in the hundred. For they will
have one fourth, or at least one eighth per Cent. allowed for those that were
coined but two years before: So that the poor People that cannot read the year
wherein the Roupies were coined, are subject to be cheated; for they will
always abate a Pecha or a half a Pecha upon a Roupie, or three or four Cori's
upon a Pecha.

As for counterfeit Silver, there is very little amongst them. If you receive
one false Roupie in a Bagg from any particular Person, it is better to cut it to
pieces, and lose it, than to speak of it; for if it should come to be known,
there might be danger in it. For you are commanded by the Kings Law to return
the Bagg where you received it; and to return it from one to another, till you
can find out the Counterfeiter; who if he be apprehended, is only sentenced to
lose his hand. If the Counterfeiter cannot be found, and that it be thought
that he who paid the Money is not guilty, he is acquitted upon some small
amercement. This brings great profit to the Changers. For when there is any Sum
of Money received or paid, the Merchants ^ause him to look it over, and for
their pains, they have one sixteenth of a Roupie in the hundred.

As for the Money which is paid out of the Sarquet, or Kings Exchequer, there
is never any found that is counterfeit: For all the Money that is carried in
thither, is exactly viewed by the Kings Bankers* The Great Lords have also
their particular Bankers. Before they put up the Money into the Treasury, they
throw it into a great Charcoal-fire, and when the Roupies are red-hot, they
quench the fire, by throwing water*upon it; and then take out the Money. If
there be any Piece that is white or that has the least mark of Alloy, it is
presently cut in pieces. As often as these Roupies are carried into the
Treasury, they mark the Pieces with a Puncheon, which makes an hole, but not
quite through; and there are some Pieces that have seven or eight holes made in
that manner, to show that they have been so many times in the Exchequer. They
are all put, a thousand Pieces together, in a Bagg, sealed with the Seal of the
great Treasurer, and the number of years superscrib'd, since*they were coined.
And here you are to take notice, whence the Treasurers profit arises, as well
that of the Kings Treasurer, as that of the particular Treasurers of the Great
Lords of the Kingdom. When there is any bargain made, they agree for new
Roupies coined the same year: but when they come to receive the payment, the
Treasurers will make it in old Roupies, wherein there is a loss of six per
Cent. So that if they will have new Silver, the Merchants must compound with
the Treasurer. In my fifth Voyage, I went to visit Cha-Est-Kan according to my
promise, to let him have the first sight of what I brought along with me. So
that as soon as I arrived at Suratt, I sent him word; and received his Orders
to meet him at Choupart, a City in the Province of Decan, to which he had laid
Siege. Coming to him, in a little time, and a few words, I sold him the
greatest part of what I had brought along with me out of Europe: And he told me
that he expected every day, that Money should be sent him from Suratt to pay
the Army, and to pay me also at the same time for what he had bought of me I
could not imagine however, that so great a Prince as he, that commanded so great
an Army, had not store of Money by him; but rather conjectured, that he had an
intention to make me some abatement, upon those Pieces which he would put upon
me in payment, as he had served me before. It fell out, as I foresaw. But for
Provisions for my self, my men, and my Horses, he took such order, that there
was great plenty brought me, night and morning, and for the most part he sent
for me my self, to his own Table. Ten or twelve days thus past away, and not a
word of the Money that I expected: So that being resolved to take my leave of
him, I went to his Tent. He appeared to be somewhat surpised, and looking upon
me with a frowning-brow* wherefore will you be gone, said he, before you are
paid? or who d*you think, shall pay you afterward, if you go away before you
receive your Money? Upon these words, with a countenance as stern as his, my
King, replied I, will see me paid. For his goodness is such, that he causes all
his Subjects to be paid; that have not received satisfaction for such Goods as
they fell in Foreign Countries. And what course will he take, answered he in a
great choler: with two or three stout Men of War, said I, which he will send
either to the Port of Suratt, or toward the Coasts to wait for the Ships that
come from Mocca. He seemed to be netled at the reply, but not daring to give
any more way to his choler, he ordered his Treasurer immediately to give me a
Letter of Exchange to Aurengaebad. I was the more glad of that, because it was
a place through which I was to pass in my way to Golcanda; besides that, it
would spare me the carriage and the hazards of my Money. The next day I had my
Bill of Exchange, and took Ieave of the Prince, who was nothing displeased, but
told me, that if I returned to the Indies, I should not fail to come and see
him, which I did in my sixth and last Voyage. When I came to Suratt, he was at
Bengala, where I sold him all the rest of my Goods that I could not put off
either to the King of Persia, or great Mogul.

But to return to the payment of my Money, I was no sooner arrived at
Aurenggabat, but I went to find the great Treasurer; who no sooner saw me, but
he told me, he knew wherefore I came; that he had received Letters of advice
three days before, and that he had already taken the Money out of the Treasury
to pay me. When he had brought me all the Baggs, I caused my Banker to open
them, who saw them to be Roupies, by which I was to lose two in the hundred.
Upon that I thanked the Treasurer very heartily, telling him, I understood no
such dealing, and that I would send and complain of him to Cha-Est-Kam; and
declare to him that he should either give order that I should be paid in new
Silver, or else let me have my Goods again, which I presently did. But not
receiving* an answer so soon as I knew I might have done, I went to the
Treasurer, and told him, I would go my self, and fetch away my Goods. I believe
he had received order what to do, for seeing I was resolved to go; he told me
he was very unwilling I should put my self to so much trouble, and that it
would be better for us to agree among our selves. After many contests about the
two in the hundred, which he would have made me lose, I was contented to abate
one, and had lost the other, had I not happily met with a Banker who wanted
Silver, and had a Bill of Exchange to pay at Golconda; so that he was glad to
make use of mine, and gave me a Bill to be paid at Golconda, being my full
Sum, at fifteen days sight.

The Changers to try their Silver, make use of thirteen little pieces, one half
Copper, and the other Silver, which are their Says.

The manner how their thirteen Saypieces are filled; the upper-half being
Copper, and the lowerhalf Silver.

These thirteen pieces differing all in goodness, they never make use of them,
but when any question arises concerning a small q uantity of Silver, or if any
wrought Silver. For they refine all their great quantities. All that kind of
Silver is brought by the weight which they call Tolla, which weighs nine
Deneers, and eight Grains, or 32 Val's; 81 Val's, making an Ounce: So that an
hundred Tolla's making 38 Ounces, 21 Deneers, and 8 Grains.

See here the differences of the thirteen Goodnesses of Silver.
THe first, which is the lowest goodness, they take at fifteen Pecha's to the
Molla, which makes of our Money nine Sous, two Deneers.

The second, at eighteen Pecha's, which make ten Sous two Deneers.

The third, at ten Pecha's, which make twelve Sous, six Deneers.

The fourth, at thirteen Pecha's, which make fourteen Sous, six Deneers.

The fifth, at sixteen Pecha's, which make fifteen Sous, ten Deneers.

The sixth, at nineteen Pecha's, which make seventeen Sous, six Deneers.

The seventh, at thirty-three Pecha's, which make nineteen Sous, two Deneers.

The eighth, at thirty-five Pecha's, which make twenty Sous, ten Deneers.

The ninth, at thirty-eight Pecha's, which make twenty-two Sous, six Deneers.

The tenth at forty Pecha's, which make twenty-four Sous, ten Deneers.

The eleventh, at forty-three Pecha's, which make twenty-five Sous, ten Deneers.

The twelfth, at forty-six Pecha's, which make twenty-seven Sous, six Deneers.

The thirteenth, at forty-nine Pecha's, which make nineteen Sous, two Deneers.

Here it will not be amiss to give you an hint, how far the cunning extends,
not only of the Cheraffs or Changers, but of all the Indians in general; and it
shall suffice to give you one example, which is very particular, and of which
our Europeans make no account: Which is this; that of all the Gold, which
remains upon the stone upon which they make the Essay, and of which we make no
reckoning, they are so far from losing the least atome of that small matter,
that they fetch it all off, by means of a Ball made half of Black-pitch, and
half of Soft-wax, with which they rub the stone that carries the Gold; at the
end of some years the Ball will shine, and teen they get out all the Gold that
sticks to it This Ball is about the bigness of one of our Tennis-Balls; and the
Stone is such a one as our Goldsmiths generally use.

Thus much of the Custom-houses and Money current among the Indians. It remains
to speak of their manner of Exchange.

As all the Goods which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogull, and some
part of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour are brought to Suratt to be
transported into several parts of Asia and Europe; the Merchants, when they go
from Surat to buy Commodities in the several Cities where they are made, as at
Lahor, Agra, Amadabat, Seronge, Brampour, Dasa, Patna, Banarous, Golconda
Decan, Visapour, and Dultabat, take up Money a^ (...) and are discharged at the
places where they go, by giving kind for kind. But when it happens that the
Merchant is short of Money in those places, and that there is a necessity* for
him to take up Money to complete his Markets, he must then return it at Suratt
within two Months, paying Monthly for the Change.

From Lahor to Suratt the Exchange goes at six and a quarter per Cent.

From Amadabat, from one, to one and an half.

From Seronga, at three.

From Brampour, from two and an half, to three*

From Daca, at ten.

From Banarou, at six.

From the three last places they make their Bills of Exchange only to Agra; and
at Agra they make others for Suratt, the whole at the same price as I have


set down.

From Golconda, from four to five.

And for Goa the same.

From Decan at three.

From Visapour at three.

From Dultabat, from one to one and an half.

Some years the Exchange rises from one to two per Cent. by reason of certain
Raja's or petty Vassal Princes that disturb Trade, every one pretending that
the Mechandizes ought to pass through his Country, and pay Toll. There are two
particularly between Agra and Amadabatt, the one called the Raja of Antivar,
and the other the Raja of Bergam, who very much molest the Merchants for this
very cause. But you may avoid passing through the Territories of these Princes,
taking auother road from Agra to Suratt, thorough Seronge and Brampour. But
they are fertile Lands, divided with several Rivers, witout Bridges or Boats,
and it is impossible to go that way, till two Months after the rains are
fallen. Which is the reason that those Merchants who must be at Suratt when the
season permits them to take the Sea, are forced to pass through the Territories
of these two Raja's, because they can pass that way at all times, even in the
time that the rains fall, which only knit and harden the Sand.

Nor are you to wonder that the Exchange runs so high; for they that trust out
their Money, run the hazard, by obligation, of losing their Money, if the
Merchants should be robbed.

When you come to Suratt to Embarque, there is Money enough. For it is the
greatest Trade of the Grandees of the Indies to venture their Money by Sea from
thence for Ormus, Balsara, and Mocca; nay even as far as Bantam, Achen, and the
Philippine Islands. For Mocca and Balsara, the change runs from 22 to 24 per
Cent. And to Ormus, from 16 to 20. And to the other places which I have nam ed,
the change runs proportionable to the distance.

I have but one word to say of their Weights and Measures; I have given you in
the Margin the fifth part of an Ell of Agra, and the fourth part of an Ell of
Amadabat and Suratt. As for their Weights, the Men is generally 69 Pound, and
the Pound 16 Ounces. But the Men which they weigh their Indigo withal, is but
53 Pound. At Suratt they talk of a Serre, which is one and three fourths of a
Pound, and the Pound is 16 Ounces.

CHAP. III.
Of their Carriages, and the manner of Traveling in India.
BEfore you set forward upon the road, it will be convenient to speak of their
Carriages and manner of traveling in India, which, in my opinion, is more
commodious than any thing that has been invented for ease in France or Italy.
Quite otherwise it is in Persia, where they neither make use of Asses, Mules,
or Horses, but transport all their Wares to the Indies upon Oxen, or in Wains,
their Countries being so near to one another. If any Merchant carries an Horse
out of Persia, it is only for show; or to walk in his hand, or to sell to some
Indian Prince.

They will lay upon an Oxes back 300, or 350 pound weight, and it is no
wonderful thing to see ten or twelve thousand Oxen at a time all laden with
Rice, Corn and Salt, in such places where they exchange those Commodities:
Carrying Corn where only Rice grows, Rice where only Corn grows, and Salt where
there is none at all. They make use of Camels sometimes, but very rarely, they
being particularly appointed to carry the luggage of great Personages. When the
season requires have, and that they would speedily conveigh their Merchandise
to Suratt to ship them off, they load them upon Oxen, and not in Wains. And in
regard that the Territories of the Great Mogul are very well manured. the
Fields are fenced with very good Ditches; and to every Field there belongs a
Pond to preserve the water. This is this great inconvenience for Travelers;
that when they meet with these numerous Caravans in straight places, they are
forced to stay two or three days till they are all past by. They that drive
these Oxen, follow no other Calling as long as they live, nor do they dwell in
houses; yet they carry their Wives and Children along with them. There are some
among them that have an hundred Oxen of their own, others more or less; and
they have always one, who is their Chief, that takes as much state as a Prince,
and has his Chain of Pearl hanging about his neck. When the Caravan that
carries the Corn, and that which carries the Salt happen to meet, rather than
yield the road, they frequently enter into very bloody Disputes. The Great
Mogull considering one day that these quarrels were very prejudicial to Trade,
and the transportation of necessary Provisions from place to place, sent for
the two Chiefs of the Caravan, and after he had exhorted them, for the common
good and their own interest, to live quietly together, and not to quarrel and
fight when they met, gave to each of them a Leck, or an hundred thousand
Roupies, and a Chain of Pearl.

That the Reader may the better understand the manner of Traveling in the
Indies, he is to take notice, that among the Idolaters of that Country there
are four Tribes, which are called Manari's, each of which may consist of an
hundred thousand Souls. These people live always in Tents, and live only upon
the transporting of Merchandise from Country to Country. The first of these
Tribes carry nothing but Corn. the second Rice, the third Pulse, and the fourth
Salt, which they fetch from Suratt, and all along from as far as Cape-Camorin.
These Tribes are also distinguished in this manner: Their Priests, of whom I
shall speak in another place, mark the forheads of the first, with a red-Gum,
about the breadth of a Crown; and then they draw a streak all the length of his
nose, sticking grains of Wheat upon it, sometimes ten, and sometimes twelve.
Those of the second Tribe are marked with yellow-Gumin the same place, with
grains of Rice. Those of the third are marked with a grey-Gum, down to the
shoulders, and grains of Millet. Those of the fourth Tribe carry tied about
their necks a Bagg, with a great lump of Salt in it, weighing sometimes eight
or ten pounds, (for the heavier it is, the more they glory in carrying it;) and
with this Bagg they thump their stomachs, as a sign of repentance every morning
before they say their Prayers. They have all in general a little line or twist,
like a Scarf, about their necks, at the end whereof hangs a little Silver-box,
like a Relique-box, wherein they enclose a little superstitious writing which
their Priests give them; they tie them also about their Oxen and other Cattle,
which are bred in their Herds, for which they have a particular affection, and
love them as tenderly as children, especially if they have no children of their
own. Their Women wear only a piece of Calicut white or painted, some six or
five times doubled from their wastes downward. From their wastes upward they cut
their flesh into several forms of Flowers, as they do that apply
Cupping-glasses, which they paint in various colors with the juice of Grapes,
that their skin seems to be all made of Flowers.

Every morning, while the men load the Beasts, and that the Women fold up the
Tents, the Priests that follow them, set up in the most convenient place of the
Plain where they lodged a certain Idol in the form of a Serpent in wreaths,
upon a Perch six or seven foot high; to which they come all in files to
worship, their Women going three times about. After the Ceremony is over, the
Priests take care of the Idol, and load it upon an Ox particularly appointed
for that purpose.

The Caravan of Wagons seldom exceeds the number of an hundred or two hundred
at most. Every Wagon is drawn by ten or twelve Oxen; and attended by four
Soldiers, which the Person that ows the Merchandise isoblig'd to pay- Two of
them march upon each side of the Wagon, over which there are two Ropes thrown
across, the ends whereof they hold in their hands, to the end, that if the
Wagon come to lean on one side in ill-way, the two Soldiers on the other
side may keep it from over-turning by pulling the Ropes with all their strength.

All the Wagons that come to Suratt, either from Agra, or any other parts of
the Empire, and which return through Agra, or Janabatt, are bound to carry back
the Lime that comes from Barocha, which, after it is tempered, and laid on,
becomes as hard as Marble.

I come now to the manner of traveling in India, to which purpose they make
use of Oxen instead of Horses, and there are some, whose pace is as easy as the
amble of our Hackneys. But you must take a care, when you either buy or hire an
Ox to ride upon, that the horns be not a bove a foot in length. For if they be
longer, when the flies begin to sting, he will chafe, and toss back his horns,
and strike them into the stomach of the Rider, as oftentimes it has happened.
These Oxen are rid like our Horses, and instead of Snaffles or Bitts, they have
only a Rope drawn through the muscly part of the muzzle or nostrils. In firm
ground where there are no stones, they never shoe their Oxen; but only in
rough places, where not only the stones, but the heat will wast and chop the
hoof. Whereas in Europe we tie our Oxen by the horns, the Indians only put a
thick truss upon their necks, that keeps fast a Collar of Leather four fingers
broad, which they have nothing to do but to put about their necks when they
fasten them to the Wagon.

They use also for Travel little Coaches, but very light, that will hold two
persons; but generally they ride alone for more ease, carrying only their
necessary Cloak-Bags along with them; with a small Vessel of Wine, and a small
quantity of Provisions, for which there is a proper place under the Coach,
where they tie the two Oxen. These Coaches have their Curtains and Seats like
ours, yet are not hung: But in my last Travels I caused one to be made after
our manner; and the two Oxen that drew it, cost me near upon six-hundred
Roupies. Nor is the Reader to wonder at the price; for there are some of these
Oxen that are very strong, and that will travel upon the trot twelve or fifteen
leagues a day for sixty days together. When they have gone half the days
journey, they give them two or three Balls, as big as one of our
two-penny-loaves, of Wheat kneaded up with butter and black-sugar. The hire of
a Coach comes to a Roupie a day more or less. From Suratt to Agra is forty days
journey, and you pay for thewhole journey from forty to forty-five Roupies.
From Suratt to Golconda, being almost the same distance, the same price is
observed; and by the same proportion you may travel over all the Indies.

They who have more to spend, for their own ease make use of a Pallanquin,
wherein they travel very commodiously. This is a sort of little Couch six or
seven foot long, and three broad, with balisters round about it. A sort of
Cane, called Bambouc, which they bend like an Arch, sustains the covering of
the Pallanquin, which is either of Satin or Cloth of Gold; and when the Sun
lies upon one side, a Slave that goes by the side, takes care to pull down the
covering. Another Slave carries at the end of a long stick a kind of Target of
Osier, covered over with some gentile stuff, to preserve the person that is in
the Pallanquin from the heat of the Sun, when he turns and lies upon his face.
The two ends of the Bambouc are fastened on both sides to the body of the
Pallanquin between two sticks joined together like a Saltir or St.
Andrews-cross, every one of those two sticks being five or six foot long. There
are some of these Bambouc's that cost two hundred Crowns; I my self have paid
an hundred and twenty. Three men for the most part apply themselves to each of
these two ends to carry the Pallanquin upon their shoulders; some on the right,
and some on the left, and they go swifter than our Sedan-men, and with a much
more easy pace, as being that which they practice from their youth. You give to
every one for all things not above four Roupies a Month; but it stands you in
above five if the journey be long, and exceed sixty days labor.

Whether it be in a Coach, or Pallanquin, he that will travel honorably in the
Indies, must take along with him twenty or thirty armed men, with Bows and
Arrows some, others with Muskets; and they have the same rate with those that
carry the Pallanquin. Sometimes for more magnificence they carry a Banner, as
the English and Hollanders do, for the honor of their Companies. These
Soldiers are not only for show, but they watch for your defense, keeping
Sentinels, and relieving one another, and are very studious to give content.
For you must know, that in the Towns where you take them into service, they
have a Chieftain, that is responsible for their fidelity, who for his good word
has two Roupies a-piece of every one.

In the great Villages there is generally a Mahumetan that commands, of whom
you may buy Mutton, Pullets, or Pigeons. But where there live none but
Banians, there is nothing but Flower, Rice, Herbs and Milk-meats to be had.

The great heats in India enforcing the Travelers, that are not accustomed to
them, to travel by night, and rest in the daytime; when they come into any
fortified Towns, they must be gone*before Sunset, if they intend to travel
that night. For night coming on, and the Gates being shut, the Commander of the
place, who is to answer for all the Robberies that are committed within his
Jurisdiction, will let no person stir forth, telling them that it is the King's
order, to which he must be obedient. When I came to any of those Towns, I
brought my Provisions, and went out again in good time, and staid in the Field
under some Tree, in the fresh air, till it was time to set forward.

They measure the distances of places in India by Gos, and Costs. A Gos is
about four of our common leagues, and a Cost is one league. It is now time to
travel from Surat to Agra, and Janabat, and to observe what is most remarkable
upon the Road.

CHAP. IV.
The Road from Surat to Agra, through Brampour and Seronge.
I Am no less well acquainted with all the principal Roads that lead to the
chief Cities in India, than those of Turkey and Persia; for in six times that I
have traveled from Paris to Ispahan, I have gone twice for one from Ispahan to
Agra, and many other places of the Great Mogul's Empire. But it would be
tiresome to the Reader to carry him more than once the same way, on purpose to
make a relation of every particular journey, and the accidents that accompany
them: And therefore let it suffice to give an exact description of the Roads,
without particularizing the distinct times that I went.

There are but two Roads from Surat to Agra, one through Brampour and Seronge,
the other through Amadabat. The first shall be the Subject of this Chapter.
From Surat to Barnoly, costs 14 Barnoly is a great Borough-Town, where you are
to ford a great River; and this first days journey you cross a mixed Country,
part Wood, through Fields of Wheat and Rice. From Barnoly to Bahor, costs 10
Bahor is also a large Village upon a Lake, about a league in compass. Upon the
side whereof is to be seen a good substantial Fortress; though there be no use
made of it. Three quarters of a league on this side the Village you ford a
small River, though not without great difficulty, by reason of the Rocks and
Stones that hazard the over-turning of the Coach. This second days journey you
travel almost altogether through Woods From Balor to Kerkoa, or as it is called
at this day, Carvansera de la Begum, costs 5 This Carvansera or Inn is very
large and commodious; being built out of Charity by Begum-saheb the Daughter of
Cha-jehan. For formerly the journey from Balor to Navapoura was too great: And
this place being upon the Frontiers of those Raja's that sometimes will not
acknowledge the Great Mogul, whose Vassals they are, there was no Caravan that
past by which was not abused; besides that it is a wooddy-Country. Between
Carvansera and Navapoura you ford a River; as also another very near to
Navapoura. From Kerkoa to Navapoura, costs 75 Navapoura is a great Town full
of Weavers; but Rice is the greatest Commodity of that place. There runs a
River through the Country, which makes it very fruitful, and waters the Rice,
that requires moisture. All the Rice which grows in this Country has one
peculiar quality, that makes it more particularly esteemed. The grain of it is
less by one half, than the grain of the common Rice; and when it is boiled no
snow is whiter; but besides all that, it smells of Musk; and all the Grandees
of the Indians eat no other. When they would make an acceptable Present to any
one in Persia, they send him a sack of this Rice. This River which passes by
Kerkoa and those other places I have mentioned, empties it self into the River
of Surat. From Navapoura to Nasarbar, costs. 9 From Nasarbar to Dol-medan,
costs. 74 From Dol-medan to Senquera, costs. 7 From Senquera to Tallener,
costs. 10 At Tallener you are to pass the River, which runs to Baroche; where
it is very large, and empties it self into the Golf of Cambaya. From Tallener
to Choupre, costs. 15 From Choupre to Senquelis, costs. 13 From Senquelis to
Nabir, costs. 10 From Nabir to Badelpoura, costs. 9 At Badelpoura it is,
where the loaded Wagons pay the duties of Brampour; but the Wagons that carry
nothing but Passengers pay nothing. From Badelpoura to Brampour, costs. 5

Brampour is a great City, very much ruined, the Houses being for the most part
thatched with straw. There is also a great Castle in the midst of the City,
where the Governor lies; the Government of this Province is a very
considerable command; and is only conferred upon the Son or Uncle of the King.
And Aureng-zeb, the present King, was a long time Governor of this Province in
the Reign of his Father. But since they came to understand the strength of the
Province of Bengala, which formerly bore the Title of a Kingdom, that Province
is now the most considerable in all the Mogul's Country. There is a great
Trade in this City, and as well in Brampore, as over all the Province, there is
made a prodigious quantity of Calicuts very clear and white, which are
transported into Persia, Turkey and Muscovia, Poland, Arabia, to Grand Cairo,
and other places. There are some which are painted with several colors, with
flowers, of which the Women make Veils and Scarfs; the same Calicuts serve for
Coverlets of Beds, and for Handkerchiefs. There is another sort of Linen which
they never dye, with a stripe or two of Gold or Silver quite through the piece,
and at each end from the breadth of one inch to twelve or fifteen, in some
more, in some less, they fix a tissue of Gold, Silver, and Silk, intermixed
with Flowers, whereof there is no wrong-side, both sides being as fair the one
as the other. If these pieces, which they carry into Poland, where they have a
vast utterance, want at each end three or four inches at the least of Gold or
Silver; or if that Gold or Silver become tarnish'd in being carried by Sea from
Surat to Ormus, and from Trebizan to Mangala, or any other part upon the
Black-Sea, the Merchant shall have much ado to put them off without great loss.
He must take care that his goods be packt up in good Bales, that no wet may get
in; which for so long a Voyage requires great care and trouble. Some of these
Linnens are made purposely for Swathbands or Shashes, and those pieces are
called Ornis. They contain from 15 to 20 Else; and cost from an hundred to an
hundred and fifty Roupies, the least, not being under ten or twelve else. Those
that are not above two else long are worn by the Ladies of Quality for Veils
and Scar^s, of which there is a vast quantity vended in Persia and Turkey. They
make at Brampour also other sorts of Cotten-Linnen; for indeed there is no
Province in all the Indies which more abounds in Cotton.

When you leave the City of Brampoure, you must pass another River, besides
that which I have mentioned already. There is no Bridge, and therefore when the
water is low, you ford it; when the rains fall, there are Boats attending.

From Surat to Brampour it is 132 Costs; and these Costs are very short in
the Indies; for you may travel one of them in a Coach in less than an hour.

I remember a strange tumult at Brampoure, in the year 1641, when I returned
from Agra to Surat; the cause whereof was thus, in short: The Governor of the
Province, who was the King's Nephew by the Mother's-side, had among his Pages a
young Boy that was very beautiful, and of a very good Family, who had a Brother
in the City that lived as a Dervich; and for whom all the Town had a very great
veneration. One day the Governor, being alone in his Chamber, did all that lay
in his power, by virtue of Gifts and Caresses to have had the use of his Body;
but the Boy detesting his abominable purpose, made his escape from him, and
came and told his Brother. The Dervich, without deliberating what Counsel he
had to give his younger Brother, gave him a Sword, such a one as he might
easily hide under his Garment; and told him, that if the Governor urged him
any more, that he should make a show of complying with him, but that when he
went about to do the fact, he should be sure to run him into the Guts. The
Governor, who knew nothing of what the Page had revealed to his Brother,
ceased not every day to court him to consent to his infamous lust; and being
one day alone with him in a small Apartment of a Banqueting House, at the
lower end of his Garden, he sent for his Page to fan him, and to keep off the
Flies, after the fashion of the Country; for it was about noon, when every one
goes to sleep. Then did the Governor begin again to press the young Page; and
finding that he made no resistance, he thought he should suddenly accomplish
his design. But the Page seeing him ready to commit the act, stabbed him three
times into the Belly, before he could open his mouth to cry out for help. That
done, the Page went out of the Palace, without any disturbance in his
countenance; so that the Guards believed that the Governor had sent him out
upon some errand. The Dervich understanding by his Brother what had passed, to
save him from the fury of the people, and to discover the Infamy of the
Governor, caused the rest of the Dervichs his Companions, to take the Banners
of Mahomet, that were planted round the Mosquee; and at the same time with loud
cries encouraged all the rest of the Dervichs, Faquirs, and others that were
good Mahumetans, to follow him. In less than an hours time he had got together
an infinite multitude of the Rabble, and the Dervich marching at the head of
them, they made directly to the Palace, crying out with all their might, Let us
dye for Mahomet, or let us have that infamous person delivered up into our
hands, to the end the Dogs may eat him after his death, not being worthy to be
enterr'd among the Musselmen. The Guard of the Palace was not in a condition to
resist so great a Multitude, so that they must have been forced to have yielded
to their fury; had not the Deroga of the Town, and some five or six Lords,
found a way to make themselves to be heard, and to appease them, by
representing to them, that they ought to have some respect to the Nephew of the
King; by that means obliging them to retire. That night the Body of the
Governor was sent to Agra, with his Haram; and Cha-jehan, who then reigned,
being informed of the accident, was not much troubled, because he is Heir to
all the goods of his Subjects; and at the same time he bestowed upon the Page a
small Government in the Province of Bengala.

From Brampour to Piombi-sera, costs

Before we go any further, you must take notice, that wherever you mee^ with
the word Sera, it signifies a great Enclosure of Walls and Hedges, within which
are about fifty or sixty Huts, covered over with Straw. There are some men and
women that there put to sale Flower, Rice, Butter, and Herbs, and make it their
business to bake Bread and boil Rice. If there be any Mahumetan in that place,
he will go to the City, and buy a little piece of Mutton, or a Fowl; and those
that sell Victuals to the Travelers, always cleanse the Hut which they take
up, and put into it a little Bed with girths, to stay a Mattress or Quilt upon,
which the Travelers carry along with them.

From Piombi-sera to Pander, costs 3 From Pander to Balki-sera, costs 6 From
Balki-sera to Nevilki-sera, costs ^ From Nevilki-sera to Consemba, costs 5
From Consemba to Chenipore, costs 3 From Chenipore to Charava, costs 8 From
Charava to Bich-ola, costs 8 From Bich*ola to Andy, costs ^ At Andy you must
pass a River that falls into Gunges, between Banarou and Patna. 1 From Andi to
Onquenas, costs 4 From Onquenas to Tiquery, costs 5 From Tiquery to
Tool-meden, costs 4 From Tool-meden to Nova-sera, costs 4 From Nova-sera to
Ichavour, costs 4 From Ichavour to Signor, costs 5 From Signor to Chekaipour,
costs 3 From Chekaipour to Dour-ay, costs 3 From Dour-ay to Aser-kaira,
costs 3 From Aser-kaira to Telor, costs 3 From Telor to San-kaira, costs 3
From San-kaira to Seronge, costs 13

Seronge is a great City, the most part of the Inhabitants whereof are Banian
Merchants, and Handicraft-trades-men from Father to Son, which is the reason
that there are in this City several Houses of Stone and Brick. There is also a
great Trade for all sorts of painted Calicuts, which are called Chites, which
is the clothing of all the meaner sort of people both in Persia and Turkey: Of
which in other Countries also they make use, for Coverlets for Beds, and
Table-napkins. They make the same sort of Calicuts in other Countries as well
as at Seronge, but the colors are not so lively; besides, that they wear out
with often washing. Whereas those that are made at Seronge, the more you wash
them, the fairer the colors show. There runs a River by the City, the water
whereof has that virtue, that it gives that beauty and liveliness to the
colors. And all the while the rains fall, the Workmen will make these prints
upon their Cottons, according to the Patterns which the Foreign Merchants give
them; for when the waters are ceased, the water is the thicker; and the oftener
they dip their Calicuts, the better the colors hold.

There is also made at Seronge another sort of Calicut, which is so fine, that
when a man puts it on, his skin shall appear through it, as if he were naked.
The Merchants are not permitted to transport it. For the Governor sends it all
to the Seraglio of the Great Mogul, and to the principal Lords of the Court. Of
this, the Sultanesses, and great Noblemen's Wives make them Shifts and Garments
in hot-weather: And the King and the Lords take great pleasure to behold them
in those Shifts, and to see them Dance with nothing else upon their Bodies.

From Brampore to Seronge is an hundred and one costs, which are longer than
those from Surat to Brampore; for the Coach is a full hour, and sometimes five
quarters, going one of these costs. In these hundred leagues of the Country
you travel whole days journeys along by most fertile Fields of Corn and Rice,
being lovely Champaign, where you meet with very little Wood; and from Seronge
to Agra, the Country is much of the same nature: And because the Villages lie
thick together, your journey is the more pleasant; besides, that you may rest
when you please.

From Seronge to Madalki-sera, costs. 6 From Madalki-sera to Poulki-sera,
costs. 2 From Poulki-sera to Kasariki-sera, costs. 3 From Kasariki-sera to
Chadolki-sera, costs. 6 From Chadolki-sera to Callabas, costs. 6 Callabas is
a great Town, which was formerly the Residence of a Raja, who paid Tribute to
the Great Mogul. But when Orang-zeb came to the Crown, he not only cut off his,
but a great number of the heads of his Subjects. There are two Towers near the
Town, upon the highway, and round about the Towers are several holes, like
windows; and in every hole, two foot distant one from another, there is fixed a
man's head. In my last Travels in the year 1665, it had not been long since
that Execution had been done; for then all the Heads were whole, and caused a
very ill smell: From Callabas to Akmate, costs 2 From Akmate to Collasar,
costs 9

Collasar is a little Town, all the Inhabitants whereof are Idolaters. As I
past through it upon my last Travels, there were brought to it eight Pieces of
Artillery, the one carrying 48 pound-Bullet, the rest 36. Every Piece was drawn
by 24 Yoke of Oxen. A very strong Elephant followed the Artillery, and when
they came to any bad-way, where the Oxen were at a stand, they brought up the
Elephant, who heaved the Cannon forward with his Trunk. Without the Town, all
along the highway, there grows a vast number of great Trees, which they call
Mangues; and in many places near the Trees are to be seen little Pagods, with
every one an Idol at the door. The Elephant passing by one of the Pagods,
before which I was lodged, at the door whereof there stood three Idols about
five foot high; so soon as he came near one, he took it up in his trunk, and
broke it in two pieces; the next he took, he threw it up so high, and so far,
that he broke it in four pieces; and carried away the head of the third along
with him. Some thought that the Governor of the Elephant had taught him what
to do, and made signs to him, which however I did not observe; nevertheless the
Banians were very much offended, though they durst not say any thing; for there
was a Guard of above two thousand men that convoyed the Artillery, all
Soldiers of the King, and Mahometans, besides Franguis, or Franks, English and
Hollanders that were Cannoneers. The King sent this Artillery to his Army in
Decan, being at Wars with the Raja Seva-gi, who the year before had plundered
Surat; of whom I shall have occasion to speak in another place.

From Collasar to Sansele, costs 6 From Sansele to Dongry, costs 4 From
Dongry to Gate, costs 3

Gate is a strait passage of the Mountains, a quarter of a League in length,
the descent whereof leads from Surat to Agra. At the entery thereof you see the
ruins of two or three Castles, and the Road is so narrow, that two Wagons can
hardly go a breast. They that come from the South to go to Agra, as from Surat,
Go^, Visapore, Golconda, Maslipatan, and other places, cannot avoid these
streights, there being no other Road but this, especially if you take the Road
from Amadabat. Formerly there was a Gate at each end of the straight, and at
that end which is next to Agra, there are five or six Shops of Banians, that
sell Flower, Butter, Rice, Herbs and Pulse. In my last Travels I staid at one
of these Shops, to tarry for the Coaches and Wagons, all the Passengers
alighting at the foot of the Streights. Not far off there is a great Magazin
full of sacks of Rice and Corn; and behind every sack lay a Serpent thirteen or
fourteen foot long, and proportionable in bigness. A Woman*that went to fetch
Corn out of one of those sacks, was bitten by one of those Serpents, and
perceiving her self wounded, ran out of the Magazin, crying out Ram, Ram, that
is, O God, O God; whereupon several Banians, men and women came running to her
relief, and bound her arm very hard above the wound, thinking to stop the venom
from running any higher. But all in vain, for immediately her face swelled and
turned black, and she died in less than an hour. The Ragipou's, who are the
best Soldiers among the Indians, and are all Idolaters, came in just as the
woman was expiring, and about four of them entering with their Skains, and
Half-pikes in their hands into the Magaziu, killed the Serpent. The people of
the Village took and threw it without the Town, and immediately there came a
great number of Birds of prey, which lighting upon the Carrion, devoured it in
less than an hours time. The Parents of the woman took her body, carried it to
the River, washed it, and then burnt it. I was forced to stay two days at that
place, because there was a River to pass, which instead of falling, swelled at
that time, by reason of the rains that fell for three or four days together: So
that I was constrained to go half a league lower before I could cross it. They
always endeavored to ford this River; for otherwise they must be compelled to
unload the Wgagon into the Boats; and also to carry the Goods in their arms for
above half a league, which is worse way than can be imagined. The people get
their livings by the Passengers, from whom they extort as much as they can,
there being none but they that know the ways: Otherwise it would be an easy
thing to make a Bridge, there being no want either of Wood or Stone near at
hand. For the passage is nothing but thorough Rocks, that lie between the
Mountain and the River; so that the waters when they swell, overflow all the
Road, in-so-much that nobody can pass it, but they who are very well
acquainted with it.

From Gate to Nader, costs 4 Nader is a great City upon the descent of a
Mountain, at the top whereof is a kind of Fortress; all the Mountain being
encompast with walls. The greatest part of the Houses, as in all other Cities
of India, are thatched with straw, one Story high; but the Rich-men's Houses,
are two Stories, and terrass'd. Round about the City are several great ponds to
be seen, which were formerly encompast with hewn-stone, but now are not at all
looked after: yet there are very fair Monuments about them. The same River
which we past the day before, and which we repass four or five Costs on this
side Nader, encompasses three parts of the City and Mountain, like a Peninsula,
and after a long winding-course which it takes, falls at length into Ganges. At
Nader they make a great quantity of quilted-Coverlets, some white, others
embroidered with Flowers of Gold, Silk and Satin. From Nader to Barqui-sera,
costs 9 From Barqui-sera to Try, costs 3 From Try to Goualeor, costs 6

Goualeor is a great City ill-built, like all the rest, after the manner of the
Indians; it is built all along the side of a Mountain that lies upon the
West Side of it; and which at the top is encompast with Walls and Towers. There
are in this Enclosure several Ponds made by the rains; and what they sow there
is sufficient to keep the Garrison: For which reason it is esteemed one of the
best in the Indies. Upon the descent of the Hill, which looks toward the
North-east, Chajean built an House of Pleasure; from whence there is a Prospect
over all the City, and indeed it may serve for a Garrison. Below the House are
to be seen several Idols cut out of the Rock, representing the shapes of their
Gods: And among the rest, there is one of an extraordinary height.

Since the Mohammedan Kings became Masters of this Country, this Fortress of
Goualeor is the place where they secure Princes and great Noblemen. Cha-jehan
coming to the Empire by foul-play, caused all the Princes and Lords whom he
mistrusted, to be seized one after another, and sent them to the Fortress of
Goualeor; but he suffered them all to live, and enjoy their Estates. Aureng-zeb
his Son acts quite otherwise; For when he sends any great Lord to this place,
at the end of nine or ten days he orders him to be poisoned; and this he does
that the people may not exclaim against him for a bloody Prince. So soon as he
had in his clutches Prince Morat-Bakche his youngest Brother, whom he engaged
to take Arms against his Father Cha-jehan; and who being Governor of the
Province of Guzerat, took upon him the Title of King, he sent him to this
Fortress, where he died. They have made him a most magnificent Monument in the
City in a Mosquee, which they built on Purpose, with a great Piazza before it
all surrounded with Vaults and Shops over them. For it is the custom of the
Indians, when they rear any public building, to make a great Piazza before it,
where they keep their Markets, with a Foundation for the Poor, to whom they
give Alms every day, as being to pray to God for him that raised the Fabric.

Five Cost's from Goualeor, you ford a River which is called Lan^ke. From
Goualeor to Paterki-sera, costs 3 From Paterki-sera to Quariqui-sera, costs
10 There is a Bridge at Paterki*sera, consisting of six wide Arches; and the
River you go over is called Quarinado. From Quariki-sera to Dolpoura, costs 6
At Dolpoura there is a great River which is called Chammelnadi, to which there
belongs a Ferry-Boat: The River it self falls into the Gemena between Agra and
Halabas. From Dolpoura to Minasqui-sera, costs 6 At Minasqui-sera there is a
River which is called Jagounadi. You pass it over a very long Bridge, built of
Stone, the name whereof is Jaoulcapoul. From Minasqui-sera to this Bridge,
costs 8 Not far from this Bridge it is, that they view the Merchants Goods,
that when they come to Agra they may not be deceived of their duties. But more
particularly to see whether among the Casks of Fruits pickled in Vinegar, in
pots of Glass, there be no flasks of Wine. From the Bridge Jaoulcapoul to Agra,
costs 4 So that from Seronge to Agra it is an hundred and six Costs, which
are ordinary leagues; and from Surat to Agra, 339.

CHAP. V.
The Road from Surat to Agra through Amadabat.
FRom Surat to Baroche, costs 22

All the Country between these two Cities is full of Corn, Rice, Millet, and
Sugarcanes. Before you enter into Baroche, you must Ferry over the River which
runs to Cambaya, and falls into the Golf that carries the same name.

Baroche is a great City, to which there belongs a Fortress, of which there is
no use made at this time. But the City has been always very famous, by reason
of the River, which has a particular quality to whiten their Cottons; which are
brought thither from all parts of the Great Mogul's Territories, where they
have not that convenience. In this place are made a great quantity of Baffa's,
or long and large pieces of Cotton. These Cottons are very fair, and close
woven; and the price of these pieces is from four to an hundred Roupies. You
must pay Custom at Baroche for all Goods that are brought in and carried out.
The English have a very fair House in the City; and I remember once, that
coming thither one day in my return from Surat to Agra with the President of
the English, presently the Mountebanks came about him, and asked him if he
would see any of their tricks. The first thing they did was to light a great
fire, and to heat certain Iron-chains red-hot, and wind them about their
bodies, making as if they felt a great deal of pain, but in truth receiving no
harm at all. Then they thrust a piece of a stick into the ground, and asked the
Company what Fruit they would have. One told them, he would have Mengues; then
one of the Mountebanks hiding himself in the middle of a Sheet, stoopt to the
ground five or six times one after another. I was so curious to go up stairs,
and look out of a window, to see if I could spy what the Mountebank did; and
perceived, that after he had cut himself under the armpits with a Razor, he
rubbed the stick with his Blood. After the two first times that he raised
himself, the stick seemed to the very eye to grow. The third time there sprung
out branches with young buds. The fourth time the Tree was covered with leaves;
and the fifth time it bore flowers. The President of the English had then his
Minister with him, having brought him from Amadabat to Christen the Commander
of the Hollander's Child, to which he had promised to be Godfather. The English
Minister Protested that he could not give his consent that any Christian should
be a spectator of such delusions. So that as soon as he saw that those
Mountebanks had of a dry-stick, in less then half an hour, made a Tree four or
five foot high, that bare leaves and flowers as in the Springtime; he went
about to break it, protesting he would not give the Communion to any person
that should stay any longer to see those things. Thereupon the President was
forced to dismiss the Mountebanks, who wander about the Country with their
Wives and Children just like Gypsies; and having given them to the value of ten
or twelve Crowns, they went away very well contented.

They that are curious to see Cambaya, never go out of their way above five or
six Costs, or thereabout. For when you are at Baroche, instead of going to
Broudra, you may go directly forward to Cambaya, from thence afterward to
Amadabat. But whether it be for business, or out of curiosity, the latter Road
is never to be taken; not only because it is the longest way, but because of
the danger in crossing the mouth of the Golf.

Cambaya is a great City at the bottom of the Golf that bears its name. Here it
is that they shape those fair Agats, that come from the Indies, into Cups,
Hafts of Knives, Beads, and other sorts of Workmanship. In the parts adjacent
to the City, they also make Indigo of the same nature of that of Sarquess; and
it was famous for traffic at the time when the Portugueses flourished in
India. There are to be seen at this day, in the Quarter next the Sea, very fair
Houses, which they had built, with very rich Furniture, after the Portugal
manner; but now they are uninhabited, and fall to decay every day more and
more. There were then such good Orders observed in Cambaya, that two hours
after day was shut in, every Street was locked up with two Gates, which are
still to be seen; and still they continue to lock up the principal Streets, as
also the Streets that lead into the Town. One of the chief reasons why the Town
has lost the greatest part of its Trade is, because that formerly the Sea run
close up to Cambaya, so that little Vessels easily anchored by it; but
afterward the Sea daily lost in that part, so that a small Ship could not ride
within five or six Leagues of the City.

There are a great number of Peacocks in the Indies, especially in the
Territories of Baroche, Cambaya, and Broudra. The flesh of the young ones is
white and well-tasted like ours, and you shall see vast numbers of them all day
in the Fields, for at night they roost upon the Trees. It Is a hard matter to
come near them in the day, for as soon as they perceive themselves hunted, they
fly away as swift as a Partridg among the Bushes; so that it is impossible for
any man to follow them without tearing his Clothes all to rags; therefore are
they only to be taken in the night time, to which purpose they have this
invention. They approach the Tree with a kind of a Banner, upon which there is
a Peacock painted to the life on both sides; at the top of the stick are
fastn'd two lighted Candles, the brightness whereof amazing the Peacock, causes
him to stretch out his Neck toward the end of the stick, to which there is a
Rope tied with a sliding knot, which he that holds the Banner draws, when he
finds that the Peacock has put his Neck into it. But you must have a care of
killing either Bird or any other Animal in the Territories, of which the
idolatrous Rajah's are Masters; which is nothing dangerous to do in those parts
of the Indies, where the Governors are Mahometans, and give liberty to Fowl or
Hunt. It happened one time that a rich Persian Merchant, passing through the
Territories of the Raja of Dantivar, shot a Peacock upon the road, and killed
it, either out of rashness, or ignorance of the Customs of the Country. The
Bannians incensed at the attempt, which is accounted among them a most
abominable sacriledg, seized upon the Merchant, and all his Money to the value
of 300000. Roupies, and tying him to a Tree, whipped him in so terrible a manner
for three days together, that the Man died.

From Cambaya you go to a little Village distant some three Costs, where there
is a Pagod, to which all the Indian Curtisans come to make their Offerings.
This Pagod is full of a great number of naked Images, among the rest, there is
a large Figure of one that seems to resemble Apollo, with his privy parts all
uncovered. When the old Curtisans have got together a good sum of Money in
their youth, they buy young Slaves, whom they teach to Dance, and sing wanton
Songs, and instruct in all the mysteries of their infamous Art. And when these
young Girls are eleven or twelve years old, their Mistresses send them to this
Pagod, believing it will bring them good fortune, to offer and surrender up
themselves to this Idol.

From this Pagod to Chiidabad you have six Costs. This is one of the fairest
Houses of the great Mogul, with a wide Enclosure, wherein he has vast Gardens,
and large Ponds, with all the pleasures and curiosity whereof the Genius of the
Indians is capable.

From Chiidabad to Amadabad you have but five Costs; and so I return to
Baroche, and the common Road. From Baroche to Broudra, Costs 22 Broudra is a
great City standing in a fertile Soil, wherein there is a vast Trade for
Calicuts. From Broudra to Neriade, costs 18 From Neriade to Amadabat, costs
20

Amadabat is one of the greatest Cities in India; and where there is a mighty
Trade for Silk-Stuffs, Hangings of Gold and Silver, and others mixed with Silk,
for Saltpeter, Sugar, Ginger candid and raw; Tamarins, Mirobolans; and flat
Indigo, which is made at a great Town, not far from Amadabat, called Sarquess.
There was in that place a Pagod, which the Mahumetan's have pulled down, and
built a Mosquee in the place. Before you enter into it, you must cross three
large Courts paved with Marble, and encompast with Galleries; nor must you
enter into the third Court till you have pulled off your shoes. The inside of
the Mosquee is adorned with Mosaick-work, the greatest part whereof is of Agats
of diverse colors, which they fetch from the Mountains of Cambaya, not above
two days journey off. There are several Sepulchers of the ancient Idolatrous
Kings, that look like little Chapels, of Mosaick-work, built upon a Vault that
is under the Sepulcher. There runs a River from Amadabat toward the North-west,
which during the rainy-seasons that continue three or four Months together, is
very wide and rapid, and does much mischief every year. It is so with all the
other Rivers in India; and after the rains are fallen, you must stay six weeks
or two months before you can ford Amadabat-River, where there is no Bridge.
There are two or three Boats; but they are of no use, when the stream is so
swift; so that you must stay till the waters are fallen. But the people of the
Country will not stay so long; for to cross from one River to another, they
only make use of Goatskins, which they blow up and fill with wind, and then tie
them between their stomachs and their bellies. Thus the poor men and women swim
cross this River, and when they would carry their children along with them,
they put them in certain round pots of Earth, the mouth whereof is four fingers
wide, and drive the Pots before them. This puts me in mind of a Passage, when I
was at Amadabat in the year 1642, which is too remarkable to be omitted.

A Countryman and a Countrey-woman one day past the River as I have related,
and having a child about two years old, they put it into one of these Pots, so
that there was nothing but the head appeared. Being about the middle of the
River, they met with a little bank of Sand, where there lay an huge Tree, which
the stream had carried thither; whereupon the Father should the Pot toward that
part, to rest himself awhile. When he came near the Tree, the trunk whereof lay
somewhat above the water, a Serpent leapt out from among the roots, into the
Pot where the Infant was. The Father and the Mother frighted at the accident,
and having almost lost their senses, let the Pot go a-drift where the stream
carried it, and lay almost dead themselves at the bottom of the Tree. About two
leagues lower, a Banian and his Wife with a little Infant, were washing
themselves in the River before they went to eat. They descried the Pot
a-far-off, with the half of the Infant's-head that appeared above the hole. The
Banian immediately swims to the relief of the child, and having stopped the
Pot, drives it to the shore. The Mother followed by her own, comes presently to
take the other child out of the Pot, at what time the Serpent that had done no
harm to the other child, shoots out of the Pot, and winding about hers, stings
it, and infuses its venom into the Infant, so that it died immediately.
However, the accident being so extraordinary, did not trouble these poor
people; who rather believed it to have happened by the secret disposal of their
Deity, who had taken from them one child, to give them another for it, with
which opinion they presently comforted themselves. Some time after, the report
of this accident coming to the ears of the first Countryman, he comes to the
Banian to tell him how the mischance had happened, and to demand his child of
him; the other Indian affirming that the child was his, and that his God had
sent it him, in the place of that which was dead. To be short, the business
made so loud a noise, that it was at length brought before the King, who
ordered, that the child should be restored to the Father.

At the same time there happened another very pleasant accident in the same
City of Amadabat. The Wife of a rich Merchant Banian, named Saintidas, never
having had a child, and manifesting her eager desire to have one, a servant of
the House took her a-side one day, and told her, that if she would but eat that
which he would give her, she should be with child. The woman desirous to know
what she was to eat, the servant told her it was a little fish, and that she
should eat but three or four. Now the Religion of the Banians forbidding them
to eat any thing that has life, she could not at first resolve to yield to his
proposal; but the servant having promised her that he would so order the
matter, that she should not know whether it were fish or no that she eat, she
resolved to try his receipt, and went the next night to lie with her Husband,
according to the instruction which she had received from the Servant. Some time
after, the woman perceiving that she was big, her Husband happened to die, and
the kindred of the deceased would have his Estate. The Widow opposed them, and
told them that it behooved them to stay, till they saw whether the Child she
went withal, would live or no. Her kindred were surpised to hear such news
that they so little expected, and taxed her for one that either ly'd or jested
with them; knowing that the woman had lived fifteen or sixteen years with her
Husband, yet never had been with Child. Seeing therefore that her kindred still
tormented her, she went and threw her self at the Governor's feet, to whom she
related all that had past; who thereupon ordered that the kindred should stay
till the woman was delivered. Some days after she had lain-in, the kindred of
the deceased Merchant, who were Persons of Credit, and gaped after so fair an
inheritance, affirmed that the child was not Legitimate, and that she had it
not by her Husband. The Governor, to understand the truth of the matter, calls
for the Physicians; who concluded, that the Infant should be carried to the
Bath, saying, that if the Receipt which the Mother had made use of, were real,
the sweat of the Child would smell of Fish; which was done accordingly, and the
Experiment proved true. Thereupon the Governor ordered that the Child should
have the Estate, the Merchant being so proud to be his Father: But the kindred,
troubled that such a fat Morsel had escaped their mouths, appealed to the King.
Upon their relation of the story, the King wrote to the Governor to send him
the Mother and the Infant, to the end the Experiment might be made in his
presence: which having the same success as before, the kindred surceas'd their
claim, and the Estate remained remained to the Mother and the Infant.

I remember also another pleasant Story which was related to me at Amadabat,
where I have been ten or twelve times. A Merchant with whom I often dealt, and
who was very well beloved by Cha-Est-Kan, Governor of the Province, and the
King's Uncle, had the reputation never to have told a lie. Cha-Est-Kan, after
the three years of his Government were expired, according to the custom of the
Great Mogul, and that Aureng-zeb, the King's Son was come into his place,
retired to Agra, where the Court then was. One day, discoursing with the King,
he told him, that he had seen many rare things in the Government, with which
his Majesty had honored him, but that one thing above all the rest had
astonished him, to have met with a Rich Merchant that had never told a lie, and
yet he was above threescore and ten years of age. The King surpised at a thing
so extraordinary, signified to Cha-Est-Kan, his desire to see the person, and
commanded him to send for him to Agra, which he did. The Old Man was very much
troubled, as well in regard of the length of the way, it being a journey of 25
or 30 days, as for that he was to make a Present to the King. In short, he
provided one, esteemed at fourty-thousand Roupies, to carry Betle in, enchas'd
with Diamonds, Rubies, and Emraulds. When he had made his obeisance to the
King, and given him his Present, the King asked him only what was his name, to
whom he replied, that he was called the man that had never told a lie. Then the
King asked him who was his Father? Sir, said he, I cannot tell; his Majesty
satisfied with an answer, stopped there, and unwilling to trouble him any
farther, commanded an Elephant to be given him, which is a very great Honor,
and ten thousand Roupies to bear his charges home.

The Banians have a great Veneration for Apes, and there are some which they
breed up in their Pagods to worship. There are three or four Houses in Amadabat
which they make use of for Hospitals for Cowes, Oxen, Apes, and other sick or
maimed Beasts; and they carry all they can find thither to preserve them. This
is also very remarkable, that every Tuesday and Friday, all the Apes in the
places adjoining to Amadabat, of their own accord come to the City, and get
upon the tops of their Houses, where they lie, during the excessive heats. And
therefore upon those days the People never fail to set ready in their
Terrasses, Rice, Millet, Sugarcanes in their seasons, and other suchlike
things. For if the Apes did not find their provision when they came, they would
break the Tiles wherewith the rest of the House is covered, and do a great
deal of mischief. And you must here take notice also, that the Ape never eats
any thing which he does not very well like the scent of beforehand; and before
he swallows anything, he lays up his Magazin against future hunger; filling
his bags with provision, which he keeps till next day.

I have said, that the Banians have a particular Veneration for the Ape; of
which I will give you one Example, among many, that I could bring. Being one
day at Amadabat, at the House belonging to the Hollanders, a young man of that
Nation newly arrived to serve in the Factory, not knowing the custom of the
Country, and seeing a great Ape upon a Tree in the Court, would needs show a
piece of activity, or rather a trick of youth, to kill the Ape with a small
Gun. I was at the Table then with the Dutch-Commander; and we no sooner heard
the blow, but we heard as soon a loud noise of Banians, that wait upon the
Holland-Company, who came to complain bitterly of him that had killed the Ape.
They would all have been gone; so that the Commander had much ado, and made
many excuses before he could appease them, and oblige them to stay.

In the Neighborhood about Amadabat, there are a great number of Apes. And
this is observable, that where there are a great number of those Animals, there
are very few Crows. For as soon as they have built their Nests and laid their
Eggs, the Apes get upon the Trees and throw their Eggs to the Ground. One day
returning from Agra, and departing out of Amadabat with the English President,
who came hither about some business, and was returning to Surat, we passed
through a little Forest of Trees, called Mangues, some four or five Leagues
from Amadabat; there we saw a vast number of great Monkeys, male and female,
and many of their females holding their young ones in their Arms. We had each
of us our Coach, and the English President causing his to stop, told me he had
an excellent and very neat Harquebuss, that was presented him by the Governor
of Daman, and knowing I could aim well, he desired me to try it, at one of
those Apes. One of my Servants, who was born in the Country, making me a sign
not to venture, I endeavored to dissuade the President from his design; but it
was impossible; so that I took the Harquebuss, and killed a female Monkey, who
lay stretched out upon the Boughs, letting her little ones fall to the ground.
But it fell out as my Servant had forewarned me. For immediately all the
Monkeys that were upon the Trees, to the number of sixty, came down in a great
fury, to have leaped into the Presidents Coach, where they would soon have
strangled him, had we not prevented them by closing the Shutters, and had we
not had a great number of Servants, that which much ado kept them off. And
though they came not to my Coach, yet I was very much afraid of my self; for
they pursued the President's Coach above a League, and they were stout lusty
Monkeys.

From Amadabat to Panser, costs 13 From Panser to Masana, costs 14 From
Masana to Chitpour, costs 14

Chitpour is a very good City, so called by reason of the great Trade for
painted-Calicuts, which are called Chites: Near which, some four or
five-hundred paces toward the South, there runs a small River. Arriving at
Chitpour in one of my Voyages, I pitched my Tent under two or three Trees at
the end of a wide-place near the Town. A little while after I saw four or five
Lions appear, which were brought to be tamed; which they told me took them up
five or six months; and their way to do it, is this: They tie the Lions at
twelve paces distance one from another by the hinder-legs, with a Rope fastened
to a great woodden-stake set deep in the ground, with another cord about the
neck, which the Master holds in his hand. These stakes are planted in the same
Line, and in another Parallel they stretch out another Cord as long as the
space, which the bodies of the Lions so disposed of, as I have described, take
up. The two Cords which hold the Lion tied by the two hinder-feet, give him
liberty to spring out as far as that long Cord; which is a mark to those that
stand to provoke and incense the Lions, by throwing stones and pieces of wood
at them, not to venture any farther: The people run to see the sight, and when
the Lion, provoked, gives a spring toward the Cord, the Master holds another
in his hand, tied about his neck, that pulls him back. Thus they accustom the
Lion by degrees to be familiar with the people, and at my coming to Chiapour, I
saw this Divertisement without stirring out of my Coach.

The next day I had another, meeting with a knot of Faquirs, or Mohammedan
Dervichs. I counted fifty-seven, among whom, he that was the Chief or Superior,
had been Grand Esquire to Cha-jehan-guir, having left the Court, when Sultan
Boulaki, his youngest Son, was strangled by Order of Cha-jehan; there were four
others, who next to the Superior, were chief of the Company, who had been also
great Lords in the same Cha-jehan's Court. All the Clothes those five Dervichs
had, were only four else of Orange-colour-Calicut to hide what modesty will
have hid before and behind, and every one of them a Tygers-skin over their
shoulders tied together under their chins. They had led before them eight fair
Horses-saddl'd and bridled; three whereof had Bridles of Gold, and Saddles
covered with Plates of Gold, and the other five had Bridles of Silver covered
with Plates of Silver, and a Leopard's-skin upon every one. The other Dervichs
had only a Cord for their Girdle, to which was fastened a piece of Calicut only
to cover their private parts. Their hair was tied in wreaths round about their
heads after the manner of a Turbant. They were all well-arm'd, the most part
with Bows and Arrows, some with Muskets, and others with Half-pikes, with
another sort of weapon which we have not in Europe; that is to say, a sharp
piece of Iron like the side of a Platter without a bottom, which they wind
eight or ten times about their necks, and carry like a Calves Chaldron. They
draw out these Iron-Circles as they intend to make use of them; and they will
throw them with such a force against a man, that they shall ssy as swift as an
Arrow, and go very near to cut a man in two in the middle. They had every one,
besides all this, an Hunting-Horn, which they wind, making a prodigious noise
when they come to any place, and when they go away; together with a Grater or
Rasp, being an Iron-Instrument, made like a Trowel. This is an Instrument which
the Indians carry generally about them when they travel, to scrape and make
clean the places where they intend to rest; and some of them, when they have
scraped all the dust together into an heap, make use of it instead of a
Mattress or Pillow to lie easily upon. There were some of them that were armed
with long Tucks; which they had bought either of the English or Portugals.
Their Luggage consisted of four great Chests full of Persian and Arabian Books,
and some Kitchen-housholdstuff: They had also ten or twelve Oxen to carry their
sick. When the Dervichs came to the place where I lay with my Coach, having
about fifty persons with me, as well of the people of the Country, as of my
own servants; the Chief or Superior of the Troop seeing me so well-attended,
inquired what Aga that was; and desired me to let him have that place which I
had taken up, as being the most convenient in all that place, for him and his
Dervichs to lodge. When they told me the quality of the Chief, and the four
Dervichs that attended him, I was willing to be civil, and to yield to their
request; and thereupon I left them the place free. After they had well-water'd
the place, and laid the dust, they lighted two fires, as if it had been in the
frost and snow for the five principal Dervichs, who sat and chased themselves
before and behind. That very evening, after they had supped the Governor of
the Town came to complement the principal Dervichs, and during their stay, sent
them Rice and other things, which they are accustomed to eat. When they come to
any place, the Superior sends some of his Crew a begging into the Towns and
Villages, and what Alms they get, is presently distributed equally among them;
every one of them taking care to boil his own Rice. What is over and above they
give to the Poor in the evening; for they reserve nothing till next day.

From Chilpour to Balampour, costs 12 From Balampour to Dantivar, costs 11
From Dantivar to Bargant, costs 17

Bargant is in the Territories of a Raja, to whom you pay duties. In one of my
journeys to Agra, passing through Bargant, I did not see the Raja, but only his
Lieutenant, who was very civil to me, and made me a Present of Rice, Butter,
and Fruit in season. To make him amends, I gave him three Shashes of Gold and
Silk, four Handkerchiefs of painted Linen, and two Bottles, the one full of
Aquavitae, and the other full of Spanish* Wine. At my departure he sent a
Convoy of twenty Horse four or five leagues along with me.

One evening being about to lodge upon the Frontiers of the Territories of the
Raja of Bargant, my people came to me and told me, that if we took the Road
through Bargant, we should go near to have all our throats cut, for that the
Raja of that place lived altogether upon Robbery. So that unless I hired an
hundred more of the Country People, there was no likelihood of escaping those
Freebooters. At first I argued with them, and taxed their Cowardice, but
fearing to pay for my rashness afterward, I sent them to hire fifty more, for
three days only, that we crossed the Raja's Country: for which they asked me
every one four Roupies, which is as much as you give them for a whole Month.
The next day as I was about to set forward, my Guard came and told me they
would leave me, and that they would not venture their lives, desiring me not to
write to Agra to their Captain, who was responsible for them, that they had
left me against my will. Three of my servants also did as they did, so that I
had no body left with me, but a man that lead an Horse in his hand, my
Coachman, and three other servants, and so I set forward under the protection
of God. About a league from the place which I had left, I perceived some part
of my Convoy following me. Thereupon I stopped my Coach to stay for them, and
when they came near, I bid them advance if they intended to go along with me.
But seeing them fearful, and unresolved, I bid them go about their business,
telling them I had no need of such Cowards as they were. About a league from
thence I discovered upon the brow of an Hill about fifty Horse, four of which
came riding up to me; when I perceived them, I alighted out of my Coach, and
having with me some thirteen Spit-fires, I gave to every one of my men an
Harquebuss. The Horsemen approaching, I kept my Coach between them and me, and
had my Gun ready cockt, in case they should assail me. But they made me a sign,
that I should fear nothing; only that the Prince was a-Hunting, and had sent to
know what Strangers past through his Territories: I made answer, that I was the
same Franguy that had past by five or six weeks before. By good luck, the very
same Lieutenant to whom I had made the Present of Aquavitae and Spanish-Wine,
followed those four Horsemen.* And after he had testified how glad he was to
see me, he asked me if I had any Wine; I told him I never traveled without
that: For indeed the English and Hollanders had presented me with several
Bottles at Agra. So soon as the Lieutenant was returned to the Raja, the Raja
himself came to me, and told me I was welcome; and bid me rest my self in a
shady-place which he pointed to, about a league and an half from the place
where we were. In the evening he came, and we staid together two days to make
merry; the Raja bringing alone with him certain Morrice-dancers, without which
the Persians and Indians can never think themselves heartily merry. At my
departure the Raja lent me 200 Horse, to convoy me to the Frontiers of his
Territories, for three days together; for which I only gave them three or four
pound of Tobacco. When I came to Amadabat, the people would hardly believe that
I had had so kind a reception from a Prince, that was noted for abusing
strangers that past through his Country.

From Bargant to Bimal, costs 15 From Bimal to Modra, costs 15 From Modra to
Chalaour, costs 10 Chalaour is an ancient Town upon a Mountain, encompast with
Walls, and very difficult to come to. There is a Lake at the top of the
Mountain, and another below; between which and the foot of the Mountain lies
the Road to the Town. From Chalaour to Cantap, costs 12 From Cantap to
Setlana, costs 15 From Setlana to Palavaseny, costs 14 From Palavaseny to
Pipars, costs 11 From Pipars to Mirda, costs 16

From Dantivar to Mirda is three days journey, being a mountainous Country the
belongs to Raja's, or particular Princes that pay tribute to the Great Mogul.
In recompense whereof the Great Mogul gives them Commands in his Armies; by
which they gain much more than they loose by the tribute which they pay.

Mirda is a great City, but ill-built. When I came thither in one of my
Indian-journeys, all the Inns were full of Passengers, in regard that
Cha-jehan's Aunt, the Wife of Cha-Est-Kan, was going that* way to marry her
Daughter to Sultan Sujah, the second Son of Cha-jehan; I was forced to set up
my Tent upon a Bank, with Trees on both sides: But I was not a little surpised
two hours afterward, to see fifteen or twenty Elephants loofe, that tore down
the boughs as far as they could reach, breaking off the huge Arms of Trees, as
if they had been but small faggot-sticks. This spoil was done by the order of
the Begum, in revenge of the Affront which the Inhabitants of Mirda had put
upon her, who had not waited on her, and made her a Present as they ought to
have done.

From Mirda to Boronda, costs 12 From Baronda to Coetchiel, costs 18 From
Coetchiel to Bander-Sonnery, costs 14 From Bandar-Sonnery to Ladona, costs 16
From Ladona to Chasou, costs 12 From Chasou to Nouali, costs 17 From Nouali
to Hindoo, costs 19 From Hindoo to Baniana, costs 10 These two last places
are two Towns, where, as in all the Country round about, they make
Indigo-Plate, which is round; and as it is the best of all the Indigo's, so is
it double the price. From Baniana to Vettapour, costs 14 Vettapour is an
ancient Town where they make woollen-Hangings. From Vettapour to Agra, costs
12 From Surat to Agra is in all, costs 415

If you could divide your journeys equally into thirteen Costs a-piece, you
might go to Surat in thirty-three days; but because you rest, and stay at some
places, it is generally thirty-five or forty days journey.

CHAP. VI.
The Road from Ispahan to Agra, through Candahar.
I Have made an exact description of some part of the Road, and brought the
Reader as far as Candahar; it remains, that I carry him from Candahar to Agra;
to which there are but two ways to go, either through Caboul, or through
Multan. The latter way is the shorter by ten days journey. But the Caravan
never goes that way. For from Candahar to Multan you travel almost all the way
through Deserts; and sometimes you travel three or four days without meeting
any water. So that the most ordinary and beaten Road, is through Caboul. Now
from Candahar to Caboul, is twenty-four days journey; from Caboul to Lahor,
twenty-two; from Lahor to Dehly, or Gehanabat, eighteen; from Dehly to Agra,
six; which with the sixty days journey from Ispahan to Farat, and the twenty
from Farat to Candahar, makes in all from Ispahan to Agra, an hundred and fifty
days journey. But the Merchants that are in haste, take Horses, three or four
together in a company, and ride the whole journey in sixty, or sixty-five days
at most.

Multan is a City where there is made a vast quantity of Linen Calicuts, which
was all transported to Tuta, before the Sands had stopped up the mouth of the
River, but since that, it is carried all to Agra, and from Agra to Surat, as is
the greatest part of the Merchandise which is made at Lahor. But in regard
carriage is so dear, very few Merchants traffic either to Multan or at Lahor;
and many of the Workmen have also deserted those places, so that the Kings
Revenues are very much diminished in those Provinces. Multan is the place
whither all the Banians come, that trade into Persia, where they follow the
same Trade as the Jews, and outdo them in Usury. They have a particular Law
among them, which permits them to eat Fowl upon certain days in the year; and
not to have more than one Wife among two or three Brothers, the eldest whereof
is accounted the Father of the Children. This City also breeds abundance of
Dancers, of both Sexes, that spread themselves all over Persia.

I come now to the Road from Gandahar to Agra, through Caboul and Lahor. From
Candahar to Charifafar, costs 10 From Charifafar to Zelate, costs 12 From
Zelate to Betazy, costs 8 From Betazy to Mezour, costs 6 From Mezour to
Carabat, costs 17 From Carabat to Chakenicouze, costs 17 From Candahar to
Chakenicouze, a Frontier Town of the Indies, is a Country under the command of
several Princes, that acknowledge the Persian Emperor. From Chakenicouze to
Caboul, costs 40

In all these forty Costs of way, there are but three pitiful Villages; where
sometimes, though very rarely, you have Bread and Barley for your Horses; but
the surest way is to carry provision along with you. in the Months of July and
August, there blows a hot Wind in those parts, that takes away a man's breath,
and kills him upon the place; being of the same nature with those Winds, of
which I have spoken in my Persian Relations, that blow at certain seasons near
Babylon and Moussul.

Caboul is a large City, very well fortified; and is the place where those of
Vsbek come every year to sell their Horses. They reckon, that there are bought
and sold, every year, above sixty thousand. They bring also out of Persia,
great numbers of Sheep, and other Cattle; it being the general Concourse of
Persians, Tartarians, and Indians. There is also Wine to be had; but Provisions
go off at a very good rate.

Before I go any farther, I must take notice of one thing in particular,
concerning the people called Augans, who inhabit from Candahar to Caboul,
toward the Mountains of Balch, a sturdy sort of people, and great Robbers in
the nightime. It is the custom of the Indians to cleanse and scrape their
tongues every morning with a crooked piece of a root, which causes them to void
a great quantity of Phlegm and Rhume, and provokes vomiting. Now though those
people that inhabit the Frontiers of Persia and India practice the same thing;
nevertheless they vomit very little in the morning, but when they come to eat,
as soon as they have swallowed two or three bits, their lungs begin to swell,
and they are constrained to go forth and vomit; after which, they return again
to their Victuals with a very good appetite. Should they not do so, they would
not live above thirty years; and besides, they would be troubled with the
Dropsy.

From Caboul to Ba^iabe, costs 19 From Bariabe to Nimela, costs 17 From
Nimela to Aliboua, costs 19 From Aliboua to Taka, costs 17 From Taka to
Kiemri, costs 6 From Kiemri to Chaour, costs 14 From Chaour to Novechaar,
costs 14 From Novechaar, to Atek, costs 19 Atek is a City situated upon a
point of Land where two Rivers meet together. It Is one of the best and
strongest Garrisons the Great Mogul has; into which there is no stranger
permitted to enter without a Passport from the King. Father Roux the Jesuit and
his Companion, going this way to Ispahan, and not having the King's Passport,
were forced to return back to Lahor, where they embarked upon the River for
Scimdi, from whence they past into Persia. From Atek to Calapane, costs 16
From Calapane to Roupate, costs 16 From Roupate to Toulapeca, costs 16 From
Toulapeca to Keraly, costs 19 From Keraly to Zerabad, costs 16 From Zerabad
to Imiabad, costs 18 From Imiabad to Lahor, costs 18

Lahor is the Metropolis of a Kingdom, built upon one of the five Rivers that
descend from the Mountains of the North to swell the River Indus; and give the
name of Peniab to all the Region which they water. This River at this time
flows not within a league of the Town, being subject to change its* Channel,
and many times does very great mischief to the adjoining Fields, through the
rapid deluges which it makes. The City is large, and extends it self above a
league in length. But the greatest part of the Houses, which are higher than
those of Agra and Deli, fall to ruin, by reason of the excessive rains that
have overflowed a great number of them. The King's Palace is an indifferent
fair one, is not, as formerly it was, upon the River, which is fallen off above
a quarter of a league from it. There is Wine to be had at Lahor.

I must observe by the by, that after you have past Lahor, and the Kingdom of
Kakemir, that lies upon it toward the North, none of their Women have any hair
upon any part of their bodies, and the Men but very little upon their chins.

From Lahor to Menat-kan, costs 12 From Menat-kan to Faty-abad, costs 15 From
Faty-abad to Sera-dakan, costs 15 From Sera-dakan to Sera-balour, costs 15
From Sera-balour to Sera-dourai, costs 12 From Sera-dourai to Serinde, costs
17 From Serinde to Sera-Mogoul, costs 15 From Sera-Mogoul to Sera-Chabas,
costs 14 From Sera-Chabas to Dirauril, costs 17 From Dirauril to
Sera-Crindal, costs 14 From Sera-Crindal to Guienaour, costs 21 From
Guienaour to Dehly, costs 24

Before you go any farther, you are to take notice that all the way from Lahor
to Dehly, and from Dehly to Agra, is a continual walk set on both sides with
fair Trees; an object most pleasing to the sight* But in some places the Trees
are decayed, and there is no care taken to Plant others in their stead.

Dehly is a great City near the River Gemma, which runs from the North to the
South, afterward from the West to the East; and after it has past by Agra and
Kadione, empties it self into the Ganges. After Cha-jehan had built the new
City of Gehanabad, which is called by his own Name; and where he chose rather
to keep his Court, than at Agra, because the Climate is more temperate. Dehly
is almost come to ruin, and indeed is nothing but an heap of Rubbish; there
being no other Houses remaining but only for poor people. The Streets are
narrow, and the Houses of Bambouc, as over all the rest of the Indies. Neither
are there above three or four Lords of the Court that reside at Dehly, where
they set up their Tents in great Enclosures, and in the same manner lodged the
Reverend Jesuit that was at Court.

Gehanabad, as well as Dehly, is a great City; and there is nothing but a
single Wall that make the separation. All the Houses of particular men consist
of great Enclosures, in the midst whereof is the place for Lodgings. The
greatest part of the Lords do not live in the City, but have their Houses
without, for the convenience of the water. As you enter into Gehanabad from
Dehly, you meet with a long and broad Street, on each side whereof are Vaults,
where the Merchants keep shops, being only plat-form'd at the top. This street
ends in the great Piazza before the King's House; and there is another very
fair and large Street, that runs toward another Gate of the same Palace, in
which live the great Merchants that keep no Shops.

The King's Palace takes up above half a league circuit: The Walls are of fair
cut-Stone with Battlements. The Moats are full of water, paved with Freestone.
The great Gate of the Palace has nothing in it of magnificence; no more than
the first Court, into which the great Lords may enter upon their Elephants.

Having past that Court, you enter into another long and large passage, with
fair Portico's on both sides. Under which are several little Chambers, where
part of the Horse-Guard lies. These Portico's are raised some two foot above
the ground, and the Horses which are ti'd without, feed upon the steps. In some
places there are great Gates that lead to several Apartments; as to the Women's
Lodgings, and to the Seat of Justice. In the midst of the passage runs a Cut
full of water, leaving a fair Walk on each side, where, at equal distances, are
little Basins or Fountains.

This long Passage carries you into a great Court, where the Omra's, that is to
say, the great Lords of the Kingdom, such as the Basha's in Turkey, and the
Kan's in Persia, keep Guard in Person. They have low Lodgings round about the
Court, and their Horses are ti'd to their doors.

From this second Court you pass into a third, through a great Portal; on one
side whereof there is a little Hall, raised some two or three steps high from
the ground. This is the Wardrobe where the Royal Garments are kept; and from
whence the King sends for the Calaat, or a whole Habit for a man, when he would
honor any Stranger or any one of his own Subjects. A little farther, under the
same Portal, is the place where the Drums, Trumpets, and Hautboys are laid up;
which they sound and beat a little before the King enters into his
Judgment Seat, to give notice to the Omrah's; and they make the same noise when
the King is ready to rise. Entering into the third Court, you see the Divan
before you, where the King gives Audience. This is a great Hall raised some
four-foot-high above the superficies of the Court, with three sides open.
Thirty-two Pillars sustain as many Arches; and these Columns are about
four-foot-square, with Pedestals and Mouldings. When Cha-jehan first began to
build this Hall; he intended to have enriched it, and inlaid it all over with
those Stones that seem to be naturally painted, like those in the Great Duke of
Tuscany's Chapel. But having made a trial upon two or three Pillars, about two
or three-foot-high, he found that there would not be Stones enough, of that
sort, in the World to finish the work' besides the vastness of the Sum it would
come to. So that he left off his design, contening himself with a Painting of
several flowers.

In the middle of this Hall, next to the side which looks toward the Court,
there is a Throne erected upon a kind of Theater, where the King gives
Audience, and pronounces Judgment. The Throne is a little Bed with four
Columns, about the bigness of one of our Field-beds, with a Canopy, Backpiece,
Boulster and Counterpoint, all embroidered with Diamonds. Besides all this,
when the King comes to sit upon the Throne, they throw over the Bed a Coverlet
of Cloth of Gold, or some other richly-embroider'd Silk; and he ascends by
three little steps, two-foot-broad. On one side of the Bed is erected an
Vmbrello upon a Staff, as long as an Half-Pike. Upon one of the Pillars of the
Throne hangs one of the King's Weapons; upon another his Buckler; upon another
his Scimetar; and then his Bow and Quiver of Arrows, and other things of the
same nature.

Below the Throne there is a place*some twenty-foot-square, encompast with
Balusters which at some times are covered with Plates of Silver, at other times
with Plates of Gold. At the four Corners of this small enclosure sit the four
Secretaries of State, who as well in Civil as Criminal Causes, do the duty of
advocates. Many Lords stand about this Balust rade; and there is also the
Music placed, that plays all the while the King is in the Divan. This Music
is so sweet and soft, that it never takes off the mind from the seriousness of
business at that time managed. The King being sat upon his Throne, some great
Lords stand by him; generally it is some one of his own Children. Between
eleven a Clock and Noon, the Nahab, who is the chief Minister of State, like
the Grand Vizier in Turkey, makes a report to the King of what has past in the
Chamber where he Presides, which is at the Entry of the first Court; and when
he has done speaking, the King rises. For you must take notice, that from the
time that the King is sat upon his Throne, till he rises, no person whatsoever
is permitted to stir out of the Palace; and yet I can say that the King
dispensed with my performance of this Law so generally observed by all the
Court: The occasion whereof was thus in short.

Being one day going out of the Palace, while the King was sitting in the
Divan, upon some urgent business that would admit of no delay, the Captain of
the Guards held me by the arm, and told me I should go no farther; I contested
and argued the Case with him for some time, but finding his usuage to be very
boisterous, I lifted up my Cane, and had certainly struck him in my passion,
had not two or three of the Guards that saw all the passages, held my hand.
Happily for me at that time, the Nahab, who was then the King's Uncle, came by,
and being informed of the ground of our quarrel; ordered the Captain of the
Guards to let me go. After that he made a report to the King how the matter
stood; and toward evening the Nahab sent me one of his Servants to tell me, it
was his Majesty's pleasure, that I might come in or go out of the Palace,
though he were sitting in the Divan, as I pleased my self; for which I went the
next day, and returned thanks to the Nahab.

Toward the middle of the same Court there is a small Channel some five or six
inches broad, where while the King is sitting upon the Seat of Justice, they
that have business are to stand. Further it is not lawful for them to go, till
they are called; and Ambassadors themselves are not exempted from this custom.
When an Ambassador, comes as far as this Channel, the Master of the Ceremonies
calls out toward the Divan where the King is sitting, that such an Ambassador
craves Audience of his Majesty. Then one of the Secretaries of State declares
it to the King; who oftentimes makes as if he did not hear: But some time after
lifting up his eyes, he casts them upon the Ambassador, making him a sign by
the same Secretary, that he may approach.

From the Hall of the Divan, turning to the left, you walk upon a Terrass,
where you discover the River. Over this Terrass the King passes into a little
Chamber, from whence he goes into his Haram. In this little Chamber it was that
I had my first Audience of his Majesty; as I shall relate in another place.

Upon the left hand of the Court where the Divan is built, stands a little
Mosquee neatly built; the Cupola whereof is covered with Lead perfectly
gilded. Here the King goes to hear Prayers every day, except it be Fridays,
when he is to go to the great Mosquee, which is a very fair one, and placed
upon an high Platform, raised higher than the Houses of the City, and there is
a noble ascent to it. That day that the King goes to the Mosquee, they place
huge rails of wood round about the steps, as well to keep off the Elephants, as
out of respect to the Mosquee.

The right side of the Court is taken up with Portico's, that make a long
Gallery, raised from the ground about half a foot; and these are the King's
Stables into which you have many doors to enter. They are also full of stately
Horses, the worst whereof stands the King in three-thousand Crowns; and there
are some that cost him ten-thousand. At the door of every one of these Stables
hangs a kind of Mat made of Bambouc, that cleaves like our Osiers. But whereas
we bind our Osier twigs with the same Osier, they bind their Bambouc's with
wreath'd-Silk, which is delicate work, but very tedious. These Mats are to
hinder the Flies from tormenting the Horses; there being two Grooms to an
Horse, one of which is still employed in fanning the Beast. There are also Mats
spread before the Portico's, and before the Stable-door; which they spread or
take away as occasion requires. And the Floor of the Gallery is covered with
fair Carpets, which is taken away in the evening, and the Horses Litter strow'd
in the same place. Which litter is nothing but the Horse-dung dried in the Sun,
and then squeezed a little flat. The Horses that are brought into India either
out of Persia, Arabia, or the Country of Vsbech, change their food: For in
India they never give them Hay nor Oats. Every Horse in the morning having for
his proportion three loaves made of Meal, Wheat, and Butter, as big as one of
our sixpenny-loaves. It Is an hard matter to bring them to this diet at first;
it being sometimes three or four Months before they can do it. The Groom is
forced to hold their tongue in one hand, and to thrust down the bread with the
other. When Sugarcanes or Millet are in season, they give them that diet about
noon; and in the evening, two hours before Sunset they give them a measure of
Garden-Chiches which the Groom squeezes between two stones, and mixes with
water. This is instead of Barley and Oats. As for the King's other Stables,
where he has also very fine Horses, they are scurvy places, ill-built, which
deserve not to be mentioned.

The Gemene is a fair River that bears good big Boats, which running to Agra
loses its name, falling into Ganges at Hallabas. The King has several small
Brigantines at Gehanabad upon the River, to take his pleasure in; and they are
very curiously trimmed after the manner of the Country.

CHAP. VII.
The continuance of the same Road from Dehly to Agra.
FRom Dehly to Badelpoura, costs 8 From Badelpoura to Pelvel ki-sera, costs
18 From Pelvel-ki-sera to Cotki-sera, costs 15 From Cotki-sera to Cheki-sera,
costs 16

At Cheki-sera is one of the greatest Pagods of the Indians, together with an
Hospital for Apes; as well for those that breed there-abouts, as for those that
^ome from the neighbouring-parts, which the Banians are very careful to feed.
This Pagod is called Matura, and it was formerly in far greater veneration than
it is at this day. The reason is, because the Gemene ran then just at the very
foot of the Pagod; wherein the Banians, as well those of the Country, as those
that came from remote parts in Pilgrimage, had the convenience to wash
themselves before they went to their Devotions; and when they had performed
them, to wash again before they eat; which they are not to do ere they have
washed; believing also that if they wash in running-water, their sins will be
the more easily defaced. But some years since the River, changing its course
more to the Northward, comes not within a good league of the Pagod, which is
the reason that the Pilgrims have deserted it.

From Cheki-sera to Goodki-sera, costs 5 From Goodki-sera to Agra, costs 6

Agra lies in 27 degrees. 31 min. of Lat. and in a Sandy-soil, which causes
extremity of heat. It is the biggest City in India, and formerly the Residence
of their Kings. The Houses of great Persons are fair, and well built; but the
Houses of the meaner-sort are as plain, as in all the other Cities of India.
They are built a good distance one from another, and hid by the height of their
Walls, to keep their Women from being seen: So that it may be easily
conjectured that their Cities are nothing so pleasant as ours in Europe. Add to
this, that Agra being encompast round with the Sands, the heats are there very
excessive, which constrained Cha-jehan to remove from thence, and to keep his
Court at Gehanabad.

All that is remarkable in Agra is the King's Palace; and some Monuments as
well near the City, as in the parts about it. The Palace of the King is a vast
piece of ground encompast with a double-wall, which is terrass'd in some parts,
and in those parts are built certain Lodgings for some of the Officers of the
Court: The Gemene runs before the Palace; but between the Wall and the River
there is a large space of ground, where the King causes his Elephants to fight.
This Field is on purpose near the water, because that the Elephant which gets
the victory, being in a fury, they could not bring him to himself, did they not
drive him into the River: to which end they are forced to have recourse to
Policy, by tying Squibs and Crackers to the end of an Half-Pike, and then
giving fire to them to fright him into the water: for when he is in but two or
threefoot-deep, he is presently appeased.

There is a wide Piazza upon one side of the City before the Palace, and the
first Gate, wherein there is nothing of magnificence, is guarded by a few
Soldiers. Before the King removed his Court from Agra to Gehanabad, when he
went into the Country for some time, he gave to some one of his greatest
Omrah's, who was his Confident, the Guard of his Palace, where his Treasure
lay; and till the return of the King he never stirred out of the Gate, where he
lodged, neither by night nor day. At such a time that it was, that I was
permitted to see the Palace of Agra. The King being departed for Gehanabad,
whither all the Court followed him, together with the Women, the Government of
the Palace was given to one that was a great Friend of the Hollanders, and
indeed to all the Franguis. Menheir Velant, chief of the Holland Factory at
Agra, so soon as the King was departed, went to visit the Lord, and to present
him according to custom. The Present was worth about 6000 Crowns, and consisted
in Spices, Cabinets of Japan, and fine Holland-Cloath. He desired me to go
along with him when he went to Compliment the Governor. But the Lord being
offended that he had put himself to so much charge, forced him to carry the
Present back again, taking only one Japan-Cane, of six that were in the
Present, telling him he would have no more, out of the kindness which he had
for the Franguiz. Nay, he would not so much as take the Gold-head and Ferula,
but caused them to be taken off. The Complements being over, the Governor
asked Menheir Velunt, wherein he might serve him: whereupon he desiring the
favor, than since the Court was gone, he might see the inside of the Palace,
the Governor granted his request, and ordered six men to attend him.

The first Gate where the Governor of the Palace lies, is a long blind Arch,
which leads you into a large Court all environed with Portico's; like our
Piazza in Covent Garden. The Gallery in front is larger and higher than any of
the rest, sustained by three ranks of Pillars, and under those Galleries on the
other side of the Court which are narrower and lower, are little Chambers for
the Soldiers of the Guard. In the midst of the large Gallery, is a Nich in the
Wall, into which the King descends out of his Haram by a private pair of
Stairs, and when he is in, he seems to be in a kind of a Tomb. He has no Guards
with him then, for he has no reason to be afraid of any thing; there being no
way to come at him. In the heat of the day he keeps himself there only with one
Eunuch, but more often with one of his Children, to fan him. The Great Lords of
the Court stay below in the Gallery under the Nich all the while.

At the farther end of this Court is another Gate that leads into a second
Court encompast with Galleries, underneath which, are little Chambers for some
Officers of the Palace. The second Court carries you into a third, which is the
King's Quarter. Cha-jehan had resolved to cover with Silver all the Arch of a
Gallery upon the right hand. And a frenchman, Austin de Bordeaux by name, was
to have done the work: but the King not finding any one in his whole Kingdom so
capable as the Frenchman was to treat with the Portugals at Goa about some
important affair he had at this time; the design was laid aside: For they being
afraid of Austin's Parts, poisoned him upon his return to Cochin. This Gallery
is painted with branch'd-work of Gold and Azure, and the lower-part is hung
with Tapestry. There are several doors under the Gallery that lead into little
square-Chambers; of which we saw two or three opened, and they told us all the
rest were such. The other three sides of the Court lie all open, there being
nothing but a single Wall, no higher than for a man to lean over. On the side
that looks toward the River there is a Divan, or a kind of out-jutting Balcony,
where the King sits to see his Brigantines, or to behold his Elephants fight.
Before the Divan is a Gallery, that serves for a Portico; which Cha-jehan had a
design to have adorned all over with a kind of Lattice-work of Emraulds and
Rubies that should have represented to the life Grapes when they are green, and
when they begin to grow red. But this design which made such a noise in the
World, and required more Riches, than all the World could afford to perfect,
remains unfinished; there being only three Stocks of a Vine in Gold, with their
leaves, as the rest ought to have been; and enameled in their natural colors,
with Emralds, Rubies and Granates wrought into the fashion of Grapes. In the
middle of the Court stands a great Fat to bath in, 40 foot in Diameter, cut out
of one entire grey-stone, with steps wrought out of the same stone within and
without.

As for the Monuments which are in and about Agra, they are very fair ones, for
there is scarce an Eunuch belonging to the King's Haram, that is not very
ambitious of leaving a fair Monument behind him. Indeed, when they have heaped
together great Sums, they would fain be going to Mecca, and making rich
Presents to Mahomet. But the Great Mogul, unwilling to let his Money go out of
his Country, will seldom permit them leave to undertake that Pilgrimage: and
therefore not knowing what to do with their Money, they employ a great part
thereof in Monuments to perpetuate their Memories.

Of all the Monuments that are to be seen at Agra, that of the Wife of
Cha-jehan is the most magnificent; she caused it to be set up on purpose near
the Tasimacan, to which all Strangers must come, that they should admire it.
The Tasimacan is a great Bazar, or Marketplace, composed of six great Courts,
all encompassed with Portico's; under which there are Warehouses for Merchants;
and where there is a prodigious quantity of Calicuts vended. The Monument of
this Degum, or Sultaness, stands on the East Side of the City, upon the River
side, in a great place enclosed with Walls, upon which there runs a little
Gallery, as upon the Walls of many Cities in Europe. This place is a kind of
Garden with Compartiments, like our Garden-plots; but whereas our Walks are
made with Gravel, here the Walks are black and white Marble. You enter into
this place through a large Portal; and presently upon the left hand you espy a
fair Gallery, that looks toward Mecca; wherein there are three or four Niches,
wherein the Mufti comes at certain hours to pray. A little beyond the middle of
the place, toward the Water, are three great Platforms, one raised above
another, with four Towers at the four Corners of each, and Stairs within, upon
the top whereof they call the people before the time of their prayer. On the
top there is a Cupola, little less magnificent than that of Val de Grace in
Paris; it is covered within and without with black marble, the middle being of
Brick. Under this Cupola is an empty Tomb; for the Begum is interred under the
Arch of the lowest Platform. The same change of Ceremonies which is observed
under ground, is observed above. For they change the Tapestries, Candles, and
other Ornaments at several times, and there are always Mollah's attending to
pray. I saw the beginning and completing of this great work, that cost two and
twenty years labor, and twenty thousand men always at work; so that you cannot
conceive but that the Expense must be excessive. Cha-jehan had begun to raise
his own Monument on the other side of the River; but the Wars with his Son,
broke off that design, nor did Aurengzeb, now reigning, ever take any care to
finish it. There is an Eunuch who commands two thousand men, that is entrusted
to guard not only the Sepulcher of the Begum, but also the Tasimacan.

On another side of the City, appears the Sepulcher of King Akabar. And as for
the Sepulchers of the Eunuchs, they have only one Platform, with four little
Chambers at the four Corners. When you come to Agra from Dehly, you meet a
great Bezar; near to which there is a Garden, where King Jehanguire, Father of
Cha-jehan, lies interred. Over the Garden Gate you see the Tomb it self, beset
with Portraitures, covered with a black Hearse-Cloath, or Pall, with Torches of
white Wax, and two Jesuits attending at each end. There are some who wonder,
that Cha-jehan against the practice of the Mahumetans, who abhor Images, did
permit of carving; but the reason conjectured at is, that it is done upon the
consideration that his Father and himself learnt from the Jesuits certain
principles of Mathematics and Astrology. Though he had not the same kindness
for them at another time; for going one day to visit an Armenian, that lay
sick, whose name was Corgia, whom he loved very well and had honored with
several Employments, at what time the Jesuits who lived next to the Armenians
house, rang their Bell; the sound thereof so displeased the King, as being a
disturbance to the sick person, that in a great fury he commanded the Bell to
be taken away, and hung about his Elephants neck. Some few days after, the King
seeing his Elephant with that great Bell about his neck, fearing so great a
weight might injure his Elephant, caused the Bell to be carried to the
Couteval, which is a kind of a railed place, where a Provost sits as a Judge,
and decides differences among the people of that Quarter, where it has hung
ever since. This Armenian had been brought up with Cha-jehan; and in regard he
was an excellent Wit, and an excellent Poet, he was very much in the Kings
favor, who had conferred upon him many fair Commands, though he could never
either by threats or promises win him to turn Mohammedan.

CHAP. VIII.
The Road from Agra to Patna. and Daca, Cities in the Province of Bengala, and
of the Quarrel which the Author had with Cha-Est-Kan, the King's Uncle.
I Departed from Agra toward Bengala the 25 th of November 1665, and that day I
reached no farther than a very bad Inn, distant from Agra, costs 3 The 26 th I
came to Beruzabad, costs 9 This is a little City where, at my return, I
received eight thousand Roupies, being the remainder of the Money which
Giafer-Kan owed me for Wares that he had bought at Janabat. The 27 th to Serael
Morlides, costs 9 The 28 th to Serail Estanja, costs 14 The 29 th to Serail
Haii-mal, costs 12 The 30 th. to Serail Sekandera, costs 13 The 1 st of
December to Sanqual, costs 14 I met that day 110 Wagons, every Wagon drawn
by six Oxen, and in every Wagon 50000 Roupies. This is the Revenue of the
Province of Bengala, with all charges defraid, and the Governor's Purse
well-fill'd, comes to 5500000 Roupies. A league beyond Sanqual, you must pass a
River called Saingour, which runs into Gemine, not above half a league distant
from it. You pass over this River of Saingour upon a Stone-bridg, and when you
come from toward Bengala to go to Seronge or Surat, if you have a mind to
shorten your journey ten days, you must leave Agra-Road, and come to this
Bridge, and so Ferry over Gemine in a Boat. But generally Agra-Road is taken,
because the other way you must travel five or six days together upon the
stones; and also for that you are to pass through the Territories of certain
Raja's, where you are in danger of being robbed. The second day I came to an
Inn called Cherourabad, costs 12 When you are got about half the way, you pass
through Gianabad, a little City, near to which, about a quarter of a League on
this side, crossing a Field of Millet, I saw a Rhinoceros feeding upon
Millet-Canes, which a little Boy of nine or ten years old gave him to eat. When
I came near the Boy, he gave me some Millet to give the Rhinoceros; who
immediately came to me, opening his chops three or four times; I put the Millet
into his mouth, and when he had swallo'd it, he still opened his mouth for
more. The 3 d I came to Serrail Chajeada, costs 10 The 4 th to Serrail Atakan,
costs 13 The 5 th to Aureng-Abad, costs 9 Formerly this Village had another
name; but being the place where Aurengzeb gave Battle to his Brother Sultan
Sujah, who was Governor of all the Province of Bengala; Aureng-zeb, in Memory
of the Victory he had won, gave it his own name, and built there a very fair
House, with a Garden, and a little Mosquee. The 6 th to Alinchan, costs 9 Two
leagues on this side Alinchan, you meet the River Ganges. Monsieur Bernier the
King's Physician, and another person whose name was Rachepot, with whom I
traveled, were amazed to see, that a River had made such a noise in the World,
was no broader than the River Seine before the Lovre; believing before, that it
had been as wide as the Danaw above Belgrade. There is also so little water in
it from March to June or July, when the rains fall, that it will not bear a
small Boat. When we came to Ganges, we drank every one of us a Glass of Wine,
mixing some of the River-water with it; which caused a griping in our bellies:
But out Servants that drank it alone, were worse tormented than we. The
Hollanders, who have an House upon the Bank of Ganges, never drink the water of
this River, until they have boiled it. But for the natural Inhabitants of the
Country, they are so accustomed to it from their youth, that the King and the
Court drink no other. You shall see a vast number of Camels every day, whose
business only it is to fetch water from the Ganges. The 7 th, I came to
Halabas, costs 8 Halabas is a great City, built upon a point of Land where
Ganges and Gemine meet. There is a fair Castle of hew'n Stone, with a double
Moat; where the Governor resides. He is one of the greatest Lords in India;
and being very sickly, he has always about him ten Persian Physicians. He had
also in his service, Claudius Maille of Bourges, who practices Chyrurgery and
Physic both together. This was he that advised us not to drink of Ganges
Water, which would put us into a looseness; but rather to drink Well-water. The
chief of these Persian Physicians, whom this Governor hires with his Money,
one day threw his Wife from the top of a Battlement to the ground; prompted to
that act of cruelty, by some jealousies he had entertained. He thought the fall
had killed her, but she had only a Rib or two bruised; whereupon the Kindred of
the Woman came and demanded justice, at the feet of the Governor. The Governor
sending for the Physician, commanded him to be gone, resolving to retain him no
longer in his service. The Physician obeyed, and putting his maimed Wife in a
Pallanquin, he set forward upon the Road with all his Family. But he was not
gone above three or four days journey from the City, when the Governor finding
himself worse than he was wont to be, sent to recall him; which the Physician
perceiving, stabbed his Wife, his four Children, and thirteen female Slaves, and
returned again to the Governor, who said not a word to him, but entertained
him again into his service. The eighth, day I crossed the River in a large
Boat, having stayed from morning till noon upon the bank-side, expecting
Monsieur Maille, to bring me a Passport from the Governor. For there stands a
Derega, upon each side of the River, who will not suffer any person to pass
without leave; and he takes notice what sort of Goods are transported; there
being due from every Wagon four Roupies, and from every Coach one; not
accounting the charge of the Boat, which you must pay beside. The same day I
went to Sadoul-serail, costs 16 The ninth, to Yakedel -- sera, costs 10 The
tenth, to Bouraki-sera, costs 10 The eleventh, to Banarou, costs 10

Banarou is a large City, and handsomely built; the most part of the Houses
being either of Brick or Stone and higher than in any other Cities of India;
but the inconveniency is, that the Streets are very narrow. There are many Inns
in the Town; among the rest, one very large, and very handsomely built In the
middle of the Court are two Galleries, where are to be sold Calicuts, Silks,
and other sorts of Merchandise. The greatest part of the Sellers, are the
Workmen themselves; so that the Merchants buy at the first hand. These Workmen,
before they expose any thing to sale, must go to him that has the stamp, to
have the King's Seal set upon their Linen and Silks; otherwise they would be
fined, and lambasted with a good Cudgel. This City is situated upon the North
side of Ganges, that *runs by the Walls, and into which there falls also
another River, some two leagues upward toward the West. In Banarou stands one
of the Idolaters principal Pagods, whereof I shall speak in my second Book,
when I come to treat of the Religion of the Banians.

About five hundred paces from the City Northward, there is a Mosquee, where
are to be seen many Mohammedan Sepulchers; whereof some are very curious pieces
of Architecture. The fairest are every one in the middle of a Garden enclosed
with Walls, wherein there are Holes some half a foot square, through which
Passengers may have a sight of the Tomb within. The most considerable of all is
as it were four square Pedestal, every square whereof is forty paces wide. In
the midst of this Platform rises a Column thirty-two or thirty-five foot high,
all of a piece, which three men can hardly embrace. The Stone is of a gray
color, and so hard that I could not scrape it with my Knife. As it is
Pyramidical, there is a great Bowl at the top, which is encompassed (...) the
upper end with huge Grains of Wheat. All the fronts of the Tomb are full of
figures of Animals cut in the Stone; and it has been higher above ground than
now it seems to be, for several old men, that looked to some of the Sepulchers,
assured me, that within these fifty years it had sunk above thirty foot into
the Earth. They tell you moreover, that it is the Sepulcher of one of the Kings
of Boutan who was interred here after he had left his own Country to conquer
this Kingdom, out of which he was driven by the Successors of Tamerlane. The
Kingdom of Boutan is the place from whence they fetch Musk, and I will give you
a description of it in my third Book.

I stayed at Banarou the 12 th and 13 th; and during those two days it rained
continually, but not so as to stop my journey; so that the evening of the
thirteenth day I crossed the Ganges, with the Governors Passport. Before you
go into the Boat, they search the Travelers baggage; wearing Apparel however
pays nothing of Custom, but only Merchandise. The 13 th, I went to Baterpour,
costs 2 The 14 th, to Satraguy-sera, costs 8 The 15 th, to Moniarky-sera,
costs 9 The same day in the morning, after I had traveled two Leagues, I
crossed a River called Carnasarsou; and three Leagues from thence I crossed
another, which they call Saode-sou; both which I foarded. The 16 th, to
Gourmabad, costs 8 This is a Town upon a River called Goudera-sou, which is
crossed over a Stone-Bridg. The 17 th, to Saseron, costs 4 Saseron is a City
at the foot of certain Mountains, near to which there is a great Lake. In the
middle whereof there is a small Island, with a fair Mosquee built upon it;
wherein is to be seen, the Sepulcher of a Nahab or Favorite, called Selim-Kan;
who built it when he was Governor of the Province. There is a fair Bridge to
cross over into the Island, paved and lined with large Freestone. Upon one
side of the Lake is a great Garden, in the middle whereof is another fair
Sepulcher of the Sun of the same Nahab, Selim-Kan, who succeeded his Father in
the Government of the Province. If you would go to the Mine of Soulmelpour,
whereof I shall speak in the last Book of these Relations you must leave the
great Road to Patna, and bend to the South through Exberbourgh, and the famous
Fortress of Rhodes, of which I shall treat in the same place. The 18 th, I
ferry'd in a Boat over the River, Sonsou, which descends from the Southern
Mountains; after you have crossed it, the Merchandise pays, a certain Toll. The
same day I traveled on to Daoud-Nagarsera, where there is a fair Tomb, costs.
9 The 19 th, to Halva-sera, costs 10 The 20 th, to Aga-sera, costs ^9 In the
morning I met a hundred and thirty Elephants, great and small, which they were
leading to Dehli to the great Mogul. The one and twentieth, to Patna, costs 10

Patna is one of the greatest Cities of India, upon the Bank of Ganges, toward
the West; not being less than two Leagues in length. But the Houses are no
fairer than in the greatest part of the other Cities of India; being covered
with Baembouc, or Straw. The Holland Company have a House there, by reason of
their Trade in Saltpeter, which they refine at a great Town called Choupar,
which is also situated upon Ganges, ten Leagues above Patna.

Coming to Patna, we met the Hollanders, in the Street returning from Choupar,
who stopped our Coaches to salute us. We did not part, till we had emptied two
Bottles of Schiras Wine in the open Street; which is not taken notice of in
that Country, where people meet with an entire freedom without any Ceremony.

I stayed eight days at Patna, during which time there fell out an accident,
which will let the Reader understand, that Sodomy does not go altogether
unpunished among* the Mahumetans. A Mimbachi, who commanded a thousand Foot,
went about to abuse a young Boy in his service; and who had several times
resisted his attempts; complaining also to the Governor, and telling him
withal, that if his Master persisted to urge him any more, he would certainly
kill him. At length the Captain took his opportunity, at a House which he had
in the Country, and forced the Boy. The Boy overwhelmed with grief and rage,
took his opportunity also to revenge himself; and being one day hunting with
his Master, about a quarter of a League from any of his other Servants, he got
behind him, and cleft his head with his Hanger. After he had done, he rode full
speed to the City, crying out all the way, that he had killed his Master for
such a reason; and went immediately to the Governors Lodging; who sent him to
prison; but he let him out at the end of six months; and notwithstanding all
the endeavors which the Captains Kindred used to have had him put to death,
the Governor durst not condemn him, for fear of the people, who affirmed that
the Boy had done well.

I parted from Patna in a Boat for Daca, the nine and twentieth of January,
between eleven and twelve at noon; and had the River been deep, as it uses to
be after the Rains, I had taken Boat at Hallabas, or at least at Banarou.

The same day I came to lie at sera-Beconcour, costs 15 Five Leagues on this
side Beconcour, you meet with a River called Pomponsou, which comes from the
South, and falls into Ganges. The thirtieth to Sera-d' Erija, costs 17 The one
and thirtieth, after we had traveled four Leagues, or thereabout, we met with
the River Kaoa, which comes from the South. Three Leagues lower, you meet with
another River called Chanon, which comes from the North. Four Leagues farther,
you discover the River Erguga, which runs from the South; and at length, six
Leagues beyond, the River Aquera, falling from the same part of the World; all
which four Rivers lose their Names in the Ganges. All that day I saw great
Mountains toward the South, distant from Ganges sometimes ten, and sometimes
fifteen Leagues, till at length I came to lodge in Monger-City, costs 18 The
first day of January, 1666, after I had gone by Water two hours, I saw the
Gandet fall into the Ganges, flowing from the North. This is a great River,
that carries Boats. That evening I lay at Zangira, costs 8 But in regard of
the winding of Ganges all that days journey, I might well reckon them by Water
two and twenty Leagues. The second day, from between six in the morning till
eleven, I saw three Rivers that threw themselves into Ganges; all three
descending from the North. The first is called Ronova, the second Tae, the
third Chanan. I came to lie at Baquelpour, costs 18 The third, after four
hours upon the Ganges, I met the River Katare, which comes from the North; and
lay at a Village called Pongangel, at the foot of certain Mountains that
descend to Ganges it self, costs 13 The fourth, an hours rowing beyond
Pongangel, I met a great River, called Mart-Nadi, coming from the South; and I
lay at Rage-Mehale, costs 6

Rage-Mehale, is a City upon the right hand of Ganges; and if you go by Land,
you shall find the highway, for a League or two, paved with Brick to the Town.
Formerly the Governors of Bengala resided here; it being an excellent Country
for hunting, besides that it was a place of great Trade. But now the River
having taken another course, above a good half League from the City, as well
for that reason, as to keep in awe the King of Aracan, and several Portuguese
Banditi, who are retired to the mouths of Ganges, and made excursions even as
far as Daca it self; both the Governor and the Merchants have removed
themselves to Daca, which is at present (...) large City, and a Town of great
Trade.

The sixth, being arrived at a considerable Town, called Donapour, six Leagues
from Rage-Mehale I parted with Monsieur Bernier, who was going to Casenbasar,
and thence to Ogouli by land; for when the River is low, there is no going by
Water, by reason of a great Bank of Sand that lies before a City called
Santiqui.

I lay that night at Toutipour, distant from Rage-mehale, costs 12 I saw there
at Sunrising a great number of Crocodiles lying upon the Sand. The seventh, I
came to Acerat, costs 25 From Acerat to Daca, it is counted by Land forty-five
Leagues. All that day I saw such a vast number of Crocodiles, that I had a
great desire to shoot at one, to try whether the vulgar report were true, that
a Musket Shot would not pierce their skin. The bullet hit him in the jaw, and
made the blood gush out; however it would not stay in the place, but plunged
into the River. The eight, I saw again a great number lying upon the bank of
the River, and made two shot at two with three bullets at a time. As soon as
they were wounded, they turned themselves upon their backs, opening their
throats, and di'd upon the spot. That day I came to lie at Douloudia, costs 17
The Crows were here the cause that we found a very fair Fish, which the
Fishermen had hid among the Osiers by the side of the River; for when our
Watermen saw the Crows in great numbers hovering, and making an hideous noise
about the Osiers, they presently conjectured that there was something more than
ordinary: and they made so diligent a search, that at length they found an
excellent dish of meat. The ninth two hours after noon, we met with a River
called Chativor, that runs from the North, and we lay at Dampour, costs 16 The
tenth, we lay by the Riverside in a place remote from Houses, and we traveled
that day, costs 15 The eleventh, toward evening, being come to that part where
Ganges divides it self into three Arms, whereof one runs to Daca; we lay at a
large Town, upon the entry of the great Channel, which Town is called
Jatrapour, costs 20 They that have no luggage, may make a short-cut from
Jatrapour to Daca, and save much ground, by reason of the many windings of the
River. The twelfth, about noon, we past by a large Village called Bagamara, and
came to lie at Kasiata, another great Town, costs 11 The thirteenth, about
noon we met with a River, two leagues from Daca, called Laquia, which runs from
the North-East. Just against the Point where the two Rivers join, there stands
a Fortress of each side, with several pieces of Cannon. Half a league lower,
appears another River called Pagalu, upon which there is a fair Bridge of Brick,
which Mirza-Mola caused to be built. This River comes from the North-East; and
half a league upward appears another River called Cadamtali, that runs from the
North, over which there is a another Bridge of Brick. On both sides of the River
are several Towers, as it were inchas'd with several heads of men, executed for
robbing upon the high way. About evening we came to Daca, having traveled by
water that day, costs 9

Daca is a great Town, that extends it self only in length; every one coveting
to have an House by the Ganges-side. The length of this Town is above two
leagues. And indeed from the last Brick-Bridge which I mentioned to Daca, there
is but one continued row of Houses separated one from the other; inhabited for
the most part by Carpenters, that build Galleys and other small Vessels. These
Houses are properly no more than paltry Huts built up with Bambouc's, and
daubed over with fat Earth. Those of Daca are not much better built: The
Governors Palace is a place enclosed with high Walls, in the midst whereof is
a pitiful House, built only of Wood. He generally lodges in Tents, which he
causes to be set up in a great Court of that Enclosure. The Hollanders finding
that their Goods were not safe in the ordinary Houses of Daca, have built them
a very fair House; and the English have another, which is reasonably handsome.
The Church of the Austin-Friers is all of Brick, and is a very comely Pile.

When I traveled last to Daca, the Nahab Cha-Est-Kan, who was then the
Governor of Bengala, was at War with the King of Arakan, whose Naval-Force
consists generally of 200 Galeasses, attended by several other smaller Vessels.
These Galeasses run through the Gulf of Bengala, and enter into the mouth of
Ganges, the Sea flowing up higher then Daca. Cha-Est-Kan, Uncle to King
Aurengzeb, the present Mogul, and the best Headpiece that ever was in all his
Territories, found out a way to corrupt several of the King of Aracan's
Captains, so that of a sudden forty Galeasses, commanded by Portugals, came and
joined themselves with him. To engage more firmly all this new multitude to his
service, he gave a larger pay to all the Portugal-Officers, and to the
Soldiers proportionably: But those of the Country had no more than their
ordinary pay doubled. It Is an incredible thing to see how swiftly these
Galeasses cut their way in the water. Some are so long that they carry fifty
Oars of a side; but they have but two men to an Oar: There are foam very
curiously painted, and upon which there is no cost of Gold and Azure spared.
The Hollanders have some of their own to transport their Goods; and sometimes
they are forced to hire others, whereby many people get a good livelihood.

The next day after my arrival at Daca, which was the 14 th of January, I went
to wait upon the Nahab; and presented him with a Garment of Cloth of Gold,
laced with a Gold-needle-work Lace of Point of Spain; with a Scarf of Gold and
Silver, of the same Point; and a very fair Emrald-Jewel. Toward evening, being
returned to the Hollander's House, where I lodged, the Nahab sent me Granates,
China-Oranges, two Persian-Melons, and three sorts of Pears.

The fifteenth, I showed him my Goods, and presented the Prince with a Watch,
in a Gold-Enamell'd-Case; with a pair of little Pistols inlaid with Silver, and
a very fair Prospective-Glass. What I gave to the Father and the Son, a young
Lord, about ten years old, stood me in above five thousand Livres.

The sixteenth, I treated with him about the Prizes of my Goods: and at length
I went to his Steward to take my Letter of Exchange to be paid at Casen-Bazar.
Not but that he would have paid me my Money at Daca; but the Hollanders, who
understood things better than I did, told me it was very dangerous to carry
Money to Casen-Bazar, whither there was no going, but over the Ganges by water,
the way by land being full of Bogs and Fens. And to go by water is no less
dangerous, by reason that the Boats which they use, are very apt to tip over
upon the least storm: And when the Mariners perceive that you carry Money along
with you, it is an easy thing for them to overset the Boat, and afterward to
come and take up the Money that lies but at the bottom of the River.

The twentieth, I took leave of the Nahab, who desired me to come and see him
again, and caused a Pass to be delivered me, wherein he gave me the title of
one of the Gentlemen of his house, which he had done before, when he was
Governor of Amadabat, when I went to him, to the Army, in the Province of
Decan, into which the Raja-seva-gi was entered, as I shall relate in another
place. By virtue of these Passes I could travel over all the Countries of the
great Mogul, as being one of his Household.

The one and twentieth, the Hollanders made a great Feast for my sake; to which
they invited the English, and some Portuguese's, together with the
Austin-Friers of the same Nation.

The two and twentieth, I made a Visit to the English, whose President then was
Mr. Prat.

From the twenty-third to the twenty-ninth, I brought up Goods, to the value of
11000 Roupies; and after I had embarked them, I took my leave.

The twenty-ninth, in the evening, I departed from Daca, the Hollanders bearing
me company for two leagues, with their little Barques Armed: Nor did we spare
the Spanish-Wine all that time. Having been upon the River from the
twenty-ninth of January to the eleventh of February, I left my Goods and
Servants at the Barque at Acerat; where I took a Boat that carried me to a
great Village called Mirdapour.

The next day I hired an Horse for my self, but not finding another for my
Luggage, I was forced to hire two Women, who carried it for me. That evening I
arrived at Casen-Basar, where I was welcomed by Menheir Arnold Van
Wachttendonk, Director of all the Holland-Factories in Bengala, who invited me
to lie at his House.

The fourteenth, Menheir Wachttendonk returned to Ouguely, where is the General
Factory. The same day one of my Servants brought me word that my People and
Goods, which I had left behind in the Barque, had been in very great danger,
by reason of the high Winds that had blown for two days together.

The fifteenth, the Hollanders lent me a Pallekis, to go to Madesou-basarki.
This was a great Town three Leagues from Casen-basar, where lay Cha-Est-Kan's
Receiver General, to whom I presented my Bill of Exchange. He told me it was
very good, and that he would willingly have paid me, had he not received order
the night before, not to pay me, in case he had not paid me already. He did not
tell me the reason that moved Cha-Est-Kan to act in that manner; so that I went
home to my Lodging infinitely surpised at his proceeding.

The sixteenth, I wrote to the Nahab, to know the reason why he had forbad his
Receiver General to pay me.

The seventeenth in the evening, I took water for Ougueli, in a Bark of
fourteen Oars, which the Hollanders lent me; and that night and the next I lay
upon the River.

The ninteenth toward evening, I passed by a large Town called Nandi, farther
than which the Sea does not flow. Here the Wind blew so fiercely, and the water
grew so rough, that we were forced to stay three or four hours, and ly by the
shore.

The twentieth, I arrived at Ougueli, where I stayed till the second of March.
During which time the Hollanders bid me very welcome, and made it their
business to show me all the divertisements which the Country was capable to
afford. We went several times in Pleasure-Boats upon the River, and we had a
Banquet of all the Delicacies that the Gardens of Europe could have afforded
us. Salads of all sorts, Colewarts, Asparagus, Pease, but our chiefest Dish was
Japon Beans; the Hollanders being very curious to have all sorts of Pulse and
Herbs in their Gardens, though they could never get Artichokes to grow in that
Country.

The second of March I left Ougueli, and the fifth arrived at Casenbasar.

The next day I went to Madesou-Barsaki, to know whether the Nahab had sent any
other orders to his Receiver. For I told you a little before, that I wrote upon
the place to Cha-Est-Kan, to complain of his proceedings, and to know the
reason why my Bill of Exchange was not paid. The Director of the Holland
Factories writ a Letter also in my behalf, which I enclosed, wherein he
represented to the Nahab, that I was too well known to him, as having been
formerly with him at Amadabat, in the Army in Decan, and other places, do
deserve such hard usuage. That he ought to consider, that I being the only
person that brought the chiefest rarities of Europe to the Indies, it was not
the way to make me eager of returning any more, as he himself had invited me to
do, to send me away in a discontent. Besides, that the credit of my report
would discourage others from coming to the Indies, fearing the same usuage as I
had received. Neither mine nor the Directors Letter produced that effect which
we expected. Nor was I much better satisfied with the new order which the Nahab
sent to his Receiver; which was to pay me, abating twenty thousand Roupies of
the sum which we had agreed upon; and if I would not take the remainder, that I
might come and fetch my goods again.

This ill dealing of the Nahab, proceeded from a scurvy trick that was played
me by three Canary-birds at the Great Mogul's Court. The story whereof was thus
in short.

Aurengzeb, that now reigns, at the instigation of two Persians and a Banian,
has brought up a custom very much to the disadvantage of Merchants, that come
out of Europe, and other parts, to sell Jewels at Court. For whether they come
into India either by Land or Sea, the Governor of the place where they first
arrive, has order to send them to the King, together with their goods, whether
they will or no. As the Governor of Surat dealt by me, in the year 1665,
sending me to Dehli, or Jehanabad, where the King was. There were then
attending upon his Majesty, two Persians and a Banian, who are entrusted to
view and examine all the Jewels which are to be sold to the King. One of those
Persians is called Nahab-Akel-Kan, that is, the Prince of the Spirit; who keeps
all the Kings Jewels. The name of the other is Mirza-Mouson, whose business is
to rate every stone. The Banian, whose name is Nalikan, is to see whether the
Stones be false or not, or whether they have any defect. These three men have
obtained a License from the King, to view, before ever he does, whatever
foreign Merchants shall bring to Court, and to present their goods to him
themselves. And though they are under an Oath not to take any thing from the
Merchants, yet they extort whatever they can get from them, though it be their
ruin. When they see any thing that is lovely, and likely to bring great
profit, they would persuade you to sell it to them for less by half than the
King is worth; and if you refuse to let them have it, when they are in the
Kings presence, they will set a price upon it at half the value; knowing that
Aurengzeb is not very covetous of Jewels, loving his Money far better. Upon the
Kings Festival-day, of which I shall speak in another place, all the Princes
and Nobility of the Court present him with most magnificent gifts. And when
they cannot meet with Jewels, they send him Roupies of Gold, which the King
likes far better than Stones; though Jewels are the more honorable present.
Therefore when this Festival draws nigh, he issues out of his Treasury, a great
quantity of Diamonds, Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls, which he who is entrusted
to prize the Stones, delivers to several Merchents to sell to the Nobility, who
are bound to present the King; by which means the King gets the Money and his
Jewels again.

There is also another thing very disadvantageous to a Merchant Jeweller, which
is, that when the King has seen the Stones, no Prince nor Nobleman that knows
of it, will ever buy them. Besides, while these three persons, who are
entrusted to view the Jewels, are considering and examining them at their
Lodgings, several Banians resort thither, who are expert, some in Diamonds,
some in Rubies, some in Emraulds, and others in Pearls, who write down the
weight, goodness, cleanness, and color of every piece. So that when a Merchant
goes afterward to any Prince or Governor of any Province, these people send
them a note of what he has, and the price, which they set down at half the
value. For in trade these Banians are a thousand times worse than the Jews;
more expert in all sorts of cunning tricks, and more maliciously mischievous in
their revenge. Now you shall hear what a trick these unworthy people served me.

When I arrived at Gehanabad, one of them came to my Lodging, and told me, he
had order from the King to see what I had brought, before I exposed my goods in
the Kings presence. They would have rather that the King had not been at
Gehanabad, for they would have then endeavored to have bought them themselves,
to gain thereby, by selling them again to the King, or the Nobility upon
occasion; which they could never persuade me to. The next day they came to see
me all three, one after another; and they would needs have of me, amongst other
things, a Jewel of nine great Pearls, in the fashion of a Pear, the biggest
whereof weighed thirty Carats, and the least sixteen; together with another
single Pearl like a Pear, of fifty-five Carats. As for the Jewel* the King took
it; but for the single Pearl, they finding that whatever they could say, I
would not be wrought upon to sell them any bargains, so ordered it, that before
I had showed my Jewels to the King, Giafer-Kan the Kings Uncle saw, and kept
it, telling me he would give me as good a price as the King; and desired me not
to speak of it, for indeed he had a design to make a present to the King.

When the King had made choice of such of my Jewels as he pleased, Giafer-Kan
bought of me several pieces, and at the same time agreed with me for the great
Pearl. Some days after he paid me, according as we had agreed, except for the
Pearl, upon which he would have abated me ten thousand Roupies. For the two
Persians and the Banian had maliciously informed him, that at my first arrival,
they could have bought the Pearl for eight or ten thousand Roupies less than I
had valued it to him; which was absolutely false. Thereupon Giafer-Kan telling
me, that if I would not take his Money, I might have my Jewel again; I took him
at his word, assuring him, he should never see it again as long as he lived.
And I was as good as my word. And indeed that which made me the more resolute
was, that I was resolved to carry something which was considerable to
Cha-Est-Kan; for could I have had my liberty upon my arrival at Surat to have
gone to him, I would never have seen the King at Gehanabad; about which I had a
very great quarrel with the Governor of Surat. For when I came to visit him,
he told me presently, that the case was altered from what it had been since my
last being there, for that the King was resolved to have the first view of all
Curiosities imported into his Kingdom. I was above four Months contending in
vain with the Governor; but nothing would serve; I must go to the King, and
for fear I should take another Road, he sent fifteen Horsemen along with me as
far as Shalaour.

When I went for Bengala, these Overseers of the Jewels, out of mere spite,
and, it may be, set on by Giafar-Kan, to be revenged of me for denying to let
him have my Jewel, writ to Cha-Est-Kan, that I intended to show him certain
Jewels, among the rest a very fair Pearl, which I had sold to Giafer-Kan; but
that he had given it me again, because he understood that I would have made him
pay for it, ten thousand Roupies more than it was worth. They wrote also the
particular proportion of all the other Stones which I carried. And upon this
false and malicious advice it was, that Cha-Est-Kan, who received not this
information till he had delivered me my Bill of Exchange, would abate me for my
whole parcel, twenty thousand Roupies, which he reduced at length to ten
thousand; and well I had it too.

Since I told you before, what a Present I gave to Cha-Est-Kam; I think it not
amiss to tell you, what I gave the King, to Nehab Giafer-Kan, to the Eunuch of
the Grand Begum, Aurengzeb's Sister, the Great Treasurer, and the Porters of
the Treasury. For you must take notice, that whoever he be, that craves
Audience of the King, they ask him in the first place, where the Present is
which he intends for the King; and examine whether it be fitting to present to
his Majesty. For no man must come into his presence empty handed, though it be
an honor dearly purchased. Coming then to Gehanabad, I went to make my
obeisance to the King; and this is the Present which I made him.

In the first place, a Buckler of Brass highly embossed, and very richly guilt,
the cost of the Guilding alone amounting to two hundred Ducats of Gold, or
eighteen hundred Livres; the value of the whole piece coming to four thousand
three hundred seventy eight Livres. In the middle thereof was the story of
Curtius, who threw himself and his Horse into the Barathrum, when the Earth
gaped, near Rome. Round the outermost Circle of the Buckler, was represented
the siege of Rochel. It was wrought by one of the best Workmen in France, by
the order of the Cardinal Richlieu. All the great Lords that were about
Aurengzeb at that time, were charmed at the beauty of the Workmanship, and told
him, he could not do better, than to put it upon the great Elephant, which
carried the Standard before his Majesty when he marched into the Field.

I presented him also with a Battle-Axe of Crystal of the Rock, the sides
whereof were set with Rubies and Emraulds, enchas'd in Gold in the body of the
Crystal, which cost three thousand one hundred and nineteen Livres.

Moreover, I presented him with a Saddle after the Turkey fashion, embroidered
with little Rubies, Pearls, and Diamonds, which cost two thousand eight hundred
and ninety-two Livres.

I presented him also with another Saddle and Foot-cloath, embroidered with
Gold and Silver, to the value of one thousand seven hundred and thirty Livers.
The whole Present amounting to twelve thousand one hundred and nineteen Livres.

The Present which I made to Giafar-Kan, the Great Mogul's Uncle, was a Table,
with other nineteen pieces to make a Cabinet, all natural Stones, of diverse
colors, representing the shapes of several Birds and Flowers. The work was
made at Florence, and cost two thousand one hundred and fifty Livres.

A perfect Ruby Ring, which cost one thousand and three hundred Livres.

To the great Treasurer, I presented a Watch in a Gold Case, set with small
Emraulds, at seven hundred and twenty Livres.

To the Porters of the Kings Treasury, and those that deliver out the Money out
of the Treasury, two hundred Roupies, at three hundred Livres.

To the Eunuch of the Great Begum, Sister to Aurengzeb, a Watch in a painted
Case, which cost two hundred and sixty Livres.

All these Presents which I made, as well to the Great Mogul, as to
Cha-Est-Kan, Giafer-Kan, his Majesty's Uncles; as also the Great Treasurer, to
the Stewards of the Houses of the Kan's, and those that brought me twice the
Calaat, or Habit of Honor from the King, and as many times from the Begum his
Sister, and once from Giafar Kan; all these Presents, I say, came to
twenty-three thousand one hundred fourscore and seven Livres. So true it is,
that they who have any business to do at the Court of the great Princes, as
well in Turkey as in Persia and in the Indies, must not pretend to do any thing
in reference to their affairs, till they have their Presents, and those very
considerable, ready. Besides, that his Purse must be continually open to diverse
Officers of meaner reputation, who may be able to serve him. I did not mention
in my first Volume the Present which I made to him that brought me the Calaat
from the King of Persia, to whom I gave two hundred Crowns.

CHAP. IX.
The Road from Surat to Golconda.
I Have made several journeys to Golconda, and have taken several Roads;
sometimes by Sea embarking from Ormus for Malispata; sometimes setting out from
Agra, but most often from Surat, which is the chiefest landing-place of
Indolstan. But in this Chapter I will only speak of the common Road from Surat
to Golconda; wherein I comprehend that of Agra; which Road comes in at
Dultabat, as I shall afterward relate, making mention only of two journeys
which I made in 1645, and 1652, for fear of tiring the Reader.

I departed from Surat in the year 1645, upon the nineteenth of January, and
came to lie at Cambari, costs 3 From Cambari to Barnoli, costs 9 From Barnoli
to Beara, costs 12 From Beara to Navopour, costs 16 This is the place where
grows the best Rice in the World, that smells like Musk. From Navapour to
Rinkula, costs 18 From Rinkula to Pipelnar, costs 8 From Pipelnar to Nimpour,
costs 17 From Nimpour to Patane, costs 14 From Patane to Secoura, costs 14
From Secoura to Baquela, costs 10 From Baquela to Discon, costs 10 From
Discon to Dultabat, costs 10

Dultabat is one of the best Fortresses in the Kingdoms of the Great Mogul,
upon a Mountain every way steep; the only way to it being so narrow, that but
one Horse, or one Camel can go at a time. This City is at the foot of the
Mountain, very well walled. And this place of such importance, which the
Mogul's lost, when the Kings of Golconda and Visapour revolted from them, was
retaken in the Reign of Jehan-guire, by a subtle stratagem. Sultan Courom, who
was afterward called Cha-jehan, commanded in Decan the Army of the King his
Father; and Ast-Kan, Father in Law to Cha-Est-Kan, who was one of the Generals,
gave the Prince some sort of language which so highly offended him, that
immediately sending for one of his Papouche's, or Shoo's, he caused him to have
six blows given him upon the Bonnet; which among the Indians is the highest
indignity can be put upon a man, after which he is no more to appear in the
Prince's presence. This was done by consent between the Prince and the General,
to deceive the World, more especially any Spies which the King of Visapour
might have in the Prince's Army. The report of Ast-Kan's disgrace was
immediately spread abroad: and he himself flying for Sanctuary to the King of
Visapour, who had not cunning enough to discern the imposture, was welcomed by
the same King, and assured of his protection. Ast-Kan seeing himself so well
received, begged leave of the King, that he might retire with ten or twelve of
his Women, and as many of his Servants, into the Fortress of Dultabat, which
was granted. He entered the Town with eight or ten Camels, the two Cajava's or
Litters on each side of the Camel being close shut, to keep the Women from
being seen. But instead of Women, he had put into every Cajava two Soldiers,
all bold and resolved men, as were also every one of the supposed Eunuchs that
led the Camels: so that he had no great difficulty to cut the Garrison in
pieces, not being upon their guard; and to make himself Master of the place,
which has been ever since under the Power of the Great Mogul. There are in the
place a great number of excellent Pieces of Cannon, and the Cannoniers are
generally English or Hollanders. True it is, that there is one little Mountain
higher than the Fortress; but there is hardly any way to it, but through the
same Fortress. There was a Dutch Engineer, who after he had served the King
fifteen or sixteen years, desired leave to be gone, and the Holland-Company it
self, that had recommended him to the Service, did all they could to obtain it;
but they could never procure it; because he was an excellent Cannonier, and
very skilful in making Fireworks. The Raja Jesseing, who is the most Potent
of all the Idolatrous Princes of India, and who was most powerfully
Instrumental to put the Crown upon Aureng-zeb's Head, was sent as Generalissimo
of the Army of this King, against the Raja Seva-gi; and passing by the Fortress
of Dultabat, this Dutchguis, as well as he. The Hollander laying hold of this
opportunity, told the Raja, that if he would procure him a License to depart,
he would show him a way to get up a Cannon, and to mount them upon that
Mountain which commanded the Fortress: for they had already walled it about,
and put Soldiers upon it to keep it secure. The Raja pleased with his
proposal, assured him that he would procure him the King's License, if he
performed what he had proposed. Thereupon the Hollander undertaking and
accomplishing his design, the Raja was as good as his word, and obtained of the
King to dismiss the Dutch-Cannonier: who came to Surat when I was there, about
the beginning of the year 1667; whence he embarked for Holland.

From Dultabat to Aureng-abat, costs 4 Aureng-abat was formerly but a Village,
till Aureng-zeb made it a City, though it be not walled. It grew to be thus
enlarged, as well by reason of a Lake two leagues about, upon which the Village
is built, as for the Memorys-sake of his first Wife, who is dead, by whom he
had his Children. She is Interred toward the end of the Lake, upon the
West Side, where the King has built a Mosquee, with a stately Monument, and a
fair Inn. The Mosquee and the Monument were reared at a great expense, being
covered with white-Marble, which is brought from Lahor by Wagon; being a
journey of four Months. Going one time from Surat to Golconda, I met five days
journey from Aureng-abat, more than three hundred Wagons laden with this
Marble, the least whereof was drawn by twelve Oxen. From Aureng-abat to Pipoli,
costs 8 From Pipoli to Aubar, costs 12 From Aubar to Guisemner, costs 10
From Guisemner to Asti, costs 12 From Asti to Sarver, costs 16 From Sarver to
Lesona, costs 16 From Lesona to Nadour, costs 12

At Nadour you must cross a River which runs into Ganges; and pay for every
Wagon four Roupies; besides that, you must have a pass from the Governor.

From Nadour to Patonta, costs 9 From Patonta to Kakeri, costs 10 From Kakeri
to Satapour, costs 10 From Satapour to Sitanaga, costs 12 From Sitanaga to
Satanagar, costs 10 At Satanagar you begin to enter upon the Territories of
the King of Golconda. From Satanagar to Melvari, costs 16 From Melvari to
Girballi, costs 12 From Girballi to Golconda, costs 14 So that from Surat to
Golconda, there are, costs 324

All this I traveled in twenty-seven days. I made five journeys more in my
Travels in the year 1653. And I also took another Road from Piplenar, where I
arrived the eleventh of March, setting out from Surat, the sixth.

The twelfth, to Birgam.

The thirteenth, to Omberat.

The fourteenth, to Enneque-Tenque, a strong Fortress, that bears the name of
two Indian Princesses. It stands upon a Mountain steep every way; there being
but one ascent to it upon the East Side. Within the enclosed compass of the
Walls there is a large Pond, and Ground enough to sow for the maintenance of
five or six-hundred men. But the King keeps no Garrison therein, so that it
falls to ruin.

The fifteenth, to Geroul.

The sixteenth, to Lazour, where you are to cross a River; upon which, about a
Cannons-shot from the fording-place, are to be seen several large Pagods of the
Country, whither great numbers of Pilgrims repair every day.

The seventeenth, to Aureng-abad.

The eighteenth, to Pipelgan, or Piply.

The nineteenth, to Ember.

The Twentieth, to Deogan.

The one and twentieth, to Patris.

The two and twentieth, to Bargan.

The three and twentieth, to Palam.

The four and twentieth, to Candear, a large Fortress, but upon one side
commanded by an high Mountain.

The five and twentieth, to Gargan.

The six and twentieth, to Nagooni.

The seven and twentieth, to Indove.

The eight and twentieth, to Indelvai.

The nine and twentieth, to Regivali. Between these two last places there is a
little River which separates the Territories of the Great Mogul, from the
Dominions of the King of Golconda.

The thirtieth, to Masapkipet.

The one and thirtieth, to Mirel-mola-kipet.

To go from Agra to Golconda, you must go to Brampour, according to the Road
already described from Brampour to Dultabat, which is five or six days journeys
off; and from Dultabat to those other places before set down.

You may also take another Road to go from Surat to Golconda; that is to say,
through Goa and Visapour; as I shall inform you in the particular relation of
my journey to Goa. I come now to what is most worthy of observation in the
Kingdom of Golconda: And to relate what happened in the last Wars the King
maintained against his Neighbors, during the time that I have known the Indies.

CHAP. X.
Of the Kingdom of Golconda, and the Wars which it has maintained for some few
years last past.
THE whole Kingdom of Golconda, take it in general, is a good Country,
abounding in Corn, Rice, Cattle, Sheep, Poultry, and other necessaries for
human life. In regard there are great store of Lakes in it, there is also great
store of Fish. Above all the rest, there is a sort of Smelt, that has but one
bone in the middle, which is most delicious food. Nature has contributed more
than Art, toward the making these Lakes, whereof the Country is full; which are
generally in places somewhat raised, so that you need do no more than make a
little Dam upon the plain-side to keep in the water. These Dams or Banks are
sometimes half a league long: and after the rainy seasons are over, they open
the Sluices from time to time to let out the water into the adjacent Fields,
where it is received by diverse little Channels to water particular grounds.

Bagnager is the name of the Metropolis of this Kingdom; but vulgarly it is
called Golconda, from the name of a Fortress, not above two leagues distant
from it, where the King keeps his Court. This Fortress is about two leagues in
circuit, and by consequence requires a numerous Guard. It is as it were a Town
where the King keeps his Treasure: having left Bagnagar, ever since it was
sacked by the Army, which Aureng-zeb brought against it.

Bagnagar is then the City, which they vulgarly call Golconda; and it was
founded by the great Grandfather of the present King; upon the importunity of
one of his Wives, whom he passionately loved, whose name was Nagar. Before
that, it was only a place of Pleasure, where the King had very fair Gardens,
till at length his Wife continually representing to him the delicacies of the
situation for the building a City and a Palace, by reason of the River; he laid
the foundations, and ordered that it should bear the name of his Wife, calling
it, Bag-Nagar, that is to say, the Garden of Nagar. This City lies in seventeen
degrees of Elevation, wanting two minutes. The Country round about is a slat
Country, only near the City are several Rocks, as you see about Fontain-Bleau.
A great River washes the Walls of the City upon the South-west-side, which,
near to Maslipatan, falls into the Gulf of Bengala. At Bagnagar you cross this
River over a Bridge no less beautiful than Pont-Neuf at Paris. The City is
little less than Orleans, well built, and full of Windows. There are many fair
large Streets, but not being well-pav'd, they are dusty, as are all the Cities
of Persia and India, which is very offensive in the Summer.

Before you come to the Bridge, you must pass through a large Suburb, called
Erengabad, about a league in length; where live all the Merchants, the Brokers,
Handicraft-Trades, and in general, all the meaner sort of people; The City
being inhabited only by persons of Quality, Officers of the King's House,
Ministers of Justice, and Officers of the Army. From ten or eleven in the
foren^^n, till four or five in the evening, the Merchants, Brokers, and Workmen
co^^ into the City to trade with the Foreign Merchants; after which time they
return to their own Houses. In the are Suburb two or three fair Mosquees, which
serve for Inns for the Foreigners, besides several Pagods in the
Neighbouring-parts. Through the same Suburb lies the way to the Fortress of
Golconda.

So soon as you are over the Bridge, you enter into a large Street, that leads
you to the King's Palace. On the right hand are the Houses of some Lords of the
Court; and four or five Inns two Stories-high: wherein there are fair Halls and
large Chambers to let in the fresh Air. At the end of this Street there is a
large Piazza; upon which stands one of the sides of the Palace; in the middle
whereof there is a Balcony, wherein the King comes to sit, when he pleases to
give Audience to the People. The great Gate of the Palace stands not upon this
Piazza, but upon another very near adjoining; and you enter first into a large
Court surrounded with Portico's, under which lies the King's Guards. Out of
this Court you pass into another, built after the same form, encompast with
several fair Apartments, the Roofs whereof are terrass'd. Upon which, as upon
those where the Elephants are kept, there are very fair Gardens, wherein there
grow Trees of that bigness, that it is a thing of great wonder, how those
Arches should bear so vast a burden.

About fifty years since, they began to build a magnificent Pagod in the City;
which would have been the fairest in all India, had it been finished. The
Stones are to be admired for their bigness: And that wherein the Nich is made,
which is on that side where they say their Prayers, is an entire Rock, of such
a prodigious bulk, that it was five years before five or six-hunder'd men,
continually employed, could hew it out of its place. They were forced also to
roll it along upon an Engine with Wheels, upon which they brought it to the
Pagod; and several affirmed to me* that there were fourteen-hunder'd Oxen to
draw it. I will tell you hereafter the reason it remains imperfect: For had it
been finished, in all reason it had excelled all the boldest Structures of Asia.

On the other side of the City, as you go to Maslipatan, there are two great
Lakes, being each about a league in compass, wherein there ride several Pinks
richly adorned for the King's Pleasure; and upon the Banks are several fair
Houses that belong to the Principal Lords of the Court.

Upon three sides of the City stands a very fair Mosquee, wherein are the Tombs
of the Kings of Golconda: and about four in the afternoon there is a Dole of
Bread and Pilau to all the Poor that come. If you would see any thing that is
rare, you must go to view these Tombs upon a Festival-day. For then from
morning till night they are hung with rich Tapestry.

As for the Government and Policy which is observed in this City: In the first
place, when a stranger comes to the Gates, they fearch him exactly, to see if
he have any Salt or Tobacco about him; for those Commodities bring the King his
greatest Revenue. Sometimes a Stranger shall wait a day or two, before he shall
have leave to enter. For a Soldier first gives notice to the officer that
commands the Guard, and then he sends to the Deroga, to know what he shall do.
Now, because it many times happens that the Deroga is busy, or gone to take a
walk out of the City, or else for that sometimes the Soldier himself pretends
he cannot find the Deroga, only, to create himself more errands, to get the
more Money; a Stranger is forced to endure all this delay, sometimes, as I have
said before, for a day or two.

When the King sits to do Justice, I observe that he comes into the Balcone
that looks into the Piazza, and all that have business stand below, just
against the place where the King sits. Between the People and the Walls of the
Palace are fixed in the ground three rows of Poles, about the length of an
Half-Pike, to the ends whereof they tie certain ropes across one upon another.
Nor is any person whatsoever permitted to pass beyond those bounds, unless he
be called. This Bar, which is never set up, but when the King sits in Judgment,
runs along the whole breadth of the Piazza; and just against the Balcone there
is a Bar to open, to let in those that are called. Then two men, that each of
them hold a Cord by the end, extended all the breadth of the passage, have
nothing to do but to let f^ll the Cord, for any person that is called to step
over it. A Secretary of Sta^ ^^ts below under the bal^one, to receive all
Petitions; and when he has five or six together, he puts them in a Bag, and
then an Eunuch, who stands in the Balcone near the King, lets down a string, to
which the Bag being tied, he draws it up, and presents it to his Majesty.

Every Monday the chiefest of the Nobility mount the Guard, every one in their
turn, and are never relieved till at the eight days end. There are some of
these Lords that have five or six thousand men under their command; and they
lie encamped in their Tents round about the City. When they mount the Guard,
every one goes from his own Habitation to the Rendevouz; but when they are
relieved, they march in good order over the Bridge, thence through the long
Street into the Piazza, where they draw up before the Balcone. In the first
place, march ten or twelve Elephants, more or less, according to the quality of
the Captain of the Guard. There are some of these Elephants that carry Cages,
which in some sort resemble the Body of a little Coach; there are others that
have but one man to guide them, and another in the Cage who carries a Banner.

After the Elephants, follow the Camels by two and two, sometimes to the number
of thirty or forty. Every Camel carries a kind of Packsaddle, upon which is
fastened a little Culverine, which a certain Engineer, clad in a skin from head
to foot, and sitting upon the Crupper of the Camel, with a lighted Match in his
hand, dexterously manages from one side to another before the Balcone, where the
King sits.

After them come the Coaches, attended by the Domestic Servants of the
Commander: Next to them follow the lead-Horses, and then the Lord appears, to
whom all this Equipage belongs, attended by ten or twelve Curtisans, that stay
for him at the end of the Bridge, an^skip and dance before him to the Piazza.
Behind him the Cavalry and infantry march in good order: which being a show,
wherein there was much of delight and state, all the while I staid at Bagnabar,
which was about four Months, I had the divertisement to see them out of my
Lodging in the great Street every week as they marched by.

The Soldiers wear no other Clothes than only three or four else of Calicut,
with which they cover half their Bodies behind and before. They wear their hair
very long, and tie it up in a knot upon the top of the crown, like the women,
who have no other Headgear than only a piece of Linen with three corners, one
that comes to the middle of the head, and the other two, which they tie under
their chins. The Soldiers do not wear Hangers or Scimitars like the Persians;
but broad Swords like the Switzers, as well for a thrust, as a blow, which they
hang in a Girdle. The Barrels of their Muskets are stronger than ours, and much
neater; for their Iron is better, and not so subject to break. Their Cavalry
carry Bows and Arrows, a Buckler and a Battel-Ax, an Headpiece and a Jacket of
Mail, that hangs down from the Headpiece over their Shoulders.

There are so great a number of common Women as well in the City as in the
Suburbs, and in the Fortress, which is like another City, that there are
generally above twenty thousand set down in the Deroga's Book; without which
license, it is not lawful for any Woman to profess the Trade. They pay no
tribute to the King; only they are obliged to come, a certain number of them,
with their Governess, and their Music every Friday, and present themselves
before the Balcone. If the King be there, they dance before him. if he intend
not to come, an Eunuch comes into the Balcone, and makes them a sign to retire.
In the cool of the evening they stand at the doors of their Houses, which are
for the most part little Huts, and when night comes, they set up a Candle or a
lighted Lamp for a Signal: Then it is also that they open all the Shops where
they sell Tari; which is a certain drink made of the juice of a Tree, and is as
Sweet as our new Wines. They fetch it some five or six league off, upon Horses,
that carry two earthen-Bottles of each side, and trot at a great rate; of which
there come every day to the City above five or six hundred. This King has a
considerable Revenue by the Impost which he lays upon this Tari. And for that
reason he permits so many common Women, in regard it is for their sake that so
much Tari is consumed; those that sell it, for that cause, keeping their Shops
by those Houses.

These sort of Women are so nimble and active, that when the present King went
to see Maslipatan, nine of them undertook to represent the figure of an
Elephant; four making the four feet, four the body, and one the trunk; upon
which the King, sitting in a kind of Throne, made his entry into the City.

All the Men and Women of Golconda are well proportioned, and of comely,
statures; and fair enough in their countenances; only the Country People are a
little more swart.

The present King of Golconda bears the Name of Abdoul-Coutou-Sha; and I will
tell the Reader in a few words, from whence he drew his Original. In the Reign
of Axbar King of India, the Father of Jehan-Guir, the Territories of the Great
Moguls did not extend farther Southward then Narbider; so that the River which
runs by it, and which coming from the South, empties it self into Ganges,
separated their Dominions from the Territories of the Raja of Narsingue, that
Itretch'd as far as Cape-Comorin, the other Raja's being only his Subjects and
depending upon him. This Raja and his Successors have been always at Wars with
them that succeeded to Tamerlane or Temur-leng in India; and their Power was so
great, that the last Raja, who was at War with Akbar, brought into the Field
four Armies under as many Generals. The most considerable of his Armies lay in
those Provinces, which at this day are called the Kingdom of Golconda; the
second was quartered in the Provinces of Visapour, the third in the Province of
Dultabat, and the fourth in the Territories of Brampour. The Raja of Narsingue
dying without Children, the four Generals divided among themselves the
Countries which they possessed with their Army, and took upon them the title of
Kings, the one of Golconda, the other of Visapour, the other of Brampour, and
the fourth of Dultabat. Though the Raja were an Idolater, nevertheless his four
Generals were Mahumetans; and he of Golconda was of the Sect of Haly, descended
from an Ancient Family of the Turcomans, which inhabit the Country of Hamadan
in Persia. This General, as I have said, was more considerable than any of the
rest; and some few days after the death of the Raja, they won a famous Victory
from the Mogul; so that he could not hinder them from assuming their several
Sovereignties. But after that, Jehan-Guir, the Son of Akbar, conquered again
the Kingdom of Brampour, Cha-jehan the Son of Jehan-Guir recovered the Kingdom
of Dultabat, and Aureng-zeb the Son of Cha-jehan recovered some part of the
Kingdom of Visapour. As for the King of Golconda, neither Cha-jehan, nor
Aureng-zeb disturbed him, but let him rest in peace, upon condition that he
should pay to the Mogul an annual tribute of 200000 Pagods. At present the
greatest Raja on this side Ganges is the Raja of Velou, whose Territories
extend to Cape-Comorin, and who succeeded to some part of the Territories of
the Raja of Narsingue: But in regard there is no Trade in his Country, and by
consequence no concourse of strangers, there is little notice taken of him. The
present King of Golconda has no Sons, but three Daughters, who are all married.

The eldest Espoused one of the Kinsmen of the Grand-Chek of Mecca. Nor must we
forget some passages that fell out before this Marriage. The Check coming to
Golconda in the habit of a Faquir, for some Months lodged without the Gate of
the Palace, disdaining to give any answer to several Courtiers, that demanded
what his business was. At length the thing being made known to the King, he
sent his chief Physician, who spoke good Arabic, to know of the Chek what he
had to request, and the reason of his coming. The Physician, and some other
Lords of the Court that discoursed him also, finding him to be a person of
great Wit and Learning, brought him to the King, who was very well satisfied
with his aspect and his presence. But at length the Chek declaring to him, that
he came to Espouse the Princess; that proposal very much surpised the Prince,
and was looked upon by the greatest part of the Court, as made by a person not
well in his wits. At first the King only laughed at him. But when he found him
obstinately persevering in his demand, in-so-much that he threatened the
Country with some strange Calamity, if the Princess were not given to him in
Marriage, he was committed to Prison, where he lay a long time. At length the
King thinking it more to the purpose to send him back into his own Country,
caused him to be shipped away at Maslipatan, in a Vessel that carried Goods and
Pilgrims to Mocca, whence they travel by land to Mecca. About two years after
the same Chek returned again to Golconda, and ordered his affairs so well, that
he Espoused the Princess, and won an high reputation in the Kingdom, which he
governs at this day, and is very Potent. He it was that kept the King from
surrendering the Fortress of Golconda, whither he was retired, when Aureng-zeb
and his Son took Bagnabar, as I shall tell you by and by, threatening to kill
him, if he would not resolve to hold it out, and not deliver the keys to the
enemy. This bold action was the reason which made the King love him ever
afterward; and that he takes his counse in all weighty affairs, not as he is
the King's Son-in-Law, but as he is a great Minister of State, and the chiefest
person, next the King, in all the Court. He it was that has put a stop to the
finishing the great Pagod in Bagnagar, having threatened the whole Kingdom with
some great Calamity, if they went forward with the work. This Prince is a
passionate Lover of all those that profess the Mathematics, and understands
them as well. For which reason, though he be a Mahumetan, he is a great
Favourer of all the Christians, who are versed in that Science, as he has
particularly testified to Father Ephraim, a Capuchin, passing through Golconda
for Pegu, whither he was sent by his Superiors. He did all he could to oblige
him to stay in the Country, and offered to build him a House and a Church at
his own expenses; telling him, he should neither want employment, nor Hearers,
in regard there were several Portuguese Christians, and several Armenians that
came thither to trade. But Father Ephraim having a particular Order to go to
Pegu, could not accept of his Offer; yet when he went to take his leave of the
Check, he presented him with a Calaat, the most noble that was in his Wardrobe;
being the whole habit; the Cap, the Cabay or large Vest, the Arcalou or short
Cassock, two pair of Drawers, two Shirts, and two Scarfs, which they wear about
their necks, and over their heads to keep off the heat of the Sun. The Friar
was surpised at the present, and gave the Check to understand, that it was not
proper for him to wear it: however the Check would force him to take it,
telling him he might accommodate some of his Friends with it. Two months after
Father Ephraim bestowed the same Present upon me, being at Surat; for which I
returned him thanks.

The Check seeing he could not detain the Father, and unwilling he should go
afoot from Golconda to Maslipatan, obliged him to take an Ox, with two Men to
lead it; and because he could not persuade him to take also thirty Pagods,
which he presented the Father withal, he commanded the two men, when they came
to Maslipatan, to leave the Ox and the thirty Pagods with him, which they did
very punctually; for otherwise at their return to Golconda, they had forfeited
their lives. I will finish the History of Father Ephraim, when I come to the
description of Goa, which is the principal place that the Portugals have in the
Indies.

The second Daughter of the King of Golconda was married to Sultan Mahumad, the
eldest Son of Aurengzeb; the occasion whereof was this: Mirgimola,
Generalissimo of the King of Golconda's Army, and who had been very serviceable
to his Master, to settle the Crown upon his head, according to the custom, left
with the King as a mark of his fidelity, both his Wife and Children in Hostage;
for he was sent to reduce certain Raja's in Bengala, that were in Rebellion. He
had several Daughters, but only one Son, who had a great train, and made a
great noise at Court. The reputation and riches which Mirgimola had gained,
raised him up several Enemies, who endeavored in his absence to ruin him, and
to put him out of the Kings favor. They pretended that the great power of
Mirgimola was very much to be suspected; that all his designs tended to
dethrone him, and to settle the Kingdom of Golconda upon his own Son; that it
behooved him not to stay till the remedy were past cure, but to rid himself of
an Enemy, so much the more to be feared, the closer he kept his intentions; and
that the shortest and best way was to poison him. The King being easily
persuaded, gave them leave and authority to act as they pleased for his
security; but having missed of their design for three or four times together,
Mirgimola's Son began to smell the plot; and immediately gave advice thereof to
his Father. It is not known what instructions he received from his Father; but
so soon as he had his answer, he went to the King, and spoke boldly to him,
taxing him with the services which his Father had done him, and that without
his assistance he had never come to the Crown. The young Lord, naturally of a
fiery disposition, kept on this discourse, so displeasing to the King, till at
length his Majesty flung away; and the Lords that were present, fell upon the
young man, and basely misused him. At the same time also he was arrested and
committed to prison, together with his Mother and Sisters. Which action, as it
made a great noise at Court, coming to Mirgimola's ears, so incensed him, that
having an Army under his command, and being beloved by the Soldiers, he
resolved to make use of the advantages he had, to revenge himself for the
injury done him. He was then not far from Bengala, being sent, as I said
before, to reduce certain Raja's to obedience, whose Territories lie upon the
Ganges; and Sultan-Sujah, Cha-jehan's second Son, being then Governor of
Bengala, the General thought it his best way to address himself to him; as
being the next Prince, with whom he might join his Forces against the King of
Golconda, whom he looked upon now no more as his Master, but as one of his most
inveterate Enemies. Thereupon he wrote to the Prince to this effect: That if he
would join with him, he would give him an opportunity to possess himself of the
whole Kingdom of Golconda; and that he should not neglect so fair an
opportunity to enlarge the Dominions of the Great Mogul, the succession whereof
might as well concern him, as any of the rest of his Brothers. But the answer
which Sultan-Sujah sent him, was contrary to his expectation; who told him,
that he could not tell how to trust a person, who as he went about to betray
his King, might more easily be drawn to betray a Foreign Prince, whom he had
inveigl'd only for the sake of his Revenge; and that therefore he should not
rely upon him. Upon Sultan-Sujah's refusal, Mirgimola wrote to Aurengzeb, who
was then in his Government of Brampoure, who being not so nice as his Brother,
accepted of the proposal that was made him. Thus while Mirgimola advanced with
his Troops toward Bagnabar, Aurengzeb hasten's toward Decan, and both Armies
being joined, they came to the Gates of Bagnabar before the King was in a
posture to receive them. He had only time to retreat into his Fortress of
Golconda, to which Aurengzeb, after he had rifl'd the City of Bagnabar, and
plundered the Palace, laid a close Siege. The King seeing himself thus
vigorously pressed, sent away to Mirgimola his Wife and Children very
honorably. For there is virtue and generosity in the Indians, as well as in
the Europeans; of which I will give you an illustrious Example in the person of
the King of Golconda. Some days after the Enemy had besieged the Fortress, a
Canoneer espying Aurengzeb upon his Elephant, riding about to view the
Fortifications of the Castle, told the King, being then upon the Bastion, that
if he pleased he would fetch off Aurengzeb with a Canon-shot; and at the same
time was about to give fire; but the King holding his hand, told him he
perceived it well enough, but that it behooved Kings to be better Husbands of
the Lives of Princes. The Canoneer obeyed the King, and instead of shooting at
Aurengzeb, he took off the Head of the General of his Army, who was a little
before him; which put a stop to the Assault they were about to have given, the
Army being in a confusion upon his death. Abdul-jaber-Beg, General of the King
of Golconda's Army, lying not far from the Camp, with a flying Army of four
thousand Horse, understanding the disorder of the Enemy by reason of the loss
of their General, laid hold of so favorable an opportunity, gave them a
desperate charge in that confusion, and putting them to the rout, persu'd them
till night, for four or five Leagues. Some few days before the General's death,
the King of Golconda finding that his provisions failed him in the Fortress,
was about to have delivered the Keys; but as I said before, Mirza-Mahomed, his
Son-in-Law, snatched them out of his hand, and threatened to kill him, if he
persever'd in that resolution. Which was the reason, that the King who loved
him not before* had ever after the greatest affection imaginable for him as
long as he lived.

Aurengzeb being thus constrained to raise his Siege, stayed some days to rally
his Troops; and having received a recruit of fresh men, returned again to the
Siege, with new resolutions. But Mirgimola, who had still some kindness for the
King remaining in his breast, would not permit Aurengzeb to use the utmost
extremity, but by his wit and good management gained a suspension of Arms.

Cha-jehan, the Father of Aurengzeb, had formerly had great kindnesses shown
him by the King of Golconda, to whom he fled after he had lost the Battle,
together with his eldest Brother, which he fought against Jehan-guir his
Father, with whom he made War. The eldest Son was taken, and Jehan-guir caused
his eyes to be put out; but Cha-jehan being more wary, fled, and was
entertained by the King of Golconda, with whom he entered into a particular and
strict friendship; Cha-jehan making an Oath to his Benefactor, that he would
never wage War against him upon any occasion whatever. Mirgimola therefore
knowing that it would be no difficult thing to bring two Kings, that were
Friends, to an accommodation, wrought underhand with both, toward the
conclusion of a Peace. And he so brought his business about, that the King of
Golconda writ a Letter first to Cha-jehan, wherein he submissively requested
him to be an Arbitrator between Aurengzeb and him, promising to submit wholly
to him, and to sign such Articles as he should propose. By the same policy of
Mirgimola, Cha-jehan was advised, in answer to the King of Golconda's Letter to
propose a Match between his second Daughter and Sultan Mahomed, the Son of
Aurengzeb, upon condition that after the death of the King her Father, the
Son-in-Law should inherit the Kingdom of Golconda. This proposition being
accepted, the Peace was concluded, and the Nuptials celebrated with an
extraordinary Magnificence. As for Mirgimola, he quitted the service of the
King of Golconda, and went with Aurengzeb to Brampour. Soon after Cha-jehan
made him his Prime Minister of State, and Generalissimo of his Armies; and he
it was that so potently assisted Aurengzeb to get the Crown, by the defeat of
Sultan-Sujah. For Mirgimola was a person of great wit, and no less
understanding in Military than in State affairs. I had occasion to speak with
him several times; and I have no less admired his justice, than his dispatch to
all people that had to do with him; while he gave out several Orders, and
signed several Dispatches at the same time, as if he had but one entire
business in hand.

The other Princess of Golconda was promised to Sultan Sejed, another Chek of
Mecca; and the Match went on so fairly, that the day was appointed for the
celebration of the Nuptials; but Abdoul-Jaber-Beg, General of the Army, with
six other Lords, went to the King to divert him from his intention; and they
brought it so to pass, that the Match was broken off, and the Princess was
given in Marriage to Mirza-Abdoul-Cofing, the Kings Cousin; by whom she has two
Sons, which have wholly annulled the Pretensions of Aurengzeb's Son; whose
Father now keeps him in Prison, in the Fort of Gavaleor, for having taken his
Uncle Sultan Sujah's part against him. The Princess had been given before to
Mirza-Abdoul-Cofing, but for his debauchery, which rendered him little regarded
by the King. But since his marriage he is very much reclaimed.

Now the King of Golconda does not stand in so much fear of the Moguls; for in
imitation of them, he keeps his Money in his own Country, and has already
hoarded up a Treasury sufficient to maintain his Wars. Besides, he is
altogether addicted to the Sect of Haly, so that he will not wear a Bonner,
like the other Mahumetans, because they say Haly wore none; but another sort of
attire for the head. Which is the reason that the Persians, that come into
India to seek their fortune, apply themselves rather to the King of Golconda
then to the Great Mogul. Such is the condition of the King of Visapour also,
whom the Queen, Sister to the King of Golconda, takes care to educate in the
Sect of Haly, which invites great numbers of Persians into her Service.

CHAP. XI.
The Road from Golconda to Maslipatan, al. Masalipatan.
FRom Maslipatan they count it an hundred costs or leagues, taking the right
way. But if you go by the Diamond-Mine, which in the Persian Language is called
Color, in the Indian, Gani; they reckon it an hundred and twelve leagues: and
this is the Road which I generally took.

From Golconda to Tenara, costs

Tenara is a sweet place, where there are four very fair Houses, to every one
of which belongs a large Garden. One of the four standing upon the left hand
along the Highway, is much more beautiful then any of the other three. It is
built of Freestone two stories high, wherein there are several fair Galleries,
Halls, Parlors, and lodging-Chambers. Before the front of the House is a large
apiece Piazza, little inferior to the Place Royale in Paris. Upon every
one of the other three fronts there is a great Portal, on each side whereof
there is a fair Platform raised from the earth above four or five-foot-high,
and well-Arch'd, where Travelers of Quality are lodged. On the top of each
Portal there is a strong Baluster, and a little Chamber for the Ladies. When
Persons of Quality care not to be in their Houses, they set up Tents in their
Gardens; and you must take notice that there is no dwelling for any person but
only in the three Houses; for the fourth, which is the fairest, belongs only to
the Queen. When she is not there however, any body may see it, and take a walk
in the Garden, which is a very lovely place, and well-stor'd with water. The
whole Piazza is encompast with several Chambers for the lodging of poor
Travelers; who every day toward the evening have an Alms bestowed upon them,
of Rice, or Pulse, which they boil ready to their hands. But for the Idolaters
that eat nothing which is provided by other hands, they give them flower to
make Bread, and a little Butter. For when their Bread is baked like a broad
thin Cake, they dip it in the melted-Butter.

From Tenara to Jatenagar, costs 12 From Jatenagar to Patengi, costs 12 From
Patengi to Pengeul, costs 14 From Pengeul to Nagelpar, costs 12 From Nagelpar
to Lakabaron, costs 11 From Lakabaron to Color or Gani, of which I shall
speak in my discourse of the Mines, costs 11 The greatest part of the way from
Lakabaron to Color, especially when you come near to Color, is very rocky;
so that I was forced in some places to take my Coach off the Carriages, which
was presently done. If you meet with any good Earth between those Rocks, there
you shall find Cassia-Trees, that bear the best Cassia, and the most laxative
in all India. Which I found by its working with my men that eat of it by the
way. There runs a great River by the Town of Color, which falls into the Gulf
of Bengala near Maslipatan. From Color or Gani, to Kah-Kaly, costs 12 From
Kah-Kaly to Bezouar, costs 6 Near to Bezouar you must repass the River of
Color. From Bezouar to Vouchir, costs 4 From Vouchir to Nilimor, costs 4
About half the way between Vouchir and Nilimor, you must cross a great River
upon a Float-boat of Timber, there being no other kind of Boat in that place.
From Nilimor to Milmol, costs 6 From Milmol to Maslipatan, costs 4

Maslipatan is a great City, the Houses whereof are only of Wood, built at a
distance from one another. The place it self, which stands by the Sea, is
famous for nothing but the Road for Ships which belongs to it, which is the
best in the Gulf of Bengala; and from hence they set Sail for Pegu, for Siam,
for Aracan, for Bengala, for Cochinchine, for Mecca, and for Ormus, also for
the Islands of Madagascar, Sumatra and the Manille's.

You must take notice, that from Golconda to Maslipatan, there is no traveling
by Wagons, by reason of the high Mountains, Lakes and Rivers that make the
Road very straight and impassable, It Is a very difficult thing to carry a
little Coach thither; for I was forced to have my own taken off the Carriages,
and so to have it lifted out of the bad way. The Road is every jot as bad
between Golconda and Cape-Comorin; a Wagon being hardly so much as made
mention of all the way; for that there is no other way to travel, or for the
carriage of Goods, than with Horses and Oxen. But instead of Coaches, they have
the convenience of Pallekie's, wherein you are carried with more speed and more
ease than in any part of India.

CHAP. XII.
The Road from Surat to Goa to Golconda through Visapour.
YOU may go from Surat to Goa, partly by Land, and partly by Sea. But the Road
being very bad by Land, generally Travelers go by Sea, and hiring an Almadier,
which is a Barque with Oars, they go by the Shore to Goa: though sometimes the
Malavares or Indian Pirates are very much to be feared all along those Coasts,
as I shall tell you in due place.

The way from Surat to Goa, is not reckoned by Costs, but by Gos, one of which
makes four of our common Leagues.

From Surat to Daman, gos 7 From Daman to Bassain, gos 10 From Bassain to
Chaoul, gos 7 From Chaoul to Daboul, gos 12 From Daboul to Rejapour, gos 10
From Rejapour to Mingrela, gos 9 From Mingrela to Goa, gos 4 In all from Surat
to Goa, gos 61

The great danger which you run along the Coast, is the hazard of falling into
the hands of the Malavares, who are violent Mahumetans, and very cruel to the
Christians. I saw a barefoot Carmelite-Friar who had been taken by those
Pirates. This Friar, to get his ransom the sooner, they put to that kind of
torture, that his right-arm was shorter by one half then his left, and so it
was with one leg. The Captains do not give above six Crowns to every Soldier
for the whole six months that they are usually out at Sea: Then the Soldiers
may return home, and if their Captains will have them stay longer, they must
allow *em more pay. They seldom venture out above 20 or 25 leagues at Sea,
which is no great hazard of the Vessel. But sometimes the Portuguese's snap
them, and then they either hang 'em up presently, or throw 'em overboard.
These Malavares carry sometimes 200, sometimes 250 men, and they sail together
in Squadrons of ten or fifteen Barques to attack a great Vessel, not caring a
rush for the great Guns. They come board and board so suddenly, and cast such a
quantity of Pots of Artificial Fire upon the deck, that if there be not speedy
remedy applied, they will presently do a world of mischief. Generally our
Seamen, knowing the custom of these Pirates, when they come within ken,
presently shut up the Scuttles, and fill the deck with water, to hinder the
Fire-Pots from doing execution.

An English Captain, whose name was Mr. Clark, coming from Bantam to Surat, not
far from Cochin, met a Squadron of these Malavares, consisting of 25 or 30 of
these ^^^ques. Who came board and board, and vigorously attacked him. The
Captain seeing he could not withstand their first Fury, put fire to some
Barrels of Powder, and blowing up the deck, blew a great number of the Pirates
into the Sea. Nevertheless, the rest were nothing discouraged, but boarded the
Ship a second time. The English Captain seeing there was no help, put his men
into two Shallops, and staying behind in his Cabin, where the Pirates could not
enter so suddenly, he set fire to a Train which he had laid, that reached to
all the rest of the Powder, and at the same time leaping into the Sea, was
taken up by his own men. In the mean time the Ship being all a-fire, the Pirates
leapt into the Sea also. But for all this, the two Shallops, wherein there were
about forty English, were taken by the rest of the Malavares, that were
Fresh-men; and I was then at breakfast with the English President, Mr.
Fremelin, when he received a Letter from Captain Clark, that he was a Slave to
Samorin, who is the most considerable King all along the Pirates Coast. The
Prince would not leave the English in the hands of those Scoundrels, knowing
that they would have been in great danger of their lives, by reason that above
twelve-hunder'd Women had lost their Husbands, in the two times that the ship
had been fired. However the King found a means to appease them, promising to
each of them that had lost their Husbands two Piasters, every Piaster being
four shillings apiece, which came to above two thousand four hundred Crowns,
besides four thousand, which were to be paid for the Ransom of the Captain and
the other Seamen, immediately the President sent the Money, and I saw them at
their return, some in health, others in violent Fevers. The Malavares are a
People so superstitious, that they never touch any thing that is foul or
soyl'd, with their Right Hands, but only with the Left, the Nails of which
Fingers they let grow, and use instead of Combs, for they wear their Hair long
like the Women, tying it about their Heads in wreaths, and binding it with a
Linen cloth with three corners.

Since I have mentioned Daman, I will tell you in a few words how that City was
besieged by Aureng-Zeb the present Great Mogul. Some are of opinion that
Elephants do great matters in War; which may* be sometimes true, but not
always; for very often instead of doing mischief to the Enemy, they turn upon
those that Iead them, and rout their own party as Aureng-Zeb found by
experience, at the Siege of this City. He was twenty days before Daman, and
resolved at length to Storm it upon a Sunday, believing that the Christians
were like the Jews and would not defend it upon that day. He that commanded the
Place was an old Soldier, who had served in France, and had three Sons with
him. In the Town were eight hundred Gentlemen, and other stout Soldiers, who
came from all parts to signalize their valor at that Siege. For though the
Mogul had in his Army above forty thousand men, he could not hinder relief from
being put into Daman by Sea, in regard that he wanted Ships: The Sunday that
the Prince intended to Storm, the Governor of Daman, as had been ordered at
the Council of War, caused Mass to be said presently after Midnight, and then
made a Sally with all his Cavalry and some part of his Infantry, who were to
fall on upon that quarter which was guarded by two hundred Elephants. Among
those Elephants they flung a great number of Fireworks which so affrighted
them in the dark of the Night, that knowing not whither they went, nor being to
be ruled by their Governors, they turned upon the Besiegers with so much fury,
that in less than two or three hours half the Army of Aureng-Zeb was cut in
pieces, and in three days the Siege was raised; nor would the Prince after
that, have any more to do with the Christians.

I made two Voyages to Goa, the one at the beginning of the year 1641. the
second at the beginning of the year 1648. The first time I stayed but five
days, and returned by Land to Surat. From Goa I went to Bicholly, which is upon
the main Land, thence to Visapour, thence to Golconda, thence to Aureng-abat,
and so to Surat. I could have gone to Surat without passing through Golconda,
but my business led me that way.

From Goa to Visapour, costs. 85 Which takes up generally eight days journey.
From Visapour to Golconda, costs. 100

Which I traveled in nine days.

From Golconda to Aureng-abat, the Stages are not so well ordered, being
sometimes sixteen, sometimes twenty five, sometimes twenty Leagues asunder.

From Aureng-abat to Surat takes up sometimes twelve, sometimes fifteen,
sometimes sixteen days journey.

Visapour is a great scambling City, wherein there is nothing remarkable,
neither as to the public Edifices, nor as to Trade. The Kings Palace is a vast
one but ill built; and the access to it is very dangerous, in regard there are
abundance of Crocodiles that lie in the Water which encompass it. The King of
Visapour has three good ports in his Dominions, Rejapour, Daboult, and
Cra-paten. The last is the best of all, where the Sea beats upon the foot of
the Mountain, and you have fourteen or fifteen Fathom Water near the Land. Upon
the top of the Mountain there is a Fort, with a Spring of Water in it. Crapaten
is not above five days journey from Goa to the North. And Rabaque, where the
King of Visapour sels his Pepper, is as far distant from it to the East. The
King of Visapour and the King of Golconda have been formerly tributary to the
Great Mogul: but now they are absolute of themselves.

This Kingdom was for some time disquieted by the revolt of Nair-seva-gi,
Captain of the King of Visapour's Guards; after which the young Seva-gi his Son
conceived so deadly a hatred against the King, that he made himself the head of
certain Banditi, and as he was both wise and liberal, he got together so many
Horse and Foot, as made a Complete Army; the Soldiers flocking to him from all
parts, for the reputation of his Liberality. And he was just about to have led
them to action, when the King of Visapour happened to dye without Children, so
that with little or no trouble he got possession of one part of the Coast of
Malavar; taking Rejapour, Rasigar, Crapaten, Daboul; and other places. They
report that upon his demolishing the fortifications*of Rasigar, he found vast
Treasures, which helped him to pay his Soldiers, who were always well paid.
Some years before the death of the King, the Queen perceiving no probability,
of having any Children, adopted a little Boy, upon whom she bestowed all her
affections, and caused him to be brought up in the Doctrine of Haly's Sect. The
King upon his Deathbed caused this Adopted Son to be Proclaimed King; but
Seva-gi having a numerous Army continued the War, and much disturbed the
Regency of the Queen. At length he made the first propositions for Peace; which
was concluded upon conditions, that he should quietly enjoy the Territories
which he had subdued; that he should become Tributary to the King, and pay him
the half of all his Revenue. The young King being thus fixed in his Throne, the
Queen Regent went in Pilgrimage to Mecca; and I was at Ispahan, when she passed
through the Town in her return home.

When I made my second Voyage to Goa, I embarked in a Dutch Vessel called the
Maestritch, which carried me to Mingrela, where I landed the eleventh day of
January, 1648.

Mingrela is a large Town, extended half a League in length upon the Sea, in
the Territories of Visapour. It is one of the best Roads in all India, where
the Hollanders take in fresh Provisions every time they sail to block up Goa,
as also when they are bound upon Trade for many other parts of India. For at
Mingrela there is both excellent Water, and excellent Rice. This Town is also
very famous for Cardamoms, which the Eastern people esteem the best of Spices,
not being to be had in any other Country; which makes that sort of Commodity
very scarce and very dear. There is also made great store of course Calecuts,
that are spent in the Country; besides great quantities of course Matting, that
serves to pack up goods. So that both in respect of Trade, as also for the
furnishing their ships with fresh Provisions, the Hollanders have a Factory in
the Town. For, as I said before, not only all Vessels that come from Batavia,
from Japon, from Bengala, Ceylan, and other places, and those that are bound
for Surat, the Red Sea, Ormus, Balsara, etc. both going and coming, come to an
Anchor in the Road of Mingrela, but also while the Hollanders are at Wars with
the Portugals, and lie before the Bar of Goa, where they have usually eight or
ten Sail, they send their small Barks to Mingrela for Provisions. For the
Hollanders lie eight months in a year before the mouth of the Port of Goa so
that there can nothing pass in to Goa by Sea all that time. You must also take
notice, that the Bar of Goa is also stopped up some part of the year by the Sands
which the South and West-winds that precede the great Rains, cast up; so that
there is not above a foot, or a foot and half Water for very small Boats. But
when the great Rains come, the Water swells and carrying away the Sands, opens
a passage for the great Vessels.

CHAP. XIII.
Observations upon the present State of the City of Goa.
GOA lies in 15 Degrees, 32 minutes of Latitude, in an Island six or seven
leagues about, upon the River of Mandoua, ten leagues from the mouth of the
River. The Island abounds in Corn and Rice, and bears several sorts of Fruit,
as Manga's, Anana's, Adam's- Figs, and Coco's. But most certainly a Pippin is
far beyond all those fruits. All those that have seen Europe and Asia, agree
with me, that the Port of Goa, the Port of Constantinople, and the Port of
Toulon, are three of the fairest Ports of all our vast Continent. The City is
very large, and the Walls are of good Stone. The Houses are for the most part
very magnificently built, especially the Viceroy's Palace. There are in it a
great number of Apartments, and in one part of the Rooms and Chambers, which
are very large hang several Pictures, wherein are severally painted by
themselves, the Ships that come from Lisbon to Goa, with those that are bound
from Goa to Lisbon, with the name of the Vessel, the Captain, and the number of
Guns which the Ship carries. If the City were not so closely environed with
Hills, it would doubtless be better inhabited, and the air would be much more
wholesome. But these Mountains keep off the cool winds, which is the reason that
the heats are very excessive. Beef and Pork is the ordinary diet of the
Inhabitants of Goa. They have good store of Poultry, and some few Pidgons; but
though Goa be very near the Sea, Fish is very scarce. They have abundance of
all sorts of Sweetmeats, and feed upon them uery mvch.

Before the Hollanders had brought down the power of the Portugals in India
there was nothing to be seen at Goa, but Magnificence and Riches: but the Dutch
having every where got their Trade out of their hands, they have lost their
springs of Gold and Silver, and are fallen from their former splendour. In my
first Voyage to Goa I met with people of fashion, that had above two-thousand
Crowns Revenue; at my second Voyage the same persons came privately to me in
the evening, to beg an Alms; yet abating nothing, for all that of their
inherent pride and haughtiness: Nay, their Women will come in Palleki's to the
door, and stay while a Boy, that attends them, has brought you a Complement
from his Mistress. Then usually you send them what you please, or carry it your
self, if you have a curiosity to see their faces; which rarely can be done,
because they cover themselves with a veil from head to foot. Moreover, if you
go your self to present them your Charity, they will give you a little note,
containing a recommendation of some religious Person, who signifies what
substantial persons they have been, and how they came to fall to decay.
Sometimes, if the person be handsome, she is desired to walk in; and to take a
Collation, which lasts most commonly till the next day. Had not the Portugals
so many Fortresses to keep upon the Land; or had, they not, out of their
contempt of the Hollander neglected their affairs, they could never have been
reduced to so low a condition.

The Portugueses have no sooner made the Cape of Good-Hope, but they are all
Fidalgues or Gentlemen; and add the Title of Dom to the single name of Pedro or
Jeronimo, which they received at their Baptism: From whence they are called the
Fidalgues or Gentlemen of the Cape of Good-Hope. As they change their Names,
they also change their Nature; for it may be truly said, that the
Indian-Portugals are the most revengeful persons and the most jealous of their
Wives of any persons in the World. And when the least suspicion creeps into
their noddles, they rid themselves of them either by Poison or Dagger. If they
have an enemy, they never pardon him; but if he be a person of that courage
that they dare not grapple with him, their persons have attending upon them a
sort of black Slaves, that if they command them to kill any one, the Slaves
will do it with a blind obedience; which they do either with a Dagger, or a
Pistol, or else by knocking the party on the head with a club, which they
always carry, about the length of an Half-Pike. If it happen that they stay too
long before they can meet with an opportunity ere they can dispatch their
mischief; and that they cannot conveniently meet the person to be murdered, in
the Fields or in the City, they are no such Saints, but they will kill him at
the very Alter, while he is at his devotions; of which I saw two fatal
presidents, the one at Goa, the other at Daman. At Daman three or four of these
black Slaves perceiving some persons whom they were to murder, at Mass in the
Church, discharged their Muskets at them through the windows, never
considering what other mischief they might do to any other persons, against
whom they had no quarrel or design. The same thing happened at Goa, where seven
men were killed close by the Alter, and the Priest that said Mass was
dangerously wounded at the same time. Nor do their Courts of Justice take any
cognizance of these crimes, for generally the guilty persons are the chiefest
of the Country. As for their Suits of Law, there is no end of them, for they
are managed by the Canarins, who are Natives of the Country, whose business it
is to follow the Law; the most subtle and crafty sort of people in the World.

To return to the ancient Power of the Portugals in India, most certain it is,
that if the Hollanders had never come among them, you should not have seen a
bit of Iron in any Portugal Merchant's House; but all Gold or Silver; for they
needed no more than to make three or four Voyages to Japan, the Philippin, or
Molucca Islands, or to China to enrich themselves; gaining at their return
above five or six for one one upon rich Merchandises. The very Soldiers as
well as the Captains and Governors enriched themselves by Trade. There was not
any person, unless it be the Governor, who was not a ^rader; or if he does
Trade, it is in another man's name, for he has Revenue enough without it.
Formerly it was one of the finest employments of the World to be Viceroy of
Goa: and there are but few Monarchs, that have Governments at their disposal,
which are equal in value to some of those which depend upon this Viceroy. The
chief Command is that of Mozambique for three years. In those three years the
Governor gets above four or five hunder'd-thousand Crowns, and sometimes more,
if in all that time they receive no losses from the Cafres. These Cafres are
people that bring Gold for the Commodities which they carry away; and if any
one of them happen to dye, going or coming, whatever you trusted them withal
is lost without redemption. The Governor of Mozambique trades also with the
Negro's that inhabit all along the Coast of Melinda; and they ordinarily pay
for the goods they buy, either in Elephants Teeth, or Ambergreese. When I was
last in Goa, the Governor of Mozambique, who returned to Goa after he had been
three years in his Command, had by him only in Ambergreese, two hundred
thousand Crowns, not reckoning his Gold, and his Elephants Teeth, which
amounted to a far larger sum.

The second Government was that of Malaca, by reason of the Custom which was
there to be paid. For it is a Straight through which all Vessels that are bound
from Goa, for Japon, China, Cochinchina, Java, Macassar, the Phillippin
Islands, and many other places, must of necessity pass. They may sail another
way by the Island of Sumatra, toward the West, and so through the Straight of
Sonde, or else leave the Island of Java to the North; but when the Ships return
to Goa, they must show a discharge from the Custom-House of Malaca, which
obliges them to go that way.

The third Government is that of Ormus, by reason of the great Trade which is
there, and the Custom which all Ships are to pay that are bound in and out of
the Persian Golf. The Governor of Ormus exacted great Tolls from those that
went to the Island of Bakren to fish for Pearls, for if they did not take a
License from him, he would sink their Vessels. The Persians at present exact
this Custom from the English, who have a small share in that Trade, as I have
related in my Persian Voyages. But though they are severe enough to the
Merchants, their Customs amount to nothing near so much as what the Portugueses
made of it. The Hollanders are in the same condition at Malaca, not receiving
hardly sufficient to pay their Garrison which they keep there.

The fourth Government is that of Moscate, the revenue whereof was very great.
For all Vessels that are bound from India, from the Persian Golf, from the Red
Sea, and from the Coast of Melinda, must come under the Point of Muscate, where
they generally take in fresh Water. If there be any Ships that would not come
to an Anchor there, the Governor sent for his Custom, which was four in the
hundred; and if they refused, the Governor had his Galeasses ready to sink
them.

The fifth Government was that of the sland of Ceyland, to which belonged all
those places whcih the Portugals had, as well upon the Coast of Malavar the
Golf of Bengala, and other parts of India; the worst of which employments was
worth ten thousand Crowns per ann.

Besides these five great Governments, which were at the disposal of the
Viceroy, he had abundance of other Offices in his Gift, as well in Goa, as in
other parts of India. The very day that he makes his Entry into Goa, the
Captain of his Guards gets above four thousand Crowns. The three Offices of
Engineer Major, Visitor of the Forts, and chief Master of the Ordinance,
yielded every year twenty thousand Pardo's; every Pardo being worth
twenty-seven Sous of our Money. The Portugueses were then all very rich; the
Nobility by reason of their Governments and Commands, the Merchants by their
Trade, till the English and Hollanders cut them short. When they had Ormus,
they would not let any Merchant pass by Sea into India; so that they were
forced to go by Land through Candahar. Then, when the Turkey, Persian, Arabian,
Muscovits, Polonian, and other Merchants arrived at Bander-Abassy, they joined
together, and deputed four of the most experienced persons among them, to view
all the sorts of Commodities, and to understand their quality and price. After
they have made their report, they agree upon their price, and fetch away their
goods, which are distributed to every one proportionably according to the
number of Merchants. It is also the custom of all Asia, that there is nothing
sold, but a Broker has a hand in the Bargain. They make good the Money to those
that have sold, and receive it from them that buy; and there are some sorts of
Commodities upon which there is due to them for Brokage, sometimes one in the
Hundred, sometime one and a half, and two.

At that time the Portugueses made great profit, without any loss. For the
Viceroy took care to preserve them against the Pirates. Who as soon as the Rains
are over, and that it was seasonably to put to Sea, always sent a sufficient
convoy to guard the Merchants twenty-five or thirty Leagues to Sea, the
Malvares not daring to stir above fifteen or twenty. The Captains of the
Galiots, and the Soldiers drive a small Trade also in their Voyages, and in
regard they pay no custom, they gain enough to maintain themselves handsomely
all the time they lie in Garrison, which is during the Rains. There was also
care taken for the advancement of the Soldiery; for every Soldier that came
from Portugal, after nine years service, had some Command either by Sea or Land
bestowed upon him; and if he would not accept of it, they gave him leave to
Trade as a Merchant. So that if there happened to be any person of
understanding among them, he could not fail, to raise his fortune, having all
the credit he could desire. For there were people enough that being glad to let
out their Money, would venture with him at Cent. per Cent. upon his return. If
the Vessel be lost, they that lend their Money, lose either their Money or
their goods; but if the Ship come safe home, of one they make three or four.

The Natives of the Country, called Canarins, are not permitted to bear any
Offices among the Portugueses, but only in reference to the Law, that is to
say, either as Advocates, or Sollicitors, or Scriveners; for they keep them
very much under. If one of these Canarins or Blacks, happen to strike a White
or European, there is no pardon for him, but he must have his hand cut off. As
well the Spaniards as Portugueses, make use of them as Receivers, and to follow
their business. And in the Manilia's, or Philippin Islands, there are some of
these Blacks so rich, that many of them have offered twenty thousand Croisats
to the Viceroy, for liberty to wear Hose and Shoo's, which they are not
permitted to wear. Some of these Blacks have thirty Slaves attending upon them,
very richly habited; but only they go barefoot. And had the Portugals permitted
them to set out Ships of their own, and to have chosen Captains and other
Officers at their own pleasure, the Portugueses would not have made such large,
at least not so easy Conquests in the Indies. These Blacks are very courageous
and good Soldiers, and several of the Religious Orders have assured me, that
they will learn more in six months in one of their Colleges, than the Portugal
Children in a year, whatever Science you put them to; which is the reason that
the Portugals keep them so low. The natural Inhabitants of the Country about
Goa, are Idolaters, and worship several sorts of Idols, which they say are the
Resemblance of several that have done good works, to whom they ought to give
praise by adorning their Portraitures. There are many of these Idolaters who
worship Apes. And therefore in the Island of Salsete, there was a Pagod, where
the Idolaters kept in a Chest, like a Tomb, the Bones and Nails of an Ape,
which they said had been mighty serviceable to their Anchestors, by bringing
news and intelligence to them, when any hostile Princes prosecuted them; for
which purpose they would sometimes swim through the very Sea it self. The
Indians come from several parts in procession, and make offerings to this
Pagod. But the Clergy of Goa, especially the Inquisitors, caused the Tomb one
day to be taken away, and brought it to Goa, where it remained a good while, by
reason of the difference which it made between the Ecclesiastics and the
people. For the Idolaters offering a great sum of Money to have their Relics
again, the people were willing to have restored them; saying, that the Money
would do well upon any occasion of War, or else to relieve the poor. But the
Clergy were of a contrary opinion, and maintained that such a piece of Idolatry
was not to be endured upon any account whatsoever. At length the Archbishop
and the Inquisitors, by their own Authority, took away the Tomb, and sending it
in a Vessel twenty Leagues out to Sea, caused it to be thrown to the bottom of
the Ocean. They thought to have burned it, but the Idolaters would have raked
up the Ashes again, which would have been but a new food to their Superstition.

There are in Goa abundance of Clergymen; for besides the Archbishop and his
Clergy, there are Dominicans, Austin-Friars, Franciscans, Barefoot Carmelites,
Jesuits, and Capuchins, with two Religious Houses, whereof the Austin-Fryars
are Directors or Governors. The religious Carmelites, that came last, are the
best seated; for thought they are somewhat at a distance from the heart of the
City, yet they have the advantage of a fine Air, and the most healthy situation
in all Goa. It stands upon a rising ground, free to the refreshment of the
Wind; and it is very well built, with two Galleries one over the other The
Austin-Fryars, who were the first that came to Goa, were indifferently well
seated, at the foot of a little rising ground, their Church also standing upon
a rising ground with a fair Piazza before it; but when they had built their
Habitation, the Jesuits desired them to sell that rising ground, which was then
a void place, under pretense of making a Garden in it for the recreation of
their Scholars, But after they had purchased it, they built a most stately
College upon the same ground, which quite stops and choaks up the
Austin-Friars Covent, so that they have no Air at all. There happened several
Contests about this business, but at length the Jesuits got the better. The
Jesuits at Goa, are known by the name of Paulists; by reason that their great
Church is dedicated to St. Paul. Nor do they wear Hats or Corner-Caps, as in
Europe, but only a certain Bonnet, resembling the Skull of a Hat without the
Brims; somewhat like the Bonnets which the Grand Siegnors Slaves wear; of which
I have given you a description in my relation of Seraglio. They have five
Houses in Goa, the College of St. Paul, the Seminary, the Professors House, the
Noviciate, and the Good Jesus. The paintings in this House are admirable pieces
of Workmanship. In the year 1663 the College was burnt by an accident which
happened in the night, so that it cost them near sixty thousand Crowns to
rebuild it.

The Hospital of Goa was formerly the most famous in all India. For in regard
the Revenues thereof ^re very great, the sick persons were very carefully
looked after. But since the change of the Governors, there is but very bad
accommodation; and several of the Europeans that have been put in, have never
come forth again, but in their Coffins. However, they have lately found out a
way to save some by frequent Blood-letting. They let Blood sometimes as
occasion requires, thirty or forty times, even as often as any ill-blood comes
forth; as they did by me one time that I was at Surat. Butter and flesh is very
dangerous to them that are sick, and many times cost them their lives. Formerly
they made several sorts of well-tasted diet for those that recovered: Now they
serve the Patient only with young Beef-broth, and a dish of Rice. Usually the
poorer sort that recover their health, complain of drowth, and call for water.
But they that look after them, being only Blacks, or Mongrels, a sort of
covetous and pittiless people, will not give them a drop, unless they put money
in their hands; and to color their wickedness, they give it them by stealth,
pretending what they do to be against the Physitian's order. As for Sweetmeats
and Preserves, there is no want of them; but they are not a diet which
contributes overmuch to the restoring of decayed strength, especially in those
hot Countries where the body requires rather cooling and refreshing nourishment.

I have forgot one thing in reference to their more frequent blood-lettings
than among us Europeans. Which is, that to bring their color again, and to
restore them to perfect health, they order the Patient to drink for twelve days
together three glasses of Cow's Urine; one in the morning, another at noon, and
another at night. But in regard it is a very nauseous sort of drink, the
Patient swallows as little as he can, how desirous so ver he may be of his
health. They learnt this remedy from the Idolaters of the Country; and whether
the Patient will take it or no, they never let him stir out of the Hospital,
till the twelve days are expired wherein he ought to drink it.

CHAP. XIV.
What the Author did, during his stay at Goa, the last time he went thither in
the year 1648.
TWO days before I departed from Mingrela for Goa, I wrote to Monsieur St.
Amant, who was Engineer, to send me a Man of War, for fear of the Malvares
which are upon the Coast, which he immediately did. I parted from Mingrela the
20 th of January 1648, and arrived at Goa the 25 th. And in regard it was late,
I staid till the next morning before I went to visit the Viceroy, Don Philip
de Mascaregnas, who had formerly been Governor of Ceylan. He made me very
welcome, and during the two months that I tarri'd at Goa, he sent to me a
Gentleman five or six times, who brought me still to the Powder-House, which
was without the City, where he often used to be. For he took great delight in
levelling Guns, wherein he asked my advice, esteeming very much a Pistol very
curiously and richly inlaid, which I presented him at my arrival. This Pistol
the French-Consul at Aleppo gave me, the fellow of it being unhappily lost: for
else the Pair had been presented by the French-Nation to the Basha, who might
then have boasted himself the Master of the fairest and best-made pair of
Pistols in all Asia. The Viceroy admits no person whatever, no not his
Children to sit at his Table. But there is a little partition in the
Dining Room, where there is a Cloth laid for the Principal Officers, as is
usual in the Courts of the German-Princes. The next day I went to wait upon the
Archbishop, and the next day after I designed to have visited the Inquisitor;
but I understood by one of his Gentlemen that he was busy, writing into
Portugal; there being two Ships ready to weigh Anchor, that only staid for his
dispatches. After the Ships were set sail, he sent the same Gentleman to tell
me that he expected me at the Inquisition-House, about two or three in the
afternoon. I failed not to go thither at the time prefixed* when I came, a Page
brought me into a large Hall, where after I had walked a quarter of an hour, an
Officer came and carried me into the Chamber where the Inquisitor was. After I
had past through two Galleries, and some Chambers, I entered into a little
Chamber where the Inquisitor sat at the end of a great Table like a
Billiard-Table, which, as well as the Chairs and Stools in the Chamber, was
covered with green Cloth, such as is carried out of England. He told me I was
welcome, and after a Complement or two, he asked me what Religion I was of ^ I
answered him, of the Protestant Religion. He asked me then, if my Father and
Mother were of the same Religion; and after I had satisfied him that they were
so; He told me again I was welcome, calling out at the same time for some other
persons to enter. Thereupon, the Hangings being held up, there came in ten or
twelve persons out of another room hard-by. The first of the Train were two
Austin-Friars, followed by two Dominicans, two barefoot-Carmelites, and some
other of the Clergy; whom the Inquisitor told who I was, and assured them I had
brought no prohibited Books; for indeed, knowing their orders, I had left my
Bible at Mingrela. We discoursed about two hours of several things, but
particularly of my Travels; the whole Company testifying their desire to hear
me make some repetitions. Three days after the Inquisitor sent for me to dine
with him at a fair House, about half a league from the City, which belongs to
the Barefoot Carmelites. It is one of the loveliest Structures in all the
Indies; and I will tell you in short how the Carmelites came by it. There was a
Gentleman in Goa, whose Father and Grandfather had got great Estates by
Merchandising; and he it was that had built this House, which might well have
past for a most noble Palace. He had no mind to Marry, but being altogether
addicted to his devotions, he very much frequented the Austin-Friars, to whom
he showed himself so affectionate, that he made his Will, wherein he gave them
all his Estate, provided they would bury him on the right-side of the
High-Altar where he intended a sumptuous Monument. Now according to the common
report, this Gentleman was a Leaper, which some jealous persons endeavored to
make the World believe, seeing he had given away all his Estate to the
Austin-Friars. Thereupon they told him that the ground on the right hand of the
High-Alter was a place only fit for a Viceroy; and that a leaprous person was
not to be laid there: which was the opinion of the generality of the people,
and of a good part of the Austin-Friars themselves. Thereupon some of the
Fathers of the Covent coming to speak with the Gentleman, on purpose to
persuade him to choose some other place in the Church, he was so offended at
the proposal, that he never went more to the Austin-Friars, but always went to
perform his devotions among the Carmelites, who received him with open arms,
and accepted the conditions which the other had refused. Nor did he live long
after he had interested himself with that Order; so that the Carmelites having
magnificently buried him, enjoyed all his Estate, with this same House, where
we were splendidly entertained with Music all the time of Dinner.

I staid at Goa from the twenty-first of January till the eleventh of March,
departing thence that very day in the evening, after I had taken leave of the
Viceroy. I begged leave also of the Viceroy for a French-Gentlemen, whose
name was Belloy, to go along with me: which was granted me; but through the
imprudence of that Gentleman, who did not tell me the reason of his coming to
Goa, he had like to have been taken from me again, and it was an even-lay, that
we had not been both carried to the Inquisition. This Gentleman had left the
place of his Nativity to travel over Holland, where having run himself in debt,
and finding no person that would lend him any Money, he resolved to go for
India. Thereupon he listed himself as a private Soldier upon the account of
the Holland-Company; and came to Batavia at the same time that the Hollanders
made War against the Portuguezes in Ceylan. Being arrived, they sent him away
among the recruits which were sent into that Island; and the Holland-General
seeing such a reinforcement of stout men commanded by a French-Captain, whose
name was St. Amant, a person of great courage and experience; he resolved to
besiege Negombe, a considerable Fort in the Island of Ceylan. They made two
assaults wherein the Frenchmen behaved themselves valiantly, especially St.
Amant, and John de Rose, who were both wounded. The General of the Dutch,
seeing them to be two such men of courage, made a promise that if Negombe were
taken, one of them two should be Governor. The place was taken, and the General
kept his word with St. Amant: but the News being carried to Batavia, a young
Gentleman of kin to the General, and but newly arrived out of Holland, obtained
to be Governor of Negombe, to the prejudice of St. Amant, and came with an
order from the Council at Batavia to displace him. St. Amant incensed at such
ill-usage, inveigles to his Party a matter of fifteen or twenty, most part
French-Souldiers, among whom were Monsieur Belloy, Marests, and John de Rose,
and revolts to the Portugueses. The Portugals encouraged by the reinforcement
of such a stout, though small number of men, stormed Negombe again, and took it
at the second assault. At that time was Don Philip de Mascaregnas Governor of
Ceylan, and all the places belonging to it, under the jurisdiction of the
Portugal. He lived also at the City of Colombo; and then it was, that having
received Letters from Goa that the Viceroy was dead, and that the Council and
all the Nobility desired him to come and succeed in his place, he resolved to
see St. Am^nt and his Companions before his departure, to the end he might
bestow upon them some proper reward. So soon as he saw them, he was resolved to
take them along with him to Goa. Whether it were that he thought he might have
better opportunities to advance them there; or that he thought it convenient to
have stout men about him, by reason of the Malavares who lay in wait for him
with forty Vessels, whereas he had but twenty*two. But they were no sooner come
to make Cape-Comorin, when the winds rose, and such a Tempest followed, that
the Vessels were dispersed, and many of them unfortunately cast away. They that
were in Don Philip's Vessel did all they could to get to the shore, but seeing
they could not, and that the Ship was ready to split, St. Amant and his Six
other Companions threw themselves into the Sea with cords and pieces of planks,
and so bestirred themselves, that they made a shift not only to save
themselves, but Don Philip also. Hereupon Don Philip coming to Goa, after he
had made his entrance gave to St. Amant the Command of Grand Master of the
Artillery, and Superintendent General over all the Forts which the Portuguezes
had in India. He married him also to a young Virgin, with whom he had
twenty-thousand Crowns, whose Father was an Englishman, who had quitted the
Company, and married a Natural Daughter of one of the Viceroy's of Goa. As for
John de Rose, he desired leave of the Viceroy to return to Colombo, where, by
his favor, he married a young Widow, half Native, half Portugueze, by whom he
had a fair fortune. Marests the Viceroy made Captain of his Guards, the most
considerable Command in all his Court, being obliged to Marests for his life,
who was the person that bore him upon his shoulders to save him from drowning.
Du Belloy desired leave that he might go to Macao, which was granted him. For
he understood that the greatest part of the Portugal-Gentry, retired to that
place, after they had got Estates by Merchandising; that they were very
courteous to strangers, and withal extremely addicted to play, which was Du
Belloy's chief delight. He lived two years at Macao, very much to his content;
for when he wanted Money, the Gentry lent it him freely. One day he had won
above six-thousand Crowns, but going to play again, he was so unfortunate as to
lose it all, besides a good sum of Money which his friends had lent him. Being
thus at a loss, and finding that nobody would lend him any more Money, he
began to swear against a Picture that hung in the room, which was the
Portraiture of some Papistical Saint; saying in his passion that it was an
usual thing with them that played, that if they saw a Saint Picture hang in
their sight, it made them lose; and that if that Picture had not been there he
had certainly won. Immediately the Inquisitor was informed of this, (for in
every City in India under the Jurisdiction of the Portuguezes there is one.
However his power is limited; having no other authority than to seize the
person of him that says or acts any thing against their Religion, to hear the
Witnesses, and to send the Offender with the examinations to Goa in the first
ship which is bound thither: where the inquisitor-General has an absolute Power
either to absolve him, or to put him to death.) Thereupon Du Belloy was put
aboard a small Vessel of ten or twelve Guns loaded with Irons: with a strict
charge to the Captain to keep him safe, and some threats that he should be
answerable for him if he escaped. But so soon as the Ship was out at Sea, the
Captain, who was of a noble disposition, and knew Du Belloy to be of a good
Family, took off his Irons, and made him sit at his own Table; giving him also
Linen, and other convenient Apparel necessary for the Voyage, which was to
continue forty days. They put into Goa the nineteenth of February 1649; and the
Ship was no sooner come into Harbor, but St. Amant came a-board by the
Governor's order, as well to receive his Letters, as to hear what news in
China. But his surprise was very great, to see Belloy in that condition, and
that the Captain would not let him go, before he had surrendered him up into
the hands of the Inquisitor. Nevertheless, in regard that St. Amant was a
person of great credit, he obtained of the Captain, that Belloy should go along
with him into the City. As for Belloy he immediately and for the nonce shifted
himself into his old Clothes, which were all to tatters and full of Vermin; and
St. Amant, who knew there was no dallying with the Inquisition, took that
season to present him to the Inquisitor; who seeing a Gentleman in such a sad
condition, had some compassion upon him, and allowed him the whole City for his
Prison; on condition he should surrender his body, upon demand when he
understood what was informed against him. In the interim St. Amant brings Du
Belloy to my Lodging just as I was going to visit the Archbishop of Mira, whom
I formerly knew at Constantinople, when he was Prior of the Franciscans at
Galata. I desired them to stay a while and to dine with me, which they did;
after which I proffered my House and Table to Du Belloy, who lived with me; and
for whom I also bought two new Suits of Apparel, and Linen convenient.
However, all the while that I stayed at Goa, which was ten or twelve days, I
could not persuade the Sieur Du Belloy to put on those new Clothes, not knowing
the reason, though he promised me every day. But being upon my departure, I
told him I was going to take leave of the Viceroy; whereupon he desired me to
procure leave for him also; which I did. We departed toward evening in the same
Vessel wherein I came, and about midnight the Sieur Belloy began to shift
himself, and when he had done he threw his old rags into the Sea, swearing
against the Inquisition like a mad man; I understanding nothing all this while
of the business. When I heard him swear in that manner, I told him we were not
yet out of the Portugals hands; neither were he and I with five or six
Servants, able to defend our selves against forty Seamen that belonged to the
Ship. I asked him then, why he swore so heartily against the Inquisition; he
replied, that he would tell me all the circumstances of the Story; which he
did, when we came to Mingrela, which was about eight a Clock in the morning.
When we landed we met certain Hollanders with the Commander, who were eating
Oysters and drinking Sack upon the Shore. Immediately they asked me who that
person was with me. I told them it was a Gentleman who attending the French
Ambassador into Portugal, had taken Shipping there for India, together with
four or five more whom he had left at Goa; but that neither the situation of
the place, nor the humor of the Portugals pleasing him, he had desired my
assistance in his return for Europe. Three or four days after, I bought him an
Ox to carry him to Surat; and I gave him a Servant to assist him, together
with a Letter to Father Zenon, a Capuchin, wherein I desired him to speak to my
Broker to pay him ten Crowns a month for his subsistence, and to desire of the
English President to embark him for Europe with the first opportunity. But it
fell out contrary to my Intentions; for Father Zenon carried him back again
along with him to Goa, where he had some business to do for Father Ephraim his
Companion; of whom I shall speak in the next Chapter. Father Zenon without
doubt believed that Du Belloy making his appearance to the Inquisition, and
desiring his pardon might have easily obtained it. It Is very true he did obtain
it, but it was after he had been two years in the Inquisition, from which he
was not discharged but with a sulphur'd Shift, with a St. Andrews Cross upon
his Stomach. There was with him another Gentleman, called Lewis de Bar upon the
Seine, who was used in the same manner; and they always put them to accompany
those who were put to death. The Sieur Du Belloy did very ill to return to Goa,
and worse to appear afterward again at Mingrela, where the Hollanders, who
understanding he had formerly revolted out of their service, by the
intelligence they received from their Commander at Surat, seized his person,
and sent him away in a Ship that was going for Batavia. They pretended that
they sent him to the General of the Company, to do with him as he should think
fitting. But I am in part assured, that as soon as the Vessel was out at Sea,
they put the poor Gentleman into a Sack, and threw him into the Sea. This was
the end of the Sieur Du Belloy.

As for Sieur des Marests, he was a Gentleman, born in the Dauphinate, near to
Loriol, who having killed his adversary in a Duel, fled into Poland, where he
so far signalized himself, that he won the esteem and affection of the General
of the Polonian Army. At that time the Grand Seignior kept in the prison of the
Seven Towers at Constantinople, two Noble Polonians; whereupon the Polonian
General observing the courage and address of this Des Marests, who was a daring
Fellow, and a good Engineer besides, made a proposal to him, to go to
Constantinople, and to endeavor, if he could by any means in the world, to set
those princes at liberty. Des Marests willingly accepted the employment, and
without doubt he had succeeded in his design, had he not been discovered by
some Turks, who accused him for having been too circumspect in viewing the
seven Towers, seeing him with a Chalk Pencil in his hand, ready to take the
draught thereof, which seemed to tend to no good design. This had been enough
to have ruined the Gentleman, had not Monsieur de Cesy, the French Ambassador
stifled the further examination of the business by some Present; which in Turkey
is the most sovereign remedy upon all accidents of danger; telling the Vizier,
that he was only a French Gentleman that traveled for his pleasure, and one
that was going for Persia with the first opportunity. However it was not
Marests design at that time to go very far, for he intended to have returned
into Poland, so soon as he had used his utmost endeavors to set the Princes at
liberty; but for his own safety it behooved him to give it out that he was gone
to Persia; and at length he was constrained to go thither indeed. As for the
Grand Seignior, he had resolved never to set the two Noblemen at liberty. But
at length they were so fortunate as to gain the love of a young Turk, who was
the Son of the Captain of the Seven Towers; with whom the Father usually
trusted the Keys to open and shut the Gates of the Prison. The night appointed
for their flight, he made as if he had shut some doors, the Padlocks whereof he
left all open. But he durst not do so by the two first Gates, near one of which
the Captain with a strong Guard lay, for fear of being discovered. The young
man, who had entirely devoted himself to serve the Princes, having foreseen
this difficulty before, had bethought himself of Rope-Ladders to get over the
two Walls; to which purpose it was necessary to have a correspondence within
and without. Finding therefore that because the utmost of severity was not used
toward those Princes, they had the liberty to receive several Dishes of Meat
from the French Ambassadors Kitchen, the Clerk of the Kitchen was made of the
plot, who thereupon sent them in several Cords in Pasties, whereof they made
Ladders. The business succeeded so well, that the escape was made, and the
young Turk fled with the Polonian Lords into Poland, where he turned Christian,
and received ample rewards both in Employments and Money. The same gratitude
proportionably was observed toward those who had contributed toward the liberty
of the Princes, who amply acknowledged the services which they had received
from every one of them.

In the mean time the Sieur Des Marests arrives at Ispahan, and addressing
himself to the Capuchin Friars, they brought him to my Lodging, where he had
the freedom of my Table, and a Chamber. He staid some time at Ispahan, during
which he got acquainted with the English and Hollanders, who had a great esteem
for him, finding him to be a person of merit. But it happened one day, that his
curiosity putting him upon a bold attempt, had like to have been the ruin of
him and all the Franks in Ispahan. Never the Inn where we lodged there was a
large Bath, where the men and women by turns take their times to come and bath
themselves; and where the Queen of Visapour, during her stay at Ispahan, as she
returned home to Mecca, delighted to go and prattle with the French men's wives.
The Sieur Des Marests having a passionate desire to see what the women did,
satisfied his curiosity, by means of a cranny in the Arch of the Vault, which
he had observed when he went thither; for having found out a way without side
to get up to that Arch, through a blind hole that was next to the Inn where he
lay, the Arch being flat, as I have described them in my relations of Persia,
and the Seraglio, he laid himself upon his belly, and saw throtgh the cranny
what he fo much longed to behold. He was at this sport some ten or twelve
times; and not being able to contain himself, he told me one day what he had
done. I bid him have a care of going there any more, for fear of ruining
himself and all the French men in that City. But he contrary to my advice went
thither two or three times after that, till at length he was discovered by one
of the women of the Bath that took care of the Linen, and dry them without,
upon Perches as high as the top of the Arch, to which they get up by a little
Ladder. The woman seeing a man lying all along upon his belly, seized upon his
Hat, and began to cry out. But Marests, to get himself out of the mire, and to
hinder the woman from making more noise, put two Tomans, into her hand. When he
returned to the Inn, I perceived him to look as if he had been scared, and
conjecturing that some ill accident had befallen him, I pressed him to confess
what was the matter. He was loath at first, but at length he confessed how he
had been discovered by a woman, and how he had stopped her mouth with money.
Thereupon I told him, that there was a necessity for him to fly, for that the
danger was far greater than he imagined. The Dutch President also, to whom I
thought it convenient to tell what had passed, was of the same opinion; upon
which we gave him a Mule, and as much money as was necessary for him, ordering
him to go to Bander, and thence by Sea to Surat. I gave him a Letter of
Recommendation to the English President, who was my Friend; whom I also desired
to let him have two hundred Crowns, if he had occasion for them. I wrote very
much in his commendation; and mentioned the proffer which the Dutch President
at Ispahan had made him, to send him with Letters to the General, who would not
fail to employ him according to his merit. For indeed at that time that the
Hollanders had War with the Portugueses in Ceylan, any person of wit, and
courage, like the Sieur Des Marests, was very acceptable to them. Which made
them very earnest with him, to take an employment among them; and to that end,
they caressed him, and presented him very nobly during his stay at Ispahan. But
he told them, that not being of their Religion, he was unwilling to serve them
against the Portugueses; which was the only reason that hindered him from
accepting the offers which I had made him. These particulars I wrote in his
behalf to the English President at Surat; so that the Sieur Des Marests being
desirous to go to Goa to serve the Portugals, the President wrote in his behalf
to the Viceroy, by whom he was very much beloved, relating to him, besides,
what the Hollanders had proffered him, that his recommendation might be the
more acceptable. Thereupon the Viceroy made him very welcome; and upon the
Sieur Marests desire to be employed in Ceylan in the Portugal Army, he sent him
away with the first opportunity, with Letters of Recommendation to Don Philip
de Mascaregnas, who was then Governor of Ceylan, and all those places that
belonged to it under the jurisdiction of the Portugueses. It happened three
days after, that they lost Nagombe, and when they retook it, the Sieur Marests
was one of those that received most wounds, and won most honor in the
Assaults. He it was that afterward was most instrumental in saving Don Philip
from being drowned; so that when Don Philip came to be Viceroy of Goa, he
could not think he deserved a less reward than the Command of his Guards; in
which employment he died within three or four Months. He was very much lamented
by the Viceroy, by whom he was entirely beloved. But he left his Estate to a
Priest, with whom he had contracted a particular friendship; upon condition
that he should only pay me two hundred and fifty Crowns that I had lent him;
which however I had much ado to get out of the Priest's Clutches.

While I stayed at Goa, I was told a pretty story concerning a Caravel, or
Portugal Vessel, which arrived there but a little before, and came from Lisbon.
When she was about to make the Cape of good Hope, there happened such a violent
Tempest, as lasted five or six hours, and put the Mariners to such a nonplus,
that they knew not were they were. At length they fell into a Bay, where they
saw several Inhabitants; and as soon as they came to an Anchor, they beheld the
shore cov er'd with men, women, and children, that testified a strange
amazement to see white people, and such kind of people as the Caravel. The
mischief was, that they could not understand one another, but by signs. But
after the Portugals had given those Cafres Tobacco, Biscuit, and Water, the next
day the people brought them a great quantity of young Ostriches, and other Fowl
that seemed to resemble large Geese, but so fat, that they had very little
lean. The Feathers of those Birds were very lovely, and those upon the Belley
proper for Beds One of the Portugueses Mariners ^old me a large Gushion stu^^^
with those Feathers, and related to me what had happened to them in that Bay,
where they stayed seven and twenty days. They gave those Cafres one thing or
other every scot, as Knives, Axes, false Coral, and false Pearls, out of hopes
to have discovered some* Trade, and particularly whether they had any Gold; for
they observed that some of them wore pieces of Gold in their Ears; some beaten
thin upon one side, and others like the Nails of a Lock. They brought two of
the people to Goa; and I saw one of them that wore several of those pieces of
Gold in several parts of each Ear. The Mariner told me, that there were some of
their women that wore of those pieces of Gold under their Chins, and in their
Nostrils. Eight or nine days after the Portugals arrived in that Bay, those
Cafres brought them little pieces of Ambergreese, some Gold, but very little;
some Elephants teeth, but very small* some Ostriches, and other Birds, some
Venison; but for Fish there was abundance. The Portugals endeavored all they
could by signs to know where they found the Ambergreese, for it was very good.
The Viceroy showed me a a piece that weighed not above half an Ounce, but he
assured me withal that he had never seen so good. They also labored to
discover where they had the Gold. After the Elephants teeth they made no great
enquiry seeing a great number of Elephants that came to drink at a River that
threw it self into the Bay. At length after they had stayed three weeks, the
Portugals finding it impossible for them to discover any thing more, because
they understood not one another, resolved to set sail with the first wind. And
because they had always some of these Cafres aboard in regard they were very
liberal of their Tobacco, Biscuit, and strong Water, they thought good to bring
two of them along in the Vessel; in hopes that they might learn the Portuguese
Language, or that there might some Child be found out that might understand
what they said* The Mariners told me, that when they set sail, after the Cafres
saw that they they had carried two of their people away, who perhaps were no
inconsiderable persons, they tore their Hair, struck their Breasts* as if they
had been frantic, and set up a most horrible yelling and howling. When they
were brought to Goa, they could never be brougut to learn any thing of the
Portugal Language. So that they could get out of them nothing of that further
discovery at which they aimed, of a Country from whence they only brought away
two pound of Gold; three pound of Ambergreese, and thirty-five or forty
Elephants teeth. One of the Cafres lived but six months, the other fifteen; but
both languish'd and pined to death for grief to be so trapann'd.

From Goa I passed to Mingrela, where there fell out an accident not to be
forgotten. An Idolater dying, and the Fire being ready prepared for the burning
of the Body, his Wife who had no Children, by the permission of the Governor,
came to the Fire, and stood among the Priests and her Kindred, to be burnt with
the Body of her deceased Husband. As they were taking three turns, according to
custom, about the place where the Fire was kindled, there fell of a sudden so
violent a Shower, that the Priests willing to get out of the rain, thrust the
Woman all along into the Fire. But the Shower was so vehement, and endured so
long a while, that the Fire was quenched, and the Woman was not burned. About
midnight she arose, and went and knocked at the door of one of her Kinsmens
Houses, where Father Zenon and many Hollanders saw her, looking so ghastly and
grimly, that it was enough to have scared them; however the pain that she
endured did not so far terrify her, but that three days after accompanied by
her Kindred, she went and was burned according to her first intention.

CHAP. XV.
The Story of Father Ephraim, and how he was put into the Inquisition at Goa by
a surprisal.
THE Chek, who had married the Eldest of the Princesses of Golconda, not being
able to persuade Father Ephraim to stay at Bagnabar, where he promised to build
him an House and a Church; gave him an Ox and two men to carry him to
Maslipatan, where he staid to embark for Pegn, according to the order of his
Superiors. But finding no Vessel ready to fet sail, the English drew him to
Madrespatan, where they have a Fort called St. George, and a general Factory
for every thing that concerns the Countries of Golconda, Pegu and Bengala. They
over-perswaded him that he might reap a fairer Harvest in this place, than in
any other part of the Indies; to which end they presently built him a very neat
House, and a Church. But in the conclusion, the English sought not so much the
interest of Father Ephraim, as their own. For Madrespatan is but half a league
from St. Thomas, a Sea-Town upon the Coast of Cormandel, indifferently
well built, as formerly belonging to the Portugals. In that place there was a
very great Trade, especially for Calicuts, and a very great number of Merchants
and Workmen lived there, the greatest part whereof desired to inhabit at
Madrespatan with the English, but that there was no place for them to exercise
their Religion in that place. But when the English had built a Church, and
persuaded Father Ephraim to stay, many of the Portugueses quitted St. Thomas,
by reason of the frequent Preaching of Father Ephraim, and his great care as
well of the Natives, as of the Portugals. Father Ephraim was born at Auxerre,
the Brother of Monsieur Chateau de Boys, Councellor of the Parliament of Paris;
who was very happy in learning Languages, so that in a little time he spoke
English and Portuguez perfectly well. But now the Clergy of St. Thomas-Church
seeing Father Ephraim in so high a reputation, and that he drew the greatest
part of their Congregation to Madrespatan, were so enraged against him that
they resolved to ruin him. And thus they laid their plot. The English and
Portuguezes being neer-neighbours, could not choose but have several quarrels
one among another, and still Father Ephraim was applied to for the composing
their differences. Now one day it happened, that the Portuguezes quarreled on
purpose with some English Mariners that were in St. Thomas-Road, and the
English came by the worst. The English President resolving to have satisfaction
for the injury, a War broke out between the two Nations: which had ruined all
the Trade of that Country, had not the Merchants on both sides been very
diligent to bring things to an accommodation: not knowing any thing of the
wicked contrivance of particular persons against Father Ephraim. But all the
interposition of the Merchants availed nothing: the Friar must be concerned in
the affair, he must be the Mediator to act between party and party, which he
readily accepted. But he was no sooner entered into St. Thomas, but he was
seized by ten or twelve Officers of the Inquisition, who shipped him away in a
Frigate that was bound at the same time for Goa. They fettered and manacl'd him,
and kept him two and twenty days at Sea, before they would let him once put his
foot ashore: though the best part of the Mariners lay a-shoar every night.
When they came to Goa, they staid till night before they would land Father
Ephraim, to carry him to the Inquisition-House. For they were afraid, lest if
they should land him in the day, the people should know of it, and rise in the
rescue of a person, who was in an high veneration over all India. The news was
presently spread abroad in all parts, that Father Ephraim was in the
Inquisition, which very much amazed all the Frenchmen. But he that was most
surpised, and most troubled at it was Friar Zenon, the Capuchin, who had been
formerlyly Father Ephraim's Companion; who after he had consulted his friends,
resolved to go to Goa, though he were put into the Inquisition himself. For
when a man is once shut up there, if any one have the boldness to speak to the
Inquisitor, or to any of his Council in his behalf, he is presently put into
the Inquisition also, and accounted a greater Offender than the other. Neither
the Arch Bishop nor the Viceroy themselves dare interpose; though they are the
only two persons over whom the Inquisition-has no power. For if they do
anything to offend them, they presently write to the Inquisitor and his Council
in Portugal, and as the King and the Inquisitor-General commands, they either
proceed against, or send those two great persons into Portugal.

Notwithstanding all these considerations, Father Zenon, taking along with him
the Sieur de la Boulay, a decaid Gentleman, goes to Goa; where, when he
arrived, he was visited by some friends, who advise him to have a care not to
open his mouth in the behalf of Father Ephraim, unless he intended to bear him
company in the Inquisition. Father Zenon seeing he could do nothing at Goa,
advised the Sieur de Boulay to return to Surat: and goes himself directly to
Madrespatan, more particularly to inform himself concerning the reason of
Father Ephraim's being sent away. But when he understood how he had been
betrayed at St. Thomas, he resolved to have satisfaction, and without
acquainting the English-President, communicates his design to the Captain that
commanded in the Fort* Who being incensed, as were all the Soldiers, at the
injury done Father Ephraim, not only approved, but also promised Father Zenon
to assist him in his design. Thereupon the Father sets his spies; and
understanding by them, that the Governor of St. Thomas went every
Saturday*morning, early to a Chapel upon a Mountain half a league from the
City, dedicated to the Virgin- Mary, he causes three Iron-Bars to be fixed in
the window of a little Chamber in the Covent with two good locks to the door,
and as many padlocks. And having so done, he goes to the Governor of the Fort,
who was an Irishman, and a very stout person; who with thirty Soldiers, and
Father Zenon, issued out of the Fort about midnight, and hid themselves till
day near the Chapel, in a part of the Mountain, where they could not be
discovered. The Governor of St. Thomas came exactly, according to his custom, a
little after Sunrising; and as soon as ever he alighted from his Pallequin,
was immediately surpised by the Ambuscade, and carried to Mestipatan, into the
Chamber in the Covent which the Friar had provided for him. The Governor thus
surpised, made great protestations against Father Zenon, and threatened him
with what the King would do when he should come to hear what he had practiced
against the Governor of one of his Garrisons. To which Father Zenon said no
more, but only that he believed that he was better used at Madrespatan, than
Father Ephraim was used at the Inquisition at Goa, whither he had sent him*
That if he would obtain liberty for Father Ephraim to return, he would leave
him in the same place where they had seized his person, with as much Justice,
as he had to send; Father Ephraim to Goa. Many people came to the English
President, desiring him to use his authority for the Governor's liberty. But
his answer was, that the Governor was not in his jurisdiction, neither could he
compel Father Zenon to release him, who had been one of the Authors of the
injury which had been done his Companion. So that he contented himself only to
desire of Father Zenon that his Prisoner might dineat his Table in the Fort,
promising him to return him when he should require his body; a request which he
easily obtained* but could not so easily keep his word. For the Drummer of the
Garrision being a Frenchman, with a Merchant of Murseilles, called Roboli,
then in the Fort, two days after came to the Governor, and promised him, for a
good reward, to procure his escape. The agreement being made, the Drummer in
the morning beat the Reveillez sooner than he was wont to do, and louder, while
Roboli and the Governor let themselves down at a corner of a Bastion that was
not very high; and were presently as nimbly followed by the Drummer; so that
Madrespatan and St. Thomas being but half a league asunder, they were all three
in the Town before their escape was known. The whole City greatly rejoiced at
the return of their Governor, and immediately dispatched away a Barque to Goa
to carry the news. The Drummer also and the Merchant set sail at the same time,
and when they came to Goa with Letters of recommendation in their behalf, there
was no House or Covent which did not make them Presents: The Viceroy also
himself caressed them extremely, and took them into his own Ship to have
carried them into Portugal along with him; but both he and the two Frenchmen
died at Sea.

Never did any Viceroy depart from Goa so rich as Don Philippo de Mascaregnas;
for he had a great parcel of Diamonds, all large stones, from ten Carats to
forty. He showed me two when I was at. Goa, o^^ whereof weighed 57 Carats, the
other 67 and an half; clean Stones, of an excellent water, and cut after the
Indian manner. The report was that the Viceroy was poisoned in the Ship, and
that it was a just punishment of Heaven, for that he had poisoned several
others, especially when he was Governor of Ceylan. He had always most exquisite
poisons by him, to make use of when his revenge required it: for which reason,
having raised himself many enemies, one morning he was found hung in Effigy in
Goa; when I was there in the year 1648.

In the mean time, the Imprisonment of Father Ephraim made a great noise in
Europe; Monsieur de Chasteau des Bois, his Brother complained to the Portugal
Ambassador, who presently wrote to the King his Master to send a positive
command by the first Ships, that Father Ephraim should be discharged. The Pope
also wrote, declaring that he would excommunicate all the Clergy of Goa, if
they did not set him at liberty. But all this signified nothing. So that Father
Ephraim was beholding for his liberty to none but the King of Golconda, who had
a love for him, and would* have had him have staid at Bagnagar. For the King
was then at Wars with the Raja of Carnatica, and his Army lay round about St.
Thomas's. Hearing therefore what a base trick the Portuguezes had played with
Father Ephraim, he sent orders to his General Mirgimola to lay siege to the
Town, and put all to Fire and Sword, unless the Governor would make him a firm
promise that Father Ephraim should be set at liberty in two months. A Copy of
this Order was sent to the Governor, which so alarmed the Town, that they
dispatched away Barque after Barque to press the Viceroy to use his endeavors
for the release of Father Ephraim. Thereupon he was released; but though the
door were set open, he would not stir, till all the Religious Persons in Goa
came in procession to fetch him out. When he was at liberty he spent 15 days in
the Covent of the Capuchins. I have heard Father Ephraim say several times,
that nothing troubled him so much all the while of his imprisonment, as to see
the ignorance of the Inquisitor and his Council, when they put him any
question: and that he did not believe that any one of them had ever read the
Scripture. They laid him in the same Chamber, with a Maltese, who never spoke
two words without a desperate oath; and took Tobacco all day, and a good part
of the night, which was very offensive to Father Ephraim.

When the Inquisitors seize upon any person, they search him presently; and as
for his Goods and wearing-Apparel, it is set down in an Inventory, to be
returned him again in case he be acquitted; but if he have any Gold, Silver, or
Jewels, that is never set down; but is carried to the Inquisitor to defray the
expenses of the Process. They searched the Reverend Father Ephraim, but found
nothing in his Cloak-pockets, unless it were a Comb, an Inkhorn, and two or
three Handkerchiefs. But forgetting to search the little Pockets which the
Capuchins carry in their sleeves toward their armpits, they left him four or
five black-lead pens. These Pencils did him a great kindness. For the Maltese
calling for such a deal of Tobacco, which is always cut and ti'd up in
white-paper, for the profit of the seller, who weighs both Tobacco and Paper
together: these Papers Father Ephraim kept very charily, and with his pencil
wrote therein whatever he had studi'd at any time: though he lost the sight of
one of his eyes, through the darkness of the Chamber, which had but one window,
half a foot square, and barred with iron. They would never so much as lend him
a Book, or let him have an end of Candle; but used him as bad as a certain
Miscreant that had been twice let out already with his Shirt sulphur'd, and at
St. Andrews-Cross upon his stomach, in company with those that are lead to the
Gallows, and was then come in again.

Father Ephraim having staid 15 days in the Covent of the Capuchins to recover
his strength after 20 months imprisonment, returned for Madrespatan, and
passing through Golconda, went to return his humble thanks to the King of
Golconda and his Son-in-law, who had so highly interess'd themselves for his
liberty. The King importuned him again to stay at Bagnagar, but seeing him
resolved to return to his Covent at Madrespatan, they gave him as before, an
Ox, two Servants, and Money for his journey.

CHAP. XVI.
The Road from Goa to Maslipatan through Cochin, here described in the story of
the taking of that City by the Hollanders.
AFter the Dutch had dispossessed the Portugals of whatever they had in Ceylan,
they cast their eyes upon Cochin, in the Territories whereof grows the Bastard
Cinnamon, which hindered the utterance of Ceylan Cinnamon. For the Merchants
seeing that the Hollanders kept up their Cinnamon so dear, bought up that of
Cochin, which they had very cheap; and that coming into request, was
transported to Gomron, and distributed there among the Merchants that came from
Persia from Tartary, from Moscovia, from Georgia, Mingrela, and all the places
from the black Sea. It was also carried away in great quantities by the
Merchants of Balsara and Bagdat, who furnish Arabia; as also by the Merchants
of Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Constantinople, Romania, Hungary, and Poland. For in
all those Countries, they use it either whole or beaten in most of their meats,
to heighten the taste thereof.

The Army which was commanded out of Batavia for the Siege of Cochin, landed at
a place called Belli-Porto; where the Hollanders had a Fort made of Palm Trees.
It is near to Cranganor, a small City which the Hollanders took the year
before; not being able to take Cochin then, though they had made some attempts
upon it. So soon as the Army landed, they marched within Cannon-shot of the
City, there being a River between them and the City. That part where the
Hollanders encamped, is called Belle-Epine, where after they had fortified
themselves, as well as the Nature of the place would permit, they raised some
Batteries, which could not much annoy the City, by reason of the distance. They
lay there till they had recruits of more men; for they had but three Ships
full, though he that commanded them were one of the bravest Captains of his
time. Some few days after, the Governor of Amboyna arrived with two Ships
more, and afterward a Dutch Captain brought a great number of Chinglas, who
are the Natives of the Island of Ceylan. For the Forces of the Hollanders would
not be so considerable as they are, did they not make use of the Natives of the
Country to fill up the Companies which they bring out of Europe. The Natives of
Ceylan, are good for digging Trenches, and raising Batteries, but for a Storm
they signify little. Those of Amboyna are good Soldiers, four hundred of which
were left at Belle-Epine. The Body of the Army took Shipping again, and landed
near to Cochin, not far from a Church dedicated to St. Andrew; where the
Portugals, with certain Malavares, seemed to have stayed ashore for the
Hollanders coming: But seeing the Enemy to land with so much resolution, they
only gave them one Volly and retreated. In their March the Hollanders descried
certain Companies of Portugueses near the Seashore, others somewhat farther up
in the Land, in a Church called St. John's. Thereupon they sent out some
Horsemen to discover their number; but the Portugals still retreated, after
they had set fire to the Church. Thereupon the Hollanders made their approaches
to the Town; and after they had besieged it for some time, a French Soldier,
who was under their pay, seeing a Pannier tied at the end of a Cord, hanging
over one of the Bastions, ventured notwithstanding all the Bullets that flew
about his Ears, to see what was in it. But he was strangely surpised, to find
nothing but a languishing Infant, which the Mother had hung there, that she
might not see it perish for hunger. The Soldier moved to compassion, took the
Infant and gave it such as he had to eat; at which the Dutch General was so
incensed, saying that the Soldier should have let the Infant perish, that he
called a Council of War, where he would have had the Soldier run the Gauntlet,
which was very cruel; but the Council moderating the sentence, condemned him
only to the Strappado.

The same day ten Soldiers out of every Company were commanded to go to one of
the Houses of the King of Cochin; but they found no body there, having
plundered it the year before. At which time the Hollanders s^ew four Kings of
the Country, and six hundred Blacks; nor did there escape but only one ancient
Queen, who was taken alive by a common Soldier, called Van Rez, whom the
Commander of the Army made a Captain immediately, for his reward. They left one
Company in that House; but the Queen stayed there but six days, for they gave
her into the custody of Savarin, one of the most potent of the petty Kings upon
that Coast, to whom the Hollanders had promised to give the City of Cranganor,
if they took Cochin, provided he would be faithful to them.

Six weeks passed ere any thing considerable was done; but then the Hollanders,
storming the Town by night, were repulsed, and lost abundance of men, slain and
taken Prisoners, through the Governor of Cranganors fault, who commanded them,
and was drunk when the assault was made. Two months after, the General of the
Hollanders resolved to make another assault in the same place; and because he
would not want men, he sent for those that lay upon the side of Belle-epine.
But by misfortune the Frigate struck upon the Sands, and splitting, abundance of
the Soldiers were drowned. They that could swim, got to land near Cochin, not
finding any either other place convenient, and were all taken Prisoners by the
Portugals, being not above ten in all, Soldiers and Mariners. The General
however would not give over the assault, but causing the Seamen to land, he
armed some with half-Pikes, others with Swords, to others he gave
hand-Granadoes, and about ten a Clock in the morning he began the assault, with
four Companies, consisting each of a hundred and fifty men. The Hollanders lost
abundance of men in this last assault, and so did the Portugueses, for they
defended themselves stoutly, being seconded by two hundred Soldiers, who were
all Dutchmen, tho they sided with the Portugueses, because their Countrymen
had abated them six months and a half pay for the loss of Touan. Without the
assistance of these Soldiers, the City had never held out two months, there
being among them one of the best Dutch Engineers of his time, who had left his
Countrymen by reason of their ill usage of him.

At length the Hollanders having entered the Town toward evening, on Calivete
side, and being Masters of the chief Bulwark, the Portugals came to a
Capitulation, and the City was surrendered. The Portugals by their Articles
marched out of Cochin with their Arms and Baggage; but when they came out of
the City where the Hollanders were drawn up in Battalia, they were all forced
to quit their Arms, and to lay them at the Generals feet; except the Officers,
who kept their Swords. The General had promised the Soldiers the Pillage of the
Town, but not being able to keep his word, for several plausible reasons which
he told, he promised them six months pay, which in a few days after was reduced
to eight Roupies a man. Samarin also demanded of him the City of Cranganor,
according to his promise; which the General made good; but he caused all the
Fortifications to be slighted first, and left Samarin nothing but the bare
Walls. For being of a very mean Extraction, he was naturally as cruel and
barbarous in his disposition. One time the Soldiers being so put to it for
four days together, that they could get no food for money, two of them had
somewhere taken a Cow and killed her; for which the General, when he came to
know of it, caused one of them to be hanged immediately, and had ordered the
other to have run the Gauntlet, had not King Perca interceded for him.

King Perca, was a petty King of that Country, with whom the General was then
in Treaty; and the Treaty being at length concluded, the General mustered all
his Land and Seamen, to the number of about six thousand men. A few days
after, he sent some Companies to besiege the City of Cananor, which surrendered
without any resistance. When they returned, the General caused a Crown to be
made for the new King of Cochin, the other being expelled his Country. And
upon the day which he had appointed for this most solemn Coronation, the
General sat upon a kind of a Throne, at the foot whereof, a Malavare or Pirat,
being led ^^ither between three Captains of each side, fell upon his knees to
receive the Crown from the Generals hand, and to do homage for a petty Kingdom,
that is to say, the little City of Cochin and its Territories, which were very
small. The King and the King-maker were both alike. For no doubt it could not
but be a pleasant fight, to see a Hollunder, that had been only the Cook of a
Ship, crowning a miserable Pirat with those hands that had oft'ner handled a
Ladle than a Sword.

In the mean time the Ships that carried the Inhabitants of Cochin to Goa;
returned laden with the spoils of those distressed people; for contrary to the
Articles of Capitulation, the Hollanders were no sooner out at Sea, but they
took from those poor Creatures whatever they had, rifling both men and women,
without any regard to sex or modesty.

The General being returned into Batavia, they sent a Governor to Cochin, who
to make the place the stronger, demolished a great part of the City. But this
Governor used the greatest rigor imaginable, even toward the Soldiers; he
shut them up in the City as if they had been in a Prison; nor could they drink
either. Wine, or Sury, or Strong-water, by reason of the great Imposts which he
laid upon them. (Sury is a drink which flows from the Palm Trees.) So that when
the Portugueses kept Cochin, men might live better for five or six Sous, than
under the Hollander for ten. This Governor was so severe, that he would banish
a man for the smallest fault in the world, to the Island of Ceylan, to a place
where they made Brick, sometimes for five or or six years, sometimes as long as
the party lived. For it is oftentimes observed, that when any one is banished
thither, though the sentence be only for a term of years, yet the Exile never
obtains his freedom afterward.

CHAP. XVII.
The Passage by Sea from Ormus to Maslipatan.
I Departed from Gomron to Maslipatan the eleventh of May, 1652, and went
aboard a great Vessel of the King of Golconda's, which is bound every year from
Persia, laden with fine Calicuts, Chites, or Calicuts painted with a Pencil,
which makes them much more beautiful and dearer than those which are printed.
The Holland Company are wont to allow to those Vessels which belong to any of
the Kings or Princes of India, a Pilot, and two or three Gunners; neither the
Indians nor Persians being expert in Navigation. In the Vessel where I was
aboard there were but six Dutch Mariners at most, but above a hundred Natives.
We failed out of the Persian Golf, with a pleasing and favorable Gale; but we
had not sailed very far before we found the Sea very rough, and the Winds at
South-West, so violent, though full in our Stern, that we were not able to
carry out more than one small Sail. The next day, and for some days after, the
Wind grew more violent, and the Sea more boisterous; so that being in the
sixteenth Degree, which is the elevation of Goa, the Rain, the Thunder, and
Lightning, rendered the Tempest the more terrible; insomuch that we could not
carry out any other than our top-sail, and that half furled. We passed by the
Maldives Islands, but were not able to discern them, besides that the Ship had
taken in very much water in the Hold. For the Ship had lain five months in the
Road of Gomron, where if the Mariners are not very careful to wash the Planks
that lie out of the water, they will be apt to gape, which causes the Ship to
leak when she is laden. For which reason the Hollanders wash the outside of
their Ships morning and evening. We had in our Vessel five and fifty Horses,
which the King of Persia had sent as a Present to the King of Golconda; and
about a hundred Merchants, Persians and Armenians together, who were Traders to
India. One whole day and night together there rose a cross Wind, so violent,
that the Water rolled in from Stern to Stern, and the mischief was, that our
Pumps were naught. By good fortune there was a Merchant that had two Bails of
Russia Leather, besides four or five Sadlers that knew how to sow the Skins,
who were very serviceable as well to the whole Ship as to themselves. For they
made great Buckets of the Skins, four Skins to a Bucket, which being let down
from the Masts with Pullies, through certain great Holes which were cut in the
Deck, drew up a vast quantity of Water. The same day the violence of the
Tempest continuing, there fell three Thunderbolts into the Ship. The first fell
upon the Boltsprit, and split it quite in two; and running along upon the Deck,
killed three men. The second fell two hours after, and killed two men, shooting
along as the other did from Head to Stern. The third followed presently after,
the Master, the Masters Mate, and my self standing together near the main Mas^.
At what time the Cook coming to ask the Master whether he should take up the
Victuals, the Thunderbolt took him in the lower part of his Belly, made a
little hole, and took off all the Hair as clean as they dress a Pig with hot
water and Rosin, without doing him any more harm. Only when they came to anoint
the little hole with Oil of Coco's he roared out through the sharpness of the
pain which he endured.

The twenty-fourth of June in the morning, we discovered Land; and making
toward it, we found our selves before Ponte de Galle, the first Town in the
Island of Ceylan, which the Hollanders had taken from the Portugals. From
thence to the Road of Maslipatan we had very good weather; where we arrived the
second of July, an hour or two after Sunset. There I went ashore, and was most
civilly treated by the Dutch President, and Merchants, as also by the English.

The eighteenth and nineteenth of June, the Sieur Du Jardin and I, bought us
two Palleki's, and six Oxen to carry our selves, our Servants, and our Luggage.
Our design was to have gone directly to Golconda, there to have sold the King a
parcel of long Pearls, the least whereof weighed thirty-four Carats, and the
biggest thirty-five, with some other Jewels, the most part whereof were
Emraulds. But the Hollanders assuring us, that our journey would be to no
purpose, in regard the King would buy nothing that was rare, or of a high
price, till Mirgimola, his General and prime Minister of State, had viewed the
Commodity; understanding therefore, that he was then at the Siege of Gandicot,
in the Province of Carnatica, we resolved to go thither to him.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Road from Maslipatan to Gandicot, a City and Garrison in the Province of
Carnatica. And of the dealings which the Author had with Mirgimola, who
commanded the King of Golconda's Army. With a discourse at large concerning
Elephants.
WE set forth from Maslipatan the twentieth of June, about five of the Clock in
the Evening.

The next day, being the one and twentieth, we traveled three Leagues, and lay
at a Village called Nilmol.

The two and twentieth, we traveled six Leagues, to Wouhiz, another Village;
crossing the River upon a floating Bridge, before we came thither.

The three and twentieth, after we had traveled six hours, we came to Patemet,
a pitiful Village, where we were constrained to lie three days by reason of the
Rains.

The twenty-seventh, we came to a great Town, called Bezouart; not being able
to travel above a League and a half, because the Road was overflowed. There we
were forced to stay four days, for the Rains had so swelled the River which we
were to cross, that the Ferryman could not govern his Boat against the violence
of the Stream. There we also left the Horses which the King of Persia sent to
the King of Golconda; which by that time were reduced to fifty.

While we stayed at Bezouart, we went to see several Pagods, of which the
Country is full; there being more than in any other part of India; for unless
it be the Governors of Towns; and some of their Domestics, all the rest of
the Inhabitants are Idolaters. The Pagod belonging to the Town of Bezouart, is
a very large one, but not closed with Walls; it consists of fifty-two Pillars
twenty foot high, that uphold a flat roof of Freestone* they are adorned with
several embossed Figures of ugly Devils, and several sorts of Creatures. Some
of those Devils are made with four Horns, others with many Legs and many Tails,
others lo^^ing out their Tongues, and others in several other ridiculous
postures. The same Figures are cut in the Stone of the Roof, and between the
Pillars stand the Statues of their Gods upon Pedestals. The Pagod is built in
the midst of a Court, of a greater length than breadth, encompassed with Walls*
which are adorned within and without, with the same Figures as the Pagod; and a
Gallery uphold by sixty-six Pillars, runs round the Wall, after the manner of a
Cloister. You enter into this Court through a wide Portal, upon which are two
Niches, one above another, the first uphold by twelve, the other by eight
Pillars. At the bottom of the Pillars of the Pagod, are certain old Indian
Characters, of which the Priests of those Idolaters themselves can hardly tell
the meaning.

We went to see another Pagod, built upon a Hill, to which there is an ascent
of a hundred and ninety-three steps, every one a foot high. The Pagod is
apiece, with a Cupola at the top; and has the same embossed Figures, as
the Pagod of Bezouart, round about the Walls. In the middle there is an Idol
sitting cross-leg'd, after the manner of the Country; and in that sitting
posture it is about four foot high; upon the Head it has a Triple Crown, from
which four Horns extend themselves; and it has the face of a man, turned toward
the East. The Pilgrims that come out of devotion to these Pagods, when they
enter, clasp their hands together, and rear them up to their foreheads; then
they advance toward the Idol, tossing their two hands so claspt together, and
crying out several times Ram, Ram, that is to say, God, God. When they come
near, they ring a little Bell that hangs upon the Idol it self, after they have
besmeared the Face, and several parts of the Body, with several sorts of
Painting. Some there are that bring along with them Viols of Oil, with which
they anoint the Idol; and besides, they make an Offering to it of Sugar, Oil,
and other things proper to be eaten; the richer sort also adding pieces of
Silver. There are sixty Priests that belong to the Idol, and maintain
themselves, their Wives and Children upon the Offerings brought to the Idol.
But to the end the Pilgrims may believe the Idol takes them, the Priests let
them lie two days, and the third day in the evening they take them away. When
any Pilgrim goes to a Pagod, to be cured of any distemper, he brings the Figure
of the Member affected made either in Gold, Silver, or Copper, according to his
quality, which he offers to his god; and then falls a singing, as all the rest
do, after they have offered. Before the Gate of the Pagod, there is a flat
Roof, upheld by sixteen Pillars, and right against it, is another upheld by
eight; which serves for the Priests Kitchen. On the South Side there is a large
Platform cut in the Mountain, where there is a pleasing shade of many fair
Trees, and several Wells dug in the ground. Pilgrims come far and near to
this Pagod; and if they be poor, the Priests relive them with what they receive
from the rich, that come there out of devotion. The great Feast of this Pagod
is in the month of October, at which time there is a great concourse of people
from all parts. While we were there, there was a Woman that had not stirred out
of the Pagod for three days together; and her prayer to the Idol was, since she
had lost her Husband, to know what she should do to bring up her Children.
Thereupon asking one of the Priests, wherefore she had no answer, or whether
she was to have any answer or no; he told me, that she must wait the pleasure
of their God, and that then he would give her an answer to what she expected.
Upon this I mistrusted some cheat, and to discover it, I resolved to go into
the Pagod when all the Priests were absent at Dinner, there being only one that
stood at the Gate, whom I sent to fetch me some water at a Fountain two or
three Musket Shot from the place. During that time I went in, and the Woman
hearing me, redoubled her cries; for there being no light in the Pagod, but
what comes in at the door, it is very dark. I felt my way to the Idol, and by
the glimmering light observed an hole behind the Idol. I could not do this so
quickly, but that the Priest returned before I had done, He cursed me for
profaning his Temple, as he called it. But we became suddenly very good
friends by the mediation of two Roupies which I put into his hands, whereupon
he presently presented me with some of his Betle

The one and thirtieth, we departed from Bezouart, and past the River which
runs to the Mine of Gani or Color. It was then near half a league broad, by
reason of the great Rains which had fallen continually for eight or nine days
together. After we had traveled three leagues on the other side of the River
(...) came to a great Pagod built upon a large Platform, with an ascent of 15
or 20 steps. Within it stood the Figure of a Gow, all of very black-Marble* and
a number of deformed Idols four or five-foot-high; some having many heads,
others many hands and legs: and the most ugly are most adored, and receive most
Offerings.

A quarter of a league from this Pagod is a large Town; but we traveled three
leagues farther, and came to li^ at another Town, called Kab-Kali, near to
which there is a small Pagod, wherein there stand five or six Idols of Marble
very wellmade.

The first of August we came to a great City called Condev^^, with a
double-Moat, paved at the bottom with Freestone. The way to this Town is
closed on each side with strong Walls, and at such and such distances are built
certain round Towers of little or no defense. This City toward the East
stretches out to a Mountain about a league in compass, and surrounded with
Walls. At the distance of every 150 paces, there is as it were an Half Moon,
and within the Walls are three Fortresses.

The second, we traveled six leagues, and lay at a Village called Copenour*

The third day, after we had traveled eight leagues, we came to Adanquige, a
very fair Town, where there is a very large Pagod, with abundance of Chambers
which were built for the Priests; but are now gone to ruin. There are also in
the Pagod certain Idols, but very much maimed, which the People however very
superstitiously adore.

The fourth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to lie at the Town of
Nosdrepar. Half a league on this side there is a great River; but at that time
it had but little water in it; by reason of the drowth.

The fifth, after eight leagues journey we lay at Condecour.

The sixth, we traveled seven hours, and lay at a Village called Dakije.

The seventh, after three leagues journey we came to Nelour, where there are
many Pagods, and having crossed a great River, a quarter of a league farther,
we traveled six leagues, and came to Gandaron.

The eighth, after a journey of eight hours we lay at Sereple, a small Village.

The ninth, we traveled nine leagues, and lay at a good Town called Ponter.

The tenth, we traveled eleven hours, and lay at Senepgond, another good Town.

The eleventh, we went no farther than Palicat, which is but four leagues from
Senepgond; and of those four leagues we traveled above one in the Sea, up to
the Saddles of our Horses in water. There is another way, but it is the farther
about by two or three leagues. Palicat is a Fort that belongs to the Hollanders
that live upon the Coast of Coromandel; and where they have their chief
Factory, where lives also the chief Intendent over all the rest that are in the
Territories of the King of Golconda. There are usually within the Fort 200
Soldiers, or thereabouts, besides several Merchants that live there upon the
account of Trade; and several others, who having served the Company according
to their agreement, retire to that place. There also dwell some of the Natives
of the Country; so that Palicat is now as it were a little Town. Between the
Town and the Castle there is a large distance of ground, lest the Fort should
be annoid by shot from the Town. The Bastions are well-stor'd with good Guns:
And the Sea comes up to the very Wall of it; but there is no Haven, only a
Road. We staid in the Town till the next day in the evening, where we observed,
that when the Inhabitants fetch their water to drink, they stay till the Sea is
quite out, and then digging holes in the Sand as near the Sea as they can, they
meet with freshwater.

The twelfth, we departed from Calicat, and the next morning about ten of the
clock we came to Madrespatan, otherwise called Fort St. George, which belongs
to the English, having traveled not above seven or eight leagues that day. We
lay at the Covent of Capuchins, at what time Father Ephraim, and Father Zenon
were both there.

The fifteenth, we went to St. Thomas's Town, to see the Austin-Friars, and the
Jesuits Church, in the first whereof is an Iron-lance, wherewith they say that
St. Thomas was Martyred.

The two and twentieth, in the morning we departed from Madrespatan, and after
a journey of five leagues we arrived at a large Town called Serravaron.

The three and twentieth, after 7 leagues travel, we came to Oudecot, the whole
days journey being over a flat sandy Country. On each side there are only
Copses of Bambou's that grow very high. Some of these Copses are so thick, that
it is impossible for a man to get into them; but they are pestered with
prodigious numbers of Apes: Those that breed in the Copses upon one side of the
way, are enemies to them that are bred on the other side; so that they dare not
cross from one side to the other, but they are in danger of being immediately
strangled. Here we had good sport by setting the Apes together by the ears;
which is done after this manner. This part of the Country, at every leagues
end, is closed up with Gates and Bar icado's where there is a good Guard*
kept, and where all Passengers are examined whither they go, and whence they
come; so that men may safely travel there with their Money in their hands. In
several parts of this Road there is Rice to be sold; and they that would see
the sport, cause five or six Baskets of Rice to be set in the Road* some forty
or fifty paces one from the other, and close by every Basket they lay five or
six battoons about two-foot-long, and two inches about; then they retire and
hide themselves: presently they shall see the Apes on both sides of the way
descend from the tops of the Bambou's, and advance toward the Baskets which are
full of Rice: They are about half an hour showing their teeth one at the other
before they come near the Baskets; sometimes they advance, then retreat again,
being loath to encounter. At length the female-Baboons, who are most courageous
than the males, especially those that have young ones, which they carry in
their arms, as woman do their Children, venture to a approach the Basket, and
as they are about to put in their heads to eat, the males on the other side
advance to hinder them. Immediately the other party comes forward, and thus the
feud being kindled on both sides, they take up the Battoons that lie by the
Baskets, and thrash one another in good earnest. The weakest are constrained to
fly into the wood with their pates broken, and their limbs maimed; while the
Masters of the Field glut themselves with Rice. Though it may be, when their
bellies are full, they will suffer some of the female-party to come and partake
with them.

The four and twentieth, we traveled nine leagues, all the way being like the
Road the day before, as far as Naraveron.

The five and twentieth, after a journey of eight hours, through a Country of
the same nature, meeting at every two or three leagues end with Gates and
Guards, we came in the evening to Gazel.

The six and twentieth, we traveled nine leagues, and came to lie at Courva,
where there was nothing to be found neither for Man nor Beast, so that our
Cattle were forced to be contented with a little Grass, which was cut on
purpose for them. Courva is only a celebrated Pagod; by which, at our arrival,
we saw several bands of Soldiers pass by, some with Half-pikes, some with
Muskets, and some with Clubs, who were going to join with one of the principal
Commanders of Mirgimola's Army, who was encamped upon a rising-ground not far
from Courva; the place being pleasant and cool, by reason of the great number
of Trees and Fountains that grace it. When we understood the Captain was so
near, we went to wait upon him, and found him sitting in his Tent with many
Lords of the Country all Idolaters. After we had presented him with a pair of
Pocket-Pistols inlaid with Silver, he demanded of us what had brought us into
that Country; but when we told him that we came to attend Mirgimola,
Generalissimo of the King of Golconda's Army, about business, he was infinitely
kind to us: However, understanding that he took us for Hollanders, we told him
we were not Hollanders, but Frenchmen. Thereupon, not understanding what
Nation we were, he fell into a long discourse with us about the Government of
our Country, and the Grandeur of our King. Six or seven days before, they had
taken five or six Elephants, three whereof had escaped, having killed ten or
twelve of the Natives who assisted in the Chase; in pursuit whereof the General
was preparing; and because we could not stay to see the sport, we were
contented to inform our selves of the manner of hunting that vast Animal; which
is thus. They cut out several Alleys or Walks in the Wood, which they dig full
of great deep holes, and cover with Hurdles strow'd over with a little earth.
Then the Hunters hooping and hollowing, and beating up Drums, with Pikes that
have Wildfire ti'd to the end of them, force the Elephant into those Walks,
where he tumbles into the holes, not being able to rise again. Then they fetch
Ropes and Chains: and some they bring under their bellies, others they wind
about their legs and trunk, and when they think they have sufficiently hampered
the Beast, they have certain Engines ready, wherewithal to draw him up.
Nevertheless, of five, three escaped, notwithstanding the cords and chains
about their bodies and their legs. The people told us one thing which seemed
very wonderful; which was, that these Elephants having been once deceived, and
having escaped the snare, are very mistrustful ever after; and when they get
into the Wood again, they break off a great bough from one of the Trees with
their trunk, with which they examine every step they go, before they set down
their feet, to try whether there be any hole or no in their way. So that the
Hunters that told us the Story, seemed to be out of hopes of ever taking those
three Elephants which had escaped. Had we been assured that we might have been
eyewitnesses of this miraculous precaution of the Elephant, we would have
staid three or four days, whatever urgent business we had had. The Captain
himself was a kind of a Brigadeer, that commanded three or four-thousand men,
who were quartered half a league round the Country.

The seven and twentieth, after two hours travel, we came to a great Village,
where we saw the two Elephants which had been so lately taken. Every one of the
two wild Elephants was placed between two tame ones. Round about the wild
Elephants stood six men, with every one an Half-pike in their hands, and a
lighted-Torch fastened at the end of the Pike, who talked to the Beasts, giving
them meat, and crying out in their language, Take it, eat it. The food which
they gave them was a little bottle of Hey, some pieces of brown-Sucre, and Rice
boiled in water, with some few corns of Pepper. If the wild Elephants refused
to do as they were bidden, the men made signs to the tame Elephants to beat
them, which they did, banging the refractory Elephant upon the head and
forehead with their trunks; and if he offered to make any resistance, the other
Elephant thwackt him on the other side; so that the poor Elephant, not knowing
what to do, was constrained to learn obedience.

Being thus fallen into the Story of Elephants, I will add some other
observations, which I have made upon the nature of those Animals. Though the
Elephant never meddles with the female, after he is once taken, yet he is
sometimes seized with a kind of lustful rage. One day that Sha-jehan was an
Hunting upon one of his Elephants, with one of his Sons that sat by him to fan
him, the Elephant became so furious by reason of his lust, that the Governor
who was by no means able to master him, declared to the King, that to allay the
fury of the Elephant, who would else doubtless bruise him to pieces among the
Trees, there was no way, but for one of the three to forfeit his life: and that
he would willingly sacrifice his for the safety of the King and the Prince his
Son. Only he desired his Majesty to take care of three small Children which he
must leave behind him. Having so said, he threw himself under the
Elephant's-feet, who had no sooner taken him in his trunk and squeezed him to
pieces with his feet, but he grew as quiet and peaceable as before. The King,
as an acknowledgment for so famous a deliverance, gave to the poor
two-hunder'd-thousand Roupies, and highly advanced every one of the Sons of him
that had so generously laid down his life for the safety of his Sovereign.

I observed also, that though the Elephant's skin be very hard while he is
alive; yet when he is dead, it is just like melted-glue.

Elephants are brought from several parts of India; as from the Island of
C^ylan, where they are very small; but the most courageous of all: from the
Isle of Sumatra; from the Kingdom of Cochin; from the Kingdom of Siam; and from
the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Boutam near the Great- Tartarie. They are
brought also from the Coast of Melinda, Eastward of Africa: where they are in
very great numbers, according to the report of a Portugueze-Captain, made at
Goa, who came from thence to make some complaint against the Governor of
Mozambique. He told me that he had seen all along that Coast several Parks that
were empal'd with nothing but Elephants-teeth, the least of which Parks is
above a league about: He added farther, that the Blacks of the Country hunt
their Elephants, and eat the Flesh. But they are obliged to give the tusks of
every one they kill to the Lord of the place. When they intend to take their
Elephants in the Island of Ceylan, they make a long lane, closed in on both
sides, so that the Elephant can neither run to the right nor to the left: this
lane is broad at the first, but grows narrower and narrower, till there is no
more room left at the farther-end than for the female-Elephant to lie down,
which must be one that is covetous of the male at the same time. Though she be
tame, yet she is bound with good Ropes and Cords, and by her cries will call
the male-Elephant, who presently runs through the lane toward her. Now when
the Elephant comes where the lane grows narrow, they that lie hid for that
purpose, immediately barricado up the lane behind, and when he comes near the
female, there is another Barricado set up that stops him from going any
farther. When he is thus between the Barricado's, they so entangle his legs and
trunk with ropes and cords, that he is soon taken, having no way to help
himself. The same way they use for the most part in the Kingdoms of Siam, and
Pegu, only that the Natives there mount the female-Elephant, and go to find out
the male in the Forests. And when they have met with his haunt, they tie the
female to the most convenient place they can find, and then they fix their
snares for the Elephant, who in a short time hastens toward the female, hot for
Generation, where her cries call him.

This is observable of the female-Elephant, that when she begins to be hot, she
gathers together a great heap of herbs and weeds, and makes her self a kind of
bed some four or five-foot-high from the ground, where contrary to the custom
of all other creatures, she lies upon her back, in expectation of the male,
whom she calls to her by a peculiar cry.

This is also particular to the Elephants in the Isle of Ceylan, that only the
first Elephant which the female produces, has any tusks. And it is also
observable, that the Ivory which comes from Achen when it is wrought, has this
peculiar quality with it, that it never grows yellow, like that which comes out
of the Continent, and from the East Indies, which makes it more esteemed, and
dearer than any other.

When the Merchants bring Elephants to any place to sell, it is a pleasant sight
to see them go along. For in regard there are generally old and young together,
when the old ones are gone by, the children will be running after the little
ones to play with them, and give them something or other to eat. While the
young Elephants, which are very wanton, are busily taking what is offered them,
the children leap upon their backs: but when the young Elephants that Iately
stopped for the lucre of the Victuals perceiving their Dams, a great way before,
double their pace, and playing with their trunks, throw the children off their
backs to the ground, yet without doing them any harm.

Notwithstanding all the enquiry I have made, I could never find exactly how
long an Elephant will live. Nor can all the Governors and keepers of those
creatures tell you more, than such an Elephant has been in the possession of
their Father, their Grandfather, and great Grandfather. And by that
computation, I found that they had lived some of them six-score, or an hundred
and thirty years.

The greatest part of those that have made Relations of India, boldly affirm
that the Great Mogul keeps three or four-thousand Elephants. But being my self
at Jehanabad, where the King at present resides, he that was chief Master of
the Elephants, assured me that the King had not above five-hunder'd Elephants*
which were called Elephants of the House, made use of only to carry the Women,
their Tents, and Luggage; but that for the Wars, he only kept fourscore, or
fourscore and ten at most. The noblest of the latter sort is always reserved
for the King's Eldest Son, the allowance for his food and other necessaries
being 500 Roupies a month, which comes to 750 Livres. There are some that are
not allowed above 50, others 40, others, 30, and some but 20 Roupies. But those
Elephants that are allowed an hundred, two-hunder'd, three-hunder'd or
four-hunder'd Roupies a-month, have belonging to them certain Horsemen that
live upon the same pay, and two or three young fellows to fan them during the
heat of the weather. All these Elephants are not always kept in the City: the
greatest part being led out every morning into the fields, or among the
thickets, where they feed upon the branches of Trees, Sucre-canes, and Millet,
to the great detriment of the poor Country man. But not a little to the profit
of their Keepers; for the less they eat at home, the more they gain into their
own purses.

The twenty-seventh of August, we traveled six leagues, and lay at a great
Town called Ragia-peta.

The twenty-eighth, after eight leagues journey we came to Ondecour.

The twenty-ninth, after nine hours travel we arrived at Outemeda, where there
is one of the greatest Pagods in all India. It is all built of large
Freestone, and it has three Towers, where there stand several deformed figures
of Emboss'dwork. It is encompast with many little Chambers for the Priests
Lodgings: five-hunder'd paces beyond there is a wide Lake, upon the banks
whereof are built several Pagods eight or ten-foot-square; and in every one an
Idol representing the shape of some Devil, with a Bramere, who takes care that
no stranger that is not of their superstition, shall come to wash, or take any
water out of the Lake. If any stranger desires any water, they bring it in
earthen-pots: and if by chance their pot touches the stranger's Vessel, they
break it immediately. They told me also that if any stranger, not of their
superstition, should happen by accident to wash in that Lake, they must be
forced to drain the lake of all the water that was in at that time. As for
their alms, they are very charitable; for there passes by no person in
necessity, or that begs of them, but they give them to eat and drink of such as
they have. There are several Women that sit upon the Road, whereof some of them
always keep fire for Travelers to light their Tobacco by. Nay, they will give
a Pipe to some that have none at all. Others boil Rice with Quicheri, which is
a grain somewhat like our Hemp Seed. Others boil Beans with their Rice, because
the water wherein they are boiled never puts those that are over-hot into a
pleurisy. There are Women that have vowed to perform these acts of Charity to
strangers for seven or eight years, some for more, some for less, according to
their convenience. And to every Traveller they give some of their Beans, and
Rice-water, and an handful of Rice to eat. There are other Women upon the
highway, and in the fields, looking behind their Horses, their Oxen, and their
Cows, who have made vows never to eat but what they find indigested in the dung
of those Beasts. Now in regard there is neither Barley nor Oats in that
Country, they give their Cattle certain great crooked Pease, which they bruise
before between two Millstones: and then lay them in steep for half an hour;
for they are a very ^olid substance, and hard to be digested. They give their
Cattle these Pease every evening; and in the morning they feed them with two
pound of dark-brown-Sugar, like Wax, kneaded together with as much Meal, and
one-pound of Butter, whereof the Ostlers or Grooms make little round Balls
which they thrust down their throats; for otherwise they would never eat them.
Afterward they wash their mouths, that are all over clamm'd, especially their
teeth, which makes them have such an aversion against that sort of food. All
the day long they pull up the grass and weeds, by the roots, and give their
Cattle, being very careful of letting them eat any of the earth.

The thirty'th, we traveled eight leagues, and lay at a place called Goulupale.

The one and thirty'th, after we had traveled nine hours, we stopped at Gogeron.

The first of September we traveled but six leagues, and came to lie at
Gandicot. It was but eight days before, that the Nahab had taken that City,
after a Siege of three months. Nor had it been taken without the assistance of
certain Frenchmen, who had forsaken the service of the Dutch-Company, by
reason of ill-usage. They had also several English and Dutch-Cannoneers, with
two or three Italians, which mainly forwarded the surrender of that place.

Gandicot is one of the strongest Cities in the Kingdom of Carnatica. It is
situated upon the point of an high Mountain; there being but one ascent to it,
not above twenty or five and twenty-foot-broad at most; in some places not
above seven or eight-foot-wide. On the right hand of the way, which is cut out
of the Mountain, there is a most hideous precipice; at the bottom whereof runs
a vast River. Upon the top of the Mountain there is a small plain, but a
quarter of a league broad, and about half a league long. This is all sowed with
Rice and Millet, and watered with many little Springs. The top of the plain on
the Southside, where the City is built, is encompast with precipices, two
Rivers running at the bottom, which form the point. So that there is but one
Gate to enter into the City from the plain-side; and that too fortified with
three good walls of Freestone, with Moats paved at the bottom with Freestone;
so that the besieged had but only one quarter of the City to defend, containing
about five hundred paces. They had but two Iron-Guns, the one carrying
twelve-pound-Ball, the other eight. The one was planted upon the Gate, the
other upon a point of a kind of a Bastion. So that until the Nahab had found
the way to mount his Cannon upon a very high place near the City, he lost a
great number of men by several sallies which the Besieged made. The Raja that
was within, was esteemed one of the bravest and most experienced Captains that
ever were amongst the Idolaters: whereupon, the Nahab finding that the place
was not to be taken, unless he could get up his Cannon to the top of that steep
ascent, sent for all the Frenchmen that were in the King's service, promising
to every one four months extraordinary pay, if they could find a way to mount
his Cannon up to the top of such a place; wherein they had the good-hap to be
very succesful. For they mounted four pieces of Cannon, and were so prosperous,
as to hit the great Gun that was planted upon the Gate, and render it
unserviceable. At length, when they had beaten down good part of the Wall of
the City, the Besieged came to capitulate, and marched out of the Town upon
good Articles. The day we arrived, all the Army was encamped at the foot of the
Mountain, in a plain, through which there ran a very fair River; where the
Nahab mustered his Cavalry, and found them in a very good condition. An
English-Cannoneer and an Italian seeing Monsieur Jardin and my self pass by,
guessed us to be Frangui's; and because it was late, accosted us very civilly,
and obliged us to stay with them all night. By them we understood that there
was in the City a French-Engineer, whose name was Claudius Maille of Bourges,
and that he was employed by the Nahab to cast some pieces of Cannon which the
Nahab intended to leave in the City.

The next day we went into the City, and found out Maille's Lodging, having
been acquainted with him at Batavia; who informing the Nahab of our arrival, he
presently sent us Provision for our selves and our beasts.

The third day we went to wait upon the Nahab, who had pitched his Tents upon
that part of the plain near the place where the way is cut out of the Rock. We
informed him of the cause of our coming, telling him that we had some
Commodities that were rare, and worth the King's buying; but that we were
unwilling to show them to the King till he had seen them; believing it our duty
to render him that respect. The Nahab was very well-pleased with our
Complement; and after he had caused us to be presented with Betle, we took our
leaves of him, and returned to our Lodgings, whither he sent to us two Bottles
of Wine, one of Sack, and the other of Sehiras, which is a rare thing in that
Country.

The fourth day we waited upon him again, and carried along with us some
Pearls of an extraordinary weight, beauty and bigness; the least whereof
weighed twenty four Caratts. After he had vewd them and showed them to some of
the Lords that were about him, he asked the price, which when we had set him,
he returned us our Jewels and told us he would consider of it.

The tenth day he sent for us in the morning, and after he had caused us to sit
down by him, he sent for five small Bags full of Diamonds, every Bag containing
a good handful. They were loose Stones, of a very black Water, and very small;
none of them exceeding a Carat, or a Carat and a half; but otherwise very
clean. There were some few that might weigh two Carats. After the Nahab had
shown us all, he asked us whether they would sell in our Country. We made
answer, that they might have been for sale in our Country, provided they had
not been of a black Water; for that in Europe we never esteemed any Diamonds,
but such as were clean and white, having but a small esteem for any others. It
seems, that when he first undertook the Conquest of this Kingdom for the King
of Golconda, they informed him that there were Diamond Mines in it. Whereupon
he sent twelve thousand men to dig there; who in a whole years time could find
no more than those five small Bags full. Whereupon the Nahab perceiving that
they could find none but brown Stones, of a Water enclining much more to black
than white, thought it but loss of time, and so sent all the people back to
their Husbandry.

The eleventh, the French Canoneers came all to the Nahabs Tent, complaining
that he had not paid them the four months pay which he had promised them;
threatening him, that if he did not discharge it, they would leave him; to which
the Nahab promised to give them satisfaction the next day.

The twelfth, the Canoneers not failing to give him another visit, the Nahab
paid them three months, and promised to pay them the fourth before the month
were out; but so soon as they had received their Money, they fell a feasting
one another, so that the Dancing Wenches carried away the greatest part of
their Coin.

The thirteenth, the Nahab went out to see the Guns which Maille had undertaken
to cast. For which purpose he had sent for Brass from all parts, and got
together a great number of Idols which the Soldiers had pillaged out of the
Pagods as they marched along. Now you must know, that in Gandicot there was one
Pagod, said to be the fairest in all India, wherein there were several Idols,
some of Gold, and others of Silver; amongst the rest there were six of Brass,
three sitting upon their Heels, and three upon their Feet, ten foot high. These
Idols were made use of among the rest. But when Maille also had provided all
things ready, he could not make those six Idols run, that were taken out of the
great Pagod of Gandicot, though he melted all the rest. He tried several ways,
but it was impossible for him to do it, whatever expense the Nahab was at; nay
though the Nahab threatened to hang the Priests for having enchanted those
Idols. And thus Maille could never make any more than only one single piece,
and that split upon trial; so that he was forced to leave the work unfinished,
and soon after left the Nahabs service.

The fourteenth, we went to take our leaves of the Nahab, and to know what he
had further to say to us, concerning the Commodities we had then shown him.
But then he told us, he was busy at present about the examination of certain
Offenders which were brought before him. For it is the custom of that Country,
never to put a man in Prison; but as soon as the Offender is taken, he is
examined, and sentence is pronounced upon him, according to his crime, which is
immediately executed; or if the party taken, be found innocent, he is as soon
acquitted. And let the controversy be of what nature it will, it is presently
decided.

The fifteenth in the morning, we went to wait upon him again, and were
immediately admitted into his Tent, where he sat with his two Secretaries by
him. The Nahab was sitting according to the custom of the Country, barefoot,
like one of our Tailors, with a great number of Papers sticking between his
Toes, and others between the Fingers of his left hand, which Papers he drew
sometimes from between his Toes, sometimes from between his Fingers, and
ordered what answers should be given to every one. After his Secretaries had
wrote the answers, he caused them to read them, and then took the Letters and
sealed them himself; giving some to Foot Messengers, others to Horsemen. For
you must know, that all those Letters which are sent by Foot-Posts all over
India, go with more speed than those which are carried by Horsemen. The reason
is, because at the end of every two Leagues there are little Huts, where there
are men always ready, who are engaged to run away immediately; so that when one
of these men that carries the Letters, comes to one of these Huts, he throws
the Letters into the Hut, and then he that is appointed, runs with them to the
next Stage. They look upon it as an ill Omen, to give the Letters into the
Messengers hands; but they must be thrown at his feet, and he must gather them
up. It is to be observed also, that the high ways in most parts of India, are
like Walks of Trees; and that where there are no Trees, at every five hundred
paces distance there are set up little Heaps of Stones, which the Inhabitants
of the next Villages are bound to white-wash from time to time, to the end
those Letter-Carriers may not miss their ways in dark and Rainy nights. While
we stayed with the Nahab, certain Officers came to tell him, that they had
brought certain Offenders to the door of his Tent. He was above half an hour
before he returned them any answer, writing on, and giving instructions to his
Secretaries; but by and by, all of a sudden he commanded the Offenders to be
brought in, and after he had examined them, and made them confess the crime of
which they stood accused, he was above an hour before he said a word, still
writing on, and employing his Secretaries. In the mean while several of the
Officers of the Army came to tender their respects to him in a very submissive
manner, all whom he answered only with a nod. There was one of the Offenders
which were brought before him, had broken into a House, and had killed the
Mother and three Children. He was condemned upon the spot to have his Hands and
Feet cut off, and to be cast out into the high way, there to end his days in
misery. Another had robbed upon the Highway; for which the Nahab ordered his
Belly to be ripped up, and himself to be cast upon the Dunghill. I know not what
crimes the other two had committed, but their heads were both cut off. When we
perceived him at a little leisure, we asked him whether he had any other
Commands, to lay upon us, and whether he thought our Commodities fitting to be
shown to the King. He answered, that we might go to Golconda, and that he
would write to his Son in our behalf, and that his Letter would be there sooner
than we. And in order to our journey, he ordered us sixteen Horsemen to convoy
us, and to provide us necessaries upon the Road, till we came to a River,
thirteen Leagues from Gandicot, which no persons are to pass, unless they have
the Nahabs Passport, to keep the Soldiers from running from their Colors.

CHAP. XIX.
The Road from Gandicot to Golconda.
THE sixteenth in the morning, we set out of Gandicot, accompanied with the
greatest part of the Canoneers, who brought us the first days journey upon our
way; and that day having traveled seven Leagues, we came to lie at Cotepaeli.

The seventeenth, the Canoneers took their leaves of us; and we kept on our
journey with our Horsemen; and having traveled six Leagues, we lay at a Village
called Co^een, on the other side of the River, which is very broad. So soon as
we had crossed it, the Horsemen took their leaves of us; and though we made
them a present of Roupies, to buy them Tobacco and Betle, yet we could not
persuade them to take it. Their Ferry-Boats wherewith they cross the River, are
like broad bottomed Wicker Flaskets, covered without with Oxe's Hides; at the
bottom whereof they lay certain Faggots, over which they spread a piece of old
Tapestry, to keep the Wares and Merchandise from the wet. As for their Coaches
and Wagons, they fasten them between two Boats, by the Wheels and the Pole;
the Horses swimming all the while, one man whipping them on behind, while
another in the Boat holds them up by the Head-Stall. As for the Oxen that carry
the Luggage, as soon as ever they come to the River side, and that they have
unladed them, they only drive them into the River, and they will swim over of
themselves. There are four men that stand upright at the four Corners of the
Boat, and row it along with broad pieces of Wood, made like Shovels. If they do
not all strike their strokes together, but that any of the four misses, the
Boat will turn round two or three times; and the stream carries it a great way
lower than where they intended to land.

The eighteenth, after five hours travel we arrived at Morimal.

The nineteenth, we traveled nine Leagues, and lay at Santesela.

The twentieth, we traveled nine Leagues more, and lay at Goremedae.

The one and twentieth, after six hours travel, we spent the night at Kaman, a
Frontier Town in the Kingdom of Golconda, till the Conquest of Carnatica by
Mirgimola.

The two and twentieth, we traveled seven Leagues, and came to lie at
Emelipata. When we were about half the way, we met above four thousand persons,
men and women; and above twenty Palleki's, in every one whereof was an Idol.
They were adorned with Coverings of Satin, purfled with Gold, and Velvets with
Gold and Silver Fringe. Some of these Palleki's were born by four men; others
by eight, and some by twelve, according as the Idols were in bigness and
weight. On each side of the Pallekie, walked a man, with a large Fan in his
hand, five Foot in compass, made of Ostriches and Peacocks Feathers, of various
colors. The handle of the Fan was five or six foot long, laid all over with
Gold and Silver, about the thickness of a French Crown. Every one was officious
to carry one of those Fans, to keep the Flies from the Idols Face. There was
another Fan, which was carried close by the Idol, somewhat larger than the
Former, without a handle, and was born just like a Target. It was adorned with
Feathers of several colors, and little Bells of Gold and Silver, round about
the Edges. He that carried it went always near the Idol upon the same side, to
shade the Idol; for to have shut the Curtains would have been too hot. Ever and
anon, he that carried that sort of Fan, brandished it in the air, to make the
Bells ring; which they presumed to be a kind of Pastime to the Idol. All these
people with their Idols came from Brampour, and the adjacent parts, and were
going to visit their great Ram, that is to say, their chief God, who stands in
a Pagod in the Territories of the King of Carnatica. They had been about thirty
days upon the Road, and were to travel fourteen or fifteen more, before they
came to this Pagod. One of my Servants, who was a Native of Brampour, and of
the same Superstition, begged me to give him leave to bear his gods Company,
telling me withal, that he had made a vow long since to go this Pilgrimage. I
was constrained to let him go. For had I not given him leave, I knew he would
have taken it, by reason he had much acquaintance and kindred among the Rabble.
About two months after, he returned again to us to Surat, and because he had
faithfully served Monsieur Jardin and my self, we made no scruple to take him
again. Asking him some questions about his Pilgrimage, he related to me this
following passage: six days after he left me, all the Pilgrims had made an
account to go and lie at such a village, to which before they came they were to
cross a River, that has but little Water in Summer, so that it is easily
fordable. But when it rains in India, the Water falls with such a force, that
it seems to be a perpendicular deluge; and in less than an hour or two a small
River shall swell three or four foot high. The Rains having overtaken those
Pilgrims, the River was swelled in that manner, that it was impossible to pass
it that day. Now because it is not necessary for Travelers in India to carry
provisions, especially for the Idolaters, who never eat any thing that ever had
life; in regard that in the least village you may meet with abundance of Rice,
Meal, Butter, Milk Meats, Lentils, and other Pulse, besides Sugar, and
Sweetmeats, dry and moist. The people were very much surpised, having no
victuals, when they came and saw the River swelled. In short, they had nothing
to give their Children to eat; which caused great lamentations among them. In
this extremity the chiefest of their Priests sat himself down in the midst of
them, and covering himself with a sheet, began to cry out that. they who would
have any Victuals should come to him; when they came, he asked every one what
they would have, whether Rice, or Meal, and for how many persons; and then
lifting up the corner of the sheet, with a great Ladle he distributed to every
one that which they asked for; so that the whole multitude of four thousand
Souls was fully satisfied. My Servant did not only tell me this story, but
going several times afterward to Brampour, where I was known to the chief men
in the City, I inquired of several, who swore to me by their Ram, Ram, that it
was truth. Though I am not bound to believe it.

The twenty-third, we arrived at Doupar, after we had traveled eight leagues,
and crossed several Torrents.

The twenty-fourth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to Tripante; where
there is a great Pagod upon a Hill, to which there is a circular ascent of
Freestone every way; the least Stone being ten foot long, and three broad: and
there are several Figures of Demons in the Pagod. Amongst the rest, there is
the Statue of Venus, standing upright, with several lascivious Figures about
her; all which Figures are of one piece of Marble; but the Sculpture is very
ordinary.

The twenty-fifth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to Mamli.

The twenty-sixth, we traveled eight leagues more, and came to lie at Macheli.

The twenty-seventh, we traveled not above three leagues, being to cross a wide
River in Boats like Panniers; which usually takes up half the day; for when you
come to the River side, there is neither Pannier nor any thing else to cross
it. There was only one man, with whom we bargained for our passage; who to try
whether our money be good or no, made a great fire and threw it into the flame,
as he does to all others that pass that way. If among the Roupies which he
receives, he meets with any one that turns a little black, you must give him
another, which he presently heats red hot; when he finds his Money to be good,
he calls to his Companions to fetch the Manequin or Flasket-Boat, which lay hid
before in some other part of the River. For these sort of people are so
cunning, that if they descry any Passengers afar off, they will row their
Manequin to the other side, because they will not be constrained to carry any
person over without Money. But the Money being paid, the man that receives it;
calls his Companions together, who take the Boat upon their Shoulders, and when
they have launched it into the River, they fetch their Passengers and goods
from the other side.

The twenty-eighth, having traveled five leagues, we came to a place called
Dabir-Pinta.

The twenty-ninth, after twelve hours travel, we came to lie at Holcora.

The thirtieth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to spend our night at
Peridera.

The first of October, after we had traveled ten leagues, we came to lie at
Atenara. This is a House of Pleasure, which the present King's Mother caused to
be built. There are many Chambers in a great Piazza belonging to it, for the
convenience of Travelers.

You must take notice, that in all the Countries where we traveled as well in
the Kingdom of Carnatica, as the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, there are
no Physicians, but such as attend Kings and Princes. As for the common people,
after the Rains are fallen, and that it is time to gather Herbs, you shall see
every morning the good women of the Towns going into the Fields, to gather such
Simples which they know to be proper for such Diseases as reign in the Family.
It Is very true, that in great Cities there may be one or two men that have some
common Receipts, who go every morning, and sit in some known places, to give
their Remedies to such as enquire for them, whether they be Potions or
Plasters. First they feel their Pulses, and then giving them some remedy, for
which they do not demand the value of six pence; they also at the same time
mutter certain words between their teeth.

The second of October, we had but four leagues to travel before we came to
Golconda. We went immediately to the Lodging of a young Dutch Surgeon,
belonging to the King, whom the Sieur Cheteur, Envoy from Batavia, had left at
Golconda upon the King's earnest entreaty. The King was always very much
troubled with the headache: For which reason the Physicians had ordered that he
should be let blood in four places under the tongue; but there was no person
that would undertake to do it: for the Natives of the Country understand
nothing of Surgery. Now before that Peter de Lan, for that was the
Dutch*Chirurgion's name, was entertained in the King's service, he was asked
whether he could let blood? To which he answered, that there was nothing so
easy in Surgery. Some few days after the King sent for him, and gave him to
understand that he was resolved to be let blood the next day in four parts
under the tongue, as the Physicians had ordered, but he should take a care of
not drawing away above eight ounces. De Lan returning the next day to Court,
was lead into a Chamber by three Eunuchs, and four Old-women, who carried him
to a Bath, and after they had undrest him, and washed him, especially his
hands; they anointed him with Aromatick-drugs, and instead of his own
European-Clothes, they brought him a Robe according to the fashion of the
Country. After that, they brought him before the King; where he found four
little Porringers of Gold, which the Physicians, who were present, had weighed.
In short, he let the King blood under the tongue in four parts, and performed
his business so well, that when the blood came to be weighed, it weighed but
bare eight ounces. The King was so satisfied with the Operation, that he gave
the Surgeon three-hunder'd Pagods, which comes to almost seven-hunder'd
Crowns. The Young-Queen and the Queen Mother understanding what he had done,
were resolved to be let-blood too. But I believe it was rather out of a
curiosity to see the Surgeon, than out of any necessity which they had to be
let-blood. For he was a handsome young man; and perhaps they had never seen a
stranger near at hand, for at a distence, it is no improbable thing, in regard
the Women are shut up in such places where they may see, but not be seen. Upon
this, de Lan was carried into a Chamber where the same Old-women that he had
waited on him before he let the King blood, stripped up his arm, and washed it,
but more especially his hands; which when they were dry, they rubbed again with
sweet-Oils as before. That being done, a Curtain was drawn, and the Queen
stretching out her arm through a hole, was let-blood; as was the Queen Mother
afterward in the same manner. The Queen gave him fifty Pagods, and the
Queen Mother thirty, with some pieces of Cloth of Gold.

Two days after we went to wait upon the Nahab's Son, but were told we could
not speak with him that day; the next day receiving the same answer, we were
advertised upon enquiry, that we might wait long enough in that manner; that he
was a young Lord that never stirred from the King; or that if he did leave the
Court, it was only to keep his Misses company in his own Haram. The young
Surgeon seeing us so delaid, offered to speak to the King's first Physician,
who was also of the King's Council, and who had testified a great affection
toward the Batavian-Envoy, and for de Lan himself; for which reason he thought
he might embrace an opportunity to do him a kindness. In short, de Lan had no
sooner spoke to him, but he sent for us, and having, after much civilty shown
us, informed himself of the cause of our coming, he desired us to show him our
Pearls, which we did the next day. Aft^^ he had viewed them, he made us seal
them up again in our own bags: for all that is presented to the King must be
sealed with the Merchants-Seal; and when the King has had a sight of the
Commodity, it is sealed up with his own Seal, to prevent any fraud. Thereupon
we left the Pearls, so sealed up, in his hands, who promised to show them to the
King, and to give us a good account of the trust we had put into his hands.

The next day about nine of the Clock before noon we went to the River to see
how they wash the King's and the Great Noble-men's Elephants. The Elephant goes
up to the belly in the water, and lying down upon one side, with his trunk he
throws the water several times upon that side which lies out of the water; and
when he has soaked himself sufficiently, the Master comes with a kind of a
Pumice-stone, and rubbing the Elephant's-skin, cleanses it from all the filth
that clings to it. Here some believe, that when this creature is once laid
down, it cannot rise of its self; which is contrary to what I have seen. For
when the Master has well-cleans'd the one side, he commands the Elephant to
turn the other, which the beast immediately does; and when both sides are
well-wash'd, he comes out of the River, and stays awhile upright upon the
bank-side to dry himself. Then comes the Master with a pot full of some red or
yellow color, and streaks the best in the forehead, about the eyes, upon the
breast, and all behind, rubbing him afterward with Oil of Coco's to strengthen
the nerves; and some when all is done, he fastens a gilt-Plate upon their
foreheads.

The fifteenth, the chief Physician sent for us, and returned us our bags
again, sealed with the King's Signet, wherewith his Majesty had sealed them
after he had looked upon them. He demanded the price; which we told him:
Whereupon, an Eunuch that stood by him, and wrote down every thing, wondering at
the highprice of the Pearls, told us that we took the King of Golconda's
Courtiers for persons that have neither knowledge nor judgment; and that he saw
every day things of greater value brought to the King. I briskly retorted upon
the Eunuch, that he was better skilled in the price of a young Slave, than the
value of a Jewel; and so saying, we put up our Pearls; and returned to our
Lodging. The next day we set out from Golconda for Surat, in which Road there
is nothing considerable but what I have already described, only this is to be
remembered, that we were not gone above five days journey from Golconda, but
the King, who had not heard in two days after we were gone, what I had retorted
upon the Eunuch, sent four or five Horsemen after us with Orders, if they
overtook us, to bring us back: but in regard we were got one days journey into
the Territories of the Mogul before one of the Horsemen overtook us, (for the
rest staid upon the Frontiers of the two Kingdoms;) I, that knew the humor of
the Country very well, made answer for my self and Companion, that at that
time our business would not permit us; and that therefore we begged in most
humble manner his Majesty's pardon; and afterward I made my Companion allow my
reasons.

Being arrived at Surat, Monsieur de Jardin died of an overflowing of choler.
And I made a full account to have gone to Agra to Sha-jehan who then reigned.
But at the same instant the Nahab, Sha-Est-Kan, the King's Brother-in-Law, and
Governor of the Province of Guzerat, sent one of the principal Officers of his
House to me from Amadabat, to tell me he undrestood I had some extraordinary
Jewels to sell; for which reason he would be glad to see me, and that he would
pay me as much for them as the King should do. I received this Message while
Sieur de Jardin Iay sick, and the ninth day after his death I got to Amadabat,
and spoke with the Nahab. Now in regard he was a man that understood Jewels
perfectly well, we presently came to an agreement: so that we had no dispute
together, but about the quality of the Coin to be paid. He allowed me two sorts
to choose, Roupies of Gold, or Roupies of Silver: but the Prince seeming to
intimate to me that he should not be well-pleased to let such a Sum in Silver
to be seen to go out of his House, he wished I would rather accept my payment
in Roupies of Gold, that made not such a great heap. I consented to his desire;
and he showed me very fair Gold, and many Roupies, that had not seen the Sun in
a long time. But in regard the price current of a Roupy of Gold, is not above
fourteen Roupies of Silver, and for that he would have had me taken my Roupies
at fourteen and a half, or at least for fourteen and a quarter, it had like to
have spoiled our bargain; for I gave him to understand, that in so large a sum,
it would not quit cost to lose a fourth part in every Roupy of Gold. At length
to please him, I was forced to take the Gold at fourteen Roupies of Silver and
an eighth part. Thus a Prince otherwise magnificent and generous, yet in matter
of buying and selling, woulds needs approve himself to be a good Husband. While
I stayed at Amadabat, he sent me every day to my Lodging four Silver Plates of
Pilaw, and other excellent Diet; and one day that the King had sent him as many
Apples as ten or twelve men could carry, he sent me as many as for their rarity
at Amadabat, were worth three or four hundred Roupies. Besides all this, he
gave me a complete Habit of Honor, with a Sword and a Cangiar, worth a
thousand Roupies; and resolving also to give me a Horse, he asked me what kind
of one I would have. I told him, since he was pleased to give me my choice,
that I rather desired a young lively Horse, rather than an old one. Thereupon
he sent me one that was so given to bounding and prancing, that he threw a
young Hollander out of the Saddle; but upon my desire to have him changed, he
sent me another, which I fold afterward for four hundred Roupies.

From Amadabat I returned to Surat; from Surat I traveled again to Golconda,
and thence to the Mine to buy Diamonds. From whence returning back for Surat, I
resolved for Persia.

CHAP. XX.
My return from Surat to Ormus.
BEing upon my return to Surat from the Diamond Mine, I understood that the War
was proclaimed between the English and the Hollanders, and the latter would
send no more Ships into Persia. The English also gave out the same resolutions;
for indeed they had sent four Ships into Persia, which they expected back every
hour. While I was thus in fear of staying long in a place where I had no
business, there arrived at Surat five great Dutch Ships from Batavia; three of
which being rather Men of War, than Merchantmen, were ordered to be unladen
with all speed, with an intention to look out for the four English Vessels that
were expected out of Persia. The other two were appointed to follow two or
three days after, being in that time to take in provisions for the whole Fleet.

In one of those two Vessels I embarked, and setting say I the eighth of
January, we came before Diu the twelfth, where we overtook the other three
Ships. There it was debated at a Council of War, what course to steer to meet
the English; and it was resolved, that we should steer away for Scindi, where
we arrived the twentieth of the same month, and stayed there till the
twenty-eighth, and then setting sail with a fair wind, we landed at Gomrom the
seventh of March.

The End of the First Book.
TRAVELS IN INDIA. The Second Book.
Containing an Historical and Political Description of the Empire of the Great
Mogul.
CHAP. I.
A Relation of the last Wars of Indolstan; which gives an insight into the
present Estate of the Empire and Court of the Moguls.
I Have written this History in such manner, as I knew things to be transacted,
during my stay in the Country; leaving it to the Reader to make his own
reflections as he pleases; it being sufficient for me to make a faithful
description of the Potent Empire of the Moguls, according to the Observations I
have taken upon the place.

This great and vast Empire, which contains the greatest part of Indolstan, and
which extends from the Mountains on this side the River Indus, to the Mountains
on the other side of Ganges; borders Eastward upon the Kingdoms of Aracan,
Tipra, and Asia. Toward the West upon Persia, and the Vsbeg Tartars. Southward
upon the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour. Northward it runs up as far as the
Mountain Caucasus. North*Eastward the Kingdom of Bantam, whence comes our Musk,
parts it. North-Westward it borders upon the Country of Chegathay, or the
Vsbegs.

They are called Moguls, that is, white of complexion; for the last Conquerors
of the Indies where Whites; the Natives being all Brown, or Olive-colour.

Aureng-zeb, the present Emperor, is the eleventh in a direct line, of the
Descendants from the great Temur-Leng, commonly called Tamerlane; the extent
and renown of whose Conquests, from China to Poland, has exceeded all the
actions of the greatest Captains of the former Ages. His Successors completed
the Conquest of all India between the two Rivers, with the destruction of
several Kings. So that Aureng-zeb has at this time under his Dominion, the
Territories of Gouzerat, Decan-Dehly, Multan, Lahor, Kashemire, Bengala, and
many other Territories; not to mention several Raja's, or petty Kings, who pay
him Tribute, and are his Vassals. The Succession of the Kings of India is as
follows:

1. Termur-Leng, that is to say, the Lame, because one of his Legs was shorter
than the other, lies buried at Samarchand, in the Country of Chegathay, or the
Vsbeg Tartars, being the place of his Nativity.

2. Miram-Cha* the Son of Temurleng.

3. Sultan Mahomet, the Son of Miram-Cha.

4. Sultan Abousaid-Mirza, the Son of Mahomet.

5. Hameth-Sheck, the Son of Sultan Abousaid.

6. Sultan Babur, that is, the Valiant Prince, the first Mogul that was of
greatest power in India. He died in the year 1532*

7. Homajon, that is, the Happy, the Son of Sultan Babur, dyed in the year 1552.

8. Abdul Feta Gelal-Eddin Mahomet, commonly called Akabar, that is, the Great,
reigned fifty four years, and dyed in the year 1605.

9. Sultan Selim, otherwise called Jehan-guir Patsha, that is, the Victorious
Emperor of the World, succeeded Akabar his Father, and died 1627. He had four
Sons, the eldest named Sultan Kosrou, the second Sultan Kourom, the third
Sultan Perviz, the fourth Cha-Daniel.

10. Sultan Kourom, the second of the four, succeeded Jehan-guir his Father;
and was acknowledged by all the Nobility, at the Castle of Agra, by the Name of
Cha-Bedin Mahomed, but he would be called Cha-jehan, that is, King of the World.

11. Aureng-zeb, that is, the Ornament of the Throne, is the present Monarch.

The following Figure shows you what sorts of pieces the Kings cause to be
thrown among the people when they come to the Throne. They represent the Arms
or Signets of the Kings which I have named. The biggest, in the middle, was
Cha-jehan's, the tenth King. These pieces are most of them Silver; there being
very few of Gold. And as for Aureng-zeb, he never coined any particular pieces
to throw away at his Coronation.

1 Ebn Amir Tomur saheb quran

2 Ebn Miran Xah

3 Ebn Mirza Soltan Mohamed

4 Ebn Soltan Abu Seid

5 Ebn Mirza Amar Xek

6 Ebn Babor Padxah

7 Ebn Homaiun Padxah

8 Ebn Acbar Padxah

9 Ebn ^ihangir Padxah



The Great Mogul is without all question the richest and most potent Monarch of
Asia; the Territories which he possesses, being his own Hereditary Possession;
and being absolute Master of all the Territories whence he receives his
Revenues. For in the Territories of this Prince, the great Lords are but the
Royal Receivers, who give an account of the King's Revenues to the Governors
of the Provinces, and they to the chief Treasurers and Controllers of the
Exchequer.

CHAP. II.
Of the Sickness and supposed Death of Cha-jehan, King of India, and the
Rebellion of the Princes his Sons.
THis great King had reigned above forty years, not so much as a King over his
Subjects, but rather as a Father over his Family and Children. Insomuch, that
during his Reign there was such a strictness in the Civil Government, and
particularly for the security of the Highways, that there was never any
occasion to put any man to death for Robbery. In his declining years he fancied
a young Lady of an extraordinary Beauty, that was not above thirteen years of
age; and because the strength of nature would not permit him to satisfy his
passion, he took certain provocatives, which were so hot, that he fell
thereupon into a distemper that had almost killed him. This obliged him to shut
himself up in his Haram, together with his Women, for two or three months;
during which time he appeared very rarely to the people, and that at a great
distance too, which made them believe he was dead. For they are obliged by
Custom to show themselves to the people three times in a week, or in fifteen
days at most.

Cha-Jehan had six Children, four Sons and two Daughters. The Name of the
eldest was Dara-Cha, the second was called Sultan Sujah, the third Aureng-zeb,
and the fourth Morad-Bakche. The eldest of his two Daughters was called
Begum-Saheb, and the name of the second was Rauchenara Begum.

Cha-jehan loved all his four Sons alike, and had made them Governors or
Viceroys of four of his principal Provinces or Kingdoms. Dara-Cha, who was the
eldest, stayed with his Father in Debly, and had the Government of the Kingdom
of Sandi, into which he put a Deputy. Sultan Sujah had for his share the
Government of Bengala. Aureng-zeb was Viceroy of the Kingdom of Decan; and
Morad-Bakche of the Kingdom of Guzerat. But though Cha-jehan endeavored to
give equal content to his four Sons, their Ambition was not satisfied with this
division, but ruined all the good designs which so kind a Father had laid to
preserve peace among his Children.

Cha-jehan being thus sick, and retired into the Women's quarter, without
showing himself for many days; the report ran that he was dead, and that
Dara-Cha concealed his death, to gain time to provide for himself, and to
secure the Empire. True it is, that the King believing he should dye, commanded
Dara-Cha to call together all the Omrahs or Lords, and to seat himself upon the
Throne, which belonged to him, as the eldest of his Brothers. He also testified
the desire he had to see him quietly settled in the peaceable possession of the
Empire. And this intention of his was looked upon as the more just, in regard
the other three Brothers had been for some time observed to have less respect
for their Father, than Dara-Cha. Dara-Cha, who honored and respected the King
with a real tenderness, made answer to the King, that he desired of Heaven
nothing more than the preservation of his Majesty's life, and that so long as
Heaven should continue that preservation, he should take it to be a greater
honor to continue himself a Subject, than to ascend the Throne. And indeed he
was never absent from his Father, that he might be the better able to serve him
in his sickness; and because he would be present upon all occasions, he lay by
his Fathers Bedside, upon a Tapestry spread upon the ground.

During the false report of the death of Cha-jehan, his three other Sons
immediately rebelled, every one laying claim to their Fathers Crown.
Morat-Bakche the youngest, who had the Government of Guzerat, sent away Forces
immediately to besiege Surat, the most considerable Port, and most frequented
of any other all over India. The City made no resistance, for the Walls are
very weak, and broken down in several places. But they defended the Citadel,
where the Treasure was, very stoutly; though the young Ambitious Prince did all
he could to make himself Master of it. Chabas-Kan, one of his Eunuchs, who was
General of his Army, an industrious and active person, and who carried on the
Siege with all the experience of an old Captain; when he saw he could not carry
the Castle by main force, caused it to be undermined in two places, by the
assistance of an European Engineer, which took effect; so that upon the
twenty-ninth of December, 1659, he threw down a good part of the Walls, and
filled up the Moat; which very much terrified the besieged. But they presently
recovered their courage, and though they were but a small number, they defended
themselves for above forty days, to the great Damage and slaughter of
Morat-Bakche's Army. Chabas-Kan, provoked at such a vigorous resistance, sought
for all the Wives and Children, Parents and Kindred of the Canoneers that were
within the Castle, to place them at the head of his men, when they made their
approaches. He also sent one of the Brothers of the Governor of the place, to
offer him advantageous conditions. But the Governor, being a very loyal person,
and uncertain of the Kings death, rejected all his offers. The Eunuch
perceiving the Resolution of the Governor, threatened the besieged to kill all
their Wives and Children, Parents and Kindred, if they did not surrender the
place the next day. But neither did any of those considerations prevail, till
at length the breach being made wider, and the number of defandants decreasing,
the Governor surrendered upon honorably conditions; which were punctually
performed by Chabas-Kan, who seized upon all the Treasure, and carried it to
Amadabat; where Morat-Bakche was busily employed in squeezing the people to get
Money.

The news of the taking Surat being brought to this Prince, he presently
provided himself a Throne, and sitting upon it on the day which was appointed
for the Ceremony, he caused himself to be declared King, not only of Guzerat,
but of all the Dominions of Cha-jehan his Father. At the same time he also
coined Money, and sent Governors into all the Cities. But his tottering Throne,
not being well fixed, fell soon to the Ground; and the youngest of all the
Brothers, for having usurped a Scepter that no ways appertained to him, was
confined to a severe imprisonment. Prince Dara-Cha fain would have relieved
Surat; but it was impossible. For besides that he was busied in the assistance
of his Father the King, his second Brother Sultan-Sujah, more powerful than
Morat-Bakche, found him far more work to do. He was already advanced into the
Kingdom of Lahor, having absolutely reduced the Kingdom of Bengala. All that
Dara-Cha could do, was to send Soliman Checour his eldest Son, with an Army
against Sultan Sujah. The young Prince having defeated his Uncle, and driven
him back into Bengala, the Frontiers whereof he secured with good Garrisons
returned to Dara-Cha his Father. In the mean time Morat-Bakche, acknowledged
for King in the Kingdom of Guzerat, bends all his Force and Counsels to make
himself Emperor of the Indies, to destroy his Brothers, and to six his Throne
either in Agra or Jehanabat

Whiles these things passed, Aureng-zeb as ambitious, but more crafty than his
Brothers, lets them alone to kindle the first Fires; and conceals his own
designs, which afterward appeared so much to the damage of the rest. At first
he feigned to lay no claim to the Empire, but lived a private life, like a
Dervich, or Religious Hermit. And the better to act his part, he declared to
his younger Brother Morat-Bakche, whom he saw to be so ambitious, how willing
he should be to assist him in his designs; telling him, that because he merited
the Empire by his Valor, he would aid him with his Money and his Forces to
overthrow Dara-Cha, who only stood in his way. The young Prince, blinded with
the hopes of his good Fortune, easily belive'd Aureng-zeb. And so joining
Forces together, he advances toward Agra, to make himself Master of that City.
Dara-Cha marches to meet them; but the Battle was as imprudently managed by
him, as fortunately fought by his Brothers. For Dara-Cha, confiding too much in
the principal Officers of his Army, against the advice of his General, who was
his chief Minister of State, and faithful to him; thought himself sure of the
Victory, by falling on before his Brothers had time to repose themselves. The
first onset was very rude and bloody, where Morat-Bakche, full of fire and
courage, fighting like a Lion, was shot with five Arrows into the body. The
Victory leaning to Dara-Cha, Aureng-zeb retreated; but soon turned head again,
when he saw those Traitors advancing to his aid, who were in the Army of
Dara-Cha, and who had treacherously deserted him, after he had lost his best
Officers and his General. With this assistance Aureng-zeb renews the fight
against Dara-Cha; who seeing himself betrayed, and unable to maintain the fight
with the small number of men which he had left, retreats to Agra, where the
King his Father was, who began to mend. The King advised his Son to retire to
the Fortress of Dehly, and to carry the Treasure that was in Agra with him;
which he did without delay. Thus the Victory fell entirely to Aureng-zeb and
Morat-Bakche, who before the end of the Battle, being weakened with the loss of
blood, was forced to retire to his Tent, to have his wounds dressed. Now it was
an easy thing for Aureng-zeb to gain those Traitors, as well by reason of the
vast Treasures which he had, as also for that the Indians are very inconstant,
and want generosity. Besides, the Commanders are generally Fugitive Persians,
persons of little worth, who are altogether for them that give most.
Cha-Est-Kan, who was Uncle to these four Princes whose Mother was the King's
Sister, went over to Aureng-zeb with the greatest part of the principal
Commanders that had adhered to Dara-Cha, and Morat-Bakche, and had forsaken
their Masters. Morat-Bakche then began to see his Error in having trusted
Aureng-zeb, who seeing himself favored by Fortune, lost no time to accomplish
his ends. Thereupon Morat-Bakche sends to his Brother for the half of the
Treasure that he had seized, that he might retire to Guzerat. But Aureng-zeb
for answer assured him, that he had no other design than to advance him to the
Throne* to which purpose he desired to confer with him by word of Mouth.
Morat-Bakche in order to that, finding himself indifferently well recovered of
his wounds, goes to visit his Brother, who kindly welcomed him, extolled his
courage, and told him he deserved the best Empire of the world. The young
Prince was charmed by the melody of such sweet language, while his Eunuch,
Shabas-Kan, did all he could to make him sensible of the snares that were laid
for him. But when Morat-Bakche should have taken the Eunuchs advice, it was too
late; for Aureng-zeb had already laid his plot to destroy him. He invites
Morat-Bakche to a Feast; and the more the one excuses himself, the more the
other presses him to come. The young Prince perceiving he would take no denial,
resolved to go, for fear of discovering the mistrust he had, although he verily
believed that that day would be the last of his life, and that some deadly
poison was brewed for him. However, he was deceived in that particular, for
Aureng-zeb not aiming at his life then, contented himself only to deprive him
of his liberty, and so instead of advancing him to the Throne, sent him away,
to be safely kept in the Castle of Gavaleor.

CHAP. III.
Of the Imprisonment of Cha-jehan, and how he was punished by Aureng-zeb his
third Son, for the injustice he had done Prince Boulaki his Nephew, the
Grandchild of Gehan-guir, to whom, as to the Son of the Eldest Son, the Empire
of the Moguls belonged.
GEhan-guir, King of India, Son of Achbar, and Grandchild to Houmajon, reigned
very peaceably during the space of twenty-three years, equally beloved both by
his Subjects and Neighbors. But his life seemed too long to his two Sons, who
were both ambitious to reign. The eldest raised a powerful Army near Lahor,
with an intention to have surpised his Father, and to have possessed himself
of the Throne by force. The King incensed at the insolence of his Son, resolved
to chastise him; meets him with a considerable Army, defeats him, and takes him
Prisoner, with many of the most considerable Nobility that adhered to him.
After which, out of a natural affection to his Children, he saved his life, but
put out his Eyes. And when he was blind he always kept him about his person,
with an intention to have preferred his eldest Son Boulaki to the Crown, whose
Father had already many Sons, but all very young. But Sultan Courom, his second
Son, believing it his right to be preferred before a Nephew, resolved to leave
no stone unturned to remove him from his hopes, and to settle himself in
possession before the death of his Father. However he concealed his intentions
from him, appearing outwardly very obedient to his Father, who always kept
about him the Children of his eldest Son. By that submission he more easily
brought about his designs; for having by that means gained the good will of his
Father, he obtained leave to carry along with him the blind Prince, his eldest
Brother* to his Government of the Kingdom Decan. He laid before his Father,
that it would be far better to remove from his sight, an object that could not
choose but be so afflicting to him; and that the prince himself, being blind,
would spend the rest of his days more comfortably in Decan, where he might be
more retired. The King not penetrating into his design, readily consented to
his request. Who when he had that Poor Prince in his Clutches, made him away
with that secrecy which was not to be discovered; and under the most plausible
pretense imaginable, to conceal him from the eyes of men.

After the death of the blind Prince, Sultan Courom took upon him the name of
Cha-jehan, that is, King of the World; and to uphold his Title, he raised an
Army to finish what his Brother had begun, which was to dethrone his Father,
and to take possession of the Empire. The King incensed as well at the death of
his Son, as at the attempt against his own person, sent a considerable Army to
chastise Courom for so bold an Enterprise. But the rebellious Prince finding
himself to weak too stand his Fathers force, quitted the Kingdom of Decan, and
with certain Vagabonds that followed him, wandered from place to place, till he
came to Bangala, where he raised an Army with an intention to give the King
Battle. To which purpose, passing the Ganges, he marches directly toward the
Kingdom of Lahor; whom the King in person met, with an Army much more numerous
and stronger than his. But Gehan-guir being old, and wearied with the troubles
that his Sons had put him to, died by the way, leaving Cha-jehan at liberty to
pursue his own designs. However before he expired, the good King had time to
recommend his Grandchild Boulaki to Asouf-Kan, his Generalissimo and prime
Minister of State, who was Protector of the Empire. He commanded also all the
Officers of the Army to acknowledge him for King, as being the lawful Heir;
declaring Sultan Komrom a Rebel, and incapable of the Succession. Moreover he
made Asouf-Kan to swear in particular, that he would never suffer Boulaki to be
put to death, which way soever affairs went; which Asouf-Kan swear upon his
Thigh; and as religiously observed as to the Article of not putting him to
death; but not as to that of helping him to the Crown, which he designed for
Cha-jehan, who had married his eldest Daughter, the Mother of four Princes, and
two Princesses.

The news of the Kings death being known at Court, caused a general
lamentation. And presently all the Grandees of the Kingdom set themselves to
execute the Kings Will and Testament, acknowledging Sultan Boulaki for Emperor,
who was very young. That Prince had two Cousin-Germans, who were both of them
by the Kings consent turned Christians, and made public profession thereof.
Those two young Princes, being very apprehensive, perceived that Asouf-Kan,
Father-in-Law to Cha-jehan, and Father of Cha-Est-Kan, had no good intentions
toward the young King, and gave him notice of it; which cost them their lives,
and the King the loss of his Dominions. For the young King, having no more wit
than was agreeable to his age, openly declared to Asouf-Kan what his Cousins
had revealed to him in private, and asked the General whether it were true,
that he had a design to set up his Uncle against him or no. Asouf-Kan
immediately accused the Reporters of falsity and impudence, and protested his
fidelity to his King, and vowed, to spend the last drop of his blood to
preserve him in the possession of the Empire. However seeing his Conspiracy
discovered, he resolved to prevent the punishment; to which end having got the
two Princes into his possession, he put them both to death. But before that, in
regard of his power in the Army and in the Empire, he had already brought over
to Cha-jehans party the greatest part of the Command^rs and Lords of the Court;
and the better to play his game* and deceive the young King, he raised a report
that Cha-jehan was dead; and because he had desired to be buried near his
Father Gehan-guir, the body was to be brought to Agra. This Stratagem being
cunningly managed, Asouf-Kan himself gave advice of the feigned death to the
King; telling the King withal, that it would be but a common civility for him
to go and meet the Corpse when it came within a League or two of the City, being
an Honor due to a Prince of the Blood of the Moguls. All this while Cha-jehan
kept himself incognito, till coming within sight of the Army that lay about
Agra, he caused himself to be put into a Coffin, wherein there was only a hole
left for him to breath at. This Coffin being carried under a moving Tent, all
the principal Officers who were of the plot with Asouf-Kan, came to perform the
usual Ceremonies of State to the Body of the deceased Prince, while the young
King was upon the way to meet the body. But then Asouf-Kan finding it
seasonably to execute his design, caused the Coffin to be opened, and Cha-jehan
rising up, and showing himself to the eyes of all the Army, was saluted Emperor
by all the Generals and other principal* Officers, who had their Cue ready; so
that the name of Cha-jehan running in a moment from one man's mouth to another,
the Acclamation became public, and the Empire was settled upon him. The young
King hearing the news by the way, was so surpised, that he thought of nothing
but how to save himself by ^light, being upon a sudden forsaken by all his
followers. And Cha-jehan not believing it any way necessary to pursue him,
suffered him to wander a long time in India like a Fakir. At length he retired
into Persia, where he was magnificently received by Cha-Sefi, who allowed him a
pension fit for so great a Prince, which he still enjoys.

Cha-jehan having thus usurped the Crown, the better to secure himself, and ^o
stifle all Factions that might arise during the life of the lawful Prince, whom
he had so unjustly despoiled of his right, by degrees ^ut to death all those
that had sh^w'n any kindness to his Nephew. So that the first part of his Reign
was noted for many acts of cruelty, that blemished his Reputation. No less
unfortunate was the end of his Reign. For as he had unjustly deprived the
lawful Heir, of the Empire which belonged to him; he was himself, while he yet
lived, deprived of his Crown by Aureng-zeb his own Son, who kept him Prisoner
in the Fortress of Agra.

For after Dara-Cha had lost the Battle against his two Brothers, Aureng-zeb
and Morat-Bakche in the Plain of Samonguir, and was treacherously abandoned by
the principal Officers of the Army, he retired into the Kingdom of Lahor, with
all the Treasure which the confusion of his affairs would suffer him to get
together. An the King to resist the violence of his victorious Sons, shut
himself up in the Castle of Agra, to the end he might not be surpised, but
have time and leisure to observe how far the insolence of his Children would
transport them. As for Aurengzeb, who had Morat Bakche safe enough, he enters
Agra, feigning to believe a report that Chajehan was dead, that he might have
liberty to get into the Fortress, where he said one of the Omra's would make it
out. The more he reported the death of Cha-jehan, the more did the King
endeavor to let the people know he was alive. But finding both Power and
Fortune had taken Aureng-zeb's party; and being also in great necessity for
want of water, he sent Fazel-Kan, grand Master of his Household, to assure his
Son that he was alive; and withal to tell him that it was the King's command,
that he should retire to his vice-Roy-ship in Decan, without putting him to any
more vexation, and that upon his obedience, he would forgive whatever had past.
Aurengzeb, firm in his resolution, returned for answer to Fazel-Kan, that he
was certain that the King, his Father was dead, and that upon that account he
had only taken Arms to secure the Crown to himself, which he thought he
deserved, as well as the rest of his Brothers. That if his Father were living,
he had too great a respect for him to undertake the least enterprise that
should displease him; and therefore that he might be certain he was not dead,
he desired to see him, and to kiss his feet; and having so done, he would
retire to his Government, and punctually obey his Commands. Fazel-Kan returned
this answer to the King, who declared that he should be glad to see his Son,
and sent back Fazel-Kan, to tell him he should be welcome. But Aureng-zeb more
cunning than Cha-jehan, assured Fazel-Kan that he would not set his foot in the
Castle, till the Garrison that was in it should be sent away to make room for
his men. For the Prince was afraid, and not without reason, if he should
adventure into a Fortress where he was not absolute Master himself, lest they
should seize his person, of which the King being apprehensive, consented to his
proposal, not being able to do better at that time. Thereupon the Garrison
which belonged to Cha-jehan was sent out of the Castle, and another of
Aureng-zeb's entered, commanded by Sultan Mahomet the eldest of his Sons, to
whom he gave order to secure his Father's person. When they were thus got in,
and his Father safe, he delaid seeing his Father from day to day, waiting (as
he gave out for excuse) a kind opportunity for the enterview; and pretending
his Astrologers did not presently think it seasonable, he retired into the
Country, to a House about two or three leagues from Agra, which very much
displeased the people, who waited every day for the fortunate hour, from which
they expected a conclusion of their miseries by the Father and Son's discourse
together. But Aureng-zeb, who was in no great have to see his Father, took up
another resolution, which was to seize upon all his Fathers treasure, which
Dara-Sha had not time to carry away. He also shut up in the same Fortress
Begum-Saheb his Sister, to keep the King company, by whom she was entirely
beloved: and took into his own hands all the wealth she had got, by her
Father's liberality.

Cha-jehan enraged to fee himself used in that manner by his own Son, made an
attempt to escape, and killed some of the Guards that opposed him; which caused
Aureng-zeb more strictly to confine him. In the mean time it was a wonderful
thing to see that not one of the Servants of so great a King so much as offered
to help him; that all his Subjects should forsake him, and turn their eyes upon
the rising Sun; acknowledging only Aureng-zeb for King, while they seemed to
have forgotten Cha-jehan, though still alive. Thus this great Monarch sadly
ended his days in Prison, and died in the Fortress of Agra in the year 1666 the
last time that I was in India.

During his reign he had begun to build the City of Jehanabad, though he had
not quite finished it, and therefore he desired to see it once more before he
died; but Aureng-zeb would not give him leave, unless he would be content to go
and come back by water, or else to be confined to the Castle of Jehanabad, as
he was at Agra, which refusal of his Son did so torment him, that it hastened
his end. Which as soon as Aureng-zeb heard of, he came to Agra, and seized upon
all the Jewels, which he had not taken from his Father while he lived.
Begum-Saheb had also a quantity of Jewels, which he had not taken from her when
he put her into the Castle. But now, because she had formerly taken her
Father's part, he found out a way to deprive her of them after a very plausible
manner; making a show of bestowing very great Honors and Caresses upon his
Sister, and taking her along with him to Jehanabad. But in a short time after
we heard the news of her death; which proved, and all people suspected her to
have been poisoned.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Flight of Dara-cha to the Kingdoms of Scindi and Guzerat: Of the second
Battle which he fought against Aureng-zeb: His being taken Prisoner, and death.
DAra-cha having carried along with him the best part of the Gold and Silver
which was in the Fortress of Agra by his Father's advice, and being got into
the Kingdom of Lahor, was in good hopes to have raised an Army in a short time
to have stopped the proceedings of his Brother. His most faithful Servants and
Friends had always accompanied him in his misfortune. And as for his Eldest
Son, Soliman Shekour, he went, with the Raja Roup, into the Territories of that
Raja's own demeans, to levy men; carrying along with him five-millions of
Roupies, which make of our Money seven-millions and 500000 Livres. But that
great Sum opening the Raja Roup's eyes, he most treacherously and infamously
seized upon it; whereupon Soliman Chekour, fearing he should proceed farther,
and make some attempt upon his person, fled in all have into the Kingdom of
Sireneguer, under the protection of the Raja Nakti-Rani, who more foully and
basely delivered him up sometime after to Aureng-zeb.

Dara-cha having notice of the Raja Roup's treason, and seeing all his friends
had forsook him, and were revolted to Aureng-zeb, quitted Lahor, and retired
into the Kingdom of Scindi. Before he left the Fortress, he sent all* the Gold,
Silver, Jewels and Wealth that was in the Fort, away by water to Baker, a Fort
in the midst of the River Indus. To guard all that Wealth, he left an Eunuch,
and six-thousand men, with all provisions necessary for a Siege; after that he
went to Scindi, where he left several great pieces of Cannon. Then he marched
through the Territories of the Raja of Kachnagana, who made him mountainous
promises to no effect; then he came into the Kingdom of Guzerat, where the
people received him as their lawful King and Heir to Cha-jehan. He sent his
Orders to all the Cities, and particularly to Surat, where he appointed a
Governor; but the Governor of the Fortress, who was left there by Morat-Bakche,
refused to submit to Dara-cha, so that he was forced to let him alone.

In the mean time Dara-cha received news at Amadabat, that Jessomseing, one of
the most potent Raja's in all India, was fallen off from Aureng-zeb. The same
Raja also solicits him to advance with his Army. Dara-cha confiding in his
words, followed his Counsel, and marched to Emir, which was the place of
Rendevouz appointed. But Raja Jessomseing being regained by the persuasions of
Raja Jesseing, more potant than himself, to favor Aureng-zeb, never met
according to his promise; nor did he come till the last push; and then only
with a design to betray the poor Prince. Thus the two Brothers meeting, they
came to a Battle which lasted three days; but in the heat of all the Fight,
Jessomseing showing an apparent treachery, went over to Aureng-zeb; upon which
Dara-cha's Soldiers immediately fled. Dara-cha having thus lost all his hopes,
and finding Fortune contrary to all his expectations, fled away likewise with
his Wives, some of his Children, and his most faithful Servants, in an equipage
that drew compassion. But coming to Amadabat, the Governor having declared for
Aureng-zeb, denied him entrance. Thereupon he discamp'd in the middle of the
night, and took the road for Scindi.

He arrived at Scindi, with an intention to pass into Persia, where Cha-Abas
the Second expected him with a magnificent Retinue, and a resolution to have
assisted him with Men and Money. But not daring to trust himself by Sea; as he
passed through the Country of the Patanes, in the way to Candahar, he was
unworthily betrayed by one of the Lords of the Country, called Gion-Kan; who
had been an Officer under the King his Father, and who having been condemned
for his crimes by the mouth of his Father, and ready to be thrown under the
Elephant's-feet, had been pardoned at the intercession of Dara-cha. For an
addition to his affliction, before he came to Gion-Kan's House, he received the
news of the death of that particular Wife which he loved most entirely, and
which had always accompanied him in his misfortunes. He understood that she
died through heat and drowth, not being able to get a drop of water in the
Country to refresh her thirst. The Prince was so moved at the news, that he
fell down, like one that had been struck quite dead; and when he came to
himself, he tore his clothes in the excess of his grief: an ancient custom
still continued in the East. He had always showed himself insensible upon all
other occasions of misfortune, but this fatal stroke so deeply pierced him,
that he would receive no consolation from his friends. After this, he clad
himself according to his misfortune; and instead of a Turbant, he only put
about his head a piece of coarse Calicut. In this miserable equipage he entered
into the House of the Traitor Gion-Kan, where being laid down to rest himself
upon a Field-bed, a new subject of sorrow awaked him. For Gion-Kan having a
design to seize Sepper-Shekour, Dara-cha's second Son, the young Prince, though
but a Youth, made a bold resistance, and with his Bow and Arrows laid three men
upon the ground; but not being able to resist a multitude, he was at length
taken. Dara-cha wakened with the noise, saw before his eyes his Son, whom they
were leading toward him, with his hands tied behind him. Then the miserable
Father of the young Prince, no longer misdoubting the horrid treason of
Gion-Kan, could not refrain from letting fall in his passion those expressions.
Finish, said he, ungrateful and infamous Villain as thou art, finish the work
thou have begun; we are become Victims to bad fortune, and Aureng-zeb 's unjust
Ambition. But remember that I only deserve death for having saved thy life: for
never Prince of the Royal Blood had his hands tied behind him before. Gion-Kan
in some measure moved at these words, caused the little Prince to be unbound,
and only set guards upon Dara-cha and his Son. At the same time he also sent
expresses to Raja Jessomseing, and to Abdulla-Kan, to give them advice that he
had seized upon Dara-cha and his Train. Thereupon they made have to share in
the spoils of that poor Prince. But they could not be so swift, but that
Gion-Kan had seized upon all that Dara-cha had of most precious in the World;
using as inhumanly both his Wives and his Children. The Raja and Abdulla being
arrived, provided Elephants for the Prince, his Son, and his Wives, and carried
them away immediately to Jehanabat; the people crowded to behold them, every
one being desirous to see the Prince whom they so earnestly desired to have had
for their King. Aureng-zeb caused them to be shown in all the Streets and
Marketplaces of Jehanabat, that no man might question hereafter their being
taken; and as if he had glori'd in his treachery toward his Brother, he
presently condemned and sent him away to the Castle of Asser. But of all that
crowded to behold, not one would stir to assist or succor their lawful Prince.
Only some few generous Soldiers who had served him, and had received some
kindnesses from him, seeing themselves not able to deliver their Prince, yet
desirous to show him some proofs of their acknowledgment, fell with all their
fury upon the Traitor Gion-Kan, who though he were rescued from them at that
time, yet soon after met with the reward due to his crime; for he was killed as
he was crossing a Wood in his return home.

In the mean time Aureng-zeb, like a good Politician, and an extraordinary
Dissembler, gave it out, that it was by no order of his that Dara-cha was
seized; only he desired him to retire out of the Kingdom, which he refusing to
do, Gion-Kan, unknown to him, had unworthily seized his person; and without
respect to the Royal-Blood, had shamefully tied the hands of the young
Sepper-Shekour behind him: which being a crime and an indignity done to his
Majesty, had been punished by the death of Gion-Kan and his accomplices. But
this was only published to abuse the people; for had it been true, Aureng-zeb
would never have given order to have his brother's head cut off.

For Dara-Cha being sent from Jehanabat with a Guard to the place of his
imprisonment; when he came to a fair place where he thought to repose himself,
they dressed up the Tent where he was to leave his Head. After he had eaten,
Seif-Kan came and brought him the sentence of his Death. Dara-Cha seeing him
enter, told him he was very welcome, and that he was glad to see one of his
most faithful Servants. Seif-Kan made answer, that indeed he had formerly been
one of his Servants, but that now he was the Slave of Aurengzeb, who had
commanded him to bring him his Head. Must I dye then? said Dara-Cha. It Is the
Kings command, replied Seif-Kan, and I am entrusted to execute it.
Sepper-Chekour, who lay in an Antichamber of the Tent, waking upon this
contest, would have seized upon certain Weapons which had been taken from him,
with an intention to have assisted his Father; but he was prevented by those
that accompanied Seif-Kan. Dara-Cha would have made some resistance himself,
but seeing it was in vain, he only desired time for his devotions, which was
granted him. In the mean time Sepper-Chekour was taken from him; and while they
held him in a story, a Slave took off Dara-Cha's Head, which was carried to
Aureng-zeb by Seif-Kan. This bloody Tragedy being thus acted, Sepper-Chekour
was sent to the Castle Goualeor, to keep his Uncle Morat-Bakche company. As for
the Wives and Daughters of Dara-Cha, they were allotted an Apartment in
Aureng-zeb's Haram.

CHAP. V.
How Aureng-zeb caused himself to be declared King; and of the Flight of
Sultan-Sujah.
AS it is the custom at the performance of that Ceremony, for the new King to
seat himself upon the Throne; there was not much time required to prepare one,
in regard that Cha-jehan before his Imprisonment had finished that which the
Great Tamerlane had begun; which was the richest and most magnificent that ever
was seen. But as the Grand Cadi of the Empire, and Chief of the Law was to
Proclaim the new King, Aureng-zeb found himself opposed by him. For the Cadi
told him, that the Law of Mahomet and the Law of Nature equally forbad him to
declare him King, while his Father lived; besides, that he had put his elder
Brother to death, to whom the Empire belonged after the death of Cha-jehan
their Father. This stout resistance of the Cadi did not a little perplex
Aureng-zeb; and therefore that he might not seem to appear irreligious, he
called all the Doctors of the Law together, to whom he represented the
incapacity of his Father to govern, through Age and many infirmities, that
troubled him; as for Dara-Cha his Brother, he had put him to death because he
was a slighter of the Law, drank Wine, and favored Infidels. Those reasons,
intermixed with threats, caused his Council of Conscience to conclude, that he
deserved the Empire, and ought to be proclaimed King; though the Cadi
obstinately persisted in his first resolution. There was no other Remedy
therefore, but to remove him from his Employment, as a disturber of the public
Peace, and to choose another for the Honor of the Law, and the Good of the
Kingdom. The person who was elected by the Council was soon confirmed by
Aureng-zeb; in acknowledgment whereof, he proclaimed him King the twentieth of
October, 1660. This Proclamation being made in the Mosquee, Aureng-zeb seated
himself upon the Throne, and received the Homages of all the Grandees of the
Kingdom.

However, Aureng-zeb did not think his throne fast enough, nor himself secure
in the Empire, so long as Sultan Sujah was raising a powerful Army in Bengala
to release his Father. Thereupon he sent a considerable Force against him,
under the Command of Sultan Mahomed his eldest Son; to whom he appointed for
his Lieutenant the Emir-Jemla, one of the greatest Captains that ever came out
of Persia into India. His great Conduct and Courage had rendered him a person
to be reverenced by all posterity, had he been faithful to the Princes whom he
served. But first he betrayed the King of Golconda, under whom he advanced his
Fortune; and next to him Cha-jehan; under whose protection he rose so high,
that there was not a Nobleman in all India more powerful or richer than he.
Otherwise he is both beloved and feared by the Soldiers, and perfectly
understands the Art of War, according to the custom of the Country. The two
Armies engaging several times, the Victory sometimes on the one side, and
sometimes on the other; so that Sultan Mahomed finding it likely to be a
tedious War, assisted by the Counsels of his Lieutenant, resolved to add policy
to strength. Thereupon he treats underhand with the Officers of his Uncle's
Army, makes them magnificent promises, and so earnestly solicites them to come
over to Aureng-zeb's party, whom he called the Pillar and Protector of
Mahomet's Law, that he gained the principal, to whom he sent considerable
Presents, to confirm them in their resolutions. This was a mortal blow to
Sultan-Sujah, against which he could not provide. For they that adhear'd to him
being a mercenary generation, that serves whoever gives most, finding they had
little more to expect from a Prince whose Exchequer was empty, resolved to
drive a Trade with Aureng-zeb, who was Master of all the Treasure in the
Kingdom. And thus did Aureng-zeb debauch the Army of his Brother, who in the
last Battle, seeing himself abondon'd by all his Soldiers, was forced to save
himself by flight, with his Wives and Children. The Traitors ashamed of their
treachery, did not so smartly pursue the unfortunate Prince as they might have
done, but presently fell to plund'ring his Tents and Baggage; which Emir-Jemla,
suffered them to do, in recompense of their Treason. Sultan-Sujah in the mean
time crossing the Ganges with his Retinue, retired some time afterward into
the Kingdom of Arakan, upon the Confines of Bengala, where we shall leave him
for a time.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Imprisonment of Sultan-Mahomed, Aureng-zeb's eldest son; and of Sultan
Soliman Chekour, eldest son of Dara-Cha.
THough Aureng-zeb were esteemed a very great Politician, and were so indeed,
yet he failed in his Politics, to trust his Son with such a powerful Army,
under the Conduct of a Captain who had already betrayed two Masters. However at
length he began to be jealous, lest Heaven should inspire his own Son to
revenge the crimes which he had committed. And upon this, receiving
intelligence, that Sultan Mahomed began to be very pensive and melancholy, he
then absolutely believed that his Son was practicing mischief against him; for
the better discovery whereof, he wrote to Emir-Jemla. But the Letter unhappily
miscarrying, was taken by Sultan Mahomed's Guards, and given to the young
Prince; who being a person of a quick apprehension, concealed the business from
Emir-Jemla; and fearing lest he should receive other Orders more precise to
take away his life, he resolved to pass the Ganges and throw himself upon his
Uncle Sultan-Sujah; from whom he expected more mercy than from his Father. With
this resolution he feigned to go a fishing, and passing the Ganges, with
several Officers that adhered to him, he went directly to Sultan Sujah's Camp,
which lay on the other side of the River; the Sultan having raised a
considerable Force in the Kingdom of Arakan. Sultan Mohamed coming into his
Uncles presence, threw himself at his feet, begging his pardon for having taken
Arms against him, as being forced thereto by his Father. Now though Sultan
Sujah had reason enough to believe, that Mahomed's coming into his Camp, was
only a trick of his Father, to send his Son as a Spy to discover his condition;
yet being a virtuous and generous Prince, and seeing his Nephew prostrate at
his feet, he could not but raise him up; after which, embracing him, he assured
him of his Protection against Aureng-zeb. Some days after, these two Princes
made an attempt, and passing Ganges, and fetching a compass thought to have
surpised the Enemies Army, who dreamt not of their coming. They made a
vigorous onset, and killed a great number of men. But when they found the whole
Army had taken the Alarm, they contented themselves with the mischief they had
done, and repassed* the Ganges, for fear of being surrounded by number.

Emir-Jemla had already given intelligence to Aureng-zeb of the Flight of his
Son; which sensibly grieved the Father, though he durst not show his anger, for
fear of incensing the Emir to betray him, as he had betrayed his Father.
Thereupon he cunningly wrote to him, that he relied altogether upon his
prudence and policy to retrieve his Son to his duty; that he was young, and
that what he had done, was only out of his heat of youth, and the inconstancy
incident to his years. The confidence which Aureng-zeb seemed to put in
Emir-Jemla incited the General to use all his endeavors to get Mahomed out of
Sultan Sujah's hands. Thereupon he gave the young Prince to understand his
Fathers good intentions toward him, and that he was ready to receive him with
open Arms, so that he would but make good use of his Residence with Sultan
Sujah, which he might pretend was done for the advantage to his Father, and for
which his Father would have rather cause to extol his Prudence and affection
than otherwise. The young Prince easily suffered himself to be persuaded, and
the same way he went to his Uncle's, the same way he returned to his Fathers
Camp; where Emir-Jemla received him honorably, and with all the demonstrations
of joy. He advised him also, ^o tell his Father when he saw him, that he did
not go over to Sultan Sujah, but only with a design to observe what Forces he
had, and the Discipline of his Army; and that he intended to have speedily
returned, and to have given him an account of what he had done for his service.
Presently Orders came from Aureng-zeb, that his Son should be sent to him; so
that Mahomed, whether by constraint, or willingly, set forward for Jehanabat,
attended by the Guards which Emir-Jemla, had appointed. The King having notice
of his arrival, his Majesty ordered him a Lodging without the Palace, and would
not permit him to kiss his hands; pretending he was not well.

All this while Soliman Chekour, after he had been betrayed by the Raja Roup,
had continued under the protection of Nacti-Rani in the Province of Serenaguer.
This Prince, as stout as he was unfortunate, was constrained to lead a Savage
life among the Mountains, for fear of falling into the hands of Aureng-zeb, nor
could he with all his Forces do him any harm in that place. Beside Nacti-Rani
had assured him with an Oath, accompanied with all the Ceremonies that could
make it solemn, and invioable; that he would rather lose his Territo^^^, then
that Aureng-zeb should do the least violence to that protection which he
afforded him. This was done upon the Banks of a River, which passes through his
Country, where he washed his body, in token of the purity of his Soul; and
being thus purified in the Water, he made his protestations to Soliman-Chekour,
never to forsake him, taking his Gods to Witness of the sincerity of his
intentions. Upon this, Soliman-Chekour never took any farther care, but every
day went ot divertise himself with hunting. While he gives up himself to his
pleasure, Aureng-zeb marches his Army toward the Mountains, thinking to force
Nacti-Rani to surrender Soliman-Chekour into his power. But the Raja with a
thousand men being able to defend the Avenues of his Country against a hundred
thousand, Aureng-zeb finding he could do no good, that way, has recourse to
policy. He undertakes at first to treat with the Raja, but in vain, for the
Raja would not violate his Oath; and his Priests assured him besides, that
Aureng-zeb should er'e long be deposed, and that Soliman Chekour should Reign
in his room.

Aureng-zeb thus prevented, resolves to make another kind of War upon him.
Thereupon he forbids all commerce between his and the Raja's Subjects; which
was very prejudicial to the latter. This caused the people to murmur at the
protection which he had given to Soliman-Chekour; and at length they publicly
cried out, that it was to the prejudice of the Public. Their Priests also,
thus alarmed, began to doubt the truth of their Oracles, and to think it
convenient to put another interpretation upon them. But the main thing was,
that the Raja Jessomseing who had betrayed Dara-Cha, wrote privately to
Nacti-Rani, that it was for the safety of his Person and Dominions, to submit
to Aureng-zeb; and to surrender his kinsman up into his hands. This advice of
Jessomseing put him to a very great plunge; dreading on the one side the breach
of his oath; on the other, the revolt of his people. Uncertain what course to
take, he consults the Bramins, who gave their opinions that it was his duty
rather to preserve his People and his Laws, which would be both destroid,
should they fall into the hands of Aureng-zeb, than to keep his Faith with a
Prince from whom he could never expect any advantage. These consultations being
kept private from Soliman Chekour, his ruin was concluded upon, while he
thought himself most secure. Thereupon Nacti-Rani, with a Salvo, as he thought,
to his Honor and his Conscience, returned for answer to Jessomseing, that he
could not consent to betray the Prince; but that Aureng-zeb might take his
opportunity to seize his person, yet preserve his reputation too: in regard
that Soliman Chekour was wont to go a Hunting upon certain Mountains in his
Country with a small retinue, and that it would be an easy thing for him to
send a number of Soldiers sufficient to apprehend him.

So soon as Jessomseing had received this answer, he gave order to his Son to
see the business affected as the plot was laid. So that Soliman Chekour one day
going a Hunting to the usual place, was snapt by a strong party that lay in
Ambuscade. The Prince presently apprehended the treason, and defended himself
with the assistance of his Attendants, who were all slain; he himself slew
nine, but at length over-number'd, was taken and carried to Jehanabat. When he
came into Aureng-zeb's presence, the King asked him how he did? As well as a
Prisoner of yours can do, said he, who expects no better usage from you, than
his Father received before. The King bid him not be afraid, that he had no
design to put him to death, but only to secure his person. Aureng-zeb after
that, demanding of him what was become of all the Treasure which he had carried
away, the Prince made answer that he had spent a great part in raising
Soldiers against him to have ruined him, if it had been his good fortune: That
a good part was in the hands of Raja Roup, whose avarice and perfidiousness was
sufficiently known. And that Nacti-Rani had got the remainder to deliver him to
his enemies, to the prejudice of his word and honor. Aureng-zeb was surpised
and touched at the boldness of his Nephew; but ambition shutting his eyes, and
stifling all thoughts of justice, which the just remorce of Conscience might
excite within him, he gave order that Sultan Mahomet his Son, and Soliman
Chekour his Nephew should both be committed to the Fort of Goualeor to keep
Morat-Bak-che company, which was done the 30 th of Jan. 1661.

Sultan Sujah, who was yet alive, but still miserably, was the last thorn in
Aureng-zeb's foot; and the person that drew it out for him, and rid him of his
last pain, was the King of Arakan, whither the unfortunate Prince was at length
forced to retire. Who finding all his hopes to be lost, began to think of a
Pilgrimage to Mecca, and from thence to go into Persia, and implore a Sanctuary
under the protection of that Prince. To this purpose he thought he might obtain
a Vessel from the King of Arakan, or the King of Pegu, to carry him to Mecca:
but he was ignorant that neither of those Kings had any Vessels, that would
live in the main Ocean. So that he was constrian'd to stay with the King of
Arakan, an Idolater, whose Daughter he desired in Marriage, which the King
granted, and by whom he had a Son. But that which ought to have been the
greatest occasion of friendship between the Son-in-law and the Father-in-law,
was the greatest reason of their hatred and falling-out. For some Lords of the
Country, who began to be jealous of Sultan Sujah, buzzed the King of Arakan in
the ear, as if he had an intention by virtue of his Marriage, to dispossess him
of his Throne, and to leave it to his own Son. The Pagan King easily believed
what they said. Nor were these supitions ill-grounded; for Sultan Sujah having
good store of Gold and Jewels, easily corrupted several Mahumetans that lived
in the Kingdom of Arakan, and with those and about two-hunder'd men more that
had followed him after the rout of his Army, he undertook a most bold
enterprise, which was yet a mark rather of despair than courage. He appointed a
day to those of his party to force the Palace, and after they had put all the
Royal Family to the Sword, to proclaim him King of Arakan. But this Plot being
discovered the day it should have been executed, Sultan Sujah, and Sultan
Bangue, his Son, had no other way to save themselves, but by flight into the
Kingdom of Pegu. But their way lying over Mountains almost impassable, and
through thick Forests full of Tigers and Lions, and being also closely
pursued, their flight availed them little or nothing. Sultan Bangue however
being behind, to keep the Pursuers in play while his Father and his Family
gained ground, stoutly defended himself against the first Assailants, but at
length being overpowered by number, he was taken together with his two little
Brothers, his Mother and his Sisters; who were all put in Prison, where they
were very ill-us'd. But some time after, the King having a desire to marry the
eldest Sister of Sultan Bangue, they had a little more liberty allowed them.
However they enjoyed it not long, for the young Prince being of a turbulent and
ambitious spirit, plotted new treasons against the King, which being
discovered, the King immediately caused the whole Family to be put to death,
not sparing the young Princess his Wife, though she were big with Child.

As for Sultan Sujah, who was foremost among those that fled, it is more
generally thought that either he was slain by the Soldiers who were sent to
apprehend him, or that he was torn in pieces by the Tigers and Lions; of which
those Forests are full.

CHAP. VII.
Of the beginning of Aureng-zeb's Reign, and the Death of Cha-jehan his Father.
SOme days before he ascended the Throne, he sent to his Father to send him
some of his Jewels, to the end he might appear before his people with the same
magnificence as his Predecessors had done. Cha-jehan taking this request of his
Sons for an affront put upon him in Prison, fell into such a rage that he
continued mad for some days, and had like to have died upon it. In the excess
of his vexation he called several times for a Mortar and a Pestle, threatening
to beat all his Jewels to powder before his Son should have them. But
Begum-Saeheb, his eldest Daughter, never forsook him, throwing her self at his
feet, and by virtue of that criminal power which she had over him, as being
both his Daughter and his Wife, kept him from using that extremity; more out of
a design to preserve the Jewels for her self, than for her Brother, to whom she
had always been a mortal enemy. For this reason, when Aureng-zeb ascended the
Throne, he had no more than one Jewel upon his Bonnet: This Bonnet cannot be
called a Crown; and by consequence neither can the Ceremony be called a
Coronation.

At the time that Aureng-zeb took possession of the Throne, he would not eat
any wheaten-bread, nor meat, nor fish, but fed upon barley-bread, herbs and
sweetmeats, which was a kind of Penance that he imposs'd upon himself for so
many crimes.

When Aureng-zeb was settled in the Empire, several Ambassadors came to
Jehanabat to congratulate him, on the behalf of the Kings their Masters, as
from the King of the Vsbeck Tartars, the Seriff of Mecca, the Prince of
Balsara, and the Kings of Arabia Felix, and Ethiopia. The Hollanders also sent
Menheir Adrican, chief of their Factory in Surat, who was kindly received, and
first dispatched. For it is a piece of State, to keep the Ambassadors a good
while at Court before they have Audience. All these Ambassadors presented
Aureng-zeb with the rarities of their Country; who to get himself a good name
in Asia, sent them away very well satisfied.

Some months before the death of Cha-jehan Aureng-zeb sent an Ambassador into
Persia, who was magnificently received. For a month together he was nothing but
feasted and caressed with all manner of divertisements. The day that he was to
make his Present from the Great Mogul, the King of Persia sat upon his Throne
in a most magnificent habit; and having received the Embassador's Present, he
presently divided it in contempt among the Officers of his House; only keeping
for himself a Diamond that weighed sixty Carats. Some few days after he called
for the Ambassador, and after some discourse, he asked him if he were of the
Sect of the Turks? To which the Ambassador returning an answer, and letting
some words fall against Haly, the King asked him what his name was.? He replied
that Chajehan had given him the Name of Baubec-kan, that is, Lord of a free
heart; and had honored him with one of the chief employments at Court. Then
thou art a Villain, replied the King of Persia, with an angry countenance, to
desert thy Sovereign in his necessity, having received so many favors from
him, and to serve a Tyrant, that keeps his Father in Prison, and has massacr'd
all his Brothers. How dares he, pursued the King, take upon him the arrogant
Title of Alem-guir Aureng-sha, or King of all the World, who never conquered
any thing, but possesses all he has by treachery and parricide? Have thou been
one of those that counseled him to shed so much blood, to be the Executioner
of his Brothers, and to keep his Father in Prison? Thou art not worthy to wear
a Beard; and with that immediately caused it to be shaved off; which is the
greatest indignity that can be put upon a man in that Country. Shortly after
he commanded the Ambassador to return home, sending along with him for a
Present to Aureng-zeb, an hundred and fifty beautiful Horses, with a great
quantity of Gold and Silver-Carpets, Cloth of Gold, rich Shashes, and other
Stuffs, to a vast value. When Baubec-kan was come back to Agra, where the King
was then, Aureng-zeb incensed at the affront which the the Sophi of Persia had
given him in the person of his Ambassador, lie took the Horses and sent some of
them into the great Piazza, others to the corners of the Streets, causing it to
be proclaimed that the followers of Haly could not ride those Horses without
being Nigss, that is to say, unclean, as coming from a King that did not obey
the true Law. After that he caused the Horses to be killed, and all the rest of
the Present to be burnt; uttering many reproachful words against the King of
Persia, with whom he was mortally offended.

At length Cha-jehan happ'ning to dye toward the end of the year 1666.
Aureng-zeb found himself rid of an object that every hour reproached his
Tyranny; and began to enjoy himself with more delight. Soon after he received
his Sister Begum-Saheb into favor, restoring to her all her Governments, and
giving her the Name of Cha-Begum, that is to say, Pincess Queen. The truth is,
she is a Woman of Prodigious parts, and able to govern the whole Empire. And
had her Father and Brothers taken her counsel at the beginning of the War,
Aureng-zeb had never been King. As for Rauchenara Begum his Sister, she had
always taken his side, and when she heard he had taken Arms, she sent him all
the Gold and Silver she could procure. In recompense whereof he promised her,
when he came to be King, to give her the Title of Cha-Begum, and that she
should sit upon a Throne: in all which he was as good as his word; and they
continued very loving together till I was last at Genanabat: but then they were
not so good friends, upon this occasion. The Princess having cunningly stoll'n
into her Apartment a handsome young fellow, could not so privately let him out
again after she had quite tired him; but the King was advertised thereof.
Thereupon the Princess to prevent the shame and reproach, ran to the King in a
great pre^ended fright and told him that there was a man got into the Haram,
even to her very Chamber, and that his intention was certainly either to have
killed or robbed her: that such a thing was never seen; that it concerned the
safety of his Royal Person, and that he would do well to punish severely the
Eunuchs that kept guard that night. Presently the King ran in person with a
great number of Eunuchs, so that the poor young man had no way to escape but by
leaping out of a window into the River that runs by the Palace-walls; whereupon
a world of people ran out to ^eize him; the King commanding them to do him no
harm, but to carry him to the Officer of Justice: However he has not been heard
of ever since that time.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Preparations against the Feast of the Great Mogul, when he is wheigh'd
solemnly every year. Of the richness of his Thrones, and the Magnificence of
his Court.
THis great Feast begins the fifth of November, and lasts five days. They
usually weight the King at the time of his Birth; and if he weighs more than he
did the year before, there is great rejoicing. When he is weighed he seats
himself upon the richest of his Thrones; and then all the Grandees of the
Kingdom come to congratulate and present him. The Ladies of the Court send him
their Presents also, as likewise do the Governors of Provinces, and others in
great Employments. The Presents consists of Jewels, Tissues, Carpetts and other
Stuffs; besides Camels, Elephants, Horses, and indeed any thing that is rare
and of value. It Is said he receives that day thirty Millions of Livres.

They begin to prepare for this Feast the seventh of September, about two
Months before it begins. The first thing they do, is to cover the two great
Courts overhead, from the middle of each Court to the Hall, which is open upon
three sides. The Pavilions that cover these two void places, are of Purple
Velvet Embroidered with Gold, and so weighty, that the Posts which sustain them
are as big as the Mast of a Ship; some thirty, some forty foot high. There are
thirty-eight of these Posts to uphold the Tent in the first Court; and those
next the Hall, are plated with Gold as thick as a Ducket. The rest are plated
with Silver of the same thickness. The Cords are of Cotton of diverse colors;
some of them as big as a good Cable.

The first Court is surrounded with Portico's and little Chambers, where the
Omrahs keep Guard* For every eight days the Omrahs relieve the Guard; and
during those eight days, the Omrah who is upon the Guard, has a Dish of Meat
out of the Kings Kitchen. When he sees it coming afar off, he makes three obey
sances, laying his hand three times upon the Ground, and three times upon his
Head, crying out at the same time, God preserve the Kings health, give him long
Life and Victory over his Enemies. They take it for a great Honor to Guard the
King; and when they go upon the Guard, they put on all their most sumptuous
Apparel; and their Horses, Camels, and Elephants are all richly adorned. Some
of the Camels carry a small Piece of Ordnance, with a man behind to shoot it
off. The meanest of these Omrahs commands a thousand Horse; but if he be a
Prince of the Blood, he commands six thousand.

The Great Mogul has seven Thrones, some set all over with Diamonds; others
with Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls.

The largest Throne, which is set up in the Hall of the first Court, is in form
like one of our Field-Beds, six foot long, and four broad. The Cushion at the
back is round like a Bolster; the Cushions on the sides are flat.

I counted about a hundred and eight pale Rubies in Collets, about this Throne,
the least whereof weighed a hundred Carats; but there are some that weigh two
hundred Emraulds I counted about a hundred and sixty, that weighed some
threescore, some thirty Carats.

The under-part, of the Canopy is all embroidered with Pearls and Diamonds,
with a Fringe of Pearls round about. Upon the top of the Canopy, which is made
like an Arch with four Panes, stands a Peacock, with his Tail spread,
consisting all of Saphirs, and other proper colored Stones; the Body is of
beaten Gold; enchas'd with several Jewels; and a great Ruby upon his breast, at
which hangs a Pearl, that weighs fifty Carats. On each side of the Peacock
stand two Nose-gays, as high as the Bird, consisting of several sorts of
Flowers, all of beaten Gold enameled. When the King seats himself upon the
Throne, there is a transparent Jewel, with a Diamond Appendant, of eighty or
ninety Carats, encompassed with Rubies and Emraulds, so hung that it is always
in his Eye. The twelve Pillars also that uphold the Canopy, are set with rows
of fair Pearl, round, and of an excellent Water, that weigh from six to ten
Carats a piece. At the distance of four feet, upon each side of the Throne, are
placed two Parasols, or Umbrello's, the handles whereof are about eight foot
high, covered with Diamonds; the Parasols themselves are of crimson Velvet,
embroidered and fringed with Pearls.

This is the famous Throne which Tamerlane began, and Cha-jehan finished; which
is really reported to have cost a hundred and sixty Millions, and five
hundred-thousand Livres of our Money.

Behind this stately and magnificent Throne there is another less, in the form
of a Tub, where the King bathes himself; it is an Oval, seven foot long, and
five broad. The outside whereof shines all over with Diamonds and Pearls; but
there is no Canopy over it.

Coming into the first Court, on the right hand, you see a particular Tent,
where during all the Feast, the Morice-Dancers are appointed to make sport,
while the King sits upon his Trone. On the left hand is another Tent, appointed
from the Principal Officers of the Army and Household.

In the same Court, while the King sits upon his Throne, are to be seen thirty
Horses, fifteen upon one side, and fifteen upon the other, lead by two men.
Their Bridles are very short, but for the most part enriched with Diamonds,
Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls, the bits whereof are of pure Gold. Every Horse
wears between his Ears a rich Plume of Feathers, with a little Cushion upon his
Back, tied on with a Surcingle, both being embroidered with Gold; and about his
Neck hung some fair Jewel, which was either a Diamond, a Ruby, or an Emrauld.
The worst of those Horses cost three thousand, some five thousand Crowns; and
some there were, that were never bought under ten thousand. The young Prince,
who was between seven and eight years old, rode upon a Horse no higher than a
good big Greyhound, but very well shaped.

About an hour after the King has been sitting upon his Throne, seven stout
Elephants bred up for War, are brought out. One of those Elephants has his Seat
fixed upon his back, if the King should have a mind to ride out. The others are
covered with Clothes richly embroidered, with Chains of Gold and Silver about
their Necks; and there are four that carry the Kings Standard upon their
Cruppers, fastened to a Half-Pike, which a man seated on purpose close by,
holds upright with his hand. These Elephants are brought within fifty paces of
the Throne, and when they come before the King, they make their obeysances to
him, laying their Trunks to the ground, and then lifting them up above their
Heads three times; every time he makes a great cry, and then turning his back
to the King, one of the Leaders turns up the Cloth, that the King may see he
is in good case. There belongs also to every one a Cord, which is put round his
body, to show how much he is grown since the last year. The first of these
Elephants, which the King most esteems, is a great furious Creature, that has
five hundred Roupies allowed him every month. He is fed with good Victuals, and
a great quantity of Sucre, and they give him Aqua-vitae to drink. When the King
rides forth upon his Elephant, the Omrahs follow on Horseback. And when he
rides on Horseback, the Omrahs follow him on foot.

After the King has seen his Elephants, he rises up, and goes into his Haram
through a little oval door behind the Throne.

The five other Thrones are set up in another magnificent Hall in another
Court, all covered over with Diamonds, without any colored Stone.

When the King has staid about half an hour, he comes out again, attended by
three or four Eunuchs, and seats himself in the other Hall, upon the middlemost
of the five Thrones, where the Omrahs come, as long as the five days of the
Festival last, and make their Presents to him.

CHAP. IX.
Some other Observations upon the Court of the Great Mogul.
AFter Aureng-zeb had settled himself in the Empire, which he usurped from his
Father and his Brothers, he imposed upon himself a very severe penance, eating
nothing but Pulse and Sweetmeats, which has made him very meagre and lean. All
the time the Comet lasted in the year 1665, which appeared very great in the
Indies, where I then was, Aureng-zeb drank nothing but Water, and eat nothing
but Bread made of Millet; which so impaired his health, that it had like to
have cost him his life. Besides, he always lay upon the ground, only with a
Tigers Skin under him; since which time he has never been perfectly well.

I saw him drink three several times, while he sat upon his Throne; to which
purpose he had brought him a large Cup of Crystal of the Rock, round and all of
a piece, with a Gold Cover, enriched with Diamonds, Rubies, and Emraulds, the
foot thereof being of the same. But no persons see the King eat, only his Wives
and his Eunuchs. And it is but very rarely that he goes to Dine or Sup with any
of his Subjects. When I was last in India, Giafer-Kan, who was his Grand
Vizier, and his Uncle by marriage of his Wife, invited the King to see a new
Palace which he was building, who went accordingly, and it was the greatest
Honor his Majesty could do him; in retaliation whereof, Giafer-Kan, and his
Wife presented him with Jewels, Elephants, Camels, Horses, and other things, to
the value of a Million and fifty thousand Livres of our Money. For Giafer-Kan's
Wife is the most magnificent and liberal Woman in all India, and spends more
her self than all the Kings Wives and Daughters, which makes her Husband in
debt, though he be almost Lord of all the Empire.

When the King is carried in his Palleki to the Mosquee, one of his Sons
follows him, a Horseback, and all his Omrahs and officers of his Household come
behind him a foot. Those that are Mahumetans stay for him at the top of the
ascent to the Mosquee, and when he is ready to come out, they march before him
to the Gate of his Palace. Eight Elephants always go before the King, to every
one of which belong two men; one to lead the Elephant, and the other, who sits
upon his back, carries a Standard fixed to a Half-Pike. The other four carry
Seats or Thrones upon their backs, the one square, the other round; one
covered, the other enclosed with Glass of several fashions. When the King goes
abroad, he has usually five or six hundred men to attend him for his Guard,
armed every one with a kind of an Half-Pike. To the heads of their Pikes they
tie two Squibs cross-wise, about a foot long, and as big as a man's Arm, which
will carry the Half-Pike five hundred paces. The King is also attended by three
or four hundred Musquateers; but they are very Cowards, and hardly know how to
shoot off their pieces. He has also a certain number of Cavalry, which are
Soldiers much alike. A hundred Europeans might well beat a thousand Indians;
but they would hardly accustom themselves to live such sober lives. For as well
the Horse as the Infantry will live upon Meal kneaded with Water and brown
Sugar; but in the evening, when they have convenience, they make Quichery,
which is Rice boiled in Water and Salt, with a Grain, so called. When they eat
it, they stir it with the ends of their Fingers in melted Butter, which is the
usual food of the Soldiers and poor people. Beside, the heat would kill our
Soldiers, who would never be able to endure the Sun all the day long, as the
Indians do. By the way, give me leave to tell you, that the Country people have
no other clothing than a piece of Linen to hide their secret parts, being
miserable poor; for if their Governors know they have any thing about them,
they seize it either as their right, or by force. There are some Provinces in
India that lie waste, the Natives being forced to fly, by reason of the cruelty
of their Governors. Under the pretense of being Mahumetans they persecute the
poor Idolaters beyond all measure; and if any one of them embrace Mahumetism,
it is only because they would not work any longer. For they turn Soldiers or
Faquirs, who are a sort of people that profess a renunciation of the World, and
live upon Alms, but are indeed very Rascals. They reckon that there are in
India 800000 of these Mahumetan Faquirs, and twelve hunder'd-thousand Idolaters.

Once in fifteen days the King goes a Hunting, mounted upon his Elephant, and
so continues during the chase. All the Game he takes is brought within
Musketshot of his Elephants. Which consists generally of Lions, Tigers, Hearts,
and wild-Goats. For they will not meddle with Boars, as being Mahumetans. When
he returns home, he puts himself into his Palleki, and goes in the same order,
and with the same Guard, as when he returns from the Mosquee, saving that when
he goes a Hunting, he is attended with three or four-hunder'd Horsemen, that
ride without any discipline in the World.

As for the Princesses, as well the Wives, Daughters and Sisters of the King,
they never stir out of the Palace, unless it be to spend a few days in the
Country for their pleasure. Some of them go abroad, but very rarely, to visit
some great Noble-mens Wives, as the Wife of Giafer-Kan, who is the King's Aunt.
But that is only by particular leave of the King. And then it is not the custom
as in Persia, where the Ladies make their visits only by night, and with a
great number of Eunuchs, who clear the Streets of all people they meet. For in
the Mogul's Court, they usually go out about nine in the morning, with only
three or four Eunuchs, and ten or twelve Slaves, which are instead of Maids of
Honor.

The Princesses are carried in Palleki's covered over with Embroidered
Tapestry, and a little Coach to hold one single person that follows the
Palleki, drawn by two men, the wheels not being above a foot in diameter. The
reason why they carry that Coach along with them, is, because that when the
Princesses arrive at the House where they intend to alight, the men that carry
the Palliki, not being permitted to go any farther than the first Gate, they
then take their Coaches, and are drawn by their female-Slaves to the Women's
Apartment. I have also observed, that in all the Houses of great Noblemen, the
Women's Apartment is at the farther end of all. So that you must cross two or
three great Courts, and a Garden or two, before you can come at it.

When the Princesses are married to any of the Court-Grandees, they become
absolute Mistresses of their Husbands; so that if they study not to please
them, and do not as they would have them, in regard of their free access to the
King they overruled the King many times to their prejudice, even to the turning
them out of their Employments.

As it is a custom that the firstborn always is Heir to the Throne, though he
be the Son of a Slave, so soon as the Princesses of the King's Haram perceive
that there is any one among them big with Child, they use all the artifices
imaginable to make them miscarry. Insomuch that being at Patna in the year
1666, Cha-Est-Kan's Surgeon assured me, that the Wife of Cha-Est-Kan had
procured the miscarrying of eight Women, because she would suffer no other
Women's Children but her own.

CHAP. X.
Of the Commodities which are brought as well out of the Dominions of the Great
Mogul, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighboring
Territories.
IT will be necessary for the Reader to take notice what I have already said
concerning the weights and Measures in use among the Indians, where I spoke
concerning the Mines, and the Serre. Now for the Cobit.

The Cobit is a measure for all Commodities that are measured by the Ell, of
which there are several sorts, as in Europe there are several sorts of Else.
The Cobit is divided into 24 Tasots: and in regard the greatest part of the
Commodities of India are uttered at Surat, I have given you a description in
the margin of the fourth part of a Surat-Cobit, divided into six Tasots.

Of their Silk.
KAsembasar, a Village in the Kingdom of Bengala, sends abroad every year two
and twenty-thousand Bales of Silk; every Bale weighing a hundred pound. The
two and twenty Bales make two millions and two-hunder'd-thousand pound, at
sixteen ounces to the pound. The Hollanders usually carry away six or
seven-thousand Bales, and would carry away more, did not the Merchants of
Tartary, and the Mogul's Empire oppose them: for they buy up as much as the
Hollander; the rest the Natives keep to make their Stuffs. This Silk is all
brought into the Kingdom of Guzerat, the greatest part whereof comes to
Amadabat, and to Surat, where it is wrought up.

In the first place they make Carpets of Silk and Gold, others of Silk and
Silver, others all of Silk: For the Worsted Carpets are made at Vettapour, some
twelve leagues from Agra.

In the second place they make Satins with streaks of Gold and Silver; others
plain; with Tassata's after the same fashion.

In the third place they make Patoles, which are a sort of Silk-stuff very
thin, but painted with all sorts of Flowers, the manufacture whereof is at
Amadabat. They cost from eight Roupies to forty the piece. This is a Commodity
wherein The Dutch will not suffer any one of the Hollanders to trade in
particular: for they transport it to the Philippine-Islands, to the Islands of
Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other neighboring Islands.

The raw-Silk of Kasembasar is yellowish, as are all the raw-Silks that come
from Persia and Sicily; but the Natives of Kasembasar have a way to whiten it,
with a Lie made of the Ashes of a Tree which they call Adam's Fig Tree; which
makes it as white as the Palestine-Silk. The Hollanders send away all their
Merchandise which they fetch out of Bengala, by water, through a great Canal
that runs from Kasembasar into Ganges, for fifteen leagues together; from
whence it is as far by water down the Ganges to Ouguely, where they laid their
Ships.

Of the Calicuts: and first of the painted Calicuts, called Chites.
CHites or Painted Calicuts, which they call Calmendar, that is to say, done
with a Pencil, are made in the Kingdom of Golconda; and particularly about
Maslipatan. But there is made so little, that though a man should employ all
the Workmen that understand the art of weaving Calicuts, he would hardly find
enough to make three Bales.

The Chites which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogul are all Printed;
and nothing so beautiful, neither for the figures nor the fineness of the
Linen. Those which are made at Lahor, are the coarsest, and consequently the
cheapest of all. They are sold by Corges, every Corge consisting of twenty
pieces, which cost from 16 to 30 Roupies.

The Chites which are made at Seronge, are sold from 20 to 50 Roupies the
Corge, or thereabouts.

These Chites serve for Coverlets for Beds, for Sofra's or Table-cloaths after
the Countrey-fashion, Pillowbears, Handkerchiefs, but more especially for
Wastcoats as well for men as women in Persia.

The fine Calicut- Chites are made at Brampour; and are used for handkerchiefs
by those that snuff Tobacco.

The women also, over all Asia, make Veils of these Calicuts, to wear over
their heads, and about their shoulders, which Veils are called Ormis.

The Basta's or Calicuts painted red, blue, and black, are carr'id white to
Agra, and Amadabat, in regard those Cities are nearest to the places where the
Indigo is made that is used in coloring. They cost from two Roupies to 30 or
40 a-piece, according to the fineness and the quantity of Gold at the ends, and
sometimes upon the sides. The Indians have a way to dip some of these Calicuts
in a certain water that makes them look like Water'd-Chamlets, which adds also
to the price.

That sort which is sold for two Roupies, and so onward till ye come to twelve,
is transported to the Coast of Melinda, and it is the greatest Trade the
Governor of Mozambique drives, who sells them to the Cafres, that vend them
again among the Abyssins, and into the Kingdom of Saba: for those people not
understanding the use of Soap, need no more but only to wash these Calicuts in
water. That sort which is valued from 12 Roupies upward, is transported to the
Philippine-Islands, the Islands of Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other adjacent
places. Where the women wear no other clothes, than a single piece of this
Calicut. One part whereof, without cutting it, serves for a Petticoat; the
other they wind about their stomachs and their heads.

White Calicuts.
WHite Calicuts come partly from Agra, and about Lahor, part from Bengala: some
from Brouda, Baroche, Renonsari, and other places. They are brought out of the
Loom to Renonsari, and Baroche, where they are whitened by reason of the
convenience of their Meadows, and the great store of Limons, that grow
thereabouts. For the Calicuts are never so white as they should be, till they
are dipped in Limon-water.

The Calicuts that come from Agra, Lahor, and Bengala, are sold by the Corge,
and they are of several prices, from seventeen Roupies to three or
four-hunder'd, as the Merchant will have them wov'n.

The Calicuts that come from Renonsari, and Baroche, are one and twenty cubits
long, new out of the Loom; but in the whitening they shrunk to twenty cubits.

Those of Brouda twenty cubits from the Loom, and shrink in the whitening to
nineteen and a half.

All the Calicuts or Bafta's that come from these three Cities, are of two
sorts: for some are broad, some are narrow. The narrow are those I have already
mentioned, the prices whereof are various, from two Mamoudi's to six.

The broad Bafta's are a cubit, and one third part wide; the whole piece twenty
cubits long. The usual price of them is from five Mamoudi's to twelve: but a
Merchant being upon the place, may cause them to be made much more large and
fine, till they are worth five-hunder'd Mamoudi's a-piece. I saw two pieces
sold for a thousand Mamoudi's.

The English bought one, and the Hollanders another, each piece containing
eight and twenty cubits.

Mahamed Alibeg returning into Persia out of India, where he had been
Ambassador, presented Cha-S^f the second with a Coco-nut, about the bigness of
an Austrich-egg, all beset with Pearls: and when it was opened there was taken
out of it a Turbant that had sixty cubits of Calicut in length to make it, the
Cloth being so fine, that you could hardly feel it in your hand. For they will
spin their thread so fine, that the eye can hardly discern it, or at least it
seems to be but a Cobweb.

Twisted-Cotton.
COtton twisted and untwisted comes from the Provinces of Brampour and Guzerat.
Untwisted Cotton is never transported into Europe, being too cumbersome, and of
little value; only they send it to Ormus, Balsara, and sometimes to the
Philippine-Islands, and the Islands of Sinde. As for the twisted Cottons, the
English and Hillo nders transport a good quantity, not of the finest, but of
that sort which is prized from fifteen to fifty Mamoudi's: It serves for wicks
for Candles, for Packsaddles, and for the ground of Silk-stuffs.

Indigo.
INdigo comes from several parts of the great Mogul's Empire; and according to
the diversity of the places it differs in quality, and consequently in price.
In the first place, it comes from the Territories of Biana, Indoua, and Corsae,
a day or two's journey from Agra: which is esteemed the best of all. It is made
also eight days journey from Surat, in a Village called Sarquess, two leagues
distance from Amadabat. Here the flat Indigo is made. There is also Indigo
little inferior in goodness and price, which comes from the King of Golconda's
Territories. The Mein of Surat, which contains 42 Serre's, or 34 and a half of
our pounds, is valued from 15 to 20 Roupies. They make as good as this at
Baroche. That which is made up about Agra is made up in half Balls, and is the
most sought for in all India. It is sold by the Mein, which in those places
contains 60 Serres, or 51 and three quarters of our pounds. The usual price is
from 36 to 40 Roupies. There grows also Indico some 36 leagues from Brampour,
about a great Village called Raout, and round about the neighboring Towns in
the road to Surat: of which the Natives usually make above a hunder'd-thousand
Roupies.

There comes Indigo also from Bengala, which the Holland-Company transports for
Maslipatan. But they buy this Indigo, and that of Brampour and Amadabat,
cheaper by twenty four in the hundred, than that of Agra.

Indigo is made of an Herb which they sow every year after the rains are over:
which when it is grown up, is very like our Hemp. They cut it three times a
year; first when it is about two or three foot high; and they cut it within
half a foot of the ground; the first cutting far exceeds the two latter. The
second cutting is worse than the first by ten or twelve in the hundred, and
the third worse than the second by twelve in the hundred. The difference is
found by breaking a piece of the Paste, and observing the color. The color of
that Indigo which is made of the first cutting, is a violet-blue, but more
brisk and lively than the two others: and that which is made of the second is
more lively than the third.

When they have cut the Herb, they throw it unto Pits which they make with
Lime, which becomes so hard, that you would judge it to be one entire piece of
Marble. They are generally fourscore or a hundred paces in circuit; and being
half full of water, they fill them quite up with the Herb. Then they bruise and
jumble it in the water till the leaf, for the stalk is worth nothing, become
like a kind of thick mud. This being done, they let it settle for some days;
and when the settling is all at the bottom, and the water clear above, they let
out all the water. When the water is as drained out, they fill several baskets
wit hthis slime, and in a plain Field you shall see several men at work, every
one at his own basket, making up little pieces of Indigo flat at the bottom, at
the top sharp like an egg. Though at Amadabat they make their pieces quite flat
like a small cake. Here you are to take particular notice, that the Merchants,
because they would not pay custom for an unnecessary weight, before they
transport their Indigo out of Asia into Europe, are very careful to cause it to
be sifted, to separate the dust from it; which they fell afterward to the
Natives of the Country to dye their Calicuts. They that sift this Indigo must
be careful to keep a Linnen-cloath before their faces, andthat their nostrils
be well-stopt, leaving only two littles holes for their eyes. Besides, they
must every half hour be sure to drink milk, which is a great preservative
against the piercing quality of the dust. Yet notwithstanding all this caution,
they that have sifted Indigo for nine or ten days, shall spit nothing but blew
for a good while together. Once I laid an Egg in the morning among the sifters,
and when I came to break it in the evening it was all blew within.

As they take the Paste out of the Baskets with their Fingers dipped in Oil, and
make it into Lumps, or Cakes they lay them in the Sun to dry. Which is the
reason that when the Merchants buy Indigo, they burn some pieces of it, to try
whether there be any dust among it. For the Natives who take the Paste out of
the Baskets to make it into Lumps, lay it in the Sand, which mixes with the
Paste, and fouls it. But when the Merchants burn it, the Indigo turns to Ashes,
and the Sand remains. The Governors do what they can to make the Natives leave
their Knavery; but notwithstanding all their care, there will be some deceit.

Saltpeter.
GReat store of Saltpeter comes from Agra and Patna; but the refined costs
three times more than that which is not. The Hollanders have set up a
Warehouse fourteen Leagues above Patna, and when their Saltpeter is refined,
they transport it by Water by Ogueli. A Mein of refined Saltpeter is worth
seven Mamoudi's.

Spice.
CArdamom, Ginger, Pepper, Nutmegs, Nutmeg-Flowers, Cloves and Cinnamon, are
all the different sorts of Spices known to us. I put Cardamom, and Ginger in
the first place because that Cardamom grows in the Territories of Visapour, and
Ginger in the Dominions of the Great Mogul. And as for other Spices, they are
brought from other Foreign parts to Surat, which is the grand Mart.

Cardamom is the most excellent of all other Spices, but it is very scarce; and
in regard there is no great store in the place where it grows, it is only made
use of in Asia, at the Tables of great Princes. Five hundred pound of
Cardamoms, are prized from a hundred to a hundred and ten Reals.

Ginger is brought in great quantities from Amadabat, where there grows more
than in any other part of Asia; and it is hardly to be imagined how much there
is transported candied into Foreign parts.

Pepper is of two sorts. There is a sort which is very small, another sort much
bigger; both which sorts are distinguished into small and great Pepper. The
larger sort comes from the Coast of Malavare; and Tuticorin and Calicut are the
Cities where it is brought up. Some of this Pepper comes from the Territories
of the King of Visapour, being vended at Rejapour, a little City in that
Kingdom. The Hollanders that purchase it of the Malavares, do not give Money
for it, but several sorts of Commodities in Exchange; as Cotton, Opium,
Vermillion, and Quicksilver; and this is the Pepper which is brought into
Europe. As for the little Pepper that comes from Bantam, Afchen, and some other
parts toward the East, there is none of it carried out of Asia, where it is
'spent in vast quantities, especially among the Mahumetans. For there are
double the Grains of small Pepper in one pound, to what there are of the great
Pepper; besides that the great Pepper is hotter in the mouth.

The little Pepper that comes to Surat, has been sold some years for thirteen
or fourteen Mamoudi's the Mein; and so much I have seen the English give for
it, to transport it to Ormus, Balsara; and the Red Sea. As for the great Pepper
which the Hollanders fetch from the Coast of Malavare, five hundred pound in
truck brings them in not above thirty-eight Reals; but by the Commodities which
they give in Barter, they gain Cent, per Cent.

The Nutmeg, the Nutmeg-Flow'r, the Clove, and Cinnamon, are the only Spices
which the Hollanders have in their own hands. The three first come from the
Molucca Islands; the fourth, which is Cinnamon, from the Island of Ceylan:

It Is observable of the Nutmeg, that the Tree which bears it is never planted,
which has been confirmed to me by several persons that have lived several years
in the Country. They related to me, that the Nutmeg being ripe, several Birds
come from the Islands toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forced to
throw it up again before it be digested. The Nutmeg then besmeared with a
viscous matter, falling to the ground takes root, and produces a Tree, which
would never thrive were it planted. This puts me in mind of making one
observation upon the Birds of Paradise. These Birds being very greedy after
Nutmegs, come in flights to gorge themseves with the pleasing Spice, at the
season, like Felfares in Vintage time; but the strength of the Nutmeg so
intoxicates them, that they fall dead drunk to the Earth, where the Emets in a
short time eat off their Legs. Hence it comes, that the Birds of Paradise are
said to have no Feet; which is not true however, for I have seen three or four
that had Feet; and a French Merchant sent one from Aleppo as a Present to Lewis
the Thirteenth that had Feet; of which the King made great account, as being a
very lovely Fowl.

But notwithstanding all the Hollanders Projects, you may buy Cloves at
Macassar without purchasing them of the Hollander; in regard the Islanders buy
them of the Dutch Captains and Soldiers, which the Hollanders have in those
places where the Cloves grow, giving them in exchange Rice, and other
necessaries for the support of life, without which they would starve, being
very sadly provided for.

When the Natives of Macassar are thus furnished of Cloves, they barter them in
Exchange for such Commodities as are brought them; sometines they give
Tortoise-Shells in exchange, and Gold Dust; by which the Merchant gains six or
seven in the hundred, being better than the Money of the Island, though it be
Gold, by reason the King ofttimes enhances the value of it. The places where
Cloves grow, are Amboyna, Ellias, Seram, and Bouro.

The Islands of Banda also, in number six, viz. Nero, Lontour, Poulcay,
Roseguin, and Grenapuis, bear Nutmegs, in great abundance. The Island of
Grenapuis is about six Leagues in compass, and ends in a sharp point, where
there is a continual fire burning out of the Earth. The Island of Damme, where
there grows great store of Nutmegs, and very big, was discovered in the year
1647, by Abel Ta^man, a Dutch Commander.

The price of Cloves and Nutmegs, as I have known them sold to the Hollanders
at Sarat, was as follows.

The Mein of Surat contains forty Serres, which make thirty-four of our Pounds,
at sixteen Ounces to the Pound.

A Mein of Cloves was sold for a hundred and there Mamoudi's and a half.

A Mein of Mace was sold for a hundred and fifty-seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Nutmegs for fifty-six Mamoudi's and a half.

Cinnamon comes at Present from the Island of Ceylan. The Tree that bears it is
very much like the Willow, and has three Barks. They never take off but the
first and second, which is accounted the best. They never meddle with the
third, for should the Knife enter that, the Tree would dye. So that it is an
art to take off the Cinnamon, which they learn from their youth. The Cinnamon
Spice is much dearer to the Hollanders than people think; for the King of
Ceylan, otherwise called King of Candy, from the name of his principal City,
being a sworn Enemy to the Hollanders, sends his Forces with an intention to
surprise them, when they gather their Cinnamon; so that they are forced to
bring seven or eight hundred men together to defend as many more that are at
work. Which great expense of theirs very much enhances the price of the
Cinnamon. There grows upon the Cinnamon Tree a certain fruit like an Olive,
though not to be eaten. This the Portugals were wont to put into a Caldron of
Water, together with the tops of the Branches, and boiled it till the Water was
all consumed. When it was cold, the upper part became a Paste like white Wax;
of which they made Tapers to set up in their Churches, for no sooner were the
Tapers lighted, but all the Church was perfumed. Formerly the Portugals brought
Cinnamon out of other Countries, belonging to the Raja's about Cochin. But the
Hollanders have destroyed all those places, so that the Cinnamon is now in
their hands. When the Portugals had that Coast, the English bought their
Cinnamon of them, and usually paid for it by the Mein fifty Mamoudi's.

Drugs that are brought to Surat, and brought from other Countries, with the
price of every one by the Mein.
Salt Armoniack, according to the usual price, costs by the Mein twenty
Mamoudi's.

Borax, comes unrefin'd from Amadabat, as does Salt Armoniack, and costs by the
Mein thirty-five Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lack, seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Gum-Lack washed, ten Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lack in sticks of Wax, forty Mamoudi's.

There are some of these Sticks that cost fifty or sixty Mamoudi's the Mein,
and more when they mix Musk in the Gum.

Saffron of Surat, which is good for nothing but for coloring, four Mamoudi's
and a half.

Cumin White, eight Mamoudi's.

Cumin Black, three Mamoudi's.

Arlet small, three Mamoudi's.

Frankincense, that comes from the Coast of Arabia, three Mamoudi's.

Myrrh, that which is good, called Mirra Gilet, thirty Mamoudi's.

Myrrh Bolti, which comes from Arabia, fifteen Mamoudi's.

Cassia, two Mamoudi's.

Sugar Candy, eighteen Mamoudi's.

Asutinat, a sort of Grain, very hot, one Mamoudi.

Annise-Seed Gross, three Mamoudi's and a half.

Annise-Seed small and hot, one Mamoudi and a half.

Oupelote, a Root, fourteen Mamoudi's.

Cointre, five Mamoudi's.

Auzerout, from Persia, a hundred and twenty Mamoudi's.

Aloes Succotrine, from Arabia, twenty eight Mamoudi's.

Licorice, four Mamoudi's.

Lignum Aloes, in great pieces, two hundred Mamoudi's.

Lignum Aloes, in small pieces, four hundred Mamoudi's.

Vez-Cabouli, a certain Root, twelve Mamoudi's.

There is a sort of Lignum Aloes very Gummy, which comes to, by the Mein, four
thousand Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lake for the most part comes from Pegu; yet there is some also brought
from Bengala, where it is very dear, by reason the Natives fetch that lively
Scarlet color out of it, with which they paint their Calicuts. Nevertheless,
the Hollanders buy it, and carry it into Persia for the same use of painting.
That which remains after the color is drawn off, is only fit to make fealing
Wax. That which comes from Pegu is not so dear, though as good for other
Countries. The difference is only this, that it is not so clean in Pegu, where
the Pismires foul it, as in Bengala, where it grows in a healthy place, full of
Shrubs, where those Animals cannot so well come at it. The Inhabitants of Pegu
never make any use of it in painting, being a dull sort of people, that are in
nothing at all industrious.

The women of Surat get their livings by cleansing the Lake after the Scarlet
color is drawn from it. After that they give it what color they please, and
make it up into Sticks for sealing Wax. The English and Holland Company carry
away every year a hundred and fifty Chests. The price is about ten Sous the
pound.

Powdered Sugar is brought in great quantities out of the Kingdom of Bengala;
it causes also a very great Trade at Ougeli, Patna, Daca, and other places. I
have been told it for a very great certainty, by several ancient people in
Bengala, that Sugar being kept thirty years becomes absolute poison, and that
there is no Venom more dangerous, or that sooner works its effect. Loaf-Sugar
is also made at Amadabat, where they are perfectly skilled in refining it; for
which reason it is called Sugar Royal. The Sugar-Loaves usually weigh from
eight to ten pound.

Opium is brought from Brampour, a Town of good Trade between Agra and Surat.
The Hollanders buy great quantities, which they truck for their Pepper.

Tobacco also grows in abundance round about Brampour; sometimes there has been
so much that the Natives have let vast quantities rot upon the ground, for want
of gathering.

Coffee grows neither in Persia nor in India, where it is in no request; but
the Hollanders drive a great Trade in it, transporting it from Ormus into
Persia as far as Great Tartary, from Balsara into Caldea, Arabia, Mesopotamia,
and other Provinces of Turkey. It was first found out by a Hermit, whose name
was Scheck-Siadeli, about twenty-years ago, before which time it was never
heard of in any Author either ancient or modern.

Deceits in Silk Wares.
Plain Silk Wares may be altered in length, breadth, and quality. The quality
shows it self when they are of an even thread, when the weight is equal, and
when there is no Cotton thread in the West.

The Indians not having the art of guilding silver, put into their stripped
Wares threads of pure Gold, so that you must count the quantity of Gold threads
to see whether the Silk have its due number. And this also you must observe in
your Silks wov'n with Silver. As for Taffata's, your are only to mind whether
the pieces be all of a fiineness, and to see by unfolding some of them, that
there be nothing within to augment the weight, and then weighing all the pieces
by themselves, to see that they all agree.

The colors of those Carpetts which are made in India, do not last so long as
the color of those which are made in Persia; but for the Workmanship it is
very lovely. The eye of the Broaker is to judge of the largeness, beauty, and
fineness of those Carpetts which are wrought with Gold and Silver, and whether
they be fine and rich. But whether they be Carpetts, or other Stuffs mixed with
Gold and Silver, it behooves the Buyer to pull out some of the Gold and Silver
Threads, to see whether they be of the right value or no.

Deceits in the White Calicuts.
The deceits usually put upon Calicuts, are in fineness length, and breadth.
Every Bale may contain two hundred pieces; among which they will juggle in five
or six or ten, less fine, or less white, shorter and narrower than according to
the scantling of the Bale, which cannot be found out but by examining them
piece by piece. The fineness is discerned by the eye, the length and breadth by
the measure. But the Indians practice a more cunning way, which is to count the
number of threads which ought to be in the breadth, according to the fineness
of the scantling. When the number fails, it is either more transparent, more
narrow, or more course. The difference is sometimes so difficult to be
perceived, that there is no way to find it out but by counting the threads. And
yet this difference in a great quantity comes to a great deal. For it is
nothing to cosen a Crown or two Crowns, in a piece that comes but to fifteen
or twenty Crowns. Those that whiten these Calicuts, to save charges of a few
Limons, will knock the Calicuts excessively upon a Stone, which does fine
Calicuts a great injury, and loars the price.

As for their Calicuts died blew or black, you must take care that the Workmen
do not knock them after they are folded, to make them look sleek; for many
times when they come to be unfolded, you shall find holes in the creases.

As for your painted and printed Calicuts, which are painted and printed as
they come out of the Loom, the Merchant must take care that what he bespeaks be
finished before the end of the Rains, for the thicker the Water is where they
are washed, the more lively will the printed and painted colors appear. It is
easy to distinguish between the printed and the painted Calicuts; and between
the neatness of the work: but for the fineness and other qualities, they are
not so easily discerned; and therefore the Broaker must be more careful.

Cheats in Cotton.
THE cheat in the weight is twofold. The first, by laying them in a moist
place; and thrusting in the middle of every Skain something to add to the
weight. The second, in not giving good weight when the Broaker receives it from
the Workman, or Merchant that delivers it.

There is but one cheat in the quality, that is by putting three or four
Skains, of a coarser Commodity than that which is uppermost, into one Mein.
Which in a great quantity mounts high; for there are some Cottons that are
worth an hundred Crowns the Men. These two cheats being often used by the
Holland-Company, there is no way but to weigh your Commodity in the presence of
the Dutch-Commander, and his Council, and to examine every Mein, Skain by
Skain. When this is done, they who are ordered to be at this examination, are
obliged to fix to every Bale a ticket of the weight and quality: for if there
be a faileur, they who fix the ticket are engaged to make good what is wanting.

Deceits in Indigo.
I Have told you, that when the Workmen have made up the Indigo-Paste into
lumps, with their singers dipped in Oil, they lay them in the Sun a drying. Now
those that have a design to cheat the Merchants, dry them in the sand, to the
end that the sand sticking to the Indigo, should increase the weight. Sometimes
they lay up their Paste in moist places, which makes it give, and consequently
renders it more heavy. But if the Governor of the place discovers the cheat,
he makes them severely pay for it: and the best way of discovery is to burn some
pieces of Indigo, for the sand will remain.

Indian Broakers.
THE Broakers are as it were the Masters of the Indian Families; for they have
all Goods at their disposal. The Workmen choose the most aged and most
experienced, who are to endeavor equal advantages for the whole Tribe they
undertake for Every evening that they return from their business, and that,
according to the custom of the Indians, who make no Suppers, they have eaten
some little piece of Sweet-meat, and drank a glass of water, the eldest of the
Tribe meet at the Broaker's House, who gives them an account of what he has
done that day, and then they consult what he is to do next. Above all things,
they caution him to look to his hits, and to cheat, rather than be cheated.

CHAP. XI.
Of Diamonds, and the Mines and Rivers where they are found; and first of the
Author's journey to the Mine of Raolconda.
THE Diamond is the most precious of all Stones, and it was in that sort of
Commodity wherein I most dealt. And therefore to acquire a perfect experience,
I went to all the Mines; and to one of the Rivers where they are found. To
which purpose I traveled to four Mines; of which I will give you a
description; and of one of the Rivers where I have also been.

The first of these Mines, where I was, is in the Territories of the King of
Visopour, in the Province of Carnatica; and the place is called Raolconda, five
days journey from Golconda, and eight or nine from Visapour. This Mine was
discovered not above two-hunder'd years ago, as I was Informed by those of the
Country.

Round about the place where the Diamonds are found, the ground is sandy, full
of Rocks, much resembling the parts near Fountain-Bleau. There are in the Rocks
several veins, some half a finger, some a whole finger-wide: And the Miners
make use of Irons with hooks at the end, with which they pick out the earth or
Sand, which they put into tubs, and among that earth, they find the Diamonds.
But because these veins do not run always straight, but sometimes down,
sometimes upward, the Miners are constrained to break the Rock, following
always the train of the veins: When they have opened all the veins, and taken
out all the sand, then they wash it two or three times over to look for the
Diamonds. In this Mine it is that they find the cleanest Stones, and of the
whitest water. But the mischief is, that to fetch the sand out of the Rock,
they are forced to strike such terrible blows with a great Iron-leaver, that
they flaw the Diamond, and make it look like Crystal. Which is the reason there
are found so many soft Stones in this Diamond-Mine, though they make a great
show. If the Stone be clean, they only give it a turn or two upon the wheel,
not caring to shape it, for fear of losing the weight. If there be any flaws,
or any points, or any black or red specks in it, they cut all the Stone into
Fossets, to hide the defect. Now because a Merchant desires rather to have a
black speck than a red one; it is but burning the Stone, and the speck becomes
black. This trick at length I understood so well, that when I saw any Stones in
them that came from the Mine made into Fossets, especially very small ones, I
was certain there was either some speck or some flaw in the Stone.

There are several Diamond-Cutters at this Mine, but none of them have above
one Mill, which is of Steel. They never cut but one Stone at a time upon each
Mill, casting water continually upon the Mill, to find out the grain of the
Stone; which being found they pour on Oil, (not sp^^ing for powder of Diamonds
though it be very dear,) to make the Stone slide the faster; and they lay on
more weight than we do. I have seen them lay upon one Stone an hundred and
fifty pound of Lead. I must confess it was a great Stone, which weighed an
hundred and three Carats, after it was cut; and the Mill was like ours, only
the great Wheel was turned by four Negros. The Indians are not of the same
opinion that we are; for they do not believe that the weight gives any luster
to the Stones. If theirs be not subject to take their luster, it is because
there is always a Boy that stands with a thin woodden-slice in his hand, and
waters the Wheel continually with Oil and Powder of Diamonds. Besides, their
Wheel does not go so fast as ours, because the Woodden-wheel that turns the
Steel-wheel, is not above three foot in Diameter.

They cannot give that lively polishment to Stones, as we give to ours in
Europe; and I believe the reason to be, because their Wheel does not run so
flat as ours. For in regard it is of Steel, to rub it upon the Emeril, as must
be done every four and twenty hours, the Tree must be taken off, which can
never be put on again so as to run so flat as it did. Had they the invention of
Iron-mills, upon which they never use Emeril, but only the File, because their
is no necessity to take off the Tree to file the Mill, they might polish their
Stones better than they do. I have told you they must eithe rub the Mill with
Emeril, or file it every four and twenty hours. For when the Stone has run for
some time, that part of the Mill becomes as smooth and bright as glass: so that
if you do not rough it again either with Emeril or the File, the powder will
not stay; whereas if the powder stay, there is more work done in an hour than
otherwise in two.

Though a Diamond be naturally very hard, having a kind of a knot, as you see
in wood, the Indian Lapidaries will cut the Stone, which our European
Lapidaries find great difficulty to do, and usually will not undertake to
perform; which makes the Indians require something more for the fashion.

As for the Government of the Mines, they trade very freely, and very
faithfully. They pay two per cent. to the King for all that they buy: besides
that, he has also a duty from the Merchants for leave to dig. The Merchant
after he has made search with the Miners, who know all the places where the
Diamonds grow, chooses out a place about two-hunder'd paces in compass, where
they set at work sometimes fifty, sometimes an hundred Miners, as they are in
have of work. And from the day that they begin to work, to the day that they
end, the Merchants pay to the King two Pagods a day; and four when they employ
and hundred men.

These poor people never get above three Pagods all the year long, though they
understand their business extremely well; so that their wages being so small,
they make no scruple, when they can handsomely, to hide a Stone for their own
profit; and in regard they are quite naked, only for a rag about their
privities, sometimes they are so dextrous, as to swallow the Stone. The chief
of the Merchants who employ these Miners showed me one of them, that had
cozened him of a Stone, and had put it into the corner of his eye, but he took
it from the fellow so soon as he had discovered the cheat. To prevent this
cozenage, there are twelve or fifteen in fifty, who are engaged to the
Merchant, that he shall have no injury done him, nor any thefts committed. If
by accident they meet with a Stone that weighs 14 or 16 Carats, they presently
carry it to the Master of the work, who gives him in recompense the Sarpo,
which is a piece of Calicut to make him a Bonnet, to the value of 25 Sous,
together with half a Pagod in Silver, or else a whole Pagod, when he gives him
neither Rice nor Sugar.

The Merchants that come to trade at the Mines keep their Lodgings; and every
morning about ten or eleven a clock, after they have dined, the Masters of the
Miners bring their Diamonds to show them. If the Stones are large, or that
there be so many as amount from two-thousand to sixteen-thousand Crowns, they
will leave them with the strange Merchant seven or eight days, for the
Merchants to consider. When the Merchants has seen the Stones, it becomes him
to agree upon the price in a short time. Otherwise the party that owes the
Stones, takes them away again, and you shall never see the same Stones again,
unless mixed with others. When the bargain is concluded, the Purchaser gives a
Bill of Exchange upon the Banker. If you have agreed to pay him in four days,
and make him stay longer, you must pay him down one and an half in the hundred
for a months interest. Most commonly when they know the Merchant to be
sufficient, they will choose to take a Bill of Exchange for Agra, for Golconda,
or Visapour, but more especially for Surat, as being the most frequented Port
in all India, where they may furnish themselves with all Commodities which they
want.

It Is very pleasant to see the young children of the Merchants and other people
of the Country, from the age of ten to fifteen or sixteen years, who seat
themselves upon a Tree, that lies in the void place of the Town: Every one of
them has his Diamond-weights in a little Bag hanging at one side, on the other
his Purse, with five or six-hunder'd Pagods in Gold in it. There they sit
expecting when any person will come to sell them some Diamonds. If any person
brings them a Stone, they put it into the hands of the eldest Boy among them,
who is as it were their chief; who looks upon it, and after that gives it to
him that is next him; by which means it goes from hand to hand, till it return
to him again, none of the rest speaking one word. After that he demands the
price, to buy it if possible; but if he buy it to dear, it is upon his own
account. In the evening the Children compute what they have laid out, then they
look upon their Stones, and separate them according to their water, their
weight, and clearness. Then they bring them to the great Merchants, who have
generally great parcels to match: and the profit is divided among the children
equally; only the chief among them has a fourth in the hundred more than the
rest. As young as they are, they so well understand the price of Stones, that
if one of them have bought any purchase, and is willing to lose one half in the
hundred, the other shall give him his Money. They shall hardly bring you a
parcel of Stones, above a dozen, wherein there is not some flaw or other defect.

When I came to the Mine, I went to wait upon the Governor, who told me I was
welcome; and because he made no question but that I had brought Gold with me,
(for they talk of nothing under Gold at the Mines,) he bid me only lay it in my
Chamber, and he would undertake it should be safe. Thereupon he presented me
with four servants to watch my Gold day and night, and to follow my orders,
bidding me withal fear nothing, but eat, drink, and sleep, and take care of my
health; but withal he told me I must be careful of not cheating the King.
Thereupon I fell to buying, and found profit enough, above twenty in the
hundred cheaper than at Golconda.

I have one thing to observe which is more than ordinarily curious, concerning
the manner how the Indians, as well as Mahumetans as Idolaters, drive their
bargains. Every thing is done with great silence, and without any talking on
either side. The buyer and the seller sit one before another like two Tailors,
and the one of the two opening his Girdle, the seller takes the right hand of
the purchaser, and covers his own hand and that with his Girdle: under which,
in the presence of many Merchants that meet together in the same Hall, the
bargain is secretly driven without the knowledge of any person. For then the
purchaser nor seller speak neither with their mouths nor eyes, but only with
the hand, as thus. When the seller takes the purchaser by the whole hand, that
signifies a thousand, and as often as he squeezes it, he means so many thousand
Pagods or Roupies, according to the Money in question. If he takes but half to
the knuckle of the middle-finger, that is as much as to say fifty: The small end
of the finger to the first knuckle signifies ten. When he grasps five fingers,
it signifies five-hunder'd; if but one finger, one-hunder'd. This is the
mystery which the Indians use in driving their bargains. And many times it
happens, that it the same place, where there are several people, one and the
same parcel shall be sold seven or eight times over, and no person know that it
was sold in that manner every time.

As for the weight of the Stones, no person can be deceived in them, unless he
purchase them in hugger-mugger. For if they are publicly bought, there is a
person on purpose paid by the King, without any benefit from particular
persons, whose place it is to weigh the Diamonds; and when he has spoken the
weight, the buyer and seller are satisfied in his words, as not being a person
any way obliged to favor any person.

Having dispatched all my business at the Mine, the Governor appointed me six
Horsemen to convoy me through the Territories under his Government, which
extends to a River that separates the Kingdom of Visapour from that of
Golconda. It Is a very difficult thing to cross that River, it being deep, broad
and rapid; besides that, there are no Boats. But they ferry over Men,
Carriages, Oxen and Coaches upon a round Vessel, ten or twelve foot in
Diameter, made of Osiertwigs, like our Flaskets; and covered without with
Ox-hides; as I have already related. They might easily use Boats, or make a
Bridge; but the King of Golconda will not suffer either, because the River parts
the two Kingdoms. Every evening the Ferry-men on both sides are bound to carry
to two Governors on each side the River, an exact account of the Persons,
Carriages and Merchandises which they ferri'd over that day.

Coming to Golconda, I found that the person whom I had left in trust with my
Chamber, was dead: but that which I observed most remarkable, was, that I found
the door sealed with two Seals, one being the Cadi's or chief Justice's, the
other the Sha-Bander's, or Provost of the Merchants. An Officer of Justice,
together with the Servants I had left behind, watched the Chamber night and
day. This Officer hearing of my arrival, went and gave notice to the Cadi and
Sha-Bander, who sent for me. The Cadi presently asked me, if the Money I had
left in the Chamber where the person died were mine, and how I could prove it.
I told him I had no better proofs than the Letters of Exchange which I had
brought to the Banker that paid it by my order to the person deceased; to whom
I had also given farther order, that if the Banker paid me in Silver, he should
change the sum into Gold. Thereupon the Bankers were sent for, who affirming
the payments accordingly, the Cadi sent his Deputy to open the Chamber door;
nor would he leave me, till I had counted over my Money, and had assured him it
was right. After that I returned to the Cadi and the Sha-Bander, and signified
as much to them; and having paid them some Fees which they demanded. to the
value of four Crowns and a half of our Money, I returned them my thanks for
their care. This I relate to show the justice of the Country.

CHAP. XII.
The Authors Journey to the other Mines; and how they find the Diamonds there.
SEven days journey from Golconda Eastward there is another Diamond Mine,
called in the language of the Country Gani, in the Persian tongue Color. It
is near a great Town, by which the same River runs, which I crossed coming from
the other Mine; and a League and a half from the Town is a high Mountain in the
form of a Half Moon; the space between the Town an the Mountain is a Plain
where they dig and find Diamonds. The nearer they dig to the Mountain, the
larger Stones they find; but at the top they find nothing at all.

It is not above a hundred years since this Mine was found out by a Countryman,
who digging in a piece of ground to sow Millet, found therein a pointed Stone
that weighed above twenty-five Carats; he not knowing what the Stone was, but
seeing it glister, carried it to Golconda, where as it happened well for him,
he met with one that traded in Diamonds. The Merchant informing himself of the
place where the Stone was found, admired to see a Jewel of that bigness, not
having seen any one before that weighed above ten or twelve Carats. However his
report made a great noise in the Country; insomuch that the Mony'd men in the
Town set themselves to work, and causing the ground to be searched, they found,
and still do find bigger Stones, and in greater quantity than in any other
Mine. For they found a great number of Stones from ten to forty Carats, and
sometimes bigger; among the rest that large Stone that weighed nine hundred
Carats, which Mirgimola presented to Aureng-zeb.

But though this Mine of Color be so considerable for the quantity of great
Stones which are there found, yet the mischief is, the Stones are not clean;
the Waters having something of the quality of the Earth where they are found.
If the Ground be mershy, the Water enclines to black; if it be red, there is a
redness in the Water; in other places the Stones appear somewhat greenish, in
others yellowish; such a diversity of Soils there is between the Town and the
Mountain. Upon the most part of these Stones after they are cut, there appears
a kind of greasy moisture, which must be as often wiped off.

As for the Water of the Stones, it is remarkable, that whereas in Europe we
make use of daylight to examine the rough Stones, and to judge of their Water,
and the speaks that are found therein, the Indians do all that in the
nightime, setting up a Lamp with a large Wiek, in a hole which they make in
the Wall, about a foot square; by the light whereof they judge of the Water and
clearness of the Stone, which they hold between their Fingers. The Water which
they call celestial is the worst of all, and it is impossible to discern it so
long as the Stone is rough. The most infallible way to find out that Water, is
to carry the Stone under a Tree thick of Boughs, for by the verdure of that
shade you may easily discern whether the Water be bluish or no.

The first time I was at the Mine, there were above sixty thousand persons at
work, men, woman, and children; the men being employed to dig, the women, and
Children to carry the Earth.

After the Miners have pitched upon the place where they intend to work, they
level another place close by, of the same extent, or else a little bigger,
which they enclose with a Wall about two foot high. In the bottom of that
little Wall, at the distance of every two foot, they make small holes to let in
the water; which they stop up afterward, till they come to drain out the water
again. The place being thus prepared, the people that are to work meet all
together, men, women, and children, with the Workmaster in the Company of his
Friends and Relations. Then he brings along with him some little Image of the
God that they adore; which being placed upright upon the ground, they all
prostrate themselves three times before it, while their Priest says a certain
prayer. The prayer being ended, he marks the forehead of every one with a kind
of Glue, made of Saffron and Gum, to such a compass as will hold seven or eight
Grains of Rice, which he sticks upon it; then having washed their bodies with
water, which every one brings in his pot, they rank themselves in order to eat
what the Workmaster prelents them, before they go to work, to encourage them
both to labor and be faithful. This Feast consists of nothing else but every
one his Plate of Rice, distributed by the Bramin; for an Idolater may eat any
thing from the hands of one of their Priests. The Plates are made of the Leaves
of a certain Tree, not much unlike our Walnut-tree Leaves. Besides this, every
one has a quarter of a pound of Butter, melted in a small Copper pot with some
Sugar.

When their Feast is over, the men fall to digging, the women and children to
carry Earth to the place prepared in that manner as I have already described,
They dig ten, twelve, and sometimes fourteen foot deep; but when they come to
any water they leave off. All the Earth being carried into the place
beforementioned, the men, women, and children with Pitchers throw the water
which is in the drains upon the Earth, letting it soak for two or three days,
according to the hardness of it, till it come to be a kind of Batter; then they
open the holes in the Wall to let out the water, and throw on more water still,
till all the mud be washed away, and nothing left but the Sand. After that they
dry it in the Sun; and then they winnow the Sand in little Winnows, as we
winnow our Corn. The small dust flies away, the great remains, which they pour
out again upon the ground.

The Earth being thus winnow'd, they spread with a kind of Rake, as thin as
they possibly can; then with a wooden Instrument, like a Paviers Rammer, about
half a foot wide at the bottom, they pound the Earth from one end to the other,
two or three times over. After that they winnow it again then; and spreading it
at one end of the Van, for fear of losing any of the Earth, they look for the
Diamond.

Formerly they were wont to pound the Earth with Flint-stones, instead of
wooden Rammers; which made great flaws in the Diamonds, and is therefore now
left off.

Heretofore they made no scruple to buy those Diamonds that had a green
outside; for being cut, they proved very white, and of an excellent water.

Since they have been more nice; for there was a Mine discovered between
Color and Raolconda, which the King caused to be shut up again, by reason of
some cheats that were used there; for they found therein that sort of Stones
which had this green outside, fair and transparent, and which appeared more
fair than the others; but when they came to the Mill they crumbl'd to pieces.

CHAP. XIII.
A Continuation of the Authors Travels to the Diamond Mines.
I come to the third Mine, which is the most ancient of all, in the Kingdom of
Bengala. You may give it the name of Soumelpour, which is the name of the Town
next to the place where the Diamonds are found; or rather Gouel, which is the
name of the River in the Sand whereof they seek for the Stones. The Territories
through which this River runs, belong to a Raja, who was anciently tributary to
the Great Mogul, but revolted in the time of the Wars between Sha-jehan and
Gehan-guir his Father. So soon as Sha-jehan came to the Empire, he sent to
demand his Tribute of this Raja, as well for the time past, as to come; who
finding that his Revenues were not sufficient to pay him, quitted his Country,
and retired into the Mountains with his Subjects. Upon his refusal, Sha-jehan
believing he would stand it out, sent a great Army against him, persuading
himself that he should find great store of Diamonds in his Country. But he
found neither Diamonds, nor People, nor Victuals, the Raja having burnt all the
Corn which his Subjects could not carry away; so that the greatest part of
Sha-jehans Army perished for hunger. At length the Raja returned into his
Country, upon condition to pay the Mogul some slight Tribute.

The Way from Agra to this Mine.
From Agra to Halabas, costs 130 From Halabas to Banarous, costs 33 From Agra
to Sasaron, costs 4 From Agra to Saseron you travel Eastward; but from Saseron
to the Mine you must wind to the South, coming first to a great Town, costs 21
This Town belongs to the Raja I have spoke of. From thence you go to a Fortress
called Rodas, costs 4 This is one of the strongest places in all Asia, seated
upon a Mountain fortified with six Bastions, and twenty-seven pieces of Cannon,
with three Moats full of Water, wherein there are good Fish. There is but one
way to come to the top of the Mountain, where there is a Plain half a League in
compass, wherein they sow Corn and Rice. There is above twenty Springs that
water that Plain; but all the rest of that Mountain from top to bottom is
nothing but a steep Precipice covered with overgrown Woods. The Raja's
formerly used to live in this Fort with a Garrison of seven or eight hundred
men. But the Great Mogul has it now; having taken that Fort by the policy of
the famous Mirgimola, which all the Kings of India could never take before. The
Raja left three Sons, who betrayed one another; the eldest was poisoned, the
second went and served the Great Mogul, who gave him the command of four
thousand Horse; the third possesses his Fathers Territories, paying the Mogul a
small Tribute. From the Fortress of Rodas to Soumelpour, costs 30

Soumelpour is a great Town, the Houses whereof are built of Earth, and covered
only with Branches of Coco-trees. All these thirty Leagues you travel through
Woods, which is a very dangerous passage, as being very much pestered with
Robbers. The Raja lives half a League from the Town, in Tents set upon a fair
rising ground, at the foot whereof runs the Gouel, descending from the Southern
Mountains, and falling into Ganges.

In this River they find the Diamonds. For after the great Rains are over,
which is usually in December, they stay all January till the River be clear; by
reason that by that time in some places it is not above two foot deep, and in
several places the Sand lies above the water. About the end of January, or the
beginning of February, there flock together out of the great Town, and some
others adjoining, above eight thousand persons, men, women and children, that
are able to work. They that are skilful know by the sand whether there be any
Diamonds or no, when they find among the sand little Stones like to those which
we call Thunder-Stones. They begin to make search in the River from the Town of
Soumelpour to the very Mountains from whence the River falls, for fifty Leagues
together.

Where they believe there are Diamonds, they encompass the place with Stakes,
Faggots, and Earth, as when they go about to make the Arch of a Bridge to drain
all the water out of that place. Then they dig out all the Sand for two foot
deep, which is all carried and spread upon a great place for that purpose
prepared upon the side of the River; encompassed with a little Wall about a
foot and half high. When they have filled this place with as much Sand as they
think convenient, they throw water upon it, wash it, and sift it; doing in
other things as they do at the Mines which I have already described.

From this River come all those fair Points which are called natural Points,
but a great Stone is seldom found here. The reason why none of these Stones
have been seen in Europe, is because of the Wars, that have hindered the people
from working.

Besides the Diamond Mine which I have spoken of in the Province of Carnatica,
which Mirgimola caused to be set up, by reason of the yellowness of the
Diamonds, and the foulness of the Stones; there is in the Island of Borneo, the
largest Island in the World, another River called Succadan, in the Sand whereof
they find Diamonds as hard as any in the other Mines. The principal reason that
dissuaded me from going to the Island of Borneo was, because I understood that
the Queen of the Island would not permit any Strangers to carry away any of
those Diamonds out of the Island. Those few that are exported, being carried
out by stealth, and privately sold at Batavia. I say the Queen, and not the
King, because in that Island the Women have the Sovereign Command, and not the
Men. For the people are so curious to have a lawful Heir upon the Throne, that
the Husband not being certain that the Children which he has by his Wife are
his own; but the Wife being always certain that the Children which she bears
are hers, they rather choose to be governed by a Woman, to whom they give the
Title of Queen; her Husband being only her Subject, and having no power but
what she permits him.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the diversity of Weights used at the Diamond Mines. Of the Pieces of Gold
and Silver there Current; and the Rule which they observe to know the Price of
Diamonds.
AT the Mine of Raolconda they weigh by Mangelins, a Mangelin being one Carat
and three quarters, that is seven Grains.

At the Mine of Gani or Color they use the same weights.

At the Mine of Soumelpour in Bengala, they weigh by Rati's, and the Rati is
seven eighths of a Carat, or three Grains and a half. They use the same Weights
over all the Empire of the Mogul.

In the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, they make use of Mangelins; but a
Mangelin in those parts is not above one Carat and three eighths. The Portugals
in Goa make use of the same Weights in Goa; but a Mangelin there is not above
five Grains.

As for the Money in use: First, in Bengala, in the Territories of the Raja
before mentioned, in regard they lie enclosed within the Dominions of the Great
Mogul, they make their payments in Roupies.

At the two Mines about Raolconda in the Kingdom of Visapour, the payments are
made in new Pagods, which the King coins in his own Name, as being independent
from the Great Mogul. The new Pagod is not always at the same value; for it is
sometimes worth three Roupies and a half, sometimes more, and sometimes less;
being advanced and brought down according to the course of Trade, and the
correspondence of the Bankers with the Princes and Governors.

At the Mine of Color or Gani, which belongs to the Kingdom of Golconda, they
make their payments in new Pagods, which are equal in value to the King of
Visapour's. But sometimes you are forced to give four in the hundred more, by
reason they are better Gold, and besides, they will take no others at the Mine.
These Pagods are coined by the English and Hollanders, who, whether willingly
or by force, are priviledg'd by the King to coin them in their Forts: And those
of the Hollanders cost one or two per cent. more than the English, by reason
they are better Gold, and for that the Miners choose them before the other. But
in regard the Merchants are prepossessed that the Miners are a rude and savage
sort of people, and that the ways are dangerous, they stay at Golconda, where
the Workmasters keep correspondence with them, and send them their Jewels.
There they pay in old Pagods coined many ages ago by several Princes that
Reigned in India before the Mahumetans got footing therein. Those old Pagods
are worth four Roupies and a half, that is to say, a Roupy more than the new:
not that there is any more Gold in them, or that they weigh any more. Only the
Bankers, to oblige the King, not to bring down the price, pay him annually a
very great Sum, by reason they get very much by it. For the Merchants receive
none of those Pagods without a Changer to examine them, some being all defaced,
others low-metal others wanting weight: so that if one of these Bankers were
not present at the receipt, the Merchant would be a greater loser, sometimes
one, sometimes five, sometimes six in the hundred: for which they also pay them
one quarter in the hundred for their pains. When the Miners are paid, they
also receive their Money in the presence of Bankers, who tells them which is
good, and which is bad; and has for that also one quarter in the hundred. In
the payment of a thousand or two-thousand Pagods, the Banker, for his fee, puts
them into a bag, and seals it with his Seal; and when the Merchant pays for his
Diamonds, he brings the Seller to the Banker, who finding his bag entire,
assures the party that all is right and good within; and so there is no more
trouble.

As for the Roupies, they take indifferently, as well the Great Mogul's as the
King of Golconda's: by reason that those which that King coins, are to be
coined, by Articles, with the Great Mogul's stamp.

It Is an idle thing to believe that vulgar error, that it is enough to carry
Spices, Tobacco, Looking-glasses, and such trifles to truck for Diamonds at the
Indian-Mines: For I can assure ye, these people will not only have Gold, but
Gold of the best sort too.

As for the roads to the Mines, some fabulous modern relations have rendered
them very dangerous, and filled them full of Lions, Tigers, and cruel People;
but I found them not only free from those wild creatures, but also the People
very loving and courteous.

From Golconda to Raolconda, which is the principal Mine, the road is as
follows: the road being measured by Gos, is four French-leagues.

From Golconda to Canapour, one Gos.

From Canapour to Parquel, two Gos and a half.

From Parquel to Cakenol, one Gos.

From Cakenol to Canol-Candanor, three Gos.

From Canol-Candanor to Setapour, one Gos.

From Setapour to the River, two Gos.

That River is the bound between the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour.

From the River to Alpour, three quarters of a Gos.

From Alpour to Canal, three quarters of a Gos.

From Canal to Raolconda, two Gos and a half.

Thus from Golconda to the Mine, they reckon it seventeen Goss, or 68
French-Leagues.

From Golconda to the Mine of Color or Gani, is reckoned thirteen Gos and
three quarters, or 55 French-leagues.

From Golconda to Almaspinda, three Gos and a half.

From Almaspinda to Kaper, two Gos.

From Kaper to Montecour, two Gos and a half.

From Montecour to Naglepar, two Gos.

From Naglepar to Eligada, one Gos and a half.

From Eligada to Sarvaron, one Gos.

From Sarvaron to Mellaseron, one Gos.

From Mellaseron to Ponocour, two Gos and a quarter.

At Ponocour you only cross the River to Color.

CHAP. XV.
The Rule to know the just price and value of a Diamond of what weight soever,
from three to a hundred, and upwards: a secret known to very few people in
Europe.
I Make no mention of Diamonds of three Carats, the price thereof being
sufficiently known.

First then, as to others above that weight, you must know how much the Diamond
weighs, and see if it be perfect; if it be a thick Stone, well-squar'd, and
have all its corners, if the water be white and lively, without specks and
flaws. If it be a Stone cut in Facets, which we call a Rose-Diamond, you must
take notice whether the form be round or oval, whether it be of a fair breadth,
and not of Stones clapped together; whether it be of a good water, and without
specks or flaws.

Such a Stone weighing one Carat, is worth 150 Livres or more. Now to know how
much a Stone of the same perfection, weighing 12 Carats, is worth.

Multiply 12 by 12, it makes 144. Then multiply 144 by 150, which is the price
of a Stone of one Carat, it comes to 21600 Livres.

As for Example.
12 12 144 150 7200 144 21600 livres.

To know the price of imperfect Diamonds, you must observe the same rule,
grounded upon the price of a Stone of one Carat.

You have a Diamond of fifteen Carats shown ye, neither of a good water, nor
good form, and full of specks and flaws besides: such a Diamond cannot be worth
above 60, or 80, or 100 Livres at most, according to the goodness of the Stone.
Multiply therefore the weight of the Diamond of 15 Carats by 15: then multiply
the product, which is 125, by the value of the Stone of one Carat, which we
will grant to be 80 Livres, the product whereof is 10000 Livres, the price of a
Diamond of 15 Carats.

The Example.
15 15 75 15 125 80 10000 livres.

By that it is easy to discover the difference between a perfect and an
imperfect Stone. For if that Stone of 15 Carats were perfect, the second
multiplication should be wrought by 150, which is the price of a perfect Stone
of one Carat: and then the Diamond would come not to 10000 Livres, but to 33750
Livres, that is 23750 Livres more than an imperfect Diamond of the same weight.

By this rule observe the price of two the greatest Diamonds of the World for
Cut-stones, the one in Asia, belonging to the Great Mogul; the other in Europe,
in the possession of the Duke of Tuscany.

The Great Mogul's Diamond weighs 279 and 9 16 th Carats. It is of a perfect
good water, of a good shape, with only a little flaw in the edg of the cutting
be low, which goes round about the Stone. Without that flaw, the first Carat
were worth 160 Livres, but for that reason I reckon it not at above 150; and so
by the rule it comes to 11723278 Livres, 14 Sous, and three Liards. Did the
Diamond weigh no more than 279 Carats, it would not be worth above 11676150
Livres, so that the nine 16 ths comes to 47128 Livres, 14 Sous, and three
Liards.

The Great Duke of Tuscany's Diamond weighs 139 Carats, clean and wellshap'd,
cut in facets every way: but in regard the water enclines somewhat toward the
color of Citron, I do not value the first Carat above 135 Livres; so that by
the rule the Diamond ought to be worth 2608335 Livres.

A Diamond by the Miners is called Iri, which the Turks, Persians and Arabians
call Almas.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Colored Stones, and the Places where they are found.
THere are but two places in all the East where Colour'd-Stones are found,
within the Kingdom of Pegu, and the Island of Ceylan. The first is a Mountain
twelve days journey, or there-abouts, from Siren, toward the North-east; the
name whereof is Capelan. In this Mine are found great quantities of Rubies and
Espinels, or Mothers of Rubies, yellow Topazes, blew and white Saphirs,
Jacinths, Amethysts, and other Stones of different colors. Among these Stones
which are hard, they find other Stones of various colors, that are very soft,
which they call Bacan in the language of the Country, but are of little or no
esteem.

Siren is the name of the City where the King of Pegu resides; and Ava is the
Port of his Kingdom. From Ava to Siren you go by water in great
flat-bottom'd-Barks, which is a voyage of sixty days. There is no going by
land, by reason the Woods are full of Lions, Tigers, and Elephants. It is one
of the poorest Countries in the World, where there is no Commodity but Rubies;
the whole Revenue whereof amounts not to above a hunder'd-thousand Crowns.
Among all the Stones that are there found, you shall hardly see one of three or
four Carats that is absolutely clean, by reason that the King strictly enjoins
his Subjects not to export them out of his Dominions; besides that, he keeps to
himself all the clean Stones that are found. So that I have got very
considerably in my Travels, by carrying Rubies out of Europe into Asia. Which
makes me very much suspect the relation of Vincent le Blanc, who reports that
he saw in the King's Palace, Rubies as big as eggs.

All Rubies are sold by weights, which are called Ratis; that is, three grains
and a half, or seven 8 ths of a Carat: and the payments are made in old Pagods.

A Ruby weighing one Ratis, has been sold for Pagods 20 A Ruby of 2 Ratis and
one 8 th, Pagods 85 A Ruby of 3 Ratis and one 4 th, Pagods 185 A Ruby of 4
Ratis and five 8 ths, Pagods 450 A Ruby of 5 Ratis, Pagods 525 A Ruby of 6
Ratis and a half, Pagods 920

If a Ruby exceed six Ratis, and be a perfect Stone, there is no value to be
set upon it.

The Natives of the Country call all Colour'd-Stones Rubies, distinguishing
them only by the color. Saphirs they call Blue-Rubies, Amethysts they call
Violet-Rubies, Topazes Yellow-Rubies; and so of other Stones.

The other place where Rubies are found, is a River in the Island of Ceylan,
which descends from certain high Mountains in the middle of the Island; which
swells very high when the rains fall; but when the waters are low, the people
make it their business to search among the Sands for Rubies, Saphirs and
Topazes. All the Stones that are found in this River, are generally fairer and
clearer than those of Pegu.

I forgot to tell you that there are some Rubies, but more Balleis-Rubies, and
an abundance of Bastard-Rubies, Saphirs and Topazes found in the Mountains that
run along from Pegu to the Kingdom of Camboya.

Colour'd-Stones are also found in some parts of Europe, as in Bohemia and
Hungary. In Hungary there is a Mine where they find certain Flints of different
bigness; some as big as eggs, some as big as a man's fifth, which being broken,
contain a Ruby within as hard and as clean as those of Pegu.

In Hungary there is a Mine of Opals, which Stone is nowhere else to be found
in the World but there.

The Turquoise is nowhere to be found but in Persia. Where there are two
Mines. The one is called the Old-Rock, three days journey from Meched, toward
the North-west, near a great Town which goes by the name of Michabourg. The
other which is called the New-Rock is five days journey off. Those of the
New-Rock are of a Paler blue enclining to white, and less esteemed, so that you
may have a great many for a little Money. Some years since the King of Persia
commanded that no Turquoises should be dug out of the Old-Rock, but only for
himself; making use of those Turquoises instead of enamelling, to adorn Hilts
of Swords, Knives and Daggers; of which the Persians are altogether ignorant.

As for Emraulds, it is a vulgar error to say they come originally from the
East. And therefore when Jewellers and Goldsmiths, to prefer a deep-colour'd
Emrauld enclining to black, tell ye, it is an Oriental Emrauld, they speak that
which is not true. I confess I could never discover in what part of our
Continent those Stones are found. But sure I am, that the Eastern-part of the
World never produced any of those Stones, neither in the Continent, nor in the
Islands. True it is, that since the discovery of America some of those Stones
have been often brought rough from Peru to the Philippine-Islands, whence they
have been transported into Europe; but this is not enough to make them
Oriental. Besides that, at this time they send them into Spain through the
North-Sea.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Pearls, and the Places where they Fish for them.
IN the first place, there is a Fishery for Pearls in the Persian Gulf, round
about the Island of Bakren. It belongs to the King of Persia, and there is a
strong Fort in it, Garrisoned with three hundred men. The Water which the
people dring in that Island, and all along the Coast of Persia, is brackish and
ill tasted, so that only the Natives of the Country can drink it. Fresh water
costs* Strangers very dear; for the people fetch it sometimes on League,
sometimes two Leagues from the Island, from the bottom of the Sea, being let
down by a Rope, with a Bottle or two tied about their wastes, which they fill,
and stop it well; and then giving the Rope a twitch, are hall'd up again by
their Companions.

Every one that fishes pays to the King of Persia five Abassis, whether he get
any thing or no. The Merchant also pays the King some small matter for every
thousand Oysters

The second Fishery for Perals is right against Bakren upon the Coast of Arabia
the happy, near the City of Catifa, which together with all the Country about
it, is under the Jurisdiction of an Arabian Prince. The Pearls that are fished
in these places are sold to the Indians, who are not so nice as we; for they
give a good price for all, as well the uneven as the round ones. Over all Asia
they choose the yellow Water enclining to white; for they say those Pearls that
incline somewhat to a Gold color, are more brisk, and never change color; but
that the white ones will change in thirty-years time, through the very heat of
the weather and the sweat of the person that wears them, turning the
scandalously yellow.

There is a wondrous Pearl in the possession of an Arabian Prince, that took
Mascate from the Portugals. He then called himself Imenhect Prince of Mascate;
being known before only by the name of Aceph Ben-Ali Prince of Norennae. It is
but a small Province, but it is the best of all in the Happy Arabia. Therein
grow all things necessary for the life of man; particularly, delicate fruits,
but more especially most excellent Grapes, which would make most incomparable
Wine. This Prince has the most wonderful Pearl in the world, not so much for
its bigness, for it weighs not above twelve Carats and one sixteenth, not for
its perfect roundness, but because it is so clear and so transparent that you
may almost see through it. The Great Mogul offered him by a Banian forty
thousand Crowns for his Pearl, but he would not accept it. By which you see,
that it is more profitable to carry Jewels that are rare out of Europe into
Asia, than to bring them out of Asia into Europe; unless it be to Japan or
China, where Jewels are little esteemed.

There is another Fishery for Pearls in the Sea that beats against the Walls
of a great Town called Manar, in the Island of Ceylan. For their roundness and
their Water, they are the fairest that are found in any other Fishery; but they
rarely weigh above three or four Carats,

There are excellent Pearls, and of a very good water, and large, which are
found upon the Coast of Japan; but there are few fished for, in regard Jewels
are of no esteem among the Natives.

There are other Fisheries, in the West Indies; in the first place all along
the Island of Cubagna, three Leagues in compass, lying ten Degrees and a half
of Northern Latidue, a hundred and sixty Leagues from Santo Domingo. The Pearls
are small, seldom weighing above five Carats.

The second Fishery is in the Island of Manguerita, or the Island of Pearls, a
League from Cubagna, but much bigger. This Fishery is not the most plentiful,
but it is the most esteemed of all those in the West Indies, by reason the
Pearls are of most excellent water, and very large. I sold one Pear-fashion'd
to Sha-Est-Kan, the Great Moguls Uncle, that weighed fifty-five Carats.

The third Fishery is at Camogete, near the Continent.

The fourth at Rio de la Hacha, all along the same Coast.

The fifth and last, at St. Martha's, sixty Leagues from Rio de la Hacha. All
these three Fisheries produce very weighty Pearls; but they are generally
illshap'd, and of a water enclining to the color of Lead.

As for Scotch Pearl, and those that are found in the Rivers of Bavaria, tho a
Neck-lace of them may be worth a thousand Crowns, yet they are not to be
compared with the Eastern and West Indian Pearls.

Some years since there was a Fishery discovered in a certain place upon the
Coast of Japan, and I have seen some which the Hollanders have brought thence.
They are of a very good water, and large, but very uneven.

Take this observation along with you, touching the difference of their waters;
some being very white, others inclining to yellow, others to black, others to a
leaden color. As for the last, there are no such but only in America, which
proceeds from the nature of the Earth at the bottom of the Water, which is
generally more ouzy than in the East. I once met with six Pearls in the return
of a Cargo from the West Indies that were perfectly round, but black like jet,
which weighed one with another twelve Carats. I carried them into the East
Indies to put them off, but could meet with 10 Chapman to buy them. As for
those that incline to yellow, it proceeds from hence, that the Fishermen
selling the Oysters to the Merchants in heaps, while they stay fourteen or
fifteen days till the Oysters lose their water, the Oysters wast and begin to
smell, for which reason the Pearl grows yellow by infection, which appears to
be a truth, in regard that where the Oysters preserve their liquor the Pearls
are white. Now the reason why they stay till the Oysters open of themselves, is
because that if they should force them open, they might perhaps injure and cut
the Pearl. In short, the Eastern people are much of our humor in matter of
whiteness, for they love the whitest Pearls and the blackest Diamonds; the
whitest bread, and the fairest women.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Pearls are bred in the Oysters; how they Fish for them, and at what
time.
SOme ancient Writers have vulgarly reported, that Pearls are produced by the
Dew of Heaven, and that there is but one in an Oyster; but experience teaches
the contrary. For the Oyster never stirs from the bottom of the Sea, where the
Dew can never come, which is many times twelve fathoms deep; besides, that it
is as often observed, that there are six or seven Pearls in one Oyster; and I
have had in my hands an Oyster, wherein there were above ten beginning to
breed. It Is very true, that they are not always of the same bigness; for they
grow in an Oyster after the same manner as Eggs in the Belly of a Pullet. But I
cannot say there are Pearls in all, for you may open many Oysters and find none.

It Is no advantage to them that fish for Pearls; for if the poor people could
find any other employment, they would never stick to such a one as merely keeps
them alive. But the Land is so barren, that you may travel twenty Leagues
before you meet with one blade of Grass; and the people are so miserably poor,
that they feed upon nothing but Dates and Salt-fish.

They fish in the Eastern Seas twice a year; the first time in March and April,
the second time in August and September; and they keep their Fairs in June and
November. However they do not fish every year; for they that fish, will know
beforehand whether it will turn to account or no. Now to the end they may not
be deceived, they send to the places where they are wont to fish, seven or
eight Barks, who bring back each of them about a thousand Oysters, which they
open, and if they find not in every thousand Oysters to the value of five
Fano's of Pearl, which amounts to half a Crown of our Money, it is a sign that
the Fishing will not turn to account, in regard the poor people would not be
able to defray their charge. For partly for a stock to set out, and partly for
victuals while they are abroad, they are forced to borrow Money at three or
four in the hundred a month. So that unless a thousand Oysters yield them five
Fano's of Pearls; they do not fish that year. As for the Merchants, they must
buy their Oysters at hap-hazard, and be content with what they find in them. If
they meet with great Pearls, they account themselves happy; which they seldom
do at the Fishery of Manar, those Pearls being fit for little else but to be
sold by the ^unce, to powder. Sometimes a thousand Oysters amounts to seven
Fano's, and the whole Fishery to a hundred thousand Piasters. The Hollanders
take of every Diver eight Piasters, in regard they always attend the Fishery
with two or three small Men of War, to defend them from the Malavares Pirates.

The more Rain falls in the year, the more profitable the Fishery happens to
be. They fish in twelve fathom water, five or six Leagues off at Sea, sometimes
two hundred and fifty Barks together, among which there is not above one or two
Diverse at most.

There is a Cord tied under the Arms of them that dive, one end whereof is held
by them that are in the Bark. There is also a great stone of eighteen or twenty
pound tied to the great Toe of him that dives; the end of the Rope that fastens
it being also held by them in the Vessel. The Diver has beside a Sack made like
a Net, the mouth whereof is kept open with a Hoop. Thus provided, he plunges
into the Sea, the weight of the stone presently sinking him; when he is at the
bottom, he slips off the stone, and the Bark puts off. Then the Diver goes to
filling his Sack, as long as he can keep his breath; which when he can do no
longer, he gives the Rope a twitch, and is presently hall'd up again. Those of
Manar are better Fishers, and stay longer in the water than those of Bakren and
Catifa; for they neither put Pincers upon their Noses, nor Cotton in their
Ears, as they do in the Persian Gulf.

After the Diver is draw'n up, he stays half a quarter of an hour to take
breath, and then dives again, for ten or twelve hours together. As for the
Oysters themselves, they throw'em away, as being ill-tasted and unsavory.

To conclude the discourse of Pearls, you are to take notice, that in Europe
they sell them by the Carat weight, which is four Grains. In Persia they sell
them by the Abas, and one Abas is an eighteenth less than our Carat. In the
Dominions of the Mogul, the Kings of Visapour and Golconda weigh them by the
Ratis, and one Ratis is also an eighteenth less than our Carat.

Goa was formerly the greatest place of the World for the trade of jewels and
Pearls. You must know therefore, that in Goa, and in all other places which the
Portugals had in the Indies, they used a particular weight to sell their Pearls
by, which they call Chego's; the proportion whereof to Carats appears in the
following Table.

Carats. Chegos. 1 5 2 8 3 11 and a half 4 16 5 21 6 27 7 34 8 44 9 56 10 69 11
84 12 100 13 117 14 136 15 156 16 177 and 3 quart. 17 200 and a half 18 225 19
250 and a half 20 277 and 3 quart. 21 306 22 336 23 367 and a quarter 24 400 25
430 26 469 and a quarter 27 506 and a quarter 28 544 and a quarter 29 584 30
625 31 667 and a quarter 32 711 33 756 and a quart. 34 802 and 3 quart. 35 850
and a quart. 36 900 37 950 and a half 38 1002 and 3 quart. 39 1056 40 1111 and
a quart.

CHAP. XIX.
Observations upon the fairest and largest Diamonds and Rubies which the Author
has seen in Europe and Asia, represented according to the Figures in the
Plates; as also upon those which the Author sold to the King upon his last
return from the Indies; with the Figure of a large Topaz, and the fairest
Pearls in the World.
Numb. 1.
THis Diamond belongs to the Great Mogul, being cut into the same form; and it
weighs 319 Ratis and an half, which make 279 and nine 16 ths of our Carats*
when it was rough, it weighed 907 Ratis, which make 793 Carats.

Numb. 2.
Is the figure of a Diamond belonging to the Great Duke of Tuscany. It weighs
139 Carats and an half: the fault of it is, that the water enclines somewhat to
a Citron-colour.

Numb. 3.
Is a Stone that weighs 176 and one 8 th Mangelins, which makes 242 Carats and
five 16 ths. A Mangelin coming to one and three 8 ths of our Carats. Being at
Golconda I saw this Stone; and it was the biggest that ever I saw in my life in
a Merchant's-hands. It was valued at 500000 Roupies, or 750000 Livres of our
Money: I offered 400000 Roupies, but could not have it.

Numb. 4.
Is the figure of a Diamond which I bought at Amadabat; and it weighed 178
Ratis, or 157 Carats and a quarter.

Page. 148. Travels in India.
N.1.
depiction of gemstone

N.2.
depiction of gemstone

N.3.
depiction of gemstone

N.4.
depiction of gemstone

N.5.
depiction of gemstone

N.6.
depiction of gemstone

N.7.
depiction of gemstone

N.8.
depiction of gemstone

Page. 149. Travells in India.
N 1*
depiction of gemstone

N 2*
depiction of gemstone

N 6*
depiction of gemstone

N 5*
depiction of gemstone

N 4
depiction of gemstone

N 3*
depiction of gemstone



Page. 149 A Representation of 24 the fairest Diamonds Chosen out among all
those which Travels in India.

Monseiur Tavernier sold to the King at his last return from the Indies, upons
which Consideration, and for several services Jone the Kingdom His Majesty
honored him with the Title of Noble.

A 112 3/16 Caratts
The Thickness.
depiction of gemstone

the upper Part
depiction of gemstone

the under Part
depiction of gemstone



51 9/10 Ca
The Top
depiction of gemstone

The Bottom
depiction of gemstone

ye Thickness.
depiction of gemstone



31 Ca
the Thickness
depiction of gemstone

The Top.
depiction of gemstone



29 C.
the Topp
depiction of gemstone

ye Thickness
depiction of gemstone



D 20 1/16 Ca
ye upper Part
depiction of gemstone

ye Bottom
depiction of gemstone



20 ^/^ Ca
the Top.
depiction of gemstone

ye Bottom
depiction of gemstone



26 ^/^ Ca
depiction of gemstone

13 9/16 Ca
depiction of gemstone

^6 ^/16 Ca
ye Topp
depiction of gemstone

ye Thickness
depiction of gemstone



B ^4 ^ C
ye Lower part
depiction of gemstone

the topp
depiction of gemstone



13 Ca
the Bottom
depiction of gemstone

the Topp
depiction of gemstone



^^ Ca
ye Topp
depiction of gemstone

ye Thickness
depiction of gemstone



9 Car
depiction of gemstone

11 Car
depiction of gemstone

C 10 Car
ye Bottom
depiction of gemstone

ye Top
depiction of gemstone



^ Car
depiction of gemstone

^ Car
depiction of gemstone

1 ^0 ^^/^6 Ca
depiction of gemstone

2 32 Ca
depiction of gemstone

3 24
depiction of gemstone

A. Is a Diamond clean of a fair violet

B. C Are two of a pale rose Color

D. Is one of an Extraordinary fair matter.

All the rest are white and Clear and were Cut in India.

The three below marked 1. 2. 3. are foul



Numb. 5.
Is the figure of the forementioned Diamond, after it was cut on both sides;
there remaining 94 Carats and a half; the water being perfect. The flat-side
where there were two flaws below, was as thin as a sheet of brown-paper: When
the Stone was cut, I caused all that thin side to be taken off, with one part
of the end above, where there remains one little speck of a flaw.

Numb. 6.
Is another Diamond which I bought at the Mine of Color. It is fair and
clean, and weighs 36 Mangelins, or 63 and 38 ths of our Carats.

Numb. 7. and 8.
Are two pieces of a Stone that was cut in two, which being entire, weighed 75
Mangelins and a half, or 104 Carats. Though it were of a good water, it seemed
so foul in the middle, that, in regard it was large, and held at a high price,
there was never a Banian would venture upon it: At length an Hollander bought
it, and cutting it in two, found in the middle of it, eight Carats of filth
like a rottenweed. The small piece happened to be clean, excepting a little
flaw hardly to be perceived, but for the other, wherein there are so many other
cross flaws, there was no way but to make seven or eight pieces of it. The
Hollander ran a great risco in cutting it a-sunder; for it was very great luck
that it had not broke into a hander'd pieces. Yet for all that it did not turn
to account; so that it is in vain for another to buy that which a Banian
refuses.

CHAP. XX.
The Forms of twenty Rubies which the Author sold to the King upon his last
return from the Indies. The first part of the Plate shows the weight, extent,
and thickness of every Stone.
Numb. 1.
IS the Figure of a Ruby that belongs to the King of Persia. It is in shape and
bigness like an Egg, boar'd through in the middle, deep colored, fair and
clean, except one flaw in the side. They will not tell you what it cost, not
let you know what it weighs; only it appears by the Register that it has been
several years in the Kings Treasury.

Numb. 2.
Is the Figure of a Balleis Ruby; sold for such to Giafer-Kan, the Great Mogu^s
Uncle, who paid 950000 Roupies, 142^000 Liv^es for it. But an old Indian
Jeweller (...) afterward, that it was no Balle^s Ruby, that it was not worth
above 500 Roupies, and that Giafer-Kan was cheated; and his opinion being
confirmed by Sha-jehan, the most skilful in Jewels of any person in the Empire
A^^ong-ze^ compelled the Merchant to take it again, and to restore the Money
back.

Number. 3, and 4.
Is the Figure of a Ruby belonging to the King of Visapour. Numb. 4, is the
height of the Stone above the Gold. And Numb. 3, is the roundness of the
Beazil. It weighs fourteen Mangelins, or seventeen Carats and a half; a
Visapour Mangelin being but five Grains. It cost the King 14200 new Pagods, or
74550 Livres.

Numb. 5.
Is the Figure of a Ruby that a Banian showed me at Banarous; it weighs 58
Rati's, or 50 Carats and 3 quarters; being of the second rank in beauty. In
shape it is like a Plump Almond, bored through at the end. I offered 40000
Roupies, or 60000 Livres for it; but the Merchant demanded 55000 Roupies.

Numb. 6.
Is the Figure of a great Topaz belonging to the Great Mogul; nor did I see him
wear any other but that, all the while I was in India. This Topaz weighs 181
Rati's and half a quarter, or 157 Carats and three quarters. It was bought at
Goa for the Great Mogul, and cost 181000 Roupies, or 271500 Livres of our Money.

Numb. 7, 8, 9.
Are the Figures of three several Rubies belonging to the King of France.

Numb. 1.
Is the Figure of a Pearl which the King of Persia bought at the Fishery of
Catifa in Arabia. It cost him 32000 Tomans, or 1400000 Livres of our Money, at
forty-six Livres and six Deneers to a Toman. It is the fairest and most perfect
Pearl that ever was yet found to this hour, having no defect.

Numb. 2.
Is the Figure of the biggest Pearl that ever I saw in the Court of the Great
Mogul. It hangs about the artificial Peacocks neck that adorns his great Throne.

Numb. 3.
Is the Figure of a Pearl that I sold to Cha-Est-Kan; the Water is somewhat
faint, but it is the biggest Pearl that was ever carried out of Europe into
Asia.

Numb. 4.
Is a great perfect Pearl, as well for its Water as for its form, which is like
an Olive. It is in the midst of a Chain of Emraulds and Rubies, which the Great
Mogul wears; which being put on, the Pearl dangles at the lower part of his
Breast.

Numb. 5.
Is a Pearl perfectly round, the biggest I ever saw, and belongs to the Great
Mogul. The like could never be found; for which reason the Great Mogul lays it
up very charily, and never uses it. For if it could be matched, both would make
a Pair of Pendants for the Ears, set between Rubies or Emraulds, according to
the custom of the Country; there being no person of any quality that does not
wear a Pearl between two colored Stones in his Ear.

Page 150. Travels in India.
The form of three Balais Rubies belonging to his Majesty transparent quite
through
N.7.
depiction of rough gemstone

N.7.
depiction of rough gemstone

N.8.
depiction of rough gemstone

N.8.
depiction of rough gemstone

N.9.
depiction of rough gemstone

N.9.
depiction of rough gemstone

Page. 150. Travells in India.
N 3 *
depiction of gemstone

depiction of gemstone

N 2 *
depiction of gemstone

N 1 *
depiction of gemstone

N 5 *
depiction of gemstone

N 4 *
depiction of gemstone



CHAP. XXI.
Of Coral, and Yellow Amber, and the places where it is found.
COral, but little valued in Europe, is highly esteemed in all the three other
parts of the World; and there are three places where they fish for it upon the
Coast of Sardigna. That of Arguerrel is the fairest of all. The second place is
called Boza; and the third is near the Island of St. Peter. There are two other
places upon the Coast of France, the one near the Bastion of France; the other
at Tabarque. There is also another Fishery upon the Coast of Sicily, near
Trepano, bu^ the Coral is small, and ill-colour'd. There is another upon the
Coast of Catalogna, near Cape de Quiers; where the Coral is large, and of an
excellent color, but the branches are short. There is a ninth Fishery in the
Island of Majorque, much like that near the Island of Corsica. And these are
all the places in the Mediterranean-Sea, where they fish for Coral; for there
is none at all in the Ocean.

Because that Coral grows under the hollow Rocks where the Sea is deep, the
Fishers fix two spars of wood across, fastening a great piece of Lead in the
middle to make it sink: after that they wind carelessly about the spar good
store of tufted Hemp, and fasten the wood to two Cords, one end whereof hangs
at the Poop, the other at the Prow of the Vessel. Then letting go the wood with
the stream or current by the fides of the Rock, the Hemp twists it self among
the Coral, so that sometimes they stand in need of five or six Boats to pull up
the wood again: and if one of the Cables should chance to break with the
stress, all the Rowers are in danger to be lost. While they tear up the Coral
thus by force, there tumbles as much into the Sea as they fetch up: and the
bottom of the Sea being generally very ouzy, the Coral will be eaten as our
fruits are eaten by the worms; so that the sooner they get it out of the mud,
the less it will be wasted.

This puts me in mind of one thing that I saw at Marseilles in a Shop where
they dealt in Coral. It was a great piece of Coral, as big about as a man's
fist, which because it was a little worm-eaten, was cut in two pieces. When it
was so cut, there was a worm that stirred, and had life, and lived for some
months after, being again put into the hole. For among some branches of Coral
there engenders a kind of spongy-matter, like our honey-combs, where these
worms lie like bees.

Some think that Coral is soft in the Sea, though in truth it be hard. But this
indeed is as true, that in certain months of the year you may squeze out of the
end of a branch a kind of milky-substance; and this perhaps may be a kind of
seed, which falling upon any thing that it first meets with in the Sea (as if
it light upon a dead Skull, the blade of a Sword, or a Pomgranate) produces
another branch of Coral. And I have seen a Pomgranate, and had it in my hand,
that had fallen into the Sea, about which the Coral had twined at least half a
foot high.

They fish for Coral from the beginning of April to the end of July; to which
purpose there are employed above 200 Vessels, some years more, and some years
less. They are built all along the River of Genoa, being very swift. Their
sails are very large for more swiftness, so that there are no Galleys can reach
them. There are seven men and a boy to every Barque. They never fish above
forty miles from the Land, where they think there are Rocks, for fear of the
Pirates, from which they make all the Sail they can when they see them, and
easily escape them through the nimbleness of their Vessels.

I have one observation to make concerning Coral, in respect of the
Easternpeople. The Japponners make little account of Jewels or Pearls; valuing
nothing so much as a good grain of Coral, wherewith they pull the string that
shuts their Purses, such as we had formerly in England. So that they strive who
shall have the fairest grain of Coral hanging at the end of the Silk-string
that draws their Purses. For this reason a piece of Coral as big as an egg,
fair and clean without any flaw, will produce what any man will ask in reason
for it. The Portugueses have assured me they would sometimes give 20000 Crowns
for such a piece. And no wonder they will give so much Money for a piece of
Coral, who despising all other Jewels and Pearls, care for nothing but that
which is in no esteem any where else. They set a great value upon the Skin of a
certain Fish which is rougher than a Seal-skin. Upon the back of the Fish there
are (...) little holes, and sometimes eight, somewhat elevated, with another in
the middle; in the form of a Rose. They make Scabberds for Swords of the Skin;
and the more those holes grow in the form of a Rose, the higher value they put
upon them; having given ten-thousand Crowns for a Skin. To conclude the
discourse of Coral, you must know that the meaner sort of people use it for
Bracelets and Neck-laces, all over Asia, especially toward the Northern
Territories of the great Mogul; and all along the Mountains as you go to the
Kingdom of Asen and Boutan.

Yellow-Amber is only found upon the Coast of Prussia in the Baltick-Sea, where
the Sea throws it upon the Sand when such and such winds blow. The Elector of
Brandenburgh, who is Sovereign of that Coast, farms it out for 20000 Crowns a
year, and sometimes 22000. And the Farmers keep guards on both sides of the
shore, in regard the Sea casts it up sometimes upon one side, and sometimes
upon the other, to prevent the stealing of it.

Amber is nothing but a certain congelation made in the Sea, like a certain
Gum; for you shall find in several pieces, Flies, Gnats, and other insects
congealed therein. I saw seven or eight Flies so congealed in one piece.

In China, when any great Lord makes a Feast, it is for his Grandeur and
Magnificence to cause three or four several sorts of Perfuming-pots to be set
upon the Table, and to throw into every one of them a vast quantity of Amber;
for the more it burns, and the bigger the pieces are, the more magnificent is
the Entertainment accounted. The reason of this custom is, because they adore
the fire; and besides, that the Amber casts forth a scent pleasing to the
Chinese, there is a kind of Oil in it, that flames after a more unusual manner
than other materials of fire. This wast of Amber makes it the best Commodity
that could be imported into China, if the Trade were free for Strangers. At
present the Hollanders have engrossed all this Trade to themselves, and the
Chinese come all to Batavia to buy it.

As for Amber-grise; there is no person in the World that knows either what it
is, or where, or how it is produced. But the fairest probability is, that it
must be only in the Eastern-Sea* though some parcels have been found upon the
Coast of England, and in some other parts of Europe. The greatest quantity is
found upon the Coast of Melinda, but more especially in the mouth of a River
called Rio de Sena. The Governor of Mozambique gets in the three years of his
Government above 300000 Pardo's of Amber-grise, every Pardo containing 27 Sous
of our Money. Sometimes they meet with very large and very considerable pieces.
In the year 1627 a Portugal setting Sail from Goa to the Manilles, after he had
past the Straight of Malacca, was by tempest driven near an unknown Island,
where they came to an Anchor. Several of the Ship's-Company ventring ashore,
met with a River; and going to bath themselves in it, one of them found a great
piece of Amber-grise that weighed thirty-three pounds; but falling together by
the ears about their shares, the Captain, to reconcile them, told them 'twas
pity to deface it, in regard it was a Present fit for the King; and therefore
advised them to present it to the Viceroy, who would no doubt reward them for
their pains. By that means the Captain got the parcel out of their Clutches,
and presenting it to the Viceroy, got a reward for himself; and the Party that
found it: but the rest had nothing at all.

In the year 1646 or 1647, a Middleburgher of good quality found a piece of
forty-two pounds upon the Coast of the Island of St. Maurice, where he
commanded for the Holland-Company, East of the Island of St. Lawrence, and sent
it to Batavia: but there being a mark, as if some piece of it were broken off,
the Zelander, was accused to have taken half, and turned out of his Command,
whatever he could say to justify himself.

Travels in Indea. Page 153

The Beast Which yields Musk
The Bladder Where the Musk lies



CHAP. XXII.
Of Musk and Bezoar; and some other Medicinal Stones.
THE best sort, and the greatest quantity of Musk, comes from the Kingdom of
Boutan, from whence they bring it to Patna, the chief City of Bengala, to truck
it away for other Commodities. All the Musk that is sold in Persia comes from
thence. And the Musk-Merchants had rather deal with you for Coral and
Yellow-Amber, than for Gold or Silver; in regard the other is more in esteem
among the Natives where they live. I was so curious as to bring the Skin of one
to Paris, of which I caused the figure to be cut.

After they have killed the creature, they cut off the bladder that grows under
the belly as big as an egg, nearer to the genital parts than to the navil: Then
they take out the Musk that is in the bladder, which at that time looks like
clottedblood. When the natives would adulterate their Musk, they stuff the
bladder with the liver and blood of the Animal sliced together, after they have
taken out as much of the right Musk as they think convenient. This mixture in
two or three years time produces certain Animals in the bladder that eat the
good Musk; so that when you come to open it, there is a great wast. Others, so
soon as they have cut off the bladder, and taken out as much of the Musk, as
that the deceit may not be too palpable, fill up the Vessel with little stones
to make it weight. The Merchants are less displeased at this deceit than the
former, by reason that they do not find the Musk to be eaten. But the deceit is
harder to be discovered, when they make little Purses of the skin of the belly
of the Beast, which they sow up with strings of the same skin, which are like
the true bladders; and then fill those Purses with what they have taken out of
the right bladders, and the other fraudulent mixture which they design to put
among it. True it is, that should they tie up the bladder as soon as they cut
it off, without giving it air or time to lose its force, the strength of the
perfume would cause the blood to gush out of the nose, so that it must be
qualified to render it acceptable, or rather less hurtful to the brain. The
scent of the Beast which I carried to Paris, was so strong, that I could not
keep it in my Chamber; for it made all peoples heads ache that came near it. At
length my Servants laid it in a Garret, and cut off the bladder, and yet the
scent remained very strong. This creature is not to be found in 65 degrees, but
in 60 there are vast numbers, the Country being all over covered with
Forests. True it is, that in the months of February and March, after these
creatures have endured a sharp hunger, by reason of the great Snows that fall
where they breed, ten or twelve foot deep, they will come to 44 or 45 degrees
to fill themselves with Corn and new Rice. And then it is that the Natives lay
gins and snares for them to catch them as they go back: shooting some with
Bows, and knocking others of the head. Some have assured me that they are so
lean and faint with hunger at that time, that you may almost take them running.
There must be surely a prodigious number of these creatures, none of them
having above one bladder no bigger then a Hen's-egg, which will not yield above
half an ounce of Musk: and sometimes three or four will not afford an ounce;
and yet what a world of Musk is bought up?

The King of Boutan fearing that the cheats and adulterations of Musk would
spoil the Musk-Trade, ordered that none of the Bladders should be sowed up, but
that they should be all brought to Boutan, and there, after due inspection, be
sealed up with his Seal. Yet notwithstanding all the wariness and care of the
King, they will sometimes cunningly open them, and put in little pieces of Lead
to augment the weight. In one Voyage to Patna I bought 7673 bladders, that
weighed 2557 ounces and an half; and 452 ounces out of the bladder.

Bezoar comes from a Province of the Kingdom of Golconda toward the Northeast.
It is found among the ordure in the paunch of a wild-Goat that browzes upon a
certain Tree, the name whereof I have forgot. This shrub bears little buds,
round about which, and the tops of the boughs, the Bezoar engenders in the maw
of the Goat. It is shaped according to the form of the buds or tops of the
branches which the Goats eat: which is the reason there are so many shapes of
Bezoar-Stones. The Natives, by feeling the belly of the Goat, know how many
Stones she has within, and sell the Goat according to the quantity. This they
will find out by sliding their hands under their bellies, and then shaking both
sides of the paunch; for the Stones will fall into the middle, where they may
easily count them all by their feeling.

The rarity of Bezoar is in the bigness; though the small Bezoar has the same
virtue as that which is larger. But there is more deceit in the large Bezoar;
for the Natives have got a trick to add to the bigness of the Stone, with a
certain Paste composed of Gum, and something else of the color of Bezoar. And
they are so cunning too, to shape it just like natural Bezoar. The cheat is
found out two ways; the first is by weighing the Bezoar, and then steeping it
in warm water; if neither the water change color, nor the Bezoar lose any
thing of its weight, the Stone is right. The other way is to thrust a red-hot
Bodkin of Iron into the Stone; if the Bodkin enters, and causes it to fry,
there is a mixture. Bezoar is dearer according to the bigness of the Stones,
advancing in price like Diamonds. For if five or six Bezoars weigh an ounce, an
ounce will be worth fifteen or eighteen Franks; but if it be a Stone of one
ounce, that very ounce is well worth 100 Franks. I have sold one of four ounces
and a half for 2000 Livres.

I have been very curious to inform my self of all things that concerned the
nature of Bezoar; but could never learn in what part of the body of the Goat it
was to be found. One time among the rest, having obliged several Native
Merchants by putting off for them a great quantity of Bezoar; upon my request,
though it be death without mercy to transport any of these Goats out of the
Country, they brought me six Goats by stealth to my lodging. When I asked the
price of them, I was surpised, when they told me one was worth but three
Roupies; that the two other were worth four Roupies; and the three others four
and three quarters a piece. I asked them why some were more worth than others;
but I found afterward that the first had but one Bezoar, that the rest had
two, or three, or four. The six Goats had in all seventeen Bezoars in them, and
a half one, as big as the half of a Hazel-nut. The inside was like the soft
ordure of the Goat, the Bezoar lying among the dung, which is in the belly of
the Goat. Some averred that they grew right against the liver, others right
against the heart, but I could never find out the truth.

As well in the East, as West, there are a great quantity of Bezoars that breed
in the same manner in Cows; of which there have been some that have weighed
seventeen or eighteen ounces; For there was such a one that was given to the
Great Duke of Tuscany. But those Bezoars are little esteemed, six grains of the
other Bezoar working more powerfully than thirty of this.

As for the Bezoar which breeds in Apes, as some belive, it is so strong, that
two grains work as effectually as six of Goat's-Bezoar: but it is very scarce,
as being only found in those Apes that breed in the Island of Macassar. This
sort of Bezoar is round, whereas the other is of several fashions, as I said
before. As the Apes Bezoar is stronger, and scarcer than the Goats, so it is
dearer, and more sought after; a piece as big as a nut, being sometimes worth a
hundred Crowns. The Portugals make great account of this Bezoar, standing
always upon their guard for fear of being poisoned.

There is another Stone in great esteem, that is called the Porcupine's-Stone,
which that creature is said to carry in its head, and is more precious than
Bezoar against poison. If it be steeped in water a quarter of an hour, the
water becomes so bitter, that nothing can be more bitter. There is also a Stone
sometimes found in the belly of that creature of the same nature; and as good
as that which comes from the head; nevertheless with this difference, that
being steeped in water, it loses nothing of its weight nor bulk, as the other
does. I have bought in my time three of those Stones. One of them cost me 500
Crowns, and I exchanged it to advantage. I paid four-hunder'd Crowns for the
other, which I kept, the other was sold me for 200 Crowns, which I presented to
a friend.

There is the Serpent-Stone not to be forgot, about the bigness of a double;
and some are almost oval, thick in the middle, and thin about the sides. The
Indians report that it is bred in the head of certain Serpents. But I rather
take it to be a Story of the Idoloter's Priests, and that the Stone is rather a
composition of certain Drugs. Whatever it be, it is of excellent virtue to
drive any venom out of those that are bit by venomous creatures. If the person
bit be not much wounded, the place must be incis'd; and the Stone being applied
thereto, will not fall off till it has drawn all the poison to it. To cleanse
it, you must steep it in Womans-milk, or for want of that, in Cows-milk; after
the Stone has lain ten or twelve hours, the milk will turn to the color of an
Apostemated matter. The Archbishop of Goa carrying me to his Cabinet of
Rarities, showed me one of these Stones: and after he had assured me of the
rare qualities it had, gave it me. Once as he crossed a Mersh in the Island of
Salsete where Goa stands, one of the men that carr'd his Pallequis, being half
naked, was bit by a Serpent, and healed at the same time. I bought several; but
there are none but the Bramines that sell them, which makes me believe that
they compound them. There are two ways to try whether the Serpent-Stone be true
or false. The first is, by putting the Stone in your mouth, for then it will
give a leap, and fix to the Palate. The other is, by putting it in a glass full
of water; for if the Stone be true, the water will fall a boiling, and rise in
little bubbles up to the top of the Glass.

There is another Stone, which is called the Stephen's-Stone with the hood.
This is a kind of Serpent that has (...) a hood hanging down behind the head,
as it is represented in the Figure. And it is behind this hood that the Stone
is found, many times as big as Pullet's-egg. There are some Serpents both in
Asia and America of a monstrous bigness, 25 foot long; as was that, the skin
whereof is kept in Batavia, which had swallowed a Maid of 18 years of age.
These Stones are not found in any of those Serpents that are not at least two
foot long. This Stone being rubbed against another Stone, yields (...) slime,
which being drank in water by the person that has the poison in his (...)
powerfuly drives it out. These Serpents are nowhere to be found but upon the
(...) of Melinde; but for the Stones you may buy them of the Portugueze
Marin^^s and Soldiers that come from Mozambique.



CHAP. XXIII.
Of the (...) where they find their Gold both in Asia and America.
JApon, which consists of several Islands Eastward of China, bending to the
North, some people believing that Niphon, which is the biggest, is in a manner
joined to the firm La^^ is that Region of all Asia that yields the greatest
quantity of Gold: Though others believe it is found in the Island of Formosa,
and carried thence to Japon. For as long as the Hollanders have had the Island,
they could never yet tell what is the Trade of that Coast, whence they belive
the Gold comes.

There comes also Gold from China, which the Chinese exchange for the Silver
which is brought them. For price for price, they love Silver better than Gold;
because they have no Silver-Mines. Yet it is the coarsest metal of all the
Asiatick Gold.

The Island of Celebes or Macassar produces Gold also, which is drawn out of
the Rivers, where it rowls among the Sand.

In the Island of Achen or Sumatra, after the rainy season, when the Torrents
are wasted, they find veins of Gold in the Flints, which the waters wash down
from the Mountains that lie toward the North-east. Upon the West Side of the
Island, when the Hollanders come to lade their Pepper, the Natives bring them
great store of Gold, but very coarse metal, if not worse than that of China.

Toward the Thibet, which is the ancient Caucasus, in the Territories of a
Raja, beyond the Kingdom of Chachemir, there are three Mountains close one by
another one of which produces excellent Gold, the other Granats, and the third
Lapis-Lazali.

There is Gold also comes from the Kingdom of Tipra, but it is coarse, almost
as had as that of China; and these are all the places in Asia that produce
Gold. I shall now say something of the Gold of Africa, and the places where it
is found in greatest quantities.

Observe by the way, that the Viceroy of Mozambique has under his Command the
Governors of Sofala and Chepon-Goura. The first of these two Governments lies
upon the River Seen, sixty leagues from the Mouth of the River; and the other
ten leagues higher. From the Mouth of the River to those very places on each
side of the River, great numbers of Negro's inhabit, which are all commanded by
one Portugueze. The Portuguezes have been Masters of this Country for many
years, where they take upon them like Lords, and make War one upon another for
the slightest occasions in the World; some of them having under them
five-thousand Cafres, which are their Slaves. The Governor of Mozambique
furnishes them with Calicuts, and all other necessary Commodities which they
want, which he sells them at his own rates. When he enters upon his Government
he carries with him great quantities of all sorts of Commodities, especially
Calicuts died black. His Correspondents also in Goa send him every year two
Vessels, which he sends to Sofala, Chepon-Goura, and even as far as the City of
Monomotopa, the chief City of a Kingdom of the same name, otherwise called
Vouvebaran, distant from Chepon-Goura fifty leagues, or there-abouts. He that
commands all that Country, assumes the name of Emperor of Monomotopa,
extending his Dominions as far as the Confines of Prester John's Country. From
this Country of Monomotopa it is, that the most pure and finest Gold of all
Africa comes: where they dig it with ease out of the earth* not being put to
labor above two or three foot deep. In some places of that Country which are
not inhabited by reason of the scarcity of water, the people find great pieces
of Gold, of several forms and weights, upon the surface of the earth* some of
which weigh an ounce. One I have by me that weighs an ounce and a half, or
thereabouts. Being at Surat, I went (...) the Ambassador of the King of the
Abyssins. He showed us the Present which his Master had sent to the Great
Mogul, consisting of fourteen stately Horses, the remainder of 30, the rest
dying by the way; and a great number of Slaves of both Sexes. But what was most
remarkable, was a natural Tree, all of Gold, two foot and four inches high, and
six inches about in the stock. It had ten or twelve branches, some whereof shot
out half a foot in length, and an inch about; others much smaller. In some
parts of the great branches appeared certain bunches that resembl'd buds. The
roots of the Tree, which were also natural, were thick and short; the longest
not exceeding four or five inches.

The Natives of Monomotopa knowing the time of the year that the Commodities
arrive, come to Sofala and Chepon-Goura to furnish themselves. Thither also
come the Cafres of other Provinces and Kingdoms for the same purpose. Whereupon
the Governors of those places sell them what they want, trusting them till the
next year, when they oblige themselves to bring their Gold, which they are very
punctual to do, for else there could be no Trade between them. The Natives of
Monomotopa never live long, by reason of the badness of the waters in the
Country: For at the age of five and twenty years they begin to be dropsical;
so that it is a great wonder if any among them live above forty years. The
Province where the River Seen has its head, is called Monkaran, and is under
the Jurisdiction of a certain King, beginning a hundred leagues, or
there-abouts, above Chapon-Goura. The people of that Country find great store
of dust-Gold in the Rivers that fall into the Seen; but it is much coarser than
the other, though they bring it to Chepon-Goura and Sofala. The Country is
very healthy, and the people live as long as they do in Europe. Some years
there are Cafres that come from beyond the Province of Monkaran, even as far as
the Cape of good Hope. The Portuguez have inquired after their Country, and
the name; but they can tell no more, only that it is called Sabia, commanded by
a King; and that they are four months generally traveling to Sofala. The Gold
which they bring is very fine, and in pieces like that of Monomotopa, which
they say they find in the high Mountains, digging only ten or twelve foot in
the ground. They also bring great quantities of Elephants-teeth; wherewith, by
their report, the Country does so abound, that you may see them in herds in
the fields; and that all the Palisado's of their Fortresses, and the Pales of
their Parks, are made of Elephants-teeth. Their usual Diet is Elephants-flesh;
which four Cafres will kill with their Ageagayes, or a sort of Half-pikes. The
water of their Country is very bad, which is the reason that their thighs are
swelled, and it is a wonder to see any one of them free.

Beyond Sofala there is a Country commanded by a King, who is called the King
of Beroe. In some parts of his Country there grows a Root about an inchthick,
and of a yellow color. It heals all sorts of Fevers, causing the Patient to
vomit. But because it grows very scarce, the King strictly forbids his Subjects
to export it. The taste of it is very bitter upon the tongue.

As for Silver-Mines, there are none in all Asia but only in Japon; but some
years since, at Delegora, Sangora, Bordelon and Bata, have been discovered
plentiful Mines of Tin, to the great damage of the English, there being now
enough in Asia of their own besides.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Relation of a Notable piece of Treachery, whereby the Author was abused
when he Embarked at Gomrom for Surat.
IN the Month of April 1665, being ready to depart from Gomrom for Surat, in a
Vessel that belonged to a Holland-Broaker, commanded by a Holland-Captain, the
English Agent gave me a Packet of Letters to deliver to the President at Surat.
The Packet was large, containing not only the Companies-Letters, but several
private Letters to particular persons at Surat and other parts of India. This
Packet I received in the presence of one Casembrot, a Hollander, who informed
another Dutchman, whose name was Wauwuck, of it: Thereupon they presently
contrived a design to seize this Packet, upon the report that ran of the
rupture between England and Holland. Casembrot having seen the bigness of the
Packet, gives Wauwuck a description of it, and so both together they contrive
another of the same form and bigness as near as they could. When I came
a-board, I took the English Packet, and locked it up in my Bouccha, which is
the sort of Cloakbag that is used in that Country, and laid it behind my
Bolster. There were two Shallops sent a-board us, wherein there were sixty bags
of Silver, containing some fifty, some a hundred Tomans a piece. These bags
they unladed very leisurely to gain time, watching when I would be gone to bed.
But when they saw that I did not go to rest, the Dutch consulted together, and
agreed to let fall a bag of Tomans into the Sea; and so came all a-board,
sending away a Shallop to Gomron for a Diver. When I found that the Vessel
would not set Sail till two or three hours after daylight, I went to rest, my
Bouccha lying in the same place, half out, and half with inside of my Bolster:
But when my Servants were gone, and I alone and a-sleep in the Cabin, they
cunningly stole my Bouccha, took out the English Packet, and left the other
which they had counterfeited, in the place; being only so many Letters of
blanck-paper. Coming to Surat the sixth of May following, I gave the Packet, as
I thought, which I had received from the English Agent at Gomron, to two
Capuchin-Friers to deliver to the President at Surat. But when the President
came to open the Packet before several of the Company, there was nothing but
white-paper made up in the form of Letters; which when I heard, too much to my
sorrow, I understood the villainous trick that Van-Wuck had put upon me. I wrote
a smart Letter of complaint to the Dutch-General in Batavia, but finding no
redress, was forced to undergo the hard censure of the English, who would not
permit me to justify my self. However, as it is rare to see treachery go
unpunished, the Complotters all died miserably. Van-Wuck fell into a violent
Fever, and being charged with the theft; thinking to defend himself with an
equivocation, that if he took the Cloak-bag, he wished he might dye without
speaking a word, in three days ended his life just in the same manner, and at
the same time that he had imprecated upon himself. Bozan his Lieutenant, after
a great debauch, going to sleep upon the Terrass of the Cabin, where he lay for
coolness, (there being no balisters,) rolling and tumbling in his sleep, fell
down, and the next day was found dead in the Sea.

The Captain, four or five days after his arrival at Surat, being met in the
Street by a Mohammedan, who was jealous of his Wife, and being mistak'n by him
for one among several Franks, that had parted him, and kept him from correcting
his Wife some few days before, was stabbed by him in three or four places with
a Dagger, and killed him out right. And this was the end of those treacherous
people.

The End of the Second Book.
TRAVELS IN INDIA. The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
Of the particular Religion of the Mahometans in the East Indies.
THE diversity of Opinions among the Maahometans, does not consist in the
different Expositions which they put upon the Alcoran; but in the contrariety
of Belief which they received by Tradition from the first Successors of
Mahomet. From thence there sprung two Sects, directly opposite: The one, which
is called the Sect of the Sounnis, followed by the Turks; and the other of the
Chiais, which is adhered to by the Persians. I will not enlarge my self upon
these two Sects, that divide all Mahumetism; it being my design, only to tell
you how the condition of that false Religion stands in the Empire of the Great
Mogul, and in the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour.

When Mahumetism was first brought into the Indies, there was an excess of
pride, but no devotion among the Christians; and the Idolaters were an
effeminate people, able to make little resistance; so that it was easy for the
Mahumetans to subdue both the one and the other by force of Arms, which they
did so advantageously, that many, as well Christians as Idolaters, embraced the
Mahumetan Religion.

The Great Mogul, with all his Court, follows the Sect of the Sounnis; the King
of Golconda, that of the Chiais. In the King of Visapour's Territories the
Sounnis and Chiais are mingled together; which may be said also of the Court of
the Great Mogul, in regard of the great numbers of Persians that flock thither
to serve in his Armies. True it is, that though they abhor the Sounnis, yet
they adhere to the Religion of the Prince; holding it lawful for the
preservation of their Estates to conceal their belief. As for what concerns the
Kingdom of Golconda, Koutoub-Cha, the present King, very zealously maintains
the Law of the Chiais; in regard the Grandees of his Court are almost all
Persians.

Aureng-zeb testifies above all things an extraordinary devotion for the Sect
of the Sounnis; of which he is so zealous an observer, that he surpasses all
his Predecessors in outward profession; which was the Cloak under which he
usurped the Crown. When he took possession of his Throne, he gave it out that
he did it only out of a design to cause the Law of Mahomet to be more strictly
observed, which had been very much neglected in the Reign of Sha-jehan his
Father, and Gehan-guir his Grandfather; and to show himself more zealous to the
Law, he turned Faquir or Dervich, that is, poor Volunteer; and under that false
pretense of Piety he cunningly made way to the Empire. And indeed though he has
a great many Persians under his pay, yet he will not permit them to keep holy
the day consecrated to the memory of Hosen and He^^sin, the two sons of Ali,
who were put to death by the Sounnis; besides that they, to please him, are
willing e^ough to conform.

CHAP. II.
Of the Faquirs, or poor Mohammedan Volunteers in the East Indies.
THey reckon that there are in the Indies eight hundred thousand Faquirs, and
twelve hundred thousand Idolaters; which is a prodigious Number. They are all
of them Vagabonds, and lazy Drones, that dazzle the eyes of the people with a
false zeal, and make them believe that whatever comes out of their mouths is an
Oracle.

There are several sorts of Mohammedan Faquirs. The one sort go almost naked
like the Idolatrous Faquirs, having no certain abode in the world, but giving
themselves up to all manner of uncleanness. There are others whose Garments are
of so many different pieces and colors, that a man can hardly tell of what
they are made. These Garments reach down to the half Leg, and hide the rags
that are underneath. They go generally in Troops; and have their Superior of
the Gang, who is known by his Garment, which is generally poorer, and consists
of more patches than the other. Besides, that he draws after him a great Iron
Chain, which is tied to his Leg, and is about two Else long, and proportionably
thick. When he says his prayers, he does it with a loud voice, and rattling his
Chain all the while, which is accompanied with an affected gravity, that draws
the Veneration of the people. In the mean time the people prepare Dinner for
him and his company, in the place where he takes up his stand, which is usually
in some street or public place. There he causes his Disciples to spread
certain Carpets, where he sets himself down to give audience to the people. On
the other side, the Disciples go about publishing through the Country the
virtues of their Master, and the favors he receives from God, who reveals his
most important secrets to him, and gives him power to relieve persons in
affliction by his counsel. The people, who give credit to him, and believe him
to be a holy man, approach him with a great devotion, and when they come near
him, they pull off their Shoes, and prostrate themselves to kiss his feet. Then
the Faquir, to show his humility reaches out his hand to kiss; that done, he
causes them that come to consult him, to sit down by him, and hears every one
apart. They boast themselves to have a prophetic Spirit; and above all to
teach barren women a way how to have Children, and to be beloved by whom they
please.

There are some of these Faquirs who have above two hundred Disciples, or more,
which they assemble together by the sound of a Horn, or the Beat of a Drum.
When they travel, they have their Standard, Lances, and other Weapons which
they pitch in the ground, near to their Master, when he reposes in any place.

The third sort of East Indian Faquirs, are those that being born of poor
Parents, and desirous to understand the Law, to the end they may become
Moulla's or Doctors, retire to the Mosquees, where they live upon the Alms
which is given them. They employ all their time in reading the Alcoran, which
they get by heart; and if they can but add to that study the knowledge of some
natural things, and an exemplary life withal, they come to be chief of the
Mosquees, and to the dignity of Moullahs, and Judges of the Law. Those Faquirs
have their Wives; and some, out of their great zeal to imitate Mahomet, have
three or four; thinking they do God great service in begetting many Children to
be followers of their Laws.

CHAP. III
Of the Religion of the Gentiles, or Idolatrous Indians.
THe Idolaters among the Indians are so numerous, that they are reckoned to be
five or six for one Mohammedan. It seems a wonderful thing, that such a
prodigious multitude of men should be cowed by a handful, and how so easily
under the yoke of the Mohammedan Princes. But that wonder well may cease, when
we consider that those Idolaters are not in union among themselves; for
Superstition has introduced such a diversity of Opinions and Customs, that they
can never agree one with another. An Idolater will not eat Bread nor drink
Water in the House of any one that is not of his Cast; though it be more
noble, and much more superior to his own. Yet the^ all eat and drink in the
Bramins Houses, which are open to all the world. A Cast among the Idolaters,
is very near the same thing which was anciently called a Tribe among the Jews.
And though it be vulgarly believed, that there are seventy two Castes, yet I
have been informed by some of their most ingennous Priests, that they may all
be reduced into four Principal ones, from whence all the rest drew their
Original.

The first Cast is that of the Bramins, who are the Successors of the ancient
Brachmans, or Indian Philosophers, that studied Astrology. You may also meet
with some of their Ancient Books, in reading whereof the Brammins spend all
their time; and are so versed in their observations, that they never fail a
minute in the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. And to preserve this knowledge among
themselves they have a kind of University, in a City which is called Benarez,
where they make all their exercises in Astrology, and where they have Doctors
that expound their Law, which they very strictly observe. But in regard they
are so great a number, and cannot all come to study at that University, they
are all very ignorant, and consequently very superstitious; those that go for
the most refined Wits, being the greatest Sorcerers.

The second Cast is that of the Raspoutes or Ketris, that is to say, Warriors
and warlike people. These are the only Idolatrous Indians that have any courage
to signalize themselves in War. All the Raja's that I have so often memtion'd,
are of this Cast. These are so many petty Kings, whom their disunion has
rendered Tributary to the Great Mogul. But in regard that the greatest part of
them are in his service, they are highly recompensed by the large Salaries they
receive for the small Tribute which they pay. These Raja's, and the Raspoutes
their Subjects, are the chiefest support of the Dominions of the Great Mogul;
for indeeed the Raja's Jesseing and Jessomseing were those that lifted up
Aurengzeb to the Throne. But you must take notice, that all of this second
Cast are not Warriors; for they are the Raspoutes only that go to War, and are
all Horsemen. But for the Ketris, they are degenerated from their Ancestors,
and of Soldiers are become Merchants.

The third Cast is that of the Bannians, who are altogether addicted to Trade;
of whom some are Sheraffs or Bankers, others Broakers, employed between
Merchant and Merchant for buying and selling. Those of this Cast are so subtle
and nimble in Trade, that as I have said before, the Jews may be their
Prentices. They accustom their Children betimes to fly Idleness. And instead of
suffering them to lose their time in playing in the Streets, as we generally
do, they teach them Arithmetic; which they are so perfect at, that without
making use either of Pen or Ink, or Counters, but only of their memories, they
will in a moment cast up the most difficult account that can be imagined. They
always live with their Fathers, who instruct them in Trade, and do nothing but
what they show them. If any man in the heat of passion chafe at 'em, they hear
him patiently without making any reply, and parting coldly from him, will not
see him again in three or four days, when they think his passion may be over.
They never eat any thing that has life; nay they would rather dye, than kill
the smallest Animal or Vermin that crawls; being in that point above all things
the most zealous Observers of the Law. They never fight, nor go to War; neither
will they eat or drink in the House of a Raspoute, because they kill the
Victuals they eat, all but Cows, which they never touch.

The fourth Cast is that of the Charados or Soudras; who go to War as well as
the Raspoutes, but with this difference, that the Raspoutes serve on Horseback,
and the Charados on foot. Both of them take it for an Honor to dye in Battle;
and let him be Horse or Foot, that Soldier is accounted infamous that retreats
in Fight; it is an eternal blot in his Family. Upon which subject I will tell
you a story. A Soldier who was passionately in love with his Wife, and
reciprocally beloved by her, had fled from the fight, not so much out of any
fear of death, as out of a consideration of the grief which it would occasion
to his Wife, should he leave her a Widow. When she knew the reason of his
flight, as soon as he came to the door, she shut it against him, and ordered
him to be told, that she could never acknowledge that man for a Husband, who had
preferred the Love of a Woman before his Honor; that she did not desire to see
him any more, as being a stain to the Reputation of her Family; and that she
would endeavor to teach her Children to have more courage than their Father.
The Wife continuing firm to her resolution, the Husband to regain his Honor
and her affection, returned to the Army, where he so behaved himself, that he
became famous; and having highly made amends for his Cowardice, the door of his
House was again set open, and his Wife received him with her former kindness.

The rest of the Natives, that are not reckoned in the number of these Castes,
are called Pauzecour. These are such as employ themselves in Handicraft Trades;
among which there is no other distinction, but according to the Trades which
they follow from Father to Son. So that a Tailor cannot prefer his Son, but
only in his own Calling, though he be never so rich; nor marry either a Son or
Daughter, but to one of his own Craft. By the same rule, when a Tailor dies,
all those of his own Trade accompany the corpse to the place where it is burnt:
and the same practice is observed in all other Trades.

Among the particular Castes, there is one that goes by the name of Alecors,
whose employment is only to clean Houses; for which every Family pays him
something once a month, according to their proportion and quality. If a person
of quality in the Indies keeps fifty Servants, let him be Mohammedan or
Idolater, there isnot one of them will take a Besome in his hand to sweep the
House; for he would think himself affronted, it being one of the greatest
scorns you can put upon an Indian, to call him Alacor. Besides, every one of
those Servants knows his business; whether it be to carry the pot of Water to
drink by the way, or to give his Master his Pipe of Tobacco when he calls for
it; so that if the Master should bid one to do that which the other was
appointed to do, that Servant would stand like a Statue, and never make him any
answer. But for the Slaves, they are obliged to do what ever the Master
commands them. These Alacors having no other business but only to make clean
the Houses, eat the scraps of all other Castes; and so without scruple feed
upon any thing. There are none but those of this Tribe make use of Asses, to
carry away the filth of the Houses into the Field; for which reason none of the
rest of the Indians will so much as touch that Animal; which is quite otherwise
in Persia, as well for carriage, as to ride upon. Moreover, there are none of
the other Indians, except the Alacors that will eat.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Kings and Idolatrous Princes of Asia.
THe chiefest of the Idolatrous Kings of Asia, are the King of Aracan, the King
of Pegu, the King of Siam, the King of Cochinchina, and the King of Tunquin. As
for the King of China, we know that he was an Idolater before the Tartars
invaded his Dominions. But since that, we know not what to report of certainty,
in regard that the Tartars who are now Masters of the Country, are neither
Idolaters nor Mahometans, but rather both together. In the Islands, the King of
Japon, the King of Ceylan, and some petty Kings of the Molucca Islands are
Idolaters; as are all the Raja's as well in the Empire of the Great Mogul, as
in the neighboring Kingdoms of Visapour and Golconda. In a word, all the
meaner sort of people, as well in the Territories of the Great Mogul, Kings of
Golconda and Visapour, as in the Isles of Achan, Java, and Macassar, though
their Kings are Mahumetans, are all themselves Idolaters.

Some fifty years ago, one of the Kings of Ceylan became a Christian, and was
baptized by the name of John, being called before the Emperor Priapender. But
as soon as he had embraced the Christian Faith, the Princes and Priests of the
Country set up another King in his room. He endeavored all he could to bring
his people to follow his example; to which purpose he assigned to the Father
Jesuits, twelve large Villages about Colombo, for the bringing up the youth of
the Country in their Colleges; to the end that they being well instructed,
might instruct others. For the King made it plain to the Jesuits, that it was
impossible for them so well to understand the Language of the Country, as to be
able to preach to the Natives. Besides, that they found the ingenuities of the
Youth of Ceylan so quick and apprehensive, that they learnt more Latin,
Philosophy, and other Sciences in six months, than the Europeans learnt in a
year; and that they put such subtle Questions to their Masters, as were beyond
imagination.

Some years after the King had professed Christianity, a witty man of the
Island of Ceylan, and a good natural Philosopher, whose name was Alegamme,
Motiar, or the Master of the Philosophers, after he had conversed with the
Jesuits and other Religious persons, was inspired to turn Christian. Thereupon
he went to the Jesuits, and told them, that he desired to be a Christian; but
withal he was very earnest to know what Jesus Christ had done, and left in
writing. They gave him the new Testament, which he set himself to read with
that heed and study, that in less than six months there was hardly a passage
which he could not repeat. After that he again testified to the Jesuits and
other Religious persons, that he had a great desire to turn Christian, in
regard he found their Religion to be such as Jesus Christ had taught; but only
he wondered that they themselves did not follow his example. For that he could
never find by his reading, that Jesus Christ ever took any money of any body;
but that they took all they could get, and never baptized nor buried unless
they were well paid. But though he started the Question, he was baptized, and
afterward became a sedulous converter of others.

CHAP. V.
What the Idolaters believe touching a Divinity.
THough the Idolatrous Indians attribute to the Creature, as to Cows, Apes, and
several Monsters, those Divine Honors which are only due to the true Diety;
yet they acknowledge one only Infinite God, Almighty, and only Wise, the
Creator of Heaven and earth, who fills all places with his presence. They call
him in some places Permesser, in others Peremael, and Westnon among the Bramins
that inhabit the Coast of Cormandel. It may be, because they have heard that
the Circle is the most perfect of all Figures, therefore it is that they say
God is of an Oval Figure; for they have in all their Pagods an Oval Flintstone,
which they fetch from Ganges, and worship as a God. They are so obstinately
wedded to this foolish imagination that the wisest among the Bramins will not
so much as hear any argument to the contrary. So that it is no wonder that a
people led by such blind Guides, should fall into such Abysses of Idolatry.
There is one Tribe so superstitious, in reference to that article, that they
carry those Oval Flints about their Necks, and beat them against their Breasts,
when they are at their devotions. In this dark and lamentable mist of
ignorance, these Idolaters make their Gods to be born like men, and assign them
Wives, imagining that theirs are the pleasures of men. Thus they take their Ram
for a great Deity, in regard of the Miracles which they believe he wrought
while he lived upon Earth. Ram was the Son of a potent Raja, who was called by
the name of Deseret, and the most virtuous of all his Children, which he had by
two lawful Wives. He was particular beloved by his Father, who designed him to
be his Successor. But the Mother of Ram being dead, the Raja's other Wife, who
had her Husband entirely at her beck, prevailed with him to exterminate Ram and
his Brother Lokeman from his House, and all his Territories; upon whose
exclusion the Son of that Wife was declared the Raja's Successor. As the two
Brothers were about to be gone, Ram's Wife Sita, of whom he went to take his
leave, and whom the Idolaters worship as a Goddess, begged of him that she might
not leave him, having made a resolution never to forsake him; whereupon they
all three went together to seek their fortunes. They were not very successful
at first; for as they passed through a Wood, Ram being in pursuit of a Bird,
strayed from the Company, and was missing a long time; insomuch that Sita
fearing that some disaster was befallen him, befought Lokeman to look after
him. He excused himself at first, by reason that Ram had obliged him never to
leave Sita alone, foreseeing by a Prophetic Spirit what would befall her,
should she be left to her self. Nevertheless Lokeman being over persuaded by
the prayers of his fair Sister, went to seek for Ram his Brother; but in the
mean time Rhevan another of the Idolaters Gods, appeared to Sita in the shape
of a Faquir, and begged an Alms of her. Now Ram had ordered Sita, that she
should not stir out of the place where he left her; which Rhevan well knowing,
would not receive the Alms which Sita presented him, unless she would remove to
another place; which when Sita had done, either out of negligence or
forgetfulness, Rhevan seized upon her, and carried her into the thick of the
Wood, where his Train stayed for him. Ram at his return missing Sita, fell into
a swoon for grief, but being brought again to himself by his Brother Lokeman,
they two immediately went together in search of Sita, who was so dearly beloved
by her Husband.

When the Bramins repeat this Rape of their Goddess, they do it with tears in
their eyes, and great demonstrations of sorrow; adding upon this subject, an
infinite company of Fables more ridiculous, to show the great courage of Ram in
pursuit of the Ravisher. They employed all Creatures living upon the discovery;
but none of them had the luck to succeed, only the Monkey called Harman. He
crossed over the Sea at one Leap, and coming into Rhevans Gardens, found Sita
in the extremity of affliction; and very much surpised to hear an Ape speak to
her in her Husbands behalf. At first she would not give any credit to such an
Ambassador; but the Ape, to show that his Commission was authentic, presents
her with a Ring which her Husband had given her, and that she had left behind
her among her Furniture. She could hardly however believe so great a Miracle,
as that Ram her Husband should make a Beast speak, to bring her the news of his
health, and to testify as he did the marks of his affection. But the Ape
Harman wrought Miracles himself, for being taken for a Spy by some Rhevans
Servants, who therefore would have burnt him, he made use of the fire which
they had prepared to burn him, to set Rhevans Palace on fire, which he almost
consumed to the ground, with all the tatters and rags which were tied to his
tail and his body. When the Ape had thus done, the better to escape out of
Rhevans hands, he took the same way he came, and repassing the Sea again at one
jump, he came and gave Ram an account of his adventures; and told him in what a
sorrowful condition he had found Sita, who did nothing but mourn by reason of
her absence from her Husband. Ram touched with his Wives affection, resolved to
deliver her out of Rhevans hands, whatever it cost him; whereupon he raised
Forces, and being guided by the Ape, at length he came to Rhevans Palace, that
still smoked, the fire had been so great; and by reason that Rhevans Servants
were dispersed, Ram had an easy opportunity to see his beloved Sita again,
whom Rhevan abandoned wholly to him, flying for fear to the Mountains. Ram and
Sita were infinitely overjoyed at their coming together again, and returned
very great Honors to Harman, who had done him so great service.

As for Rhevan, he spent all the rest of his days like a poor Faquir, seeing
his Country ruined by Ram's Troops, who was resolved to be revenged for the
injury which he had received; and from this Rhevan it was, from whence that
infinite multitude of Faquirs, that swarm all over India, first took their
Original.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Faquirs, or poor Volunteers among the Indians, and of their Pennances.
THE Original of the Faquirs, as I said before, came from that Rhevan, whom Ram
dispoil'd of his Kingdom; at which he conceived such an unspeakable sorrow,
that he resolved to lead a Vagabond life, and to wander about the world, poor,
stripped of all, and in a manner quite naked. He found enough to follow him in a
course of life that gives them so much liberty. For being worshipped as Saints,
they have in their hands all opportunities of doing evil.

These Faquirs wander generally in Troops, every one of which has a Superior.
And in regard they are quite naked, Winter and Summer lying upon the hard
ground, when it is cold, the young Faquirs, and others that are most devout, go
in the afternoon to seek for the dungs of Cows and other Creatures, of which
they make their fires. They rarely burn Wood, for fear of killing any living
Animal which is wont to breed in it; and therefore the Wood wherewith they burn
their dead, is only such as has floated long in the Water, which never breeds
in any sort of living Creature. The young Faquirs having got together a good
quantity of dung, mixed with dry turf, make several fires, according to the
bigness of the Company; round about every one of which the Faquirs seat
themselves. When they grow sleepy, they lay themselves upon the ground,
spreading the Ashes abroad which serve them for a Mattress; without any other
Canopy than that of Heaven.

As for the Faquirs that do Penance, when they are laid down in the same
posture as you see them in the day time, they kindle a good fire on each side
of them, for otherwise they would not be able to to endure the cold. The rich
Idolaters account themselves happy, and their Houses to be filled with the
benedictions of Heaven, when they have any of these Faquirs for their Guests,
which the more austere they are, the more they honor: and it is the glory of
the Troop to have one among them that does some considerable act of Penance.

The Crews of Faquirs many time join together to go in Pilgrimage to the
Principal Pagods, and public Washings, which they use upon certain days in
the year in the River Ganges, whereof they make the chiefest account; as also
in that which separates the Territories of the Portugals of Goa from the
Dominions of the King of Visapour. Some of the most austere Faquirs live in
little pitiful Huts near their Pagods, where they have once in four and twenty
hours something to eat bestowed upon them for God's sake. The Tree whereof I
have given the description, is of the same sort as that which grows near
Gomron, which I have described in my Persian Relations. The Franks call it the
Bannians-Tree, because in those places where those Trees grow, the Idolaters
always take up their quarters, and dress their victuals under them. They have
those Trees in great reverence, and oft-times build their Pagods either under
or very near them. That which the Reader sees here described, grows at Surat;
in the trunk whereof, which is hollow, is the figure of a Monster, representing
the face of a deformed Woman, which they say was the first Woman, whose name
was Mamaniva; thither great numbers of Idolaters every day resort: near to
which there is some Bramin or other always appointed to be ready to say
Prayers, and receive the Alms of Rice, Millet, and other Grains which the
charitable bestow upon them. The Bramin marks the forhead of all, both Men and
Woman, that come to pray in the Pagod, with a kind of Vermillion, wherewith he
also besmears the Idol; for being thus marked, they belive the evil Spirit
cannot hurt them, as being then under the protection of their God.

Number 1. is that part where the Bramins paint their Idols; such as Mamaniva,
Sita, Madedina, and others; whereof they have a great number.

Numb. 2, is the figure of Mamaniva, which is in the Pagod.

Numb. 3, is another Pagod near the former. There stands a Cow at the door, and
within stands the figure of their God Ram.

Numb. 4, is another Pagod, into which the Faquirs, that do Penance, often
retire.

Numb. 5, is another Pagod dedicated to Ram.

Numb. 6, is a Hut into which a Faquir makes his retirement several times a
year, there being but one hole to let in the light. He stays there according to
the height of his devotion, sometimes nine or ten days together, without either
eating or drinking; a thing which I could not have believed, had I not seen it.
My curiosity carried me to see one of those penitents, which the President of
the Dutch-Company, who set a spy to watch night and day whether any body
brought him any victuals. But he could not discover any relief the Faquir had,
all the while sitting upon his Bum like our Tailors, never changing his posture
above seven days together, not being able to hold out any longer, by reason the
heat and stench of the Lamp was ready to stifle him. Their other sorts of
Penance out-doing this, might be thought incredible, were there not so many
thousand witnesses thereof.

Numb. 7, is the figure of another Penitentiary, over whose head several years
have past; and yet he never slept day nor night. When he finds himself sleepy,
he hangs the weight of the upper part of his body upon a double-rope that is
fastened to one of the boughs of the Tree; and by the continuance of this
posture, which is very strange and painful, there falls a humor into their
legs that swells them very much.

Numb. 8, is the figure of two postures of two doing Penance; who, as long as
they live, carry their arms above their heads in that manner; which causes
certain Carnosities to breed in the joints, that they can never bring them down
again. Their hair grows down to their wastes, and their nails are as long as
their fingers. Night and Day, Winter and Summer they go always stark naked in
the same posture, exposed to the heat and rain, and the stinging of the Flies;
from which they have not the use of their hands to rid themselves. In other
necessities they have other Faquirs in their company always ready to assist
them.

Numb. 9, is the posture of another Penitent, who every day for several hours
stands upon one foot, holding a chasing-dish in his hand, into which he pours
Incense, as an Offering to his God, fixing his eyes all the while upon the Sun.

Number. 10 and 11, are the figures of two other Penitents sitting with their
hands raised above their heads in the air.

Numb. 12, is the posture wherein the Penitents sleep, without ever resting
their arms; which is certainly one of the greatest torments the body of man can
suffer.

Numb. 13, is the posture of a Penitent, whose arms, through weakness, hang
flagging down upon his shoulders, being dried up for want of nourishment.

There are an infinite number of other Penitents; some who in a posture quite
contrary to the motion and frame of nature, keep their eyes always turned toward
the Sun. Others who fix their eyes perpetually upon the ground, never so much
as speaking one word, or looking any person in the face. And indeed there is
such an infinte variety of them, that would render the farther discourse of
them more tedious

True it is, that I have hid those parts which modesty will not suffer to be
exposed to view. But they both in City and Country go all as naked as they
came out of their Mothers wombs; and though the Woman appraoch them to take
them by the fingers-ends, and to kiss those parts which modesty forbids to
name; yet shall you not observe in them any motion of sensuality; rather quite
contrary, seeing them never to look upon any person, but rolling their eyes in
a most frightful manner, you would belive them in an ecstasy.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Idolaters belief touching the estate of the Soul after death.
IT IS an Article of the Idolaters Faith, that the Souls of Men departing out of
the body, are presented to God; who according to the lives which they lead,
orders them another body to inhabit. So that one and the same person is born
several times into the World. And that as for the Souls of wicked and vicious
persons, God disposes them into the bodies of contemptable Beasts, such as
Asses, Dogs, Cats, and the like; to do Penance for their crimes in those
infamous Prisons. But they believe that those Souls that enter into Cows are
happy; presuming that there is a divinity in those creatures. For if a man dye
with a Cows-tail in his hand, they say it is enough to render him happy in the
other World.

The Idolaters believing thus the transmigration of the Souls of men into the
bodies of other creatures, they abhor to kill any creature whatever, for fear
they should be guilty of the death of some of their kindred or friends doing
Penance in those bodies.

If the Men in their lifetime are famous for their virtuous deeds, they hold
that their Souls pass into the bodies of some Potent Raja's: where they enjoy
the pleasures of this life in those bodies, as the reward of those good works
which they did.

This is the reason why the Faquirs put themselves to such horrible Penances.
But because that all are not able to endure so much torment in this World, they
labor to supply the defect of that cruel Penance by good works. And besides,
they charge their Heirs in their Wills to give Alms to the Bramins, to the end
that by the powerful effect of their Prayers, their God may assign them the
body of some Noble Personage.

In January 1661, the Broaker belonging to the Holland Company, whose name was
Mondas-Parek, died at Surat. He was a rich Man, and very charitable, giving his
Alms very liberally as well to the Christians as to the Idolaters; The
Capuchins at Surat living one part of the year upon the Rice, Butter and Pulse
which he sent them. This Banian was not sick above four or five days; during
all which time, and for eight days more after he was dead, his Brothers
distributed nine or ten-thousand Roupies; and in the burning of his body they
mixed Sandalwood, and Lignum-Aloes, with the ordinary wood, believing that by
that means the Soul of their Brother transmigrating into another body, he would
come to be some great Lord in another Country. There are some that are such
fools that they bury their treasure in their lifetime, as it is the usal
custom of all the rich Men in the Kingdom of Asen: to the end that if they
should be condemned to the body of some poor miserable person, they might have
wherewithal to supply their necessities. I remember one day that I bought in
India an Agate Cup half a foot high; he that sold it me, assured me that it had
been buried under ground above 40 years, and that he kept it to serve his
occasions after death; but that it was to him a thing indifferent whether he
buried his Cup or his Money. In my last Voyage I bought of one of these
Idolaters sixty-two Diamonds of about six grains a-piece; and while I was
wondering to see so fair a parcel, he told me I needed not to wonder; for he had
been fifty years getting them together* to serve him after his death, but that
having occasion for Money, he was forced to part with them. This buried
treasure stood the Raja-Seva-Gi in great stead, when he took Arms against the
Great Mogul, and the King of Visapour. For that Raja having taken Callian
Biondi, a small City in the Kingdom of Visapour, by the advice of the Bramins,
who assured him he should find great store of treasure buried, caused the
greatest part thereof to be demolish;d and found so much wealth, as to maintain
his Army, which was above thirty-thousand Men. It is impossible to convince
these poor Idolaters of their errors; in regard they will hear no reason, but
submit themselves altogether to their old forms and customs.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Custom among the Idolaters to burn the Bodies of their Dead.
THE custom of burning the Bodies of the dead is very ancient among the
Gentiles; which Ceremony they most commonly perform by the banks of Rivers,
where they wash the dead; which is the last purgation of them from their sins.
Nay, their superstition is so great sometimes, that they will carry the sick
person, death approaching, to the bank of some River or Pond, and put his feet
in the water. As nature fails, they dip him deeper and deeper, till at length
they hold him expiring up to the chin in the River: to the end that the same
time that the Soul departs out of the Body, both Body and Soul may be cleans'd
from all defilement; and then plunging the newly dead Body over head and ears,
they bring it out, and burn it in the place appointed; which is generally near
some Pagod. There are some persons that make it their business to fetch Wood,
and agree what they shall have for their pains. An Idolater being dead, all
those of his Cast or Tribe assemble together at the House of the deceased, and
laying the Body upon a Bier covered with clean fine Linen according to his
Quality and Estate, they follow the Bier, which is carried by such as are
appointed for that purpose to the place where the Body is to be burned. A^ they
go along they sing certain Prayers to their God, pronouncing several times the
words Ram, Ram, while another going before the Bier, sounds a little Bell, to
advertize the living to pray for the dead. The Body being set down by the bank
of the River or Pond, they first plunge it into the water, and then they burn
it. According to the quality of the deceased they also mingle with the ordinary
wood Sandal-wood, and other Sweet-woods. But the Idolaters do not only burn the
Bodies of the dead, but the Bodies of the living. They scruple to kill a
serpent, or a louse, but account it a meritorious thing to burn a living Wife
with the body of the deceased Husband.

CHAP. X.
How the Wives are burnt in India with the Bodies of their deceased Husbands.
IT is also an ancient custom among the Indians, that the Husband happening
todye, the Wife can never marry again. So that as soon as the Man is dead, the
Wife retires to bewail her Husband; some days after that, they shave off her
hair; she lays aside all the ornaments of her apparel; she takes off from her
arms and legs the Bracelets which her Husband put on when he espoused her, in
token of her submission, and her being chained to him: and all the rest of her
life she lives slighted and dispis'd, and in a worse condition than a Slave in
the very House where she was Mistress before. This unfortunate condition causes
them to hate life, so that they rather choose to be buried alive with the body
of their deceased Husbands, then to live in the scorn and contempt of the
World. Besides that, the Bramins make them believe, that in dying after that
manner, they shall revive again with him in another World, with more honor and
more advantages than they enjoyed before. These are the motives that persuade
the Woman to burn with their Husbands; besides that, the Priests flatter them
with a hope, that while they are in the midst of the flames, before they
expire, Ram will appear, and reveal wonderful visions to them; and that after
their Souls have transmigrated into various Bodies, they shall at length obtain
a high degree of Honor to eternity.

However, there is no Woman that can burn her Husband's body, till she has the
leave of the Governor of the place where she inhabits, who be ing a Mah^metan,
and abhorring that execrable custom of Self-murder, is very shy to permit them.
Besides, there are none but Widows that have no children, that lie under the
reproach that forces them to violent death. For as for the Widows that have
children, they are by no means permitted to burn themselves; but quite the
contrary, they are commanded to live for the education of the children. Those
Woman whom the Governor will not permit to burn themselves, spend the rest of
their lives in doing Penance, and performing works of Charity. Some make it
their business to sit upon the Road to boil certain Pulse in water, and to give
the liquor to Travelers to drink. Others sit with fire always ready for them
to light their Tobacco. Others make vows to eat nothing but the undigested
grains which they find in Cow Dung.

The Governor finding no persuasions will alter the Woman's resolution, but
more especially perceiving by the sign which his Secretary makes him, that he
had received the Coin, in a surly manner gives the Woman leave, bidding the
Devil take her and all her kindred.

When they have got this leave, their Music begins to strike up, and away they
ding to the House of the deceased, with Drums beating, and Flutes playing
before them; and in that manner they accompany the person that is to be burnt,
to the place appointed. All the kindred and friends of the Widow that is to
dye, come to her, and congratulate her for the happiness she is to enjoy in the
other World: and for the honor which the Cast she is of receives by her
generous resolution, she dresses her self as she were going to be married, and
she is conducted in triumph to the place of execution. For the noise is loud of
Musical Instruments, and Women's Voices, that follow her singing Songs in honor
of the miserable creature that is going to dye. The Bramins that accompany her,
exhort her to give public testimonies of her constancy and courage: and many
of our Europeans are of opinion, that to take away the fears of death, which
naturally terrifies humanity, the Priests do give her a certain Beverage to
stupify and disorder the senses, which takes from her all apprehension of her
preparations for death. It Is for the Bramins interest that the poor miserable
creatures should continue in their resolutions; for all their Bracelets as well
about their legs as their arms, the Pendents in their ears; their Rings
sometimes of Gold, sometimes of Silver; (for the poor wear only Copper and
Tin,) all these belong to the Bramins, who rake for them among the Ashes when
the party is burned.

I have seen Women burnt after three several manners, according to the
difference of the Country. In the Kingdom of Guzerat, as far as Agra and
Dehli, they set up a little Hut above twelve foot square upon the bank of a
Pond or River. It Is made of Reeds, and all sorts of small Wood, with which they
mingle certain pots of Oil and other Drugs to make it burn more vehemently. The
Woman is placed in the middle of the Hut, in a half-lying-down posture, leaning
her head upon a kind of a wooden Bolster, and resting her back against a
Pillar, to which the Bramin ties her about the middle, for fear ^he should run
away when she feels the fire. In this posture she holds the body of her
deceased Husband upon her knees, chewing Betle all the while: and when she has
continued in this posture about half an hour, the Bramin goes out, and the
woman bids them set fire to the Hut; which is immediately done by the Bramins,
and the kindred and friends of the Woman; who also cast several pots of Oil
into the fire, to put the Woman the sooner out of her pain. After the Woman is
burnt, the Bramins search the Ashes for all her Bracelets, Pendants and Rings,
whether Gold, Silver, Copper or Tin, which is all free booty to themselves.

In Bengala they burn the Woman after another fashion. In that Country a Woman
must be very poor that does not accompany the Body of her deceased Husband to
the Ganges to wash his Body, and to be washed her self before she is burnt. I
have seen dead Carcasses brought to the Ganges above twenty days journey off
from the place, and smelt 'em to boot; for the scent of them has been
intollerably noysom. There was one that came from the Northern Mountains near
the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Boutan, with the body of her Husband carried in
a Wagon; she traveled twenty days a-foot, and neither eat nor drank for 15 or
16 days together till she came to the Ganges, where after she had washed the
body that stank abominably, and had afterward washed her self, she was burnt
with him with an admirable constancy. Before the Woman that is to be burnt,
goes the Music, consisting of Drums, Flutes and Hautboys, whom the Woman in
her best Accoutrements follows, dancing up to the very Funeral-pile, upon which
she gets up, and places her self as if she were sitting up in her Bed; and then
they lay across her the body of her Husband. When that is done, her kindred
and friends, some bring her a Letter, some a piece of Calicut, another pieces
of Silver or Copper, and desire her to deliver them to their Mother, or
Brother, or some other Kinsman or Friend. When the woman sees they have all
done, she asks the Standers-by three times, if they have nothing more of
service to command her; if they make no answer, she ties up all she has got in
a piece of Taffata, which she puts between her own belly, and the body of her
Husband, bidding them to set fire to the Pile; which is presently done by the
Bramins and her Kindred. I have observed, because there is scarcity of Wood in
Bengala, that when these poor Creatures are half griddl'd, they cast their
bodies into the Ganges, where the remains are devoured by the Crocodiles.

I must not forget a wicked custom practiced by the Idolaters of Bengala. When
a Woman is brought to bed, and the Child will not take to the Teat, they carry
it out of the Village, and putting it into a Linen Cloth, which they fast'n
by the four Corners to the Boughs of a Tree, they there leave it from morning
till evening. By this means the poor Infant is exposed to be tormented by the
Crows, insomuch that there are some who have their eyes picked out of their
heads: which is the reason that in Bengala you shall see many of these
Idolaters that have but one eye, and some that have lost both. In the evening
they fetch the child away, to try whether he will suck the next night; and if
he still refuse the teat, they carry him again to the same place next morning;
which they do for three days together; after which, if the Infant after that
refuses to suck, they believe him to be a Devil, and throw him into Ganges, or
any the next Pond or River. In the places where the Apes breed, these poor
Infants are not so exposed to the Crows; for where the Ape discovers a Nest of
those Birds, he climbs the Tree, and throws the Nest one way and the Eggs
another. Sometimes some charitable people among the English, Hollanders, and
Portugals, compassionating the misfortune of those Children, will take them
away from the Tree, and give them good education.

All along the Coast of Cormandel, when the Woman are to be burnt with their
Husbands, they make a great hole in the ground nine or ten foot deep, and
twenty-five or thirty foot square, into which they throw a great quantity of
Wood and Drugs to make the fire burn more fiercely. When the fire is kindled,
they set the body of the man upon the brink; and then presently up comes the
Woman dancing and chewing Betle; accompanied by her Friends and Kindred, with
Drums beating, and Flutes sounding. Then the Woman takes three turns round the
hole, and every time she has gone the round, she kisses her Friends and
Kindred. After the third time the Bramins casts the Carcass of her Husband into
the flame; and the woman standing with her back to the fire, is pusht in by the
Bramins also, and tumbles backward. Then her Kindred and Friends cast Oil and
other combustile Drugs upon the fire, to make it burn more vehemently, that the
Bodies may be the sooner consumed.

In most places upon the Coast of Cormandel, the Women are not burnt with their
deceased Husbands, but they are buried alive with them in holes which the
Bramins make a foot deeper than the tallness of the man and woman. Usually they
choose a Sandy place; so that when the man and woman are both let down together,
all the Company with Baskets of Sand fill up the hole above half a foot higher
than the surface of the ground, after which they jump and dance upon it, till
they believe the woman to be stifled.

When some of the Idolaters upon the Coast of Cormandel are upon the point of
death, their Friends do not carry them to the side of a River or Lake to
cleanse their Souls, but they carry them to the fattest Cow they can find; and
laying the sick party just behind the Cow, they lift up her Tail, and provoke
her to piss. If she piss, so that it falls upon the face of the sick party, all
the Company are overjoyed, saying, that his Soul is happy. But if the Cow do
not piss, to wash the sick parties face, they burn him with a great deal of
sadness. If a Cow be sick, the owner must be careful to lead her to a Pond or
River; for should she dye at his House, the Bramins would fine him.

CHAP. X.
Remarkable Story of Women that have been burnt after their. Husband decease.
THE Raja of Velou having lost his City and his life, through the loss of a
Battle gained against him by the King of Visapour's General, he was extremely
lamented at Court. Eleven of his Wives also were no less concerned for his
death, and resolved to be burnt when his Body was burned. The General of
Visapour's Army understanding their resolution thought at first to divert them,
by promising them all kind usage. But finding persuasions, would not prevail,
he ordered them to be shut up in a Room. He who had the order, going to put it
in execution, the Women in a rage told him, that 'twas to no purpose to keep
them Prisoners, for if they might not have leave to do what they had resolved,
in three hours there would not one of them be alive. The person entrusted,
laughed at their threats; but the Keeper of those women opening the door at the
end of the three hours, found them all stretched out dead upon the place,
without any mark in the world to be seen that they had any way hastened their
own deaths.

Two of the most potent Raja's of India came to Agra in the year 1642, to do
homage to Sha-jehan, who then reigned; who not having acquitted themselves as
they ought to have done, in the judgment of the Grand-Master of the Kings
Household, he told one of the Raja's one day, in the presence of the King, that
they had not done well, to behave themselves in that manner toward so great a
Monarch, as was the King his Master. The Raja looking upon himself to be a
great King, and a great Prince, he and his Brother having brought along with
them a Train of 15 or 16000 thousand Horse, was netl'd at the bold reproof
which the Grand Master gave him, and drawing out his Dagger, slew him upon the
place, in the presence of the King. The Grand Master falling at the feet of his
own Brother, who stood close by him, he was going about to revenge his death,
but was prevented by the Raja's Brother, who stabbed him, and laid him athwart
his Brothers Body. The King, who beheld these two murders one upon the neck of
the other, retired into his Haram for fear. But presently the Omrahs and other
people fell upon the Raja's, and cut 'em to pieces. The King incensed at such
an attempt committed in his House and in his presence, commanded the Rajah's
bodies to be thrown into the River; which their Troops that they had left about
Agra understanding, threatened to enter the City and pillage it. But rather
than hazard the City, the King was advised to deliver them the Bodies of their
Princes. When they were to be burned, thirteen Women belonging to the two
Raja's Houses, came dancing and leaping, and presently got upon the Funeral
pile, holding one another by the hands, and being presently after stifled with
the smoke, fell together into the fire. Presently the Bramins threw great heaps
of Wood, pots of Oil, and other combustible matter upon them, to dispatch them
the sooner.

I observed a strange passage at Patna, being then with the Governor, a young
Gentleman of about twenty-four years of age, in his own House. While I was with
him, in came a young woman, very handsome, and not above two and twenty years
old, who desired leave of the Governor to be burnt with the Body of her
deceased Husband. The Governor compassionating her youth and beauty,
endeavored to divert her from her resolution; but finding he could not
prevail, with a surly countenance, he asked her whether she understood what the
torment of fire was, and whether she had ever burnt her fingers? No, no,
answered she more stoutly than before, I do not fear fire, and to let you know
as much, send for a lighted Torch, hither. The Governor abominating her
answer, in great passion bid her go to the Devil. Some young Lords that were
with the Governor, desired him to try the Woman, and to call for a Torch;
which with much ado he did, and a lighted Torch was brought. So soon as the
woman saw the lighted Torch coming, she ran to meet it, and held her hand in
the flame, not altering her countenance in the least; still searing her arm
along up to the very elbow, till her flesh looked as if it had been broiled;
whereupon the Governor commanded her out of his sight.

A Bramin coming to Patna, and assembling all his Tribe together, told them,
that they must give him two thousand Roupies, and twenty-seven Else of Calicut.
To which the chief among them made him answer, that they were poor, and could
not possible raise such a sum. However he persisted in his demand, positively
affirming to them, that he would stay there without eating or drinking till
they brought him the Money and the Cloth. With this resolution he climbed a
Tree, and setting in the fork between the boughs, remained there without eating
or drinking for several days. The noise of this extravagance coming to the ears
of the Hollanders where we lay, we set Sentinels to watch whether it were true,
that a man could sit so long without victuals, which he did for thirty days
together. The one and thirtieth day of such an extraordinary Fast, the
Idolaters fearing to kill one of their Priests for want of granting him his
demand, club'd together, and brought him his twenty-seven Else of Calicut, and
two thousand Roupies. So soon as the Bramin saw the Money and the Cloth, he
came down from the Tree; and after he had upbraided those of his Tribe for want
of Charity, he distributed all the Roupies among the poor, reserving only five
or six for himself. The Cloth he cut into little pieces, and gave away, keeping
only to himself enough to cover his own makedness; and having made this
distribution, he disappeared of a suddeh, and no body knew what became of him,
though dilligent search was made after him.

When a Chinese lies at the point of death, all his Kindred and Friends gather
about him, and ask him whither he intends to go; they tell him also, that if he
want any thing, he need but only ask and have, let it be Gold, Silver, or a
Woman. When they are dead they perform many Ceremonies at their Funerals, which
consists chiefly in artificial fires, wherein the Chinese are the most expert
in the world; so that he must be a very poor man that has no fireworks at his
Funeral. Besides that, they put Money in a little Box, and bury it by the
deceased; and leave good store of victuals upon the Grave, out of an opinion
that they rise and eat. Which the Soldiers of Batavia observing, used to fill
their Bellies at these Graves every time they walked their rounds. But when the
Chinese perceived it, they poisoned the victuals to spoil the Dutchmens
feasting. The Townsmen of Batavia taking the Soldiers part, accused the
Chinese for poisoning several of the Dutch. But the Chinese pleaded, that if
the Soldiers had over-eat themselves, or surfeited themselves upon what was
left for the dead to eat, 'twas none of their fault; for that they did not
leave their victuals for the Soldiers; and besides that, among all the
multitudes which they had buried, they never had heard the least complaint
before of any one that ever came by any harm by eating their food. Thus the
business was hushed over; nor did the Soldiers dare to pilfer any more.

CHAP. IX.
Of the most celebrated Pagods of the Idolaters in India.
THE Indian Idolaters have a great number of Temples, small and great which
they call Pagods, where they pray to their Gods, and make their Offerings. But
the poor people that live in the Woods and Mountains, and remote from Towns,
are contented only with some stone, whereon they make a rude kind of Nose, and
paint it with some Vermillion color, which serves all the whole neighborhood
to worship.

The four most celebrated Pagods, are Jagrenate, Banarous, Matura, and Tripeti.

Jagrenate is one of the mouths of Ganges, whereupon is built the Great Pagod,
where the Arch Bramin, or chief Priest among the Idolaters keeps his residence.
The great Idol that stands upon the Altar in the innermost part of the Pagod,
has two Diamonds for his Eyes, and another that hangs about his neck, the least
of those Diamonds weighing about forty Carats. About his Arms he wears
Bracelets sometimes of Pearls, and sometimes of Rubies; and this magnificent
Idol is called Resora. The Revenues of this Pagod are sufficient to seed
fifteen or twenty thousand Pilgrims every day; which is a number often seen
there, that Pagod being the greatest place of devotion in all India. But you
must take notice, that no Goldsmith is suffered to enter this Pagod, because
that one of them being locked in all night long, stole a Diamond out of one of
the Idols eyes. As he was about to go out, when the Pagod was opened in the
morning, he died at the door; their God, as they affirm, revenging his own
sacriledg. That which renders this Pagod, which is a large building the most
considerable in all India, is, because it is situated upon the Ganges; the
Idolaters believing that the waters of that River have a particular quality to
cleanse them from their sins. That which makes it so rich (for it maintains
above twenty thousand Cows) is the vast Alms that are continually bestowed by
so incredible a multitude as comes from all parts. Which Alms are not so much
as at the discretion of the Donor, at the Will of the chief Priest, who before
he gives them leave to shave and wash in Ganges, taxes them according to their
quality, of which he has information. Thus he collects vasts sums, of which he
makes little or no profit himself; all going to feed the poor, and the repair
of the Pagod. The chief Bramin causes Victuals to be distributed to the
Pilgrims every day; as Milk, Rice, Butter and Wheat; but to the poor, who want
wherewithal to coo^ it, they distribute their food ready dresst. In the
morning they boil a quantity of Rice in Earth'n pots of different bigness; and
at the hour when the Pilgrims come for their meat, the chief Bramin orders
another Bramin to take a pot* of boiled Rice; this pot he lets fall; and if
there be five, the pot breaks into five equal parts, and every one takes his
own share. And in the same manner he breaks it into more pieces, if there be
more persons, to whom he is to distribute the food. Which is a thing very
strange and worthy observation. They never boil twice in an Earthen pot; but in
a Copper pot^* nor have they any other Dishes, than only certain Leaves, which
they fasten together, and a certain kind of a Basin, about a foot in compass,
wherein they melt their Butter, and stir the Rice with the ends of their
fingers when they eat. They have also a kind of a Shell, wherein they pour
their melted Butter, which they will swallow down, as we do Sack.

Now for the description of a particular Idol which stands upon the Altar in
the Pagod of Jagrenate: It is covered from the Shoulders downward with a great
Mantle that hangs down upon the Altar. This Mantle is of Tissue of Gold or
Silver, according to the Solemnities. At first it had neither feet nor hands;
but after one of their Phropets was taken up into Heaven, while they were
lamenting what to do for another, God sent them an Angel in the likeness of
that Prophet, to the end they might continue their Veneration toward him. Now
while this Angel was busy in making this Idol, the people grew so impatient,
that they took him out of the Angels hands, and put him into the Pagod, without
hands or feet; but finding that the Idol appeared in that manner too deformed,
they made him hands and arms of those small Pearls which we call Ounce-Pearls.
As for his feet, they are never seen, being hid under his Cloak. There is no
part open but his hands and feet; the head and body being of Sandal-wood; round
about the Dnomo, under which this Idol stands, being very high, from the bottom
to the top, are only Niches filled with other Idols; the greatest part whereof
represent most hideous Monsters, being all of different colors. On each side
of this Pagod, there stands another much less, where the Pilgrims make their
lesser Offerings. And some that have in sickness, or upon business made any
Vows to any Deity, bring thither the resemblance thereof in remembrance of the
good which they have received. They rub this Idol every day with sweet Oils,
that make it of a black color. And at the right hand of this Idol sits his
Sister, who stands upon her feet, and is well clad, being called by the name
Sotora; upon his left, stands his Brother, clothed all over also, whom they
call Balhadar. Before the Idol, somewhat toward his lest hand, stands the Idols
Wife upon her feet, all of massy Gold, by the name of Remin; whereas the other
three, are only of Sandalwood.

The other two Pagods are appointed for the residence of the chief Bramin, and
other Bramins that officiate in the great Pagod. All these Bramins go with
their heads bare, and for the most part shaved; having no other Clothes but
only one piece of Calicut, with one half whereof they cover their bodies; the
other part serves them instead of a Scarf. Near the Pagod stands the Tomb of
one of their Prophets, whose name was Cabir, to whom they give great honor.
You are to take notice also, that their Idols stand upon a kind of Altar
encompassed with Iron Bars. For no persons are to touch them, but only certain
Bramins, appointed for that service by the chief Bramin.

Next to that of Jagrenate, the most famous Pagod is that of Banurous, being
also feated upon the Ganges, in a City that bears the same name. That which is
most remarkable is, that from the Gate of the Pagod to the River there is a
descent all of Stone; near to which are certain Platforms, and small blind
Chambers, some of the Bramins lodging, others where they dress th^^ victuals;
for so soon as the Idolaters have said their Prayers, and made their Offerings,
they dress their food, not suffering any person to touch it but themselves, for
fear lest any unclean person should come near it. But above all things, they
passionately desire to drink of Ganges water; for as often as they drink it,
they are washed, as they believe, from all their sins. Great numbers of these
Bramins go every day to the cleanest part of the River, where they fill their
little round earthen-pots full of water, the mouths whereof are very small, and
contain every one of them a Bucket-full. Being thus filled they bring them
before the great Priest, who covers them with a fine piece of flame-colour'd
Calicut, three or four times doubled, to which he sets his Seal. The Bramins
carry these pots, some six of them tied together with six little cords fastened
to the end of a stick as broad as a lath, shifting their shoulders often;
traveling sometimes three or four hundred leagues with those precious
burdens up into the Country. Where they sell it, or present it; but that is
only to the rich, from whence they expect great rewards. There are some of the
Idolaters, who when they make any great Feast, especially when they marry their
children, will drink four or five hundred Crowns in this water. They never
drink of it till the end of their meals; and then a glass or two according to
the liberality of the Master of the Feast. The chief reason why they esteem the
water of Ganges so highly, is, because it never putrifies, nor engenders any
Vermin; though I know not whether they may be believed, considering the great
quantity of dead bodies which they fling into the Ganges.

The body of the Pagod of Banarous is made like a Cross, as are all the rest of
the Pagods, the four parts whereof are equal. In the midst there is a Cupola
raised very high, the top whereof is pyramidal; at the end also of every four
parts of the Cross there is a Tower, to which there is an ascent on the
outside. Before you come to the top, there are several Balconies and Niches
wherein to take the fresh air: and round about are figures of all sorts of
creatures, but very Lend work. Under the Duomo, in the middle of the Pagod
there is an Altar, like a Table, eight foot long, and six foot broad, with two
steps before, that serve for a footstool, which is covered sometimes with a
rich Tapestry, sometimes with Silk, sometimes with Cloth of Gold or Silver,
according to the solemnity of their Festival. Their Altars are covered with
Cloth of Gold or Silver, or else with some painted Calicuts. Approaching the
entry of the Pagod, you see the Altar right before ye, together with the Idols
which are upon it. For the Women and Virgins worship without, not being
permitted to enter the Pagod, no more than is a certain Tribe which is among
them. Among the Idols that stand upon the great Altar, there is one placed
upright some five or six foot high; but you can see neither arms, nor legs, nor
body: nothing appears but the head and neck, all the rest being covered down to
the Altar with a Robe that spreads it self below. Sometimes you shall see the
neck set out with some rich Chain either of Gold, Rubies, Pearls or Emraulds.
This Idol was made in honor and likeness of Bainma-don, who was heretofore a
very great and holy Personage among them, whose name they oft'n have in their
mouths. Upon the right-side of the Altar stands the figure of a Chimera, part
Elephant, part Horse, part Mule. It is of massive Gold, and they call it Garou,
not suffering any person to approach it but the Bramins. They say it is the
resemblance of the Beast which carried that holy person when he lived upon
earth. And that he traveled long journeys upon his back, to see if the people
remained in their duty, and whether they did no wrong one to another. Between
the great Gate and the great Altar upon the left hand, there is a little Altar,
upon which there stands an Idol of black Marble sitting crosslegg'd, about two
foot high. While I was there, a little Boy who was the Son of the High Priest
stood upon the left-side of the Altar, and all the people threw him certain
pieces of Taffata, or imbroider'd Calicut, like Handkerchiefs, all which he
returned to the people again after he had wiped them upon the Idol. Others
threw him Bracelets of Coral, others of yellow-Amber, others threw him fruits
and flowers; whatever they threw him, he rubbed it upon the Idol, put it to his
lips, and then restored it to the people. This Idol is called Morli-Ram, that
is to say God* Morli, and was the Brother of him that stands upon the great
Altar.

Under the Portal of the Pagod sits one of the principal Bramins with a great
Basin by him, full of a yellow color mixed with water. All these poor
Idolaters come and present themselves before him, who gives them a mark from
between the eyes to the top of the nose, then upon the arms, and upon the
stomach; by which marks they know who have washed themselves in Ganges, and who
not. Those that never washed themselves but in the waters of their own Wells,
or have only sent for it from the River, they do not belive to be perfectly
purified, and by consequence they are not to be marked with that color. By the
way take notice, that these Idolaters are marked with different colors,
according to the Tribe they are of. But in the Empire of the Great Mogul, they
who are painted with yellow compose the biggest Tribe, and are the least
defiled. For when they are necessitated to the deeds of nature, some think it
enough to wash the part defiled; but they first rub the part with a handful of
sand, then they scour it with water. After so doing, they affirm their bodies
to be clean, and that they can eat their food without fear.

Near to this great Pagod upon the Summer-West, stands a kind of a College,
which the Raja Jesseing, the most potent of all the Idolaters in the Mogul's
Empire, built for the education of the youth of the better sort. I saw two of
the children of that Prince there at School, who had for their Masters several
Bramins, who trught them to write and read in a language peculiar to the
Idolaters Priests, and far different from the speech of the common people.
Entering into the Court of that College, and casting my eyes up, I discovered
two Galleries that went round the Court, where I saw the two Princes sitting,
attended by several petty Lords and Bramins, who made several Mathematical
Figures upon the ground with chalk. The two Princes seeing me, sent to know who
I was; and understanding that I was a Frank, they sent for me up, and asked me
several questions touching Europe, and particularly touching France. Whereupon
there being two Globes in the room which the Hollanders had given the Bramins,
I showed the Princes where France lay upon one of them. After I had taken
leave, I asked one of the Bramins when I might see the Pagod open: he answered
me, the next morning before Sunrising. When I came there, I observed before
the door, a Gallery supported with Pillars, where there was already a great
crowd of men, women and children expecting when the Pagod would be opened. By
and by, the Gallery, and a great part of the Court being full, there came eight
Bramins, four of each side of the Gate, with every one a Censer in his hand,
followed by a rabble of other Bramins that made a hideous noise with Drums and
other Instruments. The two eldest of the Bramins sing a Song; and then all the
people falling into the tune, fall a singing and playing, with every one a
Peacock's-tail, or some other kind of flable, to drive away the flies, that the
Idol may not be annoid when they open the Pagod. This fanning, and the Music,
lasted a good half hour. Then the two principal Bramins made a great noise
three times with two little Bells, and with a kind of a Mallet knocked at the
Pagod-door. Which was presently opened by six Bramins within, discovering, some
six or seven paces from the entrance, an Alter with an Idol upon it, which they
call Ram, Ram, the Sister of Morli-Ram. Upon her right hand she has a child
made like a great Cupid, which they call the God La-Kemin, and in her left-arm
a little Girl, which they call the Goddess Sita. So soon as the Pagod was open,
and that a great Curtain was drawn, the people, who perceived the Idol, fell
upon the ground, laying their hands upon their heads, and prostrating
themselves three times. Then rising up, they threw great quantities of Nosegays
and Garlands to the Priests; with which the Bramins touched the Idol, and then
restored them again. Before the Alter stood a Bramin, who held in his hand a
lamp of nine wieks lighted* upon which he cast Incense every foot, land then
held it to the Idol. All these ceremonies lasted above an hour; after which the
people departed, and the Pagod was shut. They presented the Idol with great
store of Rice, Meal, Butter, Oil, and Milk-meats, of which the Bramins lose
nothing. Now in regard this Idol is the representation of a Woman, the Women
all invoke it, and call her their Patroness: which is the reason that the place
is generally crowded with Women and Maids. The Raja, to have this Idol in the
Pagod of his own house, and for taking it out of the great Pagod, has expended
as well upon the Bramins, as in alms to the poor, above five Lacres of Roupies,
or 750000 Livres of our Money.

On the other side of the Street where the College is built, there stands
another Pagod, called Richourdas, from the name of the Idol, which is within
upon the Altar: and somewhat lower upon another small Altar stands another
Idol, which they call Goupaidas, the Brother of Richourdas. You see nothing but
the face of all these Idols, which is either of wood or jet; unless it be the
Idol of Morly-Ram, which stands in the great Pagod stark naked. As for the Idol
Ram-Kam, which stands in the Raja's Pagod, it has two Diamonds instead of eyes,
which the Prince caused to be set there, with a Collar of Pearl, and Canopy
over his head, supported with four Silver-Pillars.

Some eight days journey from Banarous, bending Northward, you enter into a
Mountainous Country; but which sometimes op'ns it self into very large plains,
sometimes three or four leagues in length. They are very fertile in Corn, Rice,
Wheat, and Pulse. But that which is the plague and ruin of the people of that
Country, is the vast number of Elephants that breed there, and devour their
Harvest. If a Caravan pass through any part of that Country where there are no
Inns, in regard the people are forced to lie in the open Fields, they have much
ado to defend themselves from the Elephants that will come to take away their
provisions. To skare them, the people make great fires, shoot off their
Muskets, hooping and hollowing ever and anon. In this place there is another
Pagod, well built, and very ancient, adorned with many figures both within and
without, which are only the representations of Maids and Women; so that Men are
seldom known to repair thither for devotion's-sake; and therefore it is called
the Women's Pagod. There is an Altar in the middle, as in other Pagods; and upon
the Altar an Idol of massy Gold, four foot high, representing a Maid standing
upright, which they call Ram-Marion. At her right hand stands a Child of massy
Silver, about two foot high; and they say that the Maid lived a very holy life,
that that Child was brought to her by the Bramins to he instructed in her
belief, and in the knowledge of well-living: but that after two or three years
that the Child had lived with her, the Infant grew so knowing and ready witted,
that all the Raja's of the Country longed for her company; so that being
stoll'n from her one night, she was never seen afterward. Upon the left hand
of this Idol, stands another Idol, representing an old Man; who, as they say,
was the servant of Ram-Marion and the Infant: for which reason the Bramins do
very much reverence this Idol. They never come but once a year in devotion, but
they must be there upon a prefixed day, which is the first of November, though
they never open the Pagod till the full of the Moon. During those fifteen days,
the Pilgrims, as well Men as Women, fast from time to time, and wash themselves
three times a day, not leaving a hair in any part of their bodies, which they
take off with a certain earth.

CHAP. XII.
A Continuation of the description of the principal Pagods of the Indian
Idolaters.
NEXT to the Pagods of Ingrenate and Banarous, the most considerable is that of
Matura, about eighteen leagues from Agra, upon the way to Dehly. It is one of
the most sumptuous Edifices in all India, and the place to which the greatest
number of Pilgrims was wont to resort: But now there are very few or none; the
Idolaters having sensibly lost the reverence which they had for that Pagod,
since the River of Gemena, that formerly ran by that Pagod, has changed its
course, above half a league from it. For it requires so much time to return to
the Pagod, after they have washed in the River, that they were many times
defiled again before they could reach it. Though this Pagod stand in a bottom,
yet you may discover it five or six leagues before you come at it, the building
being very lofty and magnificent. The Stones are of a red color, which they
fetch from a Quarry, near Agra. They cleave like our Slates, some of them being
fifteen foot long, and nine or ten foot broad, yet not above six fingers thick,
especially when you cleave them as you would have them for use: They also make
very fair Pillars. The Fortress of Agra, the Walls of Jebanabat, the King's
House, the two Mosquees, and several Noblemens Houses are all built of this
Stone.

The Pagod is built upon a great Platform of an Octogonal Figure, paved with
Freestone; being adorned round about with the figures of all sorts of
creatures, especially Apes. There is an ascent to it two ways of fifteen or
sixteen steps a-piece, every step being two foot broad, for two persons to go
a-brest. One of the ascents leads up to the great Portal of the Pagod, the
other behind up to the Chancel. The Pagod does not take up above half the
Platform, the other half serving for a Piazza before it. The Structure is in
the form of a Cross, like the rest of the Pagods, in the midst whereof a great
Duomo, with two others of each side somewhat less, advance themselves above the
rest of the building. The outside of the building from top to bottom is
adorned with the figures of Rams, Apes and Elephants, and several sorts of
Monsters. From one foot below every one of these Duomo's to the Roof, at such
and such spaces, are Windows, some five, some six feet high, and to every
Window, belongs a Balcone, where four persons may stand. Every Balcone is
covered with a little Arch, supported by four Pillars, others by eight, every
two touching one another. Round about the Duomo's are Niches filled with the
figures of Demons. Some with four arms, some with four legs. Some with men's
heads upon the bodies of Beasts, and long tails that hang down to their
thighs: There are abundance of Apes; and indeed it is an ugly sight to behold
so many deformed spectacles. There is but one great door to the Pagod, upon
each side whereof there are Pillars and Figures of Men and Monsters. The
hinder-part is closed with a close Balister of Stone-Pillars five or six inches
in Diameter, into which, as into a kind of Sanctum Sanctorum, none but the
Bramins are permitted to enter: but for Money, I got in, and saw a square Altar
some fifteen or sixten foot from the door covered with an old Tissue of Gold
and Silver, upon which stood the great Idol, which they call Ram, Ram. You see
nothing but his head, which is of a very black Marble, with two Rubies instead
of eyes. All the body, from the shoulders to the feet, is covered with a Robe
of Purple-Velvet, with some small embroidery. There are two other Idols of each
side of him two foot high, apparrell'd in the same manner; only their faces are
white, which they call Becchor. There I saw a Machine sixteen foot square, and
between twelve and fifteen foot high; covered with painted Calicuts,
representing the shapes of Devils. This Machine running upon four Wheels, they
told me, was a moving Altar, upon which they carried their great God in
Procession to visit the other Gods, as also to the River, whither all the
people went upon their great Festival.

The fourth Pagod is that of Tripeti, in the Province of Carnatica, toward the
Coast of Coromandel, and Cape Comorin. I saw it as I went to Maslipatan. It is
a Pagod to which there belong a great number of little lodgings for the
Bramins: so that altogether it seems to be a great Town. There are several
Ponds round about it; but their superstition is so great, that no Passenger
dare take any water out of them, but what the Bramin gives him.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Pilgrimages of the Idolaters to their Pagods.
ALL the Idolaters under the Dominion of the Great Mogul, and other Princes,
both on this side and beyond Ganges, at least once in their lives go in
Pilgrimage to one of these Pagods that I have named; but most generally to that
of Ingrenate, as being the first and most considerable above all the rest. The
Bramins and rich people go oftener. For some go every four years, some every
six, or eight; and putting the Idols of their Pagods upon Pallekies covered
with Tissues, they travel with their Bramins, as it were in procession to the
Pagod which they most esteem.

They go not in Pilgrimage, one by one, or two and two, but whole Towns, and
many times several Towns together. The poor that go a great way, are supplied
by the rich; who spend very freely in such acts of Charity. The rich travel in
Pallekies or Chariots, the poor on foot, or upon Oxen; the Wife carrying the
Child, and the man the Kitchen Implements.

The Idol which they carry in procession, by way of visit, and out of respect
to the great Ram-Ram, lies at length in a rich Palleky, covered with Tissue of
Gold and Silver, fringed as richly; the Mattress and Bolster being of the same
stuff under the head, feet, and elbows. The Bramins also distribute Flabels to
the most considerable of the Company, the handles whereof being eight foot
long, are plated with Gold and Silver. The Flabel being three foot in Diameter,
of the same Tissue as the Pallekies; round about, it is adorned with Peacocks
Feathers to gather more wind, and sometimes with Bells to make a kind of
tingling. There are six of these Flabels usually employed to keep off the Flies
from their God; the better sort taking it by turns, that the honor of waiting
upon their God may be more equally shared.

CHAP. XIV.
Of diverse Customs of the Indian Idolaters.
THE Bramins are well skilled in Astrology; and will exactly foretell to the
people the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. The second of July 1666, about one a
Clock in the afternoon, at Patna in Bengala, there was an Eclipse of the Sun;
at which time it was a prodigious thing to see the multitudes of people, men,
women, and children, that ran to the River Ganges, to wash themselves. But it
behooves them to begin to wash three days before the Eclipse; all which time
they labor day and night in providing all sorts of Rice Milk, Meats, and
Sweatmeats, to throw to the Fish and Crocodiles, as soon as the Bramins give
the word. Whatever Eclipse it be whether of the Sun or Moon, the Idolaters as
soon a^ it appears, break all their Earthen Pots and Dishes in the house, which
makes a hideous noise altogether.

Every Bramin has his Magic Book, wherein are abundance of Circles and
Semicircles, Squares, Triangles, and several sorts of Cifers. They also make
several Figures upon the ground, and when they find that the good hour is come,
they cry aloud to the people to feed the fish. Then there ensues a most
horrible Din of Drums, Bells, and great noise of sounding Metal, which they
twang one against another. And as soon as the victuals are thrown into the
River, the people are to go in and wash and rub themselves till the Eclipse be
over. So that in regard the waters were at that time very high, for more than
three Leagues above and below the City, and all the breadth of the River, there
was nothing to be seen but the heads of the people. As for the Bramins, they
stay ashore to receive the richer sort, and those that give most; to dry their
bodies and to give them dry Linen to their bellies. Afterward they cause them
to sit down in a Chair, where the most liberal of the Idolaters have provided
Rice, Pulfe, Milk, Butter, Sugar, Meal, and Wood. Before the Chair the Bramin
makes a place very clean about five foot square; then with Cow Dung steeped in
a kind of yellow Basin, he rubs all the place, for fear any Emet should come
there to be burnt. For indeed they would never make use of Wood if they could
help it; and when they do, they are very careful that there be no Worms or
Insects in it. In the place which they have thus cleans'd, they draw several
Figures, as Triangles, Ovals, Half-Ovals, etc. Then upon every Figure they lay
a little Cows-dung, with two or three small sticks of Wood, upon every one of
which they lay a several sort of Grain; after that pouring Butter, and setting
fire to each; by the smoke which rises, they judge of the plenty of every sort
of Grain that year.

When the Moon is at the full in March, they keep a solemn Festival for their
Idol, which is in form of a Serpent. This Festival continues nine days; and
when it comes, they do nothing but make Holiday all the while, as well men as
beasts, which they beautify by making Circles about their eyes with
Vermillion, with which they also color the Horns; and if they have a
particular kindness for the beast, they hang them with Leaves of Gilded Tin.
Every morning they worship the Idol, and the Maids dance about it for an hour,
to the noise of Fluits and Drums; after which they eat and drink and are merry
till the evening, and then they worship and dance about their Idol again.

Though the Idolaters never drink any strong drink at other times, yet at this
Festival they drink Palm-wine, and strong water, which is made of the same in
remote Villages; for else their Mohammedan Governor would not suffer them to
make Wine, nor to sell any which might be brought out of Persia.

Their strong Water is thus made: They take a great Earthen pot, well glazed
within, which they call Martavane; into one of these Vessels, that holds three
hundred Paris pints, of Palma-wine, they put in fifty or sixty pound of brown
Sugar unrefin'd, which looks like yellow Wax; with about twenty pound of a
great thick bark of a Thorn, not much unlike that which our Leather-dressers
use. This bark sets the Palma-wine a bubling and working just like our new
wines, for five or six days together, till it becomes of a sweet Liquor, as
sour as our Crabs. Then they distill it, and according to the taste they would
give, they either put into a Cauldron full, a little Bag of Mace, or three or
four handfuls of Annise-seed. They can make it also as strong as they please.

Being at Agra in the year 1642, an Idolater, whose name was Woldas, Broaker to
the Hollanders, about seventy years of age, receiving news that the chief
Bramin at the Pagod of Matura was dead, went to the Hollander and desired him
to even all accounts; for said he, the chief Priest being dead, it behooves me
to dye, that I may serve him in the other world. Thereupon having ended his
accounts, he took his Coach, with some of his Kindred; but having neither eaten
nor drank from the time he received the news, he died by the way; having
famished himself for grief.

The Indian Idolaters have a custom, that when any person gives a thing, they
snap their fingers, crying out, Gi-Narami, remember Narami, who was a great
Saint among them, for fear the Evil Spirit, should enter into the body of him
that gives.

Being at Surat in the year 1653, a Raspoute being demanded Custom for three or
four pieces of Calicut, boldly asked the Governor, whether a Soldier that had
served the King all his lifetime, ought to pay Custom for two or three pitiful
pieces of Calicut, not worth four or five Roupies; telling him it was only to
cloth his Wife and Children. The Governor netl'd at his sawciness, called him
Be^hico, or Son of a Whore; adding, that if he were Prince he would make him
pay his Customs. Whereupon the Soldier incensed at the affront, making as if
he felt for Money to pay his dues, bearing up to the Governor, stabbed him in
the belly, so that he died immediately. But the Soldier was presently cut in
pieces by the Governors Servants.

Though the Idolaters are in utter darkness as to the knowledge of the true God,
however the Law of Nature teaches them Morality in many things. When they are
married they are seldom false to their Wives. Adultery is very rare among them.
And as for Sodomy I never heard it mentioned. They marry their Children between
seven and eight years old, for fear they should fall into that vice; the
Ceremonies whereof are these: The day before the Nuptials, the Bridegroom,
accompanied by all his Kindred, goes to the House where the Bride lives, with a
great pair of Bracelets, two fingers thick, hollow within, and in two pieces,
with a hinge in the middle to open them. According to the quality of the Bride
those Bracelets are of more or less value, sometimes of Gold, sometimes of
Silver, Tin, or Latten, the poorest sort of all making use of Lead. The next
day there is a great Feast at the Bridegrooms House, whither all the Kindred on
both sides are invited, and about three a Clock in the afternoon the Bride is
brought thither. Then the chief of the Bramins that are there, of which there
are always several laying the head of the Bride to the Bridegrooms, pronounces
several words, sprinkling their heads and bodies all the while with water. Then
they bring him upon Plates or Fig Leaves several sorts of Meats, Calicuts, and
Stuffs; and then the Bramin asks the Bridegroom, whether so long as God shall
make him able, he will let his Wife share with him, and whether he will
endeavor to maintain her by his labor. If he says yes, they all set
themselves down to the Feast prepared for them, where every one eats by
himself. If the Bride be rich, and be acquainted among the Nobility, their
Weddings are very pompous and expensive. The Bridegroom is mounted upon an
Elephant, and the Bride rides in a Chariot; the whole Company carrying Torches
in their hands. They also borrow of the Governor and the Nobility of the
place, as many Elephants and prancing Horses as they can get. And they walk
some part of the night with Fireworks, which they throw about the Streets and
Piazza's. But the greatest expense to those that live three or four hundred
Leagues from it, is to get the water of Ganges; for in regard they account that
water sacred, and drink it out of devotion* it must be brought them by the
Bramins, and in Earthen Vessels, glazed within side, which the chief Bramin of
Ingrenate fills himself with the purest Water of the River, and then seals up
with his own Seal. They never drink this water till the end of the Feast, and
then they give their guests three or more glasses apiece. This water coming so
far, and the chief Bramin demanding a Tribute for every pot, which contains a
Pail-full, sometimes a wedding comes to two or three thousand Roupies.

The eighth of April, being in a City of Bengala called Malde, the Idolaters
made a great Feast, according to the particular Custom of that place; they all
go out of the City, and fasten Iron hooks to the boughs of several Trees, then
come a great number of poor people and hang themselves, some by the sides, some
by the brawn of their backs, upon those hooks, till the weight of their body
tearing away the flesh, they fall of themselves. It Is a wonderful thing to see
that not so much as one drop of blood should issue, from the wounded flesh, nor
that any of the flesh should be left upon the hook; besides, that in two days
they are perfectly cured by such Plasters as their Bramins give them. There
are others who at that Feast will lie upon a bed of nails, with the points
upward, the nails entering a good way into the flesh; however while these people
are under this Penance, their Friends come and present them with Money and
Linen. When they have undergone their Penance, they take the presents and
distribute them to the poor, without making any farther advantage of them. I
asked one, why they made that Feast, and suffered those severe Penances; who
answered me, that it was in remembrance of the first man, whom they called
Adam, as we do.

In the year 1666, I saw another sort of Penance, as I crossed the Ganges; upon
the Bank of which River they had prepared a clean place, where one of the poor
Idolaters was condemned to rest upon the ground, touching it only with his
hands and feet; which he was to do several times a day, and every time to kiss
the earth three times before he rose up again. He was to rise up upon his left
foot, never touching the ground with his right all the while. And every day for
a month together before he either eat or drank he was obliged to this posture
for fifty times together, and consequently to kiss the ground a hundred and
fifty times. He told me that the Bramins had enjoined him that Penance because
he had suffered a Cow to dye in his House, and had not lead her to the water to
be washed before she died.

When an Idolater has lost any piece of Gold or Silver, or sum of Money either
by negligence, or as being stolen from him, he is obliged to carry as much as he
lost to the great Bramin; for if he does not, and that the other should come to
know of it, he is ignominiously cast out of his Tribe, to make him more careful
another time.

On the other side the Ganges Northward, toward the Mountains of Naugrocot,
there are two or three Raja's, who neither believe God nor the Devil. Their
Bramins have a book containing their Belief, full of ridiculous absurdities,
whereof the Author whose name is Baudou gives no reason. These Raja's are the
Great Moguls Vassals, and pay him Tribute.

To conclude, the Malavares carefully preserve the nails of their left hands
and let their hair grow like women's. These nails, which are half a finger
long, serve them instead of Combs; and it is with their left hand that they do
all their drudgery, never touching their faces, nor what they eat, but with
their right hands.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Kingdom of Boutan whence comes the Musk, the good Rhubarb, and some
Furs.
THE Kingdom of Boutan is of a large extent; but I could never yet come to a
perfect knowledge thereof. I have set down all that I could learn at Patna,
whither the Merchants of Boutan come to sell their Musk. The most excellent
Rhubarb comes also from the Kingdom of Boutan. From hence is brought also that
Seed which is good against the worms, therefore called Wormseed; and good store
of Furs. As for the Rhubarb, the Merchants run a great hazard which way soever
they bring it; for if they take the Northern Road, toward Caboul, the wet
spoils it; if the Southern Road, in regard the journey is long, if the Rains
happen to fall, there is as much danger that way, so that there is no Commodity
requires more care than that.

As for the Musk, during the heats the Merchant loses by it, because it dries
and loses its weight. Now in regard this Commodity pays twenty-five in the
hundred Custom at Gorrochepour, the last Town belonging to the Great Mogul,
next to the Kingdom of Boutan, when the Indian Merchants come to that City,
they go to the officer at the Custom-House, and tell him that they are going to
Boutan, to buy Musk or Rhubarb, and how much they intend to lay out; all which
the Officer registers, with the name of the Merchant. Then the Merchants
instead of twenty-five, agree with him for seven or eight in the hundred, and
take a Certificate from the Officer or Cadi, that he may not demand any more at
their return. If the Officer refuses a handsome composition, then they go
another way, over Deserts and Mountains covered with Snow, tedious and
troublesome, till they come to Caboul, where the Caravans part, some for great
Tartary, others for Belch. Here it is that the Merchants coming from Boutan
barter their Commodities for Horses, Mules, and Camels; for there is little
Money in that Country. Then those Tartars transport their Commodities into
Persia, as far as Ardevile and Tauris; which is the reason that some Europeans
have thought that Rhubarb and Wormseed came out of Tartary. True it is, that
some Rhubarb comes from thence; but not so good as that of Boutan, being sooner
corrupted; for Rhubarb will eat out its own heart. The Tartars carry back out
of Persia Silks of Small value, which are made in Tauris and Ardevile, and some
English Cloth brought by the Armenians from Constantinople and Smyrna. Some of
the Merchants that come from Caboul and Boutan go to Candahar, and thence to
Ispahan; whither they carry Coral in Beads, yellow Amber, and Lapis Lazuli
Beads, if they can meet with it. The other Merchants that come from the Coast
of Multan, Lahor, and Agra, bring only Linnons, Indigo, and store of Cornelian
and Crystal Beads. Those that return through Gorrochepour, and are agreed with
the Officer of the Custom-House, carry from Patna and Daca, Coral, yellow
Amber, Bracelets of Tortoise-shells, and other Shells, with great store of
round and square thick pieces of Tortois. When I was at Patna, four Armenians
who had been before at Boutan, returned from Dantzick, where they had made
certain Figures of yellow Amber, representing the shapes of several Creatures
and Monsters, which they were carrying to the King of Boutan, who is an
Idolater, as are all his people, to set up in his Pagods. For the Armenians for
Money will sell any thing of Idolatry; and they told me besides, that if they
could but have made the Idol which the King of Boutan bespoke of them, they
should have done their business. Which was to have been a Monsters head, with
six horns, four ears, four arms, and six fingers upon every hand, all of yellow
Amber; but they could not find pieces big enough.

The Caravan is three months traveling from Patna, to the Kingdom of Boutan.
It sets out from Patna about the end of December, and eight days after arrives
at Gorrochepour.

From Gorrochepour to the foot of the high Mountains, is eight or nine days
journey more, during which the Caravan suffers very much hardship, for the
Country is nothing but wild Forests, full of wild Elephants. So that the
Merchants, instead of taking their rests, are forced to watch, keep fires, and
shoot off their Muskets all the night long. For the Elephant making no noise in
treading, would else be upon the Caravan before they were aware; not that he
comes to do any mischief to the men, but to get what victuals he can find. You
may travel from Patna to the foot of those Mountains in Palleki's. But
generally they ride upon Oxen, Camels, or Horses, bred in the Country. Those
Horses are generally so little, that when a man is upon the back of them, his
feet touch the Ground; but they will travel twenty Leagues an end, and never
bait, or else with a very small one. Some of those Horses cost two hundred
Crowns; for indeed when you come to cross, the Mountains, you can make use of
no other sort of carriage but them in regard of the narrowness and ruggedness
of the Passes; which many times put the Horses very much to it, as strong and
as low as they are.

Five or six Leagues beyond Gorrochepour you enter into the Territories of the
Raja of Nupal, which extend to the Frontiers of the Kindom of Boutan. This Raja
is a Tributary to the great Mogul, and pays him every year an Elephant for his
Homage. He resides in the City of Nupal, from whence he derives his Title; but
there is little either Trade or Money in his Country, which is all Woods and
Forests.

The Caravan being arrived at the foot of these Mountains which are called at
this day by the name of Naugrocot, abundance of people come from all parts of
the Mountain, the greatest part whereof are women and maids, who agree with the
Merchants to carry them, their Goods and provisions cross the Mountains, which
is eight days journey more.

The women carry upon each shoulder a woollen Roll, to which is fastened a
large Cushion, that hangs down upon their backs, upon which the man sits. There
are three women to carry one man, relieving one another by turns. And for their
luggage and provisions, they lade them upon Goats, that will carry a hundred
and fifty pound weight apiece. Those that will ride, are in many places forced
to have their Horses hoisted up with Cords. They never seed them but morning
and evening mixing a pound of meal, half a pound of brown Sugar, and half a
pound of Butter together, with water sufficient. In the evening they must be
contented only with a few flat Peason, bruised, and steeped half an hour in
water. The women that carry the men, get for their ten days travel two Roupies
apiece, and as much for every* burden which the Goats carry, and for every
Horse which they lead.

After you have passed the Mountains, you may travel to Boutan upon Oxen,
Camels, Horses, or Palleki's, which you please. The Country, is good, abounding
in Rice, Corn, Pulse, and store of Wine. All the people both men and women are
clad in the Summer with a large piece of Fustian, or Hempen-Cloath; in the
Winter with a thick Cloth, almost like Felt. Both men and women wear upon
their heads a kind of Bonnet, much like our drinking Cans, which they adorn
with Boars teeth, and with round and square pieces of Tortois-Shells. The
richer sort intermix Coral and Amber Beads, of which their women make them
Neck-Laces. The men as well as the woman wear Bracelets upon their left hands
only, from the wrist to the elbow. The woman wear them strait, the men lose.
About their necks they wear a silken twist, at the end whereof hangs a Bead of
yellow Amber or Coral, or a Boars Tooth, which dangles upon their Breasts. On
their left sides, their Girdles are buttoned with Beads of the same. Though
they be Idolaters, yet they feed upon all sort of food, except the flesh of
Cows, which they adore as the common Nurses of all men; they are besides great
lovers of strong water. They observe also some Ceremonies of the Chinese,
burning Amber at the end of their Feasts, though they do not worship fire like
the Chinese. For which reason the Merchants of Boutan will give at Patna for a
Serre of large pieces of yellow Amber, as big as a Nut, bright and clean,
thirty-five and forty Roupies. The Serre of yellow Amber, Musk, Coral,
Ambergrease, Rhubarb, and other Drugs, containing nine Ounces to the pound.
Saltpeter, Sugar, Rice, Corn, and other Commodities, are also sold by the Serre
in Bengala; but the Serre contains seventy-two of our Pounds, at sixteen Ounces
to the Pound; and forty Serres make a Mein, or 2824 Pounds of Paris.

To return to yellow Amber a piece of nine ounces is worth in Boutan from 250
to 300 Roupies, according to its color and beauty. Coral rough, or wrought
into Beads, yields profit enough; but they had rather have it rough, to shape
it as they please themselves.

The Women and Maids are generally the Artists among them, as to those toys.
They also make Beads of Crystal and Agat. As for the Men, they make Bracelets
of Tortoise-shell, and Sea-shells, and polish those little pieces of Shells
which the Northern people wear in their ears, and in their hair. In Patna and
Daca there are above two thousand persons that thus employ themselves,
furnishing the Kingdoms of Boutan, Asem, Siam, and other Northern and Eastern
parts of the Mogul's Dominions.

As for Wormseed, the Herb grows in the Fields, and must dye before the Seed
can be gathered; but the mischief is, that before the Seed is ripe, the wind
scatters the greatest part, which makes it so scearce. When they gather the
Seed, they take two little Hampers, and as they go along the Fields, they move
their Hampers from the right to the left, and from the left to the right, as if
they were mowing the Herb, bowing it at the top, and so all the Seed falls into
the Hampers.

Rhubarb is a Root which they cut in pieces, and stringing them by ten or
twelve together, hang them up a drying.

Had the Natives of Boutan as much art in killing the Martin as the Muscovite,
they might vend great store of those rich Furs, considering what a number of
those Beasts there are in that Country. No sooner does that creature peep out
of his hole, but the Muscovites, who lie upon the watch, have 'em presently,
either in the nose or in the eyes; for should they hit 'em in the body, the
blood would quite spoil the skin.

The King of Boutan has constantly seven or eight thousand Men for his Guard.
Their Weapons are for the most part Bows and Arrows. Some of them carry
Battel-axes, and Bucklers. It Is a long time ago since they had the first use of
Muskets and Cannons: their Gunpowder being long, but of an extraordinary
force. They assured me that some of their Cannons had Letters and Figures upon
them, that were above five hundred years old. They dare not stir out of the
Kingdom without the Governor's particular leave; nor dare they carry a Musket
along with them, unless their next Kindred will undertake for them that they
shall bring it back. Otherwise I had brought one along with me; for by the
characters upon the Barrel, it appeared to have been made above 180 years, It
was very thick, the mouth of the bore being like a Tulip, polished within as
bright as a Looking-glass. Two thirds of the Barrel were garnished with
embossed Wires, with certain Flowers of Gold and Silver inlaid between; and it
carried a Bullet that weighed an ounce. But I could not prevail with the
Merchant to sell it me nor to give me any of his powder.

There are always fifty Elephants kept about the King's House, and twenty-five
Camels, with each a Pice of Artillery mounted upon his back, that carries half
a pound Ball. Behind the Gun fits a Cannoneer that manages and levels the Guns
as he pleases.

There is no King in the World more feared and more respected by his Subjects
then the King of Boutan; being in a manner adored by them. When he sits to do
Justice, or give Audience, all that appear in his presence hold their hands
close together above their forheads: and at a distance from the Throne
prostrate themselves upon the ground, not daring to lift up their heads. In
this humble posture they make their Petitions to the King; and when they
retire, they go backwards till they are quite out of his sight. One thing they
told me for truth, that when the King has done the deeds of nature, they
dilligently preserve the ordure, dry it and powder it, like sneezing-powder:
and then putting it into Boxes, they go every Market Day, and present it to the
chief Merchants, and rich Farmers, who recompense them for their kindness: that
those people also carry it home, as a great rarity, and when they feast their
Friends, strew it upon their meat. Two Boutan Merchants showed me their Boxes,
and the Powder that was in them.

The Natives of Boutan are strong and well proportioned; but their noses and
faces are somewhat flat. Their women are said to be bigger and more vigorous
than the men; but that they are much more troubled with swellings in the throat
then the men, few escaping that disease. They know not what war is, having no
enemy to fear but the Mogul. But from him they are senc'd with high, steep,
craggy, and showey Mountains. Northward there are nothing but vast Forests and
Snow. East and West nothing but bitter water. And as for the Raja's near them,
they are Princes of little force.

There is certainly some Silver Mine in the Kingdom of Boutan, for the King
coins much Silver, in pieces that are of the value of a Roupy. The pieces are
already described. However the Boutan Merchants could not tell me where the Mine
lay. And as for their Gold, that little they have is brought them from the
East, by the Merchants of those Countries.

In the year 1659, the Duke of Muscovy's Ambassadors passed through this
Country to the King of China. They were three of the greatest Noblemen in
Muscovy, and were at first very well received; but when they were brought to
kiss the Kings hands, the custom being to prostrate themselves three times to
the ground, they refused to do it, saying that they would complement the King
after their manner, and as they approached their own Emperor, who was as great
and as potent as the Emperor of China. Thereupon, and for that they continued
in their resolution, they were dismissed with their presents, not being
admitted to see the King. But had those Ambassadors conformed to the custom of
China, without doubt we might have had a beaten rode through Muscovy and the
North part of Great Tartary, and much more Commerce and knowledge of the
Country than now we have.

This mentioning the Muscovites, puts me in mind of a story that several
Muscovy Merchants averred to be true, upon the rode between Tauris and Ispahan,
where I overtook them, of a woman of four score and two years of age, who at
those years was brought to bed in one of the Cities of Muscovy of a Male Child,
which was carried to the Duke, and by him brought up at the Court.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Kingdom of Tipra.
MOst people have been of opinion till now, that the Kingdom of Pegu, lies upon
the Frontiers of China; and I thought so my self, till the Merchants of Tipra
undeceived me. I met with three, one at Daca, and two others at Patna. They
were men of very few words; whether it were their own particular disposition,
or the General habit of the Country. They cast up their accounts with small
Stones likes Agats, as big as a man's nail, upon every one of which was a
Cipher. They had every one their weights, like a Stelleer; though the Beam were
not of Iron, but of a certain Wood as hard as Brazile; nor was the Ring that
holds the weight, and is put thorough the Beam to mark the weight, of Iron, but
a strong Silk Rope. And thus they weighed from a Dram to ten of our Pounds. If
all the Natives of the Kingdom of Tipra, were like the two Merchants which I
met at Patna, I dare affirm them to be notable topers; for they never refused
whatever strong Liquor I gave them, and never left till all was out; and when I
told them by my Interpreter that all my Wine was gone, they clapped their hands
upon their stomachs and sighed. These Merchants traveled all three through the
Kingdom of Arakan, which lies to the South and West of Tipra, having some part
of Pegu upon the Winter west. They told me also, that it was about fifteen days
journey to cross through their Country; from whence there is no certain
conjecture of the extent to be made, by reason of the inequality of the stages.
They ride upon Oxen and Horses, which are low, but very hardy. As for the King
and the Nobility, they ride in their Pallekies, or upon their Elephants of War.
They are no less subject to Wens under their throats, than those of Boutan;
insomuch that the women have those Wens hanging down to their Nipples; which
proceeds from the badness of the waters.

There is nothing in Tipra which is fit for strangers. There is a Mine of Gold,
but the Gold is very course. And there is a sort of very course Silk, which is
all the Revenue the King has. He exacts no Subsidies from his Subjects; but
only that they, who are not of the prime Nobility, should work six days in a
year in his Mine, or in his Silk-works. He sends his Gold and his Silk into
China, for which they bring him back Silver, which he coins into pieces to the
value of ten Sous. He also makes thin pieces of Gold, like to the Aspers of
Turkey; of which he two sorts, four of the one sort making a Crown, and twelve
of the other.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Kingdom of Asem.
IT was never known what the Kingdom of Asem was, till Mirgimola had settled
Aureng-zeb in the Empire. For he considering that he should be no longer valued
at Court, after the War was at an end, being then General of Aureng-zeb's Army
and powerful in the Kingdom where he had great store of Creatures, to preserve
the Authority he had, resolved to undertake the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Asem; where he knew he should find little or no resistance, that Kingdom having
been at peace above 500 years before. It Is thought these were the people that
formerly invented Guns and Powder; which spread it self from Asem to Pegu, and
from Pegu to China, from whence the invention has been attributed to the
Chinese. However certain it is, that Mirgimola brought from thence several
pieces of Canon, which were all Iron Guns, and store of excellent Powder, both
made in that Country. The Powder is round and small, like ours, and very strong.

Mirgimola embarked his Army in one of the mouths of Ganges, and sailing up one
of the Rivers that comes from the Lake Chiamay, to the twenty-ninth or
thirtieth Degree, he landed his Army, and came into a Country abounding in all
humane necessaries, still finding the less resistance because the people were
surpised. Being a Mahumetan, he spared not the very Pagods, but burned and
sacked all wherever he came to the thirty-fifth Degree. There he understood
that the King of Asem was in the field with a more powerful Army than he
expected, and that he had several pieces of Canon, and great store of
fireworks withal. Thereupon Mirgimola thought it not convenient to march any
farther; though the chief reason of his return was the drawing on of Winter;
which the Indians are so sensible of, that it is impossible to make them stir
beyond the thirti'th or thirty-fifth Degree, especially to hazard their lives.

Mirgimola therefore turns to the South-west, and besieges a City called Azoo,
which he took in a small time, and found good plunder therein. In this City of
Azoo, are the Tombs of the Kings of Asem, and of all the Royal Family. For
though they are Idolaters, they never burn their dead bodies, but bury them.
They believe that the dead go into another world, where they that have lived
well in this, have plenty of all things; but that they who have been ill
livers, suffer the want of all things, being in a more especial manner
afflicted with hunger and drowth; and that therefore it is good, to bury
something with them to serve them in their necessities. This was the reason
that Mirgimola found so much wealth in the City of Azoo. For many ages,
together, several King had built them Chapels in the great Pagod to be buried
in, and in their life times had stored up in the Vaults of their particular
Chapels, great sums of Gold and Silver, and other movables of value. Besides,
that when they bury the deceased King, they bury with him likewise whatever he
esteemed most precious in his lifetime, whether it were an Idol of Gold or
Silver, or whatever else, that being needful in this, might be necessary for
him in the world to come. But that which savours most of Barbarism is, that
when he dies, all his best beloved Wives, and the principal Officers of his
House poison themselves, to be buried with him, and to wait upon him in the
other world. Besides this, they bury one Elephant, twelve Camels, six Horses,
and a good number of Hounds, believing that all those Creatures rise again to
serve their King.

The Kingdom of Asem is one of the best Countries of all Asia, for it produces
all things necessary for humane subsistence, without any need of foreign
supply. There are in it Mines of Gold, Silver, Steel, Lead, Iron, and great
store of Silk, but coarse. There is a sort of Silk that is found under the
Trees, which is spun by a Creature like to our Silkworms, but rounder, and
which lives all the year long under the trees. The Silks which are made of this
Silk glist'n very much, but they fret presently. The Country produces also
great store of Gum-Lake; of which there is two sorts, one grows under the trees
of a red color, wherewith they paint their Linen, and Stuffs; and when they
have drawn out the red juice, the remaining substance serves to varnish
Cabinets, and to make Wax; being the best Lake in Asia, for those uses. As for
their Gold they never suffer it to be transported out of the Kingdom, nor do
they make any Money of it; but they preserve it all in Ingots, which pass in
trade among the Inhabitants; but as for the Silver, the King coins it into
Money, as is already described.

Though the Country be very plentiful of all things, yet there is no flesh
which they esteem so much as Dogs flesh; which is the greatest delicacy at all
Feasts; and is sold every month in every City of the Kingdom upon their
Market-days. There are also great store of Vines, and very good Grapes, but
they never make any Wine; only they dry the Grapes to make Aqua Vitae. As for
salt they have none but what is artificial, which they make two ways. First
they raise great heaps of that green Stuff that Swims at the tops of standing
waters, which the Ducks and Frogs eat, This they dry and burn; and the ashes
thereof being boiled in a Cloth in water, become very good Salt. The other way
most in use is to take the leaves of Adams Fig Tree, which they dry and burn;
the ashes whereof make a Salt so tart, that it is impossible to eat until the
tartness be taken away; which they do by putting the ashes in water, where they
stir them ten or twelve hours together; then they strain the substance through
a Linen Cloth and boil it; as the water boils away, the bottom thick'ns; and
when the water is all boiled away they find at the bottom very good and white
Salt.

Of the Ashes of these Fig Leaves they make a Lie, wherewith they wash their
Silk, which makes it as white as Snow; but they have not enough to whiten half
the Silk that grows in the Country.

Kenneroof is the name of the City, where the King of Asem keeps his Court;
twenty-five or thirty days journey from that which was formerly the Capital
City, and bore the same name. The King requires no Subsidies of his people; but
all the Mines in his Kingdom are his own; where for the ease of his Subjects,
he has none but slaves that work; so that all the Natives of Asem live at their
ease, and every one has his house by himself, and in the middle of his ground a
fountain encompassed with trees and most commonly every one an Elephant to
carry their Wives; for they have four Wives, and when they marry, they say to
one, I take the to serve me in such a thing; to the other, I appoint the to do
such business; so that every one of the wives knows what she has to do in the
House. The men and women are generally well complexion'd; only those that live
more Southerly are more swarthy, and not so subject to Wens in their throats;
neither are they so well featured, besides that the women are somewhat flat
Nosed. In the Southern parts the people go stark naked, only covering their
private parts, with a Bonnet like a blew Cap upon their heads, hung about with
Swines teeth. They pierce holes in their ears, that you may thrust your Thumb
in where they hang pieces of Gold and Silver. Bracelets also of
Tortoise-shells, and Sea-shells as long as an egg, which they saw into Circles,
are in great esteem among the meaner sort; as Bracelets of Coral and yellow
Amber among those that are rich. When they bury a man, all his Friends and
Relations must come to the burial; and when they lay the body in the ground,
they all take off their Bracelets from their Arms and Legs, and bury them with
the Corpse.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Kingdom of Siam.
THE greatest part of the Kingdom of Siam lies between the Golf of Siam, and
the Golf of Bengala; bordering upon Pegu toward the North, and the Peninsula of
Malacca toward the South. The shortest and nearest way for the Europaeans to go
to this Kingdom, is to go to Ispahan, from Ispahan, to Ormus, from Ormus to
Surat, from Surat to Golconda, from Golconda to Maslipatan, there to embark for
Denouserin, which is one of the Ports belonging to the Kingdom of Siam. From
Denouserin to the Capital City, which is also called Siam, is thirty-five days
journey, part by Water, part by Land, by Wagon, or upon Elephants. The way,
whether by Land or Water, is very troublesome; for by Land you must be always
upon your guard for fear of Tigers and Lions; by Water, by reason of the many
falls of the River, they are forced to hoise up their Boats with Engines.

All the Country of Siam, is very plentiful in Rice and Fruits; the chiefest
whereof are Mangos, Durions, and Mangustans. The Forests are full of Hearts,
Elephants, Tigers, Rhinocero's, and Apes; where there grow also large Bambou's
in great abundance. Under the knots of these Bambou's are Emets nests as big as
a man's head, where every Emet has his apartment by himself; but there is but
one hole to enter into the nest. They make their nests in these Canes to
preserve themselves from the rains which continue four or five months together.

In the night time the Serpents are very busy. There are some two foot long,
with two heads; but one of them has no motion.

There is also another creature in Siam, like our Salamander, with a forked
tail, and very venomous.

The Rivers in this Kingdom are very large; and that which runs by Siam is
equally as large as the rest. The water is very wholesome; but it is very full
of Crocodiles of a monstrous bigness, that devour men if they be not very
careful of themselves. These Rivers overflow their banks while the Sun is in
the Southern Tropic; which makes the fields to be very fertile as far as they
flow; and it is observed, that the Rice grows higher or lower, as the floods do
more or less increase.

Siam, the Capital City of the Kingdom, where the King keeps his Court, is
walled about, being about three of our Leagues in circuit; it is situated in an
Island, the River running quite round it, and might be easily brought into
every street in the Town, if the King would but lay out as much Money upno that
design, as he spends in Temples and Idols.

The Siamers have thirty-three Letters in their Alphabet. But they write from
the left to the right, as we do, contrary to the custom of Japon, China,
Cochinchina, and Tunquin, who write from the right to the left.

All the Natives of this Kingdom are slaves, either to the King or the great
Lords. The women as well as the men cut their hair; neither are they very rich
in their habits. Among their Complements, the chiefest is, never to go before a
person that they respect, unless they first ask leave, which they do by holding
up both their hands. Those that are rich have several Wives.

The Money of the Country is already described.

The King of Siam is one of the richest Monarchs in the East, and styles
himself King of Heaven and Earth; though he be Tributary to the King of China.
He seldom shows himself to his Subjects; and never gives Audience, but to the
Principal Favorites of his Court. He trusts to his Ministers of State, for the
management of his affairs, who sometimes make very bad use of their authority.
He never shows himself in public above twice a year; but then it is with an
extraordinary magnificence. The first is, when he goes to a certain Pagod
within the City, which is gilded round both within and without. There are
three Idols between six and seven foot high, which are all of massy. Gold;
which he believes he renders propitious to him, by the great store of Alms that
he distributes among the poor, and the presents which he makes to the Priests.
Then he goes attended by all his Court, and puts to open view the richest
Ornaments he has. One part of his magnificence consists in his train of two
hundred Elephants; among which there is one that is white, which the King so
highly esteems, that he styles himself King of the White Elephant.

The second time the King appears in public, is when he goes to another Pagod
five or six Leagues above the Town, up the River. But no person must enter into
this Pagod, unless it be the King and his Priests. As for the people, so soon
as they see the Door open, they must presently fall upon their Faces to the
Earth. Then the King appears upon the River with two hundred Galleys of a
prodigious length; four hundred Rowers belonging to every one of the Galleys;
most of them being gilded and carved very richly. Now in regard this second
appearance of the King is in the month of November, when the waters begin to
abate, the Priests make the people believe that none but the King can stop the
course of the waters, by his Prayers and by his Offerings to this Pagod. and
they are so vain as to think that the King cuts the waters with his Sabra, or
Skain; thereby commanding it to retire back into the Sea.

The King also goes, but incognito, to a Pagod in an Island where the
Hollanders have a Factory. There is at the entry thereof an Idol sitting
crossleg'd with one hand upon his knee, and the other arm akimbo. It is above
sixty foot high; and round about this Idol are about three hundred others, of
several*sorts and sizes. All these Idols are guilt. And indeed there are a
prodigious number of Pagods in this Country; for every rich Siomer causes one
to be built in memory of himself. Those Pagods have Steeples and Bells, and the
Walls within are painted and gilded; but the Windows are so narrow that they
give but a very dim light. The two Pagods to which the King goes publicly, are
adorned with several tall Pyramids, well gilded. And to that in the Hollanders
Island there belongs a Cloister, which is a very neat Structure. In the middle
of the Pagod is a fair Chapel, all gilded within side; where they find a
Lamp, and three Wax Candles continually burning before the Altar, which is all
over covered with Idols, some of Massy Gold, others of Copper guilt. In the
Pagod in the midst of the Town, and in one of those to which the King goes once
a year, there are above four thousand Idols; and for that which is six Leagues
from Siam, it is surroundded with Pyramids, whose beauty makes the industry of
that Nation to be admired.

When the King appears, all the Doors and Windows of the Houses must be shut;
and all the people prostrate themselves upon the ground, not daring to lift up
their eyes. And because no person is to be in a higher place than the King,
they that are within doors, are bound to keep their lowest Rooms. When he cuts
his hair, one of his Wives performs that office, for he will not suffer a
Barber to come near him.

This Prince has a Passionate kindness for his Elephants; which he looks upon
as his Favorites, and the Ornaments of his Kingdom. If there be any of them
that fall sick, the Lords of the Court are mighty careful to please their
Sovereign; and if they happ'n to dye, they are buried with the same Funeral
Pomp as the Nobles of the Kingdom; which are thus performed: They set up a kind
of Mausoleum, or Tomb of Reeds, covered with Paper; in the midst whereof they
lay as much sweet wood as the body weighs, and after the Priests have ^umbl'd
certain Orsons, they set it a-fire, and burn it to ashes; which the rich
preserve in Gold or Silver Urns* but the poor scatter in the wind. As for
offenders, they never burn, but bury them.

It Is thought that in this Kingdom there are above two hundred Priests, which
they call Bonzes* which are highly reverenced as well at Court as among the
people. The King himself has such a value for some of them, as to humble
himself before them. This extraordinary respect makes them so proud, that some
of them have aspired to the Throne. But when the King discovers any such
design, he puts them to death. And one of them had his head lately struck off
for his Ambition.

These Bonzes wear yellow, with a little red Cloth about their Wastes; like a
Girdle. Outwardly they are very modest, and are never seen to be angry. About
four in the morning, upon the tolling of their Bells, they rise to their
prayers, which they repeat again toward evening. There are some days in the
year when they retire from all converse, with men. Some of them live by Alms;
others have Houses with good Revenues. While they wear the Habit of Bonzes,
they must not marry; for if they do, they must lay their Habit aside. They are
generally very ignorant, not knowing what they believe. Yet they hold the
transmigration of Souls into several Bodies. They are forbid to kill any
Creature; yet they will make no scruple to eat what others kill, or that which
dies of it self. They say that the God of the Christians and theirs were
Brothers; but that theirs was the eldest. If you ask them where their God is,
they say, he vanished away, and they know not where he is.

The chief strength of the Kingdom is their Infantry, which is indifferent
good; the Soldiers are used to hardship, going all quite naked, except their
private parts; all the rest of their body, looking as if it had been cupt, is
carved into several shapes of beasts and flowers. When they have cut their
skins, and stanch'd the blood, they rub the cut-work with such colors as they
think most proper. So that afar off you would think they were clad in some kind
of flowered Satin or other; for the colors never rub out. Their Weapons are
Bows and Arrows, Pike and Musket* and an Azagaya, or Staff between five and six
foot long, with a long Iron Spike at the end, which they very dexterously dart
at the Enemy.

In the year 1665, there was at Siam a Neapolitan Jesuit who was called Father
Thomas; he caused the Town and the Kings Palace to be fortified with very good
Bulwarks, according to Art; for which reason the King gave him leave to live in
the City, where he has a House and a little Church.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Kingdom of Macassar; and the Ambassadors which the Hollanders sent into
China.
THE Kingdom of Macassar, otherwise called the Isle of Celebes, begins at the
fifteenth Degree of Southern Latitude. The heats are excessive all the day; but
the nights are temperate enough. And for the Soil, it is very fertile; but the
people have not the art of building. The Capital City bears the name of the
Kingdom, and is situated upon the Sea. The Port is free; for the Vessels that
bring great quantities of goods from the Adjacent Islands, pay no Customs. The
Islanders have a custom to poison their Arrows; and the most dangerous poison
which they use, is the juice of certain Trees in the Island of Borneo; which
they will temper so as to work swift or slow, as they please. They hold that
the King has only the secret Receipt to take away the force of it; who boasts
that he has the most effectual poison in the world, which there is no remedy
can prevent.

One day an English man in heat of blood had killed one of the Kings of
Macassars Subjects; and though the King had pardoned him, yet both English,
Hollanders, and Portugals fearing if the English man should go unpunished, lest
the Islanders should revenge themselves upon some of them, besought the King to
put him to death; which with much ado being consented to, the King unwilling to
put him to a lingering death, and desirous to show the effect of his poison,
resolved to shoot the Criminal himself; whereupon he took a long Trunk, and
shot him exactly into the great Toe of the right foot, the place particularly
aimed at. Two Surgeons, one an English man, and the other a Hollander,
provided on purpose, immediately cut off the member; but for all that, the
poison had dispersed it self so speedily, that the English man died at the same
time. All the Kings and Princes of the East are very diligent in their enquiry
after strong Poisons. And I remember that the chief of the Dutch Factory and I
tried several poisoned Arrows, with which the King of Achen had presented him,
by shooting at Squirrels, who fell down dead, as soon as ever they were touched.

The King of Macassar is a Mohammedan, and will not suffer his Subjects to
embrace Christianity. Yet in the year 1656, the Christians found a way to get
leave to build a fair Church in Macassar. But the next year the King caused it
to be pulled down, as also that of the Dominican Friars, which the Portugals
made use of. The Parish Church, which was under the Government of the secular
Priests, stood still, till the Hollanders attacked Macassar, and compelled him
to turn all the Portugals out of his Dominions. The ill conduct of that Prince
was in part the occasion of that war: to which the Hollanders were moved, to
revenge themselves upon the Portugal Jesuits, who had crossed their Embassy to
China. Besides, that they offered great affronts to the Hollanders at Macassar,
especially when they trod under foot the Hat of one of the Dutch Envoys, who
was sent to treat with the King in behalf of the Company. Thereupon the
Hollanders resolved to unite their forces with the Bouquifes, that were in
rebellion against their Sovereign, and to revenge themselves at any rate.

Now as to the business of China, it happened thus: Toward the end of the year
1658, the General of Baravia and his Council, sent one of the chief of the
Holland Company, with Presents in the King of China; who arriving at Court,
labored to gain the friendship of the Mandarins, who are the Nobility of the
Kingdom. But the Jesuits, who by reason of their long abode in the Country,
understood the language, and were acquainted with the Lords of the Court, lest
the Holland Company should get footing to the prejudice of the Portugals,
represented several things to the Kings Council to the prejudice of the
Hollanders; more especially charging them with breach of Faith in all the
places where they came. Upon this the Holland Agent was dismissed, and departed
out of China, without doing any feats. Afterward coming to understand what a
trick the Portugal Jesuits had put upon him, he made report thereof to the
General and his Council at Batavia; which so incensed them, that they resolved
to be revenged. For by the Deputies accounts, the Embassy had cost them above
fifty thousand Crowns; for which they consulted how to make the Portugals pay
double. Understanding therefore the trade which the Jesuits drove in the Island
of Macao, and to the Kingdom of Macassar, whither upon their own account they
sent seven Vessels, laden with all sorts of Commodities, as well of India as
China; they took their opportunity, and the seventh of June 1660, appeared with
a Fleet of thirty Sail before the Port of Macassar. The King thinking himself
obliged to make defense against so Potent an Enemy, endeavored to sustain the
brunt of the Hollander with the Portugal Ships in the Road; but the Hollander
dividing their Fleet, part of them fought the Portugal, the other half battered
the Royal Fortress so ^uriously, that they carried it in a short time. Which so
terrified the King that he commanded the Portugals not to fire any more for
fear of farther provoking his Enemies. The Prince Patinsaloa, was slain in the
fight, which was a great loss to the King of Macassar, who was become
formidable to his neighbors by the good Conduct of that Minister. As for the
Hollanders, they took, burnt, and sunk all the Portugal Vessels, and
sufficiently re-imburs'd themselves for their China Expenses.

The thirteenth of June the King of Macassar, whose name was Sumbaco, hung out
a white Flag from another Tower, whence he beheld the fight environed by his
Wives. During the truce, he sent one of the Grandees of his Court to the Dutch
Admiral, to desire peace, which was granted, upon condition he should send an
Ambassador to Batavia, expel the Portugals out of the Island, and not permit
his Subjects to have any more to do with them.

Thereupon the King of Macassar, sent eleven of the greatest Lords of his
Court, with a train of seven hundred men; the Chief of the Embassy being the
Prince of Patinsaloa. The first thing they did, was to pay two hundred Loaves
of Gold to redeem the Royal Fortress again; and then submitting to the
Conditions which the Dutch Admiral had proposed, the General of Batavia signed
the Articles, which are punctually observed. For the Portugals had in all
quitted the Country, some departing for Siam and Camboya, others for Macoa and
Goa. Macoa, formerly one of the most famous and richest Cities of the Orient,
was the principal motive that inclined the Hollanders to send an Ambassador
into China; for being the best station which the Portugals had in all those
parts, the Dutch had a design to win it wholly. Now, this City, lying in
twenty-two Degrees of Northern Latitude, in a small Island next to the Province
of Kanton, which is a part of China, has very much lost its former luster.

But this was not all which the Jesuits and the Portugal Merchants suffered.
The Chief of the Dutch Factory at Mingrela, which is but eight Leagues from
this City, understanding the bad success of the Dutch in China, had a
contrivance by himself to be revenged. He knew that the Jesuits of Goa and
other places, drove a great trade in rough Diamonds, which they sent into
Europe, or else carried along with them when they returned; and that for the
more private carrying on of their trade, they were wont to send one or two of
their Order, that knew the language, in the habit of a Faquir, which consists
of a Tigers Skin to cover their back-parts, and a Goats Skin to cover the
breast, reaching down to the knees. Thereupon the Chief of the Factory of
Mingrela taking his opportunity, and having notice that two of the supposed
Faquirs were gone to the Mines, to lay out 400000 Pardo's in Diamonds, gave
order to two men, which he had fee'd for the purpose, that as soon as the
Fathers had made their purchase, he should give notice to the Officer of the
Custom-House at Bicholi.

Bicholi is a great Town upon the Frontiers of those Lands that part the
Kingdom of Visapour from the Territories of the Portugals; there being no other
way to pass the River, which encompasses the Island where the City of Goa is
built.

The Fathers believing that the Customer knew nothing of their purchase, went
into the Boat to go over the River; but as soon as they were in, they were
strictly searched, and all their Diamonds confiscated.

To return to the King of Macassar; you must know, that the Jesuits once
endeavored to convert him; and perhaps they might have brought it to pass, had
they not neglected one proposal which he made them. For at the same time that
the Jesuits labored to bring him to Christianity, the Mahumetans used all
their endeavors to oblige him to stick to their Law. The King willing to leave
his Idolatry, yet not knowing which part to take, commanded the Mahumetans to
send for two or three of their most able Moulla's, or Doctors from Mecca; and
the Jesuits he ordered to send him as many of the most learned among them, that
he might be instructed in both Religions; which they both promised to do. But
the Mahometans were more diligent than the Christians, for in eight months they
fetched from Mecca two learned Moulla's; whereupon the King seeing that the
Jesuits sent no body to him, embraced the Mahumetan Law. True it is, that three
years after there came two Portugal Jesuits, but then it was too late.

The King of Macassar being thus become a Mahumetan, the Prince his Brother was
so mad at it, that when the Mosquee, which the King had caused to be built, was
finished, he got into it one night, and causing the throats of two Pigs to be
cut, he all besmeared the Walls of the new Mosquee, and the place which was
appointed for the Moulla to perform Divine Service with the blood; so that the
King was forced to pull down that, and build Another. After which the Prince
with some Idolatrous Lords stole out of the Island, and never since appeared at
Court.

CHAP. XX.
The Author pursues his Travels into the East, and embarks at Mingrela for
Batavia. The danger he was in upon the Sea; and his arrival in the Island of
Ceylan.
I Departed from Mingrela, a great Town in the Kingdom of Visapour, eight
Leagues from Goa, the fourteenth of April, 1648, and embarked in a Dutch Vessel
bound for Batavia. The Ship had orders to touch at Bokanour, to take in Rice.
Whereupon I went ashore with the Captain, to obtain leave of the King to buy
Rice. We found him upon the shore, where he had about a dozen Huts set up,
which were covered with Palm-leaves. In his own Hut there was a piece of
Persian Tapestry spread under him, and there we saw five or six women, some
fanning him with Peacocks Feathers, others giving him Be^le, others filling him
his Pipe of Tobacco. The most considerable persons of the Country were in the
other Huts; and we counted about two hundred men that were upon the Guard,
armed only with Bows and Arrows. They had also two Elephants among 'em. It Is
very probable, that his Palace was not far off, and that he only came thither
to take the fresh air. There we were presented with Tari or Palm-wine; but
being new, and not boiled, it caused the headache in all that drank it,
insomuch that we were two days before we could recover it. I asked the reason,
how the Wine came to do us so much prejudice; to which they answered me, that
it was the Planting of Pepper about the Palmtrees, that gave such a strength to
the Wine.

We were no sooner got aboard, but a mighty tempest arose, wherein the Ship,
men, and goods had all like to have been cast away, being near the shore; but
at length, the wind changing, we found our selves by break of day three or four
Leagues at Sea, having lost all our Anchors; and at length came safe to Port in
the Haven of Ponte de Galle, the twelfth of May.

I found nothing remarkable in that City; there being nothing but the ruins
made by the underminings and Cannon-shot, when the Hollanders besieged it, and
chased the Portugals from thence. The Company allowed ground to build upon, to
them that would inhabit there, and land to till; and had then raised two
Bulwarks which commanded the Port. If they have finished the design which they
undertook, the place cannot but be very considerable.

The Hollanders, before they took all the places which the Portugals had in the
Island of Ceylan, did believe that the trade of this Island would have brought
them in vasts sums, could they but be sole Masters of it; and perhaps their
Conjectures might have been true, had they not broken their words with the King
of Candy, who is the King of the Country; but breaking faith with him, they
lost themselves in all other places thereabouts.

The Hollanders had made an agreement with the King of Candy, that he should be
always ready with twenty thousand men, to keep the passages that hinder the
Portugals from bringing any succors from Colombo, Negombe, Manar, or any other
places which they possessed upon the Coast. In consideration whereof the
Hollanders, when they had taken Ponte Galle, were to restore it to the King of
Candy; which they not performing, the King sent to know why they did not give
him possession of the Town; to which they returned answer, that they were ready
to do it, provided he would defray the expenses of the war. But they knew, that
if he had had three Kingdoms more, such as his own, he could never have paid
so great a sum. I must confess indeed the Country is very poor, for I do not
believe that the King ever saw fifty thousand Crowns together in his life; his
Trade being all in Cinnamon and Elephants. As for his Cinnamon, he has no
profit of it since the Portugals coming into the East Indies. And for his
Elephants, he makes but little of them; for they take not above five or six in
a year; but they are more esteemed than any other Country Elephants, as being
the most courageous in war. One thing I will tell you hardly to be believed,
but that which is a certain truth, which is, that when any other King or Raja
has one of these Elephants of Ceylan, if they bring him among any other breed
in any other place whatsoever, so soon as the other Elephants behold the Ceylan
Elephants, by an instinct of nature they do him reverence, laying their trunks
upon the Ground, and raising them up again.

The King of Achen, with whom the Hollanders also broke their word, had more
opportunity to be revenged upon them then the King of Candy. For he denied them
the transportation of Pepper out of his Country, without which their trade was
worth little. His Pepper being that which is most coveted by the East. So that
they were forced to make a composition with him. The King of Achens Ambassador
coming to Batavia, was strangely surpised to see women sitting at the Table;
but much more, when after a health drank to the Queen of Achen, the General of
Batavia commanded his Wife to go and kiss the Ambassador. Nor was the King
behind hand with the Dutch Ambassador another way; whom the King beholding in
a languishing distemper, asked him whether he had never any familiarity with
any of the Natives. Yes, replied the Ambassador; however I left her to marry
in my own Country. Upon that the King commanded three of his Physicians to cure
him in fifteen days, upon the forfeiture of their lives. Thereupon they gave
him a certain potion every morning, and a little Pill at night; and at the end
of nine days he took a great Vomit. Every body thought he would have died with
the working of it; but at length brought up a stopple of course hair, as big as
a nut; after which he presently recovered. At his departure the King gave him a
Flint about the bigness of a Goose Egg, with veins of Gold in it, like the
veins of a man's hand, as the Gold grows in that Country.

CHAP. XXI.
The Authors departure from Ceylan, and his arrival at Batavia.
THE twenty-fifth of May we set sail from Ponte Galle. The second of June we
passed the Line. The sixth we saw the Island called Nazaco's. The seventeenth
we discovered the Coast of Sumatra, the eighteenth the Island of Ingamina, and
the nineteenth the Island of Fortune. The twentieth we were in ken of certain
little Islands, and the Coast of Java; among which Islands there are three
called the Islands of the Prince. The one and twentieth we discovered Bantam,
and the two and twentieth we anchored in the Road of Batavia.

There are two Councils in Batavia, the Council of the Fort, where the General
presides, and where all the affairs of the Company are managed. The other which
is held in a House in the City, and relates to the Civil Government, and
decides the petty differences among the Citizens.

All the kindness I had shown me here, was to be prosecuted by the City
Council, for being suspected to have bought a parcel of Diamonds for Mounsieur
Constant, my very good Friend, and President of the Dutch Factory at Gomron;
but when they could make nothing of it, they ceased their suit, ashamed of what
they had done.

CHAP. XXII.
The Author goes to visit the King of Bantam, and relates several Adventures
upon that occasion.
BEing so ill treated in Batavia, I resolved to visit the King of Bantam; to
which purpose I took my own Brother along with me, because he spoke the
Language called Malaye; which in the East is as universal as Latin among us.
Being arrived at Bantam in a small Bark, which we hired for our selves; we went
first and visited the English President, who kindly entertained and lodged us.

The next day I sent my Brother to the Palace, to know when it would be
seasonable for me to come and kiss the King's Hand. When the King saw him (for
he was well known to him) he would not suffer him to return, but sent others to
fetch me, and to tell me withal, that if I had any rare Jewels, I should do
him a kindness to bring them along with me.

When I saw my Brother returned not with the persons which the King sent, I was
almost in the mind not to have gone; remembering how the King of Achen had
served the Sieur Renaud. For the French having set up an East India Company,
sent away four Vessels, three great ones, and one of eight Guns, for the
service of the Country. Their Voyage was the shortest that ever was heard of;
arriving at Bantam in less than four months. The King also courteously received
them, and let them have as much Pepper as they desired, and cheaper by twenty
in the hundred then he sold it to the Hollanders. But the French not coming
only for Pepper, sent away their small Ship with the greatest part of their
Money to Macassar, to try the Market for Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace.

The French being so soon dispatched at Bantam, had not patience to stay till
the return of the small Vessel which they had sent to Macassar; but to pass the
time, must needs run over to Batavia, being not above fourteen Leagues off; so
that you may be at Batavia from Bantam in a tide with a good wind. When they
came to an Anchor, the General of the French Fleet sent to Complement the
General of Batavia, who failed not to answer his civility, and invited the
Admiral ashore. Moreover he sent to those that stayed aboard, great store of
excellent cheer, and a good quantity of Spanish and Rh^^ish Wine, with
particular order to them that carried it, to make the French drunk. His order
was so well followed, that 'twas easy to set the Ships on fire, according to
the private instructions which they had. So soon as the flame was discovered
from the Generals window, which overlooked all the Road, there was a wonderful
pretended astonishment among the Dutch. But the French Admiral too truly
conjecturing the ground and Authors of the treachery, beholding the company
with an undaunted courage; Come, come, cried he, lets drink on; they that set
the Ships a-fire shall pay for 'em. However the French Ships were all burnt,
though the men were all saved in Boats which were forthwith sent to their
relief. After that, the General of Batavia made them great offers, which they
refused, and returned to Batavia, in expectation of their small Vessel. When it
returned, they could find out no better way then to sell Ship and goods, and
all to the English, and to ^^are the Money among themselves, every one
according to their condition.

But the trick which they put upon the English was far more bloody. The English
were the first that found out the danger of sailing from Surat, Maslipatan, or
any other distant parts, to Japon without touching by the way. Whereupon they
thought it convenient to build a Fort in the Island of Formosa, which not only
saved the loss of several Vessels, but also brought them in great gain. The
Hollanders mad that the English were possessed of such an advantageous
situation, being the only place in all the Island where Vessels could (...) in
safety; and finding they could not carry it by force, bethought themselves of a
Stratagem; to which purpose they sent away two Ships, wherein they stored the
best of their Soldiers, who pretending they had been in a storm in Sea, put
into the Harbor of Formosa, with some of their Masts by the board, their Sails
scattered, and their Seamen seemingly sick. The English compassionating their
miseries, which was only in outward appearance, invited the chief of them to
come ashore to refresh themselves; which they were very ready to do, carrying
as many men with them as possibly they could under pretense of sickness. While
the chief of them were at Dinner with the chief of the English, they all plied
their Cups; and when the Dutch saw the English had drunk hard enough, taking
their opportunity, they picked a quarrel with the Commander of the Fort, and
drawing their Swords, which they had hidden under their Coats for that purpose,
they easily surpised and cut all the throats of the Soldiers in the Garrison;
and being thus Masters of the Fort, they kept it from that time till they were
routed out by the Chinese.

Now for the trick that the King of Achen served the Sieur Renaud; he having
got a good Estate by Jewels, arrived at length at Achen, and as it is the
custom for the Merchants to show the King what Jewels they have, the King had
no sooner cast his eye upon four Rings which the Sieur Renaud showed him, but
he bid him fifteen thousand Crowns for them; but Renaud would not bate of
eighteen thousand. Now because they could not agree, the Sieur Renaud carried
them away with him, which very much displeased the King; however he sent for
him the next day. Whereupon Renaud returning to him, the King paid him his
eighteen thousand Crowns; but he was never seen after that, and it is thought
he was secretly murdered in the Palace.

This story came to my remembrance, when I found my Brother did not come along
with those that were sent to fetch me,* However I resolved to go, taking with
me 12 or 13000 Roupies worth of Jewels; the greatest part being in Rose Diamond
Rings, some consisting of seven, some of nine, and some of eleven Stones; with
some small Bracelets of Diamonds and Rubies. I found the King with three of his
Captains and my Brother sitting together, after the manner of the East, with
five great Plates of Rice before them of diverse colors. For their drink they
had Spanish Wine, strong waters, and several sorts of Sherbets. After I had
complemented the King, and presented him with a Diamond Ring, a blew Saphir
Ring, and a little Bracelet of Diamonds, Rubies,, and blew Saphirs, he
commanded me to sit down, and ordered me a glass of strong Water to whet my
appetite. The glass held a quarter of a pint, and therefore I refused it, which
the King very much wondered at; but being told by my Brother, that I never
drank any strong Water, he ordered me presently a glass of Sack.

After that he rose up, and seated himself in a Chair, the Elbows whereof were
gilded. His feet and legs were bare, having a Persian Carpet of Gold and Silk
to tread upon. He was clad with a piece of Calicut, part whereof covered his
body from his waste to his knees, the rest being wound about his back and
shoulders like a Scarf. Instead of Shoes he had a pair of Sandals, that stood
by the Chair side, the straps whereof was embroidered with Gold and small
Pearl. About his head he had a thing like a Handkerchief, with three Corners,
bound about his head like a Fillet. His hair also, which was very long, was
twisted and tied together over his head. Two persons stood behind him with
great Fans of long Peacock Feathers, the handles whereof were five or six foot
in length. Upon his right hand stood an old black women, holding in her hand a
little Mortar and Pestle of Gold, to beat his Betl^, in; wherewith he mixed the
Kernel of the Nut of Araque, and Seed Pearl dissolved. When it was all beaten
together, the old woman gave it the King over his Shoulders, who opening his
mouth, the old woman fed him as our women feed their Children. For the King had
chaw'd so much Betle, and taken so much Tobacco, that his teeth were all fallen
out of his head.

The King of Bantam's Palace was never built by any curious Architect. It is a
square place, encompassed with a great many Pillars, varnished over with
several sorts of colors, against which the King leans when he sits down. At
the four Corners there are four great Pillars set in the earth, at forty foot
distance the one from the other, lined with a Mat made of the Rhind of a
certain Tree, so thin that it looks like a piece of Linen, which neither Fleas
nor Punies will come near. The roof was covered with Coco-Branches. Not far
off, under another Roof supported with four great Pillars, he had sixteen
Elephants, the noblest of all those that are in the Kings service: for he has a
far greater number trained up for war, that are not afraid of wildfire. For
his guard he might have about two thousand men, that were drawn up in Companies
under the shade of the next Trees. They are good Soldiers as well by Sea as by
Land; great Mahometans, and stand not at all in fear of death. His Haram, or
the Women's Apartment, was certainly a very small Place. For when he had viewed
what I brought him, he sent for two old women, to whom he gave some of the
Jewels, to go and show them to his Wives. The two women returned back through a
little pitiful door; the enclosure being nothing but a kind of Wall made up of
Earth and Cow Dung mixed together. Whatever he sent to the Women, they never
returned any thing again. Which made me believe they would bear a good price;
and indeed whatever I sold to him, I sold to good profit, and had my Money well
paid me. After this we took our leaves; but the King obliged us to come next
day in the evening, because he had a desire to show us a Turkey Dagger, the Haft
whereof, being thin of Diamonds, he had a mind to enrich with more Stones.
Coming to the English House with our Money, they wondered that the King had
laid out twenty thousand Roupies, telling me, they believed it was the best
part of his treasure.

The next day my brother and I went to wait upon him at the appointed hour, and
we found him sitting in the same place where he sat before. There was a Moulla
then read to him, who seemed to interpret to him something of the Alcoran in
the Arabic Language. The Lecture being ended, they both rose and went to
prayers; which being concluded, the King sent for the Dagger and the Haft which
was of Gold. The top of the Handle was already set with Diamonds, and upon the
upper part of the cross Bar was cut in Facets, which could not be less worth
than fifteen or sixteen thousand Crowns. The King told me, it was presented to
him by the Queen of Borneo, and that it was cut at Goa; but that he put a far
higher value upon it than I esteemed it to be worth. The Dagger, as well as the
Sheath was full of Beazils, or Collets, in very good order; but the King had
neither Diamond, Ruby, nor any other Stone to set in the Collets; and therefore
desired me to help him to some that might come at an easy rate. I told him it
was impossible to find Stones that would fit the Beazils; and therefore that it
was better, when he had got Stones enough, to fix other Beazils according to
the proportion of the Stones. To which purpose he was first to range all his
Stones in Wax; which I showed him how to do at the same time; but that was
above his skill. And therefore do what I could to excuse my self to the
contrary, he would needs oblige me to carry the Dagger to Batavia; whereupon I
took my leave of the King, and departed.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Authors return to Batavia. His re-visiting the King of Bantam. And a
relation of several Extravagancies of certain Faquirs in their return from
Mecca.
ABout elev'n a Clock at night, we embarked for Batavia; for the night winds
blowing from the Land, are the only winds to serve our turn; so that we were at
Batavia between ten and elev'n the next morning. There I stayed twenty days for
the King of Bantam's sake, to make him belive I had sought for that which I
knew was impossible to be found. I had nothing to do all the while, for in
Batavia there is no other recreation than gaming and drinking, which was none
of my business. At that time the Sieur Cant died, one of the Indian
Counselors, who was sumptuously buried for his good services done to the
Company; but the people complained heavily of the injustice which he had done
as well to the Soldiers as Mariners.

Having stayed twenty days at Bantam, I resolved to go and return the King of
Bantam his Dagger again; for it was impossible to meet with stones to fit his
Beazils. However I took along with me some other Stones which he had not seen.
Coming to Bantam, the King caused us to be lodged in one of his own Houses in
the City, which was made of Bamboo's. Thither in less then a quarter of an
hour, the King sent us some Pateches, or sweet Water-Melons, red within like
Scarlet. We had also Mongo's, and a certain large Fruit called Pompone, red
also within, the meat of it being soft and spungy, but of an excellent taste*
Having stayed our stomachs, we went to wait upon the King, whom we found in the
same place, with his old Mortar-bearer, who every foot fed him with Betle with
her fingers. There were sitting about the Hall five or six of his Captains,
viewing a certain parcel of Fireworks, as Granado's, Rochets, and other
divices to run upon the water, which the Chinese had brought; who are the most
exquisite at those sports of any people in the world. When the King was at
leisure, I returned him his Dagger, telling him, that Batavia was no place to
meet with stones; and that such as were to be found, were valued at double the
price they were worth; and that there was no place where he could fit himself,
but at Golconda, Goa, or the Diamond Mines. Thereupon the old woman took the
Dagger, and carried it into his Haram; nor did the King speak one word more
about it. After that I showed him what other stones I had brought, a percel
whereof I sold him to good profit; the King ordering us to come the next day
for payment.

The next day about six a Clock in the morning, my Brother and I, and a Dutch
Surgeon, were going along a narrow way, between a River on the one hand, and
the Pales of a great Garden on the other. Behind the Pales a Rascally
Bantamois, had hid himself; one of those that was newly come from Mecca, and
was upon the design Moqua; that is, in their Language, when the Rascality of
the Mahumetans return from Mecca, they presently take their Cric in their
hands, which is a kind of Poniard, the Blade whereof is half poisoned; with
which they run through the streets, and kill all those which are not of the
Mahumetan Law, till they be killed themselves. These Furies think that in so
doing they do God and Mahomet good service, and shall be saved thereby. If any
of these madmen be killed, the Rabble of Mahumetans buries them as Saints, and
every one contributes to make a fair Tomb. Sometimes you shall have an idle
Rogue, in the habit of a Dervich, that will build him a Hut near the Tomb,
which he undertakes to look to, and strew with Flowers. And as his alms
increase, he adds some other ornament to it. For the Fairer and better set out
the Tomb is, the more devoutly it is worshipped, and the more Alms it brings in.
I remember in theyear 1642, that at Souali, which is the Port of Surat, it
happened that a Vessel of the great Moguls returned from Mecca, with a great
number of Faquirs or Derviches. For every year the King sends two Vessels to
carry and bring back the Pilgrims, who have their passage free. And when these
Vessels are to go, the Faquirs come from all parts of India to embark. These
Vessels are lad'n with very good Commodities, which are sold at Mecca, and the
profit is distributed among the poor Pilgrims. But the principal is brought
back for the next year, amounting to six hundred thousand Roupies at least.
It Is an ill Market when they do not gain 30 or 40 per Cent. by their
Commodities; nay there are some that produce Cent. per Cent. besides, that the
principal persons of the Moguls Haram, and other particular persons, send very
large gifts to Mecca.

One of these Faquirs returning from Mecca in the year 1642, and being landed
at Souali, had no sooner said his prayers, but he took his Dagger, and ran
among several Dutch Mariners that were unlading goods upon the shore, and
before they were aware this mad* Faquir had wounded seventeen of them, of which
thirteen died. The Canjare which he had in his hand, was a kind of Dagger, the
Blade whereof toward the Handle was three fingers broad; and because it is a
very dangerous weapon, I have here given you the Figure of it.



At length the Sentinel that stood at the entry of the Tent where the Governor
and Merchants were, shot him through the body, so that he fell down dead.
Immediately all the other Faquirs and Mahumetans that were upon the place took
up the body and buried it: and at the end of fifteen days they put him up a
fair Monument. Every year the English and Hollanders pull it down; but when
they are gone, the Faquirs set it up again, and plant Banners over it; nay some
there are that perform their devotions to it.

But to return to the Bantam Faquir. That Villain lying, as I said, behind the
Pales, as my Brother and I, and the Dutch Surgeon came toward him, all three
abreast, thrust his Pike between the Pales, thinking to have stabbed it into
one of our breasts. The Dutch man being next the River, and somewhat before the
rest, the head of his Pike ran into his Breeches; whereupon we both laid hold
of the Staff. But my Brother being next the Pales, presently leaped over, and
ran the Faquir thorough. Whereupon several Chinese, and other Idolaters, came
and gave my Brother thanks for killing him. After that we waited upon the King,
and told him what my Brother had done; who was so far from being displeased,
that he gave my Brother a Girdle. For the King and his Governors are glad when
those Rogues are slain, knowing them to be Desperado's, not fit to live.

The next day, coming to take my leave of the English President, he showed me
two strings of Diamonds, and two Services of Silver, which came from England.
He would have sold them all, but I only bought one (...) of the strings of
Diamonds, the other being foul; and for the Silver, I would have bought it, had
they coined Silver in Batavia, as they were wont to do. Formerly the Hollanders
coined Reals, Half-Reals, and Quarter-Reals, bearing on the one side the stamp
of a Ship, on the other V, O, C, like a Character, as in the Figure, signifying
in Dutch, Vor Ost Indian, Compagnie, for the East Indian Company. Which they
did for the Sake of the Chinese, who loving Silver better than Gold, carried
away all the Silver that was coined at Batavia, at good rates. But at length
they left it off, finding so few people that made use of Silver.



CHAP. XXIV.
Of the War of the Hollanders with the Emperor of Java.
HAving taken my leave of the English President, I returned to Batavia; where
having little to do, I resolved to give a visit to the King of Japar, otherwise
called the Emperor of Java. This King was formerly King of all the Island, till
the King of Bantam, who was only Governor of a Province, rebelled against him;
the Hollanders being made by the divisions of those two Princes. For when the
King of Japar besieged Batavia, the King of Bantam relieved the Hollanders; and
when they were attacked by the King of Bantam, the King of Japar came to their
assistance. And when those two Kings were together by the ears, the Hollanders
always aided the weakest.

The King of Japar keeps his Court in a City of the same name, distant from
Batavia some thirty Leagues. You may cost along the shore to it by Sea; but the
City stands above eight Leagues up in the Land. From the City there is a fine
Walk to the Sea, where there is a handsome Port, and fairer Houses than any in
the City. And the King would live there if he thought it safe.

The day before I departed, I went to take my leave of one of the Indian
Counselors, and telling him that I was going to wait upon the King of Japar,
he stood amazed, in regard the King and the Hollanders were mortal Enemies; of
which he gave me this account: The deceased King, Father to the King that now
reigns, since the Hollanders built their Fort of Batavia would never have any
peace with them. And though that during the war the Hollanders took ten of his
Subjects, for one of theirs, and offered ten for one in exchange, yet he would
never exchange one upon any condition whatsoever, and charged, his Son upon his
deathbed never to release one. This obstinacy very much troubled the Dutch
General, and all the rest in Batavia, and obliged them to consult upon ways how
to right themselves. Now it is the custom when a Mohammedan King dies, that his
successor sends certain great Lords of his Court to Mecca with Presents, as
well to engage them to pray for the Soul of the deceased; as also to give
thanks to God and Mahomet for the coming of a new King to the Throne without
any Impediment; and to pray for the blessing of victory over all his Enemies.
But the new King and his Council were at a loss how to accomplish this Voyage;
for first the King had none but little Vessels, that were wont only to sail
along by the shore, by reason of the inexperience of his Seamen; and in the
second place the Dutch were always plying to and fro about the mouths of his
Havens, to surprise his Subjects if they stirred forth. For the safety
therefore of his Pilgrims, the King at last Concludes upon making an agreement
with the English. For which reason he dispatches away an Envoy to Bantam, to
the English President and his Council* who promised to len^ him the biggest
Vessel and the best mounted which the company had in the Indies. (...) whereof
the English were to pay but half Customs for ever, for all Commodities exported
or imported out of his Country. Which Treaty being (...) the English furnished
him with three ^^out Vessels, Manned and Gunn'd beyond an (...) rate. Thereupon
nine of the principal Lords of the Court, and (...) Blood Royal, with a Train
of a hundred persons, embarked themselves in the great Vessel. But all these
preparations could not be carried so privately, (...) the Dutch had (...) of it
by their Spies. Thereupon the General of the Dutch makes ready three Ships, and
lying just in the straight of Bantams mouth; so soon as the English came up,
(for they had no other way) let fly at them so roundly, that the English
fearing lest their Vessels would be sunk, struck Sail; which the Java Lords
seeing, called the English, Traitors, and drawing their poisoned Daggers, cried
a Mocca upon the English, killing a great number of them before they had time
to put themselves into a posture of defense. And perhaps there would not one of
them have escaped, had not the Hollanders come aboard as they did. Some of the
Java Lords, and about twenty of their Attendants, would take no quarter; so
that the Hollanders were forced to fight for it, and at last they got the
better, with the loss of seven or eight men. The English Vessel being carried
into Batavia, the General very civilly sent both the Prisoners and the Vessel
home again; withal giving notice to the King, that he was ready to make an
exchange of Prisoners with him. But the King would not so much as hearken to
any such proposition; returning for answer, that though the Hollanders had
three times as many of his Subjects he would not release so much as one
Hollander. So that the poor Dutch were kept slaves in Java, and the Javanners
died iniserable in Batavia.

As for the Javanners, they are good Soldiers. And it is reported, that while
Batavia was besieged by the King of Bantam in the year 1659, a Dutch Soldier
lying in Ambuscade in a Marsh, a Javanner, little dreaming, that any body had
been there, came to the same place to discover the Enemy, and was by the Dutch
man thrust with his Pike into his Body. Upon which the Javanner finding himself
wounded, did not strive to pull the Pike out of the body, but thrust himself
farther upon it, to the end he might come at his Enemy, whom he stabbed to the
heart, as soon as he got within his reach.

CHAP. XXV.
The Author buries his Brother; and is again quarreled withal by the General
and his Council.
WHile I stayed at Batavia, my Brother died; and it was pretty to consider what
the Dutch made me pay for his Funeral. The first expense is for the Feet of
those that beg leave for the Corpse to be buried of whom the more there are, the
more honorable the Funeral is esteemed, I sent six, and paid them to my wonder
for that seventy-two Crowns. The fee for the Pall is a right that belongs to
the poor, for which I paid two Crowns. There was a Vessel of Spanish Wine drank
out, that cost me two hundred Piasters. I gave twenty-six more for three
Westphalia Hams, and some Neats-tongues, and twenty-two for Baked Meats. To the
Bearers I gave twenty Crowns, and sixteen for a place in the Churchyard, for
they asked me a hundred to bury him in the Church. And all these are Fee's
demanded. So that my Brothers Funeral cost me twelve hundred and twenty three
Livres of French Money.

Being thus put by the two Voyages which I intended to Japan and Sumatra, I was
advised to lay out my Money in Requenings or Debentures of the Servants of the
Holland Company; which they that have no mind to return into their own Country,
as being settled in the Indies, will sell at an easy rate; insomuch, that for
sixty or seventy you may buy a hundred Paisters; the Act and Acquittance of the
Seller being made and registered by the Public Notary. Thereupon I bought of
one of the public Notaries, who had Bills in his hands, to the value of about
eleven thousand Guelders, at fourscore and two for the hundred. After that, I
bought by means of the Advocate of the Treasury, six thousand Guelders more, at
seventy-nine for the hundred. But some few days after, meeting with the same
Advocate again, he passed a Complement upon me, and told me, he was very much
troubled for those that had bought Debentures, in regard that the General and
the Council had commanded him to recall all Debentures that had been sold; for
they had considered, how sad a thing it would be, for the poor men to loose so
much of their Salaries. I answered him, that for my part I was willing to
return mine, provided I might have my Money again. About six or seven hours
after, I was sent for by the General and his Council. When I came there, they
asked me why I had not returned the Debentures. which I had bought. to the
Advocate, who had demanded them by their order. I answered them, that they were
at Bantam, whither I had sent them in order to my passage home; in regard that
the English President had offered me a convenience to go along with him. The
Council answered me, that the Dutch Ships were as good as the English, and very
courteously assured me, they would give order for a Cabin to my self in the
Vice Admiral. But withal they told me, I must deliver up my Debentures before
I stirred; assuring me, that they would give me a Bill to be re-imburs'd my
Money by the Company in Holland. I thought it very hard, for I knew not how to
trust 'em; but seeing the Merchants, Commanders, and all other persons clapped
up, and their Papers taken from them by force, that had bought Debentures; I
thought it the best way to deliver mine, and stand (...) their courtesy. I
often pressed the General and the Council for my Bill, but after many delays
the General ascertained me, that my Bill should be in Holland as soon as I.
Thereupon desiring the Vice Admiral and some others to be my witnesses of what
the General promised, I took my leave of him, very much repenting my going to
Batavia.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Author embarks in a Dutch Vessel, to return into Europe.
THE next day I went aboard the Vice admiral, and the third day after we set
sail, and as soon as we were out of the Straight, we discovered the Islands of
the Prince. From thence being in the Altitude of the Coco Islands, we beat
about two days to discover them; but all to no purpose, thereupon we made
directly for the Cape of good Hope.

The forty-fifth day after our departure from Batavia, our Vice Admiral
neglected to put out his Lights; believing all the Fleet had been before at the
Cape; so that it happened that one of the Fleet being behind, and not carrying
any Lights out neither, it being a dark night, fell soul upon us, which put
every man to his prayers, all people believing the Vessel had been lost; and
indeed had she not been a sound stanch Ship (for the Provinces were so
accounted) she should never have endured so terrible a shock. At length we
cleared our selves, by cutting of the Yards of the Maestricht, that hung in our
Cordage.

The fifty-fifth we came within view of the Cape of good Hope; but were forced
to keep the Sea, because the waves rolled so that we were not able to come to
an Anchor; not that the Wind was extreme high, but because the Southwind had
blown so long that it had forced the Water to that part. When the Sea grew
calm, we came to an Anchor.

But of all the people that ever I saw in all my travels I never saw any so
hideous nor so bruitsh as the Comoukes, of which I had spoken in my Persian
Travels; and those of the Cape of good Hope, whom they call Cafres, or
Hosentotes. When they speak, they make anoise with their tongues, like the
breaking of wind backward; and though they hardly speak articulately, yet they
easily, understand one another. They cover themselves with the Skins of wild
Beasts, which they kill in the Woods; in Winter wearing the hairy part
innermost, and in Summer outermost. But there are none but the best sort among
them who are thus clad, the rest wear nothing but a nasty rag about their privy
parts. The men and the women are lean and short; and when they bring forth a
Male-child, the Mothers cut out his right Stone; and presently give him Water
to drink, and Tobacco to eat. They cut out the right Testicle, because, say
they, it makes them swifter to run. There are some of them that will catch a
Roe-Buck runnig: They neither know what belongs to Gold nor Silver; and for
Religion, they have none among them.

So soon as we cast Anchor, four women came aboard us, and brought us four
young Ostriches; which were boiled for some sick people that we had aboard.
After that they brought great store of Tortoise-Shells, and Ostriches Eggs, and
other Eggs as big as Goose Eggs; which though they had no Yolk, tasted weary
well. The Birds that lay these Eggs are a sort of Geese; and so fat that they
are hardly to be eaten, tasting rather like Fish than Flesh. The women seeing
our Cook throw away the Guts of two or three Fowl which he was dressing, took
them up, and squeezing out the Ordure, eat them as they were; being hugely
pleased with the Aqua Vitae which the Captain gave them. Neither men nor women
are ashamed to show their nakedness, for indeed they are but a sort of human
Beasts.

So soon as the Ship arrives, they bring their Beeves to the shore, with what
other Commodities they have, to barter for strong Water and Tobacco, Crystal or
Agat Beads; or any sort of old Iron work. If they are not satisfied with what
you offer them, away they fly; and then giving a whistle all their Cattle
follow 'em; nor shall you ever see 'em again. Some, when they saw 'em fly,
would shoot and kill their Cattle; but after that for some years they would
never bring any more. It Is a very great convenience for the Vessels that touch
there, to take in fresh Victals; and the Hollanders did well to build a Fort
there. It is now a good handsome Town, inhabited by all sorts, that live with
the Hollanders; and all sorts of Grain, which are brought out of Europe or Asia
and sowed there, come to better perfection there then in other parts. The
Country lies in thirty-five Degrees, and some few Minutes over, so that it
cannot be said that either the heat or situation of the Climate makes these
Cafres so black. Being desirous to know the reason, and why they stunk so
terribly, I learnt it from a Girl that was bred up in the Fort, who was taken
from her Mother, as soon as she was born, and was white like our women in
Europe; she told me, that the reason why the Cafres are so black is, because
they rub themselves with a Grease or Ointment composed of several sorts of
Drugs; wherewith should they not anoint themselves very often, and as soon as
they were born, they should become Hydrop^ical, as the Blacks of Africa, and
the Abyssins are; or like the people of Saba, that never live above forty
years, and are always troubled with one Leg twice as big as the other. These
Cafres, as brutish as they are, have yet some knowledge of Simples, which they
know to apply to several Diseases; which the Hollanders have several times
experienced. Of nineteen sick persons that we had in our Ship, fifteen were
committed to the care of these Cafres, being troubled with Ulcers in their
Legs, and old wounds which they had received in the wars; and in less then
fifteen days they were all perfectly cured. Every one of these had two Cafres
to look after him; and according to the condition of the wound or Ulcer, they
went and fetched Simples, which they bruised between two Stones, and applied to
the sore. As for the other four, they were so far gone with the Pox, that they
would not trust the Cafres with them, having been given over at Batavia, and so
they all died, between the Cape and St. Helens.

In the year 1661, a Gentleman of Britanny being at Batavia, was so bit by the
Gnats in the night, that his Leg exulcerated presently in such a manner, as to
puzzle all the art and skill of the Surgeons in that Town. When he came to
the Cape of good Hope, the Captain of the Ship sending him a shore, the Cafres
came about him, and after they had beheld him, they told him if he would trust
to them they would cure him. The Captain thereupon committed him to their care,
who cured him and made him a sound man in less then fifteen days.

When a Ship comes to an Anchor in the Cape, it is the fashion for him that
commands the Ship, to give leave to some part of the Mariners and Soldiers to
go ashore to refresh themselves. The sickly have first leave by turns, and go
to the Town, where they are dyeted and lodged for seven or eight Sous a day,
and are very well used.

It is the custom of the Hollanders, when they stay here, to send out parties
of Soldiers upon the discovery of the up-land Country, and they that go
farthest are best rewaaded. With this design a party of Soldiers, under the
Command of a Serjant* far advanced in the Country; and night coming on, they
made a great fire, as well to keep themselves from the Lions, as to warm them
selves, and so lay down to sleep round about it* Being asleep, a Lion came and
seized one of the Soldiers Arms, which the Serjant perceiving, immediately
shot the Lion with his Carbine; but when he was dead, they had much ado to open
the Lions mouth, to get out the Soldiers Arm. Thus it appears a vulgar error,
to believe that Lions would not come near the fire. As for the Soldier, the
Cafres cured his Arm in twelve days. There are in the Fort abundance of Lions
and Tigers Skins; among the rest, there was the Skin of a Horse which the
Cafres had killed; it was white, crossed with black streaks, spotted like a
Leopard, without a Tail. Two or three Leagues from the Hollanders Fort, there
was a Lion found dead, with four Porcupines Qills in his body, the third part
wereof had pierced his flesh. So that it was judged that the Porcupine had
killed the Lion. The Skin, with the Quills in it, is kept in the Fort.

A League from the Fort, is a fair Town, that grows bigger and bigger every
day. When the Holland Company arrives there with their Ships, if any Soldier
or Mariner will live there, they are very glad of it. They have as much ground
as they can manage; where they have all sorts of Herbs, and Pulse, and as much
Rice, and as many grapes as they can desire. They have also young Ostridges,
Beef Seafish, and sweet water. To catch the Ostridges, when they please, they
got their Nests when they were young, and driving a stake in the ground, tie
the Birds by one Leg to the stake, and when they are old enough they come and
take them out of the Nest, from whence it is impossible to fly away.

When the Hollanders began to inhabit the Cape, they took a young Girl from her
Mother, as soon as she was born; she is white, only her Nose is a little flat.
A French man got her with Child, and would have married her; but the Company
were so far from permitting him, that they took away above a hundred Livres of
the Maids wages from her, to punish her for the misdemeanour, which was
somewhat hard.

There are great numbers of Lions and Tigers, which the Hollanders have a
pretty invention to take; they fasten a Carbine to a stake, driven into the
Earth, and lay meat round about the Gun, which meat is fastened with a string
to the Trigger. So that when the Beast snatches the meat, the String pulls the
Trigger, and the Gun going off, hits the Lion either in the throat or the
breast.

The Cafres feed upon a Root like our Skerrets, which they roast and make bread
of. Sometimes they grind it into flower, and then it tastes like a Walnut. For
their food they eat the same Root raw, with raw Fish; with the Entrails of
Beasts, out of which they only squeeze the ordure. As for the bowels of the
wild Beasts, the women wear them dried about their Legs, especially the bowels
of those Beasts which their Husbands kill, which they look upon as a kind of
Ornament. They also feed upon Tortoises, when they have so far heated them at
the fire, as to make the Shells come off. They are very expert in darting their
Azagaya's; and those that have none, make use of pointed sticks, which they
will lance a great way. With these they go down to the Seaside, and as soon as
ever they spy a Fish near the top of the water, they will not fail to strike
him.

As for their Birds, which are like our Ducks, whose Eggs are without any Yolk;
they breed in such great quantities in the Country, that in a Bay about
eighteen Miles from the Cape, you may knock them on the head with a stick.

The Hollanders once carried a young Cafre to the General at Batavia, who bred
him carefully up, teaching him to understand the Dutch and Portugal Languages
perfectly well. At length being desirous to return into his Country, the
General gave him very good Clothes, and good Linen, hoping that he would have
lived among the Hollanders, and been serviceable to them in the dicovery of the
Country; but so soon as he got home, he flung his Clothes in the Sea, and
returned wild among his fellow Natives, eating raw flesh as he did before, and
quite forgetting his Benefactors.

When the Cafres go a hunting, they go a great number together, and make such a
prodigious howling and yelling, that they fright the very Beasts themselves,
and in that affright with ease destroy them; and I have been assured, that
their cries do terrfie the Lions themselves.

The women are of so hot a Constitution of Body, that at the times that their
monthly customs are upon 'em, they happen to make water, and that European
chances to set his feet upon it, it causes an immediate Headache and Fever,
which many times turns to the Plague.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Holland Fleet arrives at St. Helens. The description of the Island*
HAving staid two and twenty days at the Cape of good Hope, seeing that the
Wind was favorable, we weighed, and steered for St. Helens. When we were under
Sail, the Mariners cried out, they would sleep till they came into St. Helens
Road. For the wind is very constant, and carries you in sixteen or eighteen
days to the Road of the Island. All the trouble that our Mariners had, was that
fourteen days after our departure from the Cape, they were often forced to the
Topmast head, upon discovery of the Island; for as soon as you discover the
Island, the Pilot must take care to steer to the Noth-side of the Island,
because there is no casting Anchor but on that side, and that very near the
shore too; by reason of the deepness of the water; for if the Anchors come not
to take hold, the current of the water and the wind carries the Ship quite out
of the Road, which there is no recovering again, because the wind never changes.

So soon as the Ships came to an Anchor, part of the Seamen were sent ashore to
get wild Hogs, of which there are great plenty; and to gather Sorrel, which
grows in great abundance; and indeed they not only send the Seamen, but all the
Pigs, Sheep, Geese, Ducks, and Pullets aboard, to feed upon that Sorrel, which
purges them in such a manner, that in a few days they became so fat, that by
that time we came to Holland they were hardly to be eaten. That Sorrel has the
same operation upon the men, who boiling their wild Swines flesh, Rice, and
Sorrel together, make thereof a kind of Potage so excellent, that it keeps
their bodies open by an insensible purgation.

There are two places upon the Coast of St. Helens where Ships may come to an
Anchor. But the best is that where we lay, by reason that ground is very good,
and for that the water that falls from the Mountain is the best in the Island.
In this part of the Island there is no plain, for the Mountain descends to the
very shore of the Sea.

It is not so good anchoring in the other Road; but there is a very handsome
plain, where you may sow or plant whatever you please. There are great store of
Citrons, and some Oranges, which the Portugals had formerly planted there. For
that Nation has that virtue, that wherever they come, they make the place the
better for those that come after them; whereas the Hollanders endeavor to
destroy all things wherever they set footing. I confess the Commanders are not
of that humor, but the Seamen and Soldiers, who cry one to another, we shall
never come hither any more, and out of greediness will cut down a whole tree
instead of gathering the fruit.

Some days after there arrived a Portugueze Vessel from Guiny, full of Slaves,
which were bound for the Mines of Peru. Some of the Hollanders that understood
the language of the Negro's, tol'd 'em how miserably they would be used, and
thereupon the next night two hundred and fifty of them threw themselves into
the Sea. And indeed it is a miserable slavery; for sometimes after they have
min'd in some places for some days together, the Earth being loose, falls down
and kills four or five hundred at a time. Besides, that after they had been
mining awhile, their Faces, their Eyes, and their Skins change color; which
proceeds from the vapors that arise from those concavities; nor could they
subsist in those places, but for the quantity of strong Water which they give
both to the men and women. There are some that are made free by their Masters,
who labor however for their living; but between Saturday night and Monday
morning they spend all their weeks wages in strong Water, which is very dear;
so that they always live miserably.

Being ready to depart the Island of St. Helens, the Admiral called a Council,
to advize which way to steer. The greatest part were for steering more to the
West, then to the South; because the season for sailing was far spent; and for
that if we steered for the West Indies, we should find the wind more proper to
carry us into Holland. But we had no sooner crossed the Line, but we found the
wind quite contrary to what the Mariners expected; so that we were forced to
steer to the sixty-forth Degree of Altitude with the Island, and so return by
the North into Holland.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Holland Fleet sets Sail from St. Helens, and prosperously arrives in
Holland.
THE next day after the Admiral had called a Council, we weighed and set Sail
about ten a Clock at night. Three days after our departure from St. Helens, the
Seamen were called very dully to prayers morning and evening; though all the
time we staid in the rode, they never minded any such matter; which made me
wonder, to find they should be more devout when they were out of danger, than
when they were in jeopardy.

After several other days sailing, we discovered the Coast of Island, and then
the Island of Ferella, where we joined with the Holland Fleet that stayed for
us. Here it is that the Commander in chief calls to account all the Mariners
for their misdemeanors during the whole Voyage.

Our Ship was bound for Zealand; but we were forced to Iye out at Sea seven
days before we could get into Flushing, because the Sand had changed its place.
Coming to an Anchor before Flushing, two of the Company came aboard to welcome
us home, and to advise us to lock our Chests, and put our marks upon them; for
all Chests are carried into the East India House, where when the owners come
for them, they are ordered to open them, lest they should have any counterband
goods therein. Thereupon I set a mark upon my Chests, and went ashore, after I
had given a good character of the Captain, and his civility to me all the
Voyage, and thence proceed by Land to Middleburgh.

Four days after I came to Middleburgh, I went to fetch my Chests; and finding
the two Directors there, one a Zealander, the other of Horn, who came first
aboard us; I produced my Keys, and offered my Chests to be opened. But the
Zealander more civil than the Horner, delivered me my Keys again, and taking my
word, told me I was free to take away my goods. And indeed I have always
observed, that the Northern people are always more rude and ungentile than the
Southern.

As for the 17500 Florins which the General of Batavia promised should be paid
me upon my arrival in Holland, I received so many delays and put off's, that I
was length forced to commenced a Suit that lasted above two years; nor could I
get a public Notary either at Amsterdam or the Hague, that would make me out a
protest, every one fearing the Directors, who were both Judges and Parties. At
length after five years wrangling and jangling, the Director wrote to my
Brother at Batavia: (for I was then returned again to the Indies) that if I
would accept of 10000 Livres, he might receive it for me; which he did, and was
forced to give them an acquittance form the whole.

This is the return which I made from the Indies in the year 1649, and the only
time that ever I returned by Sea; having performed all the rest of my Travels
by Land, not counting my short Voyages through the Mediterranean for any thing.
And as for my first Travels, performed them all by Land, from Paris through
Germany and Hungary, as far as Constantinople; whither I returned again in the
year 1669. From Constantinople I went to Smyrna, thence I sailed for Ligorn;
from Ligorn I traveled by Land to Genoa, thence to Turin, and so to Paris.

The End.
THE INDEX TO THE Indian Travels.
A.
ABdoul-Coutou Sha, the present King of Golconda, page 65. His Children, 66.
His reply to the Canoneer that would have taken off Aurengzeb's head, 68. See
Mirgimola. Abdul Feta, Gelul Eddin Mahomet, 107. Aceph Ben Ali takes Mascate
from the Dutch, 145. His wondrous Pearl. ibid. Agra, the King's Palace there,
48, 49. Alegamma Motiar of Ceylan turns Christian, and his answer to the
Jesuits, 163. Amadabat, and the Trade thereof, 37. Amber, where found, 151,
152. Ambergreese, where found 152. Apes, their antipathy against the Crows, 40.
The danger, of killing one, ibid. Hospitals for them, 48. How set together by
the ears Asem, the Kingdom. 187. Asouf-Kan 's Policy, 112, Assists Sha-Jehan
ibid. Ast-kan. 60. Takes Dultabat, 60, 61. Atek, 44. Ava, 143. Augans, a
strange sort of People, 44. Aureng-abat made a City, 61. Aureng-zeb his cruelty
at Callabas, 33, 35. His Dominions, 106. His Power, 108. His Ambition and
craft: he joins with his Brother, Morad-Backshe, 110, defeats Dara-Sha, ibid.
deceives Morad, and sends him to Prison, ibid. He ascends the Throne 116. He
affronts his Father, 120. His Ambassadors affronted by the King of Persia, 121.
His state when he sits upon his Throne, 123.
B.
BAgnagar, see Golconda, page 61. Banarou, 52. Bannians never kill any living
thing, 37. Their cruelty to them that do, ibid. Their veneration for Apes. 39,
outdo the Jews, 44. Bantam the King visited by the Author; his Entertainment,
196, 197, etc. Bargant, 41. The Raja of Bargant entertains the Author. Baroche,
36. Begum-Saheb, 108, imprisoned by Aurengzeb; deprived of her wealth: her
death suspected, 113, 114: restored to favor: her wit, 121. Bengala, the
Revenue of it, 51. Bezoar, 153, etc. Boutan, a Kingdom; the Commodities
thereof, 182, 183, etc. Bramins, a stranger story of one, 172. Brampour, 31 a
Tumult there, and the occasion, ibid. Broakers Indian, 133. Buildings public
in India, how reared, 35.
C.
CAboul, page 44. Callabas, 33. Callicuts, where made, 31, 33, 40, 43, 52.
Cambaya, 36. Caravasera's Indian, the met hod therein 32. Cardamoms, where had,
73. Carriages Indian, 27. Carriers; the Order and Government among them. Cast
the signification and kinds, 161, 162. Cattle how fed in India, 97. Chalaour,
42. Cheats in Indian Commodities, 232, 133. Check of Mecca comes to Golconda,
in disguise, 66. Marries the King's Daughter, 67. Hinders him from surrendering
to Aurengzeb, 68. Cheraffs-Indian Bankers, 22, subtiler than the Jews, 23.
Chinese poison the Dutch Soldiers, 173. Chites, 40. Chitpour, ib. Cifers,
Indian, 23. Cochin Besieged by the Dutch 88. Taken, 89. Dutch make a mock King
of it, ibid. Collasar, 33. Commodities of the Great Mogul's Country, 126, etc.
and their price, 128, 129, 130. Comoukes, a description of the People and
Country, 204, etc. Candevir, 93. Corral, where found, 151. Cottons, where
made, 31, 36. Where whitened, 36. Color, the Diamond-Mine, 137, 141. Coins
Arabian, 1. Mogul's, 2 His Tributaries, 3. Coins called Pagods, 4, 5. English
and Dutch, 5, 6. Made by the King of Chida and Pera, 6. By the King of Achen,
Kings of Macassar, the Celebes, and Camboya, 7. By the King of Siam, ib. By the
Kings of Asem, Tipoura, Arakan and Pegu, 8. Coins of China and Tunquin, ib. Of
Japon, 9. Coins Indian, representing the twelve signs, 10. Coins Indian, 22.
Coins made by the Portugals, 12. Coins Muscovian, 13. Coins European, their
value in India, 21, 22. Coinage Indian, 17. What loss, what gain by it, ib.
Thrown about at the King's Ascent to the Throne, 107. Current at the
Diamond-Mines, 141. Cranganor, 89. promised by the Dutch at Samarin, ib.
Demolished, ib. Crocodiles, may be wounded, 55. How they dye, ib. Customs
Indian, 17. Customs affronted by an English Captain, 17. Exacted by the
Persians from the English, 75.
D.
DAca, page 55. Daman besieged by Aurengzeb. 72. Dara-Sha his duty to his
Father, 108. Defeated by his Brother, 110. He flies into Scindi, he fights a
second Battle with Aurengzeb: He is betrayed by Jessomseing, 114, then by
Gion-Kan, 115. His death, 116. Dehly, 45. De Lan, a Dutch Surgeon, lets the
Mogul, his Mother, and Wife Blood, 103. Dervichs, 4. See Faquirs. Diamonds, a
Discourse thereof, 134, etc. The forms of several Diamonds, 148, 149. Vulgar
error concerning the purchase of them, 141. Diamond Miners, their customs, 138.
Dultabat, 60, 61. Dutch send an Ambassador to China, 192. Their revenge upon
the Jesuits, 193. Dutch break their word with the King of Caudy, 149; with the
King of Achen; at War with the King of Java, 202; they quarrel with the Author.
E.
ELephants destroy the Bannian's Idols, page 34; the Woods of Mirda, 43,
affrighted; the loss of Aurengzeb's Army, 72; how taken, 95; how tamed, ib.
Their fury, ib. The difference between them, 96. Eaten b^ the Natives, ib. How
taken in Ceilan, ib. The tusks due to the Lord, ib. How the female receives the
male, ib. A remark peculiar to Ceilan Elephants, ib. Their Age, ib. The number
kept by the Great Mogul, and his Expenses, 97; how washed, 103. Emir jemla,
116, 118. Emraulds, the vulgar error concerning them, 114. Eunuchs, covetous of
Monuments, 5. Exchange Indian, 26, 27.
F.
FAquirs; their manner of traveling, page 41; their Habit and Arms, ib. The
respect given them; ib. Their Religion, 160: their Penances, 165, etc. Their
extravagancies returning from Mecca. Feast; the Great Mogul's grand Feast when
he is weighed, 122.
G
GAnges, page 51, an ordinary River, ib. and bad water, 52 Gani; see Color.
Gate, what manner of place, 34. Gehanabad, 45; the Mogul 's Palace there, 45,
46, 47. Gehanguir, ninth King of the Indians. He permits Nourhamal his Wife to
Reign in his stead. He put out his Eldest Son's eyes, 111. He prefers his
Grandchild to the Throne, ib. Dies, ib. Gion-Kan a Traitor; his death, 115.
Goa, the present state of it 74, Golconda described, 61. The Policy and
Government of the City, 64. Gold, where found, 156, etc. Gomron Road heat
excessive, injures the Ships, 90. Gondicot taken by Mirgoimla, 98. Described,
ib. Govaleor, 35. The Prison for the Indian Grandees, ib. Guards, how relieved
at Golconda, 64.
H.
HAlabas, page 52. The Governor a great Person, ib. The cruelty of his
Physician, ib. Hameth-Sheck, 107.
I
JAva, the King thereof, page 202. Javaniers, good Soldiers, 203. Jessom-seing
betrays Dara-Sha, 114. Idolaters belief touching a Deity, 164. Of the state of
the Soul after death, 167. Of their burning their dead, 168. Their several
customs, 179. Idolatrous Princes of Asia, 163. Indians cunninger thn the Jews,
23. Their manner of crossing Rivers, 100, 102. Their Superstition, 97. The
Penance of the Women, ib. Their Alms, ib. Their Pilgrimages, 101. Their
craftinefs, 102. Their Physic, 102. Their honesty, 136, 137. Their manner of
driving bargains, ib. Their Penances, 181. Indigo, where made, 36, 37, 43.
Indolstan bounded, 106. Iron of Golconda, the best, 65. Island of St. Helens
described. Ivory the best, 96. Justice in India quick, 99, 100.
K
Kemerouf, a City, page 188.
L
LAhor, page 45. Letter-Carriers, 110. Lions, how tamed, 40.
M
MAcassar, a Kingdom described, 191. The King shoots an English Malefactor with
a poisoned Arrow, 191. His difference with the Hollanders, 192. Maldives
Islands, 90. Malvares, Indian Pirates, 71, 182, Mascate, 16. Maslipatan, 70.
Matura, one of the chiefest Pagods of the Indians, 48. Measures Indian, 27.
Mingrela, 73. A Miracle done by a Bramin, 101, 102. Miram-Sha, 107. Mirda, 43.
Mirgimola, the King of Golconda's General, 67. He is suspected by the King, ib.
He revolts, 68. He joins with Aurengzeb, ib. besieges the King, ib. and
cunningly settles a new Peace, ib. entertains the Author at Gondicot, 98, 99.
How he dispatched business, 99. He conquers Asem, 187. Mirza-Abdoul-Cofing
marries the King of Golconda's third Daughter, 69. Mirza Mahomed, 68. See Check
of Mecca. Moguls, why so called, 106. Money; the force of it in India, 19. What
most proper to be carried into India, 18, 21. Monuments Indian; their
sumptuousness, 49, 50, 52, 61. Morad-Back she, 108, Viceroy of Guzerat, ib. He
rebels against his Father, 109, besieges Surat, ib. proclaims himself King, ib.
He gives credit to Aurengzeb's fallacies, ib. joins with him, 110, and defeats
Dara-Sha, ib. wounded, ib. He sees his error, is betrayed, and sent to Govaleor,
ib. Mountebanks, Indian, 36. Multan, 43. Musk, 153. Its adulterations, ib.
N
NAder, page 35. Nahab, what it signifies, 53. Navapoura, 30, famous for Rice,
ib. Nava-Sevagi revolts from the King of Visapour, 73. Nourmahal, Queen of
Indai, her Extraction, 11, 12.
O
OBservations particular upon the Mogul's Court, page 124, 125, Omrahs, their
duty, 122. Ormus; the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Surat, 15. Outemeda, 97.
P
PAgods Indian described, 92, 93. 94, 97, 102. The most celebrated among the
Indians, 173, etc. Palicat, 93. Passage by Sea from Ormus to Maslipatan, 90.
Passes, where required, 44, 52. Patna, 53. Peacocks plentiful, 37. How caught,
ib. Pearls, and where fished for, 145. How bred, how fished for, and at what
time, 146, etc. Perca, a petty Indian King, 89. Physicians, none in India, but
such as attend Princes, 102. Pilgrimages of the Indians, 119. Ponte Galle, 194.
Portugals, their power in Goa, 74, 75. Their excessive pro^eness to revenge,
ib. discover ^ a strange Country, 83. 84. Priests Indian, how maintained*
Presents given by the Author at the Great Mogul's Court, 59.
R
RAge-Mehide, 54. Raolconda, Diamond-Mine, 134. Rauchenara-Begum, 108, always a
friend to Aurengzeb. His kindness to her; their falling out, 121. Religion of
the Mahumetans in the Indies* 159, etc. Of the Idolatrous Indians, 161. Roads
from Ispahan to Agra through Gomron, 15; from Surat to Agra through Brampour
and Seronge, 30, through Amadabat, 36. From Ispahan to Agra, through Candahar,
43. From Dehly to Agra, 48. From Agra to Patna, and Daca. 51. From Surat to
Golconda, 60. From Golconda to Maslipatan, 69. From Surat to Goa; from Goa to
Golconda, through Visapour, 71. From Goa to Maslipatan, through Cochin, 88.
From Maslipatan to Gandicot, 91. From Gandicot to Golconda, 100; to the Mines,
137, 139. 141. Rodas the Fortress, 139. Roupies, the difference of them, 20.
Rubies, the forms of several, 149, 150. Rule to know the price of Diamonds,
142, 143.
S
SAltpeter, where refined, 53. Samarin an Indian King, 89. Saseron, 53.
Say-pieces Indian, 25, 26. Sepper-chekour, 115, sent to Govaleor, 116. Sera,
the signification of the word, 32. Scronge, 33. Serpents, their vast bulk, and
deadly venom, 34. Seva gi continues the revolt, 73. He finds vast Treasures,
ib. Sha-Est-Kan, 20, 24, 56; buys the Authors Jewels, 104; his kindness to the
Author, ib. revolts to Aurengzeb, 110. Sha-Jehan first called
Sha-Bedin-Mahomet, 107. His good Government, 108. He marries a young Lady, ib.
His children, ib. His love to his children ib. He rebels against his Father, is
disinherited, 111. He is advanced to the Throne, 112. His cruelty, ib. He is
kept Prisoner by Aurengzeb, and dies, 113. Siam, a Kingdom; the King of it,
119, etc. Siren, 143. Sodomy abominated by the Indians. 54. Solomon Chekour
Defeats his Uncle, 109 betrayed by Raja Roup. flies to Nactiran, 114. Is
delivered up by him, 119. Sent Prisoner to Govaleor. Soumelpour, 139. Stones
colored, where found, 145. Stones medicinal, and their effects 154, 155.
Stories of the man that lost his child in Swimming, 38, Of the Merchant's Wife
that desired a child, 39. Of the Merchant that never told lie, ib. The Story of
Monsieur Belloy, 79. Of the rich Leaper in Goa, ib. Of St. Amant, and John de
Rose, and the Sieur Marests, ib. 80, 81, etc. Of Father Ephraim, 85, 86, 87.
Sultan Abousaid-Mirza, 107. Sultan Babur, 107. Sultan Boulaki preferred by
Sha-Jehan, 111. Betrayed by Asouf-K^n, 112. Retires into Persia, ib. Sultan
Kourom, 107. See Sha-Jehan. Sultan Mahomed, Mogul, 107. Sultan Mahomed,
Aurengzeb's Son, marries the second Daughter of the King of Golconda, 69. He
flies to his Uncle, 117. Is betrayed by Emir-Jemla, and imprisoned, 118, 119.
Sultan Selim, alias Jehanguir Patska, 107. Sultan Soujah, 108. Rebels, 109. He
flies to the King of Arakan, marries his Daughter, 119. Plots against him, ib.
His death, 120. Sumbaco King of Macassar, 192. Surat, 15.
T
TAmurleng, 106 Tari, what, 65. Tavernier abused at the Mogul's Court, 57, 58.
Tenara a sweet place, 69. Thrones; the description of the Mogul's Thrones, 122,
etc. Thunderbolts three at a time, 91. Tipra a Kingdom, 186. Traveling, the
manner in India, 27, 29. Treachery, a notable piece put upon the Author at
Gomron, 157. Turquoises, where found, 144.
V.
Visapour described, 72.
W.
VVAys; Highways in India, 100. Weights Indian for Gold and Silver, 18. Other
weights, 27. Of Diamonds, 140. Of colored Stones, 144. Of Pearls, 148. Winds
hot, their stifling nature, 44. Wives of the Indians burnt alive with their
dead Husbands, 169, 170, 171, 172. Woods of Bambous, 94.
A NEW RELATION OF The Inner-Part OF THE Grand Seignor's SERAGLIO.

Containing Several Remarkable Particulars, never before exposed to public
view.

By J. B. TAVERNIER, Baron of Aubonne.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by R. L. and Moses Pit.

1684.

THE Author's Design.
I Question not but that several Relations of the Grand Seignor's Seraglio have
been published; but I am to acknowledge withal that I have not had the leisure
to read any one of them. I have traveled six several times, by Land, into the
East, and by different Roads, during the space of Forty Years; and most persons
know, that my Employments were such, as would not allow me much time for the
reading of Books. But when my Affairs afforded me any remission, I wholly
employed those spare hours, in the collection of things the most worthy to be
remarked, whether the Scene lay in Turkey, or in Persia, or in the Indies, on
this, or the other side of the River Ganges, or in the Diamond-Mines, which are
in the Territories of diverse Princes. While I am busied in putting into order
those Memories, which I conceive my self obliged to gratify the Public withal,
I make it a Present of this Relation of the Seraglio, attended with some
Observations sufficiently remarkable, which, happily, will not be unpleasant.

The Ottoman Court, which makes so much noise in the World, has not, to my
thinking, been yet sufficiently well known, if I may judge of it, by what I
have seen thereof my self, and have heard from several Persons. I do here
communicate a faithful and ample description thereof: which I have extracted,
as well out of what I had observed my self, in the several Voyages I made to
Constantinople, as out of the informations I received from two intelligent
Persons, who had spent many years in the Seraglio, in very considerable
Employments. One of whom was a Sicilian, advanced to the Charge of
Chasnadar-bachi, or chief Officer belonging to the Treasury; and after Five and
Fifty years Service in the Seraglio, was, for some slight miscarriage committed
by him, banished to a place near Bursa, in Natolia, from whence he made his
escape into the Indies. The other, a Parisian-born, named De Vienne; had been
one of the Pages of the Treasury. In his Return from the Jubilee at Rome, in
the Year M. DC. L. being aboard a Brigantine bound from Civita Vecchia to
Marseilles, he was taken by the Pirates of Tripoli, and the Bassa finding that
young Lad well shaped, and looking like one that promised much, sent him, as a
Present, to the Grand Seignor. He was also packed away out of the Seraglio,
after Fifteen Years Service, only upon this score, that there was some
discovery made, of his holding a secret correspondence with the disgraced
Sicilian, who had heretofore shown him much kindness, and indeed it was by his
credit that the Parisian was first advanced to the Chamber of the Treasury.

From those two men, who were in a fair capacity to make exact Observations of
things, have I extracted the better part of this Relation. Though they had been
forced to embrace the erroneous persuasion of Mahomet, yet were there some
Relics of the good sentiments of Christianity: And whereas there was not the
least hope of recovering the honors, wherein they pride themselves who are
exalted to Charges in the Seraglio, it is not to be imagined, that they could
have any design to disguise things to me. They themselves thought it a certain
pleasure to descend to a greater familiarity of Discourse, and to specify even
the least circumstances: but I am to discover withal, that having had their
education amongst the Turks, and learnt of them, to love Money, it must have
been so much the greater charge to me, to give them content. I have kept them
for a considerable space of time, at my own charge, and that in several places,
one at Ispahan in Persia, and the other in the Indies, where they had made
their residences, and the Memoires which they supplied me withal were perfectly
concordant.

To the Instructions, which I made a shift to get from those two men, and to
what discoveries I may have made my self, of the present state of the Grand
Seignor's Palace, I shall add some necessary Observations of the Manners and
Customs of several Provinces of the Ottoman Empire, slightly passing over
those things, which, in all probability, are generally known. But that the
Reader may with greater ease comprehend the matters I treat of, and that the
discourse may not be interrupted, by the necessary explication of the several
names of Charges and Dignities, I have thought it ^it, in the first place, to
give a short List of them, after which shall follow another, of the different
Species of Money, which are current all over the Turkish Empire.

A TABLE OF THE Chapters contained in this RELATION.
Of the Charges and Dignities as well of the Seraglio, as of the Ottoman
Empire; AND Of the different Species of Gold and Silver, now current in TURKEY.
CHAP. I. Of the Extent, and outside of the Seraglio. II. Of the first Court of
the Seraglio, and particularly of the Infirmery. III. Of the second Court, in
which are the lesser Stables, the Kitchins, and the Divan. IV. Of the
^ivan-Hall, and the exact administration of Justice there by the Grand Seignor.
V. Of the inner part of the Seraglio in general, and particularly of the
Q^^rter of the Eunuchs and the Ichoglans. VI. Of the Hall, where the Grand
Seignor gives Audience to Ambassadors, and how they are received. VII. Of the
Baths of the Seraglio. VIII. Of the Grand Seignor's Treasure. IX. Of the secret
Treasure. X. Of the means used by the Grand Seignor, to augment his Treasury,
besides the ordinary Revenues of the Empire. XI. A subtle way which the Grand
Seignor has to bestow great Liberalities without meddling with his Revenues.
Chap. XII. Of the Present which the Grand Seignor sends every Year to Mecha.
XIII. Of the Cellar, and diverse other Appartments. XIV. Of the Quarter of the
Dogangi-bachi, or Grand Falconer, and some other Officers. XV. Of the Grand
Seignor's own Appartment. XVI. Of the Grand Seignor's ordinary Occupations.
XVII. Of the Women's Quarter. XVIII. The Entrance into Constantinople of the
Sultaness, (Mother to the Grand Seignor) who has the honorary Title of La
Valide, on the second of July, 1668. XIX. Of the Gardens of the Seraglio. XX.
Of the Princes, who follow the Mahumetan Religion in Europe, Asia, and Africa.
A NEW AND EXACT RELATION OF THE Grand Seignor's SERAGLIO.
OF The Charges and Dignities as well of the Seraglio, as of the OTTOMAN EMPIRE.
As also, Of the different Species of the GOLD and SILVER-COINS, now current in
TURKEY.
The Principal Heads of the following Discourse.
THe Origin of the Grandees of the Port. The severe Discipline of the
Seraglio. The Authority of the four Principal Bassa's, of dangerous consequence
to the Grand Seignor, and how he can take it off. Observations upon Standarts.
Of the Plume of Herons Feathers which the Grand Seignor wears in his Turbant.
The Honors and Disadvantages attending the Charge of the Grand Vizier. The
particular Privilege of the Caimacan. The number of the real Janissaries. The
transcedent privilege of their Aga, or Colonel-General. The happy condition of
the Spahis, and the Zaims. The prodigious number of Eunuchs all over the
Eastern parts. Exquisite Observations upon that Subject. The principal Charges
of the Seraglio. The noble advatages of the Capi-Aga. The Repute and Riches of
the Kislar-Agasi, Intendant, or Overseer of the Apartment of the Women. That
the Charge of Bostangi-Bachi is one of the most eminent of those belonging to
the Port. The great Economy of the Partisans. The Policy of the Port, to keep
the Cham of the lesser Tartary in subjection. The Principal Dignities of
Persons relating to the Law. The Species of Gold and Silver-Coins current in
Turkey. Whence, and how, the Gold coined at Cairo is brought thither. The
sincerity of the Abyssins. The Story of the Commerce carried on in the disposal
of the five Sols Pieces, French Money. The jealousies of the Persons concerned
in that Trade. A mischievous Fraud mildly punished. The ancient sincerity of
the Turks corrupted by the Commerce of the Europaeans.

The Origin of the Grandees of the Port.
THey who are advanced to Charges, whether it be in the Seraglio, or in the
Empire (excepting only the Eunuchs, of whom I shall give an account anon) are
generally raised out of the Children taken in War, or sent by way of Presents,
by the Bassa's, or out of the Tributary Children, who, about nine or ten years
of Age, are taken out of their Mothers arms, through all the Provinces' subdued
by the Ottoman Princes. They are all to be of Christian Parents; and counting
only the Slaves taken from the Enemy, we find the Registers of the Customhouse
of Constantinople alone, that, of both Sexes, there are brought thither every
year near twenty thousand. The Inhabitants of the lesser Tartary, who make
continual Incursions into all the Countries, that are in hostility against the
Ottoman Empire, send up vast numbers of them, and the Grand Seignor having the
choice of all those young Children, the best shaped, and such as have the most
promising looks, are distributed into several Seraglio's, to be there
instructed in the Law of Mahomet, and all sorts of Exercises. And afterward,
out of the choice or cullings of these last is the Seraglio of Constantinople
replenished; and they are to be distinguished into two Orders. The first and
the most eminent is that of the Ichoglans, designed for the great Charges and
Dignities of the Empire: The second, that of the Azamoglans, employed in such
Offices as require only strength of body. The Ichoglans are those, in whom,
besides the accomplishments of the Body, they discover also a noble Genius, fit
for a high Education, and such as may render them capable of serving their
Prince, some time or other.

The severe Discipline of the Seraglio.
These are accordingly instructed with great care, and educared with the
observance of a most severe Discipli^e. They pass through four several
Chambers, called Oda's, which are as it were four Forms, where they learn, in
order, whatever is convenient for young persons, who are to be continually
about a great Prince, and are as it were his Pages or Gentlemen. If they commit
the least fault, they are severely chastis'd, and there is a great stock of
patience requisire, for any one to be advanced to the fourth Oda, which when
they have attained, they begin to rake a little breath. But the hopes of being
exalted to the greatest Honors, and the most eminent Dignities, makes them
endure the barbarous treatments of the Eunuchs; who are appointed to be their
Masters, and are very liberal of the Bastinado to them: I shall give an account
else where of the manner of their Education, and of those four Oda's, or
Chambers, where they learn those things, whereby they are qualified for the
Charges, for which the Grand Seignor designs them. Though it be appointed by
the received Custom of the Empire, that those Children should be all descended
from Christian Parents* of the best extraction, and the best shaped that can be
found; yet the Capi-Aga, or Grand Master of the Seraglio, the Principal of the
white Eunuchs, who has the chief Command over the I hoglans, sticks not to
admit into their number some natural Turks, such as may be r^commendable, upon
the score of their good qualities and endowments: But that happens very seldom,
and that not without the particular permission of the Prince, who would rather
have all those Children to be Renegado-Christians. And this is the Origin of
the Great Persons belonging to the Grand Seignor, and the Port. They are all
Slaves, and not having any knowledge of their Pa^ents, or Relations, they
wholly apply their Affections to the Service of their Prince, who has been
pleased to advance them to such high Fortunes.

The Authority of the four Principal Bassa's, of dangerous consequence to the
Grand Seignor, and how he can take it off.
The Bassa's therefore are taken out of the Order of the Ichoglans, and the
name of Bassa, or Basha, is only a Title of Honor and Dignity, common to all
the Grandees of the Port, who are distinguishable, according to the difference
of their Charges. The four Principal are these. The Vizir-Azem, or Grand Vizir,
the Caimacan, the Bassa of the Sea, and the Aga of the Janissaries. The
Authority of these four Bassa's is so great, that sometimes they deprive their
Sovereign of the Crown, and bestow it on whom they please; as it has happened,
in our Age, to two Emperors immediately succeeding one the other, Mustapha and
Osman, of whom the later died in Prison, by the infamous hand of a common
Executioner. But on the other side; if these Bassa's know not how to take their
measures rightly, they lose their heads upon the least miscarriage, the Grand
Seignor seizing to himself all their Estates at their death, and taking their
Children into the Seraglio. Nay, these last are so far from succeeding their
Fathers, either as to wealth or employments, even though it were the Son of a
Grand Vizir, or of a Sister of the Emperor himself, that the highest
advancement they are admitted to, is to be made Captains of Galleys; the policy
of the Turks not permitting, that in any one House there should be a
transference of power from Father to Son, that so they may be prevented from
taking any occasions to disturb the State. It may be seen by this account of
them, that the fortune of the Bassa's, which for a time seems so splendid, is
but a tottering fortune, upon which neither the Son, nor the Father himself,
what repute soever he may be in, can make any sure reliance.

Observations upon the Standards.
The Bassa's, who have the denomination of Vizirs, carry three Banners or
Standards, at the top of which there is a Horse-tayl fastened, put into what
color they please themselves, green only excepted, thought they are permitted
to paint the Staff, to which the Standard is fastened, with that color. The
Origin of this Custom was thus, according to the Story which the Turks relate
of it. Having one day given Battle to the Christians, their Standard was taken
in the heat of the Engagement, and the General of the Turks perceiving that the
loss of the Standard was a discouragement to the Soldiers, who were beginning
to take their flight, he with a Cymitar cut off a Horse's rayl, and fastened it
to the top of a Half Pike, and advanced it on high, crying out, Here is the
Grand Standard, let him who loves me follow me. Immediately the Turks
re-assum'd Courage, and having rallied, renewed the Charge, and gained the
Victory. The Officers who are about the Persons of the Bassa's, have also their
Standards, but they are not allowed to add thereto one of those tayls; and it
is to be observed, that the Bassa's, who are not Vizirs, can carry but two of
them; as the Beys, who are inferior to the Bassa's, and Governors of lesser
Provinces, carry but one of them. When the Grand Seignor goes into the Country,
there are seven Standards carried, in regard that according to the Turks, the
world is divided into seven parts, or seven Climats whereof the Grand Seignor
is Master, if taken according to its breadth, and it is for that reason that in
their Language, they give him the Title of Master of all Kings. This is
grounded upon what Mahomet said, That he, who after his death, should be Master
of those Territories, where his Sepulcher were found, should assume the Title
of Master of Chief of all the Kings upon Earth. They add, that there are but
three Empires, which are, those of Constantinople, Babylon and Trebizond: And
it is for that reason, that the Grand Seignor wears three plumes of black
Heron-tops in his Turbant. Take Notice by the way, that they are only the
Herons of Candia which have their tops perfectly black, the Herons of all other
Countries having them, either white, or of a mixed Color. And because there
must be a considerable quantity of them to make up a plume, it must accordingly
be of a very great value, which possibly has occasioned its being cut of use in
Europe: For as to all the Princes of Asia, they have still a great esteem for
the Heron-tops; but they must not have the least defect, and if the points of
them be ever so little broken, there is no account made of them, as being
things of very little value. By those three Heron-tops upon the Grand Seignor's
Turbant, it is known that the Grand Vizier is in the Army; inasmuch as at that
time, he wears but two of them, and the thing is worthy our Observation. When
the Army is to march, the Grand Seignor gives Order for the drawing up those
Troops which are at Constantinople, and the parts adjacent, and having the
Grand Vizir near him, he presents him to them for their General. The Soldiers,
at that time, say not a Word, nor do they make the ordinary salute, till after
the Grand Seignor has caused one plume of the Heron-tops to be taken out of his
Turbant, and to be put upon that of the Grand Vizir; and upon that Ceremony,
the whole Army salutes him, and acknowledge him for their General, and from
that very time are to receive their Pay from him.

Having spoken of the Bassa's in general, it is requisite I should give some
Idea of those who are advanced to the principal Charges of the Empire, and I
shall bring into that List, the Grand Vizir, accompanied by six others, who
have the quality of Vizirs, the Caimacan, the Bassa of the Sea, and the Aga of
the Janissaries; after whom I shall come down to the Beglierbeys, and to the
Sangiacbeys, and to the Bossangi-bacbi, who has one of the most erninent
Charges of the Port.

The Honors and Disadvantages attending the Charge of Grand Vizir.
The Vizir-Azem, or Grand Vizir, is the Licutenant-General of the Empire, and
of the Armies, the principal Person of the Council, and he who, under the Grand
Seignor's Orders, has the absolute dispsoal of all Affaris, relating to the
State, or to the War, having in his custody the Imperial Seal. He is attended
by, and has assistant to him, in the Divan, six other Vizirs, whom they call
Vizirs of the bench, and who are properly Counselors of State, but yet such as
have not any deliberative voice, and come not into the Divan, but only to be
consulted upon some point of Law, wherein they are well skilled, without
intermedling with the government of the State; or concerning themselves in any
Affair, unless their advice be required. There are also five Beglerbeys, on
whom the Grand Seignor bestows the qualification of Vizirs, and are possessed
of the greatest anh wealthiest Governments of the, Empire, to wit, the Bassa's
of Babylon, Cairo, Buda, Natolia and Romania. The three former, who are the
three principal, had heretofore the privilege (exclusively to all the other
Bassa's) of having carried before them (in the same manner as the Grand Vizir
had) the three Horse-tayls, of which I have related the Story. But at the
present, that privilege extends to the two other Bassa's of Natolia and
Romania, and they are all five equal, as to that point.

I am now to return to the Grand Vizir, who has a magnificent Court, answerable
to the greatness of the Master, whom he serves, and there are in his house
above two thousand Domestics. Though he lies exposed, as well as the other
Bassa's, to the indignation of the Prince, and forced to send him his Head,
when he requires it; yet does the Grand Seignor, in the Affairs of greatest
importance, and such as concern the State, comply much with the Sentiments of
his Grand Vizir, and his Propositions in Council are as so many definitive
Sentences. It Is that which renders his Power so absolute, that in all the
Empires and Kingdoms of the World, there is not any chief Minister of State
whose Authority can be paralleled to that of the Grand Vizir. Whoever comes to
make him a Visit, he rises not out of his Chair, either to give him a
reception, or to conduct him out again, unless it be the Mufti, who is the
principal Person relating to the Law (of Mahomet) upon whose access, the Grand
Seignor himself rises from his Throne. But this particularly worth our
observation, That as it belongs only to the Grand Vizir, to propose all Affairs
of importance, so does it concern him to be very careful, not to advance any
thing that may be displeasing to the Grand Seignor; for if it should so happen,
he gives immediate Order for the strangling of him, without making him any
answer at all, upon this Maxim of the Ottoman Court, that there must not be
any thing proposed to the Prince, which may give him any cause of
dissatisfaction.

A Privilege particular to the Caimacan.
The Caimacan is the Captain, and Governor of the City of Constantinople,
Lieutenant to the Grand Vizir, yet so as not to have any Authority, but only in
his absence; And then he performs all the functions of that important Charge;
he has the absolute Command and gives Audience to Ambassadors. He is not
subject, as the other Bafsa's are, to that rigorous necessity of resigning his
Head; upon this account, that if he does any thing, which may be displeasing to
the Grand Seignor, he lays the blame thereof upon the Grand Vizir, from whom he
receives his Orders.

The Bassa of the Sea is the Admiral, and Captain General of the Naval Forces.
The Beys, Governors of the Maritime Provinces, and such as are obliged to
maintain the Grand Seignor's Galleys in good order, are to obey the Commands
they receive from him, and to go to Sea upon the first advertisement they
receive to that purpose.

The number the real Janissaries.
The Janizary-Aga, whom the Turks call Yengeri-Agasi, is the Colonel-General of
the Janissaries. The Charge is very considerable, inafmuch as the Turkish
Infantry, at this time, does for the most part pass under the name of
Janizares, though such as ase really Janissaries, who derive their Institution
from Ottoman the First, and their great Privileges from Amurath the Third, do
not at this day amount to a Body of above five and twenty thousand Men. They
have excellent Regulations amongst themselves, and are distributed into several
Chambers, in the spacious Lodgings, whereof they are possessed, whether it be
at Constantinople, or in other places. The order observed there is so excellent
in all things, and so exactly maintained, that they live more like Religious
Persons, than Soldiers; and though they are not forbidden to marry, yet it is
very seldom that they do it. The great Privileges which they enjoy all over
the Empire, wherein they are so highly respected, induce abundance of Persons,
merely in order to their exemption from the paying of Taxes, and their being
discharged from public Duties, to prevail with the Officers, by Money, to
protect them, and make them pass for Janissaries. But they receive no Pay from
the Prince, and all their advantage is restrained to the enjoyment of those
Privileges, which indeed are great enough. It is by this intermixture of the
real Janissaries, with those who are admitted by corruption, that the number of
them amounts at this day to above a hundred thousand; and yet not accounting
any but such as are effectively Janissaries, their Body has sometimes been so
dreadful, as that they have unthron'd the Ottoman Monarchs, and changed the
whole face of the Empire of a sudden.

The great Privilege of the Aga.
The Power of their Aga is very great, and there is not any Person can approach
the Prince, as he is permitted to do. For he may come into the Grand Seignor's
presence, with his arms at absolute liberty, and with a confident deportment,
whereas all the other Grandees of the Port, without any exception, even to the
Grand Vizir himself, dare not appear before him, otherwise than with their arms
crofs their bodies, and the hands one upon the other, on the breast, as a mark
of a profound submission.

The Beglerbeys are, in dignity, next the four first Bassa's, and are as't were
so many Sovereigns, in the general Government of the Empire, whereof the Grand
Seignor bestows the Command on them. But in regard it is not my design to speak
of the Government of Turkey, any further than is requisite for the Subject
whereof I treat, there is not any necessity that I should inform the Reader of
the number of those Beglerbeys, and it is enough that I have named the five
principal ones, of whom I shall have occasion to speak elsewhere. I shall only
add here, That those great Bassa's have under them a certain number of
Sangiac-Beys, who are Governors of Sangiacs, or particular Provinces, as the
Sangiacbey of Salonica, or of Morea.

And whereas there will also be frequently mentioned some others, under the
Denominations of Spahis, Zaims and Chiaoux, we must give a short account of
those three sorts of Persons.

The Spahis, who make up a Body of about fifteen thousand Men, are a kind of
Knights, who would pass for the Gentry or Nobility of the Country, and stand
very much upon their Gallantry. They are maintained out of the Revenue of the
Timars, that is to say, out of the Manors, or Commanderies, which the Grand
Seignor bestows on them, according to the recompense he would make them for
their services. Those Timars cannot be taken away from them, unless they be
negligent in their duty, which is, that they should be in the Army, when the
Grand Vizir is there in person. These are the happiest persons in all the
Ottoman Empire, and as it were petty Sovereigns, in he places where they
command.

The Zaims differ not much from the Spahis, and, as the other, have the Command
and Revenues of certain Lands, or Fiefs, which the Grand Seignor bestows on
them. There is a very great number of them over all the Empire, and they look
on themselves, as the Lords and Barons of the Country. The Turkish Cavalry
consists of the Zaims and the Spahis, and they know what number of Horse they
are to bring into Field, according to the Revenue of their Timars.

The Cbaoux, or Chiaoux-Bachi, is the Chief of all the Chaoux of the Empire,
whose employment it is to carry the Prince's Commands, to any part either
within his Territories, or without, and to be sent upon Embassies, though
indded they are but as so many Messengers, or Expresses. It Is ordinarily into
their custody that Prisoners of Quality are committed, and they suffer them not
to be out of their sight.

And thus you have an account of the principal charges and Dignities of the
Empire, all possessed by Persons taken out of the rank of the Ichoglans. I now
come to the Officers of the Seraglio, and in regard they are Eunuchs, on whom
the Grand Seignor bestows the most eminent Charges, and who, besides, have the
Government of the Ichoglans, I shall follow the order of the things, in my
placing of them here, before I say ought of the second order or rank of
tributary Children, or such as are taken in War, who are the Azamoglans.

The prodigious number of Eunuchs all over the East.
Of the Eunuchs there are also two ranks. There are some white, who have
endured only a simple castration; and there are black ones, who have all cut
off, even with the belly. Both sorts of them are severe, humorous and morose,
and their Treatments are almost insupportable to all those who are under their
Charge. There is a prodigious number of them, as well in Constantinople, as all
over the Empire, and generally all over the Eastern parts of the World, where
there is hardly a private Person, having any thing of abilities, but keeps an
Eunuch or two, as Sentinels over his Observations upon this Subject.
Women. And it is this that causes so great a commerce of Eunuchs in several
parts of Asia and Africa, and in the single Kingdom of Colconda, where I
chanced to be in the year 1659. there were put off of them in that very year
about two and twenty thousand. It comes into my mind, that the Grand Mogor's
Ambassador, in whose Country that Barbarism is not suffered, but the Eunuchs he
makes use of are brought out of other places, took me one day aside, to tell me
that he cared not how soon he returned into his own Country, out of the fear he
was in, lest that Kingdom of Colconda might sink into the ground, after such
cruelties. Most of the Fathers and Mothers, who are extremely poor, and have no
love for their Children, and whom they are also afraid that they cannot
maintain, have no other shift, upon the first dearth of Provisions, than to
sell them to certain Merchants, who afterward have them gelt, and sometimes
make clear work, and cut of all. Some of those who have not any thing lest,
when they would urine, are forced to make use of a little Cane or Pipe, and to
put it to the bottom of the belly. And whereas few escape after so dangerous an
operation, such are accordingly much dearer than the others, and they are sold
in Persia and Turkey at the raze of six hundred Crowns; when a hundred, or a
hundred and fifty, is the price of the ordinary Eunuchs. For the supply
therefore of all Turkey, all Persia, all the Indies, and all the Provinces of
Africa, it may be easily judged that there must come millions of them from
several places. The Kingdom of Colcunda, in the Peninsula on this side Ganges,
and the Kingdoms of Assan, Boutan, Arachan, and Pegu, on the other side of it,
afford a prodigious number of them. All these Eunuchs are either white, or of
duskish color. The black Eunuchs, who are brought out of Africa, much
inferior in point of number, are, as I said, much the dearer. The most
deformed yield the greatest price, their extreme ugliness being looked on as
beauty in their kind. A flat Nose, a frightful Aspect, a large Mouth, thick
Lips, the Teeth black, and standing at a distance one from another (for
ordinarily the Moots have fair Teeth) are so many advantages to the Merchants
who sell them. The Seraglio at Constantinople is full of these two sorts of
Eunuchs: The black are designed for the custody of the Apartment where the
Women are, and sent to Court by the Bassa's of Grand-Cairo. The white, who are
somewhat less savage, and have been educated with some care, are for the Grand
Seignor's own Apartment.

The principal Charges of the Seraglio.
The four principal Eunuchs, who approach the Prince's Person, are the
Hazodabachi, the Chasnadarbachi, the Kilargibachi, and the Sarai-Agasi, who
have for their Superior the Capi-Aga, who has the superintendency of all the
Chambers of the Ichoglans. They ordinarily succeed one the other, that is to
say, the Sarai-Agasi succeeds the Kilargibachi; the Kilargibachi succeeds the
Chasnadarbachi; and the last named succeeds the Hazodabachi; and in fine, the
Hazodabachi succeeds the Capi-Aga, who is always of the longest standing in
service of the white Eunuchs.

The noble Advantages of the Aga.
The Capi-Aga, or Capou-Agasi, is as it were the Grand Master of the Seraglio,
he is the principal in dignity and repute of all the white Eunuchs, and he is
always near the Grand Seignor's Person, wherever he is. He is the Person who
introduces Ambassadors to Audience, and all great Affairs passing through his
hands, e're they come into those of the Prince, his Charge renders him
necessary to all others, and procures him many rich Presents. All those persons
also who are to make any Present to the Grand Seignor, must address themselves
to the Capi-Aga, in order to their being presented to his Highness, of which he
makes great Advantages. No Man can enter into the Emperor's Apartment, nor get
out of it, without his Order; and when the Grand Vizir would speak to him, it is
the Capi-Aga's place, to take and present him to his Highness. Whether it be by
night or by day, if there happen some pressing Affair, whereof the Vizir would
give the Grand Seignor immediate notice in writing, the Capi-Aga receives it
from him and brings him the answer thereto. He wears his Turbant in the
Seraglio, and rides up and down on Horseback, by a Privilege particularly
annexed to his Charge. He accompanies the Grand Seignor even into the Apartment
of the Sultanesses, but he stays at the door, as having no Command in that
place. When he leaves the Seraglio, upon his being dismissed from his Charge,
which very seldom happens, he cannot be a Bassa. As to his Table, all is at the
Prince's Charge, and he has over and above ten Sultanines a day, which amount
to sixty Livers, French Money. There have been some Capi-Aga's who have died
worth two millions, all which returned into the Grand Seignor's Coffers. The
chief of the white Eunuchs is attended by four others, who next to him have the
principal Charges of the Grand Seignor's Quarter.

The Hazodabachi, is, as it were, the Lord High-Chamberlain, having under his
Charge the forty Pages of the Chamber, who ordinarily approach the Grand
Seignor's Person.

The Serai-Agasi has the general Superintendency of all the Chambers of the
Grand Seignor's Quarter, as to what relates to Embellishment, and the necessary
Reparations. He has a particular inspection over the Seferli Odasi, which is
the Chamber of the Pages, who are to look after the Grand Seignor's Linen, and
attend him in his Progresses. It Is incumbent also upon him to give Order for
their Clothes, and whatever else they stand in need of: And his Charge does
somewhat resemble that of Captain of the Louver-Castle, in France, since it is
his work generally to make provision for whatever may contribute to the decency
and well-ordering of that great Palace. He has for his Assistant, or
Lieutenant, the Seraiket-Odasi, who is also an Eunuch, whose employment it is
to have the Tapistry and Carpets which are spread upon the Floors, in the Halls
and Lodgings of the Seraglio, changed every six months.

The Haznadar, or Chaznadar-Bachi, is the chief Intendant of the Treasury, and
has the inspection of the conduct and deportment of the Pages of that Camber.
Which is not to be understood of the Treasury, designed for the exigencies of
the State, and the ordinary Pay of the Soldiery, and whereof the Grand Vizir,
and the three Tefterdars, or Treasurers-General have the Keys, and Intendency.
But I here speak of, is the place where they keep the Jewels of the Crown, and
all the other Rarities, and the wealth gathered together, from Father to Son,
by the Ottoman Princes; which I shall endeavor to lay down distinctly, before
the Reader's prospect, in my Relation, when I come to open to him both the
Treasuries. However it is to be observed, that the Chaznadar-bachi has only the
honorary title of chief of the Treasury, nay, that he cannot so much as enter
into it, since that in the Reign of Sultan Amurat, the Pages of the Treasury
having complained to the Grand Seignor of the ill conduct of that Eunuch, he,
upon their Petition, ordered that the Chaznadar-bachi should no longer have any
Command there, and that the Chaznaket-odasi should for the future exercise his
Charge, without depriving him of the title thereof. But in regard the
Chaznadar-bachi is the better known, and the more pronounceable Name, I shall
always make use of it, instead of the other; and we must not omit giving you
this remark, That when the Chief, or Overseer of the Treasury, is removed from
his Charge, he is made a Bassa. Upon this counterchanging of these two Officers
of the Seraglio, it is to be observed, That, amongst all the Mahumetan Princes,
Turks, Persians, Indians, and of what Sect soever they may be of, what has been
ordered and established in the Reign of one Prince, is never revoked by his
Successor: And under the same Sultan Amurat, the Capou-Agasi having committed
some little impertinence, whereat the Grand Seignor took offense, he excluded
thenceforwards all the Capou-Agasi's, who should be removed out of the
Seraglio, from the privilege of coming into a capacity to be made Bassa's. I
shall not think it much to allege upon this particular, another example of
that Maxim, of which I was an eyewitness my self, in the King of Persia's
Court. 'Twas in the Reign of Scach Abas, against whom some Grandees of the
Court had entered into a Conspiracy, and attempted to take away the King's
Life, yet with a design to have put his Son into the Throne. About Two or Three
in the afternoon, when every one in Persia is retired to the Haram, which is
the Appartment of the Women, the Conspirators sent to the Palaces twenty Men
well armed, with Order, first, to put to the Sword all they should find at the
Gates, which ordinarily are guarded only by two ot three Men, armed with a
massy Club, and afterward to go and murder the King himself in the Haram,
which would be but poorly defended by black and white Eunuchs, who are poor
Soldiers. But the intended blow of the Conspirators was prevented, and the
chief Porter, a Person accounted one of the most valiant of his time, being in
his Station, with two of his Servants, Georgians by Country, that is to say,
valiant, as all those People are, fell upon the Traitors with his Cuttelas, and
beat them back so smartly, that they thought it the best way to run for it. The
King having been informed of that action, ordered him to be brought into his
Presence, and after he had commended him, made this establishment, That the
Charge of chief Porter, should ever continue in his Family, from Father to Son.
He also commanded the Keeper of the Archives, or Records, to insert that action
into the History, and wished that his own Name might be dashed out of it, and
all that had been done during his Reign, if any of his Successors attempted to
change any thing of his Will, and deprive the House of that Faithful Georgian
of that Charge.

The Kilargi-bachi is the chief Governor of the Pages of the Kilar, which is
the place where they keep all the exquisite Drinks for the Grand Seignor's own
drinking. It is a kind of Cup-bearers Office, and the Kilargi-bachi, a kind of
Cup Bearer; and he is also made a Bassa, upon his removal from the Charge of
Kilargi-bachi. He is moreover the Chief or all the Akegis, who are the Cooks
and Confectioners, since no Body can have any entrance into those Offices, but
by his Order; and he has under his custody all the Plate, which is for the
peculiar service of the Grand Seignor. This Officer has for his Substitute the
Kilarketodasi. Now having told you, that, upon the resignation of his Charge,
he is made a Bassa, it were not amiss to advertise you further, That they who
are removed out of the Seraglio, in order to their being Bassa's, ought to have
been of the number of the forty Pages of the Chamber, and to have passed
through one of these six Charges, of Chasnaketodasi, and of Kilarketodasi, of
whom I have spoken already, of Dogangibachi, of the Chokadar, of the Seligdar,
and of the Rikabdar, of whom I shall discourse anon. Otherwise, they can only
be Beys, or Zaims, or Spahis, or at most, but Capigibachis, by the Grand
Seignor's singular favor. The case is the same with the Cugombachi, who is the
second Person of the Office of the Treasury, as also with the Anakdar-Agasi,
who is the third. If these People remove out of the Seraglio, be fore they are
admitted into the number of the Forty Pages of the Chamber, they have only a
certain Pay, more or less, the highest whereof amounts not to above two hundred
Aspers. I proceed to the other Officers of the Seraglio, of whom there will be
some mention made in my Relation.

The Dogangi-bachi is the Grand Falconer, and his Charge makes him a
considerable Person about the Prince.

The Chokador is he who carries the Royal Robe,, called the Ciamberluc, the
same Officer which the French call Portemanteau.

The Rikabdar is he who holds the Stirrup, when the Grand Seignor gets on
Horseback.

The Seligdar is the first of the Pages of the Chamber; he carries the Grand
Seignor's Sword upon days of Ceremony, and they ordinarily advance to that
Charge one of the handsomest Pages.

The Hammangibachi is the chief Overseer of the Bath. When he leaves the
Seraglio, as also when the Kamachirbachi, who is the chiefest of the Pages of
Seferli, does so; their Pay is an hundred Aspers a day; and if they are in
favor, it may amount to an hundred an fifty. It is to be observed in the
general, that when any one of the Forty Pages of the Chamber is removed, the
vacancy is supplied sometimes out of the Treasury, sometimes out of the Kilar,
and sometimes out of the Seferti, and in that they take their turns. They
always take out the most ancient; and they who were next to them come into
their places. How that is done, we shall take occasion to explicate more
plainly in the Chapter of the Treasury.

The Chiamc^bachi is the grand ^aundry-man, or the Principal of those, who wash
and order the Grand Seignor's Linen.

The Giritbey is the chief Director of those who are exercised in shooting with
the Bow, and casting the Dart. These two Exercises are much practiced every
Friday, in a place of the Seraglio, appointed for that Divertisement. Thus have
you, in few words, an account of whatever relates to the principal Charges of
the Seraglio, possessed by those who have passed through the Chambers of the
Ichoglans.

The Black, or Negro-Eunuchs* of whom I have but a word more to say,
additionally to what I have intimated before, are appointed to guard the
Appartment of the Women, and they make choice, for that Office, of the most
deformed and the most Aesopical, that can be found. They are all cut even with
the belly, ever since the time of Solomon the Second, who being one day in the
fields, and seeing a Gelding offering to leap a Mare, inferred thence, that the
Eunuchs, who Kept his Wives, might likewise endeavor to satisfy their
passions; for which he bethought himself of a present remedy, by ordering them
to have all cut off; and his Successors have since observed that Rule. There is
a great number of those Negro-Eunuchs, and they have their variety of Chambers,
and their Regulations, as the white ones have. I say nothing here of their
different Employments, and the Reader will find, in the Chapter concerning the
Appartment of the Women, all can be known, that is certain upon that Subject.

The credit and wealth of the Kislar-Agasi, who keeps the Appartment of the
Women.
The Kislar-Agasi, or, as others name him, the Kuezer-Agasi which is as much,
in our Language, as to say, the Guardian of the Virgins, is the chiefest of all
the Negro-Eunuchs, and is of equal authority and credit with the Capi-Aga, who
is the Supreme of the white Eunuchs. The former is the Overseer of the
Appartment of the Women, has the Keys of the Doors in his custody, and has
access to the Emperor when he pleases himself. The charge he is possessed of
brings him in Presents from all parts; and there are not any such made to the
Sultannesses, by the Bassa's, and other Persons, who stand in need of their
favor, in reference to the Sultan, but there comes along with it one to
himself, which makes him one of the richest and most considerable Officers,
belonging to the Seraglio.

I come now to the Azamoglans, who make the second Order of young Lads,
wherewith the Seraglio is replenished, and out of whose number they take such
as are designed for mean Officers, of whom I shall give you the List.

The Azamoglans as well as the Ichoglans, are, as I said before, Tributary
Children, taken away from the Christians or made Captives, by Sea, or Land.
They make choice of the handsomest, the best shaped, and most robust, for the
Seraglio, and they have neither wages nor allowances of any profit, unless they
be advanced to some small Employments. Nor can they attain those, till after
many years Services, and what is then allowed them does not amount to above
four Aspers and a half per diem. As for those who are brought up in other
places, under the simple denomination of Azamoglans, and are not received into
the Seraglio at Constantinople, their fortune can amount no higher, than to
become Zanizaries.

When these young Boys are brought up to Constantinople, the first distribution
which is made of them is into the Seraglio's, or Royal Houses of the Grand
Seignor: there are some of them left in the City, to be put to Trades, and
others are sent to Sea, to serve for seamen, and so gain experience in
Navigation, by which means they capacitate themselves for some Employments. But
to confine our discourse to the Azamoglans received into the great Seraglio,
they are employed in several Offices, and some* of them are made Bostangis,
some Capigis, some Atagis, some Halvagis, and some, Baltagis; which terms I
shall explicate to the Reader in as few words as I can.

The Bostangis are they who are employed in the Gardens of the Seraglio, out of
whose number they take out those who are to row in the Grand Seignor's
Brigantines, when he has a a mind to divert himself in fishing, or take the air
upon the Canal. They who thus serve in the Brigantines, and row on the right
hand, may be advanced to the charge of Bostangi-Bachi, which is one of the most
considerable places of the Seraglio: But they who row on the left hand, are
capable only of the mean Employments, which are bestowed in the Gardens. If it
happen that any one of them break his Oar, by strength of rowing in the Grand
Seignor's presence, his Higness immediately orders him a gratuity of fifty
Crowns; and there is also a certain distribution made of some Money to the
others, as the Grand Seignor takes his diversion in the Brigantine. Their
greatest Pay, after they have served some years, is seven Aspers and a half per
diem, besides clothing and diet, which they all equally have.

Bostangi-bachi one of the noblest Charges of the Port.
The Bostangi-Bachi has the general Intendancy or Oversight of all the Grand
Seignor's Gardens, as well those of Constantinople as those of the neighboring
Villages, and commands above ten thousand Bostangis, who are employed in the
culture of them. Though he be taken out of the meanest rank of the Azamoglans,
yet his power is very great, and his employment one of the noblest and most
considerable about the Court. That gives him access to he prince's Person, to
whom he may speak familiarly when he carries him by Sea; for he has his Seat at
the Helm of the Brigantine, wherein the Grand Seignor is, who most commonly
makes use of him, to carry his Orders to some Bassa, when he would have his
Head. All the Grandees of the Port stand in Awe of him, and endeavor to gain
his Affection by their Presents, because it lies in his power, to do them
either good or bad Offices about the Prince, whom he can dispose as he pleases,
when he has him abroad upon the Water. For being as 'twere at his Elbow, and
having the whip of the Rudder in his hand, with the privilege of sitting in
his Presence, that he may the more easily Govern it, he has then the
opportunity to entertain him with Affairs of State, and the Conduct of the
Bassa's, and answerable to his Passion or Interest, clearly to Acquaint him how
things pass, or turn and disguise them as he pleases. In fine, if he be highly
in Favor, he may obtain one of the great Governments, and become Bassa of
Buda, Babylon, or Cairo, nay happily Grand Vizier, which is the most eminent
Charge of the Empire.

The Capigis are the Porters or Keepers of the Gates of the Seraglio, that is
to say, of the first and second Courts; for the third Gate, which gives
entrance into the inner Seraglio, is kept by Eunuchs. The Chief of the Capigis
is called Capigi-bachi, who has under him other Officers, bearing the same
Name; and whom the Grand Seignor makes use of, to carry his Orders. The
Capi-Aga is above all.

The Attagis are the Cooks of the Seraglio, over whom as well as over the
Halvagis, the Kilargi-bachi has full Power. Every Kitchen has its Attagi-bachi,
that is to say, its chief Director, or Master-Cook. And the Moutbak-Emin is the
Intendant or Over^eer, who supplies the Kitchens with all that is necessary,
taking care also for the Tables of the Ambassadors, according to the Orders he
has received from the Grand Vizir.

The Halvagis are the Confectioners, of whom I shall have occasion to speak
more at large elsewhere. They give also the same Name to those who serve the
Grandees of the Seraglio, and are permitted to go out of it and into it, when
they please.

The Baltagis are a robust sort of People, employed in the carrying of
Burdens, as Porters, and Cleavers of Wood are amongst us. Baltagi implies
properly a Laboring Man, who makes use of the Wedge.

The Hasteler-Agasi is the Overseer of the Infirmary, who observes what comes
in and what goes out, and especially that there be no Wine brought in.

I shall have occasion also, in my Relation, to speak of two others, to wit,
the Emirabour-bachi, and the Ekmeggi-bachi, who are two Officers belonging to
the Sultan, but have their Habitations out of the Seraglio.

The Emirabour-bachi is the great Gentleman Usher, who goes before the Grand
Seignor, when he appears in public, and in all Ceremonies.

The Ekmeggi-bachi is the Master-Baker, who has the oversight, and gives
directi on for the Baking of all the Bread that is Eaten in the Seraglio. These
two Employments are not bestowed on any of those who have their Abode within
the Seraglio, but to Persons who live out of it, but have the Liberty of
ingress into it, egress out of it, at any time.

To be short, I shall have occasion to speak of the Caragi-bachi, and of the
Cham of the Lesser Tartary, and I have some curious Observations to make upon
both of them.

The Economy the Partisans ^r Collectors of opublick Moneys.
The Caragi-Bachi is the Chief of those who collect the Tributes, and it is of
him, as also of the Gemmerou-bachi, or Grand Farmer of the Customs, and of the
Bazarean-bachi, or Chief amongst the Merchants, that the Grand Seignor makes
use of to make Advancements when he wants Money, and that there is not any in
the public Treasury, he being unwilling that they should meddle with the
Secret Treasury. They must of necessity find it out, and it is no hard matter
for them to do, in regard that of all the Tributes, Customs, and other
Impositions due to the Grand Seignor, there is not any thing paid till the end
of the Year, and these Officers oblige Men to the payment thereof, at the
beginning of it.

All sorts of Persons, what Religion soever they are of, except the Mahumetan,
are obliged to pay the Tribute without any exception, from the time of their
settling in the Empire, and having attained the sixteenth year of their Age.
And this Tribute, or Poll-Money, amounts to five hundred and fifty old Aspers,
which neither rise nor fall, but always keep at the same rate of eighty, to a
Piastro, which, in the French Money, and consequently with little difference in
ours, amounts to five Crowns and. All other Christians who come into the
Empire, upon the score of Trade, or Business, though 'twere but for one day,
are forced to pay, at the first City where they arrive. The foreign Greeks,
such as they from Muscovy or other places, pay three hundred and fifty Aspers;
but the Armenians, who come from Persia, Georgia, Mingrelia, and other
Countries, are taxed but at three hundred. As to the Christians, whom they call
Franguis, they pay nothing; and that has given much trouble to the Ambassadors
of Europe, especially to the French Ambassador, there being more French that
are Inhabitants in Turkey, than there are of any other Nation. And yet though
the Turks make their Year to consist but of twelve Moons, ours being near
twelve and a half, they make the Tributaries pay but for twelve Moons; yet in
requital, and that nothing may be lost, they make them pay that Tribute double,
every three and thirtieth year, and are very frugal Husbands for the benifit
and advantage of their Master.

The policy of the Port, to keep the Cham of the lesser Tartary quiet.
There are but two Princes in the World that are known by the Name of Cham, to
wit, the Emperor of great Tartary, and the King of the little Tartary, a
Vassal to the Ottoman Monarchs. I conceive my self obliged, to give the Reader
some information of the present condition of the latter. When the Cham of the
lesser Tartary enters upon the Government, he comes to take his Oath of
Fidelity to the Grand Seignor, and the Turks look upon him on otherwise than as
a Governor of a Province, or at most, but as a Vassal-Prince. But those of his
own Country, the Muscovites, the Poles, the Georgians, the Mingrelians, and
the other Nations bordering upon him, treat him as a King, when they write to
him. The Grand Seignor uses much Policy toward the Cham, lest he should revolt
from him, and render himself more powerful than he is, by Alliances with the
neighboring Princes. For it is to be observed, That the lesser Tartary,
whereof the City Caffa, near the Cimerion Straight, is the metropolis, is not a
Country subdued by the Arms of the Ottomans. The ancient Kings of it did only
put themselves under the Grand Seignor's protection who received them into it,
upon condtion, that when the Father died, his Son, or the next of kin, his
successor, was not to enter upon the Government, till he had received the
Investiture from the Port, and taken the Oath of Fidelity to the Grand Seignor,
obliging himself to come to him upon the first Orders to that purpose. The
Grand Seignor promised in requital, that he would not establish any other than
what were of their Race, to command in the Lesser Tartary. And whereas there
are two Branches of that Family, he keeps one of them always banished in the
Island of Rhodes, while the other Governs. But if, after Fifteen or Twenty
Years, there should be any suspicion of this latter Family's having a design,
to render it self absolute, he sends for the Cham and his Children, when he has
any, and sending them to Rhodes, brings thence him who was there exile, and
orders him to reign in his turn, for some years. The form of his Oath you will
find in the sixth Chapter of my Relation, where I speak of the Hall for
Audience, and the manner, in which that Prince is there received.

The principal Dignities of those who study the Law.
I have only now somewhat to say of the Moufti, the Cadilesquer, and the Cadis
and the others relating to the Law, which I shall do in few words. Only let it
be here observed in the general, That, according to the persuasion of the
Turks, the Civil Laws are part of their Religion, and that having been given
them by their Prophet, they are derived from God, and require an implicit
obedience. It Is by this course, that they are kept within their duty, and that
they obey the Laws, as much out of a principle of Religion and Conscience, as
out of the fear of chastisement; and in that they do not much recede from our
Christian Maxims. The Mouftis and the Cadis pass therefore indifferently under
the Name of Persons well skilled in the Law, as if we should reduce our Divines
and our Civil Lawyers into the same Class, and in civil and criminal Causes the
Moufti is often consulted.

The Moufti is the honourary Chief of the Law all over the Empire, and
accounted to be the Interpreter of the Alchoran. I speak of the Grand Moufti of
Constantinople, who is the most esteemed, and the principal of all. For there
are several others of them in Turkey, over whom he has no more jurisdiction,
than he has over the Imans, or Priests; every one of them submitting themselves
only to the Magistrate, and there being no Ecclesiastical Superiority amongst
them. That hinders not but that the Grand Moufti is honored by all the rest,
and in great veneration among the Turks. The Grand Seignor never bestows that
Dignity, but upon a Person of great abilities, and great integrity; he often
consults him in the Affairs of greatest importance; he always follows his
Directions, and he is the only Person in the World, at whose approach he rises
up to receive him.

The Cadilesquers follow the Moufti, and are Judges-Advocates of the Militia,
the Soldiers having this Privilege, That they are judged only by them; whence
they also call them, Judges of the Armies. There are but two of them all over
the Empire, the Cadilesquer of Romania, and the Cadilesquer of Natolia, who are
in highest esteem next to the Moufti, and have their Seats in the Divan,
immediately next to the Grand Vizir.

The Mollah, or Moula-Cadis, are the Judges of great Cities, who recive their
Commissions from the Cadilesquers, to whom there may be an Appeal made from
their Sentence, in Civil Concerns only; for as to the Criminal part, the Cause
is soon decided, and the least Judge condemns to death without any Appeal.

The Cadis are under the Mollah, and ought to be well versed in the Laws and
Customs of the Country. They have also under them the Naips, who administer
Justice in the Villages, and that is done with much expedition, without the
help of Proctors, or Advocates.

The Imans, or Emaums, are the priests of the Turks, and as 'twere the Parsons
of their Mosqueys, where they take care that all things be done in order, and
at the times appointed.

The Hogias are the Doctors of the Law, and as it were the Regents, and
Instructors of Youth.

The Sheiks are to them, instead of Preachers, and they make public
Exhortations.

The Muezims are they, who cry upon the Towers of the Mosquey, to call the
People together at the hour of Prayer; the Turks, not using any Bells, nor the
Christians, in the Levant.

The Dervis are Religious Men, among the Turks, who live poorly, and indeed the
very word signifies poor. They are for the most part ridiculously clothed, and
all, generally, great Hypocrites.

OF The Different Species of Gold and Silver-Coins, and the small Money now
current in TURKEY:
TOGETHER WITH THE HISTORY OF THE TRADE In Five Sols Pieces (French Money) and
the Abolition of it.
What Money current in Turkey.
THere are but two Species of Gold-Coins current all over the Turkish Empire;
the one is the proper Country Money, the other comes out of Foreign Parts. The
former is the Scherif, otherwise called Sequin, or Sultanine; and that kind of
Gold is worth at the present six Franks, French Money, though heretofore it
yielded but five Franks, nay came so low as four.

The Gold brought to Cairo and coined there.
the Scheriffs come from Egypt, and Cairo is the only City of the Empire, where
Gold is coined. That Cold is brought out of the Kingdom of the Abyssines, and
this is the manner how it is brought to Cairo. The quantity is not the same
every year, and when the passages are shut up, whether by War, or by
extraordinary Rains, whereby the Fields are overflown, there comes but little
Gold into Egypt, during that time. As soon as those obstructions are takn away,
and that there is a freedom of Commerce, you shall see arriving at Cairo, nay
at Alexandria too, several Abyssines who bring in, one man, two pounds, another
four, every one more or less, according to his abilities. Those poor People run
a thousand risques in their Travels, and it is almost a miracle, how they bring
them to a period. Some of them are of that Country, whence the Queen of Shebo
came, and which is now called the Kingdom of Sabour. Others come from places at
a greater distance, and they have sometimes fifteen days journeys to make, and
cannot meet with any waters to drink, but what are corrupt, and destructive to
health: which I found but too true my self, when I crossed the Deserts of
Arabia. If by chance they come to some Cottage or Hut, where they have killed
an Elephant, it is a place for them to feast in. This considered, we need not
wonder at the short lives of those miserable People, whose Bodies are destroyed
in those Voyages, and who for the most part do not exceed forty years of Age.
The case is the same with those, who trade with the Portugueses, on the Coasts
of Melinda and Mozambico, the corrupt waters they are forced to drink in their
way make them hydropical at five and twenty years of Age, and generally, all
the several peoples of the Kingdom of Sabour, have the right Leg swell'd' and
twice as big as the left, and seldom exceed five and thirty years. The
sincerity of the Abyssines.


It Is a miraculous thing to see the fidelity wherewith those poor Abyssines
demean themselves in trading, as well those of the Southern parts, who are
Christians, as those of the North, who border upon Egypt, and are Mahumetans.
For after they have taken the Commodities they like for the Gold they have
brought, if the Merchant they deal with will supply them with any thing
further, to be paid at the^r return, and upon their own words, he is sure
enough of it, and need not break his sleep for it. For if it happen that one of
those Abyssines, who is a Debtor, should die by the way, some of his Relations
or, Friends, whom he acquaints with his affairs, brings the Gold at the next
return, for the Commodity which had been taken up; and it could never hitherto
be found, that any Merchant could complain, that ever he had lost ought by any
one of them. All that is to be feared, is, that they should fall into the hands
of their Enemies, who rob, and kill them, and particularly on the South Side,
there being less danger, toward the North.

The foreign Coins of Gold in Turkey are the Ducates of Germany, Holland,
Hungary, and Venice. They are very much sought after, and they are changed at
six Livers and a half, and sometimes at six Livers and fifteen Sols; and that
is done in order to the sending of them to the Indies, where they drive a great
Trade with them, as I shall make it appear in my Relations of the Levant.
Sometime since, there has been some abatement made in the Discates of Venice,
upon a discovery of their not being of so good an alloy, as those of Germany.

There will be often mention made of Purses, in that Relation of the Seraglio.
A Purse implies as much as the sum of five hundred Crowns, and it is of those
Purses that the Grand Seignor makes his ordinary Presents. But a Purse of Gold,
wherewith he regales his Sultanesses, and his peculiar Favorites, amounts to
fifteen thousand Sequins, or thirty thousand Crowns. A Kize is also a bag of
fifteen thousand Ducates.

In all the Ottoman Empire, there is not any Money of Copper to be seen, and
the Spieces current there must be either of Silver or Gold. True it is, that
there are some pieces of Silver taken there, of a very base alloy, especially
the Roup, which are quarter-Ryals, coined in Poland; and with the assistance of
the Jews, the Bassa's in their several Governments, conterfeit certain foreign
Coins, which are all much different from those which they are intended to
imitate.

The case is the same as to Silver-Coins in Turkey, as it is with those of
Gold. There are some coined in the Country, as the Asper, and the Parasi,
which are the least of all. And there are some foreign Moneys, as the Spanish
Ryal, and the Rix-dollar of Germany and Holland.

An Asper is the least of all the Moneys, which heretofore was worth eight
Deniers, French Money, that is about two thirds of the English Penny, as being
of good Silver, and the value set upon them was after the rate of 80, for the
Crown-piece. But in the more remote Provinces, the Bassa's and the Jews cause
such an abundance of counterfeit ones to be made, that at present, a
Crown-piece will yield one hundred and twenty Aspers.

A Parasi is another kind of small Money, which is worth four Aspers, and
coined at Cario.

Groche is the Crown, or Spanish Ryal, otherwise called the Piece of eight.

Kara*Groche is the Rix-dollar of Germany.

As^lani is the Rix-dollar, marked with the Lion of Holland. After which follow
the Pieces of four Ryals, of two Ryals, and of one Ryal; and heretofore the
Pieces of five Sols, French Money, wherewith there was a great Trade driven in
Turkey: It Is a thing not well known to all, and therefore the History thereof
will happily not be unpleasant to the Reader.

The Trade driven in the five Sols-pieces.
A certain Merchant of Marseilles, without any forethought design, sent as
many Pieces of five Sols, newly come out of the Mint, as amounted to the sum of
two, or three hundred Crowns amongst some other Pieces of Silver-Coins, to buy
Silks. The Turks found those little Pieces so pretty and so beautiful, and were
at the first so taken therewith, that they thought them to be the eighth part
of a Ryal, and were content to allow a Crown, for every eight of them. The
Factor, perceiving it, writ to Marseilles, whence he received a very great sum
in that Money, and gained very much thereby. If the French could have contented
themselves with that honest profit, the commerce of those Pieces, which was
quashed by the excessive frauds committed in the managment of it, might have
continued still, and would have been very advantageous to them. The Turks were
unwilling to trade in any other kind of Money, and in the payment of the
Armies, to give the Soldiers content, there was a necessity of dispersing them
among them. One day, returnig out of Persia into Turkey, I was persecuted by
several Women, who would needs have me give them some Temins, (so they call
that kind of Money) and I could not have any thing to eat, for any other Money.

Our French Merchants were gainers at the first, after the rate of fifty, per
cent. allowing in Turkey but eight of those Pieces for a Crown whereas they had
twelve of them in France for the same Piece. But the other European Nations,
the English, the Dutch, and the Italians, envying their happiness, came to give
a check to their design, and making their complaints to the Grand Vizir, that
minister ordered, That, for the future they should allow twelve of those Pieces
for the Crown, or that they should not be current any longer, and that whatever
sums thereof were found in the Ships, should be confiscated.

The French were not at all satisfied with that; and whereas there was a
necessity of submitting to the Grand Vizir's Decree, they bethought themselves
of having some of those Pieces coined, which should not have above four Sols of
good Silver, which was a considerable advantage, of twenty five upon the
hundred* They passed well enough for some time, before the Turks had discovered
the fraud; they being satisfied, that the Stamp was fair, and that he Pieces
looked very white: And the Women and Maidens, of the meaner sort of People,
made them contribute to the ornament of their Head-tires, about which they
fastened those pretty little Pieces, and they came down flaping about their
Foreheads, as the wealthier sort fastened Pieces of Gold to theirs.

But the better to compass their design, the French Merchants were obliged to
find out other Countries, where it might be lawful for them to traffic in
those Pieces. Their first recourse was to those of Dombes, Orange, and Avignon,
and passing into Italy, they found work for some time for those of Monaco, and
Massa. But having observed, that the Turks were more taken with the Pieces
which had the impression of a Woman's Head, and those Princes being unwilling
to suffer them to coin among them any Money of so base an alloy, or to give it
the Stamp of Ja, the Princess of Dombes, they cast their eyes upon some Castles
situate within the Territories of the Genueses, yet subject to the jurisdiction
of the Empire, where they obtained what they desired, upon conditions not
disadvantageous to the Lords of those places. The Pieces they got coined at
Orange, where also sought after, and pleased the Turks, in regard the Stamp was
beautiful, and very clear; but those of the Legate of Avignon were not so
current, the Effigies thereof not being well done, and the Cross, hanging at
the Neck, displeasing to the Turks. Had they contented themselves, in that
Tade, with twenty five upon the hundred, it might have continued and the profit
would have been considerable: but by little and little, the thing came to so
great an excess, till, at last, there was not one pennyworth of good Silver in
every piece.

The French, to make them pass the better, gave eighteen, and sometimes twenty
for a Crown, of which abuse the great Merchants of Constantinople, Aleppo,
Smyrna, and other Cities of Trade, made a good hand, they giving but twelve or
thirteen for the worth of a Crown, in the payments they made to the petty
Merchants of the Provinces of the Empire, for the Merchandises they brought out
of Turkey, there was none of that counterfeit Money dispersed, and the
Armenians were far enough from burthening themselves with it, in regard that
all the Money, which is carried into Persia, is presently conveyed to the
Mints, upon the Frontiers, to be melted down, and afterward coined into
Abassis, whereof they give the Merchant an account, answerably to the Standard
of his Money, after it has been examined; and by that means there can be no
fraud committed. The same course is taken over all the Great Mogol's Empire;
and of all the Princes in the World, he causes all the Species of Gold and
Silver of the best Standard to be coined without admitting the least alloy.

The jealousy of the other Merchants.
The Genuese Merchants perceiving that the French had, at the beginning been
fortunate in their Commerce, would needs imitate them in other sorts of Money,
and got two or three hundred thousand Ducates coined which they carried into
Turkey. But they had not the success they expected, the Gold was so
counterfeit, that the cheat was immediately discovered, the Consul, and the
Captain of the Vessel, were in some trouble about it, and the persons concerned
therein, saved what they could of that disaster.

The Germans also would needs come in for a share, taking another course all
along the Dannow, quite to the mouth of it, from whence they got to
Constantinople through the Black Sea. With other their Merchandises, most
whereof consisted in the counterfeit Copper-wares of the City of Nu^emberg,
things fit enough those Nations, which border upon the Fuxine Sea, they carried
a quantity of Roups or quarter- Ryals, of the Coinage of Poland, which are
pleasant to the Eye, and might have been commodious enough for the Merchants,
if the adulteration had been moderate. But the Italians need not be much
ashamed, that the Germans should be more successful than they upon that
occasion, since that both Nations came short in point of subtilty, to deceive
the Turks.

But to return to the French, the first concerned in this History, to which it
is time to put a period. In the heat of their Commerce, and while all things
were very well with them, they thought it not enough, to carry away the richest
Merchandises, but they also bought up all sorts of good Money they could meet
withal, and brought it into France, to carry on and continue the coinage of
their counterfeit pieces. This Trade was carried on so far, through the whole
extent of that vast Empire, and there was so prodigious a quantity of that
counterfeit Money spread abroad, that it was found by the Register-Books of the
Farmers of the Customs, that the sum of what had been dispersed of it amounted
to an hundred and fourscore millions of Livers, not accounting what had never
come to their knowledge, and what Seamen, and other private Persons might have
concealed.

The other Merchants and Traders of Europe, who brought none but good Money,
having exclaimed against that disorder, and renewed their complaints to the
Grand Vizir; the Turks at last opened their eyes, and that principal Minister,
having comprehended, that if the thing continued, in a short time, instead of
Silver, there would be nothing but Copper in the Empire, prohibited the
bringing in of any more of those pieces of five Sols, upon pain of
confiscation, and great penalties to be inflicted on those, who durst do any
thing contrary thereto.

Yet could not that crying of them down, and the Grand Vizier's prohibition
make the Soldiers who served in Candia, out of love with those little pieces,
the beauty whereof they were so much taken withal. Notwithstanding all the
Remonstrances that could be made to them, they would not be paid in any other
kind of Money; and some discontented Persons and Mutineers beginning to show
their Teeth, they were forced immediately to send Galleys to Smyrna, and some
other Cities of great Commerce, to bring away all that could be found of that
sort of money. The incredible quantity of those counterfeit pieces, dispersed
in all the Provinces of the Ottoman Empire, is at last vanished, they are grown
red, and no longer current.

A mischievous fraud gently punished.
At the First crying down of that counterfeit money, before the news of it
could have been brought to foreign Countries, a certain Person named Goulin,
engaged all he had in the world, to make up to the sum of five and twenty
thousand Crowns in those Pieces of five Sols, so extremely falsifyd, that there
was hardly so much Silver as was requisite to whiten them. He came to Smyrna,
where I then was, and where he soon found, that there was no way to put off his
counterfit Merchandise. Whereupon he imagined, that he might get it off, if he
could make a speedy Voyage to Constantinople, where, as he had been assured,
some Persons took them, even after they had been cried down. Being unwilling to
hazard all by Sea, he sent away, by Land, four or five thousand Crowns, which
were taken away by Thieves, near Bursa, and carried the much greater part to
Constantinople in a Dutch Vessel, of which he had also sufficient cause to
repent him. After he had exposed it at the Customhouse, for the payment of the
Duties, the Chief Officer of the Customs told him, that he might return within
two or three days, to take back what belonged to him; and as soon as the other
was gone, he causd all to be melted down in his presence. The separation being
made, upon twenty thousand Crowns, which was the sum he had brought thither,
there was not the full fourth part of Silver, and the Merchant coming again to
the Customer, fell down all along, out of pure fear lest a severe punishment
might follow the fraud whereof he was visibly convicted, seeing so much scum of
brass on the one side, and so little silver on the other. But the Turks are not
so rigorous, as some persons imagine, all was restored to him, nay there was no
penalty inflected upon him, and they only ordered him to be gone.

The ancient sincerity of the Turks corrupted by the commerce of the Europeans.
Certain it is, that the Europeans, more addicted to subtilty and
circumvention, than the Levantines, and for the most part not endeavoring to
be sincere in Commerce, have taught the Turks several Cheats, which they were
either ignorant of, or did not practice, especially since the Inhabitants of
Granada, being driven out of Spain, dispersed themselves into several Provinces
of the Levant. Before that time, a man might have relied on their integrity and
fair dealing. But now, when you treat with them, you must stand upon your
guard; so prevalent is the Example of Evil to corrupt men's minds. Nor are we to
be astonished at that ancient undisguized humor of the Turks in their Commerce,
since we find, that the poor Abyssines, who come from the lower parts of
Ethiopia to Traffic at Cairo, and the Idolaters themselves in the Indies
amongst themselves and with Strangers, with a strict observance of an
inviolable fidelity.

CHAP. I.
Of the extent, and external parts of the Seraglio.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Origin of the word Serrail, or Seraglio, common to all the Royal Houses,
as well in Turkey as Persia. The admirable Situatton of the Grand Seraglio at
Constantinople. Its extent, figure, and externals. The Artillery not kept in
good order, and the Gunners not well skilled. A delightful place of it self;
but restraint makes it otherwise.
The origin of the word Seraglio, common to all the Royal Houses in Turkey and
Persia.
THE Grand Seignor's Seraglio, whereof I undertake to give a Description, is
the Palace where the Ottomon Princes ordinarily keep their Court. All the Royal
Houses, as well in Turkey, as Persia, have the same Name, which derives it
Origin from the word Serrai, which signifies a great Noble House, in the
Persian Language. The Grand Seignor has many Seraglio's in the Provinces of his
Empire, and the principal of them are those of Bursa, and Adrianople, two
Residences which that Monarch does ordinarily make use of, according to the
conjuncture of his Affairs.

But to confine our selves to Constantinople, we find there three Seraglio's,
which have all their different Beauties. The old Seraglio is the Palace
appointed for the retirement of those Women who have served the Predecessors of
the Prince Regent, and whence they never get out, unless it be in order to
Marriage. The Grand Seignor goes thither but very seldom, and that when he is
out of humor, to pass away some days there in solitude. The Seraglio of the
Hippodrome, so called from the Exercises done there on Horseback, which was
built by Ibrahim Bassa, Son-in-Law, and Favorite to the Emperor Solomon the
Second, serves now for an Amphitheatre for public Festivals, Exercises,
Combats, Carousels, and particularly for the Circumcision of the Ottomon
Princes, which is their greatest Solemnity. The third is the Grand Seraglio,
whereof I make the Relation, and to which that Name is principally attributed,
so as that there needs not any thing else to be added thereto, to distinguish
it from the others. I shall have but little to say concerning the Structures of
it, wherein there is not any thing extraordinary to be observed, but shall
rather insist upon what is privately done, in each Apartment of that great
Palace.

The admirable situation of the Seraglio of Constantinople.
The Grand Seraglio is a vast place enclosed, which reaches to that point of
Land where the ancient Byzantium was built, upon the Bosphorus of Thrace, and
the joining together of the Aegean Sea and the Euxine, which contribute so much
to the Beauty and Wealth of Constantinople. This great City, let the Wind sit
where it will, does every hour receive some refreshments or other, from one of
those Seas; and the Seraglio advancing it self into the Channel, which makes a
communication between them, receives the first Advantages that may be derived
thence.

Its extent, figure, and externals.
That great Enclosure makes a Triangle, one side whereof is to the Land-side,
and reaches to the City, and the two others lie open to the Sea and a River
which falls into it. This Triangle is unequal, and if it be divided into eight
parts, that side toward the Land takes up three of them, and the five others
are for the two sides abutting on the Sea. Its compass is about three Italian
Miles, or one of our common Leagues. And this Palace is surrounded all about
with high and strong Walls, flanked on the Seaside with square Towers, at a
considerable distance one from another; and toward the City, with round
Towers, which are at a nearer distance one from another, from the great Gate of
the Seraglio, which is toward St. Sophia, as far as the Sea where you Embark
for Galata. In those Towers, in the Nightime, there are Guards of the
Azamoglans, to see that no body approaches the Seraglio by Sea or Land; and if
occasion require, they may fire some Pieces of Artillery, which stand always
laden upon a Quay of five fathom breadth, which is carried quite about the
Seraglio.

Upon one of those Towers, about a hundred paces from the great Gate of the
Seraglio, as you go down, in order to your passage over to Galata, they have
wrought a Closet, into which the Grand Seignor goes sometimes to divert
himself, and to see People passing to and fro, without being seen himself.
Somewhat lower, and upon the Seaside, there is a spacious place covered over,
under which, as if it were in a little Haven, they keep the Caicks or
Brigantines, wherein the Prince takes his divertisement by Water, when he is
pleased to do it.

Not far thence, within the enclosure of the Seraglio, are the Habitations of
the Bostangis, who are entrusted with the conduct of the Brigantines; and at a
little farther distance, in your way to the point of the Seraglio, which is
toward Scudaret, stands the Quarter of the Bostanchi-bachi, Overseer of the
Gardens of the Seraglio, and of all the other Gardens belonging to the Grand
Seignor.

The Artillery out of order, and the Gunners not well skilled.
Upon the Quay, which as I told you, does surround the Walls of the Seraglio,
there are forty or fifty pieces of Cannon of different bigness, and there are
some of so great a bore, that a man might get into them. Opposite thereto, and
in the middle of the Channel, there is a Tower built upon a Rock, which the
Turks call Quisler houlesi, or the Tower of the Virgins. It is kept by
Bostangis, and has its Guns levelled with the Water, which better defend the
Straight, than those at the point of the Seraglio, which for the most part are
without Carriages, and unserviceable. Besides, they want good Gunners, and if
all that Artillery were well mounted, and managed by skilful Persons, it would
better keep in awe, whatever comes out of the Mediterranian, and the Black Sea.

A pleasant abode, but restraint makes it otherwise.
We have spoken sufficiently of the external parts, it is time we now enter into
the Seraglio, and rather consider what passes in every Appartment of it, than
the Structures thereof, wherein, as I said, there is not any thing of
Magnificence, whatever some Persons might invent, who in my presence, have made
noble Draughts of it, grounded on their own pure Imaginations. I have seen as
much of the Seraglio, as a Stranger could do, and I have seen it several times,
in several Voyages, having had time enough to consider the two first Courts,
the Divan, and the Hall of Audience, but cannot celebrate them much for any
great Beauty I could find in them. There is, I must confess, abundance of
Marble and Porphyry in all the Apartments; but on the other side, all those
Apartments are confusedly shuffled together; there is no regularity at all;
most of the Rooms have but little light, and all the Ornament of them consists
in Rich Tapistry laid all over the Floors thereof, and some Cushions of Gold
and Silver Brokado, some whereof are embroidered with Pearls. But taking things
generally, if the Walls and the Towers, which enclose the Seraglio, look more
like a frightful Prison, than a Royal Palace, the Apartments whereof it
consists, have not also that Wealth or Pleasure, for which the Palaces of
France and Italy are so highly celebrated, and they offer not any thing which
may long entertain the sight of a curious Person. All that can make the
Seraglio a pleasant place of Abode, is the advantage of its situation, and
indeed a Nobler cannot be imagined. For it looks toward the East, and takes up
the upper part, and the descent of a sloping Hillock, from St. Sophia, quite to
the Channel. The Buildings are upon the most eminent places, and have a
Prospect into the Gardens, which run along the descent, as also into the two
Seas which meet at the point of the Seraglio, whence the Grand Seignor may at
the same time see Europe and Asia, in both which parts of the World, his
Territories are very great. But never was any Prison thought a pleasant place,
and there are few in the Seraglio, who rather would live in a Hut, and have
their Liberty, than be continually confined in a Palace under such severe
Discipline.

CHAP. II.
Of the first Court of the Seraglio, and particularly, of the Infirmary.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Regulations of the Infirmary of the Seraglio. The difficulties of getting
Wine into it. The subtilty of some People to be received into it, though they are
not Sick. An abominable vice common all over the East. The fruitless endeavors
used to check the course of it. The sacrilegious action of two Ichoglans. The
Wood-piles of the Seraglio. The great advantages of those who have the Charge
thereof. The exercise of the Girit. The Grand Seignor's Liberalities. The
counterfeit Modesty of the Grandees of the Port.
OF the many Gates which give a Man entrance into the Seraglio, as well on the
Seaside, as on the Land-side, that toward S. Sophia is the greatest. That is
always open, the others not being so, but according to the Grand Seignor's
pleasure. You first come to a great Portal, whic h has not any thing of
magnificence, and where you only find certain golden Letters, and about them
Feuillages and Compartiments, according to the Arabian way of Painting. That
Gate is kept by Fifty Capig^s, who have for their Arms, the Firelock, the Dart,
and the Cymitar, and gives you entrance into the first Court of the Seraglio,
which is four hundred Paces in length, and a hundred in breadth, without any
Paving.

The Regulations of the Infirmary of the Seraglio.
On the right hand of that first Court, there runs all along a spacious
structure, containing several Appartments or Chambers, and serving for an
Infirmary to the whole Seraglio. The Gate of it is kept by an Eunuch, who has
under him a great many People, employed in attending on, and ministering to the
sick, whom, answerably to their quality, they dispose into convenient quarters
in that house, where they may be better assisted, then in those which their
indisposition had obliged them to quit. The two principal Physicians, and the
two principal Surgeons, whom they call Hequinz-bachi, and Geirah-bachi, make
their visits there every day, at certain hours. A man cannot imagine a place
better ordered and regulated then that is: and the Grand Seignor himself
sometimes comes thither in person to take an exact account of the Sick and
their condition, as also to enquire whether they are well treated, whether the
Physicians visit them often, and whether every Officer of the Infirmary perform
the duty incumbent on him. There is seldom any place void in that House, for as
soon as one is gone out, another comes in: and though it be designed only for
such as are sick, yet several persons, who are well, are brought thither, under
pretense of indisposition, or to enjoy themselves a while, or to weather out
some trouble or discontent. They continue there for the space of ten or twelve
days, and are diverted, according to their mode, with a wretched kind of vocal
and instrumental Music, which begins betimes in the morning, and holds on till
night. The permission they have there to drink wine, which they never have
elsewhere, is a greater inducement for their coming in thither than the music.
But that permission, which, they would as 'twere conceal, and which the
superstition of the Turks dares not publicly own, is accompanied by a thousand
difficulties. They are not permitted to bring in any wine in the sight of the
Eunuch, who stands at the entrance of the place: and if any one should be
surpised in the doing of it, his punishment would be to receive three hundred
bastinadoes, and a penalty of three hundred Aspers, to be paid to those from
whom he had received them. But if he can cunningly get in with the Wine not
having been stopped at the Gate, as soon as he is got in, he runs no risque at
all, and may drink of it without fear of any chastisement, though 'twere in the
presence of the Grand Seignor.

The difficulty of getting wine into the Infirmary.
The small quantity of Wine which can be got in by this way, would signify but
little among so many People, if there were not some other less difficult
contrivances to supply them therewith. And this is one of them. The Infirmary
adjoins to one side of the Gardens, from which it is separated only by a wall
which is not very high; so that the Bostangis, who find that wine goes off at a
good rate, and that they who are within the Seraglio know not how to spend
their money, do, in the night time, by ropes convey over the wall, so many
Borrachoes or Bags of Buck-Skins, full of wine, containing forty or fifty
quarts, which some other persons of the Infirmary stand ready to receive. This
way brings in abundance of wine, but not without fear of being suppriz'd by the
Bostangi-bachi, who goes the rounds every night.

The subtilty of some persons to be received in, though not sick.
Nor is the drinking of Wine the main inducement which makes those counterfeit
sick persons to seek out pretenses, to go and pass away some days in the
Infirmary; insomuch that some have the lewd artifice to put themselves into a
slight Fever, which is presently removed. A detestable passion, and which is
in a manner natural to them, though it be against nature, makes them study all
the imaginable ways to satisfy it. This proves a hard matter for the
Ichoglans to do, while they are in their Chambers observed and watched night
and day by severe Overs^ers, who never pardon them the least misdemeanour.

For though the Grand Seignor be himself subject to the same passion, the very
name whereof causes a horror, yet he orders cruel punishments to be inflicted
on those who shall presume to imitate him. He does what he can to prevent the
mischief, which he would not have countenanced by his example, and imposes the
prevention of it as a task upon the Eunuchs, a vigilant sort of animals, whose
Eyes are always open. But in the Infirmary, all these precautions prove
fruitless; the Eunuchs belonging to that place being corrupted partly by
presents, partly by treats, or being made drunk with wine, or some other
liquors, they bring in thither some young lads, of whom there is great store in
the City of Constantinople. The better to overreach the Eunuchs, they put
those young lads into the habits of the Halvagis, and so the cheat succeeds, in
regard they are the Attendants on the Officers of the Seraglio, and all the
Errands they have to do in the City.

Of these Halvages, there is ordinarily to the number of six hundred, and they
have only their clothing and sustenance allowed them, without any wages, till
such time as they have served thirteen or fourteen years. Their wages begin at
the rate of two Aspers per diem and in time may rise to seven Aspers and a
half: but they have other contingent Profits, and they know well enough, how to
make their advantage of the Employments they are upon. For whereas they only
are the Persons who have the freedom of going and comeing in and out of the
Seraglio, they set double the price on every thing they buy. But their most
considerable gain proceeds from the infamous commerce of those young Lads whom
they bring in to their Masters, and whom they cunningly slip into the
Infirmary, after they had put them into Habits like their own. They wear a
white Cap, which rises up from the Crown of the Head, to a pretty height
somewhat to the resemblance of a Sugar Loaf.

The fruitless endeavors used to check its course.
The Hasteler-Agasi, or chief Overseer of Infirmary, is inded continually at
the Gate with five or six other Eunuchs, and carefully observes whatever goes
in, or comes out. But all that vigilance will not do the work; nay though he
had a hundred eyes, yet were it impossible for him to discern those young Lads,
amidst the great number of those Halvagis and that the rather, for these
reasons, that they are frequently changed, that some of them are made
Janissaries, and that new ones are taken in upon the advancement of the old ones
to some other Employments. But if it should happen that the said Superintendent
Eunuchs should have any secret information of what is designed, and seems as if
he would make some noise about it, he is presently appeased with a silk Vest,
or some other Present, and it is thence that he derives his greatest advantages.
In fine, that brutish Passion is so ordinary Abominable excess over all the
East.
amongst the Turks and generally over all the Eastern parts, that
notwithstanding all the endeavors that has been used to prevent the effects of
it, they will hardly ever be able to do it. There happened a memorable Example
of this in my time. Two Pages of the Chamber, who could not have the
convenience of executing Tho Sacrilegious allion of two Pages.
their wicked design in the Seraglio, would needs aggravate their crime, by
going into the Mosqu^y to satiate their brutality. After Prayers where ended,
they suffered all the people, to go out, and having so well hid themselves that
he who shut the doors could not perceive them, they fell to the doing of an
action, whereof the very Idea causes horror.

The Wood Pile of the Seraglio.
On the left hand of this first Court, there is a spacious Lodgement,
answerable to that of the Infirmary; and that is the habitation of the
Azamoglans, persons designed for the meanest Employments of the Seraglio.
Within that Structure there is a spacious Court, where you shall find disposed
in order, all about, and in the middle so many Wood-piles, which are renewed
every year, and there are brought in thither above forty thousand Cart-loads of
wood, every Cart-load being as much as two Oxen can draw. Some part of this
wood comes in by the Black Sea, and the rest out of the Mediterranean: and
whereas there is a great quantity of it left every year, especially when the
Grand Seignor does not winter at Constantinople, that remainder, which must be
very considerable, is disposed of to the advantage The great profit of such as
have the Charge thereof.
of the principal persons among the Azamoglans. They are cunning enough to take
their opportunity, when it is unloaden upon the Port, and computing, as well as
they can, how much may go to make up the Piles, they proportionably send, what
they think may be spared, to the City, and lodge it in the houses, where they
are acquainted. Which they may do with so much the more security, in regard
that no body minds what they do, and that they perform their duty, when the
Piles are completed in the season during which they are wont to make their
Provisions. The wood they thus convert to their own use they are paid for, and
the sum raised thereby is considerable for Persons of so mean a Quality.

The Exercise of the Girit.
On the same side as the Infirmary, and a little lower, (for the Seraglio is a
rising ground for a certain space* and then there is an insensible descent on
both sides, quite down to the point, whereby it is terminated) you discover the
great Portal of the Gardens, which they call Bagge-Karpousi. From that Gate,
which overlooks the foresaid descent, and where you are as it were upon an
Eminency, you descend into a very noble Place, which the Grand Seignor causes
to be always kept neat and even, where the Great Persons of the Court come to
do the Exercises of the Girit, or the Dart, which is performed most commonly on
Fridays* immediately after their comeing out of the Mosquey. There are about
two hundred paces from the Portal to that place, and in the Court there may
ordinarily be, upon those days above fifteen hundred Persons, yet so as that
not any person whatsoever is permitted to go any further, unless he be called
by the Order of the Girt-Bey, who is the chief Overseer, and Director of that
Exercise. They who enter into the Lists, do many times amount to the number of
a thousand Persons. If the Grand The Grand Seignors liberalities.
Seignor himself, who is present at those Exercises, the end whereof proves many
times Tragical to those, by whom they are performed, has found any particular
divertisement therein, especially when there are Limbs lost or broken, he
orders every one to receive a Purse, which, as I told you, amount to five
hundred Crowns. The distribution of those Presents is greater or lesser,
according to his being in a good or bad humor, and sometimes there are
distributed at his departure thence, to the number of ten Purses. The
Treasurer, who is always attending on him, and has ordinarily brought along
with him fifteen or twenty thousand Ryals in Gold or Silver, stands ready, upon
a beck to obey his Orders.

The counterfeit modesty of the Grandees of the Port.
But this is worth our observation, That when the Prince is ready to bestow his
Liberalities, on those who had behaved themselves valiantly in that exercise,
the Grandees of his Court, who had appeared therein as well as others,
purposely shift themselves out of the way, and leave him to make his Presents
to other less considerable Persons, as being such as stand more in need of them
than they do. This is their custom ordinarily, whether it proceed from
Generosity, or from a counterfeit and personated Modesty, it matters not. And
after the Grand Seignor is withdrawn, it is lawful for those who are left in
the foresaid Court, and are skilled in the handling of the Dart, to spend the
remainder of the day in that exercise. But those, how great soever their
performance may be, and what wounds soever they may receive, are not to expect
any Presents; There Is no Prince to be a spectator of their Gallantry, nor
Treasurer, to distribute his Liberalities. They only lay some wagers amongst
themselves, and he who gives the fairest blow, wins, and the fairest blow is in
the head or face. There is ever and anon an Eye struck out, or a Cheek carried
off, and that Solemnity proves very fatal in the end to some of them.

And this is an account of all that is observable in the said first Court, Let
us now make our entrance into the second, and observe what is most remarkable
in all its Appartments.

CHAP. III.
Of the second Court, wherein are the little Stables, the Kitchins, and the
Divan.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
A square and spacious Court, and its Embellishments. The Janissaries extremely
sprightful, active, and well ordered. The number of the Kitchins. The ordinary
dishes of meat that are served up in the Seraglio. The way of ordering the
Pilau. A particular way of roasting in the Levant. The Turks cannot endure the
Hare. Conserves of all sorts. Several Compositions of Sherbet. Receeptacles for
all the Waters of the Seraglio. The little Stables. The Quarters of the Eunuchs.
OUT of the first Court, into which the Bassa's and Grandees of the Port, may
come on Horseback, and where they are obliged to alight, if they intend to go
any further, there is an entrance into another, through a second Gate, kept, as
the former, by fifty Capigis. The second Court, much more noble, and more
delightful, then that whereof we gave you the precedent description, is near
three hundred paces square, and only the walks, leading to the several
Appartments, are paved, the rest being in Grass-plots, planted about with
Cypress, and watered by Fountains, with rails all about, to hinder people from
going upon the grass. Over the Gate of that Court; may be seen these words,
written in great golden Characters.

La Illahe Illa Alla,
Muhammed Resoul Alla.
That is to say,

There is no other God than God,
Mahomet is sent by God.
Resoul signifies Sent, which is the greatest Title given by the Turks to their
Prophet.

The Janissaries well ordered.
On both sides of that Court there runs a very noble Gallery, the Pillars
whereof are of Marble, all along which the Companies of the Janissaries are
drawn up, and disciplined when the Grand Seignor orders them to show their
Activity, and to appear well Armed, at the Arrival of some Ambassador, who is
to have Audience.

On the right hand, behind the Gallery where the Janissaries are drawn up, on
the Divan-days (that is to say, upon Council-days) are the Kitchins, and the
Offices of the Seraglio, distinct one from the other, and every one served by
its peculiar Officers. Heretofore there were Nine of them, but now that Number
is reduced to Seven. Every Office or Kitchen, has its chief Director, or
Master-Cook, and there is a Superintendent above them all, named the
Akegi-Bachi, who has the Command over four hundred Cooks.

The chiefest of these Kitchins, which is for the Grand Seignor himself, is
called Hasmoutbak.

The number of the Kitchins,
The Second is called Valede-Sultanum-Moutbaki, and is designed for the
Sultanesses, as for instance, the Mother, the Wife, or to say better, the
Princess, for whom the Grand Seignor has the greatest kindness, and who had the
Happiness to bring into the World a Successor to the Empire, as also for his
Sisters and Daughters.

The third Kitchen, which they call Kisl r-Agazinum-Moutbaki, is appointed for
the Overseer of the Appartment of the Women, and the other Negro-Eunuchs who
are employed about the guarding of them.

The fourth is for the Capou-Agasi, or Grand-Master of the Seraglio, who has
the greatest access to the Grand Seignor's Person, and whose Charge (as I said
elsewhere) generally extends over whatever enters into the Palace. And this
Kitchen serves also for the Officers of the Divan.

The fifth is for the Chasnadar-bachi, or the chief Person concerned about the
Treasury, and for those who are under his Jurisdiction, and obey his Orders.

The sixth is for the Kilargi-bache, or principal Cup Bearer, and those who
have their dependence upon him.

The seventh and last, is that of the Sarai-Agassi, and of all the Officers*
who are under his Charge.

Lastly, as for the (...) whose work lies in the Gardens, they (...) their Meat
themselves* and appoint some among them to execute that Office^ and they
provide the Commons for all the ^est. There are also some of (...) ^ostangis
employed in the Offices designed for the Grand Seignor.

The ordinary meats served up in the Seraglio.
There enters no Beef into the Kitchins of the Seraglio: but the ordinary
consumption of every day, including all, as well those who eat within, as
without, may amount to five hundred Sheep, in which number must be comprehended
Lambs and Kids; and the greatest part of those Sheep are brought from the
Frontiers of Persia; which Country excells all others, as to that Creature.
According to this proportion of Mutton, may be computed the quantity of
Pullets, Chickens, and young Pigeons, the number whereof is limited, according
to the Seasons; as also what may be consumed in Rice and Butter, for the Pilau,
which is accounted the best dish in Turkey, and all over the East. Those
Nations who are lovers of Temperance, and do not much study the satisfaction of
the Palate, seldom have any other dish: and that not being contemptible, some
happily will give me thanks for communicating the ordering of it.

The way of ordering the Pilau.
The Turks, and generally all the Inhabitants of the Eastern Parts, make the
Pilau after this manner. According to the quality of the persons who are to be
entertained, and the quantity which is to be made of it, you take either a
piece of Mutton alone, or together with that some Pullets or Pigeons, which
are to be boiled in a Pot, till they are half done, or somewhat more. When you
think them so far boiled then pour out both Meat and Broth into a Basin, and
the Pot being washed, put it on the Fire again with Butter in it, which they
suffer to melt, till such time as it is very hot. Then they chop the meat which
had been but half-boyl'd, into little pieces, the Pullets into quarters, and
the Pigeons into halves, and so they cast it into the Butter, they fricass it
till it be of a very brown color. The Rice being well washed they put some
into the Pot over the meat, as much as they think fitting, and the Broth which
had been poured into the Basin, they also put it into the Pot Ladle-ful after
Ladle-ful, over the Rice, till such time as it stands two fingers breadth above
it. Then is the Pot immediately covered, there is a clear Fire made under it,
and they ever and anon take out some grains of the Rice, to see if it be
softened, as also whether it be not requisite to put in some more of the Broth
to complete the stewing of it. For it is not like the Rice brought into our
parts, which presently breaks asunder, but their Rice is of such a kind, that
it must be fully boiled and yet the Grain entire, as well as the whole Pepper
wherewith they season it. As soon as it is come to that condition, they cover
the Pot with a Cloth three or four times doubled, and set the Pot-lid upon
that, and sometime after they make another melting of Butter, till it be very
red; to be cast into the holes, which are made in the Rice with the handle of
the Ladle, after which they cover it again of a sudden, and so let it stand
soaking a while, and then serve it up. It is put into large Dishes with the
Meat, handsomely disposed upon it, and some part will be white, that is,
continued in its natural color, some part yellow, occasioned by a little
mixture of Saffron, and a third part of a Carnation-colour; done by the
tincture of the juice of Pomegranate. Nay, though the meat be as fat as is
requisite for the ordering of this Dish, yet to make the Pilau more delicate
and palateable to them, they bestow three pound of Butter on six pound of Rice,
which makes it so extraordinary fat, that it disgusts, and is nauseous to those
who are not accustomed thereto, and accordingly would rather have the Rice it
self simply boiled with Water and Salt. There are always two or three Dishes
served up after that manner, to the Grandees of the Port, who for the most
part, keep open Table, and instead of Flesh they cover them with a great
Aumelet or Omelet, made with good Herbs, and about three fingers thick, or with
some poach'd Eggs, which are neatly disposed about it. A man is never
incommodated by this kind of Rice, but the other, which is too fat, is not fit
for those who drink Wine, and will not excite in them a desire to Eat of it
often.

A particular way of roasting in the Levant.
Since I have given you an account how they order the Pilau, I cannot forbear
making you a further discovery of the Turks management of the Kitchen, and
telling you how they roast their meat. The greater sort of meat, as Sheep and
Lambs are roasted whole in Ovens made in the Floor, wherein they hang them by
the heads, and they are taken out thence as it were brown-bak'd and Cooked well
enough, so as to excite Appetite. At the bottom of the Oven there is ordinarily
a Basin placed, having in it some Rice and fair Water, which receives the
dripings of the Beast, the very Tail it self, which sometimes weighs fifteen or
twenty pound, yelding a good quantity thereof, as being in a manner all fat.
The Tayls of the Lambs, having not so much fat, are excellent meat, and in a
manner as delicate as the Sweet-breads of Veal. These Lambs being thus roasted,
are always served up with Rice under them, and for the greater Tables, they
serve up two of them in a Dish. So that there is no use of Spits in the Turkish
Kitchins but what is for Poultry or Fowl, which they order so untowardly, that
when they are brought up to the Table they appear so mangled and disordered,
that it is no easy matter to distinguish the head from the feet. But it is to
be observed, that the Pilau, and all sorts of Flesh-meat, are not served up,
but only at Supper, about five of the Clock in the Evening; and that in the
Morning those of better Quality Eat only Sallets, Herbs, Fruits, and Conserves;
the meaner sort of People contenting themselves with meats made of Milk, Melons
and Cucumbers, according to the Season.

As for Fish, the Turks care not much for it, and though the Seas and Rivers
are well replenished therewith, yet they seldom Eat of them. It seldom happens
also, that any Venison or Wild-Fowl comes into their houses, as being The Turks
^ave an aversion for the Hare.
a kind of meat they do not any way relish, But above all meats they have an
aversion for the Hare; which Observation I made also in the Armenians, who are
of a persuasion, that the Female of that Creature has its Monthly Courses
regularly, as the Woman has. It is easily perceivable, by what account I have
given, that there is no great variety or delicacy in the Turkish
Entertainments, and that the French and other Europeans, would not think
themselves well treated thereat. But however, their Kitchins are kept very
neat, they have all the accommodations requisite for their way of dressing, and
whether you consider the Dishes and other Vessels they use, or the meat it
self, there is as much cleanliness as can be expected.

Conserves.
The Offices where the Conserves and Sweetmeats are made (there being six or
seven of them) are above the Kitchins, and served by four hundred Halvagis, who
were Established by Sultan Solomon, a magnificent Prince, who also regulated
all the Offices and Officers of the Seraglio. They are perpetually at Work in
those seven Offices, and there they prepare all sorts of Conserves, dry and
liquid, and several sorts of Syrups, as also several kinds of Turchi, which are
Fruits preserved in Vinegar and Salt, into which they put a quantity of
fragrant Herbs, such as Rosemary, Marjoram and Sage.

Several Compositions of Sherbet.
In the same Offices they also prepare the ordinary drink of the Turks, which
they call Sherbet, and it is made several ways. That which is most common in
Turkey comes somewhat near our Lemonade, but there is very little water in it;
it is in a manner all juice of Lemmon, or Citron, having an intermixture of
Sugar, Amber, and Musk. They make another sort of it, which is highly in
esteem, and that is made with the water destill'd from the flower of a Plant,
which grows in Pools and Rivers, and has the figure of a Horse-shooe. These
flowers are yellow, and called Nuloufer. But the Sherbet which they most
esteem, and which is drunk by the Grand Seignor himself, as also by the
Bassia's and other Grandees of the Port, is made of Violets and Sugar, and
there is but little juice of Citron put into it. They make also another sort of
drink, which they call Magion, composed of several Drugs, whereby it is made
hot: and there is another sort purposely prepared for the Grand Seignor himself
called Muscavi, of which he takes a Dose, when he intends to visit the
Sultanesses, The principal Persons about the Court send for it secretly to the
Halvagi-bachi, who does not deny them, as being a great advantage to him,
because he is well paid for it. Nor do they want Snow and Ice to cool all those
Liquors, and the Turks are much more humerous and delicate in their Drinks,
than they are in their Meat.

Receptacles for the Waters of the Seraglio.
At a place ten or twelve Paces distant, and opposite to these Offices is the
Receptacle, or Reservatory, which distributes all the Waters of the Seraglio,
and they are thence directed to every Quarter, into the places where there is a
necessity of them. One of the Baltagis has his station there all the day long,
to give Water as he is directed. And when the Grand Seignor passes from one
Quarter to another, the Fountain of that where he is in Person, plays
continually during his abode there, by a Signal which is given to the Baltagi.

The little Stables.
On the left hand in the same Court, and opposite to the Kitchins, may be seen
the Grand Seignor's little Stables, which do not hold above twenty five or
thirty choice Horses, desig'nd for his Exercises with his Favorites, and above
the Stables, in great Rooms, they keep the Saddles, Bridles, Housses,
Trappings, Foot-Cloaths, and Stirrops, which are of inestimable value by reason
of the abundance of precious Stones whereby they are enriched. There are some
Harnesses which amount to a million of Livers, French Money. The great Stables
stand all along the Canal, which beats against the Walls of the Seraglio. They
are always well replenished, and in good order, and they take care that there
be not so much as one vacant place therein. In those Stables does the Grand
Seignor keep a great number of Horses of value, to be reserved for the War, or
to be used in some Magnificent Solemnity, that Strangers may see the Splendour
of his Court.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Hall of the Divan, and the exact Justice which the Grand Seignor causes
to be admitted there.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Divan-Hall not very magnificent. The Council-days. Causes quickly decided.
The causes of that expedition of Justice in Turkey. The subtle Policy of the
Ottoman Family. The care which is taken to prevent the revolt of the
Janissaries. How the Grand Seignor assists at the Divan, or Council. The bold
action of a Timar-Spahi, who kills a Grand Vizir, and is pardoned. The noble
Genius of Sultan Amurat, and by what Artifices he discovered a great breach of
Trust. A kind of Beads used by the Turks at their Prayers. A noble Example of a
severe Act of Justice. At what times, and how, the Grand Seignor rids those out
of the way whom he suspects. The days on which Ambassadors come to the Divan.
The Divan-Hall not very magnificent.
THE Hall of the Divan, which belongs to this Second Court, is on the left hand
next to the little Stables, as you go toward the Grand Seignor's Quarter. It Is
a great low Hall, covered with Lead, and wainscotted and gilt in some places
within, from which it derives a little Ornament. The Floor of it is covered
with a great Carpet, and there are some Benches for the Officers, of whom that
Council consists, which the Turks call Divan. There are, as I told you,
Galleries of all the sides of that Court, which makes it look as it were like a
Cloister; and it is under that Gallery which is on the right hand; that the
Janissaries have their Station, while the Divan is sitting.

Council-days*
The Council sits, ordinarily, four days in the week, which days are answerable
to the Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday of the Christians.

Causes soon decided.
Justice is there exactly administered to any one that desires it, and for what
cause soever it be, so, as that the differing Parties have no need either of
Proctors or Advocates, Names not known in Turkey, and the Persons concerned are
to lay open their Cases themselves. There is no talk of delays, or putting off
from one time to another; People shall not languish in Expectation, but the
business is decided immediately, what nature soever it may be of.

The Reason of that Expedition of justice.
Though this Custom be very commendable, yet can it not be so well practiced
amongst Christians, because they stand upon the property of what they have, and
that is derived by inheritance from some to others, and the litigious
partitions of them do many times engage the Proprietors thereof in long Suits
of Law. It Is quite otherwise amongst the Great Officers of the Port, who are
all Slaves, either taken in War, or sent up, as Presents, by ^he Bassa's, and
Governors of Provinces. All their Estates, when they die, return to the Grand
Seignor, from whom they had receive'd them, so that it is a perpetual
Circulation, and their Children, as I told you in the beginning of this
discourse, are brought up to the Seraglio, to be educated there, and that
without any hope of ever succeeding their Parents, either in their Estates, or
Employments. The Ottoman Monarchy has always observed this subtle Policy, not
to permit that any Family should aggrandize it self, and be powerful from
Father to Son: but they bring it down, as soon as they have raised it up, and
timely enough deprive them of the means whereby they might create Factions, to
the disturbance of the State. Thence it comes, that, besides the Royal Family
of the Ottomans, they know not what Gentility, and antiquity of Extraction
means; there is no emulation upon that score, Charges and Dignities are bestowed
answerabl to the Merit of the Person, without any consideration of his
Extraction. Nay, it sometimes happens, that the Principal Ministers of the
Empire are the Sons of Cow-keepers, as was one Rustan, a Grand Vizir, who made
so much noise under the Reign of Solomon. And so, being not any way obliged to
their Birth, they acknowledge their Fortunes to be the reward of their
Education.

But to return to the administration of Justice amongst the Turks. Those who
make the Law their profession, and are looked upon as the Clergy of Mahomet,
leave no place for suits at Law; every one knows his privileges, and what
belongs to the function of his Charge, and there arise no differences among
them, because all things are perfectly well regulated.

In like manner, the people are ignorant what pleading signifies. There Is no
occasion for public Notaries, in order to Matrimonial Contracts; There Is no
great sums given with a daughter, and the jewels and clothes which she can get
out of her Fathers house, are all the portion she brings to her Husband. And
this, in few words, is the reason that the Turks can put an expeditious end to
all their affairs, without giving any toleration to that pettifogging, which,
among Christians, proves the ruin of so many People.

The Officers, who sit in the Divan are, first, the Grand Vizir, the
Lieutenant General of the whole Empire, who is President of it, and represents
the Grand Seignor's Person; Then the six other Vizirs; Then the Cadilesquers of
Romania and Natolia, who are the Judges and Intendants of the Armies; Then the
three Tefterdars, or Treasurers-General; Then the Nissangibacha, the Lord
Chancellor; And the Netangi, who is as 'twere the Secretary of State, with
some Clerks, or Notaries. All these Officers come into the Divan-Hall, at four
in the Morning, and continue there till Noon, to administer Justice. The
Chiaoux-bachi has his station at the Gate, with a troop of those that are under
his charge, to execute the Grand Vizir's Orders, and has a silver-rod in his
hand, as a badge of his Authority.

The care taken to prevent the revolt of the Janissaries.
On those days that the Divan sits, the Officers are enter^tain'd at dinner in
the same Hall, which is done with much Sobriety, and little Ceremony. All is
over and taken away, in half an hours time. The Grand Vizir eats alone, unless
he call a Bassa or two, to keep him company. There are carried also messes of
Chourba which is a kind of pottage made with Rice, for the dinners of the
Janissaries, who are in their stations, under the Galleries. But if it happen
that they are in a mutinous humor, and incensed against a Vizir, or against
the Grand Seignor himself, not one of them will put his hand to the Chourba;
but they scornfully thrust back the dishes, and by that action discover their
discontent.

The Grand Seignor is presently advertised of it, and sends to them the
Capou-Agasi, Grand Master of the Seraglio, to know what their pleasure is, and
what they desire. Then they depute one of their own Body to go, and speak on
the behalf of them all, and that person whispering the Capou-Agasi in the Ear,
declares to him the occasion of their discontent. That Eunuch presently carries
it to the Grand Seignor; And if they have a peek against a Vizir or a
Cadil^squer, or sometimes against their Aga, or Colonel, it often happens that
to appease those mutineers, the Grand Seignor orders them to be strangled, and
sends them their heads.

How the Grand Seignor is present at the Divan.
Sunday and Tuesday are the principal days of the Divan, and then it is
properly a Council of State, and of public affairs. The Grand Seignor most
commonly assists at it, but is not seen; and that keeps in awe as well the
Grand Vizir, as the other Officers. He can come thither from his own
Appartment, through a close Gallery, and seat himself at a window, which looks
into the Divan-Hall, and has always a velvet Curtain before it, which he draws
when he pleases, and especially when he perceives that they have not done
Justice. I shall produce here, an example, famous enough as to that particular,
which happened in the Reign of Sultan Achmet, the Father of Amurath and one of
the justest Princes, that ever the Ottoman Empire had.

The bold action of a Timer-Spahi, who kills a Grand Visir, and is pardoned.
The Reader is to call to mind, what I said at the beginning concerning the
Timar-Spahi, on whom they bestow, during their lives, the Government and
revenue of some Town, according as they have deserved by their Services. The
Saphi, whose story I am going to relate, had a Timar, between Aleppo and Damas,
which might bring him in a revenue of fifteen hundred Crowns. The Grand Vizir,
either out of some aversion to the Spahi, or upon some false reports which had
been made of him, and which he had been too forward to believe, without taking
an exact information of things, took away from him the Timar, whereof he was
possessed, and bestowed it on one of his own Creatures.

The Spahi, finding himself so unjustly dispossessed comes to Constantinople,
enters into the Divan, and presents a Petition to the Grand Vizir, wherein he
remonstrates to him his long Services, and how he never was chargeable with any
negligence of his duty. The Grand Vizir having read it, tears it in his
presence, which was to signify as much, as that he would not answer it, and
that there was nothing for for the Spahi to hope for. The Petitioner withdrew,
without saying any thing: but some days afterward, he returns to the Divan,
and presents a second Petition, which the Grand Vizir likewise tears, as he had
done the former, without making any answer thereto. Upon this second injury,
the Spahi, full of fury, and justly exasperated, draws his Poniard, falls upon
the Vizir, and kills him.

The Grand Seignor, who was then at the Window, having observed that action,
draws the Curtain, and with a loud voice commanded that no hurt should be
offered to the person who had done it. He thereupon orders the Spahi to
approach, and asked him the Reason of his having demeaned himself with so much
violence. The other much ashamed, humbly makes answer, but with resolution
enough, That he could not forbear doing what he had done, upon the sight of so
great a piece of injustice: and thereupon presenting to him the Petition, which
had been torn to pieces, the Grand Seignor caused it to be read, and patiently
hearkend to the just complaints which it contained. Having fully examined the
Affair, his Highness commended the Spahi for the Action he had done, using the
word Aferim, which is as much as to say, It Is well done, and which is ordinary
in that Language, when they approve a thing; and thereupon, there was an
additional Liberality made by the Grand Seignor to the Command which he gave,
that he should be re-established in his Timar. He thereupon took occasion to
speak to the other Vizirs, and to tell them, That that Example should teach
them to do just things, and not to ^uffer themselves to be so blinded by
favor, as not to observe Equity. The violent action of the Spahi is certainly
not to be approved, though the injustice of the Vizir was manifest, but the
procedure of the Grand Seignor, cannot be looked on otherwise then as most
commendable, and a great Model of perfect Equity.

I shall not think it much, to produce here a second Example of the exact
Justice, which the Grand Seignor would have administered to the People: and in
this Example there is something that is signally remarkable. A great
Stone-Morter, which may be seen at the Gate of the Divan, serves for a
Monumental confirmation of this Story; and whereas it is accompanied by many
circumstances worthy our observation, I think my self obliged not to conceal
them from the Reader.

How Sultan Amurate discovered a secret breach of trust.
In the Reign of Sultan Amurat, a certain private Person finding himself
without Wife of Children, resolved to undertake the Pilgrimage of Mecha. Before
his departure, he conceived, that he could not better dispose what he left
behind him that was most valuable, then by putting it into the hands of a
Hoggia, a Doctor of the Law. He thereupon left in his custody certain Jewels,
in a little bag, entreating him to keep them till he returned, and declaring
him his Heir, in case he died in his Pilgrimage. It was the Pilgrim's fortune
to return safely from Mecha, and making no question but to get what he had
entrusted the Hoggia withal, calls for what he had deposited in his hands. The
other makes him a very cold answer, telling him, That he knew not what he
meant, leaving him very much surpised at so unexpected an account of his
concerns. The Pilgrim, smothering his discontent, and reflecting, that the
thing had been done without witnesses, did nothing for some days; but
afterward, he presents a Petition to the Grand Vizir, and acquaints him how
all things had passed between him and the Doctor. The Grand Vizir perceiving
there was a great nicery in that affair, and that the Doctor might easily deny
a thing which had been transacted without witnesses, bid the Pilgrim have
patience a while, and that he would give the Grand Seignor an account of it;
which he accordingly did.

The Grand Seignor Commands the Vizir to be very circumspect in the management
of that Affair, as being very desireous to sift out the truth of it, and orders
him to send for the Doctor, to make protestations of friendship to him, and to
put him in hopes of being imployd of things in great importance. Some days pass
on, while the Grand Vizir minds what Game he had to play. At length, he sends
for the Doctor, he commends his ingenuity, and his Conduct; and so putting him
into very fair hopes, he promises him to prevail so far with the Grand Seignor,
as that he should have the honor to kiss his hands, since it was not just,
that so transcendent a Wit as he should be any longer unknown to his Highness.
The Doctor overjoyed at that discourse, thought himself the happiest man in the
World, especially when he saw, that the Grand Vizir had made him his Hougia,
which is as much as to say, his Almoner. The Vizir proceeds, and according to
the secret Orders he had received from the Grand Seignor, gives the Doctor
another Employment, which was, that he should bring him in Report of all the
Criminal Affairs which could be presented. The Grand Seignor, upon the Report
a of the Hougia, asked him his advice, and what punishment the guilty Person
deserved for the Crime whereof he was convinced, the execution being to be done
according to the judgment which the Doctor had passed, whom he made his
ordinary Reader, and would have near his Person.

Five or six months pass on in this manner, ere there could be any discovery
made of the falsify'd Trust. And it is to be observed, That the Pilgrim had
given the Grand Seignor an exact Inventory of all the several things, which he
had put into the little Bag. Among other things, there was particular mention
made of a Tesbuch of fine Coral. This Tesbuch is a kind of Chapplet, or Sring
of Beads, consisting of ninty and nine beads, upon each of which, the Turks
repeat certain words taken out of some sentences of the Alcoran. That Chaplet
is divided into three parts, from thirty three, to thirty three beads, by a
little string, which separates them: and at the end there hanged a long piece
of Corral, next to which there was another round bead, of the same material, of
an extraordinary bigness.

The more Puritanical sort of Turks have their Beads in their hands when they
are upon visits, and especially when they approach great Persons, and that very
thing made the first discovery of the Hogia's theft, and breach of trust. One
day, coming into the Seraglio with his Coral-beads in his hand, the Grand
Seignor, before whom he persented himself, casting his eyes upon them, and
persently imagining, that it might well be the Pilgrim's Tusbuch, according to
the description he had given it in the Catalogue of what things were left in
the little Bagg, told the Doctor, that he had a great rarity there. The other
immediately approaches him, and entreats his Highness with all submission to
accept of it. The Grand Seignor takes it, and making some discoveries how
acceptable that Present was to him, does by that prudent dissimulation, cause a
joy in him, whose Chastisement he was then contriving.

But that single indicium the Grand Seignor does not think enough, but he will
have other discoveries; and knowing that among other things that were in the
Bag, there was a Ring, the Work of an Excellent and Ancient Master, famous for
that sort of Rings which the Turks wear on the Thumb, when they shoot with the
Long bow, he expects a second occasion, in order to a fuller discovery of the
Cheat, and the more absolute conviction of the Doctor.

'Twas not many days ere that happened, by the contrivance of the Emperor
himself, who calling for one of his Pages, one well skilled* in Archery, went
to the place of the Girit, where he also called for a Bow, there being not any
Person in the whole Empire but was inferior to him, as to strength and
dexterity in the Exercises of the Bow and the Dart. When he came to bend the
Bow, he complained that the Ring hurt his Thumb, presuming that the Doctor,
who stood near him, and had already presented him with the Coral-Beads, would
also make him a proffer of the Ring, which he had of the Pilgrims. Is it
possible says the Grand Seignor, that there is not at this time any Master
living, who can make a Ring any thing like such a one, whom he named? The
Doctor whose apprehension was not so good, as to see that this Trap was laid
for his destruction, and thinking to insinuate himself more and more into the
Grand Seignor's Favor, told him, That by good Fortune he had a Ring of that
very Master's Work, which he had kept a long time, and that if his Highness
would be pleased to Accept of it, he would bring it thither, which he presently
did.

Asson as the Grand Seignor was returned to his own Quarter, he sent for the
Grand Vizier, and the Pilgrim, who came into his presence, and he had in his
hand the Chaplet of Corral, which he made as if he were repeating, to try
whether the Pilgrim would know it again. The other having well observed it,
addressed himself to the Emperor, saying, If it shall please your Highness to
permit me to open my mouth, I dare affirm, that the Chaplet, you have in your
hands, is very like that which I have in my little Bag of Jewels, and possible
I shall not be mistaken, if I say it is the very same. Whereupon the Grand
Seignor commands him to come nearer, and putting the Chaplet, and the Ring into
his hands, the Pilgrim affirms, upon his Life, that they are the very same
things, which he had left in the custody of the Doctor. He coming the next
Morning; according to his custom to make a Report of some Criminal Cause to the
Grand Seignor, that Prince, who was a person of great Ingenuity and
Apprehension, proposes to him a Case somewhat of the same nature with that
between him and the Pilgrim, and asked him what Punishment such a Crime
deserved. The unfortunate man, blinded by a good fortune wherein he thought
himself well established, and what was past being clearly got out of his
remembrance, pronounced Sentence against himself, and answers the Grand
Seignor, That such a Person, deserved to be pounded alive in a Mortar.

Upon that Sentence, the Emperor caused him to be immediately secured, and
having ordered all his Chests to be brought into the Seraglio, by the Baltagis,
whom he sent to his Lodgings, pulls out of his Pocket the Chaplet of Coral and
the Ring, which a Pilgrim of Mecha had entrusted him with the custody of. He
afterward shows him the Note or Schedule of all the other Pieces, and
commanding him to open his Chests, the Jewels were there found, which that
unhappy man, convinced of his Guilt, and trembling for Fear, delivered up into
the hands of the Grand Seignor. The Pilgrim was called, who presently knew his
Bag and his Jewels; and the Doctor by an open Confession, acknowledged his
Crime, and Perfidiousness.

The next day, the Emperor ordered the Divan to be Assembled, at which he
commanded that all the Grandees about Constantinople should be present, to
render the Judgment the more solemn. He first commanded, that whatever
belonged to the Pilgrim should be restored to him, together with some
additional recompense: and his next command was, That the Doctor should be
punished, according to his own Sentence. To that end, order was given, that a
Stone should be made hollow, after the form of a Mortar, into which he was
thrown stark naked, and pounded alive by the common Executioners. And that is
the same Stone-Mortar which I have often seen near the Gate of the Divan, and
is left there for a Memorial of so admirable and so solemn a Judgment. And this
was the period of a History, whereof all the circumstances are remarkable, and
which is not one of the least Monuments of the Wisdom of the Emperor Amurat.
That Prince, instead of using his absolute power at the first overture of such
an Affair, thought it fitter, by a perspicacity of mind and prudence, patiently
to expect remote occasions, that he might thence deduce evident proofs of a
concealed Crime: and his intention was to raise the Doctor to great dignities,
if he had found him innocent; and to punish him severely, as he did, upon the
discovery of his guilt.

At What time, how, the Grand Seignor rids out of the way, those, whom he
suspects.
I told you at the beginning of this Chapter, that of the four days of the
Week, appointed for the sitting of the Divan, those which are answerable to our
Sunday and Tuesday, are the principal, as being those on which the Affairs of
greatest importance are debated. They call those two days Arzghi^nz, in regard,
that after the Grand Visir, the six other Visirs, and the two Cadilesquers, who
assist at the Divan, have administered Justice, they go all together to kiss the
Grand Seignor's hands. If any one of those Nine Judges have ought to say to
him, he is permitted on those days, to speak to him freely: and it is
ordinarily upon those days also, that the Grand Seignor takes his time, if he
has a mind to take off any one. He then orders the Bostangi-Bachi to be ready,
with some of those who attend him, to execute his will; and having declared to
him who they are, whom he would have strangled, the order is no sooner given,
but that either at their arrival, or at their departure, it is punctually
obeyed. True it is, that he does not demean himself so, but when he is afraid
of some popular sedition, in case he should send to punish them in their own
Houses, where they might make some resistance. But within the Seraglio, and in
sight of the Janissaries, who are in their stations near the Divan, the
unfortunate Person, whom they would have to be strangled, has no more to do
than to bow down his Head, and to stretch out his Neck, without thinking of any
resistance, which would be to no purpose. In the Eleventh Chapter I shall give
an Account at large, how they proceed to that Execution.

The days on which Ambassadors come to the Divan.
A little beyond the Hall of the Divan, you come to another Hall, raised up
after the manner of a Balcony, where the Ambassadors are seated, when they
assist at the Divan, and that they do, once in three months, and upon the days
that the Janissaries receive their Pay. There is Notice sent them to be there,
out of a vain ostentation, that they may see, what abundance of money goes out
of the Treasury. Between these two Halls there is a Gate, which leads to the
Quarter of the Baltagis. Those are a sort of strong and robust People,
employed, as I told you, in carrying of Wood all about the Seraglio, and other
mean and painful Offices. As to the wood, which is burnt in the Appartments of
the Women, they disburthen themselves of it at the Door, where the
Negro-Eunuchs take it up, and carry it into the Baths and other Rooms, into
which they only are permitted to go. And this is all that is considerable in
that second Court. Let us now enter further into the Seraglio, and see how
things are managed there.

CHAP. V.
Of the inner part of the Seraglio in general, and particularly, of the Quarter
of the Eunuchs, and the Ichoglans.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Ichoglans Educated under a severe Discipline. The great Officers of the
Port taken out of the same School. The miserable condition of the Children of
the Bassa's. The great Authority of the Capi-Aga. The Classes, through which
the young Lads of the Seraglio are to pass. The Quarters of the four principal
Eunuchs.
THE inner Seraglio is that part of the great Palace of the Ottoman Emperors,
which, from the Second Court, whereof we have given a description, extends to
the point, at which place the Gardens are terminated, and which comprehends in
general, the Grand Seignors Quarter, and the Quarter of the Sultanesses. But in
regard the former is distinguished into several Appartments, appointed for the
Habitations of the Officers, who ordinarily approach the Grand Seignor's
Person, and are his most necessary attendants, I will conduct the Reader from
one to another, and give a distinct relation of every one of them. In this
Chapter, I shall treat only of those Appartments which are taken up by the
Eunuchs, and the Ichoglans, who are under their Discipline.

The Ichoglans kept under a severe discipline.
At the beginning of this discourse, I made mention of the four principal
Eunuchs, who have others substitute to them, to observe the actions of those
young Lads, who are committed to their charge, and to instruct them, as well in
the Mahumetan Religion, as in the Exercises of the Body, and particularly, as
to what relates to the Grand Seignor's Service. The Quarter as well of the
Eunuchs, as the Ichoglans stands next to the Divan-Hall, and begins to make
part of the third Court, all along which it reaches on the left hand. It is
divided into several Appartments, and among others, there are four, which they
call Oda's, that is to say, Chambers, into which are distributed six hundred
Ichoglans, according to the orders of the Capi-Aga; who, with the other
principal Eunuchs, judges of every ones capacity. It Is the Capi-Aga also, who
orders their passing out of one Oda into another, as we remove our Scholars
from a sixth form to a fifth; and the case is the same in their Oda's as in our
Forms, or Classes, this first of the four Oda's, the severities whereof they
must weather out as well as they can, being the last in point of dignity. When
he makes his general Visitation, upon which follows the foresaid promotion, he
turns out of the Seraglio, all those whom he thinks incapable of doing their
Prince good Service, and that such as betray their disgust of so austere a
life; and then they are put out of all hopes of ever entering into the Seraglio
any more, and cannot pretend to any other Fortune, then that of Spahis, with a
small pay. The advantages of capacitating themselves for the most eminent
Charges of the Court and the Empire, makes those who remain behind to take the
greater courage, and accordingly they patiently suffer, for the space of many
years, the harsh and unmerciful treatments of the Eunuchs, whom, upon all
occasions, they always find very liberal of the Bastinado.

They are those Ichoglans, whom we may also call the Grand Seignor's Pages who
The wretched condition of the Bassa's Children.
are advanced to the dignity of Bassa's, Beys, Capigi-bachis, Haznadar-bachis,
and the other great Officers of the Port. But they are particularly culled out
of the number of the Tributary Children, who are taken away from the
Christians, or taken in War, by Sea or Land. For, as to the Beiczades, or
Children of Bassa's, whom they bring up in the Seraglio, you are to remember
what I have already said, that they can never ascend higher, than to the
Charges of Beys, or Captains of Galleys.

When any one of these Ichoglans is desirous to remove out of the Seraglio, or
if any one of the white Eunuchs has the same desire, he presents a Petition to
the Capi-Aga, who carries it to the Grand Seignor, he receives his dismission,
and is alalow'd certain Pay, proportionabl to the continuance and quality of
his Services. But there are others, whom the same Capi-Aga turns out of the
Seraglio against their wills, and that after they had weathered out the first
years, which are the most insupportable. And that is done sometimes upon this
score, that the Capi-Aga having had some contest with any one of those
Ichoglans, while they where Camarades in the time of their youth, and fearing
least he should come one day to traverse his designs, he employs all his credit
and interest, to remove him out of the Seraglio, but withal procuring him a
Recompense and Salary, according to the number of years he has served.

The Classes through which the Lads brought into the Seraglio are to pass.
The first of the four Chambers, into which the Ichoglans are distrubuted, has
the greatest number of them, because they are yet very young, and as it were
Novices, under the first Perula and it is called the Couchouk-Oda, that is to
say, the little Chamber, though it be the largest of them all, in regard it is
the lowest in point of Dignity. There they are taught to read and write, and
are initiated in the first grounds of the Mahumetan Law. And after they have
spent six years in that Chamber, they are removed into the second, which they
call Quilar-Oda, wherein being grown more robust, they are instructed in the
Exercises of the Body, in shooting with the Bow, using the Lance and other
divertisements of that kind. They are more perfected in the speaking of the
Turkish Language, whereto they also add the Arabian, and the Persian, which
they shall have occasion to use, in the Governments whereto they may be sent.

There are four years spent in this second Chamber, out of which they are again
removed into the third, which they call Chasnadar-Oda, or the Chamber of the
Treasury. In this Chamber they begin to do the Grand Seignor some Service, and
to be employed in the Wardrobe, and the Baths, and there they are also taught
to Ride, and to perfect themselves in the Exercises suitable to that Station,
wherein they ordinarily spend four years. Each of these three forementioned
Chambers has a white Eunuch for its Chief Overseer. The Serai-Agasi has the
Direction of the first; the Quilargi-bachi Commands in the second; and the
Chasnadar-bachi is the Governor of the third.

I shall have occasion to speak more at large of the two last, when I come to
the Chapters of the Cup-bearers Office, and the Treasury; and therefore I shall
only add here, concerning all the three in general, that the Ichoglans, who are
instructed therien, have not any Commerce with those of the fourth Chamber, of
whom I shall give an account by and by, not with any other Person out of the
Seraglio, or in the other Courts, but with the particular permission of the
Capi-Aga, and in the presence of an Eunuch, who hears all that is said: That
they cannot converse amongst themselves but at certain regulated hours; and
that conversation must be managed with a great observance of Modesty, as there
is an exact Obedience remarkable in all their deportments: And lastly, that
they are all clad in ordinary Cloth, even to the Beicstades, that is, the Sons
of Viziers and Bassa's who are dead, while those of the fourth Chamber wear
Cloth of Gold and Silver, because they come into the Grand Seignor's presence,
and often approach his Person. I shall give you an account anon of their
Dormitories, that is, the places where they take their repose, as also of the
Functions of the Oda-bachi and the Deflergi-Aga, who act according to the
Orders they receive from the four Eunuchs.

The fourth Chamber, which is the Prince's Chamber, is called Haz-Oda, and I
shall speak of it when I come to treat of the Cup-bearers Office, and the Grand
Seignor's secret Apartment. Here, the Ichoglans, who have endured hardship so
many years in the three first Chambers, begin to take breath, and to be allowed
more Liberty. They are permitted to converse with all Persons within the
Seraglio, and they have the advantage of frequent approaches to the Prince's
Person, to whom they make themselves known, and from whom they ever and anon
receive favors.

The Quarters of the Four principal Eunuchs.
Under the Gate of the third Court, where a certain number of Eunuchs are upon
the Guard Night and Day, there is a passage on the left hand which leads into a
little Gallery, out of which there is an entrance into the Appartmeut of the
Capou-Agasi; and when the Gate is open, it hides that passage, into which a man
cannot enter but with some difficulty.

A little further, and on the right hand of the Hall of Audience, stands the
Appartment of the Serai-Agasi, who is to take care for the keeping of the
Seraglio clean and in good order; and a little further yet, near a little
Mosque, where the Ichoglans of the three first Chambers go to their Devotions,
lies the Quarter of the Seferlis, who are an hundred and fifty of the
Ichoglans, or thereabouts, particularly appointed for the washing of the Grand
Seignor's Linen. When he goes into the Country, the most Ancient among them
are of his Retinue; and there must be comprehended in that Number, such as play
on Timbrels, and the other Instrumental Musicians, who have the same
appointments with the rest.

Let us now enter into the Hall of Audience, which is a Quarter as 'twere
independent from others, and where the Grand Seignor receives Foreign
Ambassadors.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Hall wherein the Grand Seignor gives Audience to Foreign Ambassadors,
and the manner how they are received.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The description of the Hall of Audience. The Grand Seignor's Throne. The
manner how Ambassadors are received. Remarks upon the number of Vestments which
the Grand Seignor orders to be bestowed on the Ambassadors of Christian
Princes. The form of the Oath of Allegiance, which the Cham of the Lesser
Tartary comes to take at the same place.
The Hall of Audience described.
THE third Court of the Seraglio, wherein we now are, is far from being so
regular, as the precedent, and the Structures within sufficiently discover,
that the Persons by whom it was built, minded not the observance of any Order
in the doing of it. When you are at the Gate of this Court, you have just
opposite to you a little Appartment, not adjoining to the others, at the
entrance of which you find, on both sides, a Fountain issuing out of a Wall,
the Water whereof is received into two Basins or Cisterns: And it is in this
Appartment that the Hall of Audience stands. It Is an arched Structure noble
enough in its kind, sustained by Marble Pillars, and there is yet to be seen in
the midst of it, a small spout of Water, which falls into a Basin. This Hall is
open of all sides, and at the lower end, opposite to the Gate, they place the
Grand Seignor's Throne.

The Grand Seignor's Throne.
This Throne, which is rich enough is in the manner of an Altar, and it is
brought into that Hall only upon those days, whereon the Grand Seignor is
willing to give Audience to Ambassadors, and when the new Cham of the Lesser
Tartary, whom he has chosen to govern there, comes to receive the Investiture
of his Kingdom, and to take the accustomed Oath. The backside of the Throne,
is set against a partition erected for that purpose, which is not above half a
foot higher than it, and it is that keeps in the cushions which are behind the
Grand Seignor.

There are in the Treasury-Chamber eight several very sumptuous Coverings
purposely made to cover the aforesaid Throne: and they are so large, that they
reach down to the ground on three sides of it, that is to say, before, on the
right hand, and on the left: for as to the back-part, it is, as I told you,
fastn'd to the partition. The most Magnificent of all those Coverings is of a
black Velvet, with an Embroydry of great Pearls, whereof some are long, and
others round, and in the form of Buttons. There is another of white Velvet, set
out with an Embroydery of Rubies and Emeralds, most whereof are set in Beazils,
or Collets, the better to keep them in. There is a third, of a Violet-colour'd
Velvet, embroidered with Turqueses and Pearls. The three others, which are next
in esteem to these, are also of Velvets of different Colors, with a rich
Embroydery of Gold. And the two last are of a Gold-Brokado, which have also
their particular Beauty and sumptuousness. The Throne is adorned with one fo
these coverings, according to the Grand Seignor's respect to the Sovereign,
whose Embasly he receives; and he levels his own Magnificence to that of the
Prince whom he would honor.

The manner of receiving the Ambassadors,
And this is the manner how the Ambassadors are received into the Hall. For as
to the Order, and Ceremonies of their march from the Hotel, or great House of
Perra, to the Port of Constantinople, and from the Port, to the Seraglio, no
question but there have been Relations enough made already. After the
Ambassador has dined in the Hall of the Divan, with the Grand Visir, who there
expected him, while his Retinue are entertained under the Gallery, upon some
old Carpets of Leather, which they spread upon the ground, and upon which there
are a few Dishes of Meat set, he receives the Vests or Garments, which the
Grand Seignor sends him, as well for his own Person, as for those who Accompany
him, and they put them on immediately, over all the Clothes they have about
them, as they would do a Morning-Gown.

In this Equipage the Ambassador is conducted to the Hall of Audience, by the
Capi-Aga, the Grand Master of the Ceremonies, who is assisted by several
Eunuchs: and when he is at the Door, two Visirs stand ready to receive him, and
they go on each side of him, till he comes to the place, where he is to bow,
and to kiss the Grand Seignor's Garment. From the very Gate of the Court, kept
by the Eunuchs, quite to that of the Hall, they walk all along upon Carpets of
Silk; and the Floor of the Hall, though all paved with Marble, is also covered
with another Carpet of Gold, the Workmanship whereof somewhat resembles that of
our ordinary Straw-Mats, and much about the same thickness.

The Grand Seignor demeans himself with a great deal of gravity, while he is in
his Throne; and behind the little Wall or Partition, against which it is set,
you see, standing in order, the Kisler-Agasi, who is a Negro-Eunuch, and chief
Overseer of the Appartment of the Women; the Seligdar-Aga, who carries the
Grand Seignor's Sword; the Chokadar-Aga, who carries the Royal Robe, an Officer
whom in France they call Porte-Manteau; the Riquabdar, who holds the Stirrup,
when the Prince gets on Horseback; and the Hazadabachi, chief of the Chamber,
which Office would be equivalent in France, to that of the Grand Master of the
Wardrobe.

All these forementioned Officers do all deport themselves with a great
appearance of modesty, having their Arms cross their Breasts: And as to the
Capi-Aga, the Introductor to the Ambassadors, and Grand Master of the Seraglio,
he stands in the midst of the Hall, and in the same posture of humility. On the
left side of the Throne, there is a kind of a low Seat, covered with red
Velvet, with a Goldfringe, on which the Ambassadors go and sit down, after they
have kissed the Grand Seignor's Robe, till such time as those of their Retinue,
who have had Vests, the number whereof is limited, have performed the same
Ceremony. In the mean time, all the Bassa's are standing, in the presence of
their Prince; nay, the Cham of the Lesser Tartary is not excepted out of that
Law, when he comes to do homage. All this action is performed in great silence,
and the Grand Seignor making no answer at all at that time, leaves it to the
Grand Vizir, to make some short Complement, in order to the dismission of the
Ambassador, who withdraws with a profound reverence, without uncovering his
head, or turning his back, till he be out of the Hall.

The Ministers of Christian Princes and States who ordinarily reside at the
Port, are the Ambassadors of England, France, and Venice, and the Resident of
the States General, who have all their respective Habitations in Pera. When
there comes thither any Ambassador or Resident, from the Emperor, or from
Poland, or Muscovy, they oblige them to take up their abodes at Constantinople,
that they may be the more assured of their persons.

Remarks on the number of Vests, which the Grand Seignor orders to be given the
Ambassadors of Christian Princes*
The Grand Seignor distinguishes the Quality of those Princes and States, and
the esteem he has for them, by the number of Vests which he orders to be
bestowed on their Ambassadors when they come to Audience. The Ambassador of
France has four and twenty allowed him; the Ambassador of England, sixteen; the
Ambassador or Agent of Venice receives twelve, and the Dutch Ambassador as many.

When Monsieur de Marcheville was Ambassador in Turkey, from his most Christian
Majesty of France, I had the honor to be one of those who accompanied him to
the Seraglio, where after Dinner with the Vizirs, in the Divan-Hall, while his
Retinue were treated under the Gallery, the Vests were brought according to the
custom. The Ambassador coming to distrubute them to those whom he had a mind
to favor, and take along with him to the Audience, he was much surprised, to
find that he had got but sixteen. He immediately sent word to the Grand Vizir,
that he wanted eight Vests, and that he would not go to his Audience, till he
had the full number, which they had wont to present to the Ambassadors of
France. There was some contest about it, which retarded the Audience near an
hours time; but at last Mounsieur de Marcheville persisting in his resolution,
the Grand Vizir complied, and sent him eight other Vests.

The Form of the Oath of Allegiance made by the Cham of the Lesser Tartary to
the Grand Seignor.
What remains of this Chapter must represent the manner, how the Cham of the
Lesser Tartary comes into this Hall of Audience to take the Oath of Allegiance
to the Grand Seignor. The Reader will be pleased to remember, what Observation
I made at the beginning of this Work concerning the Family of that Tributary
Prince, whom the Ottoman Emperors keep under the Yoke. The Cham who is to Reign
in his turn, and according to what disposal the Grand Seignor has made of the
Government, presents himself before him in the Hall of Audience, and after he
has kissed his Robe, retires some paces back, and stands. Then they bring in
the Alcoran, upon a great green Velvet Cushion, without any Embroydery, at the
four Corners whereof there are four Tassels of Gold and Silk, and they place it
on the Grand Seignors right hand. Now whereas he sits on a Carpet cross-leggd,
there must be great care taken, that the Cushion be not so high as his knees;
for the Turks would account that a great sin; and they bear sogreat a respect
to the Book of the Alcoran, that they cannot touch it till they have first
washed themselves. Before they open it, they kiss it, and put it upon their
heads, and after they have read something in it, they kiss the writing of it,
and then they rub their faces with it, before they shut it. The Prince, who is
to take his Oath, is standing all this time, as I told you, with his hands
stretched out one against the other, and lifted up as high as his shoulders, to
receive the Book of the Alcoran out of those of the Capi-Aga, who had been to
take it off the Cushion, having kissed it and touched his head with it.

The Oath which the Cham takes is in these Words: Bou quittab hak juchun
seadetlu, padichaim, tare fin den her ne Emir, ve ferman bana keleurse itaat
ideym.

That is to say, By the Truth of this Book I will cause to be executed all the
Orders and Commands which shall be brought unto me from my Lord.

And now that I have given you the Oath of Allegiance made by the Vassal to his
Lord, I shall also add the Form of that, which the Ottoman Emperor requires of
all the Christian Princes, who are subject to his Jurisdiction, such are the
Princes of Moldavia and Walachia. It runs in these words: Hi isa hac Juchum,
seadetlu padichaim tare fin den her ne Emir, ve ferman bana keleurse itaat
Ideym.

That is to say, By the Truth of Jesus Christ, I will cause to be executed all
the Orders and Commands, which shall be brought unto me from the Emperor my
Lord.

The Grand Seignor requires also an Oath of Allegiance of all the Bassa's, whom
he sends to the Frontiers of the Empire; as the Bassa's of Grand Cario,
Babylon, and Buda, which is more than he exacts of the other Governors of
Provinces, which are not upon the Confines of his Territories, and of whom he
has no ground to be afraid.

Let us now make our Entrance into the Quarter of the Eunuchs and the
Ichoglans, whereof the Baths make a great part.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Baths of the Seraglio.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The prodigious strength of Body of a certain Ichoglan. The Mosquey belonging
to the Appartment of the Eunuchs. The Employments of the Dwarfs, and the Mutes.
The superstition of the Turks in the manner of paring their Nails. The Colors
forbidden the Christians in whatever they wear about their heads. The
Description of the Baths. Certain Abuses reformed. Why the Inhabitants of the
Eastern Parts do not make use of Paper upon an undecent account. The Persians
more scrupulous than the Turks. They are great Lovers of cleanliness. Certain
Chambers very commodious and divertive. The strict prohibition of Mahomet for
any one to suffer himself to be seen stark naked. A certain Earth which takes
off the Hair, and its dangerous effects.
THE Baths designed for the Grand Seignor's own Person, and his principal
Officers, take up a great space of the Quarter of the Eunuchs. The little
Ovens, whereby they are heated, called Kulkans, are adjoining to the Appartment
of the Serai-houdasi, and fifteen Ichoglans, the most robust that can be found,
are employed in keeping the Fire going. They have the denomination of
Kulkangis; and five and twenty others, who are named Dellaks, are employed in
the Baths, to shave and rub the Body, as also in applying Cupping-Glasses to
those who stand in need thereof. Among the Kulkangis, he who is the most
ancient in that Employment has a pre-eminence and superiority over the rest,
whom he many times commands to exercise themselves in wrestling, and lifting a
heavy Iron Bar with one hand.

There are three such Bars fastened upon great Cramp-Irons over the door that
goes into the Baths, and the middlemost of the three, as it is commonly
reported, weighs a hundred Okkas, which amount to Three hundred and fifty
pounds Paris weight, an Okka weighing three pounds and a half, or thereabouts.
There was heretofore one of those Ichoglans, of so prodigious The prodigious
strength of Body of a certain Ichoglan.
strength, that the Grand Seignor himself would have the satisfaction of seeing
a Trial whether he could with one hand lift up and turn about that Iron-bar;
which he did to the great astonishment of the Prince, and presently after he
entertained him with another demonstration of the strength of his Arm. Over
these three Iron-bars, there hung two Head-pieces of Iron whereof one was an
inch in thickness, and the other about the eight part of an inch. The same
Ichoglan did, in the Grand Seignor's presence, at one blow of a Battle-Axe, cut
through the headpiece of an inch thick, and, at one blow with a Sabre* cleft
the other to the middle of it.

The Mosquey belonging to the Appartment of the Eunuchs.
Opposite to those Ovens are the Cocks, whereby the waters are distributed into
the several Rooms of the Baths; and I forgot to tell you, That before you enter
into that place, you find a little Mosquey, adjoining to the Appartment of the
Saraikethoudasi, where all the Ichoglans go to their devotions twice a day. If
they fail the doing of it, the Oda-bachi, who, in every Chamber, takes notice
of their demeanours, calls them to an account, and they are sure of the
bastinado, as they are also for any other fault they commit; and sometimes they
receive the said puishment on the soles of their feet, and, upon some occasions
to such a number of blows, that the nails of their toes come off; and that is
the punishent which is properly called Drubbing.

The Employment of the Dwarfs and Mutes.
Out of that Mosquey you pass into a Gallery, adjoining to the Baths, and there
the Dislis and the Geuges; that is to say, the Mutes and the Dwarfs are
employed in some work or other all day long. Some spend the time in learning to
make up Turbants, wherein there is more work and difficulty than is imagined,
especially in making up the Grand Seignior's own Turbant, when he goes to the
Divan. For then he takes an extraordinary large one, as do also all the
Officers of the same Divan when they go to Council: and I cannot make a better
representation of that kind of Turbant, then by the form of our largest sort of
Citrals, if they be made hollow in the middle, so as that the head might enter
into that hole.

Others are employed in shaving, paring the nails, and other things of that
kind. They do not make use of any Scizars for the nails, in Turkey nor in any
part of Asia; it being a thing forbidden by Mahomet in his Law, and accordingly
they account the doing of it a great sin. But they make use of a little Steel
Instrument, somewhat like a Penknife, and the only cutting part is the end of
it, and they are dextrous enough in the performance of that Office. It is the
Custom all over the East, that the Barber who trims you, should also make up
your Turband, which is many times discomposed, pair the Nails of your Hands and
Toes, and take away the filth out of your Ears: for the Turks and all the
Inhabitants of Asia, are great lovers of cleanliness, and cannot endure the
least nastiness, either on themselves, or those who come near them, as I shall
give you an account anon.

Colors forbidden the Christians in their Coiffure.
And having spoken so much of the Turbant, it will not be unseasonable for me
to communicate this Remark to you here, That in the Ottoman Empire, and all
over Arabia, none but Mahumetans are permitted to make use of White for the
covering of their Heads; whereas in Persia, and all over the Great Mogul's
Empire, men may take what Colors they please themselves.

The description of the Baths.
I come now to the great Bath, which is adjoining to the Chamber of the
Hamangi-bachi, who is the chief Overseer of it, and which makes part of the
Appartment of the Seferlis, or the Grand Seignor's Laundry-men. The place where
they put off their Clothes, is a spacious Louver or Banqueting House of
Freestone, high enough, and in one of the most eminent parts of the Seraglio.
The Floor is paved with a very delightful kind of Marble laid in square pieces;
and it has two large Windows jutting out upon the Gardens, somewhat like
Balconies, from which you have a Prospect of the two Seas. In the midst of that
Domo or Louver, yon find a Fountain, the Water whereof is received into two
Basins or Cisterns: The former, which is the highest, and withal the least, is
of one piece of White Marble, having in it a little intermixture of Red and
Black Veins, and pierced through at six several places, for the reception of so
many small Pipes of Copper through which the Water falls down into the other
Basin, which is also of Marble, of sevreal Pieces, and several Colors.

Abuses rescrm'd
Within the Domo, there is a great number of Poles, which are disposed all
about it, and supported by certain pieces of Iron coming out of the Wall. Upon
those Poles they dry the Linen which they had used in the Bath; and of that
Linen there are several sorts. Heretofore, the Pages were allowed only a long
Piece of Linen Cloth, which came only twice about their wastes: but upon
observation made, that they abused them, and that handsome young Lads playing
together, snatched that piece of Linen one from the other, purposely to
discover their nakedness, they use in the Baths only such Garments of Linen as
are sowed close above, and reach from the waste down to the Feet, much after
the manner of a Woman's Petti-coat. At their coming out of the Bath, they have
two other sorts of Linen to dry themselves withal, of the largeness of
ordinary Table-Cloths, whereof the one is Red, with a border of Silk of three
fingers breadth, which covers them, as soon as they are out of the water, from
the waste downwards to the ham; and the other is White, wherewith they rub
themselves. For these two sorts of Towels* they have but one Name, to wit,
Pechetamal.

Why the Levantines do not use Paper undecently.
On one side of the Fountain, which is in the midst of the Domo, there is an
entrance into the Bath, and near that is the Hall where they uncloath
themselves in the Wintertime. A little Gallery which lies on the left hand,
leads to the places designed for the easing of nature, and every seat has a
little Cock, which supplies them with water to wash themselves, after they have
done. It is accounted an heinous Sin among them, to make use of Paper for that
purpose; and the reason they give for it is this, That, possibly, the Name of
God might be written upon it* or might contain some Text of the Law, which
would be a profanation of it, and consequently ought to be avoided. Besides,
they have another opinion, That Paper is not so proper so well to make clean
that part, which the necessity of the Body does ordinarily so much defile, but
that there may be something of ordure left; and that being obliged to present
themselves before God with an absolute Purity of Body and Mind, their Prayers
could not be heard, if they should not be wholly clean.

The Persians more scrupulous than the Turks.
The Persians are yet more scrupulous than the Turks upon this account. For
though they both agree in this, That their Devotions are ineffectual, nay
indeed that they are not in a condition to perform them without crime, if they
be not pure, as to Body and Mind; Yet the former are of a persuasion, That the
least ordure which, through Negligence or Inadvertency, might remain upon their
Persons or their Garments, would render their Prayers fruitless and criminal,
which the Turks, somewhat less superstitious as to that particular, will not
acknowledge.

They are great lovers of cleanliness.
Certain it is also, That in Persia they are extraordinary Lovers of
Cleanliness; insomuch that I have observed, That at Ispahan, the Metropolis of
that Country, where the Streets are not paved, when there falls a little Snow
or Rain, which must occasion some dirt, few People will come out of their
Houses, unless they be forced thereto by some Concern of great importance. And
when they do go abroad at such a time, at the House-door into which they are to
enter, they put off their Shoes, their Upper-garment, the Cap which covers
their Turbauts; and if they have the least dirt or filth about them, they think
themselves impure, and that it would be a disrespect to the Person whom they
are to Visit. Nay, a Persian shall be very scrupulous, and make a great
difficulty to receive a Man into his House in Foul Weather; and if any one
presents himself into that pleasure, he makes a sign to him with his hand to
keep at a certain distance from him, in the place wherein he is to enter into
Discourse with him. For if by chance as he comes out of the Street, where there
is some dirt, and where Horses pass to and fro, and may cast some of it upon
him, he has the least spot of any daggling about him, and afterward touch the
Person whom he comes to Visit, this latter would be Nagis, that is to say,
Unclean, and thereupon be obliged immediately to change his Clothes; so great
is the Superstition of the Persians, as to that particular.

Chambers very divertive and Commodious,
At the end of the Gallery, there is a door which gives you passage into three
Chambers, which are so many Baths for the use of the Grand Seignor's Quarter.
There is adjoining to the last of those Chambers a spacious place paved
Chequerwise with Marble of different colors, and there the Ichoglans are
trimmed. This place has a little eminency in the midst of it, from which there
is a gentle descent of all sides, that the Water wherewith the Barbars wash
their Heads and Beards may the more easily be carried off, and the place be
always kept clean. On both sides of the Wall, whereby it is enclosed, there is
a great double Cock, with two Keys belonging to it, which, at the same mouth,
supplies them alternately with either hot water, or cold, and that falls into a
Basin or Receptacle of White Marble, wherein three or four men may bathe
themselves without any inconvenience, or trouble one to the other. There is
also at one of the ends a little Room of Black and White Marble, and there the
Barbers, who have no knowledge of any other Profession, put up all their
necessary Utensils and Instruments, as Razors, Hones, Balls, and those Irons
wherewith they pare their Nails: for as for Linen, they do not use any; and
those who are to be shaved come in stark naked from the Waste upwards, and are
covered from thence downwards, only with a Cloth, which reaches to the Ancle.
It Is a great Rarity to meet with any one among those Barbers that knows how to
let blood, and their Lancets, are much like the Fleams, wherewith our Farriers
bleed Horses.

Opposite to the Chamber of the Barbers, there are three other Rooms arched
with Marble, the largest whereof much surpasses in Beauty those that are
adjoining to it. The Floor of it is of white and black Marble, and the Walls
are done about with square pieces, that are white and blew, and in every one of
them you find a Flower in embossed Work, done to the Life, and which a man
would take for enamell. Little Lamines or Plates of Gold cover the junctures of
those square pieces, and there cannot any thing be imagined more pleasant and
divertive than that Chamber is. In the Roof of it, there are several round
holes, of about half a foot diameter, over which there are little Glasses made
in the fashion of Bells, ordered as the Venice-Looking-Glasses are, lest any
one should have the curiosity, to get up to the Roof, and laying himself upon
his belly think to see what is done in the Bath. The place has no light but
what it receives by the means of those holes, and while some body is in the
Bath: But especially when they go out of it, the door is shut, the better to
keep in the heat, and to prevent their being seen; which might be if instead of
those forementioned holes in the Roof, there were Windows below, according to
our Mode. All the other Baths have their Structures after the same manner, and
having no light but what comes at little glazed holes, there is not any passage
into it but that of the door, to the end that being presently shut, the heat
might the better be kept within the Bath, and to prevent their being seen who
are in it.

The Second Chamber is another Bath, but as to Beauty, it is much inferior to
the other; And as for the third, there is something in it which is singularly
remarkable. The Floor of it is laid as with a sort of small stones, so as that
the foot cannot slip, though it be wetted at their departure out of the Bath:
And the whole Room is done all about with square pieces, having in them flowers
of embossed work, done to the Life and covered with Gold and Azure. This is the
place into which the Grand Seignor enters, when he comes out of the Bath; and
he always goes into it alone, when he intends to shave himself in those parts,
which are not to be named without immodesty.

Mahomet's Prohibition to be seen naked.
Mahomet pronounces a Curse upon those persons who suffer themselves to be
seen, and upon all those who look on them: And the strict observance, of his
Law requires, That both Men and Women ought to shave themselves, without using
the assistance of any other hand.

An Earth that takes off hair, and its dangerous effects.
But most of the Inhabitants of the EASTERN Parts, the Arabians, Tartars, and
the Indians, make use of a more easy expedient then the Razor, to get off
hair. It is a certain Earth, which they mix with some Orpiment, or Arsenick,
and which becomes soft as butter. When they are in the Bath, and begin to
sweat, they take of that Earth and therewith rub the parts, from which they
would have the hair to fall, and presently after they must be very careful to
see, whether it begins to fall, as one would observe a Fowl, whose feathers he
would take off, after it had been cast into scalding water. For if that Earth
be left too long upon the parts whereto it had been applied, it burns and makes
holes in the flesh, the marks whereof will remain, somewhat resembling those,
which the Small Pox sometimes leaves behind it. Besides the skin of those
parts, whereto this application is made, becomes in time as hard and rough as
Leather; and those ungrateful inconveniences have diverted the Turks and
Persians from using that Expedient. Nor do the Christians of the Levantine
Countries make use of it, though they imitate the Mahumetans in the Custom of
frequenting the Baths: But above all, in Persia, none make use of that remedy,
but the poorer sort of people. The Ladies, not regarding the prohibition of
Mahomet, employ their Female Slaves for the performance of that Office; and
with a small kind of Pincers and twitchers* such as those, wherewith we take of
the hair of the mustachces, they do, with a little more trouble, but less
hazard, what that Earth does in less time, but with more danger. Our
Sultanesses are yet too delicate to imitate the Ladies of Persia; nay the Men
themselves, in Turkey, are not very forward to have that twitch'd off with
pain, which the Razour can take off without any trouble.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Grand Seignor's Treasury.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
Noble Relics of Antiquity. The Turks cannot endure Figures representing
either Man or Beast. The Chambers of the Treasury, and their Wealth. The Blood
of the Bassa's is one of the Rivers which enter into that Sea of the Treasury.
The use of Aloes Wood in Turkey. A sort of Basins of a more commodious form
than ours, for the washing of the hands. Tapers or Candles of a kind of wax of
great value. Coffers full of all sorts of precious stones. The Precautions and
Ceremonies which are observed at the opening of the Treasury. A magnificent
Piece of Tapistry, wherein the Emperor Charles the Fifth, is represented, in
embossed Work. A particular Relation of a Bassa named Rustan. The heroic
sentiment of a Turk. The principal sources of the Wealth of the Empire. How the
Revenues of Egypt are employed.
THE Treasury of the Seraglio and the Ottoman Empire, the vast Wealth therein
contained, and the excellent order wherewith it is governed, required my being
a little more large upon that subject. I shall discover all the Rivers which
fall into that Sea, and may have some resemblance to those that enter into the
Caspian Sea, and are never seen to come out of it again.

Noble Relics of Antiquity.
Out of the Chamber, where the Grand Seignor shaves himself, you pass into a
Gallery, which is Thirty Paces in length, and between Nine and Ten in breadth.
There are on the one side of it, Six great Marble-Pillars, of Fifteen Foot in
height, and of different colors, among which there is one of a very delightful
Green, and that color makes the Turks have a great esteem for it. You have
under your feet in this Gallery a Walk of large square Pieces of Marble, and
the high-rais'd Fret-work thereof is a Relick of Antiquity, and there are in it
excellent Pieces of Painting after the Mosaic way, representing diverse
Persons, and which some conceive to have been made for the reception and
entertainment of some great Prince, in the time of the Greek Emperors.

The Turks have an aversion for Figures representing Man or Beast.
The Turks, who have not among them either Gravers or Painters, in order to the
making of any representation of Man or Beast, for which they have an aversion,
have thought it much to endure those Figures, and not being able to refrain
from disfiguring the heads, there is nothing left but the bodies, which is much
to be regretted. It may easily be conjectured, that the Gallery was open on
both sides, as being so still to the Court-side, and it is in the midst of the
Wall, whereby it is enclosed on the other side, that the Door of the Treasury
stands.

The Chambers of the Treasury, and their Wealth.
The first Treasury consists in Four Chambers full of Riches and Rarities. The
first contains a vast quantity of Long-Bows, Arrows, Cross-bows, Muskets,
Firelocks, Sabres, Cymitars, and other Arms of that kind, which are all so many
Masterpieces, that have been presented, from time to time, to the Turkish
Emperors. All these Arms are either hung up at the Ceeling, or fastened
against the Wall; but in a pitiful condition, all overrun with rust, and
covered with dust; and the Grand Seignor suffers them to be so neglected,
because there come in daily Presents of Arms excellently wrought, the novelty
whereof makes him forget the old ones; as also for that it is the humor of the
Turks, not to make any great account of Curiosities, but at the very time they
are presented with them.

The Second Chamber is a very spacious Arched Structure, of the same height and
Architecture as that of the Bath, of which I gave you an account in the
precedent Chapter, where they go and uncloath themselves in the Summer time:
And there is no difference between them, save only that this last has no
overtures in the Roof. That place contains Six great Chests, or Coffers, each
of them of Twelve Foot in length, Six in breadth, and Six in depth; and if the
Covers were not broken to pieces, two men would find it a hard matter to lift
them, they are so weighty. These Coffers, which are called Ambars, are full of
all sorts of Clothes for the Grand Seignor's use, as Vests, rich Furs,
Magnificent Turbants, and Cushions embroidered with Pearls.

Besides the Six Coffers before mentioned, there are Eight others, which are
but Eight Foot in length, and four in breadth; and these are filled with Pieces
of Scarlet, English and Dutch Clothes, of the finest sorts, Pieces of Velvet,
Gold and Silver Brokadoes, Embroidered Coverlets and Counterpanes for Beds, and
other rich Commodities of that Nature. As for the Bridles and Saddles covered
with precious Stones, they are disposed upon supporters of Wood or Iron, coming
out of the Wall: and all this Chamber is generally very well kept, and all
things are neat, and in good order.

The Third Chamber is very spacious, and is more like a great Hall. The first
thing that entertains your Eye, is a great Coffer, the inside whereof is
divided into three parts, and makes as it were Three other Coffers, one upon
the other: but they are opened all on the outside, so as that if there be any
thing looked for in the undermost, there is no necessity of stirring the
uppermost. The lowermost Coffer contains those sumptuous Coverings for the
Grand Seignor's Throne, of which I have spoken in the Description of the Hall
of Audience. In the middlemost are disposed the Housses and Trappings, enriched
with Embroidery, and some of them with Pearls and precious Stones, which are
used in great Solemnities. In the uppermost Coffer, are kept the Bridles,
Breast-Pieces, Cruppers, and Stirrups, which are recommendable upon the score
of the Diamonds, Rubies Emeralds, and other Precious Stones, whereby they are
enriched: but the greatest part of them is covered with Turkish-Stones, which
they have the art of setting excellently well.

The Blood of the Bassa's one of the Rivers that fall into the Sea of the
Treasury.
It is a most astonishing sight, to behold the quantity of those precious
Harnesses: but it is such only to those, who are ignorant, how the Grand
Seignor replenishes his Treasury with so much Wealth. It happens thus, That
there being a frequent mortality amongst the Bassa's and others, who are
Governors, of Provinces, whether it be by a natural death, or a violent, and
all they have in the World falling to the Grand Seignor, as I told you
elsewhere, and being brought into the Seraglio, there are ordinarily found,
amongst their rich Harnesses, some Bridles covered with precious Stones, and
those Bridles are brought into the Treasury. The Case is the same with the Gold
and Silver ready coined, and all the Jewels, and whatever else those Bassa's
were possessed of. But as to their Saddles, which ordinarily are covered with
Plates of Gold of the thickness of a Ducat, they are put into the hands of the
Imbrohor-bachi, who is the Master of the Horse, and come not with^n the
Seraglio.

There are besides, in the very same Chamber, several other Coffers of
different Bulks, wherein there is contained abundance of most precious things.
Some of them are full of rich Swords, adorned with precious Stones, as also of
Sabres which have the same Ornaments. For the Turks when they are on
Horseback, make use of both Sabres and Swords, of a good length, and somewhat
broader than ours. They wear the Sabre on one side, and fasten the Sword all
along the Saddle, as they also do the Battle-Axe, yet so as that this last
passes under their Thighs, which cannot incommode them much, because when they
are mounted, they ride with very short Stirrups. The Sides, and the Handles of
the Battle-Axes which they carry in Triumph, are also covered with precious
Stones; and in all their Accoutrements the Turks are Magnificent, and do not
spare for Money. When the Grand Seignor designs to honor a Bassa, he sends him
one of those Swords, or one of those Sabres, with a Vest of Gold-Brockado,
lined with some rich Fur. But these sumptuous Pieces do but pass to and fro, in
as much as that upon the Death of the Bassa's, whose Estates fall to the Grand
Seignor, and consequently are brought into the Seraglio, they are still found
again in the Treasury, as in their Center.

The use of Aloes Wood used in Turkey.
There are yet other Coffers filled with Amber-geeece, Musk* the precious Wood
called Lignum Aloes, and Sandal-wood. There is a certain sort of this
Lignum-Aloes, which is worth a thousand Crowns the Pound, according as it is
Fat, or Oily, the most Oily being always the best, and the Turks are very
expensive in this Aloes Wood. When some Persons come to visit them, and as soon
as they are sat down, it is their custom to present them with a Pipe of
Tobacco, with some Lignum Aloes in it, which is done after this manner. They
take of that Wood, according to the Oyliness of it, and consequently its making
a greater fumigation, the quantity of a Pea, or a small Bean, and after they
have moistened it a little they put it over a few Coals in a Chafing Dish, in a
kind of Perfuming-Pot, which they present one after another, to all the
Company. There comes out a thick Steam or Exhalation* wherewith every one
Perfumes his Head and his Beard, and sometimes the inside of his Turbant,
after which he lifts up his hands on high, crying Elmendela, that is to say,
Thanks be to God. But before they present them with the Perfuming-pot, there is
some Rose Water brought in a Vessel of Gold, or Silver, according to the
Quality of those who make the Visit. This Vessel is commonly a foot in height,
the lower part of it being about the bigness of a man's fist, and from thence
growing gradually smaller and smaller to the top of it, which is about the
bigness of ones little finger. At the top of it there is a little hole, out of
which comes the Rose Water, wherewith they wash their hands and faces, and then
hold them over the suffumigation of the Lignum Aloes, which not only dries up
the water, but also sticks so much the closer to the hair of the Head and Beard.

Basins of a more commodious fashion than ours.
There are also in those Coffers abundance of Aromatical Simples, and precious
Drugs, Bezoar-Stones, and store of Mastick, wherewith the Sultanesses, and the
young Maids of the Seraglio pass away their time. They have of it perpetually
in their Mouths* and this Mastick sweetens the Breath, and cleanses the Teeth,
upon which score they are the better beloved.

There may be seen also in the same Chamber, and in other Coffers, abundance of
Plate, both Gold and Silver, which is never used, the Grand Seignor having
other pieces, for his ordinary use, in the Kilar, whatever is served up to his
own Table being altogether in Pourcelain.

There are, amongst other Pieces, several Basins and Ewers, whereof some are
enriched with several sorts of precious Stones. Those Basins are of a fashion
more commodious than that of ours, and it is an evident Mark of the cleanliness
of the Levantines. They are found, and about half a foot in depth, and covered
as it were with a Plate or Server* full of little holes, which makes the
concavity of it of equal height with the sides, and so hides the dirtiness of
the water which lies at the bottom of it. They do not rise after their
refection, in Turkey, till they have washed their Mouths and their Hands, to do
which they bring you Soap and warm Water; and amongst Persons of Quality, they
present Rosewater or some other sweet Water, into which you put the corner of
your Handkercher.

Tapers of a kind of Wax of great value.
They have also in those Coffers great Tapers, or Wax-Candles of above two foot
in length, made of a certain very dear composition, of a greyish color, which
has some resemblance to Wax, and is brought out of Ethiopia, every Taper
amounting to near a hundred Crowns. They are not used but only when the Grand
Seignor goes to visit the Sultanesses, and then there are two of those Tapers
lighted, and set in great golden Candlesticks, enriched with precious Stones.
When they are a little above half burnt out, the Negro-Eunuchs, who serve in
the Haran, light others, and, out of civility, make a Present of the
forementioned remainders to the principal Women attending on the Sultanesses.

There is moreover in one of those Coffers, abundance of Clocks and Watches,
German-work, as also of Knives and Ink*horns, after the Turkish Mode, all those
pieces being the choice Productions and Masterpieces of great Artists, and
adorned with precious Stones. There is to be seen, in fine, all along the
Walls, but covered with a Scarlet Stuff, several Arms, after the Turkish-Mode,
neatly kept in order, as Bows, Arrows, Targets, Battle-Axes, excellently well
wrought, and most of these Pieces are of a considerable value.

An inestimable Coffer of all sorts of precious Stones.
But what is most precious in that Chamber and transcends all the rest is a
strong Coffer all of Iron-work, which contains another of about a foot and a
half square, wherein there is a vast Treasure. When this Coffer is opened, you
see a kind of Goldsmiths Jewel Box, wherein are ranked all sorts of Jewels of
highest value, as Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds, a huge number of excellent
Topazes, and four of those Gems called Cats-eyes, which are so beautiful, that
they are not to be valued. Having satisfied your curiosity with the former, you
come next to certain little Drawers full of several Jewels, great Roses of
Diamonds, Pendants, other Roses of Rubies and Emeralds, Strings and Chains of
Pearls and Bracelets. There stands aside by it self a Cabinet, where are the
Sorgouges, or the thing wherein are fastn'd the Heron-tops, which the Grand
Seignor wears in his Turbant. They are as it were little handles, made in the
fashion of Tulips, covered over with the most precious Stones of the Seraglio,
and it is into this that the Heron-top enters, that rich Plume of Feathers,
whereof I have elsewhere given the description. Of these Handles, some are
higher and more precious than others; and my Overseer of the Treasury assured
me, That, of all sorts of them, great and small, there are above a hundred and
fifty. The lesser ones serve only for the Campaign, and the great ones, which
are the richest are reserved for the Pomps and Magnificence of the Court, and
when the Grand Seignor marches in Ceremony to Constantinople. If he has a
desire to satisfy his sight with the lusture of his precious Jewels, he Orders
the Coffer to be brought into his own Chamber; but if he call for some
particular Piece of the Treasury, he gives order to the Chasnader-bachi, to
fetch it, and that Chief Officer of the Treasury cannot enter into it, without
abundance of mysterious precautions.

Pr^^autions and Ceremonies observed at the opening of the Treasury.
There are always Sixty Pages, more or less, belonging to the Chambers of the
Treasury. The number of them is not fixed, but the Credit of the Capi-Aga, and
the Chasnader-Bachi, may augment or diminish it, according to their
inclinations and interests. Unless they fall into disgrace, as he had done from
whom I have some part of these Instructions, they never go out of the Seraglio,
but upon their advancement to some considerable Government, or the settlement
of a handsome Pension for their maintenance; and so, provided they do nothing
amiss, they are well enough accommodated for their lives. The Chief Officer of
the Treasury having received Orders from the Grand Seignor to bring the Piece
he would have, assembles all the Pages in their Chamber, and sends for the
Anakdar-Agasi, who has the Custody of the Keys. This last having given three
strokes with his hand upon the Drawer, wherein they are enclosed, takes them
out of it, and following the Chasnadar-Bachi, attended by the Sixty Pages, they
all make their appearance together at the door of the Treasury.

The first thing that is done is the untwisting of a Chain, which they had put
there for the better securing of the Seal, which the Chief Officer of the
Treasury had set over the hole, and having found it entire, he orders it to be
broken by the keeper of the Keys, and commands him to open. As Soon as they are
got into the Chamber into which the Chasnadar-bachi knows they are to go, he
sets himself down upon a low Bench, and declares what Piece it is that the
Grand Seignor requires. They thereupon open the Coffer, wherein it ought to be,
then they present it to the Chasnadar-bachi, and, if he be desirous of that
honor, he has the privilege to be himself the Bearer of it to the Grand
Seignor. Then has he a fair Opportunity to secure something that is precious to
himself, if he has the dexterity to do it without any discovery. When he is in
the Treasury, he needs only say, That the Grand Seignor desires also the Piece,
which he has a mind to convert to his own use, and causing all to be
immediately carried to his own Chamber, he there leaves what he would keep, and
presents to the Prince only that which he had commanded to be brought him. Not
but that whatever is received into the Treasury and whatever goes out of it, is
exactly set down and enrolled by the Haznaquatib, or Clerk, who keeps the
Registers; and the Cheat might be easily discovered, when at the quitting of
his Charge the Chasnadar-bachi gives an account of all things to his successor.
But it ordinarily happens, that they are friends, and that the Chasnadar-bachi,
who does not leave his Charge, but upon his advancement to that of the place of
the Capi-Aga, in case he should dye, or be exalted to a higher Dignity, or upon
his being made a Bassa and Governor of a Province, proposes him, among the
Pages, for whom he has the greatest affection, and who is his Confident, as a
Person qualified for the Charge of principal Officers of the Treasury.
Accordingly being his Benefactor, he gives in his Accounts as he pleases
himself, and delivering unto him an Inventory of what is in the Treasury, he
withal produces a Memorandum of the Pieces, which had been taken our thence,
during his Surintendency, by the Grand Seignor's Orders. The Clark of the
Treasury, might, notwithstanding their intelligence and combination, discover
the intrigue; but being one of the eldest Pages of the Chamber, and in a
capacity of advancement to the Charge of Chasnadar-bachi, he shuts his eyes,
and so avoids the creation of Enemies, thinking it more prudence, to be
appeased, by the Presents he receives as well from him who enters into the
Charge, as from him who quits it. But these Thieveries are not very often
committed, and if there were but the least discovery made threof, a severe
punishment would soon be inflicted both on the Author and his Accomplices.

As to the little Chest or Coffer, wherein the most precious Jewels are kept,
it is impossible to get any thing out thence: for when the Grand Seignor would
have any Piece taken out of it, he orders the Coffer it self to be brought into
his Presence, by the principal Officer of the Treasury, accompanied by the
Keeper of the Keys, and all the Pages; and before he opens it, he takes notice
whether the Seal be entire. After he has taken what he desired, the Coffer is
locked up in his Presence the Seal is set upon it, and it is carried back into
the Treasury with the same Ceremony. Then do the Sixty Pages receive,
ordinarily some demostrations of the Grand Seignor's Liberality, which may
amount to ten or twelve Purses, to be divided amongst them.

Rich Tapistry, wherein Charles the Fifth is represented,
We are not yet got out of the third Chamber of the Treasury, which may pass
for one Spacious Hall, the middle part whereof is taken up by a Scaffold, of
nine or ten foot square, the height, the length, and the breadth being equal.
This Scaffold is covered and surrounded with a piece of Tapestry of Gold and
Silk, and in the upper part of it, there is, in embossed Work, the Effigies of
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, seated on a Throne having in one hand, a Globe,
and in the other, a Sword, surrounded by all the Grandees of the, Empire, doing
him homage. At the bottom of the said Piece of Tapestry, there may be read
certain Verses in Gothic characters: And the upper part of the Scaffold is
full of Books in the Latin, French, Italian, high German, English, and other
European Languages. There are also some Treatises upon the subject of
Navigation, together with two Globes, the Celestial* and the Terrestrial, and
some Geographical Maps drawn upon Velom: whence it may be conjectured, that
they were all taken at Sea, by some Turkish Pirate, and sent as a Present to
the Grand Seignor. But not being carefully looked after, the dust has quite
spoiled both the Tapestry, and the Books, and so they remain there as a
Monument of some Victory gained over the Christians.

A remarkable Story of the Bassa Rustan.
The Fourth Chamber of the Treasury is very dark, and has no other light than
what it receives from a little Garret-Window, which looks into the Court, and
has three strong Iron-bars, one over the other. Over the Door, there are these
words Engraved in the Turkish-Language; Money acquired by the Diligence of
Rustan. Take here an account of what occasions this Monument, which they were
pleased to Erect, to perpetuate the memory of a Grand Visir, as I have been
told it, by several Persons in Constantinople. He was the Son of a Cow-keeper,
and had followed the same Employment himself: but he had a Genius that might
become a Person of the highest Extraction, and which raised him to the Charge
of Grand Visir, and the Honor of being Son-in-law to Solomon. He had many
traverses of Fortune, and was for some time out of Favor: but in fine,
Solomon, who had great Affairs to manage, and was engaged in a War with Persia,
coming to a little indigency of Money, sent for Rustan, and bestowed on him the
Superintendency of his Revenues. He knew him to be a Man of great Abilities,
and capable of putting them, in a short time, into a good posture; and
accordingly his pains and diligence in the management thereof proved so
successful, that he presently filled Solymon's Coffers, and reestablished the
Affairs of the Empire.

The Heroic Sentiment of a Turk.
Upon which occasion I shall here set down a thing which is still fresh in the
remembrance of many Turks, who received it from their Fathers. The Turks have
so great a zeal for the welfare of the State. that one of the Grandees of the
Port, an Enemy of Rustans, and one, who, upon other occasions, would gladly
have ruined him, protested to one of his Confidents, That, though it were in
his power to do him an ill turn, yet he would not do it then, because he had,
by his Industrey and Labors, upheld the State, which he retriv'd from the
Precipice of destruction, and was in a fair way to make a considerable
augmentation of its Revenues. This generous and heriock Sentiment in the Soul
of a Turk, who at his first rise was but a simple Slave, would meet with but
few Examples amongst Christians.

But, to reassume our discourse concerning the Fourth Chamber of the Treasury.
It is full of Chests of two foot in length, and a breadth and depth
proportionable thereto, fortified with plates of Iron, and made fast, each of
'em, with two Chains. The number of them is not always the same, because the
Money is coming in, and going out of that Chamber, and the Coffers are
transported thence according to the occurrent exigencies, for the payment of
the Janissaries, and the maintenance of the Armies.

The principal Sources of the Wealth of the Empire.
All the Gold and Silver which is brought into the Treasury rises out of the
Revenues of the Empire, and out of the Sale of what Goods the Bassa's leave at
their departure out of this World. As to what is raised out of the Empire,
which dilates it self so far into the three parts of our great Continent, and
comprehends so many Kingdoms, it may be easily imagined, that it must supply
the Treasury with vast Sums; but it is not easy so to ascertain them. Its
revenues consist principally in the collection of the Tributes, and in the
Customs: and the three Tefterdars, or Treasurers-General, give an account to
the Grand Vizir of the Receipts of the Provinces. That Principal Minister has
the custody of one Key of that fourth Chamber of the Treasury, and the first
Tefterdar has that of another, and besides that, it is always sealed with the
Grand Seignors Seal. It is ordinarily opened, but upon those days, on which the
Divan sits, that is, on Council-days, either for the reception of Money into
it, or for the taking of any out, to defray the Charges of the Empire.

What is so received into it is for the most part in Silver; and as to the
Species of Gold Coins that are brought into that Chamber, they come from four
Sources, two whereof are upon a Foreign account, and the other two upon that of
the Country. One of the two former consists in the Commerce of the French,
English, Dutch, Italians, Moscovites, and Polanders, who bring in Ducats out of
those Provinces. The other is the annual Tribute, which the Cham of the Lesser
Tartary, the Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Walachia, the Republic of
Ragusa, and part of Mingrelia and Russia, are to pay the Grand Seignor in Gold,
which amounts to very great Sums. One of the two Sources of the Country poceeds
from what is found upon the removal of the Bassa's, whereof the very coined
Gold makes the best part; the other from the Revenue of Egypt, where there is
an annual coinage of a certain number of Sequins, according to the quantity of
Gold, which is brought thither out of Ethiopia, and being coined into Sequins,
is all conveyed thence into the Treasury.

The Revenues of Egypt ho^ employed.
The Revenue of Egypt may amount yearly to twelve millions of Livers, (that is,
about one million and two hundred thousand Pounds Sterling) which must be
divided into three parts. Five millions of the twelve, are brought into the
Grand Seignor's Treasury. Four millions of the foresaid Sum, are employed in
the maintenance of the Officers and Soldiers of that Kingdom: And the other
three are designed for the rich Present, which the Grand Seignor sends every
year to Mecha, for the Expenses which relates to Religious Worship, and to fill
the Cisterns of Arabia, which are supplied with Water, brought by Land, many
days Journeys.

Of the five Millions Which are brought into the Seraglio, the greatest part is
in Sequins, according to the quantity of Gold, which the Abyssines bring into
Egypt, and the rest in Dutch Rix-Dollars. All is brought together into the
Coffers of the fourth Chamber of the Public Treasury. But as to the Sequins
they are carried into the Secret Treasury, which it is time for us now to open,
and give the Reader an account of according to the description which has been
made to me thereof, by two men whom their Employments obliged to enter into it
often.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Secret Treasury.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
A Vault under ground, into which few Persons have access. The great frugality
of the Emperor Amurat. Ibrahim his Successor, charged with evil Conduct. The
Grand Seignor's precautions for the security of his Treasure. His Liberalities
to the Grandees of the Port.
A Voult under ground, into which few have access.
WIthin the fourth Chamber of the Treasury, you find a door laid all about with
good store of Iron-bars which opens the first passage, to the place that
contains the Grand Seignor's Secret Treasure. It is never opened, but when he
himself has a mind to enter into it; and he does not enter into it but when the
Grand Vizir advertises him, that it is time for him to do so, and that there is
a considerable Sum to be carried in. In the first place, by the light of
Torches they go down a Staircase of ten or twelve steps, at the bottom of
which, after an advancement of seven or eight paces further, they find a second
Door, fortified with Iron-work as the former, but much less, so that a man is
obliged to stoop ere he go into it. When it is opened, and that they have made
their entrance through it, as if they had passed through a Wicket, they are
under a great Vault, where they find a great many Coffers, of the same
largeness, as those of the Chamber we came last out of.

The great frugality of the Emperor Amurat.
In those Coffers they have, for these many years, laid up all that was not
expended upon the Public account, of the great Revenues of the
Ottoman-Monarchs, and so it may be called his Private Exchequer, into which
there is nothing but Gold has entrance, all the Silver being carried into the
other Treasury, to be thence taken out again and disposed of, as occasion
required. After the death of Amurat, Ibrahim, his Successor in the Throne,
found in that Treasury four thousand Bags, which they call Kizes, and every bag
contains fifteen thousand Ducats of Gold, which amount to thirty thousand
Crowns, and those reduced to our Pounds, come to thirty Millions Sterling.
'Twas the same Amurat (a prudent and valiant Prince, a man of great Parsimony,
and as great conduct in Military Affairs, of whom I have often had occasion to
make mention) who entered into a War against the King of Persia, and besieged
Bagdet, or Babylon, which he took on the Twenty Second of December, 1638. I
remember, that I was then but Five Days Journey from that place, in the Deserts
of Arabia, as having left Aleppo, in order to my going to Balsara, and that of
the Threescore and five days, which the Caravan spent in that Journey, for
nine of them, we were destitute of Water, which must needs press very hard,
both on the Men and the Camels.

Ibrahim charged with ill*management of the Treasury.
Ibrahim, therefore, at his coming to the Crown, found, in the secret Treasury,
that prodigious quantity of Gold, whereto he could not make any augmentations;
nay some, on the contrary, are of opinion, That he was forced to use some part
of it, through his ill Conduct of the War of Candia. True it is, That the long
continuance of that War made a great hole in the Revenues of the Empire; but
there are Two great Reasons, which divert me from giving absolute credit, to
such as affirm, That those Exigencies reached the Secret Treasury, For, in
short, it is as 'twere a fundamental Law among them, That, before any thing is
taking out thence, it is requisite, the Empire should be in imminent danger of
ruin; And it is manifest, That though the Turks could not reduce Candia under
their Jurisdiction, yet their Empire was so far from being near its decadence,
that it still continued powerful. Besides, it is to be observed, That when the
Grand Seignor loses a Battle, it is a disadvantage to his provinces, upon the
score of their being thereby depopulated, and so much the less cultivated; but
that it is an advantage to his Coffers, in regard there is so much the less
comes out of them. The reason of it is evident, because he pays the Veteranes,
or Soldiers of long standing, seven or eight Aspers a day, and that those of
the new-raised Forces do not stand him in above one and a half, or two at the
most; their pay augmenting with the time, answerably to their services, and the
Prince's good Pleasure. Whereto it is to be added, That when an Emperor dies,
his Successor augments the pay of the Janissaries, by an Asper, or two, per diem.

It must be acknowledged indeed, That there died a great number of Turks in the
War of Candia: but it is certain also, That if we consider the great number of
Kingdoms and Provinces, whereof the Empire consists, among which there are some
very fertile, and very well peopled, it is an easy matter to raise numerous
Armies, and to recruit them, when they have been weakened, by a Defeat, or by
some Sickness, which often happens among them. Upon these two grounds, I cannot
be induced to believe, that Ibrahim was obliged to make any diminution of the
Secret Treasury: but I am very apt to believe, that he made not any great
additions thereto, because he had not either the good Conduct, or good Fortune
of Amurat, and ordinarily, the one avails not much without the other.

All the Gold that lies interred under that Vault is in Leather-bags, every Bag
containing Fifteen thousand Ducats, that is Seven thousand five hundred pounds
Sterling: and it is with his own hand that the Grand Seignor puts his Seal to
them, which is the same that his Predecessors had used before him, save only
the name, which must be that of the Prince then reigning. Amurat's Seal had
these words The Grand Seignor's Precautions for the security of his Treasury.
graven upon it. Nasrum min allahi abdihil melekil Mourath. Which signifies, The
Assistance of God is upon his Servant the Emperor Amurath.

And this is the manner how the Bags of Gold is brought into the Secret
Treasury. All the Gold and Silver which come into the Seraglio, is first
carried into the Chamber of the Treasury, and each of them is disposed into the
Coffers designed for them. When there is as much Gold as will amount to two
hundred Kizes, the Grand Vizir gives notice of it to the Grand Seignor, who
appoints a day, for the disposal of it into the Secret Treasury. The day being
come, the Grand Seignor, led under the Arm by the Chasnadar-bachi, who is on
the left hand, which is accounted the more honorable amongst the Turks, and by
the Seligdar-Aga who is on the right, comes into the Chamber of the Treasury,
where the Sixty Pages expect him, ranked in order on both sides, with their
hands cross their Breasts. The Grand Seignor, having passed through the
Chamber, and ordered the first Door of the Secret Treasury to be opened, enters
into it, by the light of several Torches of white Wax, and is followed by the
Pages, two by two, till they are within the Vault, into which the Bags are
brought, tied with a Silk-string. Upon the string they put a piece of red soft
Wax, whereto the Grand Seignor sets his Seal himself, which is upon a
Gold-Ring, wherein are engraven the words before mentioned, with the name of
the Prince then reigning, after which they put the Bags into the Coff^^ which
are all double chained.

His Liberalities to the Grandees of the Port.
Before they come out of the Vault, the chief O^^^er of the Treasury, does
ordinarily make this Complement to the G^and Seignor; Seadetlu padichaim ^umijd
dur quibou bendelerignus euzre ibsan che^iignus izbar idesis: That is to say,
My Emperor, we hope, that you will make a (...) of your Liberalities to your
Slaves. According to the humor the Grand S^gnor is then in, he orders, That
there should be a distribution of Twent^ or Thirty Purses amongst all those who
^ave accompanied him, every Purs^ as I told you before amounting to Five
hundred Crowns. The Grand V^zir and the other Grandees of the Port, are
permitted to enter into the Chambers of the Treasury, where the sumptous
Harnesses, and the Precious Stones are kept, when the Grand Seignor comes
thither himself, but they are not to go as far as the Secret Treasury. They
stay for him in the Fourth Chamber, when he is to come out of the Vault and
then he orders the Coffer of his Jewels to be opened, to show them the most
precious things there are in it. And whereas there are always some Favorites
attending there, as also diverse other persons, whom the Prince looks upon
kindly upon the score of their merit, it seldom happens, but that they all
receive some Present or other from him, and he makes not any, but what is of
very considerable value. The Treasury being shut up, the Grand Seignor returns
to his own Quarter, and all the Grandees accompany him to the Gate of it.

CHAP. X.
Of the Means which the Grand Seignor makes use of, to augment his Treasures,
besides what is done by the ordinary Revenues of the Empire.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Presents made by the Bassa's to the Grand Seignor, when they enter into
their Charges. The Trade driven by the Jews very hazardous to them. The
extraordinary Wealth of the Bassa's. The great Advantages of the
Chaznadar-Bachi, and the Pages of the Treasury. The prohibition of lending
Money upon Interest. The Persians but poor Casuists. Formalities observed in
Turkey about Schedules.
BEsides what may be left every Year in the Treasury, or Exchequer, out of the
ordinary Revenues of the Empire, after all charges deducted, the Grand Seignor
has Two other Expedients very Conducive to the augmentation of both the
Treasuries, to wit, the entrance of the Bassa's upon their Governments, and
their removal out of them, whether it be by some disgrace, or by their natural,
or violent deaths.

The Bassas Presents to the Grand Seignor, upon their advancements.
All the Bassa's, on whom the Grand Seignor bestows Governments, and generally
all those, who are removed out of the Seraglio, upon their advancement into
Charges, are obliged, before they take possession of them, to make him
Presents, every one, answerable to the benefit he has received from the Prince.
For example, the Bassa of Cairo, as soon as ever he is nominated to that
Government, knows, that two Millions of Livers, that is reduced to the English
account, two hundred thousand pounds sterling, will hardly make good the
Presents, which are expected from him at the Port, that is, those due to the
Grand Seignor himself, and to the principal Sultanesses, as also to the Mufti,
the Grand Vizir, the Caimacan, and other Persons of Credit in the Court to whom
he is engaged for his advancement to that Charge, and of whom he may stand in
need for the future. The Present he makes the Grand Seignor himself, amounts to
Five hundred thousand Crowns, and the rest will come to Two hundred thousand.
Add again to that, Five hundred thousand Crowns, which will be expended in the
Bassa's equipage, and so before he sets his foot in Cairo, his own Purse, or
those of his Friends, will be drained of Three Millons and six hundred thousand
Livers.

The hazardous Trade of the Jews.
When he comes out of the Seraglio, if he want much of the aforesaid Sum,
there is a necessity of borrowing; and if the purse of his Friends cannot do
it, those of the Jews are readily opened for his supply. They run a great
hazard, upon hopes of the great profit of making Cent. per Cent. interest
which the Bassa does promise them. And to be the sooner reimburs'd of the Money
they have so hazarded, least his Government be but a short one, they teach him
a thousand lewd ways, to suck out the Peoples blood, and particulary to harass
the poor Christians. If the Bassa's can but quietly enjoy their Governments,
for one year, nay for six Months, the Jews make a good hand of it, and recover
the Smms they had advanced. But, one the other side, they run a great hazard in
regard that it happens, many times, the Grand Seignor sends for the head of a
Bassa, before he has had time enough to settle himself in his new Government,
and then, they who have lent him Money are not to hope ever to recover any part
of it.

From what has been said, it may easily be concluded, That the greatest part of
the Money of the whole Ottoman Empire is in the Grand Seignor's hands, and
among the Jews; I mean the Jews of Constantinople. For as to those who live in
the Provinces, the world goes but ill with them, and they are in a much more
wretched condition, than the Christians; in regard they do not follow any thing
of Husbandry: and their inclinations being altogether bent for Traffic, and
the management of the public Taxes or the Customs, it is impossible there
should be employment for them all.

The (...) the (...).
The Grand Seignor therefore receives very considerable Sums from the Bassa's,
and other persons, on whom he bestows Charges, even before they have taken
possession of them. But that amounts to little or nothing in comparison of the
advantages which he makes, upon their removal out of them, and especially when
they have had a fair time to gather Treasures, by their insupportable exactions
from the people. Some of these Bassa's have come to that excessive Wealth and
Power, that their Revenues were equal to those of many great Princes. Such was
the fortune of one Machmut, Beglierbeg of Europe, under the Reign of Mahomet
the Second; and that, of the Grand Vizir Nassuf, under Achmet the First. At the
death of the latter, there were extraordinary Riches found in his House, in
Silver, Gold, and Jewels, and all was brought to the Seraglio, along with his
head.

It may easily be conjectured, by the number of the greater and lesser
Governments, whereof the Empire consists, that there is a considerable
mortality amongst those, who derive their Charges and Fortunes from the pure
Munificence of the Grand Seignor, and whose acquisitions thereupon falling to
him, must of necessity make vast additionals to the Seraglio. But besides those
who are gently conveyed out of this World, by a natural death, there hardly
passes a year but, violent death comes and acts its part, and upon the least
jealousy, or any fantastic apprehension the Grand Seignor may have, a Bassa
receives a peremptory Order to stretch out his Neck, and he is immediately
strangled. In the next Chapter, I shall give the Reader an Account, of the
formality and ceremony, which is observed upon that occasion, where he will
find somewhat worth his remarking; and I think I may confidently affirm, That
they who know it is the custom, to strangle those, whose Lives the Grand
Seignor would take away, know not all the Particulars observable in that Action.

The Bassa's Goods brought into the Seraglio.
As Soon as a Bassa, or other Grandee of the Port is dead, however it came to
pass, and an Inventory of his Goods taken, of which by the Laws of the Country
the Prince is the only Heir, all is carried away into the Seraglio, and the
Baltagis bring it in Coffers to the Door of the Treasury. The Chasnadar-bachi,
having disposed them into one of the Chambers, Commands the Locks to be broke
open, and the Coffers to be emptied in his presence; And it is then, that as
well he himself, as the Pages of the Treasury endeavor to make their
advantages of that Rich Booty. For there being ordinarily, amongst the other
things, Jewels of great value, such as that wherein the Heron-tops are fastened
in their Turbants, or a Poniard enriched with precious Stones, or some Carcanet
of Pearls, if one or other of those Pages can make a dexterous and clean
conveyance of some Piece, it is his own and he puts it to what else he has in
stock, reflecting on what he has to do, at his departure out of the Seraglio,
in order to his establishment in some Charge, and the great Expenses he must be
at upon that account. The Chasnadar-bachi, who does his work first of all, and
with more liberty, does sometimes connive at what he sees done by the others,
remembering that he has been as they are, and was then glad, that he was not
reproved for so doing. Yet if he perceives that any one of them has secured to
himself a piece of great value, as soon as he is got to his Chamber, he secretly
sends for him, and makes him restore it, paying him one half of its worth, and
so keeps it himself.

The great advantages of the Chasnadar-bachi, and the Pages of the Treasury.
There are yet other great advantages accrewing to the Chief Officer, and the
Pages, from those things which are brought into the Seraglio, upon the death of
the Bassa's. When the Chasnadar-bachi has advertised the Grand Seignor, that,
in the Coffers, which had been brought in, there were many things not fit for
the Service of his Highness, and that it were better to put them off, before
they were injured by the moisture or the dust; the Prince gives his permission
for the sale thereof, and thereupon they take out of the Treasury what they do
not account worthy of a place there. Immediatedly, they send for the
Bazarcan-bachi, or Chief of the Merchants, who is the best skilled in those
things, and who, in the presence of the Chasnadar-bachi, and the Pages of the
Treasury, sets a value on every piece, to their satisfaction; for he does not
prize it at above half the worth. All the Jewels that will bear a good price,
and all the precious stones are disposed into the Treasury, and they expose to
sale only things of less value, yet such as are worth much: as Trappings for
Horses, Ponyards, Sabres, garnished with Gold, Garments, rich Furs, Sasches,
Turbants, and other things of that nature; all the pieces being valued, the
Chasnadar-bachi sets aside the best of them, to be sent, together with the
value set upon them, to the principal persons of the Seraglio, with whom he is
glad to hold a fair correspondence, and they pay for them the more willingly,
because they have them at an easy rate. The rest is distributed among the
Pages, according to the valuation, and having made choice of such things as
they will keep themselves, send away what they do not like, to be sold in
Constantinople, by the Halvagis, wherein they also make a vast advantage,
considering the apprisement; not accounting what the same Halvagis may hedge in
for themselves, as a compensation for their trouble.

When there is such a sale made, the Jews are always waiting about the great
Gate of the Seraglio, not daring to come too near, for fear of a chastisement
of the Bastinado from the Kapigis, which they are very free to give them. They
stand in expectation of these Halvagis, with their bags full of Ducats and
Ryals, and make the best bargains they can with them. These sales are seldom
made above once in two years, and the least of them does ordinarily exceed five
hundred thousand Crowns, nay some have amounted to eight hundred Thousand. The
Grand Seignor is soon advertised, what money has been raised by the sale, and
giving orders for the disposal of it into the Treasury, he at the same time
bestows ten or twenty Purses on the principal Officer, and the Pages of the
Treasury. He does not make them that Present out of any other design, then to
show his Grandeur, as being not ignorant of the advantages they have made by
the Sale; but he tolerates that custom, and knows well enough, that sooner or
later, all those profits will come again into the Treasury.

The prohibition to lend at Interest.
It Is upon the same consideration, that the Grand Seignor permits a manifest
breach of the Law of Mahomet, which prohibits the taking of any interest for
money lent; for he suffers the Pages, and others to lend considerable sums to
the Jews, at the rate of fifteen upon the hundred, interest. And the Persians
have found out a very pleasant evasion, to stave off the reproach which might
be made to them, of their transgressing against the same prohibition.

The Persians ill Casuists.
The evasion is this. When they lend out money to any one, they have a Bill or
Schedule made of the sum that is lent. Then they compute what the interest will
amount to, which is commonly after the rate of twelve in the Hundred. That
done; they take a handkerchief, or some old Sasche, and giving it to the Person
whom they lend the money to, they make him write a second Note, upon the score
of the interest, wherein it is expressed, that the debt is for commodities
bought, and duly received. And thus do they think to elude the reproaches of
their own Consc^encies, and imagine, that they do not offend against the
prohibition of Mahomet. The promise which the Debtor makes in writng, is not
signed by him, it being not the custom of the Country, but he puts his seal to
it. And yet that too is not sufficient, and it is further requisite, that they
go before the Cadi, or the Judge of the Law, who consummates the work, by
putting his own Seal to the writing.

I have made appear, in this Chapter, the Means and Expedients, which the Grand
Seignor makes use of, to augment his Revenues; we shall see in the next, the
ways he has to exercise his Liberalities, without any charge at all to himself.

CHAP. XI.
A Subtle Expedient, whereby the Grand Seignor exercises great Liberalities,
and meddles not at all with his Revenues.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Commendable Policy of the Turks. The Ceremonies attending the Presents
sent by the Grand Seignor, to those whom he would honor. The particular way
used by Mahomet the Fourth, to show himself liberal, without any charge to
himself. Formalities observed at the Death of the Bassa's, who are strangled by
the Prince's Orders. When, and how they strike off the Head in Turkey. A
prohibition against shedding the blood of the Mahumetans, who are condemned to
Death. The Inventories of the Goods of Bassa's deceased, not faithfully taken.
The Causes inducing the Turks to defy Death with so much constancy. How
difficult it is to get out of Turkey. Presents made to the Sultanesses.
THE Two expedients which the Grand Seignor makes use of to augment his
Treasury, besides what comes in by the ordinary revenues of the Empire, are
much of the same nature, with those he uses, to bestow great largesses, without
disbursing any thing himself. He makes his advantages of all; the Bassa's are
as so many spunges, and he squeezes them, as well while they are living, as
when they are dead, and at their cost assigns recompense to those, who have
done him some acceptable service. Let us take things in order, one after
another, and show in the first place, how he manages his subtle design, while
the Bassa's are living, in getting out of them wherewithal to make ample
gratifications, without any diminution of his Revenues.

Amongst the Political maxims of the Ottoman Monarchs, this is one of the most
remarkable. They would have the Bassa's to be respected in their several
Governments, by the People, as much as if they were there themselves in Person:
and to make a greater, and a more lively impression of that veneration in their
minds, they think it fitting, to honor them, from time to time, with some
Present, which is carried to them with much Ceremony. This Present, which is a
certain demonstration of the Esteem, which the Prince has for the Person to
whom he sends it, is commonly some Rich Garment; and when he is willing to make
it complete, he adds the Sabre, and the Poniard, garnished and adorned with
precious stones. The Grand Seignor, upon the consideration beforementioned,
finding himself as it were obliged to make a Present to that Bassa, knows well
enough, that he will be sure, on the other side, to send him one which shall be
worth ten times as much, and to make another to his Envoy, which he must look
on as a recompense of his Services.

But it is not always the Grand Seignor's design, by such Presents, to honor
the Bassa, and keep the People the more in subjection to him. It happens many
times, that when he intends to ruin him, he makes him a Present, that he may
thence take occasion, in case he does not receive another from him, such as he
desires, to send another Messenger for his Head. The Present, upon that
occasion, is not a Vest, or a Garment, but, a Sword, or a Battle-Axe, which are
very Ominous Presents, and Advertisements to the Bassa, that the Grand Seignor
has little kindness for him. To divert the Storm, which he sees likely to fall
upon him, he doubles the Present he should have made, in case he had sent him
but a Vest, which is a pledge of his Affection. And if that Bassa be one of
those, who Commands in the greater Governments, the Present which he sends to
the Grand Seignor, ought not to amount to less than Two hundred Purses, that is
to say, a Hundred thousand Crowns, not comprehending what is particularly given
to the person who is sent by the Emperor.

The Ceremonies attending the Presents sent by the Grand Seignor to those whom
he would honor.
The Persons charged with this Commission are, for the most part, such as the
Grand Seignor is willing to be Munificent to. So that, all things considered,
the Present is not so much designed for him who receives it, as for him who
sends it, and the Person who carries it: And in this consists the artifice of
exercising great Liberalities without disbursing any thing. The Ceremony
performed at the delivery of this Present of the Grand Seignor, is this: He who
carries it being come to the place where the Bassa lives, to whom it is sent,
and having advertised him of it, this latter, with the noise of Drums,
Trumpets, and Hawboys, assembles the People together, some of whom mount
themselves on Horseback, to do him the greater honor. The Bassa himself
marches in the Head of all, and they who are not mounted follow afoot, together
with the Curtezans, or common Strumpets of the place, who are obliged to assist
at this Ceremony, dancing after a Tabour, and putting themselves into a
thousand lascivious postures, according to the Custom of the Country.

The Messenger who brings the Present makes a halt, in expectation of this
Cavalcade, in some Garden near the City, or in the Fields under a Tent, which
he had got set up for that purpose. After mutual Salutations, he casts the Vest
over the Bassa's shoulders, putting the Sabre by his Side, and thrusts the
Poniard into his Sasche before his Breast, telling him, That the Emperor their
Master, honors him with that Present, upon the good report which had been made
to him, that he has demeaned himself well, that he does not tyrannize over his
People, and that there is no Complaint made, of his being defective in the
Administration of Justice.

This Complement past, the Bassa, in the same order, and amidst the Joyful
Acclamations of the People, takes his way, and the Grand Seignor's Envoy along
with him, toward his House, where he entertains him at a great Treat, and,
after all is done, with a Present, which amounts to Ten thousand Crowns at the
least. For, as I told you before, if the Present be carried to one of the
Bassa's who are in the greater Governments, as the Bassa's of Buda, Cairo, or
Babylon, they shall not escape under Thirty or Forty thousand Crowns, and the
Present which is sent to the Sultan, ought to amount to a hundred thousand. Nay
it many times happens, that the Grand Seignor appoints what he would have their
Present to his Envoy to amount to, and that especially, when he sends such as
he has a particular kindness for, and would amply gratify.

The particular way used by Mahomet IV. to show himself liberal, without any
Charge.
The Emperor Mahomet the Fourth, who now sits on the Throne, has a particular
inclination to exercise Liberality, and to bestow Rewards on those who serve
him; but he does it so, as that it costs him nothing, and consequently, there
is no occasion of taking ought out of the Treasury. When there is not an
opportunity to send the Person whom he has a desire to gratify, into the
Country with some Present, he has another Expedient, which will do the work.
His Darling Divertisement is Hunting, and he takes but little pleasure in any
other Exercise. He thereupon orders the Person whom he would recompense, to be
one at the Sport, and having killed a Stagg, or some other Beast, he orders him
to go and present it, from him, to one of the Grandees of the Port, whose abode
is either at Constantinople, or some place near it.

This Present is received with great demonstrations of joy, real, or apparent,
the person, to whom it is brought, is immediately to take order for the sending
back of another, much exceeding it in value, to the Grand Seignor. And that
consists ordinarily in excellent Horses, good pieces of Gold-Brocado, or rich
Furrs. But his work is yet not half over; there must be much more done for him,
through whose hands he has received the Present, and he scapes very well, when,
not accounting what he sends to the Grand Seignor, the carriage of it costs him
but Ten thousand Crowns. Nay many times, he is forced to double the Sum, when
he has not been so liberal, as the Prince expected he should have been; for he
presently dispatches away an Officer, to reproach him with the slender account
he has made of his Present, and the small recompense he had received, whom he
had employed to bring it him. To these reproaches he sends him an express
Order, to make an additional Reward of Twenty or thirty Purses, which is
immediately put in execution: and as to the Present which the Grand Seingor has
received, he commonly makes a distribution of it, amongst those, who are then
about him.

And these are the Advantages which the Grand Seignor screws out of the
Bassa's, and other Grandees of the Port, whilst they are alive. Let us now
consider those which accrue to him by their death, in order to the recompensing
of those, whom he favors, without being obliged to take any thing out of his
Coffers. When the death of a Bassa is resolved upon, the Grand Seignor delivers
the Commission to him, whom he has designed to be kind to; and he finds it much
more advantagous, to bring him the Sentence of his death, than to bring him a
Present from the Prince.

Formalities observed at the death of the Bassa's, who are strangled by the
Princes Orders.
If the Execution is to be done in Constantinople the ordinary Executioner is
the Bostangi bachi, who is always about the Grand Seignor's Person, and he
himself does the Work. But if there be a necessity of going into some remote
Province, it is commonly either a Capigi-bachi, or one of the principal
Bostangis, whom the Prince has a mind to show his kindness to, who is sent to
perform the Execution. He who carries the Order, accompanied by five or six
Capigis, sometimes manages his Affairs so, as to arrive at the place, while the
Council is sitting. But if that cannot be so ordered, he goes to the Bassa, and
commands him in the Grand Seignor's name, to call one immediately. That Council
consists of the Bassa's Lieutenant, the Mufti, the Cadi, the chief Commander of
the Janissaries belonging to that place, and some other persons concerned in the
administration of Justice, who are of the most considerable of the Province.

The Council being assembled, the Capigi-bachi enters, attended by his people,
and presents the Bassa with the Grand Seignor's Letter. He recives it with
great respect, and having put it three several times to his forehead, he opens
it, reads it and finds that the Prince demands his head. He makes no other
answer to that Order, then what he does in these few words; Let the Will, says
he of my Emperor be done: only give me leave to say my Prayers which is
granted him. His Prayers being ended, the Capigis seize him by the Arms and the
chief of them presently takes off his Girdle or Sasche, and cast it about his
Neck. That Girdle consists of several small strings of Silk, with knots at both
ends, which two of the company immediately catch hold of, one drawing one way,
and the other, t'other-way they dispatch him in an instant.

If they are unwilling to make use of their Girdle they take a handkerchief,
and with the Ring which they use, in the bending of their Bows, and which they
ordinarily wear on the right hand Thumb, they thrust the hand between the
handkerchief, which is tied very close, and the Throat, and so break the very
Throat-Bone. Thus they make a shift to strangle a man in an instant, suffering
him not to languish in pain, that he may dye a faithful Mahumetan, and not have
the time to enter into despair; the Turks thinking our way of hanging
Criminals, who are so long in torment upon the Gibbet a strange kind of
Execution.

When and how they strike off the Head in Turkey.
Though I have often used this expression, That the Grand Seignor sends to
demand the Head of any person, whom he would rid out of the way; yet they never
cut it off, but when he expressly declares his desire to see it, and then it is
brought to him. If it be from some place at a great distance, they take out the
Brains, and fill the empty place with Hay; and it was my fortune to see two
Heads so ordered at the same time, which they carried in a Bag. They were the
Heads of the Bassa's of Kars, and Erzerom.

It is further to be observed, That when the Sentence of Death is passed by t^^
Prince against any one, what quality soever he may be of, the Turks make no
further Account of him; and when they speak of him, treat him no otherwise than
they would do a Dog. The Bostangi, who had been commissionated to bring those
two Heads to the Grand Seignor, finding himself weary, and indisposed at a
Village, in Armenia, where it was my chance to be at that time, and having
understood that there was a Frenchman in the Inn, asked one of my Servants
whether I had any wine, and would be content to let him have any, to cheer up
his Spirits. I immediately sent him some in a large Flaggon; whereupon having
entreated me to come and take a Glass with him, which I thought it not fit to
deny, he would needs show me, whether I would or no, the Heads of those two
Bassa's; a sight I had no great couriosity to see.

A Prohibition against shedding the blood of the Mahumetans who are condemned
to death.
When there is no order given for the bringing of the Head, they bury the Body
about Midnight, without any ceremony, and the memory of the Bassa, who had
made so much noise before, is soon extinguish*d and laid in the dust. But it is
moreover to be noted, That it is the Custom in Turkey, not to cut off the Head
of any one, till after they have strangled him, and that the blood is quite
cold; it being against their Law, That the blood of a Mussulm^n (that is, one
of the Faithful) should be spilt, upon any occasion, but in War.

The Inventovies of the Goods of Bassa's deceased, not faithfully taken.
The execution being over, he who brought the Order for it, makes an immediate
Seizure of all that belonged to the deceased Bassa; and after he has set aside
what he liked best for his own use, whether in Gold or Jewels, he brings the
same persons, who had been at the precedent Council, to proceed to the
Inventory of his Goods, which are afterward, as I have said elsewhere,
transmitted to the Chambers of the Treasury. They who assist at the taking of
that Inventory, know well enough, that many things, which belonged to the
deceased, are embezill'd but they are so far from repining or murmuring at it,
that they sign and attest, that there was not any more found. They are afraid,
if they demeaned themselves otherwise, least that Officer of the Seraglio, whom
the Grand Seignor has sent, and who possibly is in favor, should do them ill
offices at the Court, and spread some false report of them; whence, according
to the Example they have then before their eyes, might happen, in like manner,
the loss of their Charges, and Lives.

They therefore think it prudence, to connive at what ever is done by that
Envoy, as being otherwise persuaded, that he will not be disowned by the Grand
Seignor, who is not ignorant of what is done upon those occasions. Nay on the
contrary, and whatever he may have dexterously secured to himself of the Bassa's
Goods, they make him some additional Presents of their own, at his own
departure from them, engaging him thereby, to speak well of them to the Grand
Seignor, and to the Grand Vizir, at his return to the Port. And then also, not
accounting what he had taken beforehand, and what Custom tolerates, he
receives new marks of the Liberality of his Prince, who is satisfied that he
has so faithfully executed his Orders and so he participates of what is set
down in the Inventory, when the Bassa's Goods are brought into the Seraglio.

The Causes inducing the Turks to defy Death with so much Constancy.
Some possibly, will be apt to imagine, that this Sentence of Death passed in
the Grand Seignor's Letter, should rais^ some disturbance and astonishment in
the Soul of him who reads it, and who reading therein his own Condemnation,
knows that it must be immediately executed. Yet is it not apparent in his
Countenance, that he is much startled at it, he is not surpised therewith, he
sees that few of his Companions escape the same fate, and he has disposed
himself for such an end, as soon as he first took possession of his Charge.
Besides, the Turks have a strong persuasion, That the Decrees of Predestination
are irrevocable, and that it is impossible to avoid them; which makes them look
Death in the face, with such a degree of constancy and interepity, as render
them in a manner insensible. To which reflection we may add this, That that
ready and implicit obedience and submission of the Turks, to the Orders of
their Sovereign, is rather a principle of Religion, than of State, which has
been instilled into them, by a most subtle piece of Politics; and they
believe, That, if they dye by the Command of their Prince, they go straight
into Paridise.

The Difficulties of making an Escape out of Turkey.
As for the opportunity of making an escape out of Turkey, by any one who might
have some pre^^n^iment of his de^truction, it is to no purpo^e to think of it.
All the Officers and the Slaves, whom the Bassa's have in their Retinue, are so
many Spies, and observers of their Actions; and it is impossible for them, to
conccal what they do from them. 'Twere dangerous for a man to entrust a Secret
with any one of them; they are mean Souls, and incapable of any gallant Action,
besides that the Ports and Passages are equally shut up against both. If there
be the least discovery made thereof, the Governor of the Frontier places would
immediately have Orders from the Port, to take the Field; nay if there were not
any such, they are but over-diligent, in enquiring after, and informing
themselves of all those, who pass through the extent of their Jurisdiction.

Besides, though there were some likelihood of compassing it, and that,
traveling only in the Night time a man might get into some Neighboring State;
yet Turkey being in a manner quite surrounded by Nations who abhor the
Domination of the Ottomans; 'twere as much as to leap out of the Drying Pan
into the Fire, and to go and pass for a Spy, amongst a sort of people, who
would give no quarter. Whence it might be imagined, that there were less
difficulty in attempting an ascape by Sea, than to hazard it by Land: but the
former is the much more difficult, and the severe prohibitions made to the
Christians, upon pain of death, not to take any Turk or Slave, into their
Ships, which are exactly searched, before they weigh Anchor, shut up all the
Ports of Turkey, against those of the Country, who might be desirous to get out
of it.

True it is, however, that few years pass, but that a considerable number of
Slaves are conveyed away, by the charity and contrivances of the Christian
Consuls, and Merchants. They are secretly kept at the Houses of some Christian
Inhabitants of the Country, whose Secrecy and silence are bought with Money;
and the same receipt stops the mouths of those, who have the oversight of the
Ports, and are warmly entertained with drinking, while thy cunningly get the
Slaves aboard the Vessel, which has been visited, and is then ready to set
sail. They would be loath to run themselves into that danger for natural Turks:
there would be some ground to fear, that it might be some Plot on their side,
to surprise and try the Christians; and it seldom happens that they have a
thought of making any escape. They know well enough, that, whether it be by
Sea, or Land, (excepting only the Kingdom of Persia, where they are hated upon
the account of the difference of Sects) they cannot make their escape any where
but into Christendom, where they would not be permitted the exercise of their
Mahumetan Religion, which they would not renounce for a thousand lives.

Presents made to the Sultanesses.
E're we close up the Discourse concerning the Liberality of the Ottoman
Monarchs, it is to be observed, that sometimes they make very considerable
Presents, which they take out of the Grand Treasury, and which are paid in
Silver only, if they are ordered for the Grandees of the Port, whether in the
Seraglio, or out of it. Those Presents consists ordinarily of a Purse of Gold,
which amounts to Fifteen thousand Ducats, or Thirty thousand Crowns; and when
there are any such made to the Sultanesses, they receive all in Gold. To do
that, there is no occasion of going to the Secret Treasury, there is gold enough
in the Fourth Chamber, into which they at first bring in all the Gold and
Silver of all the Revenues of the Empire; and that Sum, which makes no great
hole in the great heap, returns again into the same place, by several ways.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Present, which the Grand Seignor sends every Year to Mecha.
THE PRNCIPAL HEADS.
The third part of the Revenue of Egypt, how employed. The great Wealth of the
Sheck of Mecha. Ceremonies observed at Mahomet's Tomb. The Caravan of Cairo.
The Present sent from Mecha to the Great Mogul. The Opinion of the Mahumetans,
concerning Mecha and Medina.
THat I make here a particular Chapter of the Present, which the Grand Seignor
sends every Year to Mecha, is occasioned by this third part of the Revenue of
Egypt, which is peculiarly designed for it; and upon this Consideration
withal, That I have singular Remarks to make upon that subject.

The third part of the Revenue of Egypt, how employed.
Three Millions of Livers, of Twelve, of annual Revenue, which the Kingdom of
Egypt pays the Grand Seignor, are partly expended in the Rich Carpet, and the
Sumptuous Tent, which he sends to the Sheck, every year, in honor to Mabomet's
Tomb. Another part goes to the payment of those who serve in the Mosqueys; As
for instance, the Imans, who are Priests; the Cheuchs, who are their Preachers;
the Muezims, who, by their noise on the Towers of the Mosqueys, call the people
to their Devotions; and the Kaijms of Mecha and Medina, who look to, and keep
clean the Mosqueys, and light the Lamps. We must also put into the Account of
these Three Millions, the Sustenance of all the Pilgrims for the space of
Seventeen days, the Grand Seignor sending, for that end, a sufficient Sum to
the Sheck. This Sheck, who is, as 'twere the Supreme Person upon the score of
the Law, and the high Priest of all the Mahumetans, what Country and Sect
soever they be of, makes the poor ignorant people believe, that there come
every year to Mecha, Seventy thousand Pilgrims, Men and Women; and if that
number were not complete, the Angels would come in humane forms, to make it up.

The great Wealth of the Sheck of Mecha.
This Prince, whom we call the Sheck, for whom all the Mahumetans have a great
Veneration, is very Rich, and very powerful, and that may be easily
conjectured, by the Presents, which he receives every year from the Grand
Seignor, and the other Mahumetan Princes. The Presents are all his own, to be
disposed of as he pleases, at the end of the Year, when new ones are sent to
him. He makes his advantage also of all the presents that are made by the
Pilgrims, and of the Sums of Money, which those very Princes send him, to be
distributed in Alms, which he also disposes of as he pleases; and all these
Presents put together, make him such a Revenue as is hardly imaginable. For
Mahumetisme spreads very much into Europe, Asia, and Africa, and that much more
th^n is commonly believed as I shall more distinctly make it appear, at the end
of my Relation, in a particular Chapter, which I design for the handling of
that matter.

Ceremonies observed at Mahomet's Tomb.
From several Parts of the World, there come Caravans to Mecha, and when the
Devotion is to begin, the High Priest, assisted by all the people belonging to
the Law, spends night and day, in saying of Prayers, and performing the
necessary Ceremonies. On the Seventh day, all the Pilgrims are assembled
together before the Sheck's Tent, who appears at the entrance of it, and
standing upon a low Stool, that he may be seen by those who are at the greatest
distance from him, Prays, and gives his Bendiction to all the people, putting
a period to the Devotion, with these words, That God would enable them to
return in Peace, as they came thither.

From that minute, every one must bethink himself, that he is to be at his own
charge; the Sheck gives no more, and it is then that he begins to make great
advantage to himself. For whatever is sold for the Sustenance of the Pilgrims,
comes from him; and besides, he holds a correspondence with the Masters of the
Caravans, of whom the Pilgrims are forced to buy conveniences for their rideing
back again, at more then three times the rate they are worth, when the Beasts
they had brought out of their own Countries have failed them by the way.

The Caravan of Cairo.
The Caravan of Cairo is the most numerous, and the most considerable of all
the Caravans, that come to Mecha. The Caravan-bachi, who is the Captain and
Conductor of it, makes his gains by it, at his return, worth him Two hundred
thousand Crowns; and there is a great competition about his place, which is at
the disposal of the Bassa of Cairo, and commonly carried by the highest bidder
for it. The Captain of this Caravan is also Master of the Waters, which are
carried into the Cisterns, and it is according to his Orders that they are
distributed; and whereas that distribution is equal, as well in Relation to the
Poor, as to the Rich, if the latter would have any beyond the quantity allowed
them, they must pay dearly for it; and the Captain, who sets what imposition he
pleases upon it, makes a considerable advantage thereby.

The Present sent from Mecha to the Great Mogul.
But let us return to the Grand Seignor's Present. The Tent, and the Carpet,
which he sends, are two Pieces equally precious, as well for the excellency of
the Stuff, as the additional embellishments hereof. The Carpet is designed for
the covering of Mahomet's Tomb; and the Tent, which is erected hard by the
Mosquey, is for the Sheck, who does not stir out of it, during the Seventeen
days of Devotion. This high Priest of the Mahumetan Law, has found out the
Secret knack, of extracting inexpressible Sums of Money, out of that Carpet
and Tent, which are renewed every year: and when the new Present is arrived
from the Grand Seignor, he sends, as 'twere out of a singular favor, certain
pieces of the Curtain of the old Tent, to several Mahumetan Princes, of whom he
receives Magnificent Presents in requital. This Curtain, which is set up on the
outside of the Tent, quite round it, to hinder the people from seeing those
that are under it, consists of several pieces, six foot high, and of a great
length: and the Sheck endeavors to persuade those Princes, That if they fasten
one of those pieces to their Te^ts, when they are going to engage in a War,
against those whom they account Infidels, good fortune will be sure to attend
them, and it will not be long e're they gain the Victory. But if he sends
either the whole Curtain, or the Tent, or Carpet entire, it must be to a great
Monarch indeed, such as the great Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogul: and that
he does, once in ten, or twelve years; one while to the one, and another, to
the other.

Of this we have a late instance, in Aureng-zeb, who at the present is King of
the Indies, and whom we otherwise call the Great Mogul. For upon his
establishment in his Throne, the Sheck sent him the whole Courtain belonging to
the Tent; and great joy there was at his Court, that the King had received so
Magnificent a Present, from the Holy Place, as they call it. The Sheck was soon
after made sensible of the Royal Liberality of that Great Monarch, one of the
Richest and most Powerful of the Universe; and thus does that Spiritual Head of
the Mahumetan Religion, who has a kind of Superintendency over all the Members,
know how to make his advantage of them, and has found out the way, to enrich
himself, at the cost of all the Princes and Nations, who submit themselves to
the Mahumetan Law.

I question not, but that they who have writ of the Religion of the Turks, have
given some account of the Pilgrimage of Meeha, which is one of the most
essential parts thereof; and therefore, as well for that reason, as also for
that I should digress too much from my subject, I ought not to prosecute that
matter any farther. I shall take occasion here, to make three Remaks, which I
have originally learnt of one of the most learned in the Rubricks of the
Mahumetan Law.

The first is, that the Turks, by an ancient Tradition, believe, That Mecha is
the place where God commanded Abraham to build him an house; and that while he
was there, all Nations came thronging to visit him: and that it is also the
same place, where Mahomet received the Alcoran, from Heaven.

The second relates to the Commandment imposed upon all the Mahumetans, to be,
once in their lives, concerned in the Pilgrimage of Mecha. For it is to be
observed, That the obligation does not extend to the poorer sort of people, who
have hardly wherewithal to live upon, and would bring great misery on their
Families, by their absence, as being not able to leave them what is requisite
for their sustenance.

The third Remark is concerning the preference of the two Cities of Mecha, and
Medina. The former is the place of Mahomet's birth, which it was his design to
honor, and make known, by that famous Pilgrimage, whereto he obliges all those
of his Law. The latter is the place of his Burial, of which there is abundance
of fabulous relations. Mahomet, in his Alcoran, does only enjoin their going to
Mecha, where there are no other Relics of that false Prophet, then one of his
Sandalls: And the Doctors of the Law are also of opinion, that there is no
obligation of going to Medina, and that without seeing that City, a man
satisfies the Command of Mahomet. I shall treat at large of the Pilgrimage of
Mecha, in the last Chapter of this Relation of my Travels, and of the different
Roads by which the Mahumetans of Europe, Asia, and Africa, are conducted to the
Tomb of their Prophet.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Cup-Bearer's Quarter, and of diverse other Appartments.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Ancient Custom practiced, when the Grand Seignor is presented with any
thing to drink, between Meals. A way to quench thirst at Meals, wholly
particular to the Levantines. The composition of Treacle. A stately service of
Gold-Plate. Beds according to the Turkish mode. Ways to satisfy the
Necessities of Nature different from ours. The Causes of the abominable Sin
committed by the Turks, who are confined within the Seraglio.
I Have discovered many things particularly observable, concerning the Treasury
of the Ottoman Monarchs, and there are yet some very Remarkable passages to be
communicated, relating to the other Quarters of the inner part of the Seraglio.

Between the Treasury, and an obscure Vaulted Gallery, in length between
Fifteen and Twenty paces, which conducts you to an Iron-Door, by which there is
a passage into the Gardens, you find, on the left hand, the Appartment of the
pages of the Kilar, or the Cup-Bearer's Office. That is the place where they
prepare the Sherbets, and other Liquors, for the Grand Seignor's own drinking,
and where they keep the Wine, The Ancient Custom practiced when the Grand
Seignor drinks between Meals.
if it happens, that he drinks any, as Sultan Amurath did, of whom I have often
had occasion to speak. It Is an ancient Custom, That when the Grand Seignor
calls for Water to drink between meals, every time he so calls, costs him ten
Sequins, or Chequins. The Ceremony observed therein is this: In the Chamber
called the Haz-Oda, which is the Appartment of the Forty pages, who are always
near the Grand Seignor's person, there is perpetually one of: them standing
Scentinel at the Entrance, which leads to the Cup-Bearer's Office, where two
pages of the same Quarter are in like manner upon the Scentry. When the Grand
Seignor is thirsty, and calls for water, the Page of the Haz-Oda, immediately
makes a sign to the two Pages of the Kilar, of whom one advances up to the
Kilar-bachi, or Cup Bearer himself, crying out Sou, which signifies Water, to
advertise him, that the Prince would drink; and the other runs to the door of
the Haz-Oda, where the most ancient of the Forty Pages gives him Ten Sequins.
That Page is the Treasurer of the said Chamber, and he pays the small Sums
which the Grand Seignor gives Order for, an Office which might be called in
English, The Treasurer of the petty Enjoyments. The Water is sometimes brought
in a Cup of Gold, sometimes in a Vessel of Pourcelain, placed upon a large
Server of Gold, about two foot diameter, and enriched with Precious Stones
within and without. That is looked on, as one of the richest pieces of Plate
belonging to the Seraglio. The principal Cup Bearer, who is a white Eunuch,
carries it with great Ceremony, attended by a hundred Pages of the Kilar, whom
he ordinarily has under his Charge, and upheld under the Arms by two of them,
who walk on both sides of him. For it is required, That he should carry it
lifted up above his head, and so he cannot see his way but by looking under it.
When he is come to the Door of the Haz-Odd, the Pages of the Kilar, who have
accompanied him so far, pass no further, save only the two who uphold his Arms,
and the Pages of the Chamber go along with him quite into the Grand Seignor's
Presence. But when they come to the door of the Chamber, two of the more
ancient among them, take the places of the two Pages of the Kilar, and complete
the conducting of the Kilargi-Bachi, under the Arms, to offer the Cup to the
Prince. When he has not any thing to say to him, he carries it back again into
the Kilar; but if he will take his opportunity to entertain him with some
Affair, he delivers the Cup and the Server into the hands of one of the Pages,
who led him under the Arms, and he delivers it to those, who, belonging to the
Cup-Bearer's Office, waited there in expectation of his return.

A way to quench thirst at meals, wholly particular to the Levantines.
It Is in the same place, to wit, that under the oversight of the Cup Bearer,
they keep all sorts of refreshing and cooling Waters, as that of Peaches,
Cherries, Raspices, and such other fruits. The Turks do not drink during their
refection, that is, not till they have given over cating; and because it is
possible they may be dry, whilst they eat; take here the manner how they quench
that thirst. They are served at Table with these Waters, in great Cups or
Pourcelaine, which hold about two Quarts, and the better to distinguish them,
they put into every one of those Cups, some of the same fruit, from which the
Water that is therein had been extracted, and which they had preserved for that
purpose. Every one has lying by him a Wooden spoon, which holds three or four
times as much as any of our ordinary ones, and whereof the handle is of a
length proportionable: for as to Gold and Silver spoons, it is not their
custom to use any. With those spoons, they can take out what is in the Cups,
according to the Water which they most fancy, and so they suspend thirst,
taking ever and anon some spoonfuls of it.

The Composition of Treacle.
It is also in the Cup-bearers Appartment that the Treacle is made, which the
Turks call Tiriak-Farik, and there is a great quantity of it made, because they
use it as an Universal remedy, and charitably bestow it on all sorts of people,
as well in City as Country, who are desirous of it. The Vipers which are used
in this composition are brought out of Egypt, and they make no account of those
which other Countries afford, or they are of opinion at least, that the former
are much the better for that purpose.

A stately service of Gold Plate.
Before the Appartment of the Kilar, there is a Gallery whereof the floor is
paved with square pieces of Black and White Marble, and sustained by eight fair
Pillars of White Marble, and at the end of it is a little Quarter, where the
principal Cup Bearer has his residence. There also are the Lodgings of his
Substitute, the Kilarquet-houdasi, who is not an Eunuch, as the Kilargi-bachi
is, and who, at his removal out of the Seraglio, is ordinarily advanced to the
charge of a Bassa. The Kilargi-bachi has in his custody all the Gold and
Silver-plate, the Basins, the Ewers the Bowls, the Cups, the Servers, and the
Candlesticks, the greatest part of that service being garnished with Diamonds,
Rubies and Emeralds, and other precious Stones of value. As for golden Dishes
and Candlesticks, without any additional embellishments of precious Stones,
there are some so large, and so massy, that there must be two men to carry one
of them. These Candlesticks are made after a fashion quite different from ours.
They are ordinarily two or three Foot high, upon a Base of above twelve inches
Diameter, and the upper part thereof is as 'twere a Box or kind of Lamp, with
its beak, and it may contain above a pound of suet. It Is to prevent the fall of
any thing upon the Carpet, that they make the foot of the Candlestick so large
as I told you; and besides, it is requisite, that it should bear some
proportion to the height. The match, or wicke, which they put into the Suet,
beaten into small bits, is about the bigness of a Man's thumb, and consequently
must needs make a great light in the Room. As to the Kilar^uet-hondasi he is
the Superior over the Halvagis, and Akegis, who are the Cooks and the
Confectioners, of whom not one can enter into service, but by his Orders.

In my discourse of the Treasury I made no mention of the Quarter of those
Officers, who serve there, because my design was to follow the order of the
Structures of the Seraglio, and to conduct the Reader, by little and little,
out of one Court into another, and out of one Quarter into another. That of the
Pages of the Treasury, is hard by the Kilar, and begins with a Gallery, paved
with square pieces of Marble, of different colors, sustained by eight Pillars,
of the same material, and whereof the sides and the roof are painted with all
sorts of flowers, in Gold and Azure. That Gallery is open on the one side, and
on the other you find in the midst of it, the Door leading into the Appartment
of the Pages, with three great Windows on the right hand, and as many on the
left: And it is there that the six most elderly Pages of the Treasury have
residence night and day. From that door, along a walk paved with white Marble
stones, very large ones, about fifteen paces in length, and five in breadth, you
come to another Portal, of the same material, sustained by two Pillars of black
Marble; over the said Portal, there may be read these words, which are
ordinarily enough in the mouths of the Turks, and which I have explicated
elsewhere; La Illahe Illa Alla, Muhammed Resoul Alla.

Beds according to the Turkish mode.
It gives entrance into a long Hall, where there may be seen on both sides a
kind of Seat, or Scaffold, a foot and a half in height, and between seven or
eight in breadth. Every Page has but four foot in breadth for his reposing
place, as well by day, as by night: And for their Beds, they are permitted to
have under them, only a Woollen Coverlet, four times doubled, which seryes them
for a Quilt, and over that they ordinarily have one of Gold or Silver-Brockado,
or some other sumptuous Silk-stuff; and in the Winter time, they are permitted
to have three of them. They are not to have their Coverlets all of Wool, which
would be so much the warmer, because it would not be a decent sight for the
Grand Seignor, when he comes ever and anon, in the night time, pretending
indeed as if he would surprise them, and see how they demean themselves, but in
effect, sometimes to cover lewd designs. It Is between those Coverlets that the
Pages take their repose, having their Wast-coat and Drawers on; for there is no
talk of any other kind of Linne, either in Turkey, or any part of the East; and
whether it be Winter or Summer, they always lay themselves down to sleep, half
clad, without any great Ceremony.

Ways to satisfy the necessities of nature different from ours.
Over the Beds of the Pages, there is a Gallery, which goes quite round the
Hall, and is sustained by Pillars of Wood, painted all over with red varnish,
and there they have their Coffers, wherein their Clothes are kept. Every one
has a Coffer to himself, but the twelve Senior Pages have each of them two
Coffers, and one of those twelve has the Key of the Gallery in his custody. It
is ordinarily opened but one day in the Week, which is answerable to our
Wednesday, and then, every Page goes, and takes out of his Coffer, what he
stands in need of. If any one of them must of necessity look for some thing
there upon any other day, he gets five or six Pages together, and they all go
to the principal Officer of the Treasury, and he commands the Rafgi, who has
the Key of the Gallery in his custody, to open it for them, and to have a care
that they meddle not with the Coffers of their Companions.

At one of the ends of the Hall, there is a Door, which conducts you to the
Fountains, where those that have their dependence on the Treasury go and wash,
when they are called to their Devotions. There are seven Copper Cocks for that
convenience, and as well the pavement as the Walls, of that place are of white
Marble.

The places appointed for the easing of Nature are on the right hand, divided
into four little Rooms, which are alwas kept very clean, and paved with square
pieces of white Marble; as the Room of the Fountain is. The Turks do not sit
down, as we do, when they are in those places, but they squat down over the
hole, which is not half a foot, or little more above the ground. That hole is
covered with an Iron plate, which rises and falls by a Spring, and turning one
way or other, at the falling of the least weight upon it, it comes to the
station it was in before, as soon as the ordure is fallen from it. I have
observed elsewhere, that the Turks, and generally all the Mahumetans, do not
use paper in such cases, or upon any undecent occasion, and when they go to
those kinds of places, they carry along with them a Pot of water, to wash
themselves withal, and the Ironplate is also made clean at the same time. And
so the hole being always covered, and the Iron-plate always kept clean there
can be no ill smell in the place, and that the rather, for that a small current
of water, which passes under that place, carries away all the Ordure.

The Causes of the abominable Sin committed by the Turks who are confined
within the Seraglio.
But it were to be wished, that they would not so much concern themselves in
keeping those places so clean, provided they could forbear polluting them with
those detestable impurities, which I should gladly have left unmention'd, did I
not fear the reproach might be made to me, of my having been defective in point
of exactness. I have already said something of it, in the Second Chapter of
this Relation, and it is a subject, which is to be slightely past over, that so
there may be but imperfect Idaea's left of it. It is therefore in those places,
that the Pages make their nocturnal assignations, in order to the committing of
the worst of all crimes, which yet they find it very difficult to put in
execution, because they are so narrowly watched; and if they are taken in the
very act, they are punished with so great severity, that sometimes they are
even drubb'd to death; of which chastisement, I have elsewhere given an
account. In like manner, to prevent the committing of that infamous act, in the
places where they take their repose, there are two Torches lighted, which last
all the Night, and three Eunuchs are ever and anon going their Rounds, by which
means the Pages are deprived of the oportunities, which otherwise they might
have, to offend.

But we need not go far, to find out the Source of this Evil: the strictness of
the restraint they are in, and their being deprived of the sight of Women,
induce those Young Men to practice such defilements, and hurry the Turks into a
Gulf, to which they, by an execrable passion, are, naturally but too much
inclinable. The Ichoglans, who are brought very young into the Seraglio, know
not what a Woman is, but by the instinct of Nature; and there are some of them,
who, for one day's sight and enjoyment of a Woman, would be content to dye the
next. All those Nations generally have so great a bent to lubricity, that it
seems impossible they should quit it, but with their lives: what they cannot do
one way, they endeavor to do another; and they of the Seraglio do all they can
to elude the inspection of their Overseers. The Reader may call to mind the
Action of the two Pages, who hid themselves in the Mosquey, and that single
Example is enough, to show, how they seek out all the ways imaginable, to
satisfy their brutish passion.

The Quarter of the Kasnadar-bachi, as also that of his Companion, or
Substitute, is adjoining to that of the Pages of the Treasury, and from their
Chambers, they have a Prospect into a little Flower-Garden, which belongs to
them. We have yet some other Chambers to view, before we come to that, which
they call the Haz-Oda, which is the Appartment of the Forty Pages of the
Chamber, and the entrance to that of the Grand Seignor.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Quarter of the Dogangi-bachi, or Grand Faulconer, and of some other
Officers.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
Magnificent Chambers. The ordinary Revenues of the Grand Faulconers. The
Magnificence of the Ottoman Princes, in what relates to Hunting. Birds
supplying the places of Dogs, in running down a Deer, or a Hare. The delicate
Chamber of the Selidgar-Agi, who carries the Grand Seignor's Sword. The
excellent Order observed in the Seraglio.
Magnificent Chambers.
THE Dogangi-bachi, or Grand Faulconer, and the Pages, whom he has under his
Charge, have their Quarter between that of the Pages of the Treasury, and that
of the Pages of the Chamber. The place appointed for the Pages of the Falconry,
has nothing in it extraordinary, and a man cannot make a discovery of any thing
of beauty therein: but on the other side, the two Chambers, where the Grand
Falconer Lodges, have something that is Magnificent and are as sumptuously
furnished, as any other Rom of the Seraglio. The first, which serves for an
Antichamber, is lesser, and they are both of them paved with a Checquer-work
of black and white Marble, having the Roof beautified with Flowers, painted,
and guilt. But that of the second Chamber is the more sumptuous by much, as
having large Flowers, in embossed Work, every Flower in its square piece, and
the Junctures all covered with Gold. The Walls are excellently wainscoted,
wherein also they have not spared for Gold, and on both sides, there are
cross-barr'd Windows, whereby the Chamber receives much light. The Marble
Chequer-work of the Floor is not seen, as being covered with a silken Carpet,
upon which there are laid, in several parts of the Chamber, a certain number of
Quilts, two or three Foot in breadth, and about four Inches thick. Some of them
are covered with Velvet, or Satin, of different Colors; others with
Gold-Brockadoes, and every one has its Cushion of the same Stuff, between three
and four foot in length, and about two foot in height. These Cushions are laid
behind their backs, when they are siting, after their Mode cross-legg'd, and
those lettle Quilts are to them, instead of Chairs, and Couches, in a Chamber

The ordinary Revenues of the Grand Falconer.
If the Grand Falconer be removed out of the Seraglio, it is upon his
advancement to the Charge of one of the principal Bassa's, and to one of the
greater Governments, as that of Cairo, or Babylon; and while he continues in
the Seraglio besides his Table, which is all at the Prince's charge, he is
allowed an annual Revenue, of ten or twelve thousand Crowns. The Pages of the
Falconry, carry Hawks on their Fists, and feed them: they have the liberty to
go and exercise them in the Gardens, and they all attend the Grand Seignor,
when he goes a Hawking, or Hunting. They wear the same Stuffes, as the Pages of
the Treasury, and may also put on Vests of Cloth, but made after such a
fashion, as makes them easily distinguishable from the Ichoglans, of the first
and second Chamber, who are always clad in woollen-cloth. For the Pages of the
Falconry have their Sleeves made narrower, and narrower, from the Shoulder to
the wrist, and they are there fastened close with Buttons; but the Sleeves of
the Pages of the Treasury, are as wide below, as they are above, and that makes
the difference between them. The twelve Senior Pages of the Falcoury have the
same slaveries and advantages, as the Pages of the Treasury, and are their
Fellow-Commoners; but the other Companions of the former, are treated after the
same rate as the Pages of the Seferlis, who wash the Grand Seignor's Linen,
and they all common at the same Table.

The Magnificence of the Ottoman Princes in relation to Hunting and Hawking.
Besides the forementioned Pages, the Grand Faulconer has under his command
near eight hundred other persons, as well in Constantinople as the parts
adjacent thereto, perpetually employed in the ordering and training up of all
sorts of Birds for the Game, and there come none into the Seraglio, but what
are so ordered, and taught. Though there may be a very great number of such,
yet does not the Grand Seignor make use of any, but what have some stone of
value about the neck, nay sometimes such as may be valued at ten thousand
Crowns. All the Mahumetan Princes are very sumptuous, in all things relating to
their Game, and particulary the King of Persia. Nothing can be imagined more
Glorious, or Magnificent, than the long Train of the Grandees of his Court,
when they return from their Sports. They all march in an excellent order, every
one with a Hawke on his Fist, and every Hawke having about the neck, either a
Diamond, or some other precious stone, of great value, with the hood all
embroidered with Pearls; which must needs make a most delightful show.

Birds supplying the place of Dogs, in running down a Deer or Hare.
The Turks, and other inhabitants of the Levant, breed up, in order to their
divertisements, several sorts of Birds, which the Europaens make no use of at
all, and they are of a larger size, and stronger, than ours. With those,
instead of Dogs, will they run down a Hare, or a Stagge; and they have also the
diversion of hunting the Wild Boar, and other savage Beasts. But what makes
that Sport the more delightful is this, that in Persia the Country is all open
and champion, and there are no Woods, into which the Hawke, or other Bird,
might get out of their sight. He discovers the Beast at a great distance,
fastens of a sudden upon it, so as that it cannot get loose from him, and
sticking close to the Head, picks out the Eyes of it, vexes, and torments it,
and retards the swiftness of its course, by which means, the Huntsman come up
the sooner to it, and dispatch it. But they do not give the fatal blow, till
the Prince has ordered them to do it, or till he has shot off an Arrow, or
discharged his Fire-lock: upon which signal, they who are about him are
permitted to exercise their courage and dexterity.

Next adjoining to the Appartment of the Pages belonging to the Falconry, there
is a long Gallery, which is open but of one side, and in the floor of it, there
is a little ascent. It is sustained by ten Pillars of Marble, of several
colors, and paved with a square-piec'd work of the same material; with a
Wainscotage, wherein there are some flowers painted, but very meanly.

The Seligdar-Aga's Chamber, who carries the Grand Seignor 's Sword.
From the end of the foresaid Gallery, turning on the right hand you come to
the Chamber of the Selidgar-Aga, who carries the Sword before the Grand
Seignor. Some part of that Chamber is covered with Carpets, the other has a
Seat or Scaffold, raised three foot high, but of a considerable breadeth to
which they ascend by so many steps of white Marble, of four foot in length, the
remainder of which Seat, being divided from the Chamber by a Ballister'd work,
partly gilt with Gold, and partly Green. All within that enclosure of
Ballisters is covered with rich silken Carpets, and all about, as well to the
Wall side, as to that of the Ballisters, there are sumptuous Cushions of all
sorts, of Gold and Silver-Brokadoes. The Walls of the Chamber are all gilr, and
at equal distances, there are flower-pots painted, rarely well diversified, and
affording a most delightful prospect. The place where the Selidgar-Aga sits, is
at the corner of that part of the Chamber which is enclosed with the
Ballisters, on the right hand, and over his Head hang the Swords and Sabres,
which he carries before the Grand Seignor, whithin the Seraglio; and after him,
when his Highness goes out of the Seraglio.

The excellent order observed in the Seraglio.
As Soon as a' Prince is come to the Crown, whatever he ordinarily wears, is
never returned into the Treasury, till after his death: And the
Chasnader-bachi, who is the Overseer of it, finds by his Registries, whether
all the things that were taken out of the Treasury, during the Grand Seignor's
life, are brought into it again at his death. Whenever any piece is taken out,
the Seligdar-Aga, to whom it is delivered, gives the Principal Officer of the
Treasury an acknowledgment, under his hand, of his having received it; and by
that means nothing can be embezill'd, good order being strictly observed in all
things, relating to the Seraglio. In some other parts of the Chamber you find
hanging up Ponyards and Knives, all rich Pieces, and beset with precious
stones, which as all the rest, are exactly Registered in the Books of the
Treasury. On each side of the said Chamber, there are two little Rooms, for
four Pages of the Seferlis, who wait on the Seligdar-Aga, and are always about
his person. It Is now time that we pass into the Grand Seignor's Quarter.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Grand Seignor's Appartment.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Chamber of the Forty Pages. A noble Monument of the Valor of Amurath. The
situation of the Mosqueys in Turkey. The Ceremonies of their Devotions. A
Magnificent Winter-Chamber. The mysterious Seal of Mahomet. The great
Superstitions of the Turks. A fantastic, and covetous knack of Devotion. The
Relics of Omar. A ridiculous Sect. The Grand Seignor's Quarter. The Emperor
Amurath's Belvedere, or place of Prospect. The Excellent Wines of the Isle of
Tenedos. A perfidious Act justly punished. The Fortune of a beautiful Sicilian
Virgin. The Grand Seignor's Bedchamber. The ancient veneration of the Turks
for Mahomet's Banner. A word farther of the Prince's Appartment.
THough the inner part of the Seraglio ought properly to be divided into but
two great Quarters, which are the Grand Seignor's own Quarter, and the Quarter
of the Sultanesses; yet have I thought it more convenient, for the Reader's
better remembrance of things, to distinguish to him the different parts, of
which the former consists answerably to its several uses: and after a large
account, given of the Baths, the Treasury, the Cup-Bearer's Office, and the
Falconry, I come now to the particular Appartment of the Grand Seignor's Person.

The Chamber of the Forty Pages.
The Haz Oda is the first structure that offers it self to your view, and it is
by that name the Turks call the fourth and highest Class of the Ichoglans,
which is the Chamber of the Forty Pages, who are hourly employed in the Grand
Seignor's Service. This Chamber is of the same largness, as that of the Pages
of the Treasury, and furnished much after the same rate; but it is not near so
lightsome, or rather, it wants light. As there is not so great a number of
them, so have they accordingly more place to sit, or lie down; and in the midst
of the Chamber, you find a little square place, raised up somewhat higher than
the Beds of the Pages, whence the Haz-Odabachi, their Governor, may observe
all their actions, and see how they demean themselves. He has order to give the
Grand Seignor notice of it, Rewards being the consequences of good actions, as
chastisements are, of bad ones; and it is also incumbent upon him to make
speedy provision of all the things they stand in need of. Over the Door of that
Chamber, these words, La Illa He Illa, etc. whereof I have often made mention,
are engraved in large golden Letters; and at the four corners, are the Names of
Mahomet's four Companions, Ebou-beker, Omar, Osman, and Ali, engraved in like
manner in black Marble. When the Grand Seignor has made a Bassa, and that he is
to take his leave of his Highness, togo to his Government, he comes out at that
Door, where all those names are engraved, and as soon as he is come out, he
turns his face again to the Door, and kisses the Threshold of it, with great
humility.

As soon as you are come into the Chamber, you find on the right hand several
words of the Law, written, and enchac'd, in guilt squares, and one of these
Writings is, of Sultan Achmet's, the Father of Amurath. On the left hand, you A
noble Monument of Amurath's Valor.
find, fastened to the Wall, a Coat of Mail, a Headpiece, and a great Buckler;
it is one of the Monuments of Amurath's Valor. During the Siege of Bagdet, or
Babylon, a Persian coming out of the City, and challenging any one of the
Besiegers to meet him, that Prince, one of the most courageous and strongest
men of his age, would needs receive him himself, without any other Arms, than a
Sabre in his hand, though the Persian was armed from head to foot. Amurath who
was not only a prodigious Person as to strength, and valor, but also well
skilled in the use of a Weapon, afforded him not the time to consider whom he
had to deal withal, but immediately gave him such a furious blow with the
Sabre, over the right shoulder, that he cut his coat of Mail quite to the
Middle of his Body, and left him dead upon the place.

Opposite to the Haz-Oda, or the Chamber of the forty Pages, there is a Gallery
of a considerable length, and particularly remarkable for its Structure. It is
open on both sides, and has, of each, a row of white Marble-Pillars; but it is
built after the Serpentine fashion, and they who walk in it are, every six
paces, out of sight one of the other. There are, under this Gallery four great
Prestes, to put up the accouttements of the four Officers, who are always about
the Grand Seignor's Person, to wit, the Seligdar-Aga, the Chokadar-Aga, the
Requabdar-Aga, and the Hazodabacht, of whom I have spoken at the beginning of
this Relation, when I gave a List of the Grandees of the Port.

The situation of the Mosques in Turkey,
This Gallery, of so fantastic and so extraordinary a Structre, is not far
from that other, which is a continued ascent, and whereof I made mention in the
precedent Chapter. Opposite to this last, there is a Mosquey of the middle
sort, as to the largeness, the length of it somewhat exceeding its breadth, and
it stands North and South, a situation the Turks observe in all their Mosqueys,
which are always turned toward Meeha, which place is Meridional to all the
provinces of the Empire. There is in the Wall, opposite to the South, a kind of
Neech, which they call Mihrab, into which the Iman, who is their Priest, gets
up, to say Prayers at the accustomed hours, and the Grand Seignor is present
thereat, with the forty Pages of the Haz-Oda, in a little Room, the Window
wheerof is opposite to the Neech. On both sides of the said Neech, there is a
Gallery sustained by five Pillars, some whereof are of green Marble, and the
rest of Prophyry. And in the Mosquey, and in the Chamber, or Room, into which
the Grand Seignor comes-to do his Devotions, and in the two Galleries, there is
no going but upon rich Carpets. You are not to look for ought of Painting
there; nor have the Walls any other Ornament, then that of the whiteness of the
Marble, whereof they are built. But there are a great many Writings, in large
Arabic Characters, enchac'd in gilt Borders, hanging up in several places, and
those Writings contain only things taken out of the Law of Mahomet.

The Window of the Chamber into which the Grand Seignor comes to do his
Devotions, is six foot in length, and three foot high, and has a Lattice with a
Curtain behind it, as it is in several Chapels, which our Christiau Princes
have in their Palaces. There is also opposite to the same Neech,
beforementioned, such another Window, and such another Chamber, for the
Sultanesses, and when the Muezim, whose station is of one side of the Iman, and
who is as it were his Clerk, hears the drawing of the Curtains, he immediately
rings a small Bell which is the signal, that the Grand Seignor and the
Sultanesses are come into their several Rooms.

The Ceremonies of their Devotions.
Upon their arrival, the foresaid Muezim begins to sing these two words,
Allabu, Ek^er, which signifies, God is Great, repeating them four times: and
afterward, having added thereto some words, speaking as 'twere to himself, the
Iman in his turn, sings these following; Flhamdu lillahi Rabbil alemijn, that
is to say, The Grace of God is the Master of all things. He thus continues the
Prayer, prostrating himself several times to the ground, and all the people
present do also prostrate themselves as he does,

In the midst of the Domo of the Mosquey, there is a Hoop of Iron, all about
which there hangs a great number of Lamps, of Venice-Crystal, and there are
also some disposed along the Galleries, of the same Metal, they being not
permitted to have in there Mosqueys, either Gold or Silver. They do not light
those Lamps, but only for the Prayers at night, and the fire casting a
reflection one those Crystals, creates a most delighful Object to the sight.

The Chamber of the Sarai-Agasi, one of the four Principal Eunuchs, is
adjoining to that Mosquey, and the least of all the Chambers, of the Officers,
belonging to the Inner-part of the Seraglio. He has but little place more than
is requisite for him to sleep in, and he is waited on by two Pages of the
Couchouk-Oda, or the little Chamber

Adjoining to the Door of the Haz-Oda, there is a Hall paved with a
Checquer-work of black and white Marble, in the midst whereof there is a Basin
of the same material, but of several Colors, out of which there is an ascent
of water four or five foot high. That water is received into a second Basin,
made in the form of a Scallop-shell, out of which it falls again into a third,
much larger than the two precedent ones. The upper part of the Hall is built
Domo-wise, having therein some Windows, which give it light, and a certain
piece of dull Painting is all the Ornament of its Walls. At your entrance into
this Hall, you see two Doors, one on the right hand, the other on the left.
That on the left hand conducts to a Flower-Garden? and the other is the door of
a Chamber, into which the Grand Seignor comes sometimes in the Winter-Season.

A magnificent Winter Chamber.
This Chamber is one of the most sumptuous of any in the Seraglio. It Is Arched
Roof is divided into a great number of little Cells, Triangle-wise,
distinguished by two little filets of Gold with a green streak in the midst,
and out of every Angle, there jurs somewhat like the bottom of Lamp,
excellently well gilt. Though the Walls are of a curious white Marble, yet is
there a delicate piece of Wainscotage, of about the height of a man's waste,
carried quite round the Room, and the rich Carpets, upon which you walk,
deprive your sight of the large squares of Marble, of several colors,
wherewith the Floor is embellished. Of a great number of Cushions, which are
placed along the Walls, some are embroidered with Pearls, and precious Stones,
and set there only for ostentation; the others, which are for service, are
covered with Gold, or Silver-Brokadoes, and other costly Stuffs. At one of the
corners of the Chamber, there is a little Field-bed, about two foot in height,
embroidered all over, the Counterpane, the Cushions, and the Quilt; and that
Embroidery is all of Pearls, Rubies, and Emeralds. But when the Grand Seignor
is to come into that Chamber, they take away the Counterpane and Cushions,
which are less fit for Service than for Ornament, and they bring in others of
quilted or tufted Velvet, or Satin, upon which the Grand Seignor may more
conveniently repose himself.

Mahomet's Mysterious Seal.
Toward the feet of the said Bed, there is a kind of Neech made within the
very Wall, in which there is a little Ebony Box, about half a foot square, and
in that is locked up Mahomet's Seal. It is enchac'd in a Crystal, with a
Bordure of Ivory, and taking all together, it may be four inches in length, and
three in breadth. I have seen the Impression of it upon a piece of Paper but he
who showed it me, would not suffer me to touch it, only upon this score, that
he looked on it as a great Relick. Once in three months this Chamber is made
clean, and the Carpets are changed, the Pages of the Treasury being employed in
that Office. And then it is, that the Chasnader-bacht opens the Box, and having
in his hands an embroidered Hand-kerchief, he takes out the Seal, with great
respect and reverence, whilst the Seignor of the Pages holds a golden Cup,
garnished with Diamonds and blue Saphris, on the top of which there is a kind
of Perfuming-Pot, out of which there comes an exhalation of all sorts of sweet
Scents, whereby the whole Room is in a manner embalmed. The Page holds that in
both his hands joined together, and lifting it up higher than his Head, all
those that are present immediately prostrate themselves to the ground, as an
acknowledgment of their veneration. As soon as they are up again, the Page
brings down the Cup, lower than his chin, and the principal Officer of the
Treasury, holding the Seal over the smoke, all those who are in the Room, come
and kiss the Crystal which covers one of the most precious Relics, that they
have of their Prophet. I have used all the endeavors I could, to get out of my
two Officers of the Treasury, who had often kissed that Crystal, what
Observations they might have made, as to the material whereof the Seal was made
and what Letters were engraved upon it; but they told me, that by the reason of
the smoke, and the Chyrstal, which covers the Seal, not to insist on the small
time they have to observe it, during the act of kissing it, it is not possible
that any one can give a certain judgment of either the Stuff, or the Engraving
of it.

Upon the fourteenth day of the Ramazan, that is to say, the Lent of the Turks,
the Grand Seignor comes in person into that Chamber, accompanied only by the
Seligdar-Aga, and taking off the Crystal, which lies over the Seal, he
delivers it into his hands, ordering him to make the Impression of it upon
fifty little bits of Paper, which are not much bigger than the Seal it self.
This Impression is taken off with a certain gummy Ink, which is prepared in a
Pourcelain Dish, whereinto he thrusts his finger, and rubs the Seal with it,
and keeps all those Printed Papers, for the use, to which his Highness designs
them, as we shall see, e're we come to the end of this Chapter.

The great Superstition of the Turks.
Within the same Chamber, and adjoining to the place, where the Seal is kept,
there is another Box or Coffer, of a larger size, covered with a Carpet of
green Velvet, with a great fringe of Gold and Silver, wherein is kept,
Mahomet's Hirka. It is a Garment with large sleves of a white Camlet, made of
Goat's hair, which the Turks do also look upon as a great Relick. The Grand
Seignor having taken it out of the Coffer, kisses it with much respect, and
puts it into the hands of the Capi-Aga, who is come into the Room by his Order,
after they had taken the Impression of the Seal. The Officer sends to the
Overseer of the Treasury, for a large golden Cauldron, which is brought in
thither by some of the Seignor-Pages. It is so capacious, according to the
description which they gave me of it, as to contain the sixth part of a Tun,
and the outside of it is garnished, in some places, with Emeralds, and
Turquezes. This Vessel is filled with water within six singers breadth of the
brink, and the Capi-Aga, having put Mahomet's Garment into it, and left it to
soak a little while, takes it out again, and wrings it hard, to get out the
water it had imbibed, which falls into the Cauldron, taking great care, that
there falls not any of it to the ground. That done, with the said water he
fills a great number of Venice-Chyrstal Bottles, containing about half a pint,
and when he has stopped them, he Seals them with the Grand Seignor's Seal. They
afterward set the Garment a drying, till the twentich day of the Ramazan, and
then his Highness comes to see them put up again in the Coffer.

A ridiculous and covetous' knack of Devotion.
The next day after that Ceremoney, which is the fifteenth after their grand
Fast, the Sultan sends to the Sultanesses, and the Grandees of Constantiople as
also to most of the considerable Bassa's of the Empire, to each of them, an
Impression of the Seal, in a little scrip of Paper rolled up, and well fastened
with Silk, and with that, one of those Bottles full of water, which is looked
upon as a great favor. But it proves a very dear favor to those who receive
it, and for a scrip of Paper, and a Glass of water, they must send back again
to the Grand Seignor a very considerable Present, not accounting what they
bestow one those persons, who bring from him, those testimonies and marks of
his Affection.

It is to be observed also, That the Capi-Aga is allowed to multiply the said
Water, as far as he thinks requisite, and answerably to his desire of
multiplying the Presents. All he has to do, is only to fill up the Cauldron, as
it is emptied, and that additional water is as good as 'twas before, since it
is intermixed with that wherein Mahomet's Garment had been soaked. For there
are many persons, to whom he sends those Bottles, with out the impression of
the Seal, upon the little piece of paper, and he has a snack out of all that is
bestowed on the Bearers of those Presents. But he is not permitted to make that
multiplication of the Water, any longer than for the space of three days; that
is to say, till the Seventeenth of the Ramazan, after which time, the
additional intermixture of it would not have the Virtue, which they imagine it
has,

As soon as this Present is received by those to whom it is sent, they take the
paper, which has the impression of Mahomet's Seal, and after they have left it
to soake a little while in the Water of the little Crystal bottle, they take
off the water and the paper, swallowing down both together with great devotion.
But it is to be noted, That no body must be so presumptious as to open that
paper; for they swallow it down a^ it is brought to them, after a little
soaking in the water, they being not permitted to see the impression of the
sacred Seal: And they who receive only the little bottle, without the paper,
send for one of their Imans, who are as 'twere, their Priests, and get him to
write down these words in another piece of paper, La he Illa, Alla bull,
vahidul gebber, That is to say There is no other God then God, the punisher of
Crimes. There are others, who order these words to be writ down; La Illa he
Illa, Allahul meliqued vehhab; which signifies, There is no other God then God
alone, the Liberal Emperor, and Pardoner of Offenses. The paper having those
words written upon it, is put into the water of the little Bottle, and so they
swallow down both together, with a strong persuasion, that those words have the
same verue, as the impression of the Seal.

There is also to be seen, in the same Chamber, a very homely kind of Cuttelas,
hanging by the Wall, near the place where the Prophet's Seal The Relics of
Omar.
and Garment are kept. The Scabbard is covered with Green cloth, and they have
it by Tadition, that it had been the Cuttelas of Omar, one of Mahomet's four
Companions, who governed after him, though Ebou-Bequer was the elder of the
two, and Father-in-law to Mahomet. The Arabians affirm, That Ebou-Bequer was a
Jew, by extraction, and one of the most learned of his time; and that, having
renounced the Mosaic Law he taught at Mecha, in the Schools, after which he
beset himself to compose some part of the Alcoran.

Near the Cuttelas, there is also to be seen a kind of short Sword, for which
they have, in like manner, a great veneration, upon a persuasion, that it some
time was the Sword of a certain person named Ebou-Nislum, with which he cut to
pieces, those, who had spread a Heresy in the Law of Mahomet. He came not into
the World till Four hundred years after the death of the Prophet, and at length
destroyed that Sect, which during the space of two Ages before, had given much
trouble to the true Mahometans, and gained several Battles against them.

A ridiculous Sect.
The said Sect was grown very powerful under the denomination of Muhacriguu,
and I have met with some remainders of it in the Mountains of Churdistan, which
is the ancient Chaldes. Those people are very remarkable for their
superstition, and much more for their ignorance; and a man must have a great
care of striking a black Dog, in their presence, or cutting an Onion with a
Knife; for their way, when they are to eat an Onion, is to truth it between two
stones. The came of that gross ignorance, is their not having any Person among
them, to instruct them; and a man may Travel five or six days Journey in their
Country, and not meet with either a Mollah, or a Mosquey. The same reason may
also be given for their being, for the most part, uncircumsised, and that they
who have received Circumcision, had it not till they were Twelve or Fifteen
Years of Age, and that accidentally by going to some place at a great distance,
to find out a Mollah, and defraying the Charges of their Friends and Relations,
who must accompany them to that Ceremony.

The Grand Seignor's Quarter.
Between the Chamber, where these noble Relics are to be seen, and that of the
Forty Pages, of which I have given an Account at the beginning of this Chapter,
you have the Prospect of a treble Portal of Porphyry, that is, three doors at a
small distance one from the other, whereof that in the middle gives entrance
into the Grand Seignor's Appartment. The two others lead to the Lodgings of the
Chokadar-Aga, and the Riquab^ar-Aga, and those lodgings are very dark, because
they are not in a place where light can be brought into them, and that at the
first building thereof, they could afford each of them but one little Window.
But abating that inconvenience, they are well enough furnished, according to
the mode of the Country, you tread upon nothing but silken Carpets; there is no
want of Brokado-Cushins and emboyder'd ones, and the Walls, which are all of
white Marble, entertain the Eye with pots of Flowers plainly painted, at
certain equal distances, about which there has been an ingenious appi^ation of
Gold and Azure. The Grand Seignor's Quarter begins with a Hall, which is
spacious enough, and the embellishments of the inside of it are correspondent
to those of the outside. It is an incrustation of Marble, of several colors,
and the Floor of it is covered only with the large Woollen Carpets, which are
brought out of Persia, but such as are more sumptuous, and much more highly
esteemed, than those which are made of Silk. All about the Hall, for the space
of Five foot, there are spread Coverlets of Silk, of a light color, some
Tufted, some Embroidered, and upon the Coverlets, there are several sorts of
Rich Cushions, four foot in length, and between two and three in breadth.

Amurath's Belvedere.
Of the two Doors, which are within the Hall, one goes to the Appartment of the
Pages, the other to the Quarter of the Sultanesses, and as you go out by this
last mentioned, you enter into a Flower-Garden, in the midst whereof there is a
Basin with its water-work. From one of the ends of the Garden you pass to the
Revan Kou^bi, that is to say, a Chamber supported by Pillars. It is a
Belvedere, or spacious Room, having a delightful Prospect of all sides, which
the Sultan Amurath caused to be built, at his return from the Persian War,
after he had taken the City of Babylon from Sach-Sefi, the King of that
Kingdom, ruined the Province of Tauris, and added that of Erivan to his
Conquests, by the perfidiousness of the Governor. I shall give you an account
anon, how he was justly punished, for that act of Treachery, and I reserve the
Complete history of his baseness, for the Relations of my Travels.

This Room or Arbor, which we call the Blvedere, from the delightfulness of
its Prospect, is built in an Eminent place, upon a steepy Rock. It is a noble
Arched Roof, and the Walls, which are raised no higher than that a Man may rest
his Elbow on them, are all of White Marble, with some Arabian Verses thereon,
cut and gilt. It is open on all sides, and the Lattices all about it, hinder
those that are within it from being seen by such as are on the outside, and
afford them withal one of the most delightful Prospects in the World. For, from
that Room, they have the sight of all Galata and Pera, all that pleasant
Landscape of Asia, about Scutaret and Chalcedon, the Port of Constantinople, one
of the noblest of all Europe, and the Channel of the Black Sea, which at the
point of the Seraglio, is intermixed with the Waters of the Medeterranan, where
there is observable in the midst, as it were, a white foamy streak, which seems
naturally to denote the Confines of Europe and Asia.

The Excellent Wines of Tenedos.
'Twas in this pleasant Arbor, that Amurath was often wont to divert himself,
with that Governor of Erivan, who had taught him to drink Wine, whereto he had
so easily accustomed himself, that many times, he spent three days together, in
a continued debauch. The only Wine he drunk was of the Islands of Tenedos, the
most excellent of any of the Islands of the Archiphelago, and the least
intoxicating; and he soon became as good a proficient in the drinking of it, as
the Master, who had taught him to do it. This Persian Governor was a man
extremely inclined to Debauchery, insomuch that before his perfidious delivery
of the Place to Amurath, as I passed through Erivan, in one of my Voyages to
Persia, he entreated me to make my Abode there for the space of fifteen days,
and to humor him, there was a nece^^ity of spending whole Nights in Drinking,
so that I saw him not all the Day long, which I question not but he employed in
the management of his Affairs, and taking his repose.

Perfidiousness punished.
But, at the long run, lewd actions meet with the Punishment they justly
deserve. Shach-Sefi, King of Persia, would not entertain any proposition of
Peace, no nor so much as give audience to an Ambassador from the Grand Seignor,
whom I saw sent back from Ispahan, where I then was, unless Amurath would
dedeliver up the Traitor, in order, to his punishment. Whereupon, they being
both one day at their ordinary debauch, in the Belvedere, the Grand Seignor,
without any formality, ordered him to be Strangled, in his presence.

The fortune of a beautiful Sicilian Lady.
It was sometimes also Amurath's custom, to bring into that pleasant place,
the Principal Sultanesses, as, his Mothers, his Sisters, and such others as he
had the greatest kindness for. But his most frequent assignations there, was
with a Sicilian Lady, for whom he had a great affection, and who being
extremely handsome and of a mild disposition, obtained of him whatere he
desired. She was taken at Sea, by the Pirates of Barbary, as she was upon her
Voyage into Spain in order to her intermarriage with one of the Grandees of
that Country: And the Bassa of Algiers* sent her a Present, to the Grand
Seignor, who took a particular fancy for her, and made her as happy, as a Woman
can be, who must endure the restraint of the Seraglio.

The Grand Seignor's Bedchamber.
From that door of the Hall, which gives entrance into the Flower-garden, you
pass, on the right hand, into a kind of Gallery, about fifty paces in length,
and twelve in breadth, the pavement whereof is a Chequer-work of Black and
White Marble, at the end of it there is a great Structure, which is wholly of
Marble, and what first entertains the Eye is a pretty lage Door, over which
there is a kind of a flat arched Roof. And both the Roof, and the Door, are
adorned with flowers in embossed work; and amongst those flowers, there are
certain impresses cut in the Marble, and all curiously Gilt.

About five or six paces from that Door, you come to another not inferior to
it, as to beauty, which is that of the Grand Seignor's own Chamber. Its
Cieling, or arched Roof, is according to the model of the Winter-room, whereof
I have given you a Description at the beginning of this Chapter. The only
difference between 'em is, in what issues out of the Angles of the little
Arches; and whereas in the other Room they represent the bottoms of Lamps, gilt
with Gold; in this, they are balls of Rock-Crystal, cut Facet-wise, with an
inter-mixture of precious stones, of different Colors, which must needs give a
very divertive entertainment to the Eye. The Floor of it is covered with
Carpets, which, as to Beauty and Excellency of Workmanship, exceed those of the
other Chambers; and the same thing is to be said, as to the Quilts, the
Counterpanes, and the Cushions; the most part of this Furniture being adorned
with an Embroidery of Pearls, and the whole Room which is very spacious, having
in all parts, several other sumptuous embellishments. And whereas this Room was
Originally designed for the Grand Seignor's Summer-Divertisement, it is
accordingly the more lightsome, and has large Windows on three sides of it. As
to the Sultan's Lodging, he complies with the custom of the Country, or
rather that of all the Eastern parts. There is no Bedstead set up, but toward
the Evening the Pages spread three Quilts one upon the other, at one of the
corners of the Chamber, and place over it a Canopy of Cloth of Gold, garnished
with an embroidery of Pearls.

The Ancient Veneration for Mahomet's Standard.
On the right hand, as you come into this Room, there is a Cub-board, or Press,
wrought within the very Wall, where they keep the Bajarac, that is to say, the
Standard of Mahomet, which has these words for its Impress, or Motto, Nasrum
min Allah, that is, in our Language, The Assistance is from God. This Standard
was heretofore in so great veneration among the Turks, that when there happened
any Sedition, either at Constantinople, or in the Armies, there was no safer or
more expeditious remedy to appease it, than to expose that Standard to the
sight of the Rebels. And that very Expedient has many times proved very
fortunate to the Ottoman Princes, when they have been reduced to their great
Extremities, by the secret Combinations of some Factious Persons. Then does the
Grand Seignor send some of the Mollahs, who are in the nature of Priests,
amongst the Turks, with the Standard, and being come up to the first Ranks of
the Rebellious Forces, they speak to them, in their Language, to this effect:
This Banner is the Standard of the Prophet; all they who are Faithful, and
Obedient, ought to come and submit themselves at the Foot of this Standard; and
they who will not come to it, are Unbelievers, and they ought to be destroyed.
But some years since, the Turks made it appear, that they made but little
account of that Standard; for Hassan, one of the Bassa's, who gave the Grand
Seignor so much Trouble in the Year 1658. turned his back on Mahomet's Banner,
and, followed by his own Party, compassed the Design he was engaged in.

A word further of the Prince's Appartment.
Out of the Grand Seignor's Chamber, there is a passage into a great Hall, the
place appointed for the Reception of the Pages who approach his Person; and
there is adjoining to it a Bath, which is filled by three Cocks, where they
wash themselves, when they go to their Devotions. Out of the same Hall, there
is an ascent of some steps, which brings you to a small Closet, only Wainscoted
about, but well Painted, and well Gilt. That Staircase is always covered with
a red Cloth, the Room is open on all sides, having fair Windows, wherein Talc
is used, instead of Glass; and from thence you have, in a manner, the same
Prospect as from the Belvedere, built by the Emperor Amurath.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the ordinary Employments of the Grand Seignor; The particular inclinations
of the Emperour-Regent, Mahomet IV. And the present State of the Ottoman Family.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
Some inclinations common to all the Monarchs of the Eastern-parts. The Life of
the Seraglio, delicious to one single Person, and incommodious to many. The
Mahumetans zealous observers of their Law. The regulated times of their public
Devotions. The ordinary Employments of the Grand Seignor. How his Table is
served. The Sultan, when obliged to go, in Ceremony, to the Mosquey. The wicked
contrivances of the Moufti to get Money. The present State of the Ottoman
Family. An extraordinary Example of a Father and a Son, who were successively
Grand Vizirs. The pourtraiture of the Sultan-Regent, Mahomet. The Ancient
Custom of the Turkish Emperors, to live by their Labor. The Grand Seignor's
subtilty, in revenging himself of the Moufti
Inclinations common to the Eastern Monarchs.
THE Ottoman Monarchs, and generally all the Princes of Asia, what Reputation
soever they may have gained, for their Valor, have always been guilty of a
bent to Voluptuousness, and Effeminacy, and found great Charms in a slothful
kind of Life. They come out of their Seraglio's as seldom as they can, and
that only, when an indispensable necessity forces them to show themselves in
public, whether it be at the head of their Armies, or in those Ceremonies,
wherein the Law, or common Civilities, require their Presence. True it is, that
some of them were not so great Lovers of Retirement as others, and preferred
the hardships of War, the Divertisements of Hunting, before the blandishments
of Ease, and the conversation of Women: But those may be reduced into a very
small number, and the greatest part of them being more addicted to mind their
quiet, and to lead a Life void of disturbance, have transferred all their
concerns, Civil and Military, to the management of the principal Minister of
State, thinking it enough to content themselves with the account he was pleased
to give him thereof.

The Seraglio a place delicious to one fingle person, and incommodious to many.
It may be said of the Seraglio, That it is a delicate, but withal a solitary
place of abode: but as to the Observations I have made of things, it is
delicious only to a single person, and solitary to all the rest. Of the many
Thousands, of the Male Sex, who are there as 'twere in Prison, and have a
dependence, one upon the other, none but the Prince himself has the sight of
Women; for the Negro-Eunuchs, whom their deformity of Body and Countenance has,
in a manner, transformed into Monsters, are not to be admitted into the number
of Men.

The Mahumetans zealous observers of the Law.
But though the Otoman Monarchs, and generally all that may be comprehended
under the denomination of Turcism, are involved in Voluptuousness, as not
having any tincture of ought relating to polite Literature, yet this is
particularly recommendable in them, that their great pursuance of pleasures
does not ever make them neglect the Divine Worship, and that, setting all
things aside, they are careful to perform what the Law requires of them, upon
that acccount. They are exact and punctual, even to superstition, in all their
exercises of Piety, in their ways of washing themselves, in their Prayers, in
their Fasts, in their Alms, and in their Pilgrimages; which are the Five
principal Articles of the Mahumetan Religion.

The regulated times of their Devotions.
It is a thing sufficiently well known to all people, that the Turks go to
their Prayers, or Devotions, five times a day, that is, in the space of a
natural Day, which amounts to four and twenty hours. For the performance of
this work, there are no certain hours appointed, and it is according to the
Sun's being above the Horizon. Upon which account, there is a greater interval
between their several Offices, in the Summertime, than there is in the Winter,
and they place the principal part of their Devotion upon observations of that
nature. The first exercise is to be performed at the break of day, before
Sunrising; the second at Noon; the third, between that time and Sunset; the
fourth, immediately after his setting; and the last, about an hour and an half
after Night: in all which, unless sickness intervene, they are very punctual,
so that nothing of business, how important soever, shall divert them.

Their fervor in Acts of Devotion.
Nay, on the contrary, some are so zealous, and their fervor is so remarkable,
that being once fixed in their Prayers, they could not be put out of them,
though 'twere to force back an Enemy, who were entering into the City, or that
word should be brought them, that the house wherein they are, was on fire. They
are moreover of a persuasion, that it is a great sin, for them to put their
hand to any part of the body, to scratch* themselves, if there should be
occasion; and they would have the external part to be answerable to the
internal, and correspondent to that abjection, which ought to be the state of
the Soul, in the presence of God, during their Exercises of Devotion.

The Grand Seignors ordinary Employments.
Nor does the Grand Seignor himself desire to be dispensed from the obligation
of performing these acts of Devotion, any more than the meanest of his
Subjects; but, on the contrary, he is very religious in that observance of
their Law, and he always begins the day with the Offices appointed for that
part of it. We need say no more, than that he rises at the break of day, nay
sometimes he is up before, and goes into the Bath to wash himself, especially
when he has lain with one of his Wives, or Concubines. Having finished his
Prayers, he diverts himself in shooting with the Bow, or more commonly in
looking after his Horses, and riding some of them: and sometimes he sets himsef
in a Gallery, where he cannot be seen by any, and contents himself with the
diversion of seeing some exercises performed by his Pages. If an one of them
does something that he is much pleased withal, he sends him a Vest, or some
other thing of value, as an encouragement for his doing better another time,
and to raise an emulation in his Companions. Upon Council-days, he comes
through the close Gallery, to the Window, which looks into the Divan Hall, to
see what they are doing there: and upon the rising of the Council, he returns
to his own Quarter, where his Dinner is brought up to him.

The Services of his Table.
In the services of his Table, there is not any great varitey, or delicacy, the
Dishes that are served up, being answerable to the Bill of fare, which I have
given you in the Chapter, where I treat of the Kitchins. He takes his
refection, sitting, cross-leg'd, as Tailors do amongst us, being surrounded
with sumptuous Brocado-cushions, which keep from him the dampness of the Walls,
and upon the Carpets which cover the Scaffold, or Balcony, where he is seated,
they spread others of Spanish-Leather, lest the former should be prejudiced by
any thing of greasiness, which might fall on the Table-cloath, and soak through
it. This Cloth, which is laid over the Spanish-Leather-Carpet, is of those
sumptuous painted Clothes, which are made in the Indies, and embroidered all
about: and as for Napkins, there are not any used amongst the Turks, who are
near, and cleanly at their Meals, and if sometimes there be any occasion of
wiping, it is done with a little handkerchief. At their refections, they use the
right hand only, and when they have done, there is a Basin of warm water and
soap brought up, for them to wash, and every one takes out his Handkerchief
from under his Sasch, or Girdle, to wipe his hands and mouth. Nor must you
expect in Turkey to find Knives and Forks laid on the Table, but every one has
his Knife lodged in his Sasch, and makes use of, when occasion requires: but
they have no great use for them, inasmuch as their Bread being made thin, as
'twere into Cakes, and eaten in a manner as soon as it is out of the Oven they
break it with their fingers, and all the meat, which is served up to them, is
cut into small pieces, which is also the custom in Persia. But the Spoons they
use, in taking their Pottages, and whatever is liquid upon the Table, are much
larger than ours; and they are wooden ones. The Pages of the Kilar, that is the
Cup-bearers Office bring up the Bread, and the Sherbets, and the Pages of the
Chamber go and take the meat, at the Prince's Appartment, out of the hands of
the Officers belonging to the Kitchen, who bring it in Dishes covered with
Pourcelain, the Grand Seignor not using any Gold Vessels at his own Table.

After Dinner, the Grand Seignor says his Noon-Prayer, and sometimes, on
Sundays and Tuesdays, which are the principal Council-days he comes into the
Hall of Audience, to discourse with his Ministers of State, concerning his
Affairs. On the other days, he walks in the Gardens of the Seraglio, sometimes
with his Eunuchs, sometimes with the Sultanesses, or with the Dwarfs and Mutes,
who show a thousand apish tricks, to divert him: and sometimes he goes a
hunting, or fishing, according to his inclination. But neither his Affairs, nor
his Recreations do ever divert him from performing the five Exercises of
Devotion, at the times appointed by the Alcoran; and it is the general
Persuasion of all the Turks, that if they neglect them, they bring down God's
curse upon themselves, and that they cannot avoid the ill consequences thereof.

The Sultan, when obliged to go, in Ceremony, to the Mosquey.
I have said elsewhere, that Friday is to the Mahumetans, what the Saturday is
to the Jews, and the Sunday to the Christians, in regard it was upon the said
day, that Mahomet took his flight from Mecha; and I have also given this
further intimation, that the Turks count their Months only by the number of the
Moons. There is an ancient Custom, whereby the Grand Seignor is obliged upon
all the first Frydays of the several Moons, to go to the new Mosquey, in regard
that S. Sophia is too near the Seraglio, and besides that there is not, between
those places, room enough for so great a Train, as that of the Sultan, the
people of Canstantinople would not have the satisfaction of seeing him.

His Devotion is so great, that he seldom misses that Ceremony, and when there
passes a first Friday of the month, without his appearance in it, the people is
presently of opinion, that he is sick and thereupon turbulunt spirits are
mutining their factious designs. On those days do they, who have any
complaints to make, of some injustice that has been done them, take their
opportunity and plant themselves in the way through which he is to pass, with
Petitions in their hands, which upon a sign made by the Sultan, are received by
Eunuchs. If the injustice be very great and the person who presents the
Petition be extremely oppressed and injured, he holds a lighted Torch over his
head, which is ordinarily practiced in Turkey upon the like occasions, and by
that mysterious comportment, intimates to the Prince; That if he does not do
him justice, his Soul shall burn in the other World, as that Torch does in this.

Upon the Emperor's going out of the Seraglio, the principal Sultanesses, his
Mother, his dearest Consort, or his Sisters, are in a Room over the great Gate
of that Palace, with Bags full of Aspers, which they fling among the people,
that they may pray, That God would graciously hearken to the Devotions, which
the Grand Seignor is going to perform. His March is after the same Order, and
with an observance of the Pomp, as that of the ancient Greek Emperors, and I
question not, but that those Authors, who have written of the Ottoman Empire in
general, or particularly of the City of Constantinople, have made sufficient
descriptions, of that Ceremony, and therefore I shall think my self dispensed
from the obligations of giving a new one of it. I shall only say this of it,
That it is very Magnificent, and that there is not any Monarch in the World,
who makes so great an exposal of Gold and precious Stones together, wherewith
the Harnesses and Trappings of most of the Horses, as well of the Grand
Seignor, as those of the Bassa's are all covered.

The wicked contrivances of the Moufti, to et Money.
At their return from the Mosquey, the Moufti, on Horseback, and at the head
of a wretched Crew of Greek Christians, of the meanest sort of people (for
there are very few Armenians among them) expect the Grand Seignor, at the Gates
of the Seraglio, and telling his Highness, That those people were
Mis-believers, who had embraced the good Law, entreat him to relieve them, and
to make some provision for their Livelihood. Upon this Exhortation, the Sultan
orders twenty or thirty Purses to be distributed amongst them; nay sometimes
his Charity is so great, as to amount to twenty thousand Crowns, which are
received by the Moufti, and the distribution thereof is made, as he pleases.
But the greater part of it he converts to his own use, and holds an infamous
Correspondence with most of that wretched Crew, who though they often present
themselves for that Benevolence, he pretends not to have any knowledge of at
all. By this Imposture, which is so palpable, and suits well enough with the
followers of Mahomet, does that High Priest of the Mahumetan Law, put yearly
into his Purse, a considerable Sum of Money, which is no small augmentation to
his Revenue. But the Case is the same with him, as with the Bassa's: that is,
he is not exempted from refunding, and we shall, by and by produce a very late
Example of it.

And this may serve for a general Account of the ordinary Lives of the Ottoman
Monarchs while they are within the Scraglio. In their Armies, they have other
Employments, especially they, who have Military Souls, as there have been some
among them, of whom Histories have given us a very noble Character.

The present State of the Ottoman Family.
I come now to the present state of the Ottoman Family, and to the particular
inclinations of the Grand Seignor, who now Reigns. Mahomet, the Fourth of that
Name, the Son of Ibrahim, and a Circassian Lady, was Born in the Year 1643. and
he is, by that account, got into the Thirty fourth Year of his Age, and the
Twenty fourth of his Reign. He has two Brothers, Bajazet, and Orchan, but they
are by another Mother, who is still living, and is perpetually studying how to
preserve them. He has also a third Brother, named Solomon, who is the second of
the Sons of Ibrahim, according to the order of their Nativities. But the Mother
of the last mentioned Son is dead; and thence it comes, that the Soldiery, who
conceive greater hopes of that Prince, than of either Bajazet, or Orchan, his
Brethren, pity him the more, and have the greater Affection for him, upon that
very score of his having lost the support, which he might have expected from a
Mother.

Ever since the time of Bajazet the Second, who first introduced that inhumane
and cruel Custom, of securing the Throne of the Sultan-Regent, by the death of
his Brethren, few of those unfortunate Princes have escaped the Barbarism of
their Elder-Brother, and they, amongst them, who have been treated with
somewhat less of inhumanity, have pined away their Lives in a strict and
doleful Imprisonment, being not permitted to see any body. This was the
Treatment of Ibrahim, the Father of Mahomet, during the Reign of Amurath, his
Brother, the Son of Achmet, by Kiosem, a Woman of Excellent Parts, and well
versed in the Management of Affairs. Mahomet's Brothers are now treated after
the same rate, and the Mother of Bajazet, and Orchan, uses all the endeavors
she can, to secure to them the Affections of the great Officers of the Port,
and the Janissaries, who are somewhat disgusted with the capricious humor, and
extraordinary Covetousness of Mahomet. This Prince was advanced to the Throne
in the Year 1650. after the Death of Ibrahim, his Father, who was strangled by
the Janissaries in a Sedition. He being then but Seven Years of Age, the Regency
was bestowed, during his Minority, on the Old Sultaness, Mother to Ibrahim, who
soon after abused her Authority, and raised a dangerous Faction against her
Grandchild Mahomet, wherein she lost her Life.

An extraordinary Example of a Father and Son successively Grand Vizirs.
The present Grand Seignor, who is a Person much addicted to his Pleasures, and
takes a particular diversion in Hunting, leaves the management of Affairs to
his Grand Vizir Achmet, who has succeeded Coprogli, his own Father, in that
principal Charge of the Empire. It Is a thing which may well pass for a Prodigy,
amongst the Turks, and such as that there has not yet been any Example of it
seen, as perhaps there will not be any other hereafter. I have shown, that it
is a thing absolutely contrary to their Politics; and therefore had it not
been for the great and particular obligations, which the Empire had to
Coprogli, who on the other side, cunningly represented to the Grand Seignor,
that he never durst trust any but his own Son, with the Secret of Affairs,
whereof he only had the Key, this very Achmet, who next to the Sultan, is the
principal Person of the Empire, would have been, at present, but a simple B^y,
or Captain of a Galley.

The Pourtraiture of Mahomet IV. the present Prince.
The Grand Seignor Mahomet is handsome enough as to his Person, his Stature
somewhat exceeding that of the middle sort of persons; he has not too much
corpulency, and his health is in an uncertain state. He is very much troubled
with a Fall, which he received in the violence of his Game, some years since,
by leaping his Horse over a broad Ditch: And whereas that passion is still
predominant in him, this inconvenience attends it, That, when he is not
somewhat favorable and indulgent to himself, in that violent Exercise, he is
sometimes taken off his Horse in a miserable condition, the Remedies which
might be applied to that indisposition, taking no effect, by reason of the
little care he takes to preserve himself. He is a person of an unconstant and
unquiet disposition, which creates the greater trouble to those who wait on
him; and though they study his humors, yet is it a hard matter to satisfy
him. He has a Son, who has been Circumcised with great Solemnity, at the Age,
wherein that Ceremony is to be performed. The Sultaness, his Mother, a Woman of
a Magnificent humor, to augment the Pomp and Splendor of that Action, to the
Eyes as well of the Turks as Forreiners, would have the Garment, which the
Young Prince wore that day, to be all covered with Diamonds, and, to that end,
caused several Rich Piece, of the Treasury to be broken; but after the
Solemnity, all the Precious Stones were carried back into it again.

I said erewhile, that the present Sultan- Mahomet is extremely addicted to
Hunting, and makes it so much his Darling Divertisement, that he makes less
account of the Lives of Men, than he does of his Dogs; and withal, that he is
of a very Covetous Humor. I shall, in one single Example make a sufficient
discovery of both those inclinations in him, and that will also further make it
appear, how well he was skilled, in that Knack of exercising great
Liberalities, without any deduction out of his Revenues.

When the Grand Seignor goes a Hunting, there are Orders sent to a great number
of People, for the space of four or five Leagues about the place where he
intends to Hunt, in order to the surrounding of a certain quantity of Ground,
and for the enclosing of it so well, as that nothing can escape thence. It Is
not to be imagined, this can be done, without great destruction to the
Country, and much inconvenience to the poor People, who are forced to leave
their Work, to carry on an Exercise which is much more toilsome than it, in
which they many times come off with the Loss of Limb, or Life, or some other
disastrous Accident. These continual impositions of trouble and toil, put many
People into the repining humor, insomuch that an Eunuch, who was in favor,
having one day, taken the freedom to represent to the Grand Seignor the
prejudice his Subjects underwent, by those courses which occasioned the
spoiling of their Grounds, and the loss of their Lives, he grew very Angry, and
after some days Imprisonment, he gave him a shameful Ejection out of the
Seraglio.

But, in process of Time, the mischievous Inconveniences occasioned by this
insatiable pursuance of his Pleasures in Hunting, increasing more and more, the
Grand Vizir, and the other Bassa's, resolved to entreat the Moufti, to make a
Remonstrance to him, of the ill consequence thereof, he being the only Person
who might presume to speak any more of it to the Grand Seignor. The Moufti
would by no means hearken to it at first, imagining, as he might well, that his
Harangue would not be pleasing to the Sultan: But, at last, being
over-perswaded to do that good office to the Public, he took Courage, and his
opportunity, to speak to him, with all the insinuation he could.

The Ancient Custom of the Greek Emperors, to live by their handywork.
He could not bethink himself of a better Expedient, to remove that predominant
passion out of his mind, than to represent to him, the Custom of his
Predecessors, who took their diversion in some handiwork, when the War, or the
Concerns of State gave them any remission: That, according to their Example,
their Subjects applied themselves to things that were beneficial, and made all
Arts and Professions to flourish in the Empire, to the great Advantage of the
Public: That Sultan Amurath his Uncle, delighted in making those Horn-Rings,
which are used in shooting with the Long-Bowe: That Ibrahim his Father, was an
Excellent Artist, in the making of Tooth-picks, and other ^mall instruments of
Tortoiseshell: And that it were requisite that so Laudable a Custom should not
be lost, since it gave the People occasion to do the like, and so to avoid
Idleness.

He further Remonstrated to his Highness. That it was much more commendable in
the sight of men, and more acceptable to God, for him to live by the Labor of
his hands, than by the sweat of the People, and the Money arising by
Impositions, which were forbidden by the Law: and that what was allotted for
the peculiar Diet of his Predecessors, was the product of their own handy work:
That true it was indeed, they were not obliged to any assiduity in the
Employments they had fancied, but that what they did was as much for their own
diversion, as to satisfy the Precept of the Law; and when they had finished
some piece of Work, they sent it to some Bassa, for whom they had a particular
kindness, and he received it with extraordinary respect, and abundance of joy:
That he, who was the Bearer of it, when he came to present it, said, That Piece
of Work, was made by the Grand Seignor himself, who had sent him to Sell it, in
order to his own sustenance: And that the Bassa, or other Person, to whom it
was directed, to express how highly he was pleased therewith, gave him a
certain number of Purses for it; not accounting the Present which was to be
made to the Bearer: That what Money came in that way, was designed to bear the
Charges of the Prince's own Table, and by that means, he could not be charged
with living by the Labor of his Subjects.

To this effect was the Moufti's harangue; and I shall tell you by the way,
That the Kings of Persia have the same Custom, or rather the same
Superstition. I in the Reign of Shach-Abas, there were built, at Ispahan,
certain Places called Caravanseras, which are public houses, where the
Merchants are lodged, the Rents whereof are set aside for the maintenance of
the King's own Table; the Money which is raised by the Customs, and other
Impositions, being accounted as to that score, for Haram, that is to say, for
unjust and forbidden, and reserved to be employed in the Exigencies of State,
and not for the Sustenance of the Prince.

The Sultan is cunningly revenged of the Moufti.
The Grand Seignor dissembling and smothering the vexation, into which the
Moufti's Remonstrance had put him, pretended to take his Advertisements very
kindly, and disposed himself to satisfy him, in a short time, how well he
could make his advantage of the Lecture he had read him. He acknowledged, that
he had often thought of what he had represented to him, and that he had a way
of Livelihood in his head, which he hoped would take very well. Some days
passed away, ere the Grand Seignor made the least mention of Hunting; but at
last, he grows impatient, he leaves the Seraglio, and had the good fortune to
kill a Hare with a Gun, the first he had ever destroyed that way. He
immediately sends it to the Moufti, with order to tell him, That he has
followed his Advice, and that having learnt the Profession of a Huntsman, he
has commanded that first piece of his Game should be brought to him, which he
was willing to sell, that he might subsist by the Money it should produce: That
he fail not to give twenty Purses to him who brings it; and that as to his own
Person, he knew well enough what he ought to send him.

The Moufti concealed his surprizal as well as he could, and received the Hare
with great testimonies of his resentments and joy, of the honor, which his
Highness had done him; and having bestowed, according to his own order, Twenty
Purses upon the Bearer of the Hare, sends Sixty more to the Grand Seignor
himself; learning, at his own Cost, and that to the value of Fourscore thousand
Crowns, that men should not be over-forward to give their Sovereigns those
Advertisements, which they desire not of them.

To finish the Pourtraiture of Sultan- Mahomet, he is further chargeable with a
defect of constancy, in his humor, and a roughness of deportment toward his
People, who are thereupon apt to have the less Affection for him. And whereas
he is indefatigable in his Hunting-Exercises, and spends whole days therein,
even in the severest part of the Winter-Season, it happened, one day, as he was
returning home, from the Sport of running down a Stag, that his Grand Faulconer
took the boldness to represent to him the inconvenience of exposing his Slaves
so much in the Ice and Snow, by which means there had died about Thirty of them
the Night before, and the rest were in a fair way to follow them. The Prince,
not moved at all with that Remonstrance, made this Reply to the Grand
Faulconer, That, if the Weather proved very hard, they should have a care of
his Dogs, and allow them clothing, and other accommodations, lest the rigor
of the Season might take off any one of them; making not the least mention of,
or provision for the men, whom he sacrificed to his Divertisement. That tough
Repartee having been spread among the People, has begot such animosity in them
against this Prince, that there is no question made of his being sensible
thereof, and that it is, in some measure, the cause of his keeping so much at a
distance from the Metropolis of his Empire, where he does not think himself
secure.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Women's Appartment.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The impossibility of having a full knowledge of the Women's Appartment, in the
Seraglio. The Commerce between the Jewesses and the Sultanesses. The doleful
Story of Two Famous Wrestlers. The great Severity of the Sultan- Amurath. How
to distinguish between what is true, and what fabulous, in reference to the
Sultanesses. A strange Story of an Old Woman. Polygamy prejudicial to the
propagation of Children. The great Secrecy of the Grand Seignor's Amors.
The impossibility of having an exact account of the Women's Appartment*
I Make a Chapter by it self of the Appartment of the Women, only to entertain
the Reader, with the impossibility there is, of having a perfect knowledge of
it, or getting any exact account, either what the accomodations of it are; or
how the Persons, who are confined therein, behave themselves. There is not in
all Christendom any Monastery of Religious Virgins, how regular and austere
soever it may be, the entrance whereof is more strictly forbidden to men, than
is that of this Appartment of the Women: insomuch that my white Eunuch, who has
supplied me with so particular a description of the inner part of the Seraglio,
could give me no certain information of this Quatter of it, where the Women are
lodged. All I could get out of him, was, That the Doors of it are kept by
Negro-Eunuchs, and that, besides the Grand Seignor himself, and sometimes, the
Physician, in case of great necessity, there never enters any man into it, no
nor Woman, besides those who live in it, and they are never permittied to go
out of it, unless it be in order to their confinement in the Old Seraglio. But
we must except, out of that number, the Sultanesses, and their Maids, or Ladies
of Honor, whom the Grand Seignor allows, when he pleases, to come into the
Gardens of the Seraglio, and whom he sometimes takes abroad with him, into the
Country; yet so as that they cannot be seen by any person whatsoever. Four
Negro Eunuchs carry a kind of Pavilion, under which is the Sultaness, and the
Horse upon which she is mounted, all save only the head of the horse, which is
seen on the outside of the Pavilion, the two fore pieces of which taking him
about the Neck, are close fastened, above, and below.

And as to the Physician, he is never admitted, as I said, but in case of
extreme necessity, into the Appartment of the Women, and with such precautions,
that he can neither see the person who is indisposed, nor be seen by her, but
to feel her Pulse through a piece of Lawn, all the other Women having retired
from her Bedside, and the Negro-Eunuchs having taken their places. Thus you
see what precautions they use, to deprive the Women, of the Seraglio, of all
means of having any access to Men, or indeed so much as a sight of them: and if
it happen that some Jewess has entrance into their Quarter, to Trade with
them, and to sell them some little Rarities, they are strictly searched by the
Negro-Eunuchs, lest there should happen to thrust in some Man, disguised in
Woman's Clothes, in which case immediate death would ensue. And when the
Curiosity of some Christian Ladies has inclined them to see the Sultanesses,
they seldom escaped without the receiving of some affront; and I could produce
some examples of it did I think it covenient.

The Commerce between the Jewesses and the Sultanesses.
It might be imagined, that, by the relation of the Jewesses, it were possible
to have some account, of the embellishments of the Halls and Chambers of the
Appartment of the government of that Female Republic. But it is to be noted,
That these Jewesses are not permitted to go far into it; for there is a Chamber
appointed for the management of their Traffic, and the Negro-Eunuchs are the
Brokers between them, and the Sultanesses. They take cognizance of all, and
what the Princesses have a mind to buy, passing, through their hands they make
them pay double and treble what the things are worth, and so heap up Wealth,
though they have but little occasion or opportunity to make use of it.

The doleful Story of Two Famous Wrestlers.
But I do not expect, any one should wonder at that great exactness, of not
permiting any man, no not even a White Eunuch, to approach the Appartment of
the Women, after an Accident, which happened at Adrianople, in the Year of our
Lord M. DC. XXXIX. and which I shall here insert in few words. Amurath, at his
return, after the taking of Bagdet, came and made his abode, for some time, at
Adrianople, He had a Page, belonging to the Treasury, who was a Native of
Tocat, in Natolia, and, from the place of his brith, they gave him the name of
Tocateli. He was a well-set Young man, robust, skillful in Wrestling, and, upon
that account, the Grand Seignor had made Chief of the Wrestlers.

It happened, that one of the most Famous, for that Exercise, came about that
time to Adrianople, out of the Confines of Muscovy, and in all the Cities,
through which he traveled, he had always been too hard for those who had
presented themselves to Wrestle with him. His Reputation was spread all over
the Empire, where he had not met with any Wrestler, who acknowledged not
himself inferior to him; Which Report coming to the Page of the Treasury, he
conceived so great an emulation at the Fame of that Man, whom all the World so
higly celebrated, that he sent one of the Halvagis, to carry him a Civil
Challenge from him, and to acquaint him, That he was desirous to have a Trial
of Skill with him, in the Grand Seignor's Presence. He sent him word withal,
That, before his Highness had any notice of it, 'twere convenient, they made
some trial of their strength; And that no body might know any thing of it, he
would send him a Bostangi's Garment and Cap, by which means he might come into
the Seraglio.

When the Grand Seignor is not within the Seraglio, where ever it be, the
Bostangis are permitted to come into, and to go out of it, by the Garden-Gate;
and there being a great number of them, it is no hard matter to get a man in
under their accoutrements. By this contrivance did the Muscovian Wrestler get
into the Seraglio, the next day, upon the solicitation of the Page, who sent
him what was requisite; the Grand Seignor being that day, gone a Hunting. They
both put on Drawers of Leather well liquor'd with some fat or oily stuff, all
the rest of the body being stark maked, and liquor'd in like manner: and after
a long dispute, the Page had the better, whether he got it fairly by his own
strength, and skill, or that the other yielded the victory, out of complaisance.

This Action passed in the midst of the place which is before the Garden, in
the presence of the Mutes, and all the Pages of the Seraglio; and the Grand
Seignor being returned from Hunting, the Superintendent of the Treasury told
him, That there was come into the City, a Pehlivan, a Muscovite by Country,
robust, and of a good mien, of great strength, and well experienced in
Wrestling, and that if his Highness pleased he should have the satisfaction to
see him engaged in that Exercise. The Grand Seignor commanded he should be
brought into the Seraglio, the next day, and that Tocateli should have notice,
to be ready to entertain him.

Being both come to the place, and in a condition ready to close, the Grand
Seignor came into a Gallery, attended by all the Grandees of the Seraglio, to
be Spectators of that Trial of Skill in Wrestling. The Victory having stood as
'twere in the balance a good while, and all Spectators, being somewhat
impatient, to see which side it would turn to, a Mute expressed himself by
signs, to one of his Companions, to this effect, That he wondered the Page, who
should have derived new strength and courage, from the Grand Seignor's
presence, found it so difficult to get the better of the Muscovite, whom he had
so easily worsted the day before*

The language of the Mutes, by signs, is as intiligable in the Seraglio, as if
they had the liberty of speaking, and the Grand Seignor, who understands it as
well as any of them, as having been accustomed thereto from his Infancy, and
commonly discoursing with them, was strangly surpised, to understand that the
Muscovite had been, the day before, in the same place. His indignation
immediately flushed into his face; he commanded the Wrestlers to give over
their Exercise, and, calling the Page to him, he asked him, how he had
contrived that man's entrance into the Seraglio. The unfortunate Tocateli, who
could not deny a thing, which so many others were ready to restifie, acquainted
his Highness with what had passed; whereupon, the Sultan, incensed at the
greatness of his confidence, prevented his making an end of the Story, by
commanding the Bostangi-bachi to be presently sent for, whom he ordered to
seize on the Muscovian Wrestler, and see him receive Five hundred blows on the
soles of the Feet, with a Wand or Cudgel; which no doubt was enough to make him
incapable of exercising himself, for a good while after. The Over^eer had
Orders, to see the same punishment inflicted upon the Page Tocateli; which was
immediately put in execution: the Grand Seignor having, in the mean time,
retired into the Appartment of the Women.

It was the Opinion of most about the Seraglio, that those two unfortunate
wretches would have escaped, with the punishment of Five hundred blows, each
of them, upon the soles of their feet. But the Grand Seignor, who was resolved
to have their lives, and had retired, purposely into the Lodgings of the Women,
to prevent all mediation for their pardon, sent away presently a second Order,
to the Bostangi-Bachi, whereby he was commanded to see the Page hanged up, in
the Evening, on a Tree, which is at the Corner of the place where they had
Wrestled, and the Muscovite on another Tree, which is without the Gate of the
Seraglio.

Amurath's great Severity.
Some would be*a^t to think, that these two Executions were enough to appease
the Prince's (...) but it proved otherwise. The next morning, the Sultan-
Amurath sent for the Capi-Aga, the chiefest amongst the Eunuchs, and the Grand
Master and Comptroller, of the Seraglio, and commanded, That the Gellad, who is
the common Executioner, should also give his attendance. Upon the passing of
these Orders, all those, that were present, cast themselves at his Highnesse's
feet, beseeching him to consider, That the Capi-Aga was innocent, that he had
not the least notice of the confidence of the Page, and that, if it had come to
his knowledge, he would have severely punished it. The Grand Seignor continuing
still extremely incensed, could not be appeased by all the entreaties and
submissions they made to him, and would have the Capi-Aga, as Grand Master of
the Seraglio, to be answerable for all those that come into it; when, for the
good fortune of that principal Officer of the Sultan's Palace, there came in
the Moufti, and the Seligdar, Chief of the Pages of the Chamber, who with much
ado made a shift to beg his pardon. Yet was not that ganted but in part; for
all they could obtain, extended only to the saving of his life; and so the
Grand Seignor ordered him to be immeditely thrust out of the Seraglio, with a
charge never to enter again into it, while he lived; and instead of the Dignity
of Bassa, whereto he should have been advanced, to be reduced, to a small
Penssion of Three hundred Aspers a day.

I thought pertinent to my design, to bring in this Story of the Two wrestlers,
in order to the greater confirmation of what I have affirmed at the beginning
of this Chapter, concerning the impossibility there is, for any person
whatsoever, Man, or Woman, to get into the Appartment of the Sultanesses, when
they punish, with so much severity, a Stranger, who without express order,
presumes but to set his foot within any Court of the Seraglio.

How to dstinguish what is true, and what fabulous, as to the Sultanesses.
Take it then for granted, that this is all that can be known, with certainty,
of the Appartment of the Women, who are subservient to the pleasures of the
Ottoman Monarchs; whatever is scattered abroad, beyond this Account thereof,
being grounded only upon imaginations and conjectures, which happily are at a
great distance from the truth. Certain it is, that this Quarter of the
Seraglio, as to some part of it, has a fair Prospect upon that of the Grand
Seignor, and that the Doors of it are kept night and day, by a certain number
of Negro-Eunuchs, the most deformed, and the most dreadful to look upon, that
can be found. It is certain also, that it is well furnished with abundance of
most beautiful Women, of several Countries, who, by the chance of War, or
otherwise, are fallen into the hands of the Bassa's, and Governors of
Provinces, who send them up, as Presents to the Grand Seignor. It is known
also, That, of that variety of Women, the Prince does not appropriate to
himself above two or three, whom he has the greatest affection for; nay some of
those Princes have confined themselves to the embraces of one only, after
intermarriage. And this is affirmed, at Constantinople, of Solomon the Great,
after he had plighted his faith to Roxulana, contrary to the ordinary Policy of
the Turks, after the affront, done by T^mur-leng, to the Wife of Bajazet. The
white Eunuchs, who wait in the Grand Seignor's Lodgings, are able in some
measure, to give an account of these things, in regard that the Woman, who is
to participate of the Grand Seignor's Bed, is conducted into his own Chamber;
and, if it be a new Amor, the noise of it is spread, the next day, all over
the Seraglio.

It is also known, That the first of those Women, who is delivered of a
Malechild, and by that means, becomes Mother to the persumptive Heir of the
Ottoman-Empire, is considered as the principal Sultaness, and treated according
to her dignity: and the others, who afterward have Sons or Daughters, have
also the quality and denomination of Sultanesses; but the number of the Women,
who are to wait on them, is much inferior, to that of those who are to attend
the principal Sultaness. It is known in fine, That those young Princes are
brought up under the tutelage of their Mothers, till they are so many years of
Age; and when they are strong enough to be put upon certain Exercises, they
have Governors and Masters appointed over them, in a distinct Quarter by
themselves.

Besides these things, which may be positively known, concerning the Appartment
of the Women, in the Seraglio, it may well be immagin'd, that the
embellishments of their Lodgings are answerable to those of the Grand Seignor,
since it is the Place, where he passes away the most divertive part of his
time. It is also not to be questioned, but that it has its Infirmary, its
Baths, and the other accommodations, and conveniences, that can be wished for.
It may also be conjectured, that there is, in this Quarter, an observance of
the same regulations, as there are in the Chambers of the Ichoglans: That some
of the more ancient Maids are Mistresses over the Younger ones, and are, night
and day employed in observing their actions; and that their unvoluntary
restraint forces them to the same unseemly Actions amongst themselves, as the
brutish Passions of those Young Men engages them in, whenever they can find the
opportunities to commit them. And this presumption has no doubt given occasion
to the Fabulous Story, which is related of their being served up with Cucumbers
cut into pieces, and not entire, out of a ridiculous fear least they should put
them to undecent uses: they who have forged the Story not knowing, that it is
the custom in the Levant, to cut the Fruit across, into great thick slices,
as I shall make it appear in the Chapter, where I treat of Gardens. But it is
not only in the Seraglio, that that abominable Vice reigns, but it is
predominant also in the City Constantinople, and in all the Provinces of the
Empire, and the wicked Example of the Men, who, slighting the natural use of
Women-kind, are mutually inflamed with a detestable love for one another,
unfortunately enclines the Women to intimate them.

A strange Story of an old Woman.
Of this, there was a strange instance in the time of Solomon, the Magnificent.
An old Woman was guilty of such an excess of extravagance, as to put on Man's
Clothes, and to give out, that she had bought a Chiaoux's place the better to
compass her design, of obtaining the only Daughter of a Tradesman of
Constantinople, with thing whom she was desperately fallen in love, having made
fruitless attempts, by other ways, to satisfy her infamous inclinations. The
Father not suspecting any thing of her wicked intentions, and being withal
poor, grants her his Daughter, the Marriage is solemnized in the presence of
the Cadi, and the imposture having been discovered the very Wedding-night, the
old woman was condemned the next day to be thrown into the Sea, there to quench
the Gomorrhean Inflammations of her lewd desires. This Story is to this day
related in Constantinople, and I have had it from several good hands.

Polygamy prejudicial to propagation.
These insatiable salaciousness amongst the Women, are the effects and
consequences of the same inclinations in the Men; and the Turks are so much the
more execrable and abominable as to this particular, the more they are
permitted a plurality of Wives. But, whether it happens through a just
punishment from Heaven, or proceed from their Sorceries, which are common and
allowed in Turkey, and ordinarily practiced by the Women, in opposition one to
another, to appropriate the Affections of their Husbands, it has always been
observed, That the Turks who keep many Women, are not so well stored with
Children, as they, who observe Conjugal Chastity, and confine themselves to
one. I question not but those Authors, who have written of the Mabumetan
Religion, have given a sufficient account of that plurality of Wives, and of
the Ceremonies of Matrimony amongst the Turks.

The Secrecy of the Grand Seignor's Amors.
As to the manner, how the Grand Seignor demeans himself in the prosecution of
his Amors, it is a Secret, which I shall not enquire into; I have not much
endeavored to make any discoveries of it, and it is a hard matter to give any
Account thereof, without some hazard of travesting History into Romance. They
are Intrigues, which do not admit of any Confident, by whom they may be
disclosed, and all that is commonly related thereof, is happily at a great
distance from the true state of things: not to press this, That we ought to
have a respect for all Princes, and to forbear divulging what Informations we
may possibly have received, of their secret Amors.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Entrance into Constantinople of the Sultaness, Mother to the Grand
Seignor, whom they honor with the Title of la Valide, on the Second of July,
1668.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The order of the March. The Wealth of the Grand Seignors Favorite. The
Sultanesses Coaches. The prohibitions to look on her.
ON the Second of July, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand, six Hundred,
Sixty and Eight, the Sultaness, Mother to the Grand Seignor Regent, at her
return from Adrianople, made her Entrance into Constantinople, where I then
was, of which Entrance take the ensuing Description.

The Order of the March.
About Six in the Morning, some numbers of Janissaries, not observing any order,
took their way toward the Seraglio, sometimes ten, or more, sometimes twenty,
in little detachments, which lasted for some time.

After them came two hundred men on Horseback, belonging to the House of the
Cologlou, that is to say, the Grand Seignor's Favorite, with short Guns
resting on the Bow of their Saddles, and all very meanly clad, as also the
Officers of his Kitchen, who coming in the Rear of the others, were, in like
manner, poorly habited, and ill mounted. After them appeared in somewhat a
better order, the menial Retinue of the Caimacan, his Officers, as well those
belonging to the Chamber, as those of the Stables, were very handsomely
mounted, and all in their yellow Garments.

The next appearance was that of the Spahis, who are the Sultaness-Mother's
Lifeguard. Of those there were four hundred, which made a handsome Show, being
all well mounted, and well clad. They had all their Coats of Mail, with their
Vests of red Taffeta, and had on the right side a Quiver of Crimson Velvet,
embroidered with Flowers of Gold; and on the left, a Bow in a Cover of red
Velvet, embroidered as the other. They had all of them Helmets on their Heads,
and over them white Turbants, and from the Helmets there hung small Chains of
Mail, resembling Locks of Hair, which they use when occasion requires, to ward
off a blow from the Neck and Face. Every one of them had also a Lance in his
hand, and the Trappings of their Horses were of one of these three Colors,
yellow, violet, and red, of a rich Stuff, with an embroidery of Silver.

The Spahi-Bachi came in the Rear of them, having a Plume of Heron-tops in his
Turbant, three foot in height, which made him remarkable, and distinguished him
from all the other Spahis. On the breast-piece of his Horse, were fastn'd a
dozen little Scarffs, which hung down negligently, and he was attended by six
Pages, who had Caps on, after the Slavoman Mode, red Vests tucked up about the
waste, and yellow Hose, or Drawers.

After the Spahis, there passed several Janissaries, but not marching in any
order, followed by two hundred men on Horseback, and in the Rear of them, came
the Janizary-Aga, a Person of a very goodly presence. He had for his immediate
Attendants six gentle young Persons, who had each of them, hanging over his
shoulder, a kind of Quiver, full of small Wands, which are a sort of Arrows,
without any Iron-work at the ends.

After the forementioned, there came up twelve men, who are as it were the
Masters of the Ceremonies, in very ridiculous Accoutrements. They had Silver
Wands resting on their Shoulders, their Vestments were garnished with small
Bells, and they had Caps on, which had somewhat hanging down of each side,
resembling Asses Ears.

The next appearance after that extravagant Party, was that of a hundred
Capigis, all well mounted, every one with a Lance in his hand, with a Flag
fastened thereto, reaching from the top to the bottom, which made a very noble
Show. In the Rear of the Troop came the Capichi bachi, distinguished from the
rest by a high and large Plume of Heron-tops, which added much to the
gracefulness of his looks, and Person.

After them, came a hundred Chiaoux's, well clad, and well mounted, having
their great Caps on their Heads; and in the Rear of them came the Caimacan,
having a Cap of the same fashion, attended by twenty Pages, very neatly clad.

The next appearance was that of five or six hundred Bostangis, with their Caps
like Sugar-loaves, their Habits of a red linen Cloth, and Muskets on their
Shoulders. The Bostangi-bachi came after them, sumptuously clad, and mounted,
with a Chiaoux-Cap upon his head, and a great number of People about him.

There appeared next, two hundred Cadis, making a most noble Show, all modestly
clad, with their Busquins of black Spanish-Leather, and white Turbants, like
great Balls of Wool, or Silk.

They were followed by the Scherifs, who affirm themselves to be of the kindred
of Mahomet, and made up a Troop of sixty Persons. As they were the Relations of
the Prophet, they wore green Turbants of an extraordinary bigness.

After the Scherifs, came the two principal Officers of the Moufti (for he
never appears in Person in these sorts of Ceremonies) and they were clad in
white, having a very demure and religious Countenance.

The wealth of the Favorite.
The Cologlou, or Grand Seignor's Favorite, appeared next mounted on a gallant
Horse, whose Harness and Trappings were of the richest. The Stirrups were of
Gold, and the Housse was embellished with an embroydery of Gold and Pearls. His
Vest was of a red Brokado, and his Cap like those of the Chiaouxes. Two men
held the Reins of his Bridle, and his Horse curvetted all along, as if he had
been sensible of the goodly presence of his Master, and how well it became him.
He was a person of a good stature, and of a graceful Countenance, having withal
a mild and sprightly look, and every one saluted him, as he advanced still
toward the Seraglio. The Servants belonging to his Stables marched after him,
and fifty Grooms led each of them a Horse in his hand, and those Horses were
all highpriz'd, and their Harnesses as sumptuous as could be made. It Is
commonly reported, That this Favorite, who is a person of very great merit,
has acquired vast Riches, and that his Train, whether as to the number of
Servants, or as to that of Horses, surpasses that of many great Princes.

The Sultanesses Coaches.
There came up next a small Troop of Negro-Eunuchs, marching confusedly, before
the Coaches of the Sultaness, Mother to the present Grand Seignor, all well
mounted, and magnificently clad, in different colors.

There appeared afterward Six Capigis, about the first Coach, drawn by six
Excellent Horses. They had each of them a Lance in his hand; and, in the Rear
of them, there appeared a Horse-tail-Banner, of a pale-red color, whereby it
was known, that some Bassa's were coming up, as indeed there were, and they
were a Convoy to the second Coach, drawn by six white Horses, in which was the
Sultaness-Mother, and another Sultaness. Two Black Eunuchs marched on each side
of it, the Boots, or Doors being latic'd, that the Princesses might see, and
not be seen. Which hindered not, however, but that, as the Coach of the
Sultaness came forwards, some were still crying out to the People, and
commanding them to look the other way; which Command it concerns them exactly
to obey, and that especially in Persia, where they must get away as far as they
can, to avoid the hazard of receiving a good blow with a Sable.

After the aforesaid Coach, there passed by Twelve other Coaches with four
Horses apiece, wherein were the Female-Slaves belonging to the Sultanesses,
having two Negro-Eunuchs, at the Doors of each Coach, which were latic'd, as
the former: After which there followed several Litters, and four great Wagons,
full of Snow, for the use of the Sultanesses and their Retinue.

All this Cavalcade, consisting of between five and six thousand men, took up
almost three hours in its passage, and having made its Procession through
Constantinople, Iodg'd it self in the Seraglio, according to the description I
have given you of it.

Of the French Nation, there were several Persons of Quality, who had the
Curiosity to see that Entrance; and among others, Monsieur Ribier, de
Ville-neuve, a Councellor of the Parliament of Paris; Monsieur Le Mairat, a
Counselor of the Grand Council; The Abbot of Champhuon, de la Saulsay, all
Parisians; and Monsieur Aubert, a Native of New-France, and, by Extraction, a
Norman, Son to the Governor of Guardaloupe.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Gardens of the Seraglio.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Revenues of the Gardens employed for the Grand Seignor's Table. Cucumbers,
a fruit of much delicacy amongst the Levantines, and how they eat them. A noble
Pyramid, resembling Trajan's Pillar. Fountains. The number of the Gardiners.
The Revenues of the Gardens, how employed.
IT is an ancient Custom, or rather, a Law, established by the Ottoman Princes,
that the profits made out of their Gardens, should be contributary to the
keeping of their own Tables, and they have several of them, in the
Neighborhood of Constantinople, as well on the Europaean side, as the Asian,
all along the Seashore. But I shall give an Account only of the Gardens of the
Seraglio, that so I may not exceed the limits I have prescribed to my self in
this Relation.

There are in the Seraglio several Gardens, wherein there are only Flowers, in
diverse Appartments, and particularly in that of the Grand Seignor, and, no
question but the same thing may be said of the Quarter of the Sultanesses. Yet
is there not any thing extraordinary, which might oblige me to give this
description thereof. The great Garden, whereof the Bostangi-bachi has the
oversight, as he has also of all the others belonging to the Grand Seignor,
takes up the greatest part of the Seraglio* and consists of a great number of
Walks, planted of each side with Cypress. Those Walks are much neglected, so
that in several places, they are not cleared of Briars and Thorns. When it is
known, that the Grand Seignor is to come and take his divertisement there, a
great number of Bostangis are immediately commanded out to make clean the
Walks, which he uses to frequent, and the spaces between those Walks are so
many Kitchin-Gardens, or Orchards, which are very well furnished with
Fruit Trees, of several excellent kinds. Of Strawberries and Raspices there is
great store, and they have large beds of Melons, and Cucumbers; but most of
these last, which are accounted a great delicacy amongst the Levantines.

Cucumbers a great delicacy amongst the Levantines.
As to the Cucumbers, they commonly eat them without taking off any thing of
the rind, after which they go and drink a glass of Water. In all Asia, it is
the ordinary sustenance of the meaner sort of People, for the space of three or
four months; the whole Family lives upon them, and when a Child asks for
something to eat, whereas in our Europaean Countries, they would give him
bread; in the Levant, they bring him only a Cucumber, which he eats raw, as it
comes out of the Garrison. Laborious persons, and such as are in a manner tired
with working, such as Camel-drivers, and those who are entrusted with the care
of the Horses, and Mules, in the Caravans, make a kind of Salled of their
Cucumbers, not much unlike the Mash, which we would give our Horses. When they
are come to the Lodging place, where the Caravan is to make a stay, they take a
large Basin, which they almost, fill with water, and having put some sour milk
into it, they cut a great number of Cucumbers, into great slices, and, so make
a kind of mash of them. It Is a pleasant sight to see them at the confounding of
it. Amongst ten, or twelve, who all stand round the said Basin, there is but
one wooden Spoon, which every one takes his turn, till they have made a shift
to empty the Basin. That done, they fall a drinking of water, and those who
have wherewithal, go and take a dish of Coffee, or smoke a Pipe of Tobacco.

But to do them all the right they deferve, the Cucumbers, in the Leavant are
excellently good, and, though eaten raw, they never do a man any hurt. The
Story of the Cucmbers which occasioned the cruel death of Seven Pages of the
Grand Seignor's Chamber, is not, happily, known to all people; or at least, all
know not the reason, why the Pages of the Chamber are not now permitted to go
into the Gardens.

Sultan Mahomet, the second of that name, taking a turn in the Gardens of the
Seraglio, attended by his Pages, was much surpised to see a bed of Cucumbers,
which looked very fair to the eye, and were extremely forward considering the
Season. Being 2 great lover of that fruit, he recommended them to the
Bostangi-bachi, who told them over every day, and, with some impatience,
expected their maturity, that he might present them to the Grand Seignor. Some
days after, going to Visit the bed, he found his number of Cucumbers shorter,
than it should have been, by three or four, and that they who had taken those
that were missing, had made choice of the ripest, and thereupon making a strict
enquiry, to find out who had been guilty of that presumption, he found that the
Pages of the Chamber were the only persons who had been, that day, in the
Gardens.

Upon that discovery, he went and gave an account of the whole matter to the
Grand Seignor, who was so highly incensed thereat, that, not prevailing with
any one of the Pages to acknowledge the Theft, he, out of a cruelty as much
above all credit, as beyond all example, caused the Bellies of seven of them to
be ripp'd up. The Theft was found in the Belly of the seventh of those
unfortunate Young Men, who, after the execution done on the other six, would
not acknowledge his guilt, out of hopes, that the Prince's indignation would
not have extended so far. From that very time, and in commemoration of so
strange an action, the Pages of the Chamber are not permitted to go into the
Gardens of the Seraglio; what one Prince has established, as I have hinted
elsewhere, being never revoked by his Successors, who bear a certain respect to
the enactions of their Ancestors.

A Pyramid, much resembling Trajan's Pilliar.
In the midst of the Great Walk, which goes from the Seraglio, to the Sea-Gate
which looks toward Scudaret, there is a Pyramid, erected upon a square
Pedestal, and which four men would have much ado to fathom. About the Pedestal
they have suffered some briars and thorns to grow, and it seems to have been
done out of design, to hinder peoples coming close to it. The Pyramid, from the
top to the bottom, is full of Figures, whereof the heads are struck off; and it
may be conjectured by some remainders, that there was a very noble head on the
top of it, as being the Master piece of the work. This Pyramid somewhat
resesembles Trajan's Pillar at Rome; and some, who have seen both, imagine,
they were the work of the same master.

Fountains.
All the Fountains of the Gardens have their Basins of Marble, of different
colors. Near each of them, there is a little Scaffold, surrounded with
Ballisters, which they spread with rich Carpets, and Brocado-Cushions, when the
Sultan comes to take his walk there: and it is only at that time, the Waters
play; which Diversion he frequently gives the Princesses who bear him Company.

Tho Gardiners,
There are appointed for the Culture of these Gardens two thousand Bostangis;
and yet, though there be so vast a number to keep them, they come far short of
the Neat Contrivances and Imbellishments of ours.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Princes who follow the Mahumetan Religion, in Europe, Asia, and Africa.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
General Laws for all the Mahumetan Sects. A Curious Remark concerning the
Emperor of Java's Son. Kings, who follow the Doctrine of Hali. The Royal
Present sent from the Great Mogul to Mecha. The several ways, by which the
Mahumetans come to their Prophet's Tomb. Troublesome Deserts to be passed
through in their way to the Sepulcher of Hali. A Miraculous Channel of Water,
of the continuance of Eighteen days Journey. The Burnt-Offering of a Weather.
General Laws for all the Mahumetan Sects.
I Have so often had ocasion, in the present Relation I have made of the Grand
Seignor's Seraglio, to speak of the Mahumetan Religion, that I am content
before I put a period to this Work, to make it appear, how far it extends into
the three parts of our great Continent: Mahumetisme having not yet set footing
into that which has been discovered but two Ages since. I meddle not at all
with the Doctrine of it, of which I am sufficiently assured that many persons
have written: and I shall only entertain the Reader with a Geographical Chart
of all the Countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa, which are under the dominion
of the followers of Mahomet.

Though the Opinions of their Doctors be different, as to what conecrns the
Explication of the Law, and that there are principally two great Sects, that of
Mahomet, which is the Stock; and that of Hali, one of his principal Successors:
Yet those two general Sects, and the particular ones, which are derivable
thence, are all concordant in the fundamental Points, which every Mahumetan is
obliged, in Conscicnce, to observe and practice. Of those I gave an account,
when I made mention of the Prayers or Devotions, which the Turks are bound to
perform five times a day, and the Pilgrimage of Mecha is one of those principal
Articles. I have also said something of them, in the Chapters treating of the
Present, which the Grand Seignor sends thither every Year; and in this last, I
shall endeavor to express my self fully as to that matter.

In Europe, we have no Mahumetan Princes but the Emperor of the Turks, and the
Cham of the Lesser Tartary: But in Asia there are many of them, who are
powerful, and possessed of great Dominions. The Grand Seignor extends his
Jurisdiction, in this part, beyond the Sources of the River Tigris, and beyond
the mouths, by which it falls into the Sea, and toward the North, as far as
the Territories of the Mengrelians. To go thence from the West to the East,
next the Grand Seignor, we must count the Princes of the Three Arabia's, with
several of whom I have often spoken, in Two of my Voyages, wherein I have been
obliged to pass through the Deserts. The King of Persia, the Great Mogul, the
King of Visapour, the King of Golconda, the Kings on the Coast of Malabar, of
whom the most considerable is that of Comorin; the Great Cham of Tartary, and
the Kings of the Mountains, to the North side of the same Tartary, who are got
into China; All these Kings, I say, follow the Mahumetan, Religion.

A curious Remark of the Emeperour of Java's Son.
Since I have mentioned the Emperor of Java, I shall, by the way, insert here
an observation, which I made at the time of my being in that Island, which was,
That the eldest Son of that Emperor, who regin'd in the year 1648. had six
fingers on each of his hands, and six toes one each foot, and all of equal
length.

Kings following the Doctrine of Hali.
The Kings of Persia, Visapour and Golconda follow the Sect of Hali; and the
Kings of the mountains of Tartary, with some others, have also their particular
Sects. Besides, it is to be observed, that if we except the Grand Seignor, the
King of Persia, the Arabian Princes, and the Cham of Great Tartary, all the
other Kings, whom I have named, have only Idolaters to their Subjects, and all
the meaner sort of people is involved in the darkness of Paganism. But as to
the Grand Seignor's, with all his Militia, they follow the Law of Mahomet.

In Africa, there is a Mahumetan King, whose Territories lie all along the
Coast of Abex, which is toward Arabia Felix, as far as the Cape of Guardafu,
and his Jurisdiction extends over the Red Sea, and the Ocean. The Governors,
whom the Grand Seignor employs in Egypt, and in the Islands of the Red Sea, and
those others, whom he has established all along the Coast of Barbary, at
Tripoli, Tunis, and Argiers, who assume the Title of Kings, are also
Mahumetans; and, in fine, the King of Fez and Morocco follows the same Law.

All these Kings and Princes, are principally unanimous in this Point, That
they acknowledge themselves obliged to send every year some Present to Mecha,
which ordinarily consists in rich Carpets, to be put upon Mahomet's Sepulcher.
Sometimes these The Great Mogul's Royal sent to Mecha.
Presents are made upon a particular Vow; and it happened in one of my Voyages
to Agra, that the Great Mogul, by way of thankfulness to the Prophet, for the
recovery of his health, sent to Mecha, an Alcoron, valued at four hundred
thousand Crowns, which had, in the midst of the Cover, a Diamond, of three
hundred Carats; the rest of it being garnished with several precious Stones on
both sides. The occasion of this Present was, the fright which a certain
Bramere, put him into, upon his telling him, That he should die before the year
was expired, which happened not accordingly. But the King being extremely
incensed at that direful Prediction, and, upon the smart Interrogatory he put
to the Bramere, to wit, whether he knew also the time of his own death, having
received this Answer, That it should be within three days; which really
happened upon the third day, there was a sufficient ground for him to be
frightened, and to conceive an apprehension, that the like accident might happen
to himself, before the time limited. 'Twas that induced him to send a Present
of so great value, to Mahomet's Sepulcher, to acknowledge the favor he had
done him, in not suffering the Prediction of the Bramere to take effect, the
King having not had as much as any indisposition, during all that time.

The several ways whereby the Mahumetans come to the Sepulcher of their Prophet.
When I gave an account of the Pilgrimage of Mecha, upon occasion of the Tent
and Carpet, which the Grand Seignor sends thither every year, I made no mention
of the several ways which the Caravans take, according to the several parts of
the World, from whence great multitudes of Mahumetans do every year take their
progress thither.

In the first place, the Ambassadors, whom the Kings of the Islands, whereof I
have given you the names, and the Kings of the Indies, on this side the Ganges,
send to the Sheck of Mecha, with their Presents come by Sea, to Mocha, a
Maritime City of Arabia Felix, and from thence they travel to Mecha by Land, by
the convenience of Camels.

The Persians, who inhabit all along the Seaside make their descent from
Ormus, or to Bandar, and having passed over the Gulf, which, at that place, is
not above twelve or thirteen Leagues in breadth, are forced to cross Arabia ere
they can get to the Prophet's City. But the Inhabitants of the upper-parts of
Persia, toward the Caspian Sea, and all the Tartars, come to Tauris, and from
Tauris to Aleppo, from which place, the great Caravans, which take their
progress through the Deserts, set forth, and bring the Pilgrims to Mecha. Some
take the way of Babylon, but very seldom, because the Bassa exacts a Tribute of
them, and particularly of the Persians whom they account Heretics; and that
consideration has obliged the King of Persia, to forbid his Subjects to take
that Rode, thinking himself not inferior to the Turk.

Troublesome Deserts in the way to Hali's Sepulcher.
Some of the Devouter sort of Persians, and such as are most zealous for their
own Sect, take the way of Babylon, upon this score, that brings them at the
same time to the Sepulcher of their Prophet Hali, which is but eight days
Journey distant from it. This is the most wretched place, of all the places
upon earth, and affords no water but the most corrupted water, which is drawn
out of certain Pits, and that of a Canal, which Scbach-Abas caused to be
brought thither from the Euphrates, but which is now quite out of repair.
Whoever expects to drink good water there, must bring it along with him, from
other places, five or six days Journey distant from the other: And yet that
false Prophet imposes on those, who have such a Devotion for him, not only the
inconveniences of coming so far off; but also those of being in a fair way to
perish by thrist, and hardship of lodging.

The last time it was my fortune to pass through the Deserts, I came to that
detestable place upon this occasion, that meeting with a Courrier, who was come
from Babylon, with two Arabians, whom he had in his Company, he gave us
intelligence, that the Grand Seignor's Forces, which had then newly taken
Babylon, were upon their march back, in little Deteachments, and that there was
no question to be made, but they would seize on our Camels and Baggage. Which
advertisements obliged us to take our course more to the South, and to get
further into the Desert, where we spent sixty and five days in crossing of it,
to avoid meeting with those Forces.

As for the Princes of Arabia, they have no great Journey to make, because they
are the next neighbors to Mahomet's Sepulcher.

A Miraculous Canal of water of the length of 18 days journey.
The Mahumetans of Europe come to Aleppo, and there join the Caravan; and those
of Africa, pass to Grand Cairo, and meet in the Deserts, with the same Caravan
of Aleppo at eighteen days Journey from Medina, where there is a water, which
goes by a Canal, quite to that City, all the way of those eighteen days
Journey. They have it by Tradition, That that water was found by their Prophet
Mahomet, as he crossed the Desert with his Army, ready to dye for thirst, and
that going to drink of it first of any, there issued a Voice to him out of the
Water, which said to him, Prophet, thou will find it bitter: That he made the
Voice this Answer, Let us all drink of it, for I know it is sweet, and I would
to God, that we could always find as good. That thereupon the Voice replying
the second time, Prophet, Command, and I will follow thee: And that as soon as
he had spoken, the Water made a Canal under ground, and followed him quite to
Medina.

From Damas, Jerusalem, and Cairo, they account forty days Journey to Medina,
and it is at the two and twentieth day's journey that they find that water. It Is
partly to see that miraculous Water, which had been sweetened by the Prophet,
that there goes into those places so great a concourse of People, of so many
different Nations, from all parts of the World: in as much as there is no
Mahumetan, let him be at ever so great a distance, and but tolerably in a
condition of health, and supplied with the external accommodations of fortune,
who does not think himself obliged to go once in his life to Mecha, in person,
or to send some other in his stead.

After the Pilgrims have continued certain days at Medina, they go to
Gebel-Araffa, that is to say, the place, where Adam found Eve, his Wife, five
hundred years, after God had created her. It is a City in the Mountains, at the
distance of Two Days Journey from Medina, and at one from Emena, another City,
which is half way between both. As Soon as the Pilgrims are come thither, all
those who are so well furnished, buy a Weather to make a Holocaust of it, and
to distribute it amongst the poor, they being not allowed to keep above two
pounds of it, for themselves. If they do not punctually observe that, and that
some discovery should be made thereof, they are made incapable, ever after,
while they live, of shaving their Heads, or paring their Nails.

From Gebel-Araffa, they return to Medina, where they keep an account of the
time, when the Caravan arrived there; in regard that all the Pilgrims, who came
by Land, are, as I said elsewhere, mantain'd with sustenance for the space of
Seventeen days; but they who came by Sea are sustained, as long as they
continue there, even though they should make it the place of their abode, as
long as they live.

FINIS.
The Publisher unto the Reader.
THE ensuing Narration was put into my hands Five or Six Years ago, by a very
Intelligent Worthy Person, who long resided in the same Family with our Author,
and did assure me, that the Discourse here published, was written with his own
hand, and presented unto that Honorable Person who redeemed him out of
Captivity. The Gentleman who bestowed these Papers upon me, will not be
responsible for the Truth of all therein contained; but I having compared his
Account of several Countries with that of Olearius and other more Ancient and
Modern Writers, have found them very Consonant unto each other, and therefore
do charitably belive him no less Faithful in his Description of those Countries
and People concerning whom little has been said by any besides. By reason of
his long absence from his Native Country, and dis-use of his Mother Tongue, his
style was so rough, odd, and unpleasant, that I was forced to make therein
great Alterations both as to Method and Expression, yet keeping strictly unto
his sense: I have also much abbreviated his Discourse, many things being often
repeated, and he having stuffed it with diverse impertinencies, which would have
been void of all Instruction and Delight. He would never own his true Name or
Pedigree, for Reasons mentioned in his Paper, which I thought altogether
unnecessary to be rehearsed; that of Astracan, wherewith he concludes his
NARRATIVE, being fictitious, and I suppose assumed, because of his long
Residence in a City of that name, from which he made most of his Excursions:
And which with the Adjacent Country he has above all others most particularly
described, giving us the names of several Neighboring Places and Rivers
mentioned by no other Writer. I was highly pleased with the Account he gives us
of Czarofsgorod, which he also sometimes calls Seraichan and Seraichena; the
former of which is the Muscovitish, the latter the Tartarian Appellation, and
inrepreted, both signify the Habitation of the Emperor or Cham, it being
formerly the Metropolis of a great Empire. As also with his mention of a place
on the West side of the Volga, where he says Astracan was formerly situated.
Concerning both which Cities, I shall declare diverse things I have Collected
out of several European and Arabian Writers, which either are not commonly
known, or little regarded. But I must necessarly premise somewhat concerning
the Ancient Inhabitants of the Country wherein these Cities are situated.

The first Nation (of whom I find any mention) who made any fixed habitation in
these Quarters were the Chazari, so named by the Latins and Greeks, but by the
Mahumetans, Alchozar, and Gorjani. This Nation during the Reign of the Emperor
Justine, like a Torrent Overflowed all that Vast Continent which lies between
China and the Boristhenes, Conquered part of India, all Bactria, Sogdiana, and
made the Persians Tributary, by whom they are always called Turks, and their
Prince, Chacan, a Title formerly common unto all great Turkish Emperors. This
Mighty Monarch having conquered the Igors or Jugurs, Avares, Chuni or Huns,
Abtelites or White Huns, and all other Tribes of Turks and Tartars, together
with the Alani (whose Dominion then extended, as appears by Marcellinus, from
the Boristhenes far beyond the most North-East part of the Caspian Sea) entered
into a League with Justine, and styles himself in his Letters, Lord of the
Seven Climates of the World. His Acts may be read at large in Theophilactus
Simocatta; Excerptis de Legationibus: and diverse others of the Eizantine
Historians. This Nation Assisted the Emperor Heraclius in his Wars against the
great Cosroes, whom by their Assistance he overcame. These Cazari were also
possessed of all that part of Turica Chersonesus which is plain and fit for
feeding Cattle, they being addicted, after the manner of all other Scythian
Nomades, unto a Pastoral life; which Peninsula from them was until the Famous
Irruption of the Tartars in the Thirteenth Century, called Cassaria, or
Chazaria, and afterward more corruptly by the Genoeses, Venetians, and other
Latins, Cazaria. I find mention of these Chazari or Chozars in diverse Persian
and Arabian Historians and Geographers. Abulpharagius acquaints us with an
Expedition they made into Persia the 183 Year of the Hegira, which was after
our Account in 799. From whence they returned with great Spoil, and above
100000 Captives: and afterward, in the 514 th. Year of the Mahumetan Epoch,
being A. C. 1120. they made another Inroad, accompanied by the Comanians,) whom
the Arabians call Kaphjacks;) Frequent mention is made of them by that
Deservedly Celebrated Arabian Geographer Al Edrisi, who flourished in the 548
th. year of the Hegira; of Christ, 1153. He always calls the Caspian Sea, Mare
Chozar: and all that Country on the North and to the West of the Caspian Sea,
Terra Chozar. He acquaints us, that the Residence of the Prince of Chozar was
not far above the Mouth of the Volga, which the Tartars call Athel; which name
I suppose it derived from Attila, that Renowned King of the Hunns, being so
called in the Relation of the Ambassadors who were sent by the Emperor
Justine, unto the Great Chacan of the Turks residing in the East. Al Earisi and
his Epitomizer, commonly known by the Name of Geographus Nubiensis intimate,
That these Chozars inhabited diverse other Cities, but that this was the
Mettopolis; he surpresses the Name, styling it only from the River, the City of
Athel; and declares it was divided by the River, the chief and greatest part
being on the West Side; and that the other less considerable on the East Side,
was inhabited only by the meaner sort of People and Merchants, it being a place
of great Trade, that which made it more considerable, was the liberty allowed
unto all of the Public Profession, and Exercise of their respective Religious
Persuasions, Jews, Christians, Mahumetans, and Idolaters being there equally
countenanced, which I suppose might occasion that Dialogue published out of an
Ancient Hebrew Manuscript, by L' Empereur, between the Author a Jewesh Rabbi,
and the King of Chozar. This City is said to have been extended along the River
three miles in length, and its breadth proportionable; the Western part well
fortified; adorned with the Emperors Palace, and several other eminent
Structures. Nassir Eddin, who wrote at the latter end of the 13th. Century,
calls this City in his Geographical Tables, Balanjar, and from him Abulfeda;
they place it in 46 degrees 30 minutes of Northern Latitude; where within six
or eight minutes our best Geographers seat Astracan. And questionless this was
that City which our Author and Olearius call Old Astracan. These Chazari, did I
suppose, conserve their vast Dominion without any great Interruption, at least
until A. C. 900. For Alferganus who lived about that Time, places no other
Nation in his Table of Climes, between China and the Boristhenes; And
Eutichius, who worte about 30 or 40 years after, makes mention of them as a
mighty Nation, and many amonst them converted unto the Christian Belief. About
the middle of the 10th Century these Chazari gave place unto the Cumanians or
Commanians, who were also a Turkish Nation known unto the Turks, Persians, and
Arabians, under the Name of Kaphjack; whether they expelled the Chazari, or
that the former becoming the more Eminent Tribe, gave Law and Name unto these
latter (as has since frequently happened among the Tartars) I will not here
undertake to determine: but this is certain, that suddenly the Name of Chazari
was extinct, and all that Tract of Land from the Nepper unto Turkestan 1500
miles beyond the Volga, was inhabited by these Cumanians, who were often
troublesome unto the Russes, Lithuanians, Hungarians, and other
Neighbour-Nations. But this People was almost totally destroyed by the Tartars
in that great Inundation which happened at the beginning of the 12th Century,
soon after the death of Jingiz Chan; whose Son Hocota being chosen Emperor,
sent his Nephew Batu, or Bathy, the Son of Tussy Jingiz Chan, his Eldest Son
with 400000 Men, to invade the Northern Parts of Asia. The Cumani for diverse
years valianty resisted, and made the greatest opposition the Tartars met with
in all their Conquests; repulsed them in two pitched Battles; but then growing
secure, and dispersing upon the Tartars retreat, they were unexpectedly
surprised, the whole Country overrun, above 200000 killed, their King Kuthen
hardly escaping with 40000 into Hungary, where he met with a kind reception,
had land allotted him, and his Company; which Region is called Campus Cumanus
unto this day. This Country was so miserably wasted by the Tartars that in the
Years 1253, and 1254, when Rubriquis pasted through ir, going unto and
returning from his Embassage to Mangu Chan, there was no fixed habitation,
excepting a few Cottages in the Island where Astracan is now situated.

But Bathy having destroyed the Comanians, ruinated their Cities, and
established his own Dominion, began to think of a fixed aboade, which after
long observation he chose near the River Volga, on the East Side, and
immediately beneath the River Actabon, a great Arm of the Volga, and the first
it dismisles, which empties it self into the Caspian-Sea (having run a course
of near 400 miles, and received several other Branches from the foresaid River)
about 7 Leagues East off the main River. He had newly began this City at the
return of Rubriquis from his Embassage unto Mangu Chan, in the year 1246, and
called Serai; which City was enlarged and beautified by all his Successors,
unto the time of its destruction by Tamerlane, which was almost 150 years.
Bathy was succeeded by Barcah, who was the first professed Mahumetan Emperor;
he by Hocola, or Hoctay, Contemporary with Hayton the Armenian, who has in his
History largely discoursed concerning him: I should here mention all the other
Emperors interceeding between Hocota and Tucktamisch (who was dispossessed by
Tamerlane) together with their Acts, but that I hasten unto that which most
immediately concerns our present Design, and give some account of this City,
which (as I said) was first named Serai, which interpreted signifies only a
Dwelling or Habitation; the beginning of it being a Palace built for Bathy. You
may see what our Traveller says concering it, Page 112. Besides him I find two
Authors who make particular mention thereof; the first is in the History of
Arabshiade, published by Golius. This Author represents it as one of the
greatest and most populous Cities in the Universe, agrees with out Traveller in
the situation, only he calls that Branch which runs out of the Volga and passes
to the South-East, Sencle. The other is Michovius, who wrote his History of the
Tartars in the year. 1515. He affirms, That in his time there remained the
ruins of 300 Temples besides the Walls of the City, and several other
Magnificent Structures. The Tarters have several times attempted to re-edifie
it, but divisions amongst themselves, Wars with the Muscovites, and attempts of
the Cossacks caused them to retire unto places of greater security. But because
little mention is made of this great Revolution by any European Writer I shall
here present the Reader with an account thereof out of the most Authentic
Turkish, Arabian, and Persian Writers. For Calcondilas is greatly mistaken, who
seems to have received by his confident way of writing, most particular
information, when as nothing can be more remote from the truth than what he
affirms, viz, That Tamerlane after several attempts, and two or three Battles
was forced to retire, and glad to secure his Retreat by a Peace, he first made
with Tuckthamisch, which was by both afterward kept inviolable; which is
contrary to the Reports of much more Authentic Historians. The Origin,
Progress, and Event of this War, was after the ensuing manner.

Tamerlane being in effect Prince, but in name only Courachan (the Greeks call
it Kurgant) that is, Viceroy or General over all those Countries which are
comprehended between the Oxus and Jaxartes, wherein Bochara, Samarchand, and
several other famous Cities were contained, extended his Conquests toward
Balch and Chorasan, (the Aria of the Ancients;) which progress of his, filled
Thuetamisch Emperor of Serai (the City we have beforementioned) with
jealousies of his growing Greatness; whereupon gathering a numerous Army, he
resolved to invade him, using no formality, or so much as pretense, he thought
to have surprised his Enemy; but Tamerlane, one of whose Masterpieces was to
gain early Intelligence of whatsoever was designed, or transacted by
neighboring Princes, having timely notice of his intention, gathering all his
own Forces, together with considerable assistance from his Confederates,
marched directly toward his Enemy, and passing the Jaxartes, met him to his no
small astonishment, on the Borders of his own Country; for the Jaxartes only
divided their Territories. After a most obstinate bloody fight, Tameriane
gained the Victory, yet neither absolute, nor without great loss, but it was
sufficient that he had secured his own Dominion. After this success he did for
diverse years attend other Conquests, and having subdued a great part of India,
all Persia, Media, Armenia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, and Syria, he
resolved to requite the Invasion of Thuctamish: whereupon having drawn together
an Army of 500000 men, he marched through Mediae Atropatia, then and still
called Shervan; passed the Portae Caucasiae, which the Persians name Derbent;
thence through Dahestan, and the great Desert between that and Astracan (then
named Gitturchan) and having wasted all that spacious Country on the West Side
of the Volga, depoulated and dismantled diverse fair Cities (the ruins of
several being yet visible to those who Navigate the Volga, as we are informed
by Olearius) he passed the Volga, and on the East Side encountered Thuctamisch,
who had Collected a mighty Force, having besides his own Hords, the assistance
of the Tartars of Cassan, Tumen, Kalmuke, and Dahestan: and his Army by this
accession was more numerous than that of his Enemy. The Battle was long
doubtful, and exceeding all that happened in that Age for carnage and cruelty,
both Parties being full of hatred unto their Adversaries; and knowing that this
Fight would lose or gain them a mighty Empire. They fought three days with
little intermission, and it could not be discerned which had the advantage. But
that which is thought chiefly to have occasioned Tamerlane's Victory, was the
departure of a great Tribe from Thuctamisch, whose Prince Ectave pretended he
had received some great injury or affront, but 'twas indeed thought he was
corrupted: For retreating unto Amuarth the Turkish Emperor, he after the same
mannner betrayed Bajazet, who soon after succeeded; revolting at the beginning
of the fight unto Tamerlane. Thuctamisch being defeated, with great difficulty
made his escape, leaving his Country exposed unto the fury of the Zagataians,
whom so great a slaughter of their own Friends had highly exasperated. They
spared nothing that was capable of being spoiled; demolished Serai, together
with Seraichick upon the Jaick, and Gitturchan, which were the only
considerable Cities on the East Side of the Volga, and leaving the Country a
mere Desert, killing, or Captivating the Inhabitants, driving away the Cattle,
they returned into Persia with great Booty. This happened in the 791 year of the
Hegira. A. C. 1388. Serai, and Saraichick never regained their former splendor;
but (Gitturcan now Astracan) did by degrees recover, but never arrived to that
height it attained unto during the Empire of the Chazari and Zavolgensian
Tartars.

For J^saphat Barbaro, and Ambrosio Contarini, who were both Ambassadors from
the Venetians unto Usun Cassan Emperor of Persia, and well acquainted with
those Parts; Barbaro living sixteen years at the City Tana on the mouth of the
River Tanais; and Contarini being forced in his return from Persia to reside
there some months: They, I say, both tell us, Thar this City before its
destruction by Tamerlane, was a very famous Emporium; all the Silks, most of
the Spices and other Commodities, which were afterward brought down to Syria,
were then carried by Shipping to Astracan (which they both name Citrachan) and
thence by Land in a few days to Tana, whether the Venetians sent every year
sixteen great Galleys. But after its subversion by Tamerlane, this Commerce
ceased and the Galleys receiving their Lading in Syria, and at Alexandria of
Egypt. In the time of the forementioned Writers, which was from the year 1436.
when Barbaro first went to Tana, until his return out of Persia in 1488. And
Contarini, who returned not long before him, Citrachan was a mean Town,
consisting chiefly of Tartarian Huts and encompassed with a pitiful mud-Wall, a
place of no considerable Traffic, only the Muscovites fetched thence Fish and
Salt. But Juan Vassilowich having reduced it in the year 1554 under his
Dominion, it has been by succeeding Emperors both fortified and enlarged: I
shall say no more concerning it, Olearius a most deligent and judicious Writer,
having left us so particular a Description thereof. I shall only add, That I
suppose the cause of so diffrent names, as Gittarchan, Citrachan, and
Astrachan, were occasioned by the Princs, who successively praesided, as is
very obvious to any who are acquainted with the Customs of the Arabians,
Persians, Turks, and other Eastern People.

But to return unto our Zavolgentian Tartars, so called by the Neighboring
Slavonick Nations, because the Seat of their Empire, and their chiefest places
of Residence were on, or near the Volga (which River did also almost equally
divide their Territory) Za being only an Expletive Particle, as I could
manifest by Induction of several Russian, Polish, and Lithuanian Names of Men
and Countries. After the devastation of their Country they would
notwithstanding have soon recovered their former Grandeur, had not divisions
and intestine Wars long kept them low; and at length after diverse wonderful and
great Revolutions given the Russes leisure first to breath, and then invite
them to deprive them of the best part of their Dominion. They not able to
resist, being broken, as I said, by Discord and Division into diverse petty
Principalities. And on the other side the Crim Tartar, assisted by the Turk,
subdued the remainder, whereby that Tribe which before was comparatively
inconsiderable, became Supreme, and is at this day a terror unto all the
North-East Countries of Christendom. To show in what manner, and by what
degrees all this was transacted, is rather matter of a just History, than of a
Preface the decorum whereof I have already transgressed, in making a Porch
almost as large as the main Building, to which it should serve only for an
Entrance.

I shall therefore conclude with some short and slight Remarks on diver
Passages in our Authors Relation. His account of the Periplus of the Exuine
Sea, (leaving out what he allows for the Teine Sea, or Palus Moetis) differs
little in number of Miles from that of Arrian, though they disagree somewhat in
particular distances; and is wonderfully consonant to that calculation of
Eratosthones, Hecataeus, Ptolomy, and Ammianus Marchellinus, who reckon it to
amount unto 23000 Stadia, or 2875 Miles, which wants but 15 of our Travelers
Computation.

He is also more particular, and I believe, more exact than any I have hitherto
met with, in his Description of Crim or Taurica Chersonesus, whose length and
breadth he gives us in several places directly, or by consequence. What he
tells us concernining Arbotka and the great Field without it, sourrounded by
the Sea he calls The Ratten Sea, is scarcely mentioned by any Modern
Geographer, but wonderfully consonant to what is delivered by Strabo. Arbotka
seems to be Taphre, the Ratten Sea, he calls (...), or Lacus Putris, and
affirms to be part of the Palus Maeotis: in compass 4000 furlongs, with diverse
other particulars, confirming our Travelers Discourse, as may be read at large
in his seventh Book. And I find in a Discourse published by Mr. Thevenot
concerning the Tartars, written lately by a Religious Missionary who long
resided in those parts, a Description of this place very suitable unto our
Author. His words are these, speaking of the most remarkable places in Crim.
Arbotec est un Chasteau avee une tour scituee sur la col d'une Peninsule que
est enfermee enter la Mer de Limen and Tineka Woda, cette gorge n'a plus d'un
quart de lieue, elle est traversee d'une Pallisade qui s'ende d'une Mer a
l'autre: la Peninsule est appellee par nos Cosaques Cola, a cause q'elle a la
form d'une faulx, c'est on ce lieu ou le Chan tient son Paras qui est bien de
septante mill Chevaux. Et il est un destroit enter la terre ferme e Cosa 200
pas de large qui est gayable quand il est calm, le Cossaques le passent quand
ils vont derober le Chevaux de haras de Cham.

What our Author tells us of the Communication between the Tanais and Volga at
Camusshanka, is particularly described by Olearius, who wrote many years after
him; who also agrees with us in his account of the Rivers of Circassia, and
Comukes Country: only our Writer is more punctual in his Description of their
Sourses and Course, and mentions two or three omitted by Olearius, or unknow to
him. A frequent mention is made by Procopious, Agathias, and others of the
Bizantine Historians, of that strait passage between Georgia and Anadoule, or
as they word it, between Colchis and Asia Minor, or Armenia.

Our Author having given an account of the Course of the Volga, and of the most
remarkable places lying upon, or near it; at last assures us, That it empties
it self into the Caspian Sea only by 22 Mouths, whose names he there rehearses:
whereas other Writers ascribe unto it 70 Entrances, though as Olearius
judiciously observes, most of them are rather passages made by the Sea between
Islands and broken Ground, than proper distinct Arms or Branches of the
forementioned Rivers.

What is said concerning the Cossacks retiring unto, and nesting in an Island
of the Caspian Sea, is confirmed by a late French Writer, who long resided in
Persia, He largely acquaints us with the great spoil these Outlaws made on the
Coast of Mesanderon, that they took Asterabath one of the Emperors Royal
Stats, and having continued several days in possession, retired with great
Booty and little loss.

I could render some probable account of those Thieves our Writer calls
Sigakes, of what Nation they are, when they began, and how they live; but shall
for brevitysake wave this and diverse other Remarks; and that I may manifest how
impartial my sentiments are in reference unto the Treatise I have here
Published, I shall first acknowledge, That I never met with any Writer who
calls that Vast Plain between the Rivers Boristhenes and Tanais the Desert of
Ingel and Vngul, although I have seen diverse Journals both Ancient and Modern,
of Persons who have frequently traversed that vast Region: and have read most
Histories, and perused Geographical Books or Tables that relate unto the
Tartars, or their Country. Secondly, I must declare my distrust of his
computation concerning the compass of the Caspian Sea; which he makes less than
in truth it is, as I could largely demonstrate; though he has pretty well
salved the mistake, by his allowance of a thousand Miles for Bays, broken
Ground, and Promontories. Lastly, Our Author is greatly mistaken, when he
affirms, There is no Nation of Tartars between those of Bochara and China;
whereas indeed several very Potent Kingdoms intervene. And yet he has luckily
Andabatorum more, hit upon the Truth, where he assures us, there are no
Catayans between the Vsbeg Tartars and China. For indeed there is at present no
Catayne besides China, which is so called by all Tartars, Persians, Arabians,
and other Mahumetans, as also by the Muscovites and other Nations who travel
thither by Land, either in the Quality of Ambassadors, or Merchants. Though
formerly there was a mighty People, either Turks or Tartars (they bing both
Originally the same, as to Extract, Language, Manners, Religion, and
Government) who lay directly in the way between Persia and China, and were
certainly the Chatae of Ptolomy, but almost extirpated by Jingiz Chan, whom
they vigorously resisted. And the remainder have ever since gone under the more
general Names of Mogulls and Tartars, as I shall hereafter more clearly and
fully demonstrate in a Discourse which I have long ago written, and may
speedily publish, concerning the Beginnings and Progress of the Turkish and
Tartarian Nations and Empires.

A Short Description of all the Kingdoms which Encompass the Euxine and Caspian
Seas.
Right Honorable and my most Worthy Lord,
BEing given to understand, That I have been represented unto your Lordship, by
several who bear me no good will, as a Person possessed with that Vanity, which
ordinatly prevails among Travelers, of affirming I was well acquainted with
diverse Countries and Languages, whereunto I am utterly a stranger: And
perceiving that none of my Discourses have more exposed me unto this Censure,
than a petended monstrous rash Assertion (but indeed a real Truth) That I knew
and had visited all the Countries surrounding the Black and Caspian Seas: I
thought my self necessarily obliged in order unto my Vindication, to draw up a
short Account of all those Countries, which do incompass the formentioned Seas,
most of which Places I have personally surveyed, and fear not any Reprehension
or Confutation, being resolved to declare nothing but what I saw, or received
from such who were best able to give me full and faithful Information. And I am
well assured, That the more strict and judicious Enquiry is made into this my
Report, the more favor and credit I shall gain with your Lordship, and all
other considering impartial persons.

I shall first begin with the Black Sea, as being that wherewith I was first
acquainted, and near unto this most Famous City of Constantinople, where your
Lordship may easily learn, whether I am guilty of either falsehood or mistake;
and if I am found upon due Enquiry to declare any manifest Untruth, I deserve
not only unparalleld Reproaches, but the most severe and exemplary Punishments
which I should justly merit, when owing life and liberty unto your Lordships
Bounty and Compassion, I should instead of a grateful Acknowledgment, present
your Honor with a heap of impudent Falsities.

I will begin my Relation or Peregrination, from that side of the Black Sea on
which Constantinople is situated, and round the said Sea, until I return to
Scodra, which is in Asia opposite thereunto.

The first Province is Romella; the second Wallakia; the third Ackremen; the
fourth Crim; the fifth the great Desert of Ingul and Vngule, which is between
Crim and Asshowa; the sixth is the Little Nagoy; the seventh Circassia; the
eighth Abassa; the ninth is Mingrellia; then Georgia; and lastly Anatolia. All
which Countries are subjected unto the Turk; besides the great Desert, the
Little Nagoy and Circassia.

I shall now mention the most noted Places which I know from Fennara, which is
about the entrance into the Black Sea, unto the River of the Danaw, so to the
Neistre, from thence unto the Nepper, so round about Crim, unto the Gulf that
goes from the Black Sea into the Teine Sea, and thence unto Asshowa.

As I said, near the Entrance into the Black Sea is Fennara, then Innatada,
Missewra, Warna, Balshick, Mangalley, Constancha, Karaharman, Keelley,
Ackremen, Osshackowa, upon the mouth of the River of the Nepper.

Now I shall declare the Distances of these Places from each other; the number
of miles being the space betwixt what forgoes and immediately ensues. From
Finnara to Inatada 80 miles; to Missewra 90; to Warna 100; to Balshick 16; to
Mangalley 40; to Constancha 40; to Caraharman 40; to Kelley 80; to Ackremen or
Beallohorda 100; to Osshakowa, 80, in all 666 miles; and from Osshakowa, which
is in the mouth of the Nepper, unto the River Don (or Tanais) is 500 miles; the
Voyage by Sea and journeying by Land being much at one, viz. 1186 miles, unless
you go by Land unto Precop, about Crim, and so unto Asshowa, where the Don
falls into the Teine Sea (Palus Maeotis) and then it amounts unto at the least
1500 miles. Were it not for the formentioned great Rivers of the Danaw
(Danubius) and the Nepper (Boristhenes) there would be almost continual Wars
between the Turks and Tartars, and the Poles, Lithuanians and Muscovites; for
the Danaw is one of the greatest Rivers in the World, arising in Dutchland,
whence it passes through Hungary, Wallachy, and at the Town of Kelley falls
into the Black Sea. It has four Mouths or Entrances into the said Sea, which
the Turks call Bohasses, Boctegene Bohasse, Edreleisse Bohasse, Sullena,
Bohasse, and Kelley Bohasse. It abounds with Fish, as Sturgeon, Morone, and
Sheveroke, besides diverse sorts of smaller Fish. The Neistre is a River that
comes from Lithuania, and runs into the Black Sea under Bealohorda. The Nepper
comes from Lithuania and Russland, runs by Smolensko and Kiovia to the Porrocks
or Falls, thence to Aslamgorode, and falls into the Black Sea at Osshakowa. It
abounds with many sorts of good Fish, and all along its Banks feed innumerable
wild Beasts of diverse kinds. The Town of Aslamgorod stands upon the Nepper; and
in former times there dwelt in it two Brothers, Ingul and Ungul, who fell first
at varience, which ended in cruel Wars, by reason whereof the adjacent Country
became, though otherwise pleasant and fruitful, a very Wilderness. And besides,
the Cossacks increasing on both sides the Nepper and upon the Don, would never
since suffer that Country to be quietly possessed by these, or any other Hords
of Tartars; so that now it lies waste, being a vast Desert 500 miles over, and
1000 miles long, from the shallow Waters near Precop, unto the Country of
Muscovy. About 1625. the Grand Seignior sent an Army from Constantinople to
rebuild Aslamgorod, with Orders to inhabit the Country, and invite such
thereunto as would become subject unto the Turkish Government. But they who
arrived, finding the Town of great Compass, built only a Castle on the Bank of
the Nepper, and left 300 Men in Garrison. At the same time Shaugary Prince of
Crim, being beat out of his Country by his General Chan Timur Myrsa, retired
unto the Cossacks upon the Nepper, and having contracted a Friendship with them
and the bordering Russes, by their assistance he gathered an Army of 40000 Men,
and marched toward Crim, leaving behind him a revolted Ottoman, with a Brigade
of 3 or 4000 Men, who immediately after the departure of Sultan Shaugary,
marched directly toward Aslamgorod, and early in a Morning surprised the
Castle, then in the possession of the Turks, put every Man in Garrison to the
Sword, slighted the Walls and other Fortifications, retired with the Spoil, and
marched to join Sultan Shaugary, who in the interim arrived near Precop, where
he was met by Chan Tunur, and totally defeated, but by good fortune escaped,
and by the way of Astracan got to Persia.

From the Nepper we will pass unto Crim, with which Country I am well
acquainted, having against my will resided there some years. Crim is a small
Land, so near as I can conjecture 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad, but is
wonderfully populous, and exceedingly fruitful, abounding with Corn and Grass;
the only scarcity they have is Wood, which grows no where but upon the
Seacoast, from Bak^ssey Seray unto the Town of Crim, which in former times was
the chief City: All the rest of the Land is a Plain, where they have no Wood to
burn, nor any sort of Fuel, but Fissheke, Fusshane, Curay, and Stroa. The Land
is enclosed with the Sea, excepting at two places, Precop, and Arbotka. By
Precop there is a narrow passage, through which you may go to the Nepper,
Lithuania, or Muscovy, through the Deserts of Ingul and Vngul, and there is a
Water comes from the Teine Sea, called the shallow Water, and goes along the
Desert, until it comes to Precop, upon the West Side of Crim and by North,
where it turns back on the North-side of Crim, and falls into Guellae Mare,
commonly called the Ratten Sea. So that Crim is almost surrounded with Water;
for the Black Sea is on the one side, and the Ratten Sea on the other, which
latter produces nothing but Salt, for it is so salt, that no Fish can live
therein; I have reason to know it, because I lived in a Village which was
called Seekely Otta Mamutachy. The Towns round about Crim on the Seaside are
these, Precop, Cuslowa, Crim, Caffa, Kerse and Arbotka; and within the Land,
Carasu, Ackenesh, Mesheite, and Bakessy Seray. The Town of Arbotka lies on the
North-East side of Crim, between the Black and Ratten Seas, which there come so
near together, that there is no more Land between them, than that whereon the
Town of Arbotka stands; and without Arbotka is a great Fiel 50 miles long,
enclosed with Water, where the Tartars in Winter do keep their Hergels or
Horses, which Field goes to the shallow Waters, where I ran away from the
Tartars. I shall here take my leave of Crim, and pass unto the Little Nagoy, to
Asshowa, on the River Don, which runs down from Bealla Ossharra, through the
Country of Russia between Russia, and Lithuania, until it comes to Peilesboy,
not far from the Wolga; for from Peilsboy to the River Camusshanke, is not
above 20 miles, all level, which is called Perewolog, where the Cossacks do
draw their Strukes or Boats upon Wheels, to the River of Camusshanka, by which
they pass into the Volga; whereupon this Place is called Perewolog. The Don
runs down between the Little Nagoy and the Deserts of Ingel and Vngule, so to
Asshowa, right under the Town, and there falls into the Tein Sea. This River is
full of Fish, especially Sturgeons; well inhabited by Cossacks, for there are
seldom less than 10000 upon it, besides those that go on Freebooting. There are
also 16 Gorodkees, or strong Skonees, well manned, and with store of great
Guns, they being in continual fear of the Turks and Tartars, and sometimes also
of the Muscovites. The Little Nagoy, lies between the Tein and Caspian Seas,
the former on the West the latter on the East, Shercessan to South, and the
Volga on the North; and there is never a Town in all this Country excepting
Asshowa. It is inhabited by Tartars, who go altogether in Hords; their Prince
in my Time was Cassay Myrsa, whom the Tartars call also Sultan Vlugh, or the
Great Prince. They sow no Corn but Pross, which they sow upon the Seaside up
unto Asshowa; and after sowing they depart with their Hords, and graze up and
down the Deserts to the Don, to Capbane, Shurpoha, Yedecul, Comma and Curray,
to Masshargorodoke, and to Shercassen Land, under the Rivers Terigke, and
Balke, and almost to Pettigor, and by the River of Cupba, and back again unto
the Black Sea. Thus they ramble all the Summer, until their Harvest be ripe,
and their Pross gathered, and put into Yams under ground; after which they
settle from Asshowa, all along the Seaside, amongst the Reeds, and leave their
Horses to winter in the Deserts. So I shall leave the Little Nagoy, and pass
unto Temerossa in Shercassen Land, which is 500 miles from Asshowa.

Now in all Circassia are but two Towns, Temerossa on the Black Sea, upon the
Gulf that goes from the Black Sea into the Tein Sea, right over against
Arbotka. The other is Tumein, upon the Caspian Sea, the distance between them
being 1100 miles; and all the rest of the inhabited Places are only Cubbacks
made in the Woods, piled round with Timber. Their Houses are very high, in the
midst whereof they make the Fire. Their Men are proper Men, very like the Irish
both for person and garb; for they go in Trowses, with short Mantles, wear long
Hair on both sides of their Heads, with a shorn Crown between. Their Women are
very beautiful, and loving to Strangers; for if a Stranger come unto their
Houses, their young Women and Maidens will look Lice in their Shirts, and all
about them, the most private parts not excepted, and will allow them the
liberty to examine and handle all parts of their Bodies besides their Breasts.
The Circassians are excellent Horsemen, and very Courageous, but withal
exceedingly ignorant and superstitious; for when they kill a Goat or Kid, they
cut off the privy parts, and cast it against a Wall, if it stick, they pray to
it; if otherwise, they cast it away, and spread the Skin upon Stakes, place it
in their Cornfieldsd, and worship it. They have no Writing among them, yet
pretend to be good Christians. Do strangely bewail the Dead, making great
Cries, scratch their Hands and Faces, until they draw much Blood, knock their
Foreheads against the ground, until Knobs arise bigger than Plums. The Men are
notorious Thieves, stealing from each other, and he that steals most is
accounted the bravest Fellow. Their Country is very fruitful, abounding with
most sorts of Grain; and they have store of excellent Grass. They have also
much Fruit growing wild; many sorts of Beasts, as Hearts, Hinds, Kine,
Eissubrass, Hogs and great Adders.

The considerable Rivers which I know are Cubba, which runs from Pettigor,
between Shercassen Land and the little Nagoy, betwixt Termerossa and Asshowa,
20 miles from Temerossa it falls into the Jein Sea, and has a Course of 500
miles. The next is the River of Balke, which comes out from Cabardy, and falls
into the River of Terigke, 200 miles from its Source; which River of Terigke
descends from the Mountains between Shollohofe Knasse and Mundarawa Knasse,
runs through the Country almost due East, passes by Goracho Colloda, thence to
the Shussa, and the Shunsa, so on to the Weistra; and 6 miles from Tumein,
between Tumein and the Commocks Country, it falls into the Caspian Sea, having
a Course of 600 miles. There is another River called Tumenka, which is a branch
of Terigke, runs through Tumeine Town, and 3 miles beyond it enters the Caspian
Sea. There is also another River which they call Keeslar, which falls out of
Terigke, and 60 miles from Tumeine is received by the Caspian Sea.

Having formerly mentioned Pettigor, I shall give you some Account thereof.
Pettigor being interpreted, is in English, 5 Hills. They are five very great
and high Mountains, distant about 500 miles from the Black Sea, and 700 from
the Caspian beyond Cabardy. I came thus to know them:

In the Year 1618. I was sent with Shiedka Myrsa, from Astracan to the Little
Nagoy, to seize upon Orrake Myrsa, who being informed of our coming, fled up to
Pettigor; yet he made not such have but we overtook him, and having fought,
overcame him, and took away his Hords, by which means I became acquainted with
Pettigor. Nevertheless there are higher Hills than Pettigor, as Sneesnagore in
Cabardy, which is incredibly high, which is in English, the Hill of Snow; for
upon that and Shadgore, which signifies a wonderful high Hill, and overtops the
former, and so along for 100 miles, from Cabardy to Shollohofe, prodigious
quantities of Snow are lodged, which it is thought were never dissolved since
the Creation. I asked a Circassian, Whether ever any Man arrived at the top of
Shadgore, which to me seemed much elevated above the rest; who answered me,
They had a Tradition among them, that formerly a Bohatteere, whose Name was
Hroda, attempted to climb it, and after two or three days hard labor, arrived
not unto the middle; but after a few days, being better accommodated, he
returned, with a resolution, if it were possible, to see the top, but was never
afterward heard of; and added, That it was to that day customary for the
Neighboring Circassians, at a certain season of the Year, with diverse
Ceremonies and great Lamentations to bewail his loss.

The next Country to Sheercassen Land is Abassa, which is situated between
Circassia and Mingrellia, and the inhabitants are a kind of Circassians.
Mingrellia is under the Dominion of the Turks, and lies on the Black Sea. Of
these two Countries, I have no great knowledge, having only coasted them three
or four times in Boats, when I was among the Cossacks, where also we landed
diverse times, taking store of Kine and Sheep, but no Prisoners, because they
affirmed themselves to be Christians. They are a proper handsome People, but
very poor, and notorious Thieves, for they steal not only Goods, but even Women
and Children from each other, and sell them unto the Turks and Tartars chiefly
for Salt, which is there very scarce.

Next unto Mingrellia is Georgia, whose Inhabitants are little better than the
former, only they have a kind of Scripture; for they Worship Idols or Images,
yet have Cloisters, and a sort of Monks, with some Priests of the Greek Belief.
I once landed in Georgia with an Army of 5000 Men, we marched up into the
Country; until we came within a days journey of Deimur Capon, or the Iron
Gate, which is a narrow passage between Georgia and Anatolia, with Rocks on
each side, and a strong Town built in the midst: We stayed ten days ravaging
the Country; they told us, this Town and Castle belonged to the King of
Persia, and there is no other passage out of Georgia into Persia but through it.

The next Country unto Georgia is Anatolia, whereour Traveller resided several
Years, having been sold by the Precopensian Tartars, unto a Turkish Spahi, or
Timariot; of which Country, and the Manners of the Inhabitants, he gives a
large Description: But we being sufficieintnly informed thereof by diverse
intelligent Europeans, who dwelt long in those Parts, shall with our Traveller
pass on to those Countries which are less known. But first we will take his
Account of the Periplus of the Euxine or Black Sea.

From Fennara, which is at the head of the Strait or Gulf that enters the Black
Sea to Precop, is 700 miles; from thence to Caffa, a noted City and Port in
Crim 300 miles; to Asshowa 500 miles; to Temerossa 500 miles; to Mingrelia 400
miles; to Trebezond 400 miles; and from thence unto Constantinople 1000 miles;
in all 3800 miles. Thus much I know of the Black Sea, which I have three times
coasted by Sea, and traced above half by Land; so that now it is time to speak
concerning the Caspian Sea, and show all the Kingdoms and Countries which lie
upon it, beginning at Astracan, and proceeding thence Eastwards, until I return
unto the same City from the South.

Astracan is placed on a rising ground, not far from the mouth of the Volga,
from which it is not distant above 50 miles; it is in an Island on the Great
Nagoy side, made by the River Volga, and a branch thereof, having the Caspian
Sea on the South. The Town or City is secured by a strong Castle, furnished
with store of great Ordnance, and in the midst of the Castle is a Roskade,
which commands both Castle, Town, and the Fields round about for above a mile.
The Tartar's Town is adjoining, placed near unto Cutuma, which is a River
naturally derived from the Volga, or one of its many branches; ^o that the Town
is encompassed with Waters, having the main body of the Volga on the West, and
Cutuma on the East. Now if you would know whence the Volga comes, I will
acquaint you with what I have learned from the Muscovites. Its utmost Source is
said to be at the foot of a great Tree, whence it runs unto Jerislave 1000
miles; whence it proceeds to Neisna 500 miles, and thence unto Cassan 300
miles; from Cassan to Samara 500; to Saratoft 350 miles; to Saraichena 350, and
thence unto Astracan 500 miles; from whence it is, as we said before, unto the
Caspian Sea, 50 miles; in all 3550 miles.

The Volga is a wonderful great River, abounding with diverse sorts of great
Fish, as Sturgeon Bellouke, Severuke, Shelren, Sterleke, Some, Sassan, Suke,
Soudake, Konnee, Sablee, Lessee, Wobla, Tarane, and many others both great and
small, which I cannot readily call unto remembrance, notwithstanding that I
dwelt there ten years. The Volga enters the Caspian Sea by 22 mouths, and upon
each of them is an Oughsuke or Fish-wear, for to take Sturgeon, every one of
which Oughsukes is called by the name of the Water, as Soellova, Dertullee, B
sserigee and Ruslowa upon the main Wolga. Cokelou, Beerullee, Ewansuke, Mansor,
Argeessan, Keessan, Camusshuke, Naowara, Tussockly, Collobery, Malla Collobery,
Yamansuke, Eirichsha, Surka, Libesha, Bussan, Carabussan, Bealla Wolloskee. In
all which Ougbsukes or Wears, they take no Fish besides Sturgeon. They are made
of Shigenas, or long Poles made sharp at one end, and beaten into the ground
under Water, and a pleiting made of Rods, somewhat resmbling Osier, after the
manner of our Matts, which are fastened to the Poles, and hinder the Fish from
passing up the River. And Houses are built neat the Wears for the Convenience
of the Fishers, 40, 50, more or less, according unto the greatness of the
Water, or resort of Fish, and twice every day, usually in the morning and
evening, they set about their Fishery. They employ only long slender Poles with
an Iron Hook or Cruke in the end baited, and do ordinarily take 400 every day
in the smaller, and 600 in the larger Streams. The Sturgeon they take is all
salted, excepting that wherewith they serve the Town of Astracan, where a whole
fair Sturgeon may be bought for ten pence English; and when the great Caravan
comes from Russia, it takes off most of their Fish, which is conveyed into
dives parts of Muscovy, but chiefly unto the great City of Mosco. They return
also with great quantities of Caviar and Salt, there being not far from the
Volga, on the Little Nagoy side, great Salt Pits, which yield an immense
quantity of Salt, prepared yearly by the heat of the Sun, without any further
trouble, than taking it off the superficies of the Water where it daily kerns.

The Volga a little above Seraichena, 500 miles from Astrachan, dismisses a
great Branch named Actabon, which passing through the Desert of the Great Nagoy
through Bassane, enters the Caspian Sea. The remainder of the Volga, after
having parted with several smaller Branches, most of which join with the
forementioned River, divides the Little and Great Nagoy, passes under the Town
of Astrachan, whence it proceeds unto Ruslowa, on the South west side of Crosna
B^ggar, and then falls into the Caspian. And the distance between the East Side
of the Volga near Astrachan, and the River Actabon, is about 20 miles, which is
mostly Water and Islands.

And that the Course of the Volga from its first Source, until it does
dis-embouge it self into the Caspian Sea, can be no less than what we have
asserted, is hence confirmed; That the Snow which falls abundantly in Russia,
and begins to be dissolved about the latter end April, and do mighily increase
the Waters of the Volga, come not unto Astrachan until Midsummer, when it so
raises the Volga, that overflowing the Banks, it covers with his Waters all the
Islands near Astrachan; so that from the Little Nagoy, un Actabon in the Great
Nagoy, all the Coutries seems, excepting a Hillock or two, one continued Lake,
or a great Gulf of the Sea. Wherefore they who go in the Spring from Arstachan
to fetch Wood, having cut it, make great Floats, which are listed up when the
River overflows, and guided each by a few Men, until they are brought unto
Astrachan, or those other places for which they are designed.

The most remarkable Towns and Habitations upon the Volga, between Seraichena
and Astrachan, (which are 500 miles distant from each other) are Camena,
Rokegowa, Osshenofka, Chornoyar, Borisse, Offatalka, Poollowoy, Collmakof
Satone, Cossoyar, Crosnoyar, Nassonoyar, Satone, Yanatavy, Daneelofka, Perre
Ousshake, Eillansuke, Eiskyborro, Crukla, Bussan, Balsheeke, Tollotongorod,
Dolgoa, Goradocha, (which was old Astrachan) Sharinae, Bogar, which is near
Astrachan, besides many other Places, with whose Names I have not charged my
memory. We will now pass over the Volga through Astrachan into the Great Nagoy.

The Great Nagoy may be properly enough divided into Islands and Continent; the
former are made by the Volga, and several Rivers which fall out of it,
variously mixed with each other, and are all at length emptied into the Caspian
Sea. Those Rivers or Brances have their several Names; those which I remember
are Cuttoma, Boulda, Malla, Guellusa, Creewantya, Busane, Actabon and Bereket.
The Kingdom of the Great Nagoy is all plain and desert; 1200 miles in length
between Astrachan and Semara; 500 miles in breadth from the said Astrachan unto
the River of the Yeike or Jaick. There is no wood in all this Country, except
what grows near the Rivers. It has no Towns or fixed Habitations, though it
had formerly diverse, and some among them very considerable, as Czarofsgorod, or
Czarofs Pollate, in English, the Emperor's Town, which formerly must needs
have been as its name imports, an Imperial or Capital City. I have often viewed
it with admiration, and connot compute it to have been less than 20 miles in
Circuit; I have told fourscore great eminent Buildings, which must have been
either Moschees, Palaces, or Caravanseries, and some of them 6 miles distant
from the other. The Muscovites are of diverse Opinions concerning its
Destruction: Some say it was ruined by the Cossacks; but the Cossacks, who are
ready enough to brag of Achievements, know nothing thereof, only that they
have often dispossessed the Russes, when they endeavored to rebuild part of
it. For indeed the situation is very excellent, having the Volga on one side,
and the Actabon on the other: The Country very beautiful, healthful and
fertile; and yet notwithstanding all these encouragements, it is not yet
inhabited, not by the Russes because it standing on the main Land, they would
be continually exposed unto the Inroads of the Tartars; nor by the Tartars,
because its nearness unto the Rivers, would render them obnoxious to the
Russes, every time the great Caravan passes that way, which is at least twice
each year. Yet the Muscovites do frequently fetch Brick and Stones from this
ruined City, wherewith they have built a great part of Astrachan, and the
neighbourin Forts or Towns, where such solid Materials are employed. But
besides this Serai, (for so the Tartars call any fixed Habitation) there were
in ancient times five or six more down along the Rivers side, in each of which
formerly dwelt a Chan; but Time and Wars have almost entirely ruined them.
There is also another Serai upon the River Jaick named Seraichika, where is
said formerly to have been the Residence of a great Myrsa or Chan; but it is now
quite ruinated.

The Tarters who inhabit the Great Nagoy, both Men and Women, are very proper,
at least of much taller Stature than many other Tartars, but have ill-favored
Countenances, broad Faces, flat little Noses, small Eyes sunk in their Heads,
all which are common to most of the Eastern Tartars. But the Tartars of Crim
are more comely, which, I suppose, may partly proceed from their Wives, who
are many of them Captive Circassians, Russes, Poles, Hungars, and of diverse
other Nations. The Nagoy Tartars are also Black or rather Tawny; which I
Conjecture is not so much natural, as proceeding from the heat of the Sun,
which is in these Parts some Months of the Year much more excessive than one
would expect from the Climate. And besides, their Children go stark naked
during the great heats in Summer. It is also remarkable, That the Cold in
Winter in the same Country is exceeding severe, and one would think to them who
have such mean accommodation, intolerable. These Nagoy Tartars have great
store of Cattle, as Kine, Sheep, Horses and Camels, and yet notwithstanding
they are verv ill clad, most of their Clothing being Sheepskins, and those
but scurvily dressed. They have no sort of Corn or Grain, mightily scorning the
Europeans and Persians, whose chief Diet they say, is the top of a pitiful
weed. Poligamy is not only allowed, but altogether in fashion among them, most
having diverse Wives, more or fewer according unto their Quality and Ability;
who unless they are Captivated by War, are such as they buy of their Parents or
Kindred for Cattle. If one Brother dye, the other takes all his Wives, who are
usually five or six. But if all the Brothers die, either in War or by Diseases,
then they are devolved like other Goods or Chattels unto the Elder Brother's
Son, they never suffering any married Woman, during life, to go out of the
Kindred.

Here our Author has inserted a Discourse concerning diverse odd, and some
barbarous Customs which have long prevailed among the Nagoy-Tartars, and
wherewith they will not easily Dispense. But they giving little light unto
History or Geography, I have not thought them worthy the trouble of
transcribing; nor do I apprehend they would afford any considerable instruction
or divertisement unto the Reader.

These Tartars of the Great Nagoy when they remove their habitation, transport
their Houses from place to place in Wagons with four Wheels, which are drawn
usually by Camels; they pass up and down the Country in great Hords, their
ordinary march is from the Volga unto Buskowshake; thence to Voroslane, Semara,
Eirgeesse, Eishene, Ougogra, Reimpeska, and all along under the Calmukes
Country, until they arrive at the Jaick or Yeike: Sometimes they pass by
Cassoone, Aurrow, Camoyes Samar, and so to Saraichika: this is ordinarily their
Summer Progress. Against Winter they return unto those parts of the Country
which border upon the Caspian Sea. As Baksake upon the Caspian Sea; Beallansia,
Kitgach, Sheennamara, Coudake, Caradowan, Actabon; and higher upon the Volga,
scattering themselves upon the Seashore and Banks of the Rivers among the
Reeds and Woods, or wheresoever they find the Climate most mild and best
defense against the Cold, which in the Winter is in these Parts extremely
Severe; so that it is hard to determine whether they suffer more from the Heat
in Summer, or Cold in Winter. During which latter Season they leave their
Hergels or Horses, and most of their greater Cattle to shift for themselves in
the Deserts.

Having often had occasion to mention the River Jaicke or Yeike, I shall here
give a short Account of what I have observed and learnt concerning its Rise and
Course. It comes from the Calmukes Land, where it is thought to spring; though
some of the Russes affirm its Fountains are more Remote in Siberia, the
Southern parts of which is also inhabited if not possessed by the Kalmukes,
some of whose Vlusses or Hords are subject unto the Muscovites; others in
League with them: but they have sometimes cruel Wars, and did formerly destroy
Tumen with some other Towns and Castles of the Russes, who they apprehended did
incroach too fast upon them. But to return unto the Course of the Yeick, after
it has passed through the Calmukes Country, it divides the Great Nagoy from
Cassachy Horda, and after it has passed in all a Thousand miles, throws it
self into the Caspian Sea a little below Seraichika. This is a very large
River, and the Land on each side well clothed with Wood, Grass, diverse sorts
of Herbs and wild Fruits, and the Water full of good Fish; which Conveniences
do oft-times invite the Cossacks to make their abode there, and from thence
they make Incursions on diverse parts bordering on the Caspian Sea. This River,
among diverse other Fish does so wonderfully abound with Sturgeon, that a man
may stand upon the Bank side with a Pole in hand armed at the end with an Iron
Crook, make choice of what Sturgeon best pleases him, which he shall rarely
said of taking though never so inexpert in Fishing, if he have but strength or
help to draw it on Land. Not far from the Mouth of the Jeick in the Caspian Sea
near the Shore, are many Coves and Corners which they call Lapateens and
Cal^nkes, which are always full of Swans usually swimming on the Sea, which are
so numerous, that it is impossible to make any reasonable Computation thereof.
These Swans after Midsummer every Year cast their Feathers, a little before
which time there parts from Astracan many Boats which are manned by Russes, and
most of them are their Youth; after a passage of five hundred miles they arrive
at these places which the Swans mostly haunt, and having filled their Boats
with Swans Skins and Feathers, they return unto Astracan, where a great Trade
is driven with the Persians who give ordinarily a Dollar apiece for these Skins.

The next Country unto the Great Nagoy toward the East is Cassachy Horda,
which has, as I said, on the West the Jaick, by which it is divided from the
Great Nagoy. On the North the Kalmukes, North-East the Yurgeach, or
Jurgench-Tartars, and to the South the Caspian Sea and Caragans, who inhabit on
the North-East-side of the Caspian Sea. These Cassachy Tatars march up and down
the Country much after the manner of the Nagays. They have frequent Wars with
the Kalmukes and Yurgeachians; but seldom with either Nagoys or Caragans. Only
after the manner of most other Tartars, they will clandestinely steal even from
those Neighbors with whom they have the most uninterrupted and profound Peace.

Cassachy Horda is altogether Desert, excepting some Woods Northward, bordering
upon the Kolmukes, where more are diverse small Rivers which empty themselves
into the Jaick; which River is also in most places bordered with Woods unto its
Entrance into the Caspian Sea. And therefore the Inhabitants may well be named
Cassachy Horda, or wild People, as the Name imports: They sow no sort of Corn,
their chief Food being Horse flesh and Mares milk; which is also common to
diverse other Nations of the Tartars.

On the North of Cassachy Horda dwell the Kalmuke Tartars, if such a life as
they lead may be called dwelling. The Country they inhabit deserves a better
People, the Land abounding with all things necessary for a Comfortable
subsistence. This Country has store of Sables, Marterus, Black Foxes,
Squerrils, and several other sorts of Furs, which they Exchange with the Ruffes
for Aqua-vitae, Mead, Tobacco, and other Commodities. This Country has some
Towns, as Siberiae, the Head of a Province of the same Name, and Tu^^een, both
which the Russes have gained from them: Ouffba, Wadle, Sellona, Lncomoria,
which latter place, they say, is situated upon a Cold Sea. But Ouffha is a
midland Town, 500 miles from Cassan which is near the Volga. The Kalmukes are
accounted good Soldiers, being kegt in continual Exercise by the Muscovites on
the one side, the Nagoyans and Cassachy-Horda on the other. Their unmarried
Women do not only accompany the Men unto the Wars, but are said to be little
inferior unto the Men in Skill and Valor, shooting almost as strongly and
dexterously as the men, from whom they cannot be distinguished by their Garb,
being apparelled and riding much after the same manner: Both Men and Women in
all their Expeditions seldom carry along with them fewer than five or six
Horses apiece. I cannot precisely determine what their Religion is, but I do
perceive by Converse with them, that they have a more favorable Opinion of the
Christiansithan of the Mahumetans, or of some of their fellow Ethnicks: for if
I mistake not, they are Heathens, I not being able to discern among them any
Religious Worship, excepting some kind of Adoration which they pay unto the Sun
and Moon. They have a very peculiar kind of Diet for besides Horseflesh, which
is a great Dainty, they scruple not to eat Snakes, Adders, Foxes, and indeed
even Carrion of diverse sorts of Creatures, such Food as to Europeans would be
intolerable, even in the greatest Famine. They wear a kind of Caps or Hats
which are called by the Muscovites, Coulpackes, open before and behind; with
broad Brims on each side. And thereupon they are called by the other Tartars,
Colmukes.

Eastward from these Calmukes, inclining unto the South toward China, live the
Yurgeachians, so named from their chief Town, which some call Yurgeach, others
Jurgench: Of which Country I cannot say so much as concerning the former,
having never been therein but once; for in the Year 1620 there being great Wars
in Jurgeach, between the Chan or King, and the Myrsa his Son; some of the Nagoy
Tartars hearing thereof, invaded the Country, who whilst they were united,
durst not peep out of their own Borders, the Jurgeachians being a numerous and
warlike People. These Nagoys were all Volunteers, who went without any Command
from their own Prince, or Allowance from the Muscovites, without whose consent
by mutual Agreement they are not permitted to War. The News of their Expedition
being brought unto Astracan, the Voyvoad who had not long before made a League
with the Jurgeachians, sent out Allye (I suppose his true Name was Ali or Hali)
Myrsa a Tartarian Prince, with a Thousand of his own Subjects, and Five Hundred
Russes, all Horse. We were 20 days marching before we came to the Borders of
Jurgeach from Astracan; whence we proceeded 10 days journey, the Country
through which we passed being miserably ravaged by the aforesaid Nagoys. At the
end of which 30 days by a reasonable Computation, 'twas judged we were distant
from Astracan at least 1000 miles; about which time we overtook them in the
Valley of Ougogura, having got from the Jurgeachians an innumerable company of
Cattle of diverse sorts, as Horse, Kine, Camels and Sheep. We took all their
Booty from them; and as a further punishment for their Riot, took away their
own supernumerary Horses, leaving them only a Horse a Man for to convey them
home. Then Ally Myrsa divided the Spoil, half he bestowed upon those who did
accompany him, and sent the remainder for a Present unto the Voyvod, returning
nothing unto the Jurgeachians, because they were taken from Thieves. In the
mean while the Prince of Jurgeach in a pitched Battle overthrew his Father, took
him Prisoner, put out both his Eyes, and caused himself to be Crowned King. He
had a younger Brother, whom fearing that in time he might occasion some
Insurrection, he gave Command unto some of his Creatures, that they should
strangle him, and bring his Head: But diverse of the Nobles, by whose means he
obtained the Sovereignty, gaining intelligence thereof, would not permit his
Order to be put in execution; but seizing on the Child, sent him unto the
Emperor Muesovy, with whom he remained when I was last at Astracan.

But I must return from the Jurgeachians unto the Caragans, whom I have left
behind, and they do more immediately refer unto my promise, which was to give
an Account of all the Nations and Countries incompassing the Caspian Sea.

The Country of the Caragans occupies most of that vast space, which interceeds
between the River Yeike and the Dominions of the Ousbegs, or Tartars of
Bouchara, and their Territory surrounds the North-East corner of the Caspian
Sea, proceeding Southwards unto the River Jaxartes; and some Hords of the said
People do inhabit between the said River and the Oxus, which divides the
Tartars of Bochara and the Caragans, from the Persians and the Tartars of Bulk.
This Country of the Caragans is very desert and barren; the People miserably
Poor; their Houses are wretched Huts, the greatest part under ground; they are
very tawny and ill-favored; their Habitations are scattered, scarcely
deserving the Name of Villages: And they have no Town, as I have been informed,
besides Preesslames, which is situated on the Southside of the Juxartes, near
the Caspran Sea; which whilst I dwelt in Astracan, was by surprise taken by the
Cossacks, but they had little cause to brag of their Victory, finding little
booty therein; and the Caragans gathering together, beat them our with great
loss of Men, forcing them to retire into an Island two or three Leagues from
the Land, which they possess unto this day, no Nation being able, or else not
caring to un-nest them, although Tartars, Persians, and Muscovites, do
continually suffer by their Depredations.

Toward the East and by South of the Caragans, dwell the Tartars of Bochara,
who are by diverse called Yusbegs. The Country which they possess is better
watered, and more fertile than most of the preceding, and there is great resort
of Merchants from diverse Parts unto them, especially Persians, Muscovites, and
several Nations of Indians, as Moguls, Boutans, with many others, whose Names I
cannot recollect. I have been also told, That the Chinese do sometimes trade
with them. I am persuaded, that this is the famed Kingdom of Cataye; for the
Catayans are a sort of Tartars, and I know no other Tartars between this
Country and China. Caragan lies from them to the North-West; Vrgenshe due
North; China to the East; the Tartars of Balk to the South; and the Persians
South and by West; and the Caspian Sea duly West. They are almost continually
in Wars with the Persians.

The next Country I am to describe is Persia, in which Land I was never,
excepting once, in that part thereof which borders upon the Comukes; but I have
conversed with several Persian Merchants at Astracan, who came by Shipping from
Gilan, which when the Wind is very fair and good, they sail in two or three
days and Nights. They wear Turbants like the Turks, and so do the Bouchars.
Therefore not having seen much of Persia, nor having sufficiently informed my
self concerning it, I shall pass through it unto the Comukes Land, of which I
have obtained more perfect knowledge both by War and Traffic. This Country is
bounded on the South by Persia, on the East by the Caspian Sea; Westward by
Circassia; and on the North by the River of Tumeine; on which stands a Town of
the same Name, from which unto Chahamate, the most Northerly Habitation of
Persia, is 600 miles A great part of this Country, especially Westward, is very
mountainous; I could never learn where it does exactly Terminate. I have been
in four of their Towns: The first is Tarkee, where Gildar, whom they own for
their Prince, does ordinarily reside. The second is Derbeine, in the Mountains.
The third Derevena, in the same mountainous Tract. The fourth Kossa, upon a
River of the same Name, not far from the place where it empties it self into
the Caspian Sea. These Comukes are proper Men and very courageous; and that
which makes them more daring and adventurous than most Tartars, is the goodness
of their Horses, and the advantage of their Arms, both offensive and defensive;
for they seldom engage in Wars without Helmets, Jacks of Steel, Shirts of
Mail, and Targets, which excepting those times wherein they fight, hang behind
their backs, being very light, and not very large, and therefore not
cumbersome. They have, as other Tartars, both Bows and Cymetars, and withal
never go without Lances, which they use with great strength and dexterity. In
their Apparel they differ little from the Circassians; but as for Religion,
they are generally Mahumetans, and their Language is in substance the same with
other Tartars, their vicinity unto the Persians, Muscovites and Sheercasses,
having somewhat disguised it. The Country they inhabit abounds with Wood; part
of it is hilly, with small pleasant Valleys between the Hillocks; and in some
places, especially toward Persia, and thence into the Land, it has many great
and almost inaccessible Mountains, by reason of their height and steepness.
This Land was reduced under the Government of the Russes many years ago, after
the ensuing manner: Evan Vassilywich being Czar or Emperor of Russia, after he
had taken Cassan and Astracan, sent part of his Army into Circassia, where they
took in Tumeine. Another Body entered the Comukes Country, and possessed
themselves of Derevena, Derbeine, Tarkee and Kossa. The Russe Emperor
constituted a Voyvod, whom he ordered to reside in Tarkee, and left with him
10000 Men; he ordered also at the same time another considerable Brigade to
stay at Coisa, where he left a great number of Boats and other Vessels, who had
brought supplies of Men and Provisions from Mosco, and other Parts of his
Dominions. And having, as he apprehended, secured his new Conquests, he
returned unto Mosco: Immediately after his retreat, the Comukes gathered their
whole Force, and set down before the Town of Tarkee, which after a vigorous
resistance they took, and in it with the Voyvod, several Officers of diverse
Nations, whom with the common Soldiers they sold unto the Circassians,
Tartars, and other neighboring Nations, so that few were ever afterward
recovered. From Tarkee they marched unto Koisa, which by the instruction of
Captives they did pretty regularly besiege and assault, and after some repulses
took it by storm, killing all the Russes, excepting such as escaped in the
Ships and Boats which lay before the Town. The Russe Emperor being speedily
informed of these Successes, immediately raised a great Army, with which he
ordered all the Cossacks between the Don and Volga, unto the River of Tumeine,
to join his Forces, and assist them, in order unto the recovery of what he had
lost, and utter extirpation of the Comukes: Who hearing how highly the Czar was
exasperated, and how great a Force was ready to invade them, they began to be
solicitous about the Event; and having consulted together agreed to make some
kind of submission, and sue for pardon and peace. Whereupon they sent
Ambassadors unto Temeine, where the Russe Army was encamped; and after a Treaty
with the Czar's Plenipotentaries, they agreed upon these Articles, That the
Comukes should restore the Towns they had taken, and aid the Emperor with such
a number of Soldiers, as he should require, against any Enemy whatsoever,
whereunto their Heads being Sworn, they have inviolably observed the Agreement
unto this day. But it is time we take our leave of Gildar, Prince of Terki, and
his Comukes, and proceed into Shercassen Land, part of which as I hinted
before, lies upon the Black Sea, and extends it self unto the Caspian.

This side of Circassia which borders upon the Caspian Sea, is a very plentiful
Country; and as for Fish, it is so wonderfully plentiful, that in Tumeine you
may ordinarily purchase a good Sturgeon for two pence, and sometimes for a
penny; a most prodigious quantity of Fish being taken in the River of the
Weestra, and about the Island of Chekiene, which is off at Sea not far from
Tumeine. On the main Land, over against this Fishery, 4 miles above the River
of Terike, there is a great Well, made by a Spring, which falls from a Rock, on
the side of a great Hill, and immediately fills this Little Lake, which whether
it is Natural or Artificial, I know not. The Water of this Lake is so scalding
hot, that the Fishers flinging in their Sturgeon or other Fish, it is in a
short time boiled, as if over a fire, the heat being so intense, that no Man
can detain his hand in it for a moment; from which strange Quality it derives
its Name, being called by the Russes, Goracha Colloda, or the Scalding Well.

I shall conclude my Discourse with a short Account of the Little Nagoy, or of
that part thereof which confines upon the Caspian; for all that space between
Tumeine and Astracan, is by many ascribed unto the Nagoy Tartars. I did before
declare, That the Little Nagoy is for the most part a wide waste Desert, the
worst of which is all that Tract which lies between Tumeine and Astracan.
These Tartars have no Town but only Ashowa, which is not properly theirs,
though lying in their Country, being possessed by the Turks.

There is a sort of people in this Country, whom the Tartars call Sigakes; I
could never learn what their language is, or from what Place or Nation they
proceed; nor could I understand after what manner they live, whether they have
any Religion, or Civil Government. Their chief Subsistence is what they gain
from the Tartars; for they gather sometimes 2 or 3000, and rob the smaller Hords
of the Tartars, and those which are most remote from help. But sometimes the
Tartars discovering the place of their Retreat or Rendevous, surround them with
their Carts, and then fall in, cut them all off, never giving Quarter unto any;
no Crime being so severly punished amongst the Tartars, as Thievery; which
makes me apprehend, that these Sigakes are some of their own people, who
formerly deserted them upon some extraordinary occasion: But whatsoever is the
reason, they do most irreconcileably hate each the other.

The most noted Places on that side the Little Nagoy, which regards the Caspian
Sea, and lie all along the Coast from Tumeine to Astracan, are Sheerlona Year*
(where I was first taken Prisoner by the Tartars) Peremetka, Arsi Bash,
Moyackee, Bealla Oshera Bashmackake, Kaboylly Machakofska, Chost^way, and so
over the Volga unto Astrachan.

And to conclude all, I shall here enumerate all the Places on the Coast near
Astracan, which have Names that are considerable for Havens, Trade, Fishing, or
any other remarkable Circumstance. Soteeza Bockgra, Vcustow^ Cossa, Beerulska
Cossa, Ewanshoska Cossa, Seamme Bogaroffe, Tussocleoff Lapateene, Chaska Cossa,
Crosna Bogore, Cocklouska Cossa, Owarska Cossa, Comashaska Cossa, Colloberinska
Cossa, Cocktabow, Bussanska Lapaten, Kara Bussan; which last place is not far
from Sheene Mare, which I have formerly mentioned.

I cannot so exactly tell the Circumference of the Caspian, as of the Black
Sea, having been only on the North and Westside; but howsoever I shall from
what I have seen and learnt from experienced persons, be enabled to approach
very near unto the Truth.

The Distance between Astracan and the Jaick, is 500 miles; from thence unto
the Confines of Bochara 500 miles: From Jaxartees to Persia, and thence unto
Gilian is, according unto my Information, 1100 miles. From Gilan unto Koisa 500
miles: From thence unto Astracan as much; in all, 3100 miles. But if any person
should endeavor by Land to Travel round this Sea, or in a Voyage by Sea follow
the Coast, he would make at least a Thousand miles more: for this Sea is full
of great Gulphs, Bays, and broken ground; so that the Calculation I make, is
upon a direct passage by Sea, suppose from Astracan to Gilan, from thence to
the Oxus, from the Oxus to the great North-East Bay, into which the River Jem
falls, which is full of Islands and broken Grounds, Shelves, Sand and Shallow
Water; and from thence back to Astracan.

Having presented your Lordship with a short but true Account of those
Countries encompassing and lying between the two forementioned Mediterranean
Seas, I shall no less briefly and faithfully declare by what Accidents I came
unto this Knowledge: which cost me so dear, that I suppose the most inquisitive
person would not purchase the gratification of his Curiosity at a far lels
Expense of time and trouble, than I have employed (though often against my
will) in my Travels and Enquires.

I was born Ireland, yet of English Extract: my Family Noble, but my Estate not
corresponding with my Quality, being ambitious, and withal naturally inclined
to see Foreign Countries, I hoped to Raise my Fortune by my Sword. After I
left Ireland, before I had been long in England, an opportunity presenting it
self, I engaged in the Service of the King of Sweden, who had then Wars with
the Muscovites; having given some Considerable proofs of my Courage, I was
gradually raised unto a Considerable Command; but being engaged too far in a
Body of the Enemies, I was unhappily taken Prisoner by the Russes, and carried
Prisoner unto Pl^scow, then in their possession, having at the same time
Arrears due unto me from the Swede above 5000 Dollars. The Swedes taking no
care for my Enlargement, being willing, I suppose, to save so great a Sum of
Money, as at my Return I should have challenged: after Three years close
Imprisonment, I was proffered Liberty by the Muscovite, upon condition I would
faithfully serve him against all his Enemies; whereunto assenting, I was sent
unto Moscow, and there before the Chancellor sworn a Tolmack and preferred unto
a Command little inferior unto what I enjoyed before. And the Poles advancing
toward Moscow with a great Army, fearing lest I should go over unto them, I
was sent unto Astracan where I remained 10 years, being continually Employed
against the Tartars and Circass^ans. By which means I came to know Pettigor,
Sneesnagor, Shadgore, Cabardye, and the Great and Little Nagoy, the Comukes,
the Tartars of Cassen, the Kalmukes, Cassachy, Horda, Caragans, Vngensh, and
Vsbeg Tartars. During which Wars, I conflicted with great difficulties and
hardship; in making long Journies, faring hardly: Nor was it a small labor to
make floates in order unto our passing over the great Rivers I have mentioned,
to say nothing of the Danger. Besides, we run great hazards in our Journeying
over those waste wide howling Deserts, which on every side surrounded us;
frequently wanting provisions, and sometimes Guides; so that had we failed never
so little in our Conjectures, we had all perished. After Ten years hard
Service, in my Return from Conveying Shollohofe Knez into Shercassen Land, I
was taken Prisoner by the Tartars of the Little Nagoy, and by them carried unto
Assowa upon the Mouth of the Tana or Don. There I was sold unto a Precopensian
Tartar, who carried me along with him toward Crim: But upon the shallow Waters
I very happily made my Escape. I had little Knowledge of the Country, but
having formerly understood by our Cossacks at Astracan, that great Bodies of
the same name, mortal Enemies unto the Tartars, dwelt upon the Nepper not far
beyond Crim; by the help of the Sun and Stars, I journeyed due West many days
without any disastrous Adventure, until I found them; who gave me a very kind
reception: In this escape I traversed almost the whole Desert of Ingile and
Vngule. Dorosensko who then Commanded all the Cossacks upon the the Nepper,
immediately made me a Poskofneke, from which time for the space of almost two
years, I did accompany them in diverse expeditions, in which we visited most of
those Countries which lie upon the Black Sea, to the no small vexation and loss
of the Inhabitants. We kept a Correspondence with the Cossacks upon the Don,
and frequently asisted each other. And being all Foot, and the Country exactly
level, we traveled surrounded with Wagons (which they call a Tabor) for fear
of the Tartars who often set upon us, but were as often repulsed, we being well
accommodated with Firearms and small Field-piecs, which the Tartars do
exceedingly fear and will not ordinarily attempt closely, unless they have
greatly the Odds in Number. But at length it was my ill Fortune between the
Nepper and the Don to be again taken by the Tartars, and by them carried into
Crim, where I lived long in great misery, and was at length sold unto a
Timariot Spahi living in Anadoule, (Anatolia or Asia minor) with whom I lived 5
years, but in more easy servitude than among the Tartars. And to make my
service less irksome, my Master bestowed on me a Wallachian Woman, whom I
received for my Wife, though without the usual Solemnities of Marriage, which
are practiced among Christians: Understanding at length that a Lord Ambassador
was resident at Constantinople in behalf of the King of Great Brittian, and to
manage the Affairs of the English Nation in Turkey, I prevailed with my Master;
whose Favor I had gained to grant me my freedom, together with my Wives, if I
should procure an hundred Dollars. Whereupon he dismissed me in the company of
a Turk his Friend, who upon my humble supplicacion unto your Lordship receiving
the formetioned Sum, did in the behalf of his Friend before the Cady make me
free, and leave the Woman also at my Disposal. At the same time I very happily
met with some Vallachian Gentlemen, who were sent on a Message from their
Vayvod unto the Grand Seignor, They gladly received my Woman, and took her
along with them, promising upon their Return into their own Country, to Restore
her unto her Parents.

Now that I may fully satisfy your Lordship, that I had really visited all
those Countries which I have mentioned, I beseech your Lordship let your
Interpreter try me in those Languages wherein he is skilled; and as for others
wherewith he is not acquainted, I am ready to converse with any of those
Nations whom I pretend to know. For although I have never conversed much with
Books, yet my great Travel accompanied with a pretty good Memory, will
sufficiently Qualify me to pass through the Countries I shall hereafter
mention.

To begin my Progress from Constantinople, I can pass over from Scutery, and
thence by the help of my Tukish Language pass through all Anatolia; Thence
leaving Armeniae on my right hand, and having the Black Sea on the left, go
through Georgia, Mingrellia, Abassa, and Shercassen Land with the same Tongue,
and another, which with little variation is common unto them all. Thence into
the Comukes Country, who are a sort of Tarters and do agree with others of the
same name in speeeh, as indeed most Tartars do; only they who are Mahumetans,
and converse much with the Turks, use diverse Arabic and Turkish words
whereunto the Heathen Tartars are strangers: From Comukes Land I can pass into
Persia, but I am not so well acquainted with their Country and Language, as I
have elsewhere acknowledged. Therefore to return unto Constantinople, I can
proceed from thence unto Romellia, or Romania, through Wallachy, Bealla Horda,
Crim, the Great Desert I have so often mentioned of Ingell and Vngull, the
little Nagoy, so over the Vogal unto Astracan; thence through the Great Nagoy,
and leaving the Caspian on my Right hand into the Caragans Country, and so
through Boghar into Persia. I can also by my knowledge of the Languages
peculiar unto the following Countries traverse all Ireland, England, Norway,
Sweeden, Finland, Leifland, Poland, Russia, Mordwa, Sheremessa, Cassan,
Kalmukes Land, Cassachy Horda, Yurgench, and leaving China on the left hand
through Bochara into Persia.

And now, Sir, nothing remains, But that I make most humble and hearty
acknowledgment of your great Generosity and Christian Charity, in delivering a
Stranger out of Captivity, wherein I had Otherwise continued without hope of
seeing my Friends or Country. And were I as expert at my Pen, as I have
heretofore been at managing a Sword, I would by Consigning my Travels to
Writing, leave behind me a lasting Monument of your Fame: But being for want of
Learning and by long Disuse of my Mother Tongue rendered unfit for such a Work,
I shall wheresoever I come proclaim your Worthiness, and continually pray unto
the Omnipotent GOD to return your Kindness into your Bosom a Thousand fold.
And shall ever remain, during Life,

Your Faithful Slave, Astrachan.

FINIS.
COLLECTIONS OF TRAVELS THROUGH TURKEY into PERSIA, and the EAST INDIES.

Giving an Account of the Present State of those Countries.

AS ALSO A Full RELATION of the Five Years WARS, between Aureng-Zebe and his
Brothers in their Father's Lifetime, about the Succession. And a Voyage made
by the Great Mogol (Aureng-Zebe) with his Army from Dehli to Lahor, from Lahor
to Bember, and from thence to the Kingdom of Kachemire, by the Mogols, called,
The Paradise of the Indies.

TOGETHER With a Relation of the Kingdom of JAPAN and TUNKIN, and of their
particular Manners and Trade.

To which is added A New Description of the GRAND SEIGNIOR'S SERAGLIO, And also
of all the Kingdoms that encompass the Euxine and Caspian Seas.

BEING The TRAVELS of Monsieur TAVERNIER BERNIER, and other great Men: Adorned
with many Copper Plates.

The Second Volume.

LONDON, Printed for Moses Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.

M. DC. LXXXIV.

AN EXTRACT OF A LETTER WRITTEN TO Mr. H. Ouldinburgh, FROM Monsieur DE
MONCEAUX:
Giving a Character of the BOOK here Englished, and its AUTHOR.
VIrtue sometimes is no less interessed than Affection: Both, Sir, are glad to
receive from time to time pledges mutually answering for those that have united
themselves in a close correspondence. Yours indeed should demand of me such, as
might be a security to you for the advance you have been pleased to make me of
your Friendship. But since at present I have nothing worth presenting you with;
and yet am unwilling to give you any leisure to be diffident of my realness, or
to repent for having so easily given me a share in your esteem, I here send you
a Relation of Indostan, in which you will find such considerable Occurrences,
as will make you confess, I could not convey to you a more acceptable Present,
and that Monsieur Bernier, who has written it, is a very Gallant Man, and of a
mould, I wish all Travelers were made of. We ordinarily travel more out of
Vnsetledness than Curiosity, with a design to see Towns and Countries rather
than to know their Inhabitants and Productions; and we stay not long enough in
a place, to inform our selves well of the Government, Policy, Interests and
Manners of its People. Monsieur Bernier, after he had benefitted himself for
the space of many years by the converse of the famous Gassendi, seen him expire
in his arms, succeeded him in his Knowledge, and inherited his Opinions and
Discoveries, embarked for Egypt, stayed above a whole year at Cairo, and then
took the occasion of some Indian Vessels, that Trade in the Ports of the Red
Sea, to pass to Suratte; and after Twelve years abode at the Court of the Great
Mogol, is at last come to seek his rest in his native Country, there to give
an Account of his Observations and Discoveries, and to pour out into the bosom
of France, what he had amassed in India.

Sir, I shall say nothing to you of his Adventures, which you will find in the
Relations that are to follow hereafter, which he abandons to the greediness of
the Curious, who prefer their satisfaction to his quiet, and do already
persecute him to have the sequel of this History. Neither shall I mention to
you the hazards he did run, by being in the Neighborhood of Mecca; nor of his
prudent Conduct, which made him merit the esteem of his Generous Fazelcan, who
since is become the first Minister of that Great Empire, whom he taught the
principal Languages of Europe, after he had Translated for him the whole
Philosophy of Gassendi in Latin, and whose leave he could not obtain to go
home, till he had got for him a select number of our best European Books,
thereby to supply the loss he should suffer of his Person. This, at least, I
can assure you of, that never a Traveller went from home more capable to
observe, nor has written with more knowledge, candor, and integrity; that I
knew him at Constantinople, and in some Towns of Greece, of so excellent a
Conduct, that I proposed him to my self for a Pattern in the Design I then had,
to carry my Curiosity as far as the place where the Sun rises; that I have
often drowned in the sweetness of his entertainment the bitternesses, which
else I must have swallowed all alone, in such irksome and unpleasant passages,
as are those of Asia.

Sir, You will do me a pleasure to let me know the sentiment, your Illustrious
Society has of this Piece. Their Approbation begets much emulation among the
Intelligent, who all have no other Ambition than to please them. I my self must
avow to you, that if I thought I could merit so much, I should not so stiffly
oppose, as I do, the Publication of the Observations and Notes I have made in
the Levant. I should suffer my Friends to take them out of my Cabinet, where
from the slight value I have for them, they are like to lie imprisoned, except
the King my Master, by whose Order I undertook those Voyages, should absolutely
command me to set them at liberty, and to let them take their course in the
world. Mean time, Sir, you will oblige me, to assure those Great Men, who this
day compose the most knowing Company on Earth, of the Veneration I have for the
Oracles that come from their Mouth, and that I prefer their Lyceum before that
of Athens; and lastly, that of all their Admirers there is none, that has a
greater Concern for their Glory, than

Paris, July 16. 1670. De MONCEAVX.

The HEADS of the Principal Contents of this HISTORY.
Added by the English Interpreter.
1. WHat depth of Policy and Craft was used by Aureng-Zebe, the Heroes in this
History, and the Third of the Four Sons of Chah-Jehan the Great Mogol, to
supplant all his Brothers, and to settle himself in the Throne: And how the
first Foundation thereof was laid by the Vizier of the King of Golconda, and
the sickness of Chah-Jehan the Father of Aureng-Zebe.

2. A mixture of Love-Intrigues, practiced by the Princess Begum-Saheb, one of
the two Daughters of the Great Mogol, Chah-Jehan.

3. How Aureng-Zebe having overcome all his Brothers, did secure his Father and
others, whom he had cause to be jealous of.

4. How the Neighbors of the Empire of Mogol demeaned themselves toward the
new Emperor, Aureng-Zebe; and what Embassies were dispatched to him, first by
the Usbec-Tartars (where a description of that Country and People;) then the
Dutch of Suratte; as also from Mecca, from Arabia Felix, from Ethiopia and
Persia; together with an Account of their respective Instructions, Receptions,
Entertainments and Dismissions; particularly of that of the Hollanders,
securing and improving their Trade by this their Embassy.

5. Aureng-Zebe's singular prudence, and indefatigable pains, in managing the
Government himself; and how he treated him that endeavored to persuade him to
take his ease and pleasure, now he was established.

6. Aureng-Zebe's distaste against his Favourite-Sister, Rauchenara-Begum,
occasioned by some Love-Cabals.

7. His great Care in appointing a Governor and Tutor to his Third Son Sultan
Ekbar.

8. With what wisdom and severity Aureng-Zebe received and treated his
Pedantick Tutor, who expected to be made a great Lord for his former service;
together with a Model for the suitable Education of a Great Prince, prescribed
by Aureng-Zebe on this occasion.

9. In what credit Judiciary Astrology is over all Asia.

10. How the Kings of India make themselves Heirs of all the Estate of those
that dye in their service.

11. Of the Reciprocal Appearance of Kindnesses between Aureng-Zebe and his
Imprisoned Father and Sister.

12. What passed between Aureng-Zebe and Emir-Jemla, who had laid the first
Ground work to Aureng-Zebe's Greatness.

13. What in these Revolutions was transacted about the Bay of Bengale and the
Heathen Kingdom of Rakan.

14. How Aureng-Zebe carried himself toward his two Eldest Sons, Sultan
Mahmoud and Sultan Mahum: And how, for a Trial of the Obedience and Courage of
the latter, he commanded him to kill a certain Lion, that did great mischief in
the Country; together with the success thereof.

15. Diverse Particulars, showing the Interest between Indostan and Persia,
supposed by this Author to be unknown, or at least not well known hitherto.

16. How generously Aureng-Zebe recompensed those that had faithfully served
him in these Revolutions.

17. Some Account of that small Kingdom of Kachimere, or Cassimere, represented
as the Paradise of the Indies; concerning which the Author affirms, that he
has a particular History of it in the Persian Tongue.

18. A considerable Relation of Suratte's being strangely surpised and
plundered, by a stout Rebel of Visapour; and how the English and Dutch saved
themselves and their Treasure in this bold Enterprise.

19. A particular Account both of the former and present State of the whole
Peninsule of Indostan; the occasion of its Division into diverse Sovereignties,
and the several Arts used to maintain themselves one against another;
particularly of the present Government and State of the Kingdoms of Golkonda
and Visapour, and the Interests in reference to the Great Mogol.

20. Of the Extent of Indostan, and the Trade which the English, Portugueses,
and Hollanders, have in that Empire; as also of the vast quantities of Gold and
Silver, circulated through the World, and conveyed into Indostan, and there
swallowed up, as in an Abyss.

21. Of the many Nations, which in that vast Extent of Country cannot be well
kept in subjection by the Great Mogol.

22. Of the Great Mogol's Religion, which is Mahumetan, of the Turkish* not
Persian Sect.

23. Of his Militia, both in the Field and about his Person; and how the same
is provided for, employed, punctually paid, and carefully distributed in
several places.

24. Of the Omrahs, that is, the Great Lords of Indostan; their several
Qualities, Offices, Attendants.

25. The Artillery of the Mogol, great and small, very considerable.

26. Of his Stables of Horses, Elephants, Camels, Mules, etc.

27. Of his Seraglio.

28. Of his vast Revenues and Expenses.

29. What Prince may be said to be truly Rich.

30. An important State-Question Debated, viz. Whether it be more expedient for
the Prince and People, that the Prince be the sole Proprietor of all the Lands
of the Country over which he Reigns, yea or no?

The Heads of the Chief Contents of the Third Tome, being the Continuation of
the Great Mogols History.
AN Accurate Description of the two famous Cities of Indostan, Dehli and Agra,
p. 1. and 91. and a Comparison betwixt them and Paris, p. 92. together with
diverse particulars interspersed up and down, discovering the Court and Genius
of the Mogols and Indians; as also the Effects of the Christian Missionaries in
those parts, with some strictures and reflections upon the indiscretion and
scandalousness of some of them. p. 92. An ample and very punctual Narrative of
the Superstitions, strange Fashions and Doctrines of the Native Indians, or
Gentiles of Indostan; manifesting, that there are no Opinions so extravagant
and so ridiculous, which the Spirit of Man is not capable of, p. 96. The odd
Belief and behavior of that People concerning Eclipses, ib. The abominable
Impostures of their Priests, p. 98. Diverse very notable. Relations of the
Banian Women burning themselves alive with the Corpses of their dead Husbands,
ib. and of others of them, suffering themselves to be buried in the ground
alive up to the very Neck, p. 101. The variety and abundance of Religious and
Monkish Men among those Heathens, together with their extraordinary Strictures
and cruel Austerities exercised upon themselves, p. 102. The reputed Saints,
and many Enthusiasts that are amongst them, ib. The Books of Law and Sciences
received there, p. 104. Their Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls, ibid. Of
the Creation, Preservation and Destruction of the World, p. 150. Of a kind of
Trinity, and strange Incarnation said to be believed by them, 105. as also of
an odd Manifestation of the third person of their Trinity, p. 106. The Language
of the Brachmans, altogether different from the common Indian, p. 107. together
with its pretended extraordinary Antiquity, ibid. Their Philosophers,
constituting chiefly six different Sects, ibid. Whereof some approach to the
Epicurean principles; others reduce all to Matter and Form; others to Four
Elements; others to Light and Darkness, etc. ibid. Their Method of Physic very
different from ours; and what Principles it is grounded upon, p. 108. and how
successful, ibid. Their Ignorance in Anatomy, ibid. Their Extravagant Tenets in
Astronomy, ibid. and in Geography, p. 109. A Description of that famous School
of all the Indian Gentility at Banares, ibid. Their Chronology, making the
World in effect Eternal, ibid. Their Opinion concerning Plants and Animals,
importing, that the Seeds of both those kinds are not formed anew, but were
contrived in the First production of the World; as also, that they are (not
only potentially, but) actually the very entire Plant and Animal, p. 110. Their
Doctrine about the Soul of the World, and Creation, ibid.
The Heads of the Fourth Tome.
A Relation of a magnificent Voyage, made by the Great Mogol, Aureng-zebe,
attended by his whole Army, from Dehli to Lahor; from Lahor to Bember, and from
thence to the Kingdom of Kachemire, the reputed Paradise of the Indies. Where
is a Description of the greatness of the Mogolian Army, Provision, Artillery,
Encampment, Discipline; among all which is inserted a particular way of keeping
their Water fresh for drinking, p. 112. Then the number and pomp, the order and
disposition of the great Mogols Te^ts in the Field; and the number of
Elephants, Camels, Mules, and Porters necessary to carry them, p. 115. The
disposition of the Royal Markets in the Camp, p. 117. The particular Quarters
of the Mogolian Lords, and of the rest of the Army, ibid. The Extent of the
whole Army, p. 118. The Confusion, there met with, and how it may be avoided,
ibid. the different manners of the March of the King, the Princesses, and the
whole Seraglio, p. 119. the great danger there is in being too near the Women,
p. 120. The several ways of the Royal Hunting, ibid. Especially that of the
Lion, p. 121. The vast number of People there is in the Army, and the method of
providing for them all, p. 122. A Description of Lahor, p. 123. The excessive
Heats between Lahor and Bember, and its peculiar cause, p. 124. The Excellency
of the waters of the Indian River Tchenau, ibid. Of the excessive Sweats men
are subject to in those parts, and the harmless drinking of those Waters in
very great quantity. p. 125. An exact Description of the Kingdom and Paradise
of Kachemire; its ancient State, p. 126. Its present condition and
excellencies, for Soil, Corn, Trees, Saffron, Honey, as also for Springs,
Rivers, Lakes; Cattle of all sorts, and wild Deer, without wild Beasts; the Wit
and Industry of the Inhabitants, in making Stuffs softer than any Caster; in
making good Vernish; the European Complexion of the people, and particularly
the great beauty of their Women. p. 126. Considerable Observations about the
Mountains there, one side of them being intolerably hot, and of the temper of
the Torrid Zone, and yielding Indian Plants; the other very tolerable, and of
the nature of the Temperate Zone, and affording none but European Plants. p.
130. Remarkables about the generation and corruption of Trees there, ibid.
Strange Cascata's of Water, ibid. Odd changes of Winds, p. 104. A rare Fountain
flowing and stopping regularly thrice a day, at a certain time of the Year; and
at other times flowing regularly, p. 131. With some Reflections thereon, ibid.
Other not ordinary Fountains. p. 132. The Description of an House of pleasure,
of the ancient Kings of Kachemire, p. 133. And of two Royal Gardens. ibid. The
Discovery, made by the Author, of an Imposture practiced by the Mullah's, (a
sort of Religious Heathens) pretending to be able to lift up a big stone with
the end only of their eleven fingers. p. 133. A great Lake, having Ice in
Summer. The Condition of the neighboring Mountains and Valleys of Kachemire,
as to the Commodities of Wool, Leather, Corn, Fruit, etc. p. 134. An Account
of some of the ancient Kachemirian Kings posterity, and of an odd way of theirs
in preserving their Family. ibid. The Situation of the Kingdoms of the little
and great Tibet, and the Commodities they afford, of Crystal, Musc, and Wool,
and a certain bluish Stone, of an Adamantine hardness, highly esteemed. p.
135. The Embassy of the King of the Great Tibet, to Aureng-zebe, ibid. Where is
related a pleasant story of a Physician of that Country, touching the
Transmigration of Souls. ibid. A considerable account of Voyages made by
Caravans from Kachemire, through the Mountains of the great Tibet into Tartary,
and Cataja, p. 136. And the Commodities brought back by those Caravans, as
Musk, China-wood, Rubarb, Mamiron. ibid. An Account of the Kingdom of Kacheguer
or Kascar, its situation, together with directions how to travel thither from
Kachemire, p. 136. As also, how to pass from Kacheguer to Katay. ibid. An
Answer to five Questions; concerning Jews in Kachemire, p. 137. the Mounsons,
and the season of the ordinary Rains in the East Indies, p. 138. the wonderful
Regularity of the Current of the Sea, and of the Winds there, p. 139. the great
Fertility and Riches of the Kingdom of Bengale, p. 140. the Causes of the
Increase of the Nile. p. 143. A Memorandum for perfecting the Map of Indostan,
and for knowing the Revenue of the Great Mogol. p. 146.
THE HISTORY OF THE Late Revolution OF THE DOMINIONS OF THE GREAT MOGOL.
THE desire of seeing the World having made me Travel into Palestina and Egypt,
would not let me stop there; it put me upon a resolution to see the Red Sea
from one end to the other. I went from Grand Cairo, after I had staid there
above a year; and in two and thirty hours, going the Caravan-pace, I arrived at
Suez, where I Embarked in a Gally, which in seventeen days carried me, always
in sight of Land, to the Port of Gidda, which is half a days Journey from
Mecca. There I was constrained (contrary to my hopes, and the promise which the
Beig of the Red Sea had made me) to go ashore on that pretended Holy Land of
Mahomet, where a Christian, that is not a Slave, dares not set his foot. I
staid there four and thirty days; and then I Embarked in a small Vessel, which
in fifteen days carried me along the Coast of Arabia the Happy to Moka, near
the Straight of Babel-mandel. I resolved to pass thence to the Isle of Masowa
and Arkiko, to get as far as Gouder, the Capital Town of the Country of
Alebech, or the Kingdom of Aethiopia; but I received certain information, that,
since the Portugueses had been killed there by the intrigue of the
Queen Mother, or expelled, together with the Jesuit Patriarch, whom they had
brought thither from Goa, the Roman Catholics were not safe there; a poor
Capuchin having lost his head at Suaken, for having attempted to enter into
that Kingdom: That indeed, by going under the name of a Greek, or an Armenian,
I did not run so great hazard, and that even the King himself, when he should
know, that I could do him service, would give me Land to Till by Slaves, which
I might buy if I had money; but that undoubtedly they would forthwith oblige me
to Marry, as they had lately done a certain Friar, who had passed there under
the name of a Greek Physician; and that they would never suffer me to come away
again.

These considerations, among others, induced me to change my resolution. I went
aboard of an Indian Vessel; I passed those Streights, and in two and twenty
days I arrived at Suratte in Indostan, the Empire of the Great Mogol, in the
Year 1655. There I found, that he who then Reigned there, was called
Chah-Jehan, that is to say, King of the World; who, according to the History of
that Country, was Son of Jehan-Guyre, which signifies Conqueror of the World,
Grandchild of Ekbar, which is Great, and that thus ascending by Houmayons, or
the Fortunate, Father of Ekbar, and his other Predecessors, he was the Tenth of
those that were descended from that Timur-Lengue, which signifies the Lame
Prince, commonly and corruptly called Tamerlan, so renowned for his Conquests;
who married his near Kinswoman, the only Daughter of the Prince of the Nations
of Great Tartary, called Mogols, who have left and communicated their Name to
the Strangers, that now govern Indostan, the Country of the Indians, though
those that are employed in public Charges and Offices, and even those that are
listed in the Militia, be not all of the Race of the Mogols, but Strangers, and
Nations gathered out of all Countries, most of them Persians, some Arabians,
and some Turks. For, to be esteemed a Mogol, it is enough to be a Stranger white
of Face, and a Mahumetan; in distinction as well to the Indians, who are brown,
and Pagans, as to the Christians of Europe, who are called Franguis.

I found also at my arrival, that this King of the World, Chah-Jehan, of above
seventy years of Age, had four Sons and two Daughters; that, some years since,
he had made these four Sons Vice-Kings or Governors of four of his most
considerable Provinces or Kingdoms; that it was almost a year that he was
fallen into a great sickness, whence it was believed he would never recover:
Which had occasioned a great division among these four Brothers (all laying
claim to the Empire) and had kindled among them a War which lasted about five
years, and which I design here to describe, having been present at some of the
most considerable Actions, and entertained for the space of eight years at that
Court, where Fortune and the small stock of Money (left me after diverse
Encounters with Robbers, and the Expenses of a Voyage of six and forty days
from Suratte to Agra and Dehli, the Capital Towns of that Empire) obliged me to
take a Salary from the Grand Mogol in the quality of a Physician, and a little
after from Danechmend-Kan, the most knowing Man of Asia, who had been Bakchis,
or Great Master of the Horse, and was one of the most powerful and the most
considerable Omrahs or Lords of that Court.

The Eldest of these four Sons of Chah-Jehan was called Dara, that is Darius.
The Second was called Sultan-Sujah, that is, the Valiant Prince. The name of
the Third was Aurenge-Zebe, which signifies the Ornament of the Throne. That of
the Fourth was Morad-Bakche, as if you should say, Desire accomplished. Of the
two Daughters, the eldest was called Begum-Saheb, that is, the Mistress
Princess; and the youngest Rauchenara-Begum, which is as much as Bright
Princess, or the Splendour of Princesses.

It Is the Custom of the Country, to give such Names to their Princes and
Princesses. Thus the Wife of Chah-Jehan, so renowned for her Beauty, and for
having a Tomb, which much more deserved to be reckoned among the Wonders of the
World, than those unshapen Masses, and those heaps of Stones in Egypt, was
called Tage-Mehalle, that is to say, the Crown of the Seraglio; and the Wife of
Jehan-Guyre, who has so long governed the State, whilst her Husband minded
nothing but Drinking and Divertisements, was first called Nour-Mehalle, and
afterward, Nour-Jehan-Begum, the Light of the Seraglio, the Light of the
World. The reason, why they give such kind of Names to the Great Ones, and not
Names from their Land or Dominion (as is usual in Europe) is, because all the
Land being the Kings, there are no Marquisates, Earldoms and Dutchies, of which
the Grandees might bear their Names; all consists in Pensions either of Land or
ready Money, which the King gives, increases, retrencheth, and takes away, as
seems good unto him: And it is even for this reason, that the Omrahs have also
no other but such Names; one (for example) being called Raz-Audaze-Kan, i. e. a
Thunderer; another, Safe Cheken-Kan, a Breaker of Ranks; a third,
Bare-Audaze-Kan, a Man of Lightening; others, Dianet-Kan, or Danechmend-Kan, or
Fazel-Kan, i. e. the Faithful Lord, the Intelligent, the Perfect, and the like.

Dara, the Eldest Son, wanted not good Qualities. He was Gallant in
Conversation, Witty in Repartees, exceeding Civil and Liberal, but entertained
too good an Opinion of his person, esteeming himself alone capable of all, and
thinking it scarce possible that any Body was able to give him counsel;
insomuch, that he would give reproachful Names to those who pretended to advise
him in any thing; whereby it came to pass, that even those, who were most
affectionate to him, were shie to discover to him the most secret Intrigues of
his Brothers. Besides, he was apt to be transported with passion, to menace, to
injure, to affront, even the greatest Omrahs or Lords; but all passed over like
a flash of light. Though he was a Mahumetan, and publicly expressed in the
ordinary Exercises of Religion to be so, yet, in private, he was Heathen with
the Heathen, and Christian with the Christians. He had constantly about him of
those Heathen Doctors, to whom he gave very considerable Pensions, and who (as
was said) had instilled into him Opinions contrary to the Religion of the Land;
of which I may touch something hereafter, when I shall come to speak of the
Religion of the Indians or Gentiles. He also hearkened of late very willingly
to the Reverend Father Buzee a Jesuit, and began very well to relish what he
suggested. Yet there are some who say, that at the bottom he was void of all
Religion, and that whatever he pretended in it, was only for curiosity, or, as
others say, out of policy, to make himself beloved by the Christians, who are
pretty numerous in his Artillery; but above all, to gain the Affection of the
Rajas, or Sovereign Gentiles, that were Tributary to the Empire, and to make
them of his party upon occasion. Mean time, this has not much furthered his
Affairs, on the contrary, it will appear in the sequel of this History, that
the pretense used by Aureng-Zebe, his third Brother, to cut off his head, was,
that he was turned Kafer, that is to say, an Infidel, of no Religion, an
Idolater.

Sultan Sujah, the second Brother, was much of the humor of Dara, but he was
more close and more settled, and had better conduct and dexterity. He was fit to
manage an Intrigue well, and he made, underhand, Friends, by the force of
Presents, which he heaped upon the great Omrahs, and principally upon the most
powerful Rajas, as Jessomseigne, and some others; but he did somewhat too much
indulge his pleasures, in entertaining an extraordinary number of Women, among
whom when he was, he spent whole days and nights in drinking, singing, and
dancing. He made them Presents of very rich Apparel; and he increased or
lessened their Pensions according as the fancy took him: By which kind of life
his Affairs did languish, and the Affections of many of his People cooled. He
cast himself into the Religion of the Persians, although Chah-Jehan, his
Father, and all his Brothers, were of the Turkish. It Is known that Mahumetanism
is divided into several Sects, which made that famous Check-Sady, Author of the
Goulistan, say in Verse, which is to this effect in Prose; I am a Dervich
Drinker, I seem to be without Religion, and I am known of sixty two Sects. But
of all those Sects there are two principal ones, whose Partisans are mortal
Enemies to one another. The one is that of the Turks, whom the Persians call
Osmantous, that is, Sectators of Osman; they believing that it is he that was
the true and lawful Successor of Mahomet, the Great Caliph or Sovereign Priest,
to whom alone it did appertain to interpret the Alcoran, and to decide the
Controversies to be met with in the Law. The other is that of the Persians,
whom the Turks call Chias, Rafezys, Aly-Merdans, that is, Sectaries, Heretics,
Partisans of Aly, because they believe, contrary to the belief of the Turks,
that this Succession and Pontifical Authority, which I just now intimated, was
due only to Aly the Son-in-law of Mahomet. It was by reason of State that
Sultan Sujah had embraced this latter Sect, considering that all the Persians
being Chias, and most of them, or their Children, having the greatest power at
the Court of Mogol, and holding the most important Places of the Empire, he had
most reason to hope, that, when occasion served, they would all take his part.

Aureng-Zebe, the third Brother, had not that Gallantry, nor surprising
Presence of Dara, he appeared more serious and melancholy, and was indeed much
more judicious, understanding the World very well, and knowing whom to choose
for his service and purpose, and where to bestow his favor and bounty most for
his interest. He was reserved, crafty, and exceedingly versed in dissembling,
insomuch that for a long while he made profession to be Fakire, that is, Poor,
Dervich, or Devout, renouncing the World, and feigning not to pretend at all to
the Crown, but to desire to pass his life in Prayer, and other Devotions. In
the mean time he failed not to make a Party at Court, especially when he was
made Vice-King of Decan; but he did it with so much dexterity, art, and
secrecy, that it could hardly be perceived. He also had the skill to maintain
himself in the affection of Chah-Jehan his Father, who although he much loved
Dara, could yet not forbear to show that he esteemed Aureng-Zebe, and judged
him capable to Reign; which caused jealousy enough in Dara, who began to find
it, insomuch that he could not hold from saying sometimes to his Friends in
private, Of all my Brothers I apprehend only this Nemazi, that is, this Bigot,
this great Praying-man.

Morad-Bakche, the youngest of all, was the least dextrous, and the least
judicious. He cared for nothing but mirth and pastime, to drink, hunt, and
shoot. Yet he had some good qualities, for he was very civil and liberal; he
gloried in it, that he kept nothing secret; he despised Cabals; and he bragged
openly, that he trusted only in his A^m and Sword: In short, he was very Brave,
and if this Bravery had been accompanied with some conduct, he would have
carried the Bell from all his Brothers, and been King of Indostan, as will
appear in what is to follow.

Concerning the two Daughters, the Eldest, Begum-Saheb, was very beautiful, and
a great Wit, passionately beloved of her Father. It was even rumoured, that he
loved her to that degree as is hardly to be imagined, and that he alleged for
his excuse, that, according to the determination of his Mullahs, or Doctors of
his Law, it was permitted a Man to eat of the fruit of the Tree he had planted.
He had so great a confidence in her, that he had given her charge to watch over
his safety, and to have an eye to all what came to his Table: And she knew
perfectly to manage his humor, and even in the most weighty Affairs to bend him
as she pleased. She was exceedingly enriched by great Pensions, and by costly
Presents, which she received from all Parts, for such Negotiations as she
employed her self in about her Father: And she made also great Expenses, being
of a very liberal and generous disposition. She stuck entirely to Dara, her
eldest Brother, espoused cordially his part, and declared openly for him; which
contributed not a little to make the Affairs of Dara prosper, and to keep him
in the affection of his Father; for she supported him in all things, and
advertised him of all occurrences: Yet that was not so much, because he was the
eldest Son, and she the eldest Daughter (as the People believed) as because he
had promised her, that as soon as he should come to the Crown, he would marry
her; which is altogether extraordinary, and almost never practiced in Indostan.

I shall not scruple to relate here some of the Amors of this Princess,
although shut up in a Seraglio, and well kept, like other Women. Neither shall
I apprehend, that I may be thought to prepare matter for a Romancer; for they
are not Amors like ours, followed by Gallant and Comical Adventures, but
attended with Events dreadful and Tragical.

Now it is reported, that this Princess found means to let a young Gallant enter
the Seraglio, who was of no great Quality, but proper, and of a good Mien. But
among such a number of jealous and envious persons, she could not carry on her
business so privily, but she was discovered. Chah-Jehan, her Father, was soon
advertised of it, and resolved to surprise her, under the pretense of giving
her a Visit, as he used to do. The Princess seeing him come unexpected, had no
more time than to hide this unfortunate Lover in one of the great Chaudrons
made to Bath in; which yet could not be so done, but that Chah-Jehan suspected
it. Mean time he quarrelled not with his Daughter, but entertained her a pretty
while, as he was wont to do; and at length told her, that he found her in a
careless and less neat posture; that it was convenient she should wash her
self, and bath oftener; commanding presently, with somewhat a stern countenance,
that forthwith a Fire should be made under that Chaudron, and he would not part
thence, before the Eunuchs had brought him word, that that unhappy Man was
dispatched. Some time after she took other measures, she chose for her
Kane-saman, that is, her Steward, a certain Persian called Nazerkan, who was a
young Omrah, the handsomest and most accomplished of the whole Court; a Man of
Courage and Ambition, the Darling of all, insomuch that Chah-Hestkan, Uncle of
Aureng-Zebe, proposed to marry him to the Princess: But Chah-Jehan received
that Proposition very ill, and besides, when he was informed of some of the
secret Intrigues that had been formed, he resolved quickly to rid himself of
Nazerkan. He therefore presented to him, as 'twere to do him honor, a Betele,
which he could not refuse to chew presently, after the custom of the Country.
Betele is a little knot made up of very delicate leaves, and some other things,
with a little chalk of Sea-Cockles, which makes the mouth and lips of a
vermilion color, and the breath sweet and pleasing. This young Lord thought of
nothing less than being poisoned: He went away from the Company very jocund and
content, into his Paleky; but the Drug was so strong, that before he could come
to his house, he was no more alive.

Rauchenara-Begum never passed for so handsome and spiritual as Begum-Saheb, but
she was not less cheerful, and comely enough, and hated pleasures no more than
her Sister. But she addicted her self wholly to Aureng-Zebe, and consequently
declared her self an Enemy to Begum-Saheb and Dara. This was the cause, that
she had no great Riches, nor any considerable share in the Affairs of the
State: Nevertheless as she was in the Seraglio, and wanted no Wit and Spies,
she could not but discover many important matters, of which she gave secret
advertisement to Aureng Zebe.

Chah-Jehan, some years before the Troubles, finding himself charged with these
four Princes, all come to Age, all Married, all pretending to the Crown,
Enemies to one another, and each of them making secretly a Party, was perplexed
enough, as to what was fittest for him to do, fearing danger to his own person,
and foreseeing what afterward befell him: For, to shut them up in Goualeor,
which is a Fortress where the Princes are ordinarily kept close, and which is
held impregnable, it being situated upon an inaccessible Rock, and having
within it self good water, and provision enough for a Garrison; that was not so
easy a thing. They were too potent already, each of them having a Princely
Train. And again, he could not handsomely remove them far off, without giving
them some Government fit for their Birth; wherein he apprehended they would
Cantonize themselves, and become little independent Kings, as actually they
afterward did. Nevertheless, fearing lest they should cut one another Throat
before his Eyes, if he kept them still at Court, he at last concluded to send
them away. And so he sent Sultan Sujah, his second Son, into the Kingdom of
Bengale; his third, Aureng-Zebe, into Decan; and the youngest, Morad-Bakche, to
Guzaratte; giving to Dara, the eldest, Cabal and Multan. The three first went
away very well content with their Government, and there they acted each the
Sovereign, and retained all the Revenues of their respective Countries,
entertaining great Troops, under the pretense of bridling their Subjects and
Neighbors. As to Dara, because the eldest, and designed to the Crown, he
stirred not from the Court; which that he should not do, seemed also to be the
intention of Chah-Jehan, who entertained him in the hopes of succeeding him
after his death. He even permitted then, that Orders were issued out by him,
and that he might sit in a kind of Throne, beneath his, among the Omrahs; so
that it seemed, as if there were two Kings together. But as it is very difficult
for two Sovereigns to agree, Chah-Jehan, though Dara showed him great
observance and affection, always harbored some dissidence, fearing above all
things the Morsel; and besides, for as much as he knew the parts of
Aureng-Zebe, and thought him more capable to Reign than any of the rest, he had
always (as they say) some particular correspondence with him.

This it is, what I thought fit to premise concerning these four Princes, and
their Father Chah-Jehan, because it is necessary for the understanding of all
that follows. I esteemed also, that I was not to forget those two Princesses,
as having been the most considerable Actors in the Tragedy; the Women in the
Indies taking very often, as well as at Constantinople, and in many other
places, the best part in the most important Transactions, though men take
seldom notice of it, and trouble their heads of seeking for other causes.

But to deliver this History with clearness, we must rise somewhat higher, and
relate what passed, some time before the Troubles, between Aureng-Zebe, the
King of Golkonda, and his Vizier Emir-Jemla; because this will discover to us
the character and temper of Aureng-Zebe, who is to be the Heroes of this Piece,
and the King of the Indies. Let us then see, after what manner Emir-Jemla
proceeded, to lay the first foundation of the Royalty of Aureng Zebe.

During the time that Aureng-Zebe was in Decan, the King of Golkonda had for
his Vizier and General of his Armies this Emir-Jemla, who was a Persian by
Nation, and very famous in the Indies. He was not a man of great Extraction,
but beaten in Business, a person of excellent parts, and a great Captain. He
had the wit of amassing great Treasures, not only by the administration of the
affairs of this opulent Kingdom, but also by Navigation and Trade, sending
Ships into very many Parts, and causing the Diamond Mines, which he alone had
farmed under many borrowed names, to be wrought with extraordinary diligence.
So that people discoursed almost of nothing but of the Riches of Emir-Jemla,
and of the plenty of his Diamonds, which were not reckoned but by Sacks. He had
also the skill to render himself very potent and considerable, entertaining,
besides the Armies of the King, very good Troops for his particular, and above
all a very good Artillery, with abundance of Franguys or Christians to manage
it. In a word, he grew so rich, and so puissant, especially after he had found
a way to enter into the Kingdom of Karnates, and to pillage all the ancient
Churches of the Idols of that Country, that the King of Golkonda became
jealous of it, and prepared himself to unsaddle him; and that the more, because
he could not bear what was reported of him, as if he had used too great
familiarity with the Queen his Mother, that was yet beauteous. Yet he
discovered nothing of his design to any, having patience, and waiting till Emir
came to the Court, for he was then in the Kingdom of Karnates with his Army.
But one day, when more particular News was brought him of what had passed
between his mother and him, he had not power enough to dissemble any longer,
but was transported by choler to fall to invectives and menaces: Whereof Emir
was soon made acquainted, having at the Court abundance of his Wives Kindred,
and all his nearest Relations and best Friends possessing the principal
Offices. The King's Mother also, who did not hate him, had speedy information
of the same. Which obliged Emir, without delay, to write to his only Son,
Mahmet Emir-Kan, who then was about the King, requiring him to do the best he
could to withdraw with all speed from the Court, under some pretense of
Hunting, or the like, and to come and join with him. Mahmet Emir-Kan failed not
to attempt diverse ways; but, the King causing him to be narrowly observed, none
of them all would succeed. This very much perplexed Emir, and made him take a
strange resolution, which cast the King in great danger to lose his Crown and
Life; so true it is, that he who knows not to Dissemble, knows not how to Reign.
He writ to Aureng-Zebe, who was then in Daulet-Abad, the Capital of Decan,
about fifteen or sixteen days Journey from Golkonda, giving him to understand,
that the King of Golkonda did intend to ruin him and his Family,
notwithstanding the signal Services he had done him, as all the World knew;
which was an unexampled Injustice and Ingratitude; that this necessiated him to
take his refuge to him, and to entreat him, that he would receive him into his
protection; that, for the rest, if he would follow his advice, and confide in
him, he would so dispose Affairs, that he would at once put into his hands both
the King and Kingdom of Golkonda. This thing he made very easy, using the
following Discourse: You need but take four or five thousand Horse, of the best
of your Army, and to march with Expedition to Golkonda, spreading a rumor by
the way, that it is an Ambassador of Chah-Jehan that goes in haste, about
considerable matters, to speak with the King at Bag-naguer. The Dabir, who is
he that is first to be addressed unto, to make any thing known unto the King,
is allied to me, and my creature, and altogether mine; take care of nothing but
to march with Expedition, and I will so order it, that without making you
known, you shall come to the Gates of Bag-naguer; and when the King shall come
out to receive the Letters, according to custom, you may easily seize on him,
and afterward of all his Family, and do with him what shall seem good to you;
in regard that his house of Bag-naguer, where he commonly resides, is unwalled
and unfortified. He added, that he would make this Enterprise upon his own
charges, offering him fifty thousand Roupies a day (which is about five and
twenty thousand Crowns) during the whole time of the March.

Aureng-Zebe, who looked only for some such occasion, had no mind at all to
lose so fair an one. He soon undertook the Expedition, and did so fortunately
manage his Enterprise, that he arrived at Bag-naguer, without being otherwise
known than as an Ambassador of Chah-Jehan. The King of Golkonda being
advertised of the arrival of this pretended Ambassador, came forth into a
Garden, according to custom, received him with honor, and having unfortunately
put himself into the hands of his Enemy, ten or twelve Slaves, Gurgis, were
ready to fall upon and to seize his person, as had been projected; but that a
certain Omrah, touched with tenderness, could not forbear to cry out, though he
was of the Party, and a creature of Emir, Does not your Majesty see that this
is Aureng-Zebe? Away, or you are taken. Whereat the King being a^righted, slips
away, and gets hastily on horseback, riding with all his might to the Fortress
of Golkonda, which is but a short League from thence.

Aureng-Zebe seeing he was defeated in his design, yet was not therefore
discomposed; but seized at the same time on the Royal House, takes all the
rich and good things he finds there; yet sending to the King all his Wives
(which over all the Indies is very religiously observed) and goes to besiege
him in his Fortress. But as the Siege, for want of having brought along all
Necessaries, held on long, and lasted above two months, he received order from
Chah-Jehan to raise it, and to retire into Decan again; so that, although the
Fortress was reduced to Extremities, for want of Victuals and Ammunition of
War, he found himself obliged to abandon his Enterprise. He knew very well,
that it was Dara and Begum that had induced Chah-Jehan to send these Orders,
from the apprehension they entertained, that he would become too powerful; but
in the mean time he never discovered any resentment of it, saying only, that he
ought to obey the Orders of his Father. Yet he withdrew not, without causing
underhand payment to be made to him of all the Charges of his Expedition:
Besides, he married his Son Sultan Mahmond to the eldest Daughter of that King,
with a promise, that he would make him his Successor, causing him also to give
him for a Dowry the Fortress and the Appurtenances of Bamguyre. He also made
the King consent, that all the Silver Money that should be Coined for the
future in that Kingdom, should bear on one side the Arms of Chah-Jehan; and
that Emir-Jemla should withdraw with his whole Family, all his Goods, Troops,
and Artillery.

These two great Men were not long together, but they framed great designs: On
the way they besieged and took Bider, one of the strongest and most important
Places of Visapour; and thence they went to Daulet-Abad, where they contracted
so intimate a friendship together, that Aureng-Zebe could not live without
seeing Emir twice a day, no^ Emir without seeing Aureng-Zebe. Their Union began
to cause a new Face in all the Affairs of those Parts, and laid the first
foundations of the Royalty of Aureng-Zebe.

This Prince having used the Art to make himself to be called to the Court
diverse times, went with great and rich Presents to Agra to Chah-Jehan,
presenting him his service, and inducing him to make War against the King of
Golkunda, and him of Visapour, and against the Portugals. At first he presented
to him that great Diamond, which is esteemed matchless; giving him to
understand, that the precious stones of Golkonda were quite other things, than
those Rocks of Kandabar; that there it was, where the War ought to be made, to
get the possession thereof, and to go as far as Cape-Comory. Chah-Jehan,
whether it were that he was dazzled by the Diamonds of Emir, or whether he
thought it fit, as some believe he did, to have an Army in the Field, somewhat
to restrain Dara, whom he found active in making himself potent, and who with
insolence had ill treated the Vizier Sadullah-Kan (whom Chah-Jehan passionately
loved, and considered as the greatest Statesman that had been in the Indies)
causing him even to be made away with Poison, as a Man not of his Party, but
inclined to Sultan Sujah; or rather, because he found him too powerful, and in
a condition to be the Umpire of the Crown, if Chah-Jehan should decease; or
lastly, because being neither Persian, nor of Persian Extraction, but an
Indian, there were not wanting envious persons, who spread abroad, that he
entertained in diverse places numerous Troops of Patans, very gallant men, and
well paid, with a design to make himself King, or his Son; or at least to expel
the Mogels, and to restore to the Throne the Nation of the Patans, of whom he
had taken his Wife. However it be, Chah-Jehan resolved to send an Army toward
Decan, under the conduct of Emir-Jemla.

Dara, who saw the consequence of this Affair, and that the sending of Troops
for those Parts, was to give strength to Aureng-Zebe, opposed it exceedingly,
and did what he could to hinder it. Nevertheless, when he saw that Chah-Jehan
was resolute for it, he at last thought it best to consent; but with this
condition, that Aureng-Zebe should keep in Daulet-Abad, as Governor only of the
Country, without meddling at all in the War, or pretending to govern the Army;
that Emir should be the absolute General, who for a pledge of his Fidelity was
to leave his whole Family at the Court. Emir strugled enough within himself,
whether he should agree to this last condition, but when Chah-Jehan desired him
to give that satisfaction to Dara, and promised him, that after a little while
he would send him back his Wife and Children, he consented, and marched into
Decan toward Aureng-Zebe with a very gallant Army, and without any stop entered
into Visapour, where he besieged a strong place called Kaliane.

The Affairs of Indostan were in that condition, as I have been relating, when
Chah-Jahan fell dangerously sick, I shall not speak here of his sickness, much
less relate the particulars of it. I shall only say this, that it was little
suitable to a man of above Seventy years of Age, who should rather think on
preserving his strength, than to ruin it, as he did. This sickness did soon
alarm and trouble all Indostan. Mighty Armies were levied in Dehly and Agra,
the Capitals of the Empire. Sultan Sujah did the like in Bengale, and
Aureng-Zebe in Decan, and Mord-Bakche in Guzaratte: All four assembled to
themselves their Allies and Friends; all four write, promise, and form diverse
Intrigues. Dara having surprised some of their Letters, showed them to
Chah-Jehan, and made great noise about them; and his Sister Begum failed not to
make use of this occasion, to animate the King against them. But Chah-Jehan was
diffident of Dara, and fearing to be poisoned, gave order, that particular care
should be had of what was brought to his Table. 'Twas also said, that he wrote
to Aureng-Zebe; and that Dara being advertised thereof, could not forbear to
menace, and to break into very passionate expressions. In the mean time the
distemper of Chah-Jehan lingered, and 'twas bruited every where, that he was
dead. Whereupon the whole Court was disordered, the whole Town alarmed, the
Shops for many days shut up; and the four Sons of the King made openly great
Preparations, each for himself: And to say truth, it was not without reason,
that they all made ready for War; for they all very well knew, that there was
no hopes of Quarter, that there was no other way, than to vanquish or die, to
be King or undone, and that he that should be Conqueror would rid himself of
all the rest, as formerly Chah-Jehan had done of his Brothers.

Sultan Sujah, who had heaped up great Treasures in that rich Kingdom of
Bengale, ruining some of the Rajas or petty Kings that are in those Parts, and
drawing great Sums from others, took the Field first of all with a puissant
Army, and in the confidence he had of all the Persian Omrahs, for the Sect of
whom he had declared himself, he boldly marched toward Agra, giving out
openly, that Chah-Jehan was dead, that Dara had poisoned him, that he would
revenge the death of his Father, and, in a word, that he would be King. Dara
desired Chah-Jehan to write himself to him, and to forbid him to advance
further; which he did, assuring him, that his sickness was not at all
dangerous, and that he was already much better. But he having Friends at Court,
who assured him that the sickness of Chah-Jehan was mortal, he dissembled, and
ceased not to advance, saying still, that he knew very well Chah-Jehan was
dead; and if he should be alive, he was desirous to come and kiss his feet, and
to receive his Commands.

Aureng-Zebe immediately after, if not at the same time, takes the Field also
in Decan, makes a great noise, and prepares to march toward Agra. The same
prohibition was made to him also, as well from Chah-Jehan, as from Dara, who
threatened him. But he dissembleth, for the same reason that Sultan Sujah had
done, and gives the like answer. Mean time, finding that his Treasure was low,
and his Soldiery very inconsiderable, he devised two Artifices, which succeeded
admirably well; the one, in regard of Morad-Bakche; the other, in respect of
Emir-Jemla. To Morad-Bakche he writes with speed a very fair Letter, importing,
that he had always been his true and intimate Friend; that, as for himself, he
laid no claim at all to the Crown; that he might remember, he had all his
lifetime made profession of a Fakire, but that Dara was a person incapable to
govern a Kingdom; that he was a Kafer, an Idolater, and hated of all the
greatest Omrahs; that Sultan Sujah was a Rafezy, an Heretic, and by
consequence an Enemy to Indostan, and unworthy of the Crown: So that, in a
word, there was none but he (Morad-Bakche) that could reasonably pretend to the
Succession; that the Crown did expect him; that the whole Court, which was not
ignorant of his Valor, would be for him; and that for his particular, if he
would promise him, that being King, he would give him leave to live quietly in
some corner or other of his Empire, there to serve God the remainder of his
days, he was ready to make a conjunction with him, to assist him with his
Counsel and Friends, and to put into his hands his whole Army, to fight Dara
and Sultan Sujah; that in the mean time he sent him an Hundred thousand Rupies
(which make about Fifty thousand Crowns of our money) and prayed him to accept
thereof as a pledge of his friendship; and that he would advise him to come
with all possible speed to seize on the Castle of Suratte, where he knew to be
the Treasure of the Land.

Morad-Bakche, who was neither too rich, nor too powerful, received with much
joy this Proposition of Aureng-Zebe, and the Hundred thousand Rupies sent by
him; and showed Aureng-Zebe's Letter to every body, thereby to oblige the
Flower of that Country to take up Arms for him, and the substantial Merchants
to lend him the more willingly such Sums of money as he demanded of them. He
began in good earnest to act the King, made large promises to all, and, in
short, did so well, that he set a good Army on foot, of whom he fingled out
some Three thousand, who, under the conduct of Chah-Abas, one of his Eunuchs,
but a valiant man, should go to besiege Suratte.

Aureng-Zebe sent his eldest Son, Sultan Mahmoud (him whom he had married to
the Daughter of the King of Golkonda) to Emir-Jemla, who was yet employed in
the siege of Kaliane, to persuade him to come to him to Daulet-Abad, pretending
to have matter of the greatest importance to communicate to him. Emir, who soon
suspected his intentions, excused himself, saying openly, that Chah-Jehan was
not dead, that he had fresh News of his being alive, and that besides, all his
Family being at Agra in the hands of Dara, he could by no means assist
Aureng-Zebe, nor declare himself for him. Whereupon Sultan Mahmoud returned to
Daulet-Abad, without effecting any thing, and very much dissatisfied with Emir.
But Aureng-Zebe lost no courage for all that, but sent the second time to Emir,
yet not Sultan Mahmoud, but Sultan Mazum his second Son, who presented to him
his Fathers Letter, and handled him with that dexterity, sweetness, and
protestation of friendship, that it was not possible to resist him. Emir
therefore pressed the siege of Kaliane, forced the besieged to surrender upon
composition, took the choice of his Army, and with all diligence went away with
Sultan Mazum. At his arrival, Aureng-Zebe courted him in the highest degree,
treating him no otherwise than with the name of Baba and Babagy, that is,
Father, Lord-Father; and after an hundred Embraces, he took him somewhat aside,
and told him (according to what I could learn from persons who knew of it) That
it was not just, that having his Family at the Court, he should adventure to do
any thing in his behalf that might come to be known; but that, after all, there
was nothing so difficult but an Expedient might be found. Give me leave
therefore, said he, to propose to you a Design, which at first will possibly
surprise you; but, since you apprehend the danger of your Wife and Children
that are in Hostage, the best way of providing for their security would be, to
suffer me to seize on your person, and to put you in Prison. It is out of
doubt, that all the World will believe it done in earnest: For who would
imagine, that such a person as you would be content to let your self be laid in
Prison? In the interim, I could make use of part of your Army, and of your
Artillery, as you shall judge most proper and convenient: You also could
furnish me with a Sum of money, as you have frequently offered it; and besides,
methinks I might tempt Fortune further, and we might together take our
measures, to see in what manner I had best to domean my self, if you would also
permit, that I might cause you to be transported into the Fortress of
Daulet-Abad, where you should be Master; and that there I might have you kept
by my own Son, Sultan Mazum, or Sultan Mahmoud; this would yet better palliate
the matter, and I see not, what Dara could justly say of it, nor how he could
reasonably treat your Wife and Children ill.

Emir, whether it were by reason of the friendship he had sworn to Aureng-Zebe,
or for the great promises made to him, or the apprehension he had, of seeing
near him Sultan Mazum, who stood by, very pensive and well armed, and Sultan
Mahmoud, who looked grim upon him for his coming away at the solicitation of
his Brother, not at that of his, and had at his very entrance lift up his foot,
as if he would have hit him; whatever of these Considerations might induce him,
consented to all what Aureng-Zebe desired, and approved of the Expedient to
suffer himself to be imprisoned; so that Aureng-Zebe being no sooner gone, but
the great Master of the Artillery was seen to approach with some fierceness to
Emir, and to command him in the name of Aureng-Zebe to follow him, locking him
up in a Chamber, and there giving him very good words, whilst all the Soldiery
that Aureng-Zebe had thereabout, went to their Arms. The report of the
detention of Emir-Jemla was no sooner spread ^ut a great Tumult arose; and
those, whom he had brought along with him, althou^ ^astonish'd, yet put
themselves into a posture of reseuing him, and with their Sword^ drawn ran to
force the Guards, and the Gate of his Prison, which was easy for them to do:
For Aureng-Zebe had not with him sufficient Troops to make good so bold an
Enterprise, the only name of Emir-Jemla made all tremble. But the whole matter
being altogether counterfeited, all these Commotions were presently calmed, by
the intimations that were given to the chief Officers of Emir's Army, and by
the presence of Aureng-Zebe, who there appeared very resolute with his two
Sons, and spoke now to one, then to another; and at last by Promises and
Presents, liberally bestowed on those that were concerned. So that all the
Troops of Emir, and even most of those of Chah-Jehan, seeing things troubled,
and being without their General, and believing Chah-Jehan to be dead, or, at
best, desperately sick; considering also the ample promises made to them of
augmenting their Stipend, and of giving them at that very time three months
Advance, soon Lasted themselves under Aureng-Zebe; who having seized on all the
Equipage of Emir, even his very Camels and Tents, took the Field, resolved to
march to the Siege of Suratte, and to hasten the taking it in; where
Morad-Bakche was exceedingly embarrassed, because that his best Troops were
employed there, and that he found more resistance in that place than he
imagined. But Aureng-Zebe, after some days March, was informed, that the
Governor had surrendered the Place; for which he sent Congratulations to
Morad-Bakche, acquainting him withal of his Transactions with Emir-Jemla, and
assuring him, that he had Forces and Money enough, and very good intelligence
at the Court; that nothing was wanting; that he was directly going to Brampour
and Agra; that he had expected him on the way, and therefore desired him to
join with him.

It Is true, that Morad-Bakche found not so much money in the Fortress of
Suratte as he had imagined, whether it were that really there was not so much
as was reported, or whether the Governor had diverted a part of it, as some
believed: Yet notwithstanding that little he found there was useful to him, to
pay the Soldiers that had Listed themselves in hopes of the advantages, they
should make of the imagined vast Treasure of Suratte. It Is not less true, that
he had no greater reason to boast of the taking of this Place, in regard there
was not any Regular Fortification about it; and yet his Army had lain before it
above a month, and would never have reduced it without the Hollanders, who
furnished them with the Invention of Springing a Mine, which ruining a great
side of the Wall, cast the besieged into such a Consternation, that it made
them immediately surrender. The reduction of this Town did much advance his
Design, Fame proclaiming immediately throughout these Countries, that
Morad-Bakche had taken Suratte; that he had sprung a Mine, which sounded very
big among the Indians, who as yet do little understand that practice; and that
there he had found a vast Treasure. Notwithstanding this great noise, and all
the first advantages, joined to all those frequent Letters and great Promises
of Aureng-Zebe, the Eunuch, Chah-Abas, a Man of good Sense, of a great Heart,
and exceedingly affectionate to the Service of his Master, was not of opinion,
that Morad-Bakche should so much tie himself in Interest to Aureng-Zebe, or
precipitate his conjunction with him, but advised, that he should amuse him
with words, and let him advance alone toward Agra; that in the mean time there
would come certain News of the sickness of Chah-Jehan; that he should first see
what Channel Affairs would run in; that he should Fortify Suratte, as a very
good Post, able to render him Master of a very large and rich Country; and
that perhaps in time he might seize Brampour, which is a very considerable
Passage of a River, and as 'twere a Bar of Decan. But the continual Letters and
Protestations of Aureng-Zebe, joined to the small Forces, Artillery, and
Treasure of Morad-Bakche, blinded with an excessive ambition to Reign, made him
regardless of all other considerations; so that he went away from Amadevad,
abandoned Guzaratte, and took his way through the Woods and Mountains, with all
Expedition, to be at the Rendezvous, where Aureng-Zebe had looked for him these
two or three days.

Great Solemnities of Joy were made at the conjunction of the two Armies, the
Princes visited one another, Aureng-Zebe made a hundred Protestations and no
less Promises to Morad-Bakche, assured him afresh, and solemnly, of his not
caring for the Crown, as also of his being there for no other end than to
assist him against Dara, their Common Enemy, and to place him in the Throne,
which expected him.

Upon this Enterview, and confirmation of Friendship, both Armies marched
together, Aureng-Zebe continuing always, during the March, in the Protestations
of Friendship, and in his Courtship to Morad-Bakche, treating him never
otherwise, whether in public or private, but with the Title of Hazaret, that
is, King and Majesty: So that Morad-Bakche was fully persuaded, that
Aureng-Zebe meant sincerely, from an excess of affection toward him; whence he
even willingly, and without Ceremony, suffered the submissions and respects he
showed him; instead of remembering what had lately passed at Golkonda, and of
considering, that he, who had thus hazarded himself with so much boldness to
usurp a Kingdom, was not of a temper to live and dye a Fakire.

These two Armies thus joined made a Body considerable enough; which begot a
great noise at Court, and gave cause of thoughtfulness, not only to Dara, but
to Chah-Jehan himself, who knew the great parts and subtle Conduct of
Aureng-Zebe, and the Courage of Morad-Bakche; and who foresaw weary well, that a
fire was a kindling, which would be very hard to quench. It was to no purpose
to write Letters upon Letters, signifying that he was well, and giving Order
that they should turn back to their respective Governments, and expressing
also, that he would forget all that had passed hitherto. All his Letters were
not able to hinder their Advance; and as the sickness of Chah-Jehan did still
pass for mortal, there being no persons wanting to bring and spread such News,
they still continued to dissemble, giving out, that they were Letters
counterfeited by Dara; that Chah-Jehan was dead indeed; but that, in case he
were alive, they would go to kiss his Feet, and deliver him from the hands of
Dara.

What then should Chah-Jehan, this unfortunate King, do, who sees, that his
Sons have no regard to his Orders; who is informed at all hours, that they
march apace toward Agra in the head of their Armics, and who in this
conjuncture finds himself sick to boot in the hands of Dara, that is, of a man
who breaths nothing but War; who prepares for it with all imaginable
earnestness, and with all the marks of an enraged resentment against his
Brothers; but what could he do in this extremity? He is constrained to abandon
to them his Treasures, and to leave them to their disposal. He is forced to
send for his old and most trusty Captains, whom he knows for the most part to
be not very affectionate to Dara; he must command them to fight for Dara,
against his own Blood, his own Children, and those, for whom he has more
esteem than for Dara; he is obliged forthwith to send an Army against Sultan
Sujah, because it is he that is most advanced; and he is to send another against
Aureng-Zebe and Mored-Bakche, who no less are marching toward him.

Soliman Chekouh, the eldest Son of Dara, a young Prince of about five and
twenty years of Age, very proper of Body, and of good Parts and Conduct,
generous, liberal, and universally beloved, especially of Chah-Jehan, who had
already enriched him, and who considered him rather for his Successor than
Dara, was he, that was made General of this Army against Sujah. Nevertheless
Chah-Jehan, who wished much rather, that Sujah were returned to Bengale, than
that the matter should be tried by a bloody Combat, which could not be but very
Tragical, and wherein he run the hazard of losing one or other of his Sons,
gave him for Companion an Ancient Raja, called Jesseigne, who is at present one
of the powerfullest and richest Rajahs of all Ind^stan, and one of the ablest
in the whole Kingdom, with a secret Order not to fight, except it were
altogether unavoidable; as also to endeavor by all means to induce Sujah to
retire, and to reserve his Forces for a better occasion; that is to say, after
they should have seen the event of the sickness of Chah-Jehan, and the success
of Aureng-Zebe, and of Morad-Bakche. But this young Prince, Soliman Chekouh,
full of heat and Courage, breathing after nothing but to signalize himself by
some great action, and Sultan Sujah fearing lest Aureng-Zebe gaining a Battle
should first make himself Master of the Capital Towns of the Empire, Agra and
Dehly; it was impossible for the Raja Jesseigne to keep them from a Combat. The
two Armies are no sooner in sight of one another, but they prepare to fall on,
and they were not long from giving some Vollies of Cannon. I shall not relate
the particulars of this Fight, for, besides that the narration of it would be
too long and tedious, in the sequel of this History we shall be obliged to
describe more considerable ones, by which the Reader will be able to judge of
this. It Is sufficient to know in general, that the first onset was very sharp
and obstinate on both sides, but that at length Soliman Chekouh did urge Sujah
with that force and vigor that he disordered him, and made him fly: So that if
Jesseigne, and the Patan Delil-kan, who was one of the first Captains and a
valiant Man, but an intimate friend of the Raja, and did not act but being
moved by him, had seconded him in good earnest, it is thought that the whole
Army of Sujah would have been defeated, and himself in danger of being taken:
But that was not the design of the Raja to destroy him, no more than it was
that of Chah-Jehan, who had given him order to the contrary. Thus then had
Sujah time to retreat, and that without losing any considerable number of his
Men; yet because Soliman Chekouh kept the field, and brought away some pieces
of Artillery, it was presently bruited at Court, that Sujah had been totally
overthrown. This Defeat purchased great reputation to Soliman Chekouh, lessened
much the esteem of Sultan Sujah, and coo^ed exceedingly all the Persians that
had an inclination for him.

After that some days were spent in the pursuit of Sujah, the Prince Soliman
Chekouh, who every day received News from the Court, and who learned that
Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Backche did approach with great resolution, well knowing,
that his Father Dara had no great stock of Prudence, but good store of secret
Enemies, resolved to quit the pursuit of Sultan Sujah, and with all speed to
return to Agra, where in all appearance Dara was to give Battle against
Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche. This was the best counsel he could take, for no
man doubts, that if he could have been there in good time, Aureng-Zebe would
not have had the Advantage; and it is even believed, he would never have
hazarded the Combat, the Party being too unequal; but the bad fortune of Dara
did not permit it.

Whilst all that was thus transacted toward Elahas, which is the place where
the Gemna is joined to Ganges; the Scene was very different on the side of
Agra. At the Court they were much surprised to hear, that Aureng-Zebe had
passed the River of Brampour, and all the other passages that were most
difficult between the Mountains; so that with all have they sent away some
Troops to dispute with him the passage of the River Eugenes, whilst the whole
Army was making ready. For which purpose there were chosen two of the most
considerable and the most powerful of the Kingdom to command it; the one was
Kasem-Kan, a Renowned Captain and very affectionate to Chah-Jehan, but one that
had no great inclination to Dara, and who went not but to oblige Chah-Jehan,
whom he saw in the hands of Dara: The other was Jessomseigne, a potent Raja,
not inferior to Jesseigne, and Son-in-law to that Raja Rana, who was at the
time of Ekhar so puissant, as if he had been the Emperor of the Raja's. Dara at
their farewell expressed to them great kindness, and presented them nobly; but
Chah-Jehan took his time, before their departure, to charge them in secret, as
he had done the Raja Jesseigne, when he went away in the Expedition against
Sultan Sujah with Soliman Chekouh. Neither were they wanting, in their March,
to send several times to Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, to persuade them to turn
back: But this was in vain; their Envoys came not again, and the Army advanced
with that diligence, that they saw it much sooner than they thought upon a
rising ground, not far remote from the River.

It being then Summer, and the season of the greatest heats, the River was
fordable; which was the cause, that at the same time Kasem-kan and the Raja
prepared themselves to give Battle; besides that, they soon knew the resolution
of Aureng-Zebe, that he would force them, since that, although his Army was not
all come up, he gave them some Vollies of Cannon; his design being to amuse
them, fearing lest they themselves should pass the River, not only to prevent
his passage, but also to hinder his Army from reposing, and from taking an
advantageous post; which was indeed in great disorder, and so tired by their
March, and so faint by the heat, that if at the very first it had been
assaulted, and kept from passing the Water, it would doubtless have been routed
without much resistance. [I was not by in this first Encounter, but thus it was
generally discoursed of, and it agrees with the after-relation of many of our
Frenchmen, who served Aureng-Zebe in the Artillery.] But they were content to
stay at the Riverside, to keep Aureng-Zebe from passing it, according to the
Order they had received.

After that Aureng-Zebe had let his Army rest two or three days, and by amusing
the Enemy, had fitted it to pass the River, he made his whole Artillery play,
which was very well placed; and he commanded, that under the favor of the
Cannon they should pass the River. Kasem-Kan and the Raja, on their part,
discharged theirs also, and did what they could to repulse the Enemy, and to
keep him from passing. The Combat was sharp enough at first, and very
obstinately maintained by the extraordinary Valor of Jessomseigne. For as to
Kasem-Kan, although a great Captain, and a stout Man, he gave no great proof of
his Valor in this occasion; yea, some accuse him of Treachery, charging him
that he had in the night caused the Bullets and Powder to be hid under the
Sand, there being no more of them to be found after two or three discharges.
However it be, the Combat for all that was, as I said, very resolutely carried
on, and the Passage long disputed. There were Rocks in the Bed of the River,
which did much embarass, and the Banks in many places were very high and
difficult to climb up. But at last, Morad-Backche cast himself into the water
with so much resolution and force, and showed so much valor and boldness, that
there was no resisting of him. He passed over, and with him a good part of the
Army, which made Kasem-Kan to give back, and cast Jessomseigne into great
danger of his Person. For by and by he found the whole Body of the Enemy upon
him, and without the extraordinary resolution of his Ragipous, who almost all
were killed about him, he had been a dead man. One may judge of the great
danger he was in upon this occasion, by this, that after he had disengaged
himself as well as he could, and was come back to his own, not daring to return
to Agra, because of the great loss he had suffered, of seven or eight thousand
Ragipous he had but five or six hundred of them remaining.

These Ragipous, who take their name from the Rajas, that is to say, the
Children of the Rajas, are from Father to Son such Men as make the Sword their
Profession. The Rajas, whose Subjects they are, do assign them Lands for their
subsistence, on condition to be always ready to go to War when summoned. So
that one might say, that they were a sort of Pagan Nobles, if the Rajas gave
them their Lands in propriety for them and their Children. They are great
takers of Opium; and I have sometimes wondered at the quantity I have seen them
take: They accustom themselves to it from their youth. On the day of Battle
they double the Dose, this Drug animating, or rather inebriating them, and
making them insensible of danger; insomuch that they cast themselves into the
Combat like so many furious Beasts, not knowing what it is to run away, but
dying at the feet of their Raja, when he stands to it. They want nothing but
Order, Resolution they have enough. It Is a pleasure thus to see them, with the
fume of Opium in their Head to embrace one another, when the Battle is to
begin, and to give their mutual Farewels, as men resolved to dye. And that they
do for this reason; that the Great Mogol, though a Mahumetan, and by
consequence an Enemy of the Heathen, yet for all that entertains always a good
number of Rajas i^ his service, whom he considers as his other Omrahs, and
imploys in his Armies as if they were Mahumetans.

I cannot forbear to relate here the fierce reception, which the Daughter of
the Rana gave to her Husband Jessomseigne, after his defeat and flight. When
she heard that he was nigh, and had understood what had passed in the Battle;
that he had fought with all possible courage; that he had but four or five
hundred Men left; and that at last, not being able to re^ist any longer the
Enemy, he had been obliged to retreat: She, in stead of sending one to receive
him, and to condole him in his misfortunes, commanded in a dry mood to shut the
Gates of the Castle, and not to let this infamous Man enter; that he was not
her Husband; that she would never see him; that the Son-in-law of the Great
Rana, could not have so low a Soul; that he was to remember, that being grafted
into so Illustrious an House, he was to imitate the Virtue of it; and, in a
word, that he was either to vanquish, or to dye. A moment after she was of
another humor; she commands a Pile of Wood to be laid, that she might burn her
self, that they abused her; that her Husband must needs be dead; that it could
not be otherwise. And a little while after this, she was seen to change her
countenance, to fall into passion, and to break out into a thousand reproaches
against him. In short, she remained thus transported eight or nine days,
without being able to resolve to see her Husband, 'till at last her Mother
coming in, brought her in some degree to her self, and comforted her, assuring
her, that as soon as the Raja had but a little refreshed himself, he would
raise another Army, to fight Aureng-Zebe, and repair his Honor at any rate.

By which story one may see a pattern of the Courage of the Women in that
Country: To which I could add something I have seen some of them do, who
burned themselves alive after the death of their Husbands; but we must reserve
this Discourse for another place, where I shall also show, that there is
nothing which opinion, prepossession, custom, hope, and the point of honor,
etc. may not make Men do or suffer.

Dara having understood what had passed at Eugenes, fell into that choler
against Kasem Kan, that it was thought he would have cut off his Head, if he
had been upon the place. He was also transported against Emir-Jemla, as the
Person that was the first and principal cause of the Misfortune, and who had
furnished Aureng-Zebe with Men, Money, and Cannon. He is ready to kill his Son
Mahmet Emir-Kan, and will send his Wife and Daughter to Basar, or the
Marketplace of prostituted Women; and it is past doubt, that he would have done
some such thing, if Chah-Jehan, with much art and prudence, had not moderated
the excess of his passion, in remonstrating to him, that Emir-Jemla had not so
little conduct, nor so great a friendship for Aureng-Zebe, as to hazard, and in
a manner to sacrifice his Family, for the advancing of his Interest; that
Aureng-Zebe must needs have gulled and ensnared him, by his usual artifice and
cunning.

As for Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, the happy success of this first Encounter
did so swell their hearts, and gave such Courage to their whole Army, that
henceforth they believed themselves invincible, and capable to compass any
thing. Besides, Aureng-Zebe, the more to animate his Soldiers, bragged openly,
that he had Thirty thousand Mogols at his devotion in the Army of Dara; and
there was something in it, as appeared by the sequel. Morad-Bakche was for
nothing but fighting, and would march with all diligence. But Aureng-Zebe
represented to him, that it was necessary the Army should refresh themselves
for some time upon the Banks of this sweet River; that in the mean time he
would write to all his Friends, and get a full and certain information of the
state of the Court, and of the condition of all Affairs. So that he marched not
toward Agra, 'till he had rested some days, and after that he marched but
slowly, to inform himself of all, and to take his time and measures.

Concerning Chah-Jehan, when he plainly saw the resolution of Aureng-Zebe and
Morad-Bakche, and that there was no hope left to make them turn back, he was in
such a perplexity, that he knew not what to resolve, and foreseeing some great
calamity, he would sain have hindered the last decisive Battle, for which he saw
Dara preparing himself with great eagerness. But what could he do to oppose it?
He was yet too weak of his sickness, and saw himself still in the hands of
Dara, whom, as I have said, he trusted not much: So that he found himself
obliged to acquiesee in his Will, and to commit to him all the Forces of the
Empire, and to command all Captains to obey him. Immediately all was in Arms: I
know not, whether there was ever a more gallant Army seen in Indostan. It Is
said, that there were little less than an Hundred thousand Horse, and Twenty
thousand Foot, with Four thousand pieces of Cannon, without reckoning the
incredible number of Servants, Followers, Victuallers, whom Historians,
methinks, do often put into the number of the Combatants, when they speak of
those formidable Armies of Three or four hundred thousand men, of which their
Books are full. Though this Army was very brave, and strong enough to cut in
pieces two or three of such as Aureng-Zebe had, in which there were no more
than Thirty Five or Forty thousand men in all, and these tired and harassed by
a very long and irksom march, during the height of the Heats; and but a small
number of Cannon, in respect of that of Dara. Mean time (which seems hard to
believe) there was scarce any Body that pr^saged well for Dara, all knowing,
that most of the chief Omrahs had no affection for him, and that all the good
Soldiers that were for him, and whom he might confide in, were in the Army of
Soliman Chekouh, his Son. And 'twas for this reason, that the most prudent and
the most faithful of his Friends, and Chah-Jehan; himself, counseled him, not
to hazard a Battle: Chah-Jehan offering, as infirm as he was, that he would go
into the Field himself, and be carried before Aureng-Zebe, to interpose; which
was looked upon as a very good Expedient for Peace, and for accommodating the
Affairs of Chah-Jehan. For it is certain, that Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche,
would never have had the boldness to fight against their own Father; and if
they should have attempted it, they would have smarted for it, because, besides
that the match was not equal, and all the great Omrahs were so affectionate to
Chah-Jehan, that they would not have failed to fight resolutely, if they had
seen him in the head of the Army; besides this, I say, the Captains themselves
of Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, bore great affection and respect to this
Prince, whose Creatures they most were; and the whole Army, in a manner, was
his. So that in all appearance, not one of them would have presumed to draw his
Sword against him, nor he been at the pains of drawing his.

Then they advised Dara, that if he would not hearken to this Expedient, he
should at least not precipitate the business, but delay, 'till Soliman Chekouh,
who made all haste to join, were come in. Which was also very good counsel, in
regard that that Prince was beloved of all, and was lately come home
victorious, and had the most faithful and the bravest Soldiers with him. But
Dara would never hearken to any Proposition that could be made to him, and he
thought on nothing else but to give Battle presently, and to go against
Aureng-Zebe in person. And possibly he did not amiss, as to his own Honor and
particular Interest, if he could have commanded Fortune, and made things
succeed as he contrived them. For the Considerations he had (as he could not
forbear now and then to discover) were some such as these:

He looked upon himself as Master of the person of Chah-Jehan; that he could
dispose of him as he pleased; that he was also Possessor of all the Treasures
and Forces of the Empire; that Sultan Sujah was half ruined; that his two other
Brothers, with a weak and tired Army, were come to cast themselves into his
hands; that, if he gained the Battle, they could not escape him; that he should
all at once be absolute Master, and at the end of all his troubles, and at the
height of his wishes, so as no body could contradict him in any thing, or
dispute the Crown with him. Whereas if Chah-Jehan should take the Field, all
Affairs would be accommodated, his Brothers would return to their Governments,
Chah-Jehan, who began to recover his health, would resume the Government as
before, and all things would return into their first Channel: That, if he
should stay for Soliman Chekouh, his Son, Chah-Jehan might take some design to
his disadvantage, or contrive something with Aureng-Zebe; that whatever he
could do for gaining the Victory, the Reputation which Soliman Chekouh had
purchased, would still give him all the honor of it. And after that, what
would not he be capable to undertake, swelled with so much glory and success,
and especially being supported, as he was, by the favor and affection of
Chah-Jehan, and of the greatest part of the Omrahs? What did he know, whether
he would keep any modesty, or any respect for him, and whither his Ambition
might not carry him?

These Considerations made Dara resolve to stand out against the counsel of
all, and to pursue his Point. And for that purpose, he commanded immediately
the whole Army to take the Field, and thereupon came to take leave of
Chah-Jehan, who was in the Fortress of Agra. This good old Man was ready to
melt in tears, when he embraced him; but withal failed not to represent to him,
with a very grave countenance: Well, Dara* since thou art resolved to follow
thine own Will, Go, God bless thee, but remember well these few words: If thou
losest the Battle, take beed of ever coming into my Presence. But this made no
great impression upon him; he goes forth briskly, takes Horse, and seizes on
the Passage of the River T^hembel, which is about twenty miles from Agra; where
he fortified himself, expecting his Enemy. But the subtle and crafty Fakire,
who wanted no good Spies, and People that gave him intelligence of all, and who
knew that the Passage was there very difficult, took good heed to attempt the
foreing it. He came to encamp himself near it, so that from the Camp of Dara
one might discover his Tents. But what does he in the mean time? He inveigles a
certain Rebel of Raja, called Chempet, presents him richly, and promises him a
thousand fine things, if he would let him pass thorough his Territories, that
so he might go with speed to gain a certain place, where he knew that the River
might be passed on foot with ease. Chempet agrees, and offers of his own
accord, that he would himself attend him, and show him the way through the
Woods and Hills of his Country. Aureng-Zebe raised his Camp the same night,
without any noise, leaving some of his Tents to amuse Dara, and marching night
and day, made such haste, that he was almost as soon on the other side of the
River, as Dara could have notice of it. Which obliged Dara to abandon the River
there, and to leave all his Fortifications, and to follow his Enemy, who, he
was told, did advance with great diligence toward Agra, to gain the River of
Gemna, and there without trouble, and at his ease, to enjoy the water, to
fortify, and to fix himself well, and so to expect Dara. The place where he
encamped is but five Leagues from Agra, it was formerly called Samonguer, and
now Fateabad, which is to say, Place of Victory. A little while after, Dara
also came to encamp there, nigh the Bank of the same River, between Agra, and
the Army of Aureng-Zebe.

The two Armies were there between three and four days in sight of one another,
without fighting. Mean time Chah-Jehan wrote several Letters to Dara, that
Soliman Ch^kouh was not far off; that he should not precipitate; that he should
come near Agra, and choose an advantageous place to fortify himself 'till he
came. But Dara answered, that before three days were passed, he would bring to
him Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche tied hand and foot, to do with them what he
should think fit. And without expecting any longer, he began at that very hour
to put his Army in Battel-Array.

He placed in the Front all his Cannon, causing them to be tied the one to the
other with Chains, to shut the passage to the Cavalry. Behind these Pieces of
Cannon, he placed also front-wise a great number of light Camels, on the
forepart of the Bodies, whereof they fasten a small Piece, of the bigness of a
double Musket; a Man sitting on the hind-part of the Camel, being able to
charge and discharge without lighting. Behind these Camels stood the greatest
part of the Musketeers. Of the rest of the Army, which chiefly consisted in
Cavalry, furnished with Bows and Arrows, (as ordinarily are the Mogols, that
is, at present, White Men, Mahumetans, strangers, as Persians, Turks, Arabians,
and Vsbecks;) or with a Sword, and a kind of Hal^-pike, as commonly are the
Ragipous: Of all these, I say, there were made three different Bodies. The
right Wing was committed to Calil-ullah-Kan, with thirty thousand Mogols under
his Command; for he was made Great Bakchis, that is, Great Master of the
Cavalry, in the place of Danechmend-Kan, that was afterward my Agah, who
voluntarily resigned this Office, seeing that he was not well-beloved of Dara,
for having always highly maintained against him the Interest and Authority of
Chah Jehan. The left Wing was given to Rustam-Kan Dakny, a very renowned and
very valiant Captain, together with the Raja Chatresale, and the Raja Ramseigne
Routle.

On the other side, Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche put also their Army almost
into the same Order; except that in the midst of the Troops of some Omrahs,
they had hid some small Field-Peeces, which was, as was said, after the Way and
Art of Emir-Jemla, and with no ill effect.

They hardly made use of any more Art, than what has been now related; only
they placed here and there some M^n casting Bannes, which is a kind of Granado
fastened to a stick, that may be cast very far through the Cavalry, and which
extremely terrifieth Horses, and even hurts and kills sometimes.

All this Cavalry turns about very easily, and they draw their Arrows with
mavelous swiftness; one Man being able to draw six of them, before a
Musqueteer can twice discharge his Musket. The same Cavalry keeps also very
close in several Troops under their respective Officers, especially when they
are going to fight hand to hand. But after all, I see not, that this way of
putting an Army in Array, is any great matter, in comparison of our Armies,
when in good order.

All things being thus disposed, the Artillery began to play on both sides; for
it is always the Cannon that makes the prelude amongst them; and the Arrows were
now seen to fly through the Air, when unexpectedly there happened to fall a Storm
of Rain, so violent, that it interrupted the Combat. The Rain ceasing, the
Cannon began afresh to roar; and then it was that Dara appeared, who being
mounted upon a proud Elephant of Ceilau, commanded that an Onset should be made
on all sides; and himself advanced into the midst of the Body of the Cavalry,
directly toward the Enemies Artillery, who received him warmly, killed store
of Men about him, and put into disorder, not only the main Body which he
commanded, but also the other Bodies of the Cavalry that followed him. Yet
notwithstanding, because he was seen to keep firm upon his Elephant, without
any appearance of giving back, and was observed to look every where about him
with an undaunted look, and to make signs with his hands to advance and follow
him, this disorder soon ceased, every one resuming his Rank, and advancing in
the same place with Dara. But he could not reach the Enemy, without receiving
another Volley of Cannon-shot, which caused a second and great disorder in his
Men, and made a good part of them r^coil; yet he, without any change in his
Countenance, stood to it, encouraging his Troops, and gave still signs, that
they should follow him, and advance with speed without any loss of time. Thus
pressing vigorously forward, he forced the Enemies Artillery, broke the Chains,
entered into their Camp, and made a Rout in their Camels and Infantry, and in
every thing he met with on that side; opening also a good passage to the
Cavalry that followed him. Then it was, that the Enemies Cavalry facing him, a
sore Combat began. A shower of Arrows filled the Air from both sides, Dara
himself putting his hand to that work: But, to say truth, these Arrows do but
little Execution; more of them are lost in the Air, or broken on the ground,
than hit. The first discharges of Arrows being made, they fought hand to hand
with their Sables, pesle mesle, and the Combat was stoutly maintained on both
sides. Dara is still seen to continue firm on his Elephant, encouraging, making
a noise, and giving signs on all sides; and at last advancing with so much
resolution and force, against all that opposed him in his March, that he
overthrew the Cavalry, and made them to retire and run away.

Aureng-Zebe, who was not far from thence, and mounted also on an Elephant,
seeing this great disorder, was in great trouble, and labored with all his
might to remedy it; but to no purpose. He made the main Body of his best
Cavalry advance, to try whether he could make head against Dara; but it was not
long before this Body also was forced to give back, and to retreat in great
disorder, whatever Aureng-Zebe could say or do to hinder it. Mean time let us
take notice of his courage and resolution: He saw that almost the whole Body of
his Army was disordered, and in a flying posture, insomuch that he had not a
thousand Men about him that kept their standing; (some told me, that there were
scarce five hundred:) He saw, that Dara, notwithstanding the difficulty of the
way, which was uneven, and full of holes in diverse places, made as if he would
rush in upon him: Yet, for all this, he lost no courage, and was so far from
being struck with fear, or from retreating, that he stood firmly to it, and
called by name most of his Captains that were about him, crying out to them,
Delirane Kodahe, (these are his own words,) that is, Courage my old Friends,
God is: What hope is there in flying? Know you not, where is our Decan? Kodahe,
Kodahe, God is, God is. And that none might doubt of his being undaunted, and
that he thought on nothing less than running away, he commanded before them all
(oh strange extremity!) that forthwith Chains should be fastened to the feet of
his Elephant; and was going to fasten them in good earnest, but that they all
declared their courage and resolution, to live and dye with him.

Dara in the interim endeavored to advance upon Aureng-Zebe, though he was yet
at a good distance from him, and though the difficulty of the way embarassed
and retarded him much; he meeting also with some resistance, even from those
disordered Horse of the Enemy, that covered all high and low places where he
was to march. And this Encounter with Aureng-Zebe was looked upon as the thing,
that was to assure Dara of the Victory, and to decide the Battle. And
doubtless, he would have overcome all these difficulties, and Aureng-Zebe, with
the small number left him, would not have been able to bid head to this
Victorious Army, if Dara had known how to profit of the prize he had in his
hands. But here he failed; of which I shall now show the occasion, and how
thereby the Scale was turned to Aureng-Zebe's advantage.

Dara perceived that his left Wing was in great disorder, and he was informed,
that Rustam-Kan and Chatresale were killed; that Ramseigne Routle had too far
advanced, that he had indeed forced the Enemy, and made way through the midst
of them; but that now he was surrounded every way, and in very great danger.
This it was, which made Dara desist from his design of making directly toward
Aureng-Zebe, that he might go to succor his left Wing. There at first the
Battle was also very sharp, but Dara at last carried it, forcing and routing
all, yet so, as that there still remained something that resisted and stopped
him. Mean time, Ramseigne Routle fought with so much courage and vigor as was
possible. He wounded Morad-Bakche, and came so near him, that he began to cut
the Girdles of his Elephant, to make him fall down; but the valor and good
fortune of Morad-Bakche gave not time enough for it. In short, never any Man
fought and defended himself more bravely, than Morad-Bakche did on this
occasion: All wounded as he was, and pressed by the Ragipous of Ramseigne
Routle, who were round about him, he was not daunted, nor gave way in the
least, but knew so well to take his time, that although he was, besides
defending himself, to cover with his shield a Son of his, but of seven or eight
years of Age, who was sitting on his side, he made an Arrow-shot so luckily at
Ramseigne Routle, that it made him fall dead to the ground.

Dara soon heard the sad News of this Accident; but at the same time he
understood also, that Morad-Bakche was in very great danger; the Ragipous
fighting furiously, and like Lions, to revenge the death of their Master. And
though he saw, on that side the way was very difficult, and that he still found
some small Body opposing and retarding him; yet he was determined to rush
through to Morad-Backche: And doubtless this was the best he could do, and
that, which was capable to repair the fault he had committed in not doing his
business thoroughly with Aureng-Zebe. But his bad fortune kept him from it, or
rather, one of the blackest Treacheries that ever was imagined, and the
greatest oversight that was ever committed, did cause the entire loss and ruin
of Dara.

Calil-ullah-Kan (he that commanded the thirty thousand Mogols, which made the
right Wing, and were alone able to defeat the whole Army of Aureng-Zebe) did,
whilst Dara and his left Wing fought with so much courage and success, keep
off, as idle as if he were not concerned in the fray, not permitting any one of
his Horsemen to shoot an Arrow, with a pretense, that they were for a Reserve,
and that he had express Order not to fight but in the last extremity. But the
true cause was, that he reserved in his breast the rancour of an old Affront,
done him by Dara, when he commanded him to be struck. But after all, this
Treachery would have done no great mischief, if this infamous Man had contented
himself with this first Effect of his Resentment: Behold, how far he carried
his rage, and revengefulness! He cut himself off from his main Body, and taking
only a few men with him, rid with all possible speed toward Dara, at the same
time when he was turning to fall on Morad-Bakche, and being come so near as to
make himself be heard, cried out with all his force; Mohbareck-bad, Hazaret,
Salamet, Elhamdul-^lla; God save your Majesty, you have obtained the Victory;
what will you do any longer upon your Elephant? Is it not enough, that you have
exposed your self so long? if the least of those shots, that have been made
into your Dais, had reached your Person, what would have become of us? Are
there Traitors wanting in this Army? In the Name of God come down quickly and
take Horse. What remains more to be done, than to pursue those Run-aways. Let
us do so, nor let us suffer that they should escape our hands!

If Dara had had wit enough to discover the cheat, and to consider upon a
sudden the consequences of his not appearing any more upon the Elephant, and
being no more seen by the whole Army, always eying him, or rather, if he had
presently commanded to cut off the Head of this Parasitical Traitor, he had
been Master of all. But the good Prince suffered himself to be blinded by these
sweet words: He hearkened to this advice, as if it had been very true and very
sincere; he descended from his Elephant, and took Horse. But I know not whether
there passed one quarter of an hour, but he perceived the Treachery of Calil
ullah-Kan, and repented himself extremely of the great fault he had committed.
He looks about him, he seeks, he asks where he is; he says, he is a
Traitor, he will kill him. But the perfidious Villain is by this time at a good
distance; the occasion is lost. Would it be believed, that as soon as the Army
perceived Dara to be no more upon the Elephant, they imagined that there was
Treason, that Dara was killed; and all were struck with such a terror, that
every one thought on nothing, but how to escape the hands of Aureng-Zebe, and
to save himself? What shall I say? All the Army disbands and slyeth. A sudden
and strange revolution! He that saw himself just now Victorious, finds himself
in a few moments vanquished, abandoned, and obliged to fly himself to save his
life. Aureng-Zebe, by holding out firm a quarter of an hour upon his Elephant,
sees the Crown of Indostan upon his Head; and Dara for having come down a
little too soon, sees himself precipitated from the Throne, and the most
unfortunate Prince of the World. Thus Fortune takes pleasure, to make the gain
or loss of a Battle, and the decision of a great Empire, depend upon a nothing.

These great and prodigious Armies, it is true, do sometimes great things; but
when once terror seiseth, and disorder comes among them, what means of stopping
the Commotion? It Is like a great River broke through its Dams; it must overrun
all, without a Remedy. Whence it is, that as often as I consider the condition
of such Armies, destitute of good order, and marching like flocks of Sheep, I
persuade my self, that, if in these parts one might see an Army of five and
twenty thousand men, of those old Troops of Flanders, under the conduct of
Monsieur le Prince, or Monsieur de Turenne, I doubt not at all, but they would
trample under foot all those Armies, how numerous soever they were. And this it
is, that now makes me not find it any longer strange or incredible, what we
are told of ten thousand Greeks; and of fifty thousand Men of Alexander,
overcoming six or seven hundred thousand Men of Darius; (if it be true, that
there were so many, and that the Historian did not reckon the Servants, and all
those numbers of Men, which were to follow the Army, to furnish it with
Forage, Cattle, Corn, and all other necessaries.) Bear only the first brunt,
which would be no very difficult thing for us to do; and behold, they are all
astonished: Or, do like Alexander, set vigorously upon one place, if that hold
not out, (which will be very hard for them to do) you may be sure the work is
done; all the rest presently take fright and flight together.

Aureng-Zebe, encouraged by such a wonderful success, is not wanting to turn
every stone, to employ skill, dexterity, subtilty, craft, courage, to profit by
all the Advantages, which so favorable an occasion puts into his hands.
Calil-ullah-Kan is presently with him, offering him his Service, and all the
Troops he could be Master of. He, on his side, wants not words of thanks and
acknowledgments, nor a thousand fair Promises: But he was very cautious to
receive him in his own name; he carried him presently and presented him to
Morad-Bakche, who, as we may easily think, received him with open Arms;
Aureng-Zebe in the mean time congratulating and praising Morad-Bakche, for
having fought so valiantly, and ascribing to him all the honor of the Victory;
treating him with the title of King and Majesty before Calil-ullah-Kan, giving
him uncommon respect, and doing submissions to him becoming a Subject and
Servant. In the interim, he labors night and day for himself, he writes round
about to all the Omrahs, making sure to day of one, and next day of another.
Chah-hest-Kan, his Uncle, the great and old Enemy of Dara, by reason of an
Affront he had received from him, did the same for him on his part; and as he
is the Person who writes best and subtillest of the Empire o^ Indostan, so he
contributed not a little by his Cabals to the advancement of the Affairs of
Aureng-Zebe, making strong Parties every where against Dara.

In the mean time let us still observe the artifice and dissimulation of
Aureng-Zebe, Nothing of what he does, treats, promises, is for himself, or
in his own Name; he has still (forsooth) the design of living as a Fakire: all
is for Morad-Bakche, it is he that commands; Aureng-Zebe does nothing; it is
Morad-Bakche does all, it is he that is designed to be King.

As for the unhappy Dara, he comes with all speed to Agra, in a desperate
condition, and not daring to go see Chah-Jehan, remembering, doubtless, those
severe words which he let fall, when he took leave of him before the Battle,
viz. That he should remember not to come before him, if he were overcome. Yet,
for all that, the good old Father sent secretly a trusty Eunuch to him, to
comfort him, to assure him of the continuance of his affection, to declare to
him his trouble for his misfortune, and to remonstrate to him, that the case
was not yet desperate, considering that there was a good Army with Soliman
Chekouh, his Son, that he should go to Dehli, where he should find a thousand
Horse in the Royal Stables; and that the Governor of the Fortress had Order to
furnish him with Money and Elephants; for the rest, that he should not go
further than he needs must; that he would often write to him: And lastly, that
he very well knew how to find out and chastise Aurenge-Zebe.

I have been informed, that Dara was then in such a confusion, and sunk so low,
that he had not the power to answer a word to the Eunuch, nor the courage to
send any one to Chah-Jehan; but that, after having sent several times to
Begum-Saheb, his Sister, he went away at midnight, taking with him his Wife,
his Daughters, and his Grandchild Sepe-Chekouh; and that (which is almost
incredible) he was attended with not above three or four hundred persons. Let
us leave him in his Voyage to Dehli, and stay at Agra, to consider the
dexterity and craft, wherewith Aureng-Zebe proceeded to manage Affairs.

He well knew, that Dara, and those of his Party, could yet place some hopes in
the victorious Army of Soliman Chekouh, and therefore he resolved to take it
from him, or to make it useless to him. To this end, he wrote Letters upon
Letters to the Raja Jesseigne, and to Delil-Kan, who were the chief Heads of
the Army of Soliman Chekouh, telling them, that there was no hope left for Dara
and his Party; that he had lost the Battle; that his whole Army had submitted
to him; that all had abandoned him; that he was fled alone toward Dehli; that
he could never escape him, and that Orders were distributed every where to
seize on him. And as for Chah-Jehan, that he was in a condition hopeless of
recovery; that they should take good care of what they had to do; and if they
were Men of understanding, and would follow his fortune, and be his Friends,
they should seize on Soliman Chekouh, and bring him to him.

Jesseigne found himself perplexed enough, what he should do, still much
apprehending Chah-Jehan and Dara, and more, to lay hands upon a Royal Person,
well knowing, that some mischief might therefore fall on him, sooner or later,
even from Aureng-Zebe himself. Besides, he knew that Soliman Chekouh had too
much courage to let himself be taken after that manner, and that he would
rather die in defending of himself. Behold therefore, what he at last resolved!
After having taken counsel with Delil-Kan, his great Friend, and after they had
renewed to one another the Oath of mutual Fidelity, he went directly to the
Tent of Soliman Chekouh, who with great impatience expected him, (for he also
had heard the News of the Defeat of Dara his father) and had already diverse
times sent for him. To him he frankly discovered all things, showed him the
Letter of Aureng-Zebe, told him what course was best for him to take,
represented to him the danger he was in; that there was no reason he should
trust in Delil-Kan, or in Daoud-Kan, or in the rest of his Army; but that, as
soon as he could, he should gain the Mountains of Serenaguer; that that was the
best Expedient he could take; that the Raja of that Country being in
unaccessible places, and not apprehending Aureng-Zebe, would doubtless receive
him gladly; and; for the rest, he would soon see how things would go, and be
always in a condition to come down from the Mountains, when he should think
good.

The young Prince understood well enough by this kind of discourse, that there
was no ground to trust henceforth in this Raja, and that there was no more
safety for his Person; and that the rather, because he knew that Delil-Kan was
altogether devoted to him, and he saw well enough, that there was a necessity
to take this course suggested. Whereupon he soon commanded, that his Baggage
should be put up to march toward the Mountains. Some of his most affectionate
Friends, as a good number of Manseb-Dars, of Sajeds, and others, put themselves
in order to attend him; the rest of the Army, altogether astonished, remained
with the Raja. But that, which was very mean for a great Raja, and a very
sordid barbarousness, was, that he and Delil-Kan sent under hand some to fall
upon his Baggage, who also took other things, and among them an Elephant laden
with Rupies of Gold, which caused a great disorder among those small Troops
that followed him; and which was an occasion, that many of them returned and
abandoned him; and invited also the Country People to set upon his Men,
pillaging them, and even killing some of them: Yet he made a shift to gain the
Mountains, with his Wife and Children, where the Raja of Serenaguer received
him with all the honor and civilities he could desire, assuring him, that he
was in safety, as much as if he were King of that Country, and that he would
protect and assist him with all his Forces. In the mean time, behold what
happened on Agra's side.

Three or four days after the Battle of Samonguer, the Victorious Aureng-Zebe,
together with Morad-Bakche, came directly to the Gate of the Town into a
Garden, which may be a little League distant from the Fortress, and sent from
thence an able Eunuch, and one of those whom he most confided in, to
Chah-Jehan, to salute him with a thousand fair Protestations of his affection
and submission; that he was exceedingly sorry for what had passed, and for
having been obliged, by reason of the ambition and evil designs of Dara, to
proceed to all those extremities; that, for the rest, he rejoiced extremely to
hear, that he began to find himself better, and that he was come thither for no
other end than to receive his Commands. Chah-Jehan was not wanting to express
to the Eunuch much satisfaction, as to the proceedings of Aureng-Zebe, and to
receive the Submissions of this Son with all possible appearances of joy;
though he saw very well, that matters had been carried too far, and
sufficiently knew the reserved and crafty humor of Aureng-Zebe, and his secret
passion for Reigning; and that therefore he was not much to be trusted, for all
his fair words. And yet notwithstanding he suffers himself to be circumvented,
and instead of playing the surest Chart, by using his utmost power, by
stirring, by appearing, by causing himself to be carried through the Town, and
by assembling all his Omrahs, (for it was yet time to do all this) he goes
about to outwit Aureng-Zebe, him that was his Crafts-Master, and attempts to
draw him into a snare, wherein he will be found taken himself. He then sends
also an Eunuch to this Son, to let him know, that he well understood the ill
conduct, and even the incapacity of Dara; that he could not but call to mind
the particular inclination he always had and expressed toward him, that he
could not doubt of his affection; and lastly, that he should come to see him,
and to advise with him what was fit to be done in these disorders; and that he
passionately wished to embrace him.

Aureng-Zebe, on his side, saw also well enough, that he was not to trust too
much to the words of Chah-Jehan, knowing especially, that Begum-Saheb, his
Enemy as well as Sister, was night and day about him, and that 'twas very
probable, he acted nothing but by her motion. And he apprehended, that if he
should come into the Fortress, he might be seized on, and ill-treated; as it
was said, that the resolution was indeed taken to do so, and several of those
lusty Tartarian Women, which serve in the Seraglio, were armed to set upon him
as soon as he should enter. Whatever it be, he would never hazard himself, and
yet spread a rumor abroad, that the next day he would go to see his Father
Chah-Jehan. But when the day was come, he put it off till another, and so he
delayed it from day to day, without ever making the Visit. In the mean time he
continued his secret Negotiations and Cabals, and sounded the mind of all the
greatest Omrahs, so far, that at last, after he had well and closely laid his
Design, and politickly disposed all things for the success thereof, all were
amazed to see, that one day, when he had sent Sultan Mahmoud, his eldest Son,
to the Fortress, under a pretense of seeing Chah-Jehan in his name; this young
Prince, bold and undertaking, falls presently on the Guards that were at the
Gate, and vigorously drives all before him, whilst a great number of Men
appointed, who were there all ready, did enter with fury, and made themselves
Masters of the Walls.

If ever a man was astonished, Chah-Jehan was, seeing that he was fallen into
the snare which he had prepared for others, that himself was imprisoned and
Aurenge-Zebe Master of the Fortress. It Is said, that he presently sent to sound
the mind of Sultan Mahmoud, promising him upon his Crown and upon the Alcoran,
that if he would be faithful to him, and serve him in this conjuncture, he
would make him King; that he should come presently to see him within, and not
lose this occasion: Besides, that it would be an action that would accumulate
on him the blessings of Heaven, and an immortal Glory; in regard it would be
said for ever, that Sultan Mahmoud had delivered Chah-Jehan his Grandfather out
of Prison.

And certainly, if Sultan Mahmoud had been resolute enough to give this stroke,
and Chah-Jehan could have come abroad to show himself to the Town, and to take
the Field, no man doubts, but all his great Omrahs would have followed him; nor
would Aureng-Zebe himself have had the boldness nor the savageness to fight
against his own Father in Person, especially since he must have apprehended,
that all the world would have abandoned him, and possibly Morad-Bakche himself.
And it is indeed the great fault which Chah-Jehan is observed to have committed
after the Battle, and the flight of Dara, not to have come out of the Fortress.
But yet I have conversed with many, who maintained that Chah-Jehan did
prudently in it. For this has been a question much agitated among the
Politicians, and there are no reasons wanting to countenance the Sentiment of
the latter sort; who also add, that Men almost always judge of things by the
Event; that often very foolish Enterprises have been observed to succeed, and
which therefore are approved by all; that if Chah-Jehan had prospered in his
design, he would have been esteemed the most prudent and the most able Man in
the World; but now being taken, he was nothing but a good old Man, that
suffered himself to be led by a Woman, his Daughter Begum, which was blinded by
her passion, and had the vanity to believe, that Aureng-Zebe would come to see
her, that the Bird of it self would fly into the Cage, or at least, that he
would never be so bold as to attempt the seizure of the Fortress, nor have the
power to do so. These same Reasoners maintaining also stiffly, that the greatest
fault that Sultan Mahmoud could possibly commit, was, that he knew not how to
take the occasion to assure himself of the Crown, by the rarest and the most
generous Action that ever was, to put his Grandfather at liberty, and thus to
do himself Right and Justice, as the Sovereign Umpire of Affairs; whereas, as
things now stand, he must one day go and dye in Goualeor. But Sultan Mahmoud
(whether it was that he feared his Grandfather would not keep his word with
him, or that he should be himself detained within, or that he durst not play
tricks with his Father Aureng-Zebe) would never hearken to any thing, nor enter
into the Apartment of Chah-Jehan, answering very closely, that he had no order
from his Father to go and see him, but that he was by him commanded not to
return, without bringing him the Keys of all the Gates of the Fortress, that so
he might come with all safety to kiss the Feet of his Majesty. There passed
almost two whole days before he could resolve to surrender the Keys; during
which time, Sultan Mahmoud staid there, unalterable in his resolutions, keeping
himself upon his Guard night and day, with all his Troops about him; till at
length Chah-Jehan, seeing that all his people that were upon the Guard at the
little Gate, little by little disbanded, and that there was no more safety on
his side, gave him the Keys, with an order to tell Aureng-Zebe, that he should
come presently if he were wise, and that he had most important things to
discourse with him about. But Aureng-Zebe was too cunning to commit so gross a
fault: On the contrary, he made his Eunuch Etbarkan Governor of the Fortress,
who presently shut up Chah-Jehan, together with Begum-Saheb, and all his Women;
causing diverse Gates to be walled up, that so he might not be able to write or
speak to any body, nor go forth out of his Apartment without permission.

Aureng-Zebe in the mean time writ to him a little Note, which he showed to
every body before he sealed it; in which, among other things, he told him with
dry expressions, that he knew from good hands, that notwithstanding those great
protestations of esteem and affection he made to him, and of contempt he made
of Dara, he had, for all that, sent to Dara two Elephants charged with Rupies
of Gold, to raise him again, and to re-commence the War; and that therefore, in
truth, it was not he that imprisoned him, but Dara, and that he might thank him
for it, as the cause of all these misfortunes; and if it had not been for him,
he would have come the very first day to him, and paid him all the most dutiful
respects he could have looked for from a good Son: That, for the rest, he
begged his pardon, and a little patience; as soon as he should have disenabled
Dara from executing his evil designs, he would come himself and open the Gates
to him.

I have heard it said concerning this Note, that Chah-Jehan in very deed, the
same night that Dara departed, had sent to him these Elephants laden with
Rupies of Gold, and that it was Rauchenara-Begum that found a way to discover
it to Aureng-Zebe; as she also had detected to him that Plot, which was laid
against him with those Tartarian Women; and that Aureng-Zebe himself had
intercepted some Letters of Chah-Jehan to Dara*

I have conversed with others, that maintain there is no such thing, and that
this Writing, which Aureng-Zebe showed to all, was only to cast Sand into the
Eyes of the People, and to labor, in some degree, to justify himself in so
strange an action, and to devolve the Cause of it upon Chah-Jehan and Dara, as
if he had been forced to such proceedings. They are things, which are difficult
enough well to discover. However it be, as soon as Chah-Jehan was shut up,
almost all the Omrahs were in a manner necessitated to go and make their Court
to Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche; and (which is almost incredible) there was not
one that had the Courage to stir, or to attempt the least in the behalf of his
King, and for him that had made them what they were, and raised them from the
dust, and perhaps from slavery it self (which is ordinary enough in that Court)
to advance them to Riches and Honor. Yet some few there are, as
Danechmend-Kan, and some others, that took no side; but all the ^est declared
for Aureng-Zebe.

It Is notwithstanding to be noted what I said, that they were necessitated to
do what they did. For it is not in the Indies, as in France, or other States of
Christendom, where the Grandees and Nobles have large Possessions of Land, and
great Revenues, which enables them for a while to subsist of themselves. There
they have nothing but Pensions (as I have already touched above) which the King
can take away from them at all hours, and thus ruin them in an instant; so that
they shall be considered no more than if they never had been, nor have any
credit to borrow a farthing.

Aureng-Zebe therefore having thus assured himself of Chah-Jehan, and of all
the Omrahs, took what Sums of Money he thought fit out of the Treasury; and
then having left Chah-hest-Kan, his Uncle, Governor of the Town, he went away
with Morad-Bakche to pursue Dara.

The day that the Army was to march out of Agra the particular Friends of
Morad-Bakche, especially his Eunuch Chah-Abas, who knew, that the excess of
civility and respect is ordinarily a sign of imposture, counseled him, that
since he was King, and every body treated him with the Title of Majesty, and
Aureng-Zebe himself acknowledged him for such, he should let him go to pursue
Dara, and stay himself with his Troops about Agra and Dehli. If he had followed
this counsel, it is certain, that he would have embarassed Aureng-Zebe not a
little; but 'twas fatal, that he should neglect so good advice: Aureng-Zebe is
too fortunate; Morad-Bakche entirely confideth in his promises, and in the
Oaths of Fidelity they had sworn to one another upon the Alcoran. They went
away together, and went with the same pace toward Dehli.

When they were come to Maturas, three or four small days Journey from Agra,
the friends of Morad-Bakche, who perceived something, endeavored again to
persuade him, that he should beware; assuring him that Aureng-Zebe had evil
designs, and that beyond all doubt some mischief was upon the Anvil; that they
had notice of it from all parts, and that by no means, for that day at least,
he should go to see him; that it would be much better to prevent this stroke
the soonest it might be; that he was only to forbear going to visit him that
day, excusing himself with some Indisposition. But whatsoever could be said to
him he believed nothing of it, his Ears were stopped to all the good advice
that was given him, and as if he had been enchanted by the friendship of
Aureng-Zebe, he could not hold to go to him that very night, and to stay at
Supper with him. As soon as he was come, Aureng-Zebe, who expected him, and had
already prepared all things with Mirkan, and three or four of his most intimate
Captains, was not wanting in embracements, and in redoubling his Courtship,
Civilities and Submissions, insomuch as gently to pass his hankerchief over his
face, and to wipe off his sweat and dust, treating him still with the title of
King and Majesty. In the mean time the Table is served, they sup, the
conversation grows warm, they discourse of various things as they use to do;
and at last there is brought a huge Bottle of excellent Chiras Wine, and some
other Bottles of Caboul Wine, for a Debauch. Then Aureng-Zebe, as a grave
serious Man, and one that would appear a great Mahumetan, and very regular,
ni^bly rises from Table, and having with much kindness invited Morad-Bakche,
who loved a Glass of Wine very well, and who relished the Wine that was served,
scrupled not to drink of it to excess. In a word, he made himself drunk, and
fell asleep. This was the thing that was wished; for presently some Servants of
his that were there, were commanded away, under a pretense, to let him sleep
without making any noise; and then his Zable and Poniard were taken from about
him: But Aureng-Zebe was not long, but came himself and wakened him. He entered
into the Chamber, and roughly hit him with his foot, and when he began to open
a little his Eyes, he made to him this short and surprising Reprimand: What
means this, said he, What shame and what ignominy is this, that such a King as
you are, should have so little temper, as thus to make himself drunk? What will
be said both of you and me? Take this infamous Man, this Drunkard, tie him hand
and foot, and throw him into that room to sleep out his Wine. No sooner said,
but it was executed; notwithstanding all his appeal and outcry, five or six
persons fall upon him, and fetter his hands and feet. The things could not be
done, but some of his Men that were thereabout had news of it. They made some
noise, and would enter forcibly; but Allah-Couly, one of his chief Officers,
and the Master of his Artillery, that had been gained long before, threatened
them, and made them draw back. Without any delay, Men were sent through the
whole Army to calm this first Commotion, which also might have proved
dangerous; they made them believe it was nothing, they having been present,
that Morad-Bakche was only drunk, that in that condition he had railed at every
body, and Aureng-Zebe himself, insomuch that there had been a necessity, seeing
him drunk and furious, to keep him apart; that the next day they would see him
abroad, after he had digested his Wine. In the mean time, the Presents walked
about all night amongst the chief Officers of the Army, their Pay was forthwith
increased, they had great Promises made them; and as there was none, that had
not long since apprehended some such thing, there was no great wonder to see
almost all things quieted the next morning; so that the very next night this
poor Prince was shut up in a little close house, such an one as is wont to be
placed on Elephants to carry Women, and he was carried directly to Dehli into
Slimager, which is a little old Fortress in the midst of the River.

After that all was thus appeased, except the Eunuch Chah-Abas, who caused
difficulty enough, Aureng-Zebe received the whole Army of Morad-Bakche into his
Service, and went after Dara, who marched apace toward Lahor, with an
intention well to fortify himself in that place, and thither to draw his
Friends. But Aureng-Zebe followed him with so much speed, that he had not time
to do any great matter, finding himself necessitated to retreat, and to take
the way of Multan, where also he could do nothing considerable, because that
Aureng-Zebe, notwithstanding the great heat, marched night and day; insomuch,
that to encourage all to make haste, he sometimes advanced almost all alone two
or three Leagues before the whole Army, finding himself often obliged to drink
ill water like others, to be content with a crust of dry bread, and to sleep
under a Tree, staying for his Army in the midst of the highway, laying his
head on his Shield like a common Soldier. So that Dara found himself
constrained to abandon Multan also, that he might avoid being near Aureng-Zebe,
whom he was not able to encounter. Here it is that the Statesmen of this
Country have reasoned very diversely: For it is said, that if Dara, when he went
out of Lahor, had cast himself into the Kingdom of Caboul, as he was advised,
he would there have found above ten thousand warlick Men, designed against the
Augans, the Persians, and the Vsbecs, and for a Guard to that Country, the
Governor whereof was Mohabet-Kan, one of the most potent and the most ancient
of Indostan, and that had never been Aureng-Zebe's Friend; that, besides, he
would have been there at the Gate of Persia and Vsbec; that he was likely, that
there being no want of Money, all that Militia and Mohabet-Kan himself, would
have embraced his Party; and that further, he might have drawn assistance, not
only from Vsbec, but also from Persia, as well as from Houmayon, whom the
Persians had restored to his Country against Zaber-Kan, King of the Patans, who
had driven him thence. But Dara was too unfortunate to follow so good advice.
Instead of that he went toward Scimdy, to cast himself into the Fortress of
Tatabakar, that strong and famous place, seated in the midst of the River Indus.

Aureng-Zebe seeing him take this way, found it not fit to follow him further
off, being extremely glad that he had not taken the way to Caboul. He contented
himself to send after him seven or eight thousand Men, under the Conduct of
Mir-baba, his Foster-brother, and turned back with the same expedition to the
place whence he was come, much apprehending lest any thing should fall out
about Agra; lest some or other of those potent Rajah's as Jesseigne, or
Jessomseigne, should make an attempt in his absence, to free Chah-Jehan out of
Prison; or left Soliman Chekouh, together with the Raja of Serenaguer, should
descend from the Hills; or lest also Sultan Sujah should approach too near
Agra. Behold a little Accident, which one day betell him, for too great
precipitation.

When he thus returned from Multan toward Lahor, and marched his ordinary
swift pace, he saw the Raja Jesseigne come against him, accompanied with four
or five thousand of his Ragipous, in a very good equipage; Aureng-Zebe, who had
left his Army behind, and who also knew that this Raja was very affectionate to
Chah-Jehan, was sufficiently surprised, as may easily be imagined, fearing left
this Raja should make use of this occasion, and do a Masterpiece of State, by
seizing on him, to draw Chah-Jehan out of Prison, which at that time was very
easy to do. Neither is it known, whether this Raja had not some such design;
for he had marched with extraordinary speed, insomuch that Aureng-Zebe had no
news of it, believing him yet to be at Dehli. But what may not resolution and
presence of mind do? Aureng-Zebe, without any alteration of his Countenance,
marched directly toward the Raja, and as far off as he could see him, makes
signs to him with his hands, importing that he should make have to a nearer
approach, crying out to him with a loud voice, Salamed Bached Rajagi, Salamed
Bached Babagi, treating him with the Titles of Lord Raja, and Lord Father. When
the Raja was come to him; I expected you, said he, with great impatience; the
work is done, Dara is lost, he is all alone; I have sent Mir-baba after him,
from whom he cannot escape: And for an excess of kindness to him, he took off
his Neck-lace of Pearls, and put it about the Neck of this Raja: And the sooner
to rid himself handsomely of him, (for he wished him far enough) Go, says he,
with all the expedition you can to Lahor, my Army is somewhat tired; go quickly
to attend me there; I apprehend that else something sinister might fall out
there; I make you Governor of that place, and put all things into your hands.
For the rest, I am exceedingly obliged to you for what you have done with
Soliman Chekouh: Where have you left Delil-Kan? I shall find my revenge of him.
Make all possible dispatch, Salamed Bached, Farewell.

Dara being arrived at Tata-baker, made Governor of that place a very
understanding, gallant, and generous Eunuch, with a very good Garrison of
Patans and Sayeds; and for Cannoneers, a good number of Franguis, Portugals,
English, French, and Germans, who had followed him out of great hopes he had
given them, (for, if his Affairs had prospered and he were become King, we must
all have resolved to be Omrahs, as many Franguis as we were.) He there left
also the greatest part of his Treasure; he wanted as yet no Gold nor Silver;
and staying there but a very few days, he marched away with two or three
thousand Men only, descending along the River Indus toward Scindy, and from
thence crossing with an incredible celerity all those Territories of the Raja
Katche, he arrived in Guzaratte, and came to the Gates of Amadevat. The
Father-in-law of Aureng-Zebe, called Chah-Navaze-Kan, was Governor there, with
a very good Garrison, able to resist. Yet notwithstanding, whether it was that
he was surprised, or that he wanted courage (for although he was of those
ancient Princes of Machate, yet he was no great Soldier, though a Man of a
very obliging and civil conversation) he did not oppose Dara, but rather
received him very honorably, and even managed him afterward with so much
dexterity, that Dara was so simple as to trust himself with him, and to
communicate to him his Designs; insomuch as that he showed him the Letters
which he received from the Raja Jessomseigne, and of many other of his Friends,
which prepared themselves to come to him; although it proved too true, what
every body told him, and his Friends confirmed by Letters, that certainly this
Chah-Navaze-Kan would betray him.

Never was any man more surprised than Aureng-Zebe, when he heard that Dara was
in Amadevat: For he well knew, that he wanted no Money, and that all his
Friends, and all the discontented Party, which was numerous, would not fail to
betake themselves by little and little to him: And on the other side, he found
it not safe to go and find him out himself in that place, by removing himself
so far from Agra and Chah-Jehan, to go and embarase himself in all those
Countries of the Rajah's, Jesseigne, Jessomseigne, and others, that are in
those Provinces. Besides, he apprehended, lest Sultan Sujah should advance with
a strong Army, which was already about Elabas, and lest the Raja of Serenaguer
should descend from the Hills with Soliman Chekouh: So that he was sufficiently
perplexed and troubled, not knowing which way to turn. At last he believed it
best to leave Dara for a time quiet where he was, and to go thither where his
presence and Army was most necessary, which was toward Sultan Sujah; who had
already passed the River Ganges at Elabas.

This Sultan Sujah was come to encamp in a little Village called Cadjoue, and
had conveniently seized himself of a great Talab, or Reservatory of Water,
which is there in the way; and Aureng-Zebe came to place himself on the side of
a small Torrent, at the distance of a mile and an half from thence, on Agra's
side. Between both was a very fair Campaign, very proper for a Battle.
Aureng-Zebe was no sooner arrived, but being impatient to end this War, at
break of day he went to face Sujah, leaving his Baggage on the other side of
the Torrent. He fell upon Sujah with an effort unimaginable. Emir-Jemla,
Prisoner of Decan, and who arrived just on the day of the Combat, fearing Dara
no more, because his Family was more in safety, did there also lay out all his
force, courage, and dexterity. But seeing that Sultan Sujah had well fortified
himself, and was accompanied with a very good Artillery, advantageously placed,
it was not possible for Aureng-Zebe to force him, nor to make him retreat from
thence, so as to make him lose those Waters. On the contrary, he was obliged
himself to draw back several times, so vigorously was he repulsed, insomuch
that he found himself in great perplexity. Sultan Sujah not being willing to
advance too far into the Campaign, nor to remove from that advantageous place
where he was, pretending only to defend himself; which was very prudently done.
For he foresaw, that Aureng-Zebe could not stay there long, and that in that
hot season he would be absolutely obliged to turn back toward the Torrent for
the Water; and that, when he should do so he would fall upon his Rear,
Aureng-Zebe also foresaw well enough the same thing, and that was the reason
why he was so forward and pressing; but behold another more troublesome
accident.

In this very time he receives intelligence, that the Raja Jessomseigne, who
in appearance had accommodated himself with him, was fallen upon his Rear, and
plundered his Baggage and Treasure. This News astonished him much, and the more,
because he perceived that his Army which had heard of it was thereby frighted,
and fallen into disorder. Yet he loses not his judgment for all this; and being
well aware, that to turn back was to hazard all, he resolved, as in the Battle
of Dara, to bear up the best he could, and to expect with a steady foot all
Events. In the mean time, the disorder grew worse and worse in his Army: Sujah,
who was resolved to profit of the occasion, takes his time, and presses him
vigorously. He that led Aureng-Zebe's Elephant is killed with the shot of an
Arrow; he leads the Beast as well as he can himself, till another could be had
in that Leaders place. Arrows rain upon him; he returns many himself, his
Elephant begins to be frighted, and to go back. Behold him now in great
extremity, and brought to that point, that one foot of his was out of the seat,
as if he meant to cast himself to the ground; and no man knows what in that
trouble he had not done, if Emir-Jemla, being nigh, and performing like a great
Man as he was, beyond imagination, called to him, in holding up his hand
Decan-kou, Decan-kou, where is Decan? This seems to have been the greatest
extremity, to which Aureng-Zebe could be reduced. One would have said, 'twas
now and here that Fortune had abandoned him, and there is almost no appearance
of a possibility to escape. But his good Fortune is stronger than all that:
Sultan Sujah must be routed, and take slight, like Dara, to save his life:
Aureng-Zebe must remain Victorious, carry away the Bell, and be King of the
Indies.

We are to remember the Battle of Samenguer, and that, in appearance, slight
accident which ruined Dara: It Is the same oversight, or rather the same
Treason, which is now destroying Sultan Sujah. One of his chief Captains,
Allah-verdi-Kan, who (as some say) had been gained, us^th the same Artifice
that Calil-ullah-Kan had employed toward Dara; though there were some who
believed, that there was no malice in the case, and that it was a mere piece of
Flattery. For seeing that the whole Army of Aureng-Zebe was in disorder, he ran
toward Sultan Sujah, telling him the same thing, that Calil-ullah Kan did to
Dara, and begging of him with folded hands, that he would stay no longer in so
great danger upon his Elephant. Come down, said he, in the name of God, mount
on Horseback, God has made you Sovereign of the Indies, let us pursue those
Fugitives, let not Aureng-Zebe escape us.

But not to stay long from declaring the strange Fortune of Aureng-Zebe, and
the incredible conjuncture that recovers his desperate condition; Sultan Sujah,
not more considerate than Dara, commits the same Fault; and he was no sooner
come down from his Elephant, but his Army seeing him no more, was struck with a
terror, believing there was Treason, and that he was either taken or slain.
Whereupon they disbanded, without any more ado, as Dara's Army did in the
Battle of Samonguer; and the Defeat was so great, that the Sultan was fortunate
in that he could save himself.

Jessomseigne hearing this unexpected News, and perceiving it was not very safe
for him to tarry there, contented himself with the Spoil he had got, and with
all diligence marched straight to Agra, thence to pass to his Country. The
noise was already in Agra, that Aureng-Zebe had lost the Battle; that he was
taken, together with Emir-Jemla, and that Sultan-Sujah brought them both
Prisoners. Insomuch, that Chahhest-Kan, who was Governor of the Town, and Uncle
to Aureng-Zebe, seeing Jessomseigne, whose Treachery he had heard of, at the
Gates, and despairing of his Life, had taken into his hand a Cup of Poison to
make himself away, and had, as they say, in very deed swallowed it, if his
Women had not fallen upon him, and hindered him: So that it is thought, if
Jessomseigne had had the wit and courage to stay longer in Agra, if he had
threatened boldly, and promised and acted vigorously for the freedom of
Chah-Jehan, he might have drawn him out of Prison; so much the more easily,
because all Agra was for two whole days in that belief, that Aureng-Zebe was
overcome. But Jessomseigne, who knew how all things went, and who durst not
long stay there, nor attempt any thing, did nothing but pass, returning with
all speed homewards.

Aureng-Zebe, who apprehended mischief from Agra, and feared lest Jessomseigne
should undertake something for Chah-Jehan, was not long in the pursuit after
Sultan Sujah; he turned short for Agra with his whole Army, where he stayed a
good while, giving order for all things. Mean time he received intelligence,
that Sultan Sujah had not lost many Men in his being routed, for want of
farther pursuit; that also from the Lands of the Raja's, which are in those
quarters, on the right and left of Ganges, he raised great Forces, upon the
score of the reputation he had of being very rich, and very liberal, and that
he fortified himself in Elabas, that important and famous Passage of Ganges,
which, with its Fortress, is the first Inlet into Bengale. And then he
considered also, that he had about him two Persons, which indeed were very
capable to serve him, Sultan Mahmoud his eldest Son, and Emir-Jemla; but he
well knew, that those who have done good service to their Prince, grow often
insolent, in the belief, that all is due to them, and that they cannot be
recompensed enough. He perceived already, that the former of them began very
much to emancipate himself, and that every day he became more arrogant, for
having seized on the Fortress of Agra, and by that means had broken all the
Designs which Chah-Jehan could have formed. And as to the latter, he knew
indeed the force of his Understanding, his Conduct, and Valor; but that was
the very thing which made him apprehend him the more: For knowing that he was
very rich, that his Reputation was great, that he passed for the First Mover in
Affairs, and for the ablest Man in all the Indies, he doubted not, but that
after the Example of Sultan Mahmoud, he entertained himself with big hopes. All
this certainly would have been able to perplex an ordinary Spirit, but
Aureng-Zebe found a Remedy to all. He knew to remove them both with so much
prudence, and even with so much handsomness, that neither of them found any
cause to complain of it. He sent them both against Sultan Sujah with a puissant
Army, letting Emir secretly know, that the Government of Bengale, which is the
best quarter of Indostan, was designed for him, to hold it during his life, and
for his Son after his decease; and that thereby he would begin to express to
him his acknowledgments for the great Services he had done him; and that
therefore it belonged only to him to defeat Sujah, and that as soon as he
should have compassed it, he would make him Mir-ul Omrabs, which is the first
and the most honorable place of Indostan, and no less than the Prince of the
Omrahs.

To Sultan Mahmoud his Son, he said only these few words: Remember that thou
art the Eldest of my Children, that it is for thy self thou go forth to
fight; that thou have done much, but yet nothing, if thou overcomest not Sujah,
who is our greatest and powerfullest Enemy; I hope, God assisting me, to be
soon Master of the rest.

With these words he dismissed them both, with ordinary Honors, that is, with
rich Vests, some Horses and Elephants gallantly harnessed; making in the mean
time Emir-Jemla to consent, that his only Son, Mabmet Emir-Kan, should stay
with him for a good Education, or rather for a Pledge of his Fidelity; and
Sultan Mahmoud, that his Wife should remain in Agra (which was the Daughter of
the abovementioned King of Golkonda) as too troublesome a thing in an Army, and
in such an Expedition.

Sultan Sujah, who was always in the apprehension, lest the Raja's of the lower
Bengale, which he had ill treated, should be raised against him, and who feared
nothing more than to have to do with Emir-Jemla, had no sooner received this
News, but apprehending that the passage to Bengale would be obstructed, and
that Emir would pass in some other place the River Ganges, either lower or
higher than Elabas, raised his Camp, and went down to Benares and Patna, whence
he betook himself to Mogiere, a small Town seated upon the Ganges, a place
commonly called the Key of the Kingdom of Bengale, being a kind of Straight
between the Mountains and the Woods, which are not far from thence. He thought
fit to stay in that place, and there to fortify himself; and for greater
safety, he caused a great Trench to be made, which I have seen, passing that
way some years after, from the Town and River unto the Mountain, being well
resolved there to attend Emir-Jemla, and to dispute that passage with him. But
he was sufficiently astonished, when he was told, that the Troops of Emir,
which slowly descended along the River Ganges, were certainly for nothing but
to amuse him; that himself was not there; that he had gained the Raja's of
those Mountains, which are on the right hand of the River; and that he and
Sultan Mahmoud marched apace over their Lands with all the Flower of the Army,
drawing straight to Rage-Mehalle, to intercept him: So that he was constrained
to quit, as soon as he could, his Fortifications; yet notwithstanding he made
so much haste, that though he was obliged to follow those windings, which the
River Ganges on that side makes toward the left hand, he prevented Emir by
some days, and arrived first at Rage-Mehalle, where he had time to fortify
himself; because Emir having heard this News, took his March to the left hand
toward Ganges, through very ill ways, there to expect his Troops, which came
down with the Body of the Artillery and the Baggage along the River. As soon as
all was come, he went to attaque Sultan Sujah, who defended himself very well
for five or six days; but seeing that the Artillery of Emir, which played
incessantly, ruined all his Fortifications, which were made but of sandy Earth
and Fagots, and that he could not but with much difficulty make resistance in
that place, besides that the Season of the Rain began, he retired himself, at
the favor of the Night, leaving behind two great Pieces of Cannon. Emir durst
not follow him in the night, for fear of some Ambush, putting off the pursuit
'till the next morning: But Sujah had the good luck, that at the break of day
there began to fall a Rain, which lasted above three days; so that Emir could
not only stir out of Rage-Mehalle, but saw himself obliged to pass the Winter
there, by reason of the excessive Rains in that Country, which render the ways
so troublesome for more than four Months, viz. July, August, September, and
October, that the Armies cannot possibly march. And hereby Sultan Sujah had the
means to retire himself, and to choose what place he would, having time enough
to fortify his Army, and to send out of the inferior Bengale for many Pieces
of Cannon, and a good number of Portugals, that were retired thither, because
of the great fertility of the Country: For he much courted all those Portugal
Fathers, Missionaries, that are in that Province, promising them no less than
that he would make them all rich, and build Churches for them wheresoever they
would. And they were indeed capable to serve him, it being certain, that in the
Kingdom of Bengale there are to be found no less than eight or nine Thousand
Families of Franguis, Portugals, and these either Natives or Mesticks.

But Sultan Mahmoud, who, for the reason abovementioned, was grown fierce, and
aspired, perhaps, to greater things than at that time he ought, did pretend to
command the Army absolutely, and that Emir-Jemla should follow his Orders,
letting also from time to time fall insolent words in reference to his Father
Aureng-Zebe, as if he were obliged to him for the Crown, and uttering
Expressions of Contempt and Threat against Emir Jemla; which caused great
coldness betwixt them two, which lasted a pretty while, until Sultan Mahmoud
understood, that his Father was very much dissatisfied with his conduct: And
apprehending, lest Emir had order to seize on his person, he went away to
Sultan Sujah, accompanied with a very small number, and to him he made great
promises, and swore Fidelity. But Sujah, who feared Aureng-Zebe and
Emir-Jemla's snares, could not trust him, having always an Eye upon his
Actions, without giving him any considerable Command; which he so disgusted,
that some months after, not knowing what would become of him, he left Sultan
Sujah, and returned to Emir, who received him well enough, assuring him, that
he would write in his behalf to Aureng-Zebe, and do his utmost to make him
forget that fault.

I think fit here to take notice, on the by, of what many have told me, viz.
That this Escape of Sultan Mahmoud was altogether made by the Artifices of
Aureng-Zebe, who cared not much to hazard this Son of his to try to destroy
Sujah, and who was glad enough, that whatever the Event were, he might have a
specious pretense to put him in a place of surety. However it be, he afterward
showed himself much dissatisfied with him, and wrote to him a severe Letter, in
which he enjoined him to return to Dehli, but giving order in the mean time,
that he should not come so far: For he no sooner had passed the River Ganges,
but he met with Troops that stopped him, and put him up in a small Chair, (as was
done to Morad-Bakche) and carried him to Goualeor, whence it is thought he will
never be set at liberty: Aureng-Zebe by this means freeing himself from great
perplexity; who then also let his second Son, Sultan Mazum, know, that the
point of Reigning is so delicate a thing, that Kings must be jealous even of
their own shadow; adding, that if he be not discreet, the like may befall him
what had befallen his Brother, and that he ought to think Aureng-Zebe was not a
Man, that would suffer that to be done to himself, what Chah-Jehan did to his
Father Jehan-Guyre, and what he had also lately seen done to Chah-Jehan.

And indeed we may on this occasion say, that if this Son continue to behave
himself as he has done hitherto, Aureng-Zebe will have no cause to suspect
him, and to be dissatisfied with him: For no Slave can be more tractable, and
Aureng-Zebe himself never appeared more careless of Greatness, nor more given
to Devotion than he: Yet I have known Men of Parts, who believed, that he is
not so in good earnest, but by superlative policy and craft, like that of his
Father, which we may have the proof of in time.

Whilst all these things were thus transacted in Bengale, and that Sultan Sujah
resisted the best he could the Forces of Emir-Jemla, passing now on one side of
the River Ganges, of a Channel, or some other River, (for that Country is full
of them) then on the other; Aureng-Zebe kept himself about Agra, going to and
fro; and at length, after he had also sent Morad-Bakche to Goualeor, he came to
Dehli, where in good earnest he took upon him publicly to act the King, giving
order for all Affairs of the Kingdom, and especially thinking on means to catch
Dara, and to get him out of Guzaratte, which was a very hard thing, for the
Reasons already mentioned. But the great good Fortune, and the singular
dexterity of Aureng-Zebe soon drew him thence, which now follows next to be
related.

Jessomseigne, who had retired himself to his Country, and made the best of
what he had taken in the Battle of Kadjoue, raised a strong Army, and wrote to
Dara, that he should come to Agra as soon as he could, and that he would join
with his Forces. Dara, who had by this time set on foot a pretty numerous Army,
(though it consisted, for the most part, but of gathered people) and who hoped,
that approaching to Agra, many of his old Friends, seeing him with
Jessomseigne, would not fail to join with him also, immediately leaves
Amadevad, and marches with great speed to Asmire, seven or eight days journey
from Agra. But Jessomseigne kept not his word with him: The Raja Jesseigne
interposed to make his peace with Aureng-Zebe, and to fasten him to his Party;
or, at least, to hinder his design, which was capable to ruin himself, and to
make all the Raja's rise; and wrote to him several Letters, giving him to
understand the great danger he went to expose himself to, by espousing a Party
in that Extremity, as that of Dara's was; that he should well consider what he
was going to do; that he went about wholly to destroy himself, and all his
whole Family; that Aureng-Zebe would never forgive him; that he was a Raja as
himself; that he should think on sparing the blood of the Ragipous; that if he
thought to draw the Raja's to his Party, he would find those that would hinder
him from it. In a word, that it was a business which concerned all the Gentry
of Indostan, and exposed them to danger, if way were given to kindle a Fire,
which would not be extinguished at pleasure. And lastly, if he would leave Dara
to himself, Aureng-Zebe would forget all that had passed, and present him with
all he had taken, and give him that very instant the Government of Guzaratte,
which would be very convenient for him, that Country being near his Lands;
that he could be there in full liberty and safety, and as long as he pleased,
and that himself would be Caution for all. In a word, this Raja acted his part
so well, that he made Jessomseigne return to his Land, whilst Aureng-Zebe
approached with his whole Army to Asmire, and encamped in the sight of that of
Dara.

And now what could this poor Prince Dara do? He sees himself abandoned, and
frustrated of his hopes. He considers, that to turn back safe to Amadevad was
impossible, in regard that it was a March of Thirty and five days; that it was
in the heat of Summer; that water would fail him; that they were all the Lands
of Raja's, Friends or Allies of Jesseigne or Jessomseigne; that the Army of
Aureng-Zebe, which was not harassed like his, would not fail to follow him.
It Is as good, says he, to perish here; and although the Match be altogether
unequal, let us venture all, and give Battle once more. But alas! what does he
mean to do? He is not only abandoned by all, but he has yet with him
Chah-Navaze-Kan, whom he trusts, and who betrays him, and discovers all his
Designs to Aureng-Zebe. It Is true, that Chah-Navaze-Kan was punished for his
Perfidiousness, and killed in the Battle; whether it was by the hands of Dara
himself, as many told me, or (which is more probable) by some of Aureng-Zebe's
Army, who being secret Partisans of Dara, found means to get to him, and to
dispatch him, fearing lest he should discover them, and have some knowledge of
the Letters they had written to Dara. But what did it benefit him at that time,
that Chah-Navaze-Kan was dead? Dara should have sooner followed the advice of
his Friends, and never have confided in him.

The Fight began between Nine and Ten of the Clock in the morning: Dara's
Artillery, which was very well placed on a little Eminency, was loud enough;
but, as was said, most of the Pieces without Bullets; so was he betrayed by
all! It Is needless to relate the other Particulars of this Battle; it was
properly not a Battle, but a Rout. I shall only say, that hardly the Onset was
begun, but Jesseigne was near and in sight of Dara, to whom he sent word, that
he should fly presently, unless he would be taken. So that this poor Prince,
being altogether surprised, was constrained to run away instantly, and with so
much disorder and precipitation, that he had not leisure to put up his Baggage.
It was no small matter, that he was able to get away with his Wife, and the
rest of his Family. And it is certain, that if the Raja-Jesseigne would have
done what he could, he could never have escaped; but he always had a respect to
the Royal Family; or rather, he was too crafty and politic, and had too great
forecast, to venture to lay hands on a Prince of the Blood.

This unfortunate Prince, deserted by almost all, and finding himself
accompanied but of Two thousand Men at most, was forced in the hottest of
Summer to cross, without Tents or Baggage, all those Countries of the Raja's,
that are almost from Asmire to Amadevad. Mean time the Koullis, which are the
Country People, and the worst of all the Indies, and the greatest Robbers,
follow him night and day, rifle and kill his Soldiers, with so much cruelty,
that no Man could stay Two hundred Paces behind the Body, but he was presently
stripped naked, or butchered upon the least resistance. Yet notwithstanding,
Dara made shift to get near Amadevad, when he hoped, that the next day, or soon
after, he should enter into the Town to refresh himself, and to try once more
to gather again some Forces: But all things fall out contrary to vanquished and
unfortunate Men.

The Governor, whom he had left in the Castle of Amadevad, had already received
both menacing and promising Letters from Aureng-Zebe, which made him lose
Courage, and incline to that side; insomuch that he wrote to Dara, forbidding
him to come nearer, if he did, he would find the Gates shut, and all in Arms.

Three days before I met this unhappy Prince, by a strange Accident, when he
obliged me to follow him, having no Physician about him; and the Night before
that he received this News from the Governor of Amadevad, he did me the favor
to make me come into the Karavan-Serrak where he was, fearing lest the Koulis
should assassinate me: And (what is hard enough to believe in Indestan, where
the Grandees especially are so jeaous of their Wives) I was so near to the Wife
of this Prince, that the Cords of the Kanates, or Wind screen, which enclosed
them, (for they had not so much as a poor Tent) were fastened to the wheels of
my Chariot. I relate this circumstance by the by only, to show the extremity
Dara was reduced to.

When these Women heard this sad News (which was at the break of day, as I well
remember) they broke out upon a sudden into such strange cries and
lamentations, that they forced tears from ones Eyes. And now behold all was in
an unexpressible confusion: Every one looks upon his Neighbor, and no body
knows what to do, or what will become of him. Soon after we saw Dara come
forth, half dead, now speaking to one, then another, even to the meanest
Soldiers. He sees all astonished, and ready to abandon him. What counsel?
whither can he go? he must be gone instantly. You may judge of the extremity he
must needs be in, by this small accident I am going to mention. Of three great
Oxen of Guzaratte, which I had for my Chariot, one died the Night before,
another was dying, and the third was tired out, (for we had been forced to
march for three days together, almost night and day, in an intolerable heat and
dust:) Whatever Dara could say or command, whether he alleged it was for
himself, or for one of his Women that was hurt in her Leg, or for me; he could
not possibly procure for me, whether Ox, or Camel, or Horse: So that he was
obliged, to my good fortune, to leave me there. I saw him march away, and that
with tears in his Eyes, accompanied with four or five hundred Cavaliers at
most, and with two Elephants, that were said to be laden with Gold and Silver;
and I heard them say, that they were to take their March toward Tatabakar; for
he had no other Game to play, though even that seemed in a manner impossible,
considering the small number of People left him, and the great sandy Deserts to
be waded through in the hottest season, most of them without water fit to
drink. And indeed most of those that followed him, and even diverse of his
Women, did there perish, either of drought, or the unwholsom waters, or the
tiresom ways and ill food; or lastly, because stripped by the Koullis
abovementioned. Yet notwithstanding all this, Dara made hard shift to get to
the Raja Katche; unhappy even herein, that he perished not himself in this
March.

This Raja at first gave him a very good Reception, even so far as to promise
him assistance with all his Forces, provided he would give his Daughter in
marriage to his Son. But Jesseigne soon wrought as much with this Raja, as he
had done with Jessomseigne; so that Dara one day seeing the kindness of this
Barbarian, cooled upon a sudden, and that consequently his Person was in danger
there, he betakes himself to the pursuit of his Expedition to Tatabakar.

To relate how I got away from those Robbers, the Koullis, in what manner I
moved them to compassion, how I saved the best part of my small Treasure, how
we became good Friends by the means of my Profession of Physic, my Servants
(perplexed as well as my self) swearing that I was the greatest Physician of
the World, and that the People of Dara, at their going away, had ill treated
me, and taken from me all my best things: How, after having kept me with them
seven or eight days, they had so much kindness and generosity, as to lend me an
Ox, and to conduct me so far, that I was in sight of Amadevad: And lastly, how
from thence after some days I returned to Dehli, having lighted on an occasion
to go with a certain Omrah passing thither; in which Journey I met from time to
time, on the way, with Carcasses of Men, Elephants, Oxen, Horses, and Camels,
the remainder of that unfortunate Army of Dara. These are things, I say, I must
not insist upon to describe them.

Whilst Dara advanced toward Tatabakar, the War continues in Bengale, and much
longer than was believed, Sultan Sujah putting forth his utmost, and playing
his last Game against Emir-Jemla: Yet this did not much trouble Aureng-Zebe,
who knew 'twas a great way between Bengale and Agra, and was sufficiently
convinced of the prudence and valor of Emir-Jemla. That which disquieted him
much more was, that he saw Soliman Chekouh so near (for from Agra to the
Mountains it is but eight days Journey) whom he could not master, and who
perpetually alarmed him by the rumors that went continually about, as if he
were coming down the Mountains with the Raja. It Is certainly very hard to draw
him thence: But behold how he manages the matter to compass it.

He makes the Raja Jesseigne write one Letter after another to the Raja of
Serenaguer, promising him very great things, if he would surrender Soliman
Chekouh to him, and menacing War at the same time, if he should obstinately
keep him. The Raja answers, That he would rather lose his Estate, than do so
unworthy an Action. And Aureng-Zebe, seeing his resolution, takes the Field,
and marches directly to the foot of the Hills, and with an infinite number of
Pike-men causes the Rocks to be cut, and the passage to be widen'd. But the
Raja laughs at all that; neither has he much cause to fear on that side.
Aureng-Zebe may cut long enough, they are Mountains inaccessible to an Army,
and stones would be sufficient to stop the Forces of four Indostans; so that he
was constrained to turn back again.

Dara in the mean time approaches to the Fortress of Tatabakar, and when he
was but two or three days journey off, he received News, that Mir-baba, who had
long held it besieged, had at length reduced it to extremity: As I afterward
learned of our French, and other Franguis that were there, a pound of Rice and
Meat having cost there above a Crown, and so of other Victuals in proportion:
Yet the Governor held out; made Sallies, which extremely incommoded the Enemy;
and showed all possible prudence, courage and fidelity; deriding the endeavors
of the General, Mir-baba, and all the menaces and promises of Aureng-Zebe.

And this also I learned afterward of my Countrymen, the French, and of all
those other Franguis that were with him; who added, that when he heard Dara was
not far off, he redoubled his liberalities, and knew so well to gain the hearts
of all his Soldiers, and to encourage them to do bravely, that there was not
one of them, that was not resolved to sally out upon the Enemy, and to hazard
all to raise the Siege, and to make Dara enter; and that he also knew so well
to cast fear and terror into the Camp of Mir-baba, by sending Spies about very
cunningly to assure, that they had seen Dara approach with great resolution,
and very good Forces; that if he had come, as was believed he would do every
moment, the Army of the Enemy was for disbanding upon his appearance, and even
in part to go over to him. But he is still too unfortunate, to undertake any
thing prosperously. Believing therefore, that to raise the Siege with such an
handful of Men as he had, was impossible; he did deliberate to pass the River
Indus, and to endeavor to get into Persia; although that also would have had
mighty difficulties and inconveniences, by reason of the Deserts, and the
small quantity of good waters in those parts; besides, that upon those
Frontiers there are but mean Rajas and Patans, who acknowledge neither the
Persian nor the Mogol. But his Wife did very much dissuade him from it, for
this weak reason, that he must, if he did so, expect to see his Wife and
Daughter Slaves of the King of Persia; that that was a thing altogether
unworthy of the Grandeur of his Family, and 'twas better to die, than to
undergo this Infamy.

Dara, being in great perplexity, remembered, that there was thereabout a
certain Patan, powerful enough, called Gion-Kan, whose Life he had formerly
saved twice, when Chah-Jehan had commanded he should be cast under the feet of
an Elephant, for having rebelled diverse times: He resolved to go to him, hoping
that he could give him sufficient Succors to raise the Siege of Tatabakar;
making account, that thence he would take his Treasure, and that going from
thence, and gaining Kandabar, he could cast himself into the Kingdom of Caboul,
having great hopes of Mohabet-Kan, who was Governor of it, because he was both
potent and valiant, well beloved of his Country, and had obtained this
Government by his (Dara's) favor. But his Grandchild, Sepe-Chekouh, yet but
very young, seeing his design, cast himself at his Feet, entreating him for
God's sake, not to enter into the Country of that Patan. His Wife and Daughter
did the same, remonstrating to him, that he was a Robber, a revolted Governor,
that he would infallibly betray him; that he ought not to stand upon the
raising of the Siege, but rather endeavor to gain Caboul, that the thing was
not impossible, forasmuch as Mir-baba was not like to quite the Siege to follow
him, and to hinder him from getting thither.

Dara, being carried headlong by the force of his unhappy Destiny, rejected
this counsel, and would hearken to nothing of what was proposed to him, saying,
as was true, that the March would be very difficult, and very dangerous; and
maintaining always, that Gion-Kan would not be so mean, as to betray him, after
all the good he had done him. He departed, notwithstanding all that could be
said to him; and went to prove, at the price of his Life, That no trust is to
be given to a wicked Man.

This Robber, who at first believed that he had numerous Troops following him,
gave him the fairest reception that could be, and entertained him with very
great kindness and civility in appearance, placing his Soldiers here and there
among his Subjects, with a strict order to treat them well, and to give them
what refreshments the Country afforded: But when he found that he had not above
two or three hundred Men in all, he quickly showed what he was. It is not
known, whether he had not received some Letters from Aureng-Zebe, or whether
his avarice had not been tempted by some Mules said to be laden with Gold;
which was all that could be saved hitherto, as well from the hands of Robbers,
as of those that conveyed it. Whatever it be, on a certain morning, when no
body looked for any such thing, all being taken up with the care of refreshing
themselves, and believing all to be safe; behold this Traitor, who had
bestir^'d himself all night to get armed Men from all parts, fell upon Dara and
Sepe-Chekouh, killed some of their Men that stood up to defend themselves;
forgot not to seize on the loads of the Mules, and of all the Jewels of the
Women; made Dara to be tied fast upon an Elephant, commanding the Executioner
to fit behind, and to cut off his head upon the least sign given, in case he
should be seen to resist, or that any one should attempt to deliver him. And in
this strange posture he was carried to the Army before Taba-bakar, where he put
him into the hands of Mir-baba, the General, who caused him to be conducted in
the company of this same Traitor to Lahor, and thence to Dehli.

When he was at the Gates of Dehli, it was deliberated by Aureng-Zebe, whether
he should be made to pass through the midst of the City, or no, to carry him
thence to Goualeor. Many did advise, that that was by no means to be done; that
some disorder might arise; that some might come to save him; and besides, that
it would be a great dishonor to the Family Royal. Others maintained the
contrary* viz. That it was absolutely necessary he should pass through the
Town, to astonish the World, and to show the absolute Power of Aureng-Zebe, and
to disabuse the People, that might still doubt, whether it were himself, as
indeed many Omrahs did doubt; and to take away all hopes from those, who still
preserved some affection for him. The Opinion of these last was followed; he
was put on an Elephant, his Grandchild, Sepe-Chekouh, at his side; and behind
them was placed Bhadur-Kan, as an Executioner. This was none of those brave
Elephants of Ceilan or Pegu, which he was wont to ride on, with gilt Harness
and embroidered Covers, and Seats with Canopies very handsomely painted and
gilt, to defend themselves from the Sun: It was an old Caitiff Animal, very
dirty and nasty, with an old torn Cover, and a pitiful Seat, all open. There
was no more seen about him, that Necklace of big Pearls, which these Princes
are wont to wear, nor those rich Turbants and Vests embroidered. All his Dress
was a Vest of course Linen, all dirty, and a Turbant of the same, with a
wretched Scarf of Kachimere over his head, like a Varlet; his Grandson,
Sepe-Chekouh, being in the same equipage. In this miserable posture he was made
enter into the Town, and to pass through the greatest Merchant-streets, to the
end that all the People might see him, and entertain no doubt any more whether
it was he.

As for me, I fancied we went to see some strange Massacre, and was astonished
at the boldness of making him thus pass through the Town; and that the more,
because I knew that he was very ill guarded, neither was I ignorant, that he
was very much beloved by the lower sort of people, who at that time exclaimed
highly against the cruelty and tyranny of Aureng-Zebe, as one that kept his
Father in prison, as also his own Son Sultan Mahmoud, and his Brother
Morad-Bakche. I was well prepared for it, and with a good Horse and two good
Men I went, together with two others of my Friends, to place my self in the
greatest street, where he was to pass. But not one Man had the boldness to draw
his Sword, only there were some of the Fakires, and with them some poor people,
who seeing that infamous Gion-Kan ride by his side, began to rail and throw
stones at him, and to call him Traitor. All the Shops were ready to break for
the crowd of Spectators, that wept bitterly; and there was heard nothing but
loud Outcries and Lamentations, Invectives, and Curses, heaped on Gion-Kan. In
a word, Men and Women, great and small (such is the tenderness of the hearts of
the Indians) were ready to melt into tears for compassion; but not one there
was that durst stir to rescue him. Now after he had thus passed through the
Town, he was put into a Garden called Heider-Abad.

There were not wanting to tell Aureng-Zebe, how the People at this sight had
lamented Dara, and cursed the Patan, that had delivered him; and how the same
was in danger to have been stoned to death, as also that there had been a great
apprehension of some sedition and mischief. Hereupon another Council was held,
whether he should indeed be carried to Goualeor, as had been concluded before;
or whether it were not more expedient to put him to death, without more ado?
Some were of opinion, that he should go to Goualeor with a strong Guard, that
that would be enough; Danechmend-Kan, though Dara's old Enemy, insisting much
upon that. But Rauchenara-Begum, in pursuance of her hatred against this
Brother of hers, pushed Aureng-Zebe to make him away, without running the
danger there was in sending him to Goualeor; as also did all his old Enemies,
Galilullah-Kan, and Chah-hest-Kan, and especially a certain Flatterer, a
Physician, who was fled out of Persia, first called Hakim-Daoud, and afterward
being become a great Omrah named Takarrub-Kan: This Villain boldly rose up in a
full assembly, and cried out, that it was expedient for the safety of the State
to put him to death immediately, and that the rather, because he was no
Mussulman; that long since he was turned Kafire, Idolater, without Religion,
and that he would charge the Sin of it upon his own head: Of which imprecation
he soon after felt the smart; for within a short time he fell into disgrace,
and was treated like an infamous Fellow, and dyed miserably. But Aureng-Zebe,
carried away by these instances and motives, commanded that he should be put to
death, and that Sepe-Chekouh, his Grandchild, should be sent to Goualeor.

The Charge of this Tragical Execution was given to a certain Slave, called
Nazer, that had been bred by Chah-Jehan, and was known to have been formerly
ill treated by Dara. This Executioner, accompanied with three or four
Parricides more, went to Dara, who was then himself dressing some Lentils with
Sepe-Chekouh his Grandchild. He no sooner saw Nazer, but cried out to
Sepe-Chekouh, My dear Son, behold those that come to kill us! laying hold at
the same time of a small Knife, which was all the Arms that were left him. One
of these Butchers immediately fell upon Sepe-Chekouh; the others, upon the arms
and legs of Dara, throwing him to the ground, and holding him under, 'till
Nazer cut his throat. His Head was forthwith carried to the Fortress of
Aureng-Zebe, who presently commanded it to be put in a dish, and that water
should be fetched; which when brought, he wiped it off with an Handkerchief,
and after he had caused the Face to be washed clean, and the blood done away,
and was fully satisfied that it was the very head of Dara, he fell a weeping,
and said these words; Ah Bed-Bakt! Ah unfortunate Man! Take it away, and bury
it in the Sepulcher of Houmayon.

At night, the Daughter of Dara was brought into the Seraglio, but afterward
sent to Chah-Jehan, and Begum-Saheb, who asked her of Aureng-Zebe. Concerning
Dara's Wife, she had ended her days before at Lahor* She had poisoned her self,
foreseeing the extremities she was falling into, together with her Husband.
Sepe-Chekouh was sent to Goualeor. And after a few days, Gion-kan was sent for,
to come before Aureng-Zebe in the Assembly: To him were given some Presents,
and so he was sent away; but being near his Lands, he was rewarded according to
his desert, being killed in a Wood. This barbarous Man not knowing, or not
considering, that if Kings do sometimes permit such Actions for their Interest,
yet they abhor them, and sooner or later revenge them.

In the mean time, the Governor of Tatabakar, by the same Orders that had been
required of Dara, was obliged to surrender the Fortress. It was indeed upon
such a composition as he would have, but it was also with an intention not to
keep word with him. For the poor Eunuch, arriving at Lahor, was cut in pieces,
together with those few Men he had then with him, by Kalil-ullah-kan, who was
Governor thereof. But the reason of the non-observance of the Capitulation
was* that there was come intelligence, that he secretly prepared himself to go
directly to Soliman-Chekouh, sparing no Gold, which underhand he conveyed into
the hands of our Franguis, and to all those that were come with him out of the
Fortress to follow him, under pretext of accompanying him as far as Dehli to
Aureng-Zebe, who had often said, that he should be very glad to see so gallant
a Man, and who had so valiantly defended himself.

There remained therefore none of the Family of Dara, but Soliman-Chekouh, who
could not easily be drawn away from Serenaguer, if the Raja had been steady to
his first Declarations. But the secret practices of the Raja Jesseigne, the
promises and threats of Aureng-Zebe, the death of Dara, and the other Rajas his
Neighbors that had been gained, and were prepared by the Orders, and at the
cost of Aureng-Zebe, to make War against him, did at last shake the Faith of
this perfidious Protector, and made him consent to their demands. Sepe-Chekouh,
who was advertised of it, fled through the midst of those horrid Countries and
fearful Deserts, toward the great Tibet. But the Son of the Raja, soon
pursuing and overtaking him, caused him to be assaulted with stones. The poor
Prince was hurt, seized, and carried to Dehli, where he was imprisoned in
Serenguer, that little Fortress, where at first they had put Morad-Bakche.

Aureng-Zebe, to observe what he had practiced toward Dara, and that no body
might doubt it was Soliman-Chekouh himself, commanded him to be brought before
him in the presence of all the Grandees of the Court. At the entry of the Gate,
the Chains were taken from his feet* leaving those he had about his hands,
which seemed gilt. When this proper young Man, so handsome and gallant, was
seen to enter, there was a good number of Omrahs that could not hold their
tears; and, as I was informed, all the great Ladies of the Court, that had
leave to see him come in, fell a weeping. Aureng-Zebe, who appeared himself to
be touched at his misfortunes, began to speak very kindly to him, and to
comfort him; telling him amongst other things, that he should fear nothing,
that no hurt should be done to him; on the contrary, that he should be well
treated, and therefore be of good courage; that he had caused his Father to be
put to death for no other reason, than that he was turned Kafer, and a Man
without Religion. Whereupon this young Prince returned him the Salem, and
blessed him, abasing his hands to the earth, and lifting them, as well as he
could, up to his head, after the custom of the Country; and told him with
resolution enough, That if he were to drink the Poust, he entreated him that he
might dye presently, being very willing to submit to his Fate. But Aureng-Zebe
promised him publicly, that he should drink none of it; that he should rest
satisfied as to that, and not entertain any sad thoughts about it. This being
said, he once more repeated the Salem: And after they had asked him several
Questions, in the Name of Aureng-Zebe, touching that Elephant which was charged
with Roupies of Gold, taken from him when he went to Serenaguer, he was sent to
Goualeor to the rest. This Poust is nothing else else but Poppy expressed, and
infused a night in water. And it is that potion, which those that are kept at
Goualeor, are commonly made to drink; I mean those Princes, whose heads they
think not fit to cut off: This is the first thing that is brought them in the
morning, and they have nothing given them to eat 'till they have drunk a great
cup full of it; they would rather let them starve. This emaciates them
exceedingly, and makes them dye insensibly, they losing little by little their
strength and understanding, and growing torpid and senseless. And by this very
means it is said, that Sepe-Chekouh, and the Grandchild of Morad-Bakche, and
Soliman-Chekouh, were dispatched.

As to Morad-Bakche, he was made away by a more violent death. For Aureng-Zebe
seeing, that though he was in prison, yet the generality had an inclination to
him, and that many Verses were spread in the praise of his Valor and Courage,
thought himself not safe enough by putting him to death in private, by giving
him Poust like others; apprehending, that his Death would be still doubted of,
and that that might one time or other occasion some commotion, and therefore
devised the following Charge against him.

The Children of a certain Said, very rich, whom he had caused to be put to
death in Amadevad, to get his Estate, when he there made his preparations for
War, and borrowed or took by force great Sums of Money from all the rich
Merchants, appeared in full Assembly, making their complaints, and demanding
Justice, and the Head of Morad-Bakche, for the Blood of their Father. Not one
of the Omrahs durst contradict it, both because he was a Said, that is, one of
Mahomet's Kindred, to whom great Veneration was paid; and that every body
sufficiently understood the design of Aureng-Zebe, taking this for a pretense
to rid himself openly of Morad-Bakche, under a show of Justice. So that the
Head of him, that had killed the Father of the Plaintiffs, was granted them
without any other form of Process. Whereupon they went, with necessary Orders
issued out for that purpose, to cut it off in Goualeor.

There remained no other Thorn in the Foot of Aureng-Zebe but Sultan Sujah, who
kept himself still in Bengale; but he also was forced to yield at last to the
power and fortune of Aureng-Zebe. There were sent so many Troops of all sorts
to Emir-Jemla, that at last he was encompassed on all sides, both on this and
that side of the River Ganges; so that he was necessitated to fly to Dake,
which is the last Town of Bengale on the Sea side; and here comes the
conclusion of this whole Tragedy.

This Prince being destitute of Ships to put to Sea, and not knowing whether to
slye, sent his eldest Son, Sultan-Banque, to the King of Racan or May, a
Heathen or Idolatrous King, to know whether he would give him leave to make his
Country his place of refuge only for some time, and do him the favor, when the
(...) or the Season-winds should come, to furnish him with a Vessel for M^^ha,
^^om thence to pass into some part of Turkey or Persia. That King sent answer*
that he should be very welcome, and have all possible assistance. So Sultan
Banque returned to Dake with some Galeasses, manned with Franguis (I mean, with
those fugitive Portugals, and other straggling Christians, that had put
themselves in service to that King, driving no other Trade than to ravage all
this lower Bengale; upon which Sultan Sujah embarked, with his whole Family,
viz. his Wife, his three Sons, and Daughters. They were well enough received;
whatever was necessary for their subsistence, such as that Country would
afford, was provided for them, in the name of that King. Some months pass, the
Season of the favorable Winds come in, but not a word of the Vessel, though he
demanded it no otherwise than for his Money; for as yet he wanted not Rupies of
Gold, nor Silver, nor G^ms: He had too great a plenty of them; his Riches were,
in all appearance, the cause of his ruin, or at least contributed much to it.
Those barbarous Kings have no true generosity, and are not much refrained by
the Faith they have given, regarding nothing but their present Interests,
without so much as considering the mischiefs that may befall them for their
perfidiousness and brutality. To get out of their hands, one must either be the
stronger, or have nothing that may tempt their avarice. Sultan Sujah may long
enough solicit for a Vessel; all is in vain, he effects nothing: On the
contrary, the King begins to show much coldness, and to complain of his not
coming to see him. I know not, whether Sultan Sujah thought it unworthy of
himself, and too mean a thing to give him a Visit; or rather, whether he
feared, that being in the Kings House he might not there be seized on, to take
away all his Treasure, and then be delivered into the hands of Emir-Jemla, who
for that purpose promised, in the name of Aureng-Zebe, great Sums of Money, and
many other considerable advantages. Whatever the matter was, he would not go
thither himself, but sent his Son Sultan Banque, who being near the Kings
House, began to show liberality to the people, throwing out to them a good
quantity of half Rupies, and whole Rupies, of Gold and Silver. And being come
before the King, he presented him with store of Embroideries, and of rare
pieces of Goldsmiths-work, set with precious Stones of great value, excusing
his Father, Sultan Sujah, as being indisposed, and beseeching him in his name,
that he would remember the Vessel, and the promise made to him thereof. But all
that did not advance his business; on the contrary, five or six days after,
this King sent to Sultan Sujah, to ask of him one of his Daughters in Marriage;
which he could never resolve to grant him, whereat this barbarous Prince was
highly offended. What then could he do in this case? The Season passes away.
What shall become of him? What other resolution can he take, but to do a
desperate Action? Behold a strange undertaking, which may give a great Example
of what Despair can do!

Although this King of Racan be an Heathen, yet there is in his Dominions store
of Mahumetans mingled with the people, that are retired thither, or have been,
for the most part, taken Slaves, here and there, by those Franguis
abovementioned. Sultan Sujah did und r-hand gain these Mahumetans; and with
two or three hundred Men, whom he had yet remaining of those that followed him
from Bengale, he resolved, one day to fall unpectedly upon the House of this
Barbarian, to kill all, and to make himself proclaimed King of Recan. This was
a very bold Enterprise, and such a one, as had more of a Desperado in it, than
of a prudent Man. Yet notwithstanding, as I was informed, and by what I could
learn from many Mahumetans, and Portugals, and Hollanders, that then were there
present, the thing was feasible enough. But the day before the stroke was to be
given, the Design was discovered; which did altogether overthrow the Affairs of
Sultan Sujah, and was soon after the cause of his ruin. For not finding
hereafter any way ^o^e to recover himself, he attempted to slye toward P^gu;
which was a thing in a manner impossible, by reason of the vast Mountains and
Forests to be passed. Besides, he was immediately pursued so close, that he
was overtaken the same day he fled. It may well be thought, that he defended
himself with as much courage as was possible. He killed so many of those
Barbarians, that it will scarce be believed, but he was so overpow'red by the
multitude of pursuers, that he was obliged to quit the Combat. Sultan Banque,
who was not so far advanced as his Father, defended him also like a Lion; but
at length, being all bloody of the wounds, by stones poured upon him from all
sides, he was seized on, and carried away, with his two little Brothers, his
Sisters, and Mother.

As to the Person of Sultan Sujah himself, all what could be learnt of it, is
this: That he, with one Woman, one Eunuch, and two other persons, got up to the
top of the Mountain; that he received a wound in his Head by a stone, which
struck him down, but yet he rose again* the Eunuch having wound his Head about
with his Turbant, and that they escaped through the midst of the Woods.

I have heard the Relation three or four other manner of ways, even by those
persons that were upon the place. Some did assure, that he had been found among
the dead, but was not well known: And I have seen a Letter of the Chief of the
Dutch Factory, confirming this. So that it is difficult enough to know aright
what is become him. And this it is, which has administered ground to those so
frequent Alarms, given us afterward at Dehli: For at one time it was rumored,
that he was arrived at Maslipatan, to join with the Kings of Golkonda and
Visapour; another time it was related for certain, that he had passed in sight
of Suratte with two Ships, bearing the Red Colors, which the King of Pegu, or
the King of Siam had given him; by and by, that he was in Persia, and had been
seen in Chiras, and soon after in Kandahar, ready to enter into the Kingdom of
Caboul it self. Aureng-Zebe one day said smiling, that Sultan Sujah was at last
become an Agy or Pilgrim. And at this very day there are abundance of persons
who maintain that he is in Persia, returned from Constantinople, whence he is
said to have brought with him much Money. But that which confirms more than
enough, that there is no ground for any of these reports, is that Letter of the
Hollanders; and that an Eunuch of his, with whom I traveled from Bengale to
Maslipatan, as also the Great Master of his Artillery; whom I saw in the
Service of the King of Golkonda, have assured me, that he is no more in being,
though they made difficulty to say any more concerning him; as also, that our
French Merchants, that lately came out of Persia and from Hispahan, when I was
yet at Dehli, had in those parts heard no news at all of him; besides that, I
have heard that a while after his Defeat, his Sword and Poynard had been found:
So that it is credible, that if he was not killed upon the place, he soon dyed
afterward, and was the prey of some Robbers, or Tigers, or Elephants, of which
the Forests of that Country are full. However it be, after this last Action
his whole Family was put in Prison, Wives, and Children, where they were
treated rudely enough; yet some time after they were set at more liberty, and
they received a milder entertainment: And then the King called for the eldest
Daughter, whom he married.

Whilst this was doing, some Servants of Sultan Banque, joined with diverse of
those Mahumetans which I have mentioned, went to plot another Conspiracy like
the first. But the day appointed for it being come, one of the Conspirators,
being half drunk, began too soon to break out. Concerning this also I have
heard forty different relations, so that it is very hard to know the truth of
it. That which is undoubted is this, that the King was at length so exasperated
against this unfortunate Family of Sujah, that he commanded it should be quite
rooted out. Neither did there remain any one of it, that was not put to death,
save that Daughter which the King had made his Wife. Sultan Banque, and his
Brothers, had their Heads cut off with blunt Axes; and the Women were mured up,
where they dyed of hunger and misery.

And thus ends this War, which the lust of Reigning had kindled among those
four Brothers, after it had lasted five or six years, from 1655, or thereabout,
to 1660 or 1661; which left Aureng-Zebe in the peaceable possession of this
puissant Empire.

The End of the FIRST TOME.
Particular Events:
OR, The most considerable Passages after the War for Five Years, or
thereabout, in the Empire of the GREAT MOGOL.
THE War being ended, the Tartars of Vsbec entertained thoughts of sending
Ambassadors to Aureng-Zebe. They had seen him fight in their Country, when he
was yet a young Prince; Chah-Jehan having sent him to command the Succors,
which the Kan of Samarkand had desired of him against the Kan of Balk. They had
experienced his Conduct and Valor on many occasions, and they considered with
themselves, that he could not but remember the Affront they did him, when he
was just taking Balk, the Capital Town of the Enemy: For the two Kans agreed
together, and obliged him to retreat, alleging, That they apprehended he might
render himself Master of their whole State, just as Ekbar had formerly done of
the Kingdom of Kachimere. Besides, they had certain intelligence of all he had
done in Indostan, of his Battles, Fortune, and Advantages; whence they might
sufficiently estimate, that though Chah-Jehan was yet living, yet Aureng-Zebe
was Master, and the only Person that was to be owned King of the Indies.
Whether then they feared his just resentments, or whether it was, that their
inbred Avarice and Sordidness made them hope for some considerable Present, the
two Kans sent to him their Ambassadors to offer him their Service, and to
Congratulate him upon the happy beginning of his Reign. Aureng-Zebe saw very
well, that the War being at an end, this offer was out of season, and that it
was nothing but fear or hope, as we said, that had brought them. Yet for all
this, he received them honorably; and, since I was present at their Audience,
I can relate the Particulars of it with certainty.

They made their Reverence at a considerable distance from him, after the
Indian custom, putting thrice their hands upon their heads, and as often
letting them down to the ground. Then they approached so near, that Aureng-Zebe
himself might very well have taken their Letters immediately from their hands;
but yet it was an Omrah that took and opened them, and gave them to him. He
forthwith read them with a very grave countenance; and afterward commanded,
there should be given to each of them an embroidered Vest, a Turbant, and a
Girdle of Silk in Embroidery, which is that which they call Ser-apah, that is,
an Habit from head to foot. After this, their Presents were called for, which
consisted in some Boxes of choice Lapis Lazulus, diverse Camels with long hair,
several gallant Horses, some Camel-loads of fresh Fruit, as Apples, Pears,
Raisins and Melons, (for it is chiefly Vsbec that furnishes these sorts of
Fruit, eaten at Dehli all the Winter-long;) and in many Loads of dry Fruit, as
Prunes of Bokara, Aprecocks, Raisms without any stones that appeared, and two
other sorts of Raisins, black and white, very large and very good.

Aureng-Zebe was not wanting to declare, how much he was satisfied with the
Generosity of the Kans, and much commended the Beauty and Rarity of the Fruit,
Horses, and Camels; and after he had a little entertained them of the state of
the Academy of Samarkand, and of the Fertility of their Country, abounding in
so many rare and excellent things, he desired them to go and repose themselves,
intimating withal, that he should be very glad to see them often.

They came away from their Audience full of contentment and joy, not being much
troubled, that they had been obliged to make their Reverence after the Indian
custom, though it have something of slavish in it; nor much resenting it, that
the King had not taken their Letters from their own hands. I believe if they
had been required to kiss the ground, and even to do something of a lower
nature, they would have complied with it. It Is true, it would have been in
vain, if they had desired to make no other Salute, but that of their own
Country, and to deliver to the King their Letters with their own hands; for
that belongs only to the Ambassadors of Persia, nor have these this favor
granted them, but with much difficulty.

They stayed above four months at Dehli, what diligence soever they could use
to be dispatched, which did incommode them very much; for they fell almost all
sick, and even some of them dyed, because they were not accustomed to such
heats as are in Indostan, or rather because they were sordid, and kept a very
ill Diet. I know not whether there be a more avaricious and uncleanly Nation
than they are. They laid up the Money which the King had appointed them for
their mainten^nce, and lived a very miserable life, altogether unworthy of
Ambassadors; yet they were dismissed with great honor: The King, in the
presence of all the Omrahs, presented each of them with two rich Ser-apahs, and
gave order that Eight thousand Rupies should be carried to their Lodgings,
which amounted to near Two thousand Crowns each. He also gave them for Presents
to the Kans their Masters, very handsome Ser-apahs, store of the richest and
best wrought Embroideries, a good quantity of fine Cloth, and Silk-stuffs,
wrought with Gold and Silver, and some Tapestries, and two Poynards set about
with precious stones.

During their stay, I went thrice to see them, being presented to them as a
Physician by one of my Friends, that was Son of an Vshec, that had made his
Fortune in that Court. I had a design to have learned something in particular
of their Country, but I found them so ignorant, that they knew not so much as
the Confines of their State, much less could they inform me of any thing
concerning the Tartars that have conquered China of late years: In short, they
told me nothing that I knew not before. I had once the Curiosity to dine with
them, which liberty I obtained easily enough. They are not Men of much
Ceremony; it was a very extraordinary Meal for such a one as I, it being mee^
Horseflesh; yet for all this I got my Dinner with them; there was a certain
Ragou, which I thought passable: And I was obliged to express a liking of so
exquisite a Dish, which they so much lust after. During Dinner, there was a
strange silence; they were very busy in carrying in with their whole hands,
for they know not what a Spoon is; but after that this Horseflesh had wrought
in their stomachs, they began to talk, and then they would persuade me, they
were the most dextrous at Bows and Arrows, and the strongest Men in the World.
They called for Bows, which are much bigger than those of Indostan, and would
lay a wager, to pierce an Ox or my Horse through and through. Then they
proceeded to commend the strength and valor of their Women, which they
described to me quite otherwise than the Amazons, telling me very wonderful
stories of them, especially one, which would be admirable indeed, if I could
relate it with a Tartarian Eloquence, as they did: They told me, that at the
time when Aureng-Zebe made War in their Country, a Party of Twenty five or
Thirty Indian Horsemen came to fall upon a small Village; whilst they plundered,
and tied all those whom they met with to make them Slaves, an old Woman said to
them, Children, be not so mischievous, my Daughter is not far off, she will be
here very shortly, retreat if you be wise, you are undone if she light upon
you. They laughed at the old Woman, and her Advice; and continued to load, to
tie, and to carry away her self; but they were not gone half a Mile, but this
old Woman, looking often backward, made a great outcry of Joy, perceiving her
Daughter coming after her on Horseback; and presently this generous She
Tartar, mounted on a furious Horse, her Bow and Arrows hanging at her side,
called to them at a distance, that she was yet willing to give them their
Lives, if they would carry back to the Village all they had taken, and then
withdraw without any noise. The Advice of this young Woman affected them as
little as that of her old Mother; but they were soon astonished, when they
found her let fly at them in a moment three or four great Arrows, which struck
as many of their Men to the ground, which forced them to fall to their Quivers
also. But she kept her self at that distance from them, that none of them could
reach her. She laughed at all their Effort, and at all their Arrows, knowing
how to attack them at the length of her Bow, and to take her measure from the
strength of her Arm, which was of another temper than theirs: So that after she
had killed half of them with her Arrows, and put them into disorder, she came
and fell upon the rest with the Zable in her hand, and cut them all in pieces.

The Ambassadors of Tartary were not yet gone away from Dehli, when Aureng-Zebe
fell exceeding sick; a violent and continued Fever made him sometimes lose his
understanding: His Tongue was seized with such a Palsy, that he lost almost
his speech, and the Physicians despaired of his Recovery; nothing was heard for
the time, than that he was gone, and that his Sister Rauchenara-Begum concealed
his death out of design. It was already bruited, that the Raja Jessomseigne,
Governor of Guzaratte, was on the way to deliver Chah-Jehan; that Mohabet-Kan
(who had at length obeyed the Orders of Aureng-Zebe) quitting the Government of
Caboul, and being already on this side Lahor to come back, made haste also with
Three or four thousand Horse for the same end; and that the Eunuch Etbar-kan,
who kept Chah-Jehan in the Fortress of Agra, would have the honor of his
delivery. On one side we see Sultan Mazum bestir himself exceedingly with
Bribes, endeavoring by Promises to assure himself of the Omrahs, so far, as
that one Night he went disguised to the Raja Jesseigne, entreating him with
expressions of deep respect, that he would engage himself for his interest.

We knew from other hands, that Rauchenara-Begum, together with Today-kan, the
great Master of Artillery, and many Omrahs, declared for the young Prince
Sultan Ekbar, the third Son of Aureng-Zebe, though he was but seven or eight
years old; both Parties in the mean time pretending, they had no other design
than to deliver Chah-Jehan: so that the People believed, that now he was going
to be set at liberty, though none of the Grandees had any such thing in their
thoughts, spreading this Rumor, only to gain Credit and Concourse, and because
they feared, lest by the means of Etbar-kan, or some other secret Intrigue, he
should one day appear in the Field. And indeed of all the Parties, there was
not one that had reason to wish for his liberty and restoration to the Throne,
except Jessomseigne, Mohabet-kan, and some others, that as yet had done no
great matter to his disadvantage. The rest had been all against him, at least
they had vilely abandoned him. They knew very well he would be like an
unchain'd Lion, if he came abroad: Who then could trust him? And what could
Etbar-kan hope for, who had kept him up so close? I know not, if by some
Adventure or other, he should have come cut of Prison, whether he would not
have stood single, and been alone of his Party.

But though Aureng-Zebe was very sick, yet for all this he gave order for all
things, and particularly for the sure custody of Chah-Jehan his Father; and
though he had advised Sultan Mazum to go and open the Gates to Chah-Jehan, in
case he should die, yet he omitted not to have Etbar-kan incessantly writ to.
And the fifth day, in the height of his sickness, he caused himself to be
carried into the Assembly of the Omrahs to show himself, and to disabuse those
who might believe him to be dead, and to obviate popular Tumults, or such
Accidents as might have caused Chah-Jehan to be set at liberty. The seventh,
ninth, and tenth day, he made himself to be carried again into the said
Assembly for the same reason; and, what is almost incredible, the thirteenth,
after he had recollected himself from a Fit of Swooning, which occasioned a
rumor through the whole Town of his being dead, he called for two or three of
the greatest Omrahs, and the Raja Jesseigne, to let them see that he was alive,
made himself to be raised in his Bed, called for Ink and Paper to write to
Etbar-kan, and sent for the Great Seal, which he had trusted with
Rauchenara-Bagum, and commonly enclosed in a small Bag, sealed with a Seal he
always wore about his Arm, fearing lest she had already made use of it for her
designs. I was nigh my Agah, when all this News was told him, and I understood,
that lifting up his hands to Heaven, he said, What a Soul is this? A matchless
Fortitude and Courage of Spirit! God preserve thee Aureng-Zebe, for greater
things, certainly he will not that thou should yet die. And indeed after
this Fit, he recovered by little and little.

He had no sooner recovered his health, but he sought to get out of the hands
of Chah-Jehan, and Begum-Saheb, the Daughter of Dara, to secure the Marriage of
Sultan-Ekhar, his third Son, with this Princess, on purpose thereby to gain him
Authority, and to give him the greater right to the Empire: For he it is, who
is thought to be by him designed for it. He is yet very young, but he has many
near and powerful Relations at the Court, and is born of the Daughter of
Chah-Navaze-kan, and consequently of the Blood of the Ancient Sovereigns of
Machate; whereas Sultan Mahmoud and Sultan Mazum are only Sons of Ragipontnis,
or Daughters of Raja's. These Kings, though Mahumetans, do, for all that, marry
of the Daughters of the Heathen, either for State-interest, or for
extraordinary Beauty. But Aureng-Zebe, was disappointed in this design: It will
hardly be believed, with what height and fierceness of spirit Chah-Jehan and
Begum rejected the Proposition, and the young Princess her self, who, in the
fear of being carried away, was for some days desperate, and protested she
would rather kill her self an hundred times over, if it were possible, than to
marry the Son of him that had murdered her Father.

He had no better satisfaction from Chah-Jehan about certain Jewels which he
asked of him, in order to finish a piece of work which he caused to be added to
a famous Throne, which is so highly esteemed. For he fiercely answered, That
Aureng-Zebe should take no other Care, but to rule better than he did; that he
should let his Throne alone; that he was weary to hear of these Jewels; and
that the Hammers were ready to beat them to dust, the first time he should be
importuned again about them.

The Hollanders would not be the last in doing Reverence to Aureng-Zebe: they
had thoughts of sending an Ambassador to him. They pitched upon Monsieur
Adrican, the Commander of their Factory at Suratte; and being a right honest
man, and of good sense and judgment, not neglecting to take the counsel of his
Friends, he well acquitted himself of this Employment. Aureng-Zebe, though he
carries it very high, and affects to appear a zealous Mahumetan, and
consequently to despise the Franguis, or Christians, yet thought fit to receive
them with much Respect and Civility. He even was desirous, that this Ambassador
should complement him in the mode of the Franguis, after he had been made to do
it the Indian way. It Is true, he received his Letters by the hand of an Omrah;
but that was not to be taken for any Contempt, he having showed no more Honor
to the Ambassadors of Vsbec. After this, he intimated to him, that he might
produce his Present; and at the same time he caused him, and some of his Train,
to be dressed with a Ser-Apah embroidered. The Present consisted of store of
very fine Scarlet, some large Looking-glasses, and diverse excellent pieces of
Chinese and Japonese work, among which there was a Paleky, and a Tack^avan, or
a Field-Throne of admirable workmanship.

This Ambassador was not so soon dispatched as he wished, it being the Custom
of the Kings of Mogol to detain Ambassadors as long as they well can, from a
belief they have, that it is the interest of their Greatness, to oblige
Strangers to give long Attendance at their Court; yet he was not kept so long
as the Ambassadors of Vsbec. Mean time he had the misfortune, that his
Secretary died there, and the rest of his Retinue began to grow sick. When the
King dismissed him, he gave him such another Ser-Apah embroidered, as the first
was for himself; and another, a very rich one, for the General of Batavia,
together with a Poynard, set about with Jewels, all accompanied with a very
obliging Letter.

The chief Aim of the Hollanders in this Embassy was, to make themselves
immediately known to the King, thereby to gain Credit, and to intimidate the
Governors of the Seaports, and other places, where they have their Factories;
that so they may not attempt, when they please, to insult over them, or to
trouble them in their Trade; thereby letting them know, that they had to do
with a potent Nation, and that has a door open to address themselves, and to
complain immediately to the King. Their End also was, to make it appear, what
interest the King had in their Commerce; and therefore they showed long Rolls
of Commodities, bought up by them through the whole Kingdom, and Lists of
considerable Sums of Gold and Silver* every year brought thither by them; but
saying not a word of those which they draw thence, from the Copper, Lead,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Muscadin, Pepper, Wood of Aloes, Elephants, and other
Commodities which they vend there.

About this time, one of the most considerable Omrahs of Aureng-Zebe addressed
himself to him, and represented, that this multitude and variety of perplexing
Affairs, and this perpetual Attention of mind in him, might soon cause a great
Alteration in his Temper, and a dangerous Inconvenience in his Health. But
Aureng-Zebe, seeming to take almost no notice of what that Omrah said, turned
himself another way, and approaching to another of the prime Omrahs of the
Court, a person of great knowledge and judgment, spoke to him in this purpose
(as I was informed by the Son of this Lord, who was my Friend.)

You other Sages, are you not all of the mind, that there are times and
conjunctions so urgent, that a King ought to hazard his life for his Subjects,
and sacrifice himself for their defense with Arms in his hands? And yet this
effeminate Man would dissuade me from taking pains, and dehort me from watching
and solicitude for the Public; and carry me by pretenses of Health, to the
thoughts of an easy life, by abandoning the Government of my People, and the
management of Affairs, to some Visir or other. Does he not know, that
Providence having given me a Royal Extraction, and raised me to the Crown of
Indostan, has not made me for my self alone, but for the good and safety of
the Public, and for the procurement of Tranquillity and Happiness to my
Subjects, as far as that may be obtained by Justice and Power? He sees not the
consequence of his Counsels, and what mischiefs do attend Visirships. Does he
think it to be without reason, what our Grand Sady has so generously
pronounced, O Kings, cease, cease to be Kings, or govern your Kingdoms your
selves? Go tell thy Countryman, that I shall well like of the care he is
constantly to take of the faithful discharge of his Place; but advise him also,
not any more to run out himself so far as he has done. We have natural
inclination enough to a long, easy, and careless life, and there need no
Counselors to shake off business and trouble. Our Wives, that lie in our
bosom, do too often, besides our own genius, incline us that way.

At the same time there happened an Accident, that made a great noise at Dehli,
especially in the Seraglio, and disabused a great many, that could as hardly
believe as my self, that Eunuchs, though they had their Genitals quite cut
away, could become amorous as other men. Didar-kan, one of the chief Eunuchs of
the Seraglio, who had built an house, where he came often to divert himself,
fell in love with a very beautiful Woman, the Sister of a Neighbor of his, that
was an Heathen Scrivener.

These Amors lasted a good while, before any Body blamed them, since it was
but an Eunuch that made them, which sort of men have the privilege to go where
they please; but the familiarity grew so great, and so extraordinary betwixt
the two Lovers, that the Neighbors began to suspect something, and to rally the
Scrivener, which did so touch him, that he threatened both his Sisters and the
Eunuch to kill them, if they should continue their Commerce. And soon after,
finding them in the Night lying together, he stabbed the Eunuch outright, and
left his Sister for dead. The whole Seraglio, Women and Eunuchs, made a League
together against him to make him away; but Aureng-Zebe dissipated all these
machinations, and was content to have him turn Mahumetan. Mean time it is
thought, he cannot long avoid the malice and power of the Eunuchs; for it is
not, as is the common saying, with Men as with Brutes; these latter become
gentler and more tractable when they are castrated; but men more vicious, and
commonly very insolent, though sometimes it turns to an admirable Fidelity
and Gallantry.

It was also about the same time, that Aureng-Zebe was somewhat discontented
with Rauchenara-Begum, because she was suspected to have given Access to two
young Gallants into the Seraglio, who were discovered, and brought before
Aureng-Zebe. Yet this being but a suspicion, he expressed to her no great
resentment of it; nor did he make use of so great rigor and cruelty against
those poor men, as Chah-Jehan had done against the person above spoken of. The
matter was related to me by an old Portuguese Woman (that had a long while been
Slave to the Seraglio, and went out and in at pleasure) as follows: She told
me that Rauchenara-Begum, after she had drawn from a young man, hidden by her,
all his Ability, delivered him to some Women, to convey him away in the Night
thorough some Gardens, and so to save him: But whether they were discovered, or
whether they feared they should be so, or what else might be the cause, they
fled, and left him there wandering in the midst of those Gardens, not knowing
which way to get out: And being at last met with, and brought before
Aureng-Zebe, who examined him strictly, but could draw nothing else from him,
than that he was come in over the walls, he was commanded to get out the same
way by which he entered: But it seems, the Eunuchs did more than Aureng-Zebe had
given order for, for they cast him down from the top of the walls to the
bottom. As for the other young Gallant, this same Woman assured me, that he was
found wandering in the Garden like the first; and having confessed that he was
come in by the Gate, Aureng-Zebe commanded likewise, that he also should pass
away again by the same Gate; yet reserving to himself a severe chastisement for
the Eunuchs, since not only the honor of the Royal House, but also the safety
of the King's person is herein concerned.

Some months after, there arrived at Dehli several Ambassadors, almost at the
same time. The first was Xerif of Meccha, whose Present did consist in some
Arabian Horses: The second and third Ambassadors were, he of the King of
Hyeman, or Happy Arabia, and he of the Prince of Bassora, who likewise
presented Arabian Horses. The two remaining Ambassadors were sent from the King
of Ethiopia. To the three first no great regard was given; they appeared in so
miserable and confused an Equipage, that it was perceived they came only to get
some money by the means of their Present, and of the many Horses, and other
Merchandise, which under the pretense of Ambassadors, entered without paying any
Duty into the Kingdom, there to be sold, and to buy for the money a quantity of
Indian Stuffs, and so to return, without paying likewise any Impost at all.

But as to the Ethiopian Embassy, that deserves to be otherwise taken notice
of; the King of Ethiopia having received the News of the Revolution of the
Indies, had a design to spread his Name in those Parts, and there to make known
his Grandeur and Magnificence, by a splendid Embassy: Or, as Malice will have
it, or rather as the very truth is, to reap some Advantage by a Present as well
as the rest. Behold therefore this great Embassy! He chose for his Ambassadors
two persons, that one would think were the most considerable in his Court, and
the most capable to make such a Design prosper. And who were they? The one was
a Mahumetan Merchant, whom I had seen some years ago at Moka, when I passed
there coming out of Egypt over the Red Sea, where he was to sell some Slaves
for that Prince, and to buy of the money, raised thence, some Indian
Commodities. And this is the fine Trade of that great Christian King of Africa.
The other was a Christian Merchant of Armenia, born and married in Aleppo,
known in Aethiopia by the name of Murat. I had seen him also at Moka, where he
had accommodated me with the half of his Chamber, and assisted me with very
good Advice, whereof I have spoken in the beginning of this History, as a thing
taking me off from passing into Ethiopia, according to my first design. He also
came every year to that place, in that King's Name, for the same end that the
Mahumetan did, and brought the Present which the King made every year, to the
Gentlemen of the English and Dutch Company of the East Indies, and carried away
theirs. Now the King of Ethiopia, sutably to his design, and the desire he had
of making his Ambassadors appear with great Splendour, put himself to great
Expenses for this Embassy: He gave them Thirty two young Slaves, of both
Sexes, to sell them at Moka, and thence to make a Sum of Money to bear their
Charges. A wonderful Largess! Slaves are commonly sold there for Twenty five or
thirty Crowns apiece, one with another. A considerable Sum. Besides, he gave
them for a Present to the Great Mogol Five and twenty choice Slaves, among
which there were nine or ten very young, proper to make Eunuchs of. A very
worthy Present for a King, and he a Christian, to a Mahumetan Prince! It seems
the Christianity of the Ethiopians is very different from ours. He added to
that Present, twelve Horses, esteemed as much as those of Arabia, and a kind of
little Mule, of which I saw the Skin, which was a very great Rarity, there
being no Tiger so handsomely speckled, nor Silken Stuff of India so finely, so
variously, and so orderly streaked, as that was. Moreover, there were for a
part of the Present, two Elephants teeth, so prodigious, that they assured it
was all that a very able bodied man could do, to lift up one of them from the
ground. Lastly, an Horn of an Ox full of Civett, and so big, that the Aperture
of it being measured by me, when it came to Dehli, it had a Diameter of Half a
Foot, and somewhat better. All things being thus prepared, the Ambassadors
depart from Gondez, the Capital of Ethiopia, situated in the Province of
Dambea, and came through a very troublesome Country to Beiloul, which is a
dispeopled Seaport over against Moka, nigh to Babel-mandel, not daring to come
(for Reasons elsewhere to be alleged) the ordinary way of the Caravans, which
is made with ease in Forty days to Arkiko, and thence to pass to the Isle of
Masoua. During their stay at Beiloul, and expecting a Bark of Moka, to wast
over the Red Sea, there died some of their Slaves, because the Vessel tarried,
and they found not in that place those refreshments that were necessary for
them. When they came to Moka, they soon sold their Merchandise, to raise a
Stock of Money according to order. But they had this ill luck, that that year
the Slaves were very cheap, because the Market was glutted by many other
Merchants, yet they raised a Sum to pursue their Voyage: They Embarked upon an
Indian Vessel to pass to Suratte; their Passage was pretty good; they were not
above Five and twenty days at Sea; but whether it was that they had made no
good provision for want of stock, or what else the cause might be, many of
their Slaves and Horses, as also the Mule, whereof they saved the Skin, died.
They were no sooner arrived at Suratte, but a certain Rebel of Visapour,
called* Seva-Gi, came and ransacked and burned the Town, and in it their House,
so that they could save nothing but their Letters, some Slaves that were sick,
or which Seva-Gi could not light on, their Ethiopian Habits which he cared not
for, and the Mule's Skin, and the Ox's Horn, which was already emptied of the
Civett. They did very much exaggerate their misfortune; but those malicious
Indians that had seen them arrive in such a wretched condition, without
Provisions, without Habits, without Money, or Bills of Exchange, said, that
they were very happy, and should reckon the Plunder of Suratte for a piece of
their best Fortune, forasmuch as Seva-Gi had saved them the labor of bringing
their miserable Present to Dehli, and had furnished them with a very specious
pretense for their beggarly condition, and for the sale they had made of their
Civett, and of some of their Slaves, and for demanding of the Governor of
Suratte Provisions for their subsistence, as also some Money and Chariots to
continue their Voyage to Dehli. Monsieur Adrican, chief of the Dutch Factory,
my Friend, had given to the Armenian Murat a Letter of Recommendation to me,
which he delivered himself at Dehli, not remembering that I had been his Host at
Moka. It was a very pleasant meeting when we came to know one another, after
the space of five or six years. I embraced him affectionately, and promised him
that I would serve him in whatever I could; but that, though I had Acquaintance
at the Court, it was impossible for me to do them any considerable good Office
there: For since they had not brought with them any valuable Present, but only
the Mule's Skin, and the empty Ox's Horn, and that they were seen going upon
the streets without any Paleky or Horses, save that of our Father Missionary,
and mine (which they had almost killed) clothed like Beggars, and followed
with seven or eight Slaves, bare-headed and barefoot, having nothing but an
ugly Sharse tied between their Legs, with a ragged Cloth over their Left
Shoulder, passing under their Left Arm like a Summer-Cloak; since, I said, they
were in such a posture, whatever I could say for them was insignificant; they
were taken for Beggars, and no body took other notice of them. Yet
notwithstanding I said so much of the Grandeur of their King to my Agah
Danechmendkan, who had cause to hearken to me, as managing all Foreign Affairs
there, that Aureng-Zebe gave them Audience, received their Letters, presented
them each with an Embroidered Vest, a Silken Embroidered Girdle, and a Turbant
of the same, gave order for their Entertainment, and dispatched them in a
little time, and that with more honor than there was ground to expect: For in
dismissing them, he presented them each with another such Vest, and with 6000
Rupies for them all, which amounts to about 3000 Crowns, of which the
Mahumetan had four thousand, and Murat, because a Christian, but two thousand.
He also gave them for a Present to their Master a very rich Ser-apah or Vest,
two great silver and gilt Trumpets, two silver Tymbals, a Poynard covered with
Jewels, and the value of about twenty thousand Francs in golden and silver
Rupies, to let their King see Money coined, as a Rarity he had not in his
Country: But Aureng-Zebe knew very well, that these Rupies would not go out of
the Kingdom, and that they were like to buy Commodities for them: And it fell
out so; for they laid them out, partly in fine Cotton Cloth, to make shirts of
for their King, Queen, and their only lawful Son that is to be the Successor;
partly in silken Stuffs streaked with Gold or Silver, to make Vests and
Summer-Drawers of; partly in English Scarlet, to make two Arabian Vests of for
their King also; and lastly, in Spices, and in store of coarser Cloth, for
diverse Ladies of his Seraglio, and for the Children he had by them, all without
paying any Duty.

For all my friendship with Murat, there were three things that made me almost
repent to have served them. The first, because Murat having promised me to
leave with me for 50 Rupies, a little Son of his, that was very pretty, of a
delicate black, and without such a swelled Nose, or such thick Lips as commonly
the Ethiopians have, broke his word with me, and let me know, that he should
take no less for him than 300 Rupies. For all this, I had thoughts of buying
him, for Rarity's sake, and that I might say, a Father had sold me his Son. The
second, because I found that Murat, as well as the Mahumetan, had obliged
themselves to Aureng-Zebe, that they would employ their interest with their
King, that he might permit in Ethiopia to rebuild an old Mosquee ruined in the
time of the Portugals, and which had been built for a Tomb of a great Dervich,
which went from Mecha into Ethiopia, for the propagation of Mahumetanism, and
there made great progress. They received of Aureng-Zebe two thousand Rupies for
this Engagement. This Mosquee had been pulled down by the Portugals, when they
came with their Succors into Ethiopia, which the then King, who turned
Catholic, had asked of them against a Mahumetan Prince, invading his Kingdom.
The third, because they desired Aureng-Zebe, in the name of their King, to give
them an Alcoran, and eight other Books, which I well remember, were of the most
reputed in the Mahumetan Religion: Which proceeding seemed to me very unworthy
of a Christian Ambassador, and Christian King, and confirmed to me what I had
been told at Moka, that the Christianity of Ethiopia must needs be some odd
thing; that it savors much of Mahumetanism, and that the Mahumetans increase
exceedingly in that Empire, especially since the Portugals, that came in there
for the Reason lately expressed, were either killed, upon the death of the
King, by the Cabal of the Queen Mother, or expelled together, with the
Patriarch Jesuit, whom they had brought along from Goa.

During the time that the Ambassadors were at Dehli, my Agah, who is more than
ordinary curious, made them often come to him, when I was present, to inform
himself of the State and Government of their Country, and principally to learn
something of the source of the Nile, which they call Ababile, of which they
discoursed to us as a thing so well known, that no body doubted of it. Murat
himself, and a Mogol, who was returned out of Ethiopia with him, had been
there, and told us very near the same Particulars with those I had received of
it at Moka, viz. That the Nile had its Origin in the Country of Agam; that it
issued out of the Earth by two Springs bubling up, near to one another, which
did form a little Lake of about thirty or forty paces long; that coming out of
this Lake, it did make a considerable River: and that from space to space, it
received small Rivers increasing it. They added, that it went on circling, and
making as 'twere a great Isle; and that afterward it tumbled down from steep
Rocks into a great Lake, in which there were diverse fruitful Isles, store of
Crocodiles, and (which would be remarkable enough, if true) abundance of
Sea-Calves, that have no other vent for their Excrements than that, by which
they take in their food; this Lake being in the Country of Dambea, three small
days journey from Gondar, and four or five days journey from the source of the
Nile. And lastly, that this River did break out of this Lake, being augmented
with many River-waters, and with several Torrents falling into it, especially
in the rainy Season, (which do regularly begin there, as in the Indies about
July, which is very considerable and convincing for the inundation of the Nile)
and so runs away through Sonnar, the capital City of the King of Fungi,
Tributary to the King of Ethiopia, and from thence passes to the Plains of
Mesre, which is Egypt.

The Ambassadors were not wanting to say more than was liked on the subject of
their King's Greatness, and of the strength of his Army, but the Mogolian did
not overmuch agree with them in it; and in their absence represented to us
this Army, which he had seen twice in the Field, with the Ethiopian King on the
head of it, as the most wretched thing in the world.

They also related to us diverse Particulars of that Country, which I have put
in my Journal, one day perhaps to be digested and copied: In the mean time I
shall insert here three or four things which Murat told me, because I esteem
them very extravagant for a Christian Kingdom. He said then, that there were
few men in Ethiopia, who besides their lawful Wife, had not many others, and
himself owned that he had two, without reckoning her which he had left at
Aleppo: That the Ethiopian Women did not so hide themselves, as they do in the
Indies among the Mahumetans, nor even as among the Gentiles: That those of the
meaner sort of People, Maids, or married Women, Slaves or Free, were often
together pell-mell, night and day, in the same Chamber, without those
jealousies so common in other Countries: That the Women of Lords did not stick
much to go into the house of a simple Cavalier, whom they knew to be a Man of
Execution: That if I had gone into Ethiopia, they would soon have obliged me to
marry, as they had done, a few years since, to a certain European, who named
himself a Greek Physician: That an ancient man, of about fourscore years of
age, did one day present to the King fourscore Sons, all of age, and able to
bear Arms; and that the King asked him, Whether he had no more but them? To
whom having answered, No, but only some Daughters, the King sent him away with
this reproach; Be gone, thou Calf, and be ashamed for having no more Children
at that age, as if Women were wanting in my Dominions! That the King himself
had at least fourscore Sons and Daughters running about pell-mell in the
Seraglio, for whom he had caused to be made a number of round vernished sticks,
made like a little maze; those Children being fond of having that in their hand
like a Scepter, distinguishing them from those that were Children of Slaves, or
from others living in that place.

Aureng-Zebe sent also twice for these Ambassadors, for the same reason that my
Agah did, and especially to enquire after the state of Mahumetanism in that
Country. He had also the curiosity of Viewing the skin of the Mule, which
remained, I know not how, in the Fortress amongst the Officers; which was to me
a great mortification, because they had designed it for me for the good
services I had done them. I made account to have one day presented it to some
very curious person in Europe. I urged often, that together with the Mules
skin, they should carry the great Horn to Aureng-Zebe, to show it him; but they
feared, least he should make a question, which would have perplexed them; viz.
how it came to pass, that they had saved the Horn from the plunder of Suratte,
and lost the Civet?

Whilst these Ambassadors of Ethiopia were at Dehli, it came to pass that
Aureng-Zebe called together his Privy Council, and the most learned persons of
his Court, to choose a new Master for his third Son, Sultan Eckbar, whom he
designed for his Successor. In this Council he showed the passion he has to
have this young Prince well Educated, and to make him a great Man. Aurenge-Zebe
is not ignorant of what importance it is, and how much it is to be wished, that
as much as Kings surmount others in Greatness, they may also exceed them in
Virtue and Knowledge. He also well knows, that one of the principal sources of
the Misery, of the mis-Government, of the un-Peopling, and the decay of the
Empires of Asia proceeds from thence, that the children of the Kings thereof
are brought up only by Women and Eunuchs, which often are no other than
wretched Slaves of Russia, Circassia, Mingrelia, Gurgistan and Ethiopia; mean
and servile, ignorant and insolent souls. These Princes become Kings, when they
are of Age, without being instructed, and without knowing what it is to be a
King; amazed when they begin to come abroad out of the Seraglio, as persons
coming out of another World, or let out of some subterraneous Cave, where they
had lived all their life time; wondering at every thing they meet, like so many
Innocents; believing all, and fearing all, like Children, or nothing at all, as
if they were stupid: And all this, according to their Nature, and suitable to
the first Images imprinted upon them; commonly high and proud, and seemingly
grave, but of that kind of pride and gravity, which is so flat and distasteful,
and so unbecoming them, than one may plainly see, it is nothing but brutality or
barbarousness, and the effect of some ill-studied, and ill-digested Documents;
or else they fall into some childish civilities, yet more unsavory; or into
such cruelties, as are blind and brutal; or into that mean and gross vice of
drunkenness, or into an excessive and altogether unreasonable Luxury, either
ruining their bodies and understandings with their Concubines, or altogether
abandoning themselves to the pleasures of Hunting, like some carniverous
Animals, preferring a pack of Dogs before the life of so many poor people, whom
they force to follow them in the pursuit of their Game, and suffer to perish of
hunger, heat, cold, and misery. In a word, they always run into some extreme or
other, being altogether irrational and extravagant, according as they are
carried by their natural temper, or by the first impressions that are given
them; thus remaining, almost all, in a strange ignorance of what concerns the
state of the Kingdom; the reins of the Government being abandoned to some
Visir, who entertains them in their ignorance and in their passions, which are
the two strongest supports he can have to rule always according to his own
mind, with most assurance, and the least contradiction; and given over also to
those Slaves their Mothers, and to their Eunuchs, who often know nothing but to
continue plots of cruelty, whereby they strangle and banish one another, and
sometimes the Visirs, and even the Grand Signors themselves; so that no man
whatsoever, that has any Estate, can be in safety of his life.

But to return; after all these Ambassadors, which we have spoken of, there
came at last news, that the Ambassador of Persia was upon the Frontiers. The
Persian Omrahs, that are at the service of the Mogol, spread a rumor that he
came for affairs of great importance; though intelligent persons much doubted
of a Commission of that nature, considering that the time of great conjunctures
was passed, and that those Omrahs, and the other Persians did what they did,
rather to make a show, than for any thing else. Mean time, on the day of the
Entry, this Ambassador was received with all possible respect: The Bazars,
through which he passed, were all new-painted, and the Cavalry attending on the
way for above the length of a whole League. Many Omrah's accompanied him with
Music, Tymbals and Trumpets, and when he entered into the Fortress, or the
Palace of the King, the Guns went off. Aureng-Zebe received him with much
civility, and was content he should make his Address to him after the Persian
mode, receiving also, without any scruple, immediately from his hands the
Letters of his King; which, out of respect, he lifted up even to his head, and
afterward read them with a grave and serious countenance: Which done, he
caused an embroidered Vest to be brought, together with a rich Turbant and
Girdle, commanding it to be put on him in his presence. A little after, it was
intimated to him, that he might order his Present to be brought in, which
consisted of five and twenty as handsome Horses as ever I saw, led, and covered
with embroidered trapings; and of twenty very stately and lusty Camels, as big
as Elephants: Moreover, of a good number of Boxes, said to be full of most
excellent Rose Water; and of a certain distilled water, very precious, and
esteemed highly cordial; besides, there were displayed five or six very rich
and very large Tapisseries, and some embroidered pieces exceeding noble,
wrought in small flowers, so fine and delicate, that I know not whether in all
Europe any such can be met with. To all this were added four Damaskin'd Swords,
with as many Poynards, all covered with Jewels; as also five or six Harnasses
of Horses, which were much esteemed, being also very fine and rich, the stuff
being raised with rich Embroidery set with small Pearls, and very fair
Turcoises of the old Rock.

It was observed, that Aureng-Zebe beheld this Present very attentively; that
he admired the beauty and rarity of every piece, and that several times he
extolled the Generosity of the King of Persia; assigning to the Ambassador a
place among his chief Omrahs. And after he had entertained him a while with a
discourse about the inconveniences and hardships of his Voyage, he dismissed
him, and made instance, that he should come every day to see him.

During the four or five Months that the Ambassador staid at Dehli, he was
always splendidly treated at Aureng-Zebe's charge; and the greatest Omrahs
presented him one after another; and at last he was very honorably dismissed:
For Aureng-Zebe had him apparelled with another rich Serapah or Vest, to which
he added considerable presents for himself, reserving those he intended for his
King, 'till he should send an Ambassador expressly; which some time after he did.

Notwithstanding all these testimonies of honor and respect which Aureng-Zebe
had showed to this Ambassador, the same Persians, above spoken of, gave out,
that their King had sensibly reproached him in his Letters, with the Death of
Dara, and the Imprisonment of Chah-Jehan, as actions unworthy of a Brother, and
a Son, and a Musulman; and that he had also hit him with the word Alem-Guire,
or Conqueror of the World, which Aureng-Zebe had caused to be engraven on his
Coin. But it is hard to believe, that the King of Persia should do any such
thing to provoke such a Victorious Prince, since Persia is not in a condition
to enter into a War with Indostan; I am rather apt to believe, that Persia has
work enough to keep Kandahar on the side of Indostan, and the Frontiers on the
side of Turkey: Its Forces and Riches are known; it produces not always such
great Kings as the Chah-Abbas, Valiant, Intelligent, and Politic, knowing to
make use of every thing, and to do much with small expenses. If it were in a
condition of undertaking any thing against Indostan, or really sensible of
Piety and the Musal-Man Faith, why was it that in these last troubles and Civil
Wars, which continued so long in Indostan, the Persians sat still and looked
on, when Dara, Chan-Jehan, Sultan Sujah, and perhaps the Governor of Caboul
desired their assistance; and they might with no very great Army, nor great
expenses have seized on the fairest part of India, beginning from the Kingdom
of Caboul, unto the River Indus, and beyond it, and so made themselves Umpires
of all things? yet notwithstanding there must needs have been some offensive
Expressions in those Persian Letters, or else the Ambassador must have done or
said something that displeased Aureng-Zebe; because two or three days after he
had dismissed him, he made a rumor to be spread abroad, that the Ambassador had
caused the Ham-strings of the presented Horses to be Cut; And the Ambassador
being yet upon the Frontiers, he made him return all the Indian Slaves which he
carried along with him, of which he had a prodigious number.

Mean while, Aureng-Zebe was not so much concerned, nor troubled himself so
much with this Ambassador, as Chah-Jehan, upon a like occasion, did with him,
that was sent to him from the great Chah-Abbas. When the Persians are in the
humor of Rallying against the Indians, they relate these three or four little
Stories of them: They say, That Chah-Jehan seeing that the Courtship and
Promises made to their Ambassador were not able to prevail with him, so as to
make him perform his Salute after the Indian Mode, he devised this Artifice; he
commanded to shut the great Gate of the Court of the Amkas, where he was to
receive him, and to leave only open the Wicket, through which one man could not
pass but very difficultly, by stooping and holding down his Head, as the
fashion is, when one makes an Indian Reverence, to the end that it might be
said, he had made the Ambassador put himself in a posture, which was something
lower than the Indian Salam, or Salute; but that that Ambassador being aware of
this trick, came in with his Back foremost: And that Chah-Jehan, out of
indignation to see himself caught, told him, Eh Bed-bakt, Thou Wretch, do
thou think thou come into a Stable of Asses, such as thou art? And that the
Ambassador, without any alteration, answered, Who would not think so, seeing
such a little Door?

Another story is this; That at a certain time Chah-Jehan taking ill some
coarse and fierce Answers returned to him by the Persian Ambassador, could not
hold to tell him, What, has Chah-Abbas no other men at his Court, that he must
send to me such a Fool as thy self? And that the Ambassador answered, He has
many better and wiser than me, but to such a King, such an Ambassador. They
add, That on a certain day Chah-Jehan, who had made the Ambassador to dine in
his Presence, and sought some occasion to affront him, seeing that he was busy
in picking and gnawing of Bones, asked him smiling, Eh Eltchy-Gi, My Lord
Ambassador, What shall the Dogs eat? And that he answered readily, Kichery,
that is, a Dish of Pulse, which is the food of the meaner sort of People, and
which he saw Chah-Jehan eat, because he loved it.

They say also, That Chah-Jehan once asked him, What he thought of his new
Dehli (which he was building) in comparison of Hispahan? And that he answered
aloud, and with an Oath, Billah, Billah, Hispahan does not come near the dust
of Dehli; which Chah-Jehan took for a high Commendation, though the Ambassador
mocked him, because the dust is so troublesome at Dehli.

Lastly, They relate that Chah-Jehan one day pressing him to tell him, What he
thought of the Grandeur of the Kings of Indostan, compared to that of the Kings
of Persia? He answered, That, in his opinion, one could not better compare the
Kings of India than to a large Moon of 15 or 16 days old, and those of Persia,
to a small Moon of two or three days. And that this Answer did at first please
Chah-Jehan, but that soon after he perceived, that that Comparison did him but
little honor, the Ambassador's sense being, that the Kings of Indostan were
decreasing, and those of Persia increasing.

Whether these Points are so commendable, and such marks of Wit, every one is
free to judge, as he sees cause. My opinion is, That a discreet and respectful
Gravity is much more becoming Ambassadors, than Rallery and Roughness,
especially, when they have to do with Kings, who will not be rallied with,
witness an Accident that befell this very Ambassador; for Chah-Jehan was at
length so weary of him, and his freedom, that he called him no otherwise than
Fool; and one day gave secret order, that when he should enter into a pretty
long and narrow Street, that is near the Fortress, to come to the Hall of the
Assembly, they should let loose upon him an ill-conditioned and fierce
Elephant; and certainly, if the Ambassador had not nimbly leapt out of his
Paleky, and, together with his dextrous Attendants, shot some Arrows into the
Trunk of the Elephant, which forced him to turn back, he had been utterly
spoiled.

It was at this time, upon the departure of the Persian Ambassador, that
Aureng-Zebe received with that admirable wisdom his Tutor Mallah-Sale, the
History of which is rare and considerable. This old man, who long since had
retired himself toward Caboul, and settled himself on some Lands, which
Chah-Jehan had given him, had no sooner heard of the great fortune of
Aureng-Zebe his Discipline, who had overcome Dara and all his other Brothers,
and was now King of Indostan, but he came in haste to the Court, swelled with
hopes of being presently advanced to no less than the dignity of an Omrah. He
makes his Court, and endeavors to engage all his Friends, and
Rauchenara-Begum, the King's Sister, employs her self for him. But yet there
pass three whole Months, that Aureng-Zebe does not so much as seem to look upon
him; till at length wearied to have him always at his Elbow, and before his
Face, he sent for him to a place apart, where there was no body but
Hakim-lul-Mouluk, Danechmend-kan, and three or four of those Omrahs, that
pretend to Science, and then spoke to him to this effect (as I was informed by
my Agah.)

What is it you would have of me Doctor? Can you reasonably desire I should
make you one of the chief Omrahs of my Court? Let me tell you, if you had
instructed me as you should have done, nothing would be more just: For I am of
this persuasion, that a Child well educated and instructed, is as much, at
least, obliged to his Master as to his Father: But where are those good
Documents you have given me? In the first place you have taught me, that all
that Frangistan (so it seems they call Europe) was nothing, but I know not what
little Island, of which the greatest King was he of Portugal, and next to him
he of Holland, and after him he of England; and as to the other Kings, as those
of France and Andalusia, you have represented them to me as our petty Raja's;
telling me, that the Kings of Indostan were far above them all together, and
that they were the true and only Houmajons, the Ekbars, the Jehan-Guyres, the
Chah-Jehans, the Fortunate ones, the Great ones, the Conquerors and Kings of
the World; and that Persia and Usbec, Kachguer, Tartar and Catay, Pegu, China,
and Matchina did tremble at the name of the Kings of Indostan: Admirable
Geography* You should rather have taught me exactly to distinguish all th^s;e
different States of the world, and well to understand their strength, their way
of fighting, their Customs, Religions, Governments and Interests; and by the
perusal of solid History, to observe their Rise, Progress, Decay, and whence,
how, and by what accidents and errors, those great Changes and Revolutions of
Empires and Kingdoms have happened. I have searee learnt of you the name of my
Grandsires, the famous Founders of this Empire; so far were you from having
taught me the History of their Life, and what course they took to make such
great Conquests. You had a mind to teach me the Arabian Tongue, to read and to
write, I am much obliged to you (forsooth) for having made me lose so much time
upon a Language, that requires ten or twelve years to attain to its perfection;
as if the Son of a King should think it to be an honor to him, to be a
Grammarian, or some Doctor of the Law, and to learn other Languages than those
of his Neighbors, when he cannot well be without them; he, to whom Time is so
precious for so many weighty things, which he ought by times to learn. As if
there were any spirit that did not with some reluctance, and even with a kind
of debasement, employ it self in so sad and dry an exercise, so long some and
tedious, as is that of learning words.

Thus did Aureng-Zebe resent the pedantick Instructions of his Tutor; to which
it is affirmed in that Court, that after some Entertainment which he had with
others, he further added the following Reproof.

Know you not, that Childhood well governed, being a state which is ordinarily
accompanied with an happy memory, is capable of thousands of good Precepts and
Instructions, which remain deeply impressed the whole remainder of a man's
life, and keep the mind always raised for great Actions? The Law, Prayers, and
Sciences, may they not as well be learned in our Mother Tongue, as in Arabic?
You told my Father Ghah-Jehan, that you would teach me Philosophy. It Is true, I
remember very well, that you have entertained me for many years with airy
questions, of things that afford no satisfaction at all to the mind, and are of
no use in humane Society, empty Notions, and mere Phancies, that have only this
in them, that they are very hard to understand, and very easy to forget, which
are only capable to tire and spoil a good understanding, and to breed an
Opinion that is insupportable. I still remember, that after you had thus amused
me, I know not how long, with your fine Philosophy, all I retained of it, was a
multitude of barbarous and dark words, proper to bewilder, perplex, and tire
out the best Wits, and only invented, the better to cover the vanity and
ignorance of men like your self, that would make us believe, that they know
all, and that under those obscure and ambiguous words, are hid great mysteries,
which they alone are capable to understand: If you had seasoned me with that
Philosophy, which forms the mind to ratiocination, and insensibly accustoms
it to be satisfied with nothing but solid Reasons; if you had given me those
excellent Precepts and Doctrines, which raise the Soul above the Assaults of
Fortune, and reduce her to an unshakeable and always equal temper, and permit
her not to be lifted up by Prosperity, nor debased by Adversity; if you had
taken care to give me the knowledge of what we are, and what are the first
principles of things; and had assisted me in forming in my mind a fit Idea of
the greatness of the Universe, and of the admirable order and motion of the
parts thereof; if, I say, you had instilled into me this kind of Philosophy, I
should think my self incomparably more obliged to you, than Alexander was to
his Aristotle; and believe it my duty to recompense you otherwise, than he did
him. Should not you, instead of your flattery, have taught me somewhat of that
point so important to a King, which is, what the reciprocal duties are of a
Sovereign to his Subjects, and those of Subjects to their Sovereign? And ought
not you to have considered, that one day I should be obliged with the Sword to
dispute my Life and the Crown with my Brothers? Is not that the destiny almost
of all the Sons of Indostan? Have you ever taken any care to make me learn,
what it is to besiege a Town, or to set an Army in Array? For these things I am
obliged to others, not at all to you. Go, and retire to the Village whence you
are come, and let no body know who you are, or what is become of you.

At that time there arose a kind of Tempest against Astrologers, which did not
displease me. Most people of Asia are so infatuated by Judiciary Astrology,
that they believe there is nothing done here below, but it is written above *for
so they speak.) In all their Undertakings therefore they consult Astrologers.
When two Armies are ready to give Battle, they beware of falling on, till the
Astrologer has taken and determined the moment he fancies propitious for the
beginning of the Combat. And so, when the matter is about electing a
Captain General of an Army, of dispatching an Ambassador, of concluding a
Marriage, of beginning a Voyage, and of doing any other thing, as buying a
Slave, putting on new Apparel, etc. nothing of all that is done, without the
sentence of Mr. Star-Gazer; which is an incredible vexation, and a custom
drawing after it such important consequences, that I know not how it can
subsist so long: For the Astrologer must needs have knowledge of all that
passes, and of all that is undertaken, from the greatest Affairs to the least.

But behold, it happened, that the prime Astrologer of the King was drowned,
which occasioned a great noise at Court, and was a great discredit to
Astrology: For he being the person that determined the moments of all
Enterprises and Actions for the King, and the Omrahs, every one wondered, how a
man so experienced, and that for so long time had dispensed good Adventures to
others, could not foresee his own misfortune* There were not wanting those, who
pretended to be wiser than others, and said, that in Frangistan, where Sciences
did flourish, the Grandees do suspect all such kind of people, and that some
hold them even no better than Mountebanks, that it is much doubted, whether this
knowledge is grounded upon good and solid reasons, and that it may very well be
some fancy of Astrologers, or rather an Artifice to make themselves necessary
to the great ones, and to make them in some measure to depend on them.

All these Discourses very much displeased the Astrologers; but nothing angered
them so much as this Story, become very famous, viz. That the great Chah-Abas
King of Persia, commanded to be dug and prepared a little place in his
Seraglio to make a Garden; that the young Trees were all ready, and that the
Gardener made account to plant them the next day. Mean time the Astrologer
taking upon him, said, That a good nick of time was to be observed for planting
them, to make them prosper. Chah-Abas being content it should be so, the Star
Gazer took his Instruments, turned over his Books, made his Calculation, and
concluded, That by reason of such and such a Conjunction and Aspect of the
Planets, it was necessary they should be set presently. The Master-Gardener,
who minded nothing less than this Astrologer, was not then at hand; yet for all
that, they fell to work immediately, making holes, and planting the Trees,
Chah-Abas himself setting them, that it might be said, that they were Trees set
with Chah-Abas's own hands. The Gardener returning at Night, was sufficiently
amazed when he saw the work done; and finding that the right place and order
designed by him, was not taken; that, for Example, an Apricock-Tree stood where
an Apple Tree should stand, and a Pear Tree where an Almond-Tree; being
heartily angry with the Astrologer, caused all the Trees to be plucked up
again, and laid them down, with some Earth about them, for next morning, the
time chosen by himself. The News hereof came soon to the Ears of the
Astrologer, who presently told Chah-Abas of it: He forthwith sent for the
Gardner and with some indignation asked him, What had made him so bold, as to
pull up those Young Trees he had planted with his own hand? That the time had
been so exactly taken for them, that so good an one would never be had again;
and that so be had marred all. The rude Gardener, who had a Cup of Chiras-Wine
in his head, looked aside upon the Astrologer, and grumbling and swearing, said
to him these words, Billah, Billah, that must needs be an admirable point of
time which thou have taken for these Trees, Unhappy Astrologer! They were
planted this day Noon, and this Evening they have been plucked up again. When
Chah-Abas heard this, he fell a laughing, turned his back upon the Astrologer,
and went away.

I shall here add two Particulars, though happened in the time of Chah-Jehan,
because such things fall out often enough, and do withal give occasion to
observe that ancient and barbarous custom, which makes the Kings of India Heirs
of the Goods of those that die in their Service. The first was of Neiknam-kan,
one of the most ancient Omrahs of the Court, and who for the space of 40 or 50
years, wherein he had always been employed in considerable Offices, had heaped
up great store of Gold and Silver. This Lord seeing himself near his End, and
thinking upon this unreasonable custom, which often renders the Wife of a great
Man, upon his decease, poor and miserable in an instant, and necessitates her
to present a Petition, begging some small Pension for her subsistence, and for
that of her Children, who are constrained to list themselves for common
Soldiers under some Omrah, who, I say, considering this with himself, secretly
distributed all his Treasure to indigent Knights, and poor Widows, filled his
Trunks with old pieces of Iron, old Shoes, Rags and Bones, and locked and
sealed them, telling every body that they were Goods belonging to Chah-Jehan
the King. These Trunks, after his death, were brought before Chah-Jehan, when
he was in the Assembly, and by his command instantly opened in the presence of
all the Omrahs, that saw all this fine Stuff, which so provoked and discomposed
Chah-Jehan, that he rose in great fury, and went away.

The other is only a piece of Gallantry. A rich Banean, or Heathen Merchant,
being a great Usurer, (as most of them are) who had always been in Employment,
and in the Pay of the King, came to dye. Some years after his death, his Son
did extremely importune the Widow, his Mother, to let him have some Money: She
finding him to be a prodigal and debauched Youth, gave him as little as she
could. This young Fool, by the persuasion of others like himself, made his
Complaints to Chah-Jehan, and was so silly, as to discover to him all the Goods
his Father had left, which amounted to Two hundred thousand Rupies, or Hundred
thousand Crowns. Chah-Jehan, who soon got an itch for this Treasure, sent for
the Widow, and commanded her in the open Assembly to send him an Hundred
thousand Rupies, and to give Fifty thousand to her Son, giving order at the
same time to put her away. The old Woman, though surprised at this Command, and
perplexed enough, that she was so suddenly thrust out, without the liberty of
speaking, yet lost not her judgment, but with a loud voice gave out, That she
had something of moment to discover to his Majesty: Whereupon being brought in
again, she said, God save your Majesty; I find that my Son bath some reason to
demand of me the Goods of his Father, as being of his and my flesh and blood,
and therefore our Heir; but I would gladly know, what Kindred your Majesty is
to my deceased Husband, to be his Heir. When Chah-Jehan heard so plain a piece
of Rallery, and a discourse of Parentage of the King of the Indies, with a
She-Banian, or Idolatrous She-Merchant, he could not hold laughing, and
commanded she should be gone, and that nothing should be asked of her.

But to return, I shall not relate all the other considerable things that have
happened since the end of the War, that is, since 1660. unto my departure,
which was above six years after; though doubtless that would tend much to the
design I had in relating the other Particulars, which is, to make known the
Genius and Temper of the Mogols and Indians. This I may do in another place:
Here I shall only give an Account of five or six Particulars, which those that
shall have read this Relation, will doubtless be curious of.

The first, that though Aureng-Zebe made Chah-Jehan his Father, to be kept in
the Fortress of Agra with all imaginable care and caution; yet notwithstanding
he still left him in his old Apartment with Begum-Saheb, his eldest Daughter,
his other Women, Singers, Dancers, Cooks, and others, nothing of that kind was
wanting to him. There were also certain Mullahs, that were permitted to come
and to read the Alcoran to him (for he was become very devout.) And when he
thought fit, there were brought before him brave Horses, and tamed Gazelles
(which is a kind of Goat) to make them fight with one another; as also diverse
sorts of Birds of Prey, and several other rare Animals, to divert him as
formerly. Aureng-Zebe himself used an Art to overcome at last his fierceness
and obstinacy, which he had hitherto kept, though a Prisoner. And this was the
effect of the obliging Letters, full of respect and submission, which he often
wrote to his Father, consulting him often as his Oracle, and expressing a
thousand cares for him; sending him also uncessantly some pretty Present or
other, whereby Chah-Jehan was so much gained, that he also wrote very often to
Aureng-Zebe touching the Government and State Affairs, and of his own Accord
sent him some of those Jewels, which before he had told him of, that Hammers
were ready to beat them to Powder the first time he should again ask for them.
Besides, he consented that the Daughter of Dara, which he had so peremptorily
denied, should be delivered to him; and granted him at length that pardon and
paternal blessing which he had so often desired without obtaining it. Yet,
under all this, Aureng-Zebe did not always flatter him; on the contrary, he
sometimes returned sharp Answers, when he met with strains in his Fathers
Letters that were pregnant, or expressed something of his former height and
authority. Of this we may judge by the Letter, which I know from a very good
hand was once written to him by Aureng-Zebe, to this effect:

Sir, You would have me indispensably follow those ancient Customs, and make my
self Heir to all those that are in my Pay with the wonted rigor: An Omrah, and
even a Merchant can no sooner dye, and sometimes even before his death, but we
seal up his Trunks, and seize on his Goods, and make a strict enquiry into his
Estate, imprisoning and ill-treating the Officers of the House to discover to
us all he has, even to the least Jewels. I will believe that there is some
policy in doing so, but it cannot be denied, that it is very rigorous, and
sometimes very unjust, and to speak the very truth, we may deserve well enough,
that the same should befall us every day, what happened to you from your
Neikman-kan, and from the Widow of your rich Indian Merchant. Moreover (said
he) it seems, I am by you reputed proud and haughty now I am King: As if you
knew not by the experience of more than Forty years of your Reign, how heavy an
Ornament a Crown is, and how many sad and restless Nights it passes through:
as if I could forget that excellent passage of Mir-Timur, (commonly called
Tamberlan) which is so seriously delivered to us by that great Grandfather of
ours, Ekbar, to the end that we might the more weigh the importance and value
of it, and consider, whether we have cause to pride our selves so much in a
Crown. You well know, that he said, that the same day when Timur took Bajazet,
he made him come before him, and having fixed his eyes on him, fell a laughing;
at which Bajazet being highly offended, fiercely said to him, Laugh not at my
Fortune, Timur; know that it is God that is the Dispenser of Kingdoms and
Empires; and that the same can befall you to morrow, that has befallen me to
day. Whereupon Timur made this serious and brave Answer, I know as well as you,
Bajazet, that it is God that distributeth Kingdoms and Empires; I laugh not at
your ill Fortune, God forbid I should do so: But beholding your face, I smiled,
and had this thought, That certainly these Kingdoms and Empires must in
themselves be very little and contemptible things in the eyes of God, since he
gives them to persons so ill made as you and I both are; a deformed one-ey'd
man, as you; and a lame wretch, as my self. You require also, that abandoning
all my other Employments, which I believe very necessary for the establishment
and happiness of this State, I should think on nothing but Conquests, and the
enlargement of the Empire. I must confess that this is indeed the business of a
great Monarch, and of a Soul truly Royal, and that I should not deserve to be
of the Blood of the Great Timur, if I were not of that mind, and had not such
inclinations. Mean time, I think I sit not idle, and my Armies are not useless
in the Kingdoms of Decan and Bengale: But we must also aver, that the greatest
Conquerors are not always the greatest Kings; that we too often see a Barbarian
making Conquests, and that those great Bodies of Conquests do ordinarily fall
of themselves, and by their own weight. He is a great King, that knows to
acquit himself worthily of that Great and August Employment and Charge of
Kings, which is to dispense Justice to their Subjects, etc. The rest is not
come to my hands.

The second is in regard of the Emir-Jemla. It were to injure this great Man,
to pass by with silence his deportment to Aureng-Zebe after the War, and the
manner of ending his days. This eminent person after he had dispatched the
Affair of Bengale, with Sultan Sujah (the second of these four Brothers) not
like Gionkan, that infamous Patan with Dara; nor like the Raja of Serenaguer
with Soliman-Chekouh; but like a Great Captain and dextrous Politician,
pursuing him as far as the Seaside, and necessitating him to fly and to escape
out of his hands; after, I say, he had done these things, he sent an Eunuch to
Aureng-Zebe, entreating him, that he would give him leave to transport his
Family to Bengale; that now that the War was at an end, and he broken with Age,
he hoped he would grant him the advantage of ending his life in the company of
his Wife and Children.

But Aureng-Zebe is too sharp-sighted, not to pierce into the designs of Emir.
He sees him triumphing over Sujah; he knows his great credit and reputation,
and that he has the esteem of a very wise, undertaking, valiant and rich man;
and that the Kingdom of Bengale is not only the best of all Indostan, but
strong of it self, and further, that this Emir is in the head of a well
disciplined Army, which both honors and fears him. Besides, he is not ignorant
of his ambition, and foreseeth well enough, that if he should have with him his
Son Mahmet-Emirkan, he would aspire to the Crown, and at least take full
possession of Bengale, if he should not be able to advance things further. At
the same time he is also well aware, that there is danger in refusing him, and
that he may possibly prove such a man, as in case of denial, may run into some
dangerous extreme, as he had done in Golkonda. How then, think ye, did he carry
himself in this conjuncture? He sends to him his Wife and Daughter, and all the
Children of his Son: He makes the Emir a Mir-Vl Omrah, which is in that Empire
the greatest degree of honor that a Favorite can be raised to: And as to
Mahmet-Emirkan, he makes him the Great-Bakchis, which is a dignity and charge
like that of our Great Master of the Horse, the second or third Office in the
State, but such an one as absolutely obliges the possessor of it to be always
at the Court, not suffering him, but very difficultly, to be absent from the
person of the King.

The Emir soon perceived, that Aureng-Zebe had skilfully put by the stroke,
that it would be in vain the second time to ask of him his Son; that he could
not do it without offending him; and that therefore the safest way would be to
rest contented with all the testimonies of Friendship, and with all the
Honors, together with the Government of Bengale; being in the mean time always
upon his guard, and in such a posture, that since he could attempt nothing
against Aureng-Zebe, Aureng-Zebe should not be able to attempt any thing
against him.

Thus have we seen these two Great Men carry themselves to one another: And in
this condition did affairs remain for almost a year; till Aureng-Zebe, too well
knowing that a great Captain cannot be long at rest, and that, if he be not
employed in a Foreign War, he will at length raise a Domestic one; proposed to
him to make War upon that rich and potent Raja of Acham, whose Territories are
on the North of Dake, upon the Gulf of Bengale. The Emir, who in all appearance
had already designed this same thing of himself, and who believed, that the
Conquest of this Country, would make way for his Immortal Honor, and be an
occasion of carrying his Arms as far as China, declared himself ready for this
Enterprise. He embarked at Dake with a puissant Army, upon a River which comes
from those parts; upon which having gone about an hundred Leagues
North-Eastward, he arrived at a Castle called Azo, which the Raja of Acham had
usurped from the Kingdom of Bengale, and possessed for many years. He attacked
this place, and took it by force in less than fifteen days; thence marching
over Land toward Chamdara, which is the Inlet into the Country of that Raja;
he entered into it after 26 days journey, still Northward: There a Battle was
fought, in which the Raja of Acham was worsted, and obliged to retreat to
Guerguon, the Metropolis of his Kingdom, four miles distant from Chamdara. The
Emir pursued him so close, that he gave him no time to fortify himself in
Guerguon: For he arrived in sight of that Town in five days, which constrained
the Raja, seeing the Emir's Army, to fly toward the Mountains of the Kingdom
of Lassa, and to abandon Guerguon, which was pillaged, as had been Chamdara.
They found there vast riches, it being a great, very fair and Merchant-like
Town, and where the Women are extraordinarily beautiful. Mean time, the season
of the Rains came in sooner than usually; and they being excessive in those
parts, and overflowing all the Country, except such Villages as stand on
raised ground, the Emir was much embarassed. For the Raja made his people of
the Mountains come down from all parts thereabout, and to carry away all the
provisions of the Field; whereby the Emir's Army (as rich as 'twas) before the
end of the rains fell into great streights, without being able to go forward or
backward. It could not advance, by reason of the Mountains very difficult to
pass, and continually pestered with great Rains; nor retreat, because of the
like Rains and deep ways; the Raja also having caused the way to be dug up
as far as to Chamdara: So that the Emir was forced to remain in that wretched
condition during the whole time of the Rain; after which, when he found his
Army distasted, tired out, and half starved, he was necessitated to give over
the Design he had of advancing, and to return the same way he was come. But
this Retreat was made with so much pains, and so great inconveniences, by
reason of the dirt, the want of Victuals, and the pursuit of the Raja falling
on the ^ear, that every body (but he) that had not known how to remedy the
disorder of such a March, nor had the patience to be sometimes five or six
hours at one passage to make the Soldiery get over it without confusion, would
have utterly perished, himself, Army, and all; yet he, notwithstanding all
these difficulties and obstacles, made a shift to come back with great honor
and vast riches. He designed to return thither again the next year, and to
pursue his undertaking, supposing that Azo, which he had fortified, and where
he left a strong Garrison, would be able to hold out the rest of the year
against the Raja. But he was no sooner arrived there, but Fluxes began to rage
in his Army: Neither had himself a body of Steel more than the rest; he fell
sick and died, whereby Fortune ended the just apprehensions of Aureng-Zebe. I
say, the Just apprehensions; for there was none of those that knew this great
man, and the state of the affairs of Indostan, who did not say, It Is this day
that Aureng-Zebe is King of Bengale. And himself could not forbear to express
some such thing; for he publicly said to Mahmet-Emir-kan; You have lost your
Father, and I the greatest and the most dangerous Friend I had; yet
notwithstanding he comforted this Son, and withal assured him, that he would
ever be a Father to him. And whereas 'twas thought, that he would at least cut
off his Salary, and make Inquisition into his Treasury, he confirmed him in his
Office of Bakchis, augmented his Pension to a thousand Rupies a month, and left
him Heir of all the Estate of his Father, although the Custom of the Country
empowered him to seize on all.

The third is concerning Chah-best-kan, whom Aureng-Zebe made first Governor
of Agra, when he went out to the Battle of Kadjoue against Sultan Sujah; and
afterward, Governor and General of the Army in Decan; and at last, after the
death of Emir-Jemla, Governor and General of the Army in Bengale, together
with the charge of Mirul Omrah which Emir-Jemla had possessed. This
Chah-hest-kan is he, whom in our History we have mentioned as Uncle to
Aureng-Zebe, and one that has so much contributed to his happiness by his
eloquent and skilful pen, as well as by his intrigues and counsels. It would be
injurious to his Renown also, to be silent of the important enterprise, which
he undertook presently when he entered upon his Government; and that the rather,
because Emir-Jemla, whether out of Policy, or for another cause, had no mind to
tempt him; as also, because the particularities, which I am going to relate,
will show not only the passed and present state of the Kingdoms of Bengale and
Rakan, which hitherto has not been well described to us by any; but also some
other things that are worth knowing.

To the end therefore that the importance of Chah-hest-kan's attempt may be
well understood, and a good Idea be had of what passes about the Gulf of
Bengale, we are to know, that these many years there have always been in the
Kingdom of Rakan or Moy, some Portugueses, and with them a great number of
their Christian Slaves, and other Franguis, gathered from all parts. That was
the refuge of the Run-aways from Goa, Ceilan, Cochin, Malague, and all those
other places, which the Portugueses formerly held in the Indies; and they were
such as had abandoned their Monasteries, men that had been twice or thrice
Married, Murderers: In a word, such as had deserved the Rope, were most
welcome and most esteemed there, leading in that Country a life that was very
detestable, and altogether unworthy of Christians, insomuch that they impunely
butchered and poisoned one another, and assassinated their own Priests, who
sometimes were not better than themselves. The King of Rakan in the
apprehension he has ever had of the Mogol, kept them for a guard of his
Frontiers, in a Port-Town called Chategon, giving them Land, and liberty to
live as they pleased. Their ordinary Trade was Robbery and Piracy. With some
small and light Galleys they did nothing but coast about that Sea, and entering
into all Rivers thereabout, and into the Channels and Arms of Ganges, and
between all those Isles of the lower Bengale, and often penetrating even so far
as forty or fifty leagues up into the Country, surprised and carried away
whole Towns, Assemblies, Markets, Feasts and Weddings of the poor Gentiles, and
others of that Country, making Women Slaves, great and small, with strange
cruelty; and burning all they could not carry away. And thence it is, that at
present there are seen in the mouth of Ganges so many fine Isles quite
deserted, which were formerly well peopled, and where no other Inhabitants are
found but wild Beasts, and especially Tigers.

This great number of Slaves, which thus they took from all quarters, behold
what use they made of. They had boldness and impudence enough, to come and fell
to that very Country the old people, which they knew not what to do with; where
it so fell out, that those who had escaped the danger by flight, and by hiding
themselves in the Woods, labored to redeem to day their Fathers and Mothers,
that had been taken yesterday. The rest they kept for their service to make
Rowers of them; and such Christians as they were themselves, bringing them up
to robbing and killing; or else they sold them to the Portugueses of Goa,
Ceilan, St. Thomas, and others, and even to those that were remaining in
Bengale at Ogouli, who were come thither to settle themselves there by the
favor of Jehan-Guyre, the Grandfather of Aureng-Zebe, who suffered them there
upon the account of Traffic, and of his having no aversion to Christians, as
also because they promised him to keep the Bay of Bengale clear from all
Pirates. And it was toward the Isle of Galls, near the Cape of Palms, where
this fine Trade was. These Pirates lay there in wait at the passage for the
Portugueses, who filled their Ships with them at a very easy rate; this
infamous Rabble impudently bragging, that they made more Christians in one
year, than all the Missionaries of the Indies in ten; which would be a strange
way of enlarging Christianity.

These were the Pirates that made Chah-Jehan, who was a more zealous Mahumetan
than his Father Jehan-Guyre, to express at last his passion, not only against
the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits, Missionaries of Agra, in that he caused to be
pulled down the best part of a very fair and large Church that had been built,
as well as that of Lahor, by the favor of Jehan-Guyre, who as I said, did not
hate Christianity; and upon which there stood a great Steeple with a great Bell
in it, whose sound might be heard over all the Town, not only, I say, against
those Jesuits, but also against the Christians of Ogouli: For being impatient
to see them connive at the Pirates, to make the name of the Franguis
formidable, and to fill their houses with Slaves that were his own Subjects, he
wasted and utterly ruined them, after he had both with fair words and menaces
drawn from them as much money as he could: And because they were indiscreetly
obstinate, in refusing what he demanded of them, he besieged them, and caused
them all to be brought to Agra, even their very Children, their Priests and
Friars. This was a misery and a desolation not to be paralleled; a kind of
Babilonian transmigration. There they were all made Slaves: The handsome Women
were shut up in the Seraglio; the old Women and others were distributed among
diverse Omrahs. The young Lads were circumcised, and made Pages; and men of age
renounced for the most part their Faith, either terrified by the threatenings
they heard daily, that they should be trampled upon by Elephants, or drawn away
by fair Promises. It Is true, that there were some of those Friars, who
persisted, and that the Missionaries of Agra, who notwithstanding all this
unhappiness, remained in their houses, found means afterward, partly by
Friends, partly by Money, to get many of them away, and to have them conveyed
to Goa, and to other places belonging to the Portugueses.

They were also the same Pirates, who some time before the desolation of
Ogouli, offered to the Viceroy of Goa to put the whole Kingdom of Rakan into
their hands for the King of Portugal; but he refused, they say, this offer, out
of arrogance and jealousy, and would not send the succors, which for that end
was demanded of him by a certain Bastian Consalve, who had made himself head of
those people, and was become so potent and considerable, that he married one of
the Kings Daughters; being unwilling that it should be said, that a man of so
mean Extraction as this Bastian was, had done such a Masterpiece. But it may
be said on this occasion, that this is not much to be wondered at, considering
that the Portugueses in the Indies by such a conduct have diverse times been
faulty on the like occasions, in Japan, in Pegu, in Ethiopia, and other places;
not to mention, that by this way, and that perhaps by a (...) Divine
chastisement (as they all frankly confess themselves) they are become a prey to
their Enemies, and fallen so low in the Indies, that I know not whether they
will ever recover there; whereas formerly, before they were corrupted by vice,
and degenerated through pleasure, they made all others tremble in those parts;
foras^^ch as then they were brave and generous men, zealous for the Christian
Religion, considerable for gallant exploits and for riches; all the Indian
Kings seeking their friendship.

Besides this, the same Pirates seized at that time on the Isle of Sondiva, an
advantageous Post to command a part of the Mouth of Ganges: In which Isle a
certain Augustine Friar, a very famous man, acted the King for many years,
having taken a course, God knows how, to rid himself of the Commander of that
place.

Moreover, the same Robbers took Sultan-Sujah at Daka, to carry him away in
their Galeasses to Rakan, as we related above, and found means to open his
Cossers, and to rob him of good store of Jewels, which afterward were
secretly, and at a very cheap rate, sold in Rakan, most of them being fallen
into the hands of people that had no skill in them, and afterward into the
hands of the Hollanders, and others, who knew how to buy them up quickly,
making those fellows believe, that they were soft Diamonds, and that they would
pay them according to the degrees of their hardness.

Lastly, They are they that for many years have given exercise to the Great
Mogol in Bengale; having obliged him there to keep always Garrisons every where
upon the Passes, and a great Militia, and a Fleet also of Galeasses to oppose
their courses, and who, notwithstanding all this, have made shift to make
strange devastations, and often to enter far into the Country, and to laugh at
all the Soldiery of the Mogols; in regard they were become so bold, and so
dextrous at their Weapons, and so skilful in piloting their Galeasses, that
four or five of them stuck not to set upon fourteen or fifteen Mogolians, which
they also actually worsted, and took or run aground. And upon these Pirates
Chah hest-kan cast his eyes as soon as he came into Bengale, taking a
resolution to deliver the Country of this plague of people, that had so long
wasted it; and designing afterward to pass on, and to attack the King of
Rak^^, according to the order of Aurenge-Zebe, who at any price had a mind to
revenge the blood of Sultan-Sujah, and all his Family, that had been so cruelly
handled, and to teach that Barbarian, how the Blood Royal was to be regarded
and esteemed on any occasion whatsoever: Behold now with what dexterity Chah
hest-kan carries on this design!

Knowing that it is impossible to pass any Cavalry by Land, no not so much as
any Infantry, from Bengale into Rakan, because of the many channels and rivers
upon the Frontiers; and also that on the other side, those Pirates of Chatigon,
whom we just now were speaking of, would be powerful enough to hinder him from
transporting them by Sea; he thought upon this experiment, viz. to engage the
Hollanders in his design. He therefore sent a kind of Ambassador to Batavia,
empowering him to treat upon certain Conditions, with the General of that
Company, jointly to subdue the whole Kingdom of Rakan; as formerly Chah-Abbas
subdued that of Ormus, in conjunction with the English. The General of Batavia
seeing the thing to be possible, and that it was a means more and more to break
the Portugueses in the Indies, and that it would turn to a very good account to
the Company, dispatched away two Men of War for Bengale, to favor the
transportation of the Mogolian Troops in spite of those Pirates. But observe
what Chah-hest-kan did before these Men of War arrived: He equipped a great
number of Galeasses, and many large Vessels to transport the Army; threatened
the Pirates, utterly to spoil and ruin them; acquainted them with the design of
Aureng-Zebe upon Rakan; that a potent Army of the Dutch was near; that they
should think on themselves and their families, if they were wise; and in a
word, if they would abandon the service of the King of Rakan, and take that of
Aureng-Zebe, he would procure very good conditions for them, distribute amongst
them as much Land in Bengale as they desired, and pay them the double of what
they had now.

It Is doubtful, whether these Menaces and Promises made impression upon them,
or whether it was not an Accident that moved them, they having about that time
assassassinated one of the chief Officers of the King of Rakan, and
apprehending a punishment for that Crime: However it be, they were caught, and
they were one day struck with such a panick terror, that they shipped
themselves all at once in forty or fifty of their Galeasses, and wafted over to
Bengale to Chah-hest-kan, and that with so much precipitation, that they hardly
took time to embark their Wives and Children, and what else was most precious
to them. Chah-hest-kan received them with open Arms, courted them exceedingly,
gave them very considerable Pay, and without letting them cool, made them,
jointly with his whole Army, to attack and take the Isle of Sondiva, which was
fallen into the hands of the King of Rakan, and thence to pass with all his
Horse and Foot to Chatigon. About this time the two Holland Vessels arrived,
but Chah-hest-kan, who thought that henceforth it would be easy for him to
compass his design, thanked them. I saw these Ships in Bengale, and their
Commanders, who were but little contented with such thanks and liberalities of
Chah-hest-kan. As to the Pirates, since now he holds them fast, and hopeless of
ever returning to Chatigon, and has no more need of them, he makes nothing of
all those large Promises he made them, and treats them not as he should, but as
they deserve, leaving them whole months without Pay, and not looking upon them
otherwise than Traitors, and infamous men, unfit to be trusted, after they have
so vilely deserted him, whose Salt they had eaten so many years. After this
manner did Chah-hest-kan put an end to this Rabble, which, as I said, have
ruined and dispoiled all the lower Bengale. Time will show whether he will be
as happy in the remainder of his Enterprise against the King of Rakan.

The fourth Particular is concerning the two Sons of Aureng-Zebe, viz. Sultan
Mahmoud, and Sultan Mazum. He still keeps the first of them in Goualeor, but
(if one may believe the common report) without making him take the Poust, which
is the ordinary Drink of those that are put into that place. As to the other,
though he has always been a pattern of reservedness and moderation, yet one
knows not whether he was not too forward in making a Party, when his Father was
so extremely sick; or whether Aureng-Zebe have not upon other occasions
perceived something that might give him cause of jealousy; or whether he had
not a mind to make an authentic proof of both his Obedience and Courage.
However it be, one day he commanded him in an unconcerned manner, in a full
Assembly of the Omrahs, to go and kill a Lion that was come down to the
Mountains, and had made great havoc and waste in the Country; and this he
did, without giving order to furnish him with those strong and large Nets,
which they are wont to employ in this dangerous kind of hunting in a real mood;
telling the great Hunting-Master, who presently called for those Nets, that
when he was Prince, he did not look for such Formalities. It was the good
fortune of Sultan Mazum, that he prosper'd in this Attempt, not losing any more
than two or three men, and some Horses that were wounded, although, on the
other hand, the matter went not off so pleasantly, the wounded Lion having
leapt up to the head of the Sultan's Elephant. Since that time, Aureng-Zebe
has not been backward to express much Affection to him; he has given him even
the Government of Decan, though with so little power and treasure, that there
is no great cause to apprehend any thing upon that Account.

The fifth thing touches Mohabet-kan, the Governor of Kaboul, whom Aureng-Zebe
took from his Government, and generously pardoned; not willing, as he said, to
lose so brave a Captain, and that had stuck so close to his Benefactor
Chah-Jehan. He made him even Governor of Guzuratte, in the place of
Jessomseigne, whom he sent to make War in Decan. It may very well be, that some
considerable Presents he made to Rauchenara-Begum, and a good number of
excellent Persian Horse and Camels, wherewith he presented Aureng-Zebe,
together with fifteen or sixteen thousand Rupies of Gold, did contribute to
make his peace.

On this occasion of mentioning the Government of Kaboul, which borders upon
the Kingdom of Kandahar, which is now in the hands of the Persians, I shall
here briefly add some particulars, that serve to this History, and will still
more discover that Country, and declare the Interests between Indostan and
Persia, which no body, that I know of, has explained hitherto.

Kandahar, that strong and important place, which is the Capital and the
swaying City of this Noble and Rich Kingdom of the same Name, has in these
latter Ages been the subject of grievous Wars between the Mogols and Persians,
each of them pretending a Right thereto. Ekbar, that great King of the Indies,
took it by force from the Persians, and kept it during his life. And
Chah-Abbas, that famous King of Persia, retook it from Jehan-Guyre, the Son of
Ekbar. Afterward it returned to Chah-Jehan, Son of Jehan-Guyre, not by the
Sword, but by the means of the Governor Aly-Merdan-kan, who surrendered it to
him, and went over to live at his Court, apprehending the Artifices of his
Enemies, who had brought him into disfavour with the King of Persia, that sent
for him to make him give an account, and to deliver up his Government. The same
City was besieged, and retaken afterward by the Son of Chah-Abbas, and since
that besieged twice again, yet without being taken by Chah-Jehan. The first
time it was saved from being taken by the ill understanding and jealousy
between the Persian Omrahs, that are Pensioners of the Great Mogol, and the
most powerful of his Court, as also by the respect they bear to their Natural
King: For they all behaved themselves very effeminately in the Siege, and would
not follow the Raja Roup, who had already planted his Standards upon the Wall
on the side of the Mountain. The second time it was saved by the jealousy of
Aureng-Zebe, who would not fall into the breach of the Wall, that our Franguis,
the English, Portugueses, Germans and French had made by their Canon, though it
was a large one; being unwilling to have it said, that in the time of Dara, who
was, in a manner, the first mover of that Enterprise, and was then in the City
of Caboul, with his Father Chah-Jehan, the Fortress of Kandahar was taken.
Chah-Jehan, some years before the late trouble, was also ready to besiege it
the third time, had not Emir-Jemla diverted him from it, advising him to turn
his Forces toward Decan, (as has been said;) with whom Aly-Merdan-kan himself
concurred, who was so earnest in his dissuading him from it, as to say to him
these words, which I shall punctually relate, as having something extravagant
in them:

Your Majesty will never take Kandahar, unless you had such a Traitor there as
my self, except you were resolved never to bring a Persian into it, and to make
the Bazars or Markets wholly free, that is, to lay no Impost on those that
furnish the Army with provision.

At length, Aureng-Zebe, like the others, had prepared himself in these latter
years to besiege it also; whether it was that he was offended at the tart
Letters, written to him by the King of Persia, or by reason of the affronts and
ill treatment which he had offered to Tarbiet-kan his Ambassador; that hearing
of the King of Persia's death, he turned back, saying, (which yet is not very
credible) that he would not meddle with a Child, a new King; although
Chah-Soliman, who has succeeded his Father, is, in my opinion, about 25 years
of age.

The sixth particular we purposed to speak of, concerns those that have
faithfully served Aureng-Zebe. Those he has almost all raised to great places.
For first, as we have already related, he made Chah-hest-kan, his Uncle,
Governor and General of the Army of Decan, and afterward, Governor of Bengale.
Next, he made Mir-kan Governor of Kaboul; Then Kalil-ullah-kan, of Lahor; and
Mirbaba, of Elabas; and Lasker-kan, of Patna. The Son of that Allah-Verdi-kan
of Sultan Sujah, he appointed Governor of Scimdy; and Fazel-kan, who had
considerably served him both by his counsels and dexterity, he made Kane-saman,
that is, Great Steward of the House Royal: And Danechmend-kan, Governor of
Dehli, with this particular grace and privilege, that since he is perpetually
employed in studies and foreign Affairs, he so dispenses with him for not
coming twice a day (after the ancient custom) to wait on the King in the
Assembly, as not to retrench any thing of his pension for his absence, as he
does to the other Omrahs, if they fail. He has given to Dianet-kan the
Government of Kacihmer (alias Cassimere) that little, and in a manner
inaccessible Kingdom, which Ekbar seized on by craft, that earthly Paradise of
the Indies; which has its Histories written in its peculiar Language, whereof
I have an abridgment in the Persian Tongue, made by the command of Jehan-Guyre,
containing a large Catalogue of many very ancient Kings, that often were so
powerful, that they subdued the Indies as far as China.

It Is true, that Aureng-Zebe dismissed Nejabat-kan, who did very well in the
two Battles of Samonguer and Kadjoue, but then it is not fit at all, that a
Subject should ever reproach his King, as he did, with the services done him.

As to those infamous men, Gion-kan and Nazer, it is known, that the former has
been recompensed as he deserved; but the other no man knows what is become of
him.

What concerns Jessomseigne and Jesseigne, there is something as to them that
is intricate, which I shall endeavor to unfold. There is a certain Heathen
revolted from the King of Visapour, who knew how to possess himself of many
important Fortresses, and of some Seaports of that King. His name is Seva-Gi,
that is, Lord Seva. He is a stout man, vigilant, bold, and undertaking in the
highest degree, who gave Chah-hest-kan more work and trouble in Decan, than the
King of Visapour with all his Forces, and all his Raja's joined with him for
their common defense: Insomuch that having designed to take away Chah-hest-kan
and his Treasures out of the midst of his Army, and of the Town Aurenge-Abad,
he carried on his design so far, that he had effected it, if he had not been
discovered a little too soon; for one night, accompanied with a number of
resolute Fellows he has about him, he was got into the very apartment of
Chah-hest-kan, where his Son, who was forward in the defense, was killed, and
himself grievously wounded; Seva-Gi in the mean time getting away as well as he
came: Who for all this was so far from being daunted, that he undertook another
very bold and very dangerous Enterprise, which succeeded much better. He took
two or three Thousand chosen men of his Army, with whom he took the Field
without noise, spreading a report by the way, that it was a Raja going to the
Court. When he was near Suratte, that famous and rich Port of the Indies,
instead of marching further, (as he made the great Provost of that Country,
whom he met, believe) he fell into that Town, where he staid about three days,
cutting off the Arms and Legs of the Inhabitants, to make them confess where
were the Treasures; searching, digging, and loading away, or burning what he
could not carry with him. Which done, he returned, none opposing his return,
laden with millions of Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silken Stuffs, Fine Linen, and
other rich Merchandise. Jessomseigne was suspected to have had since
intelligence with this Seva-Gi, which was the cause that Aureng-Zebe called him
away from Decan; but he, instead of going to Dehli, went to his own Territory.

I forgot to mention, that in the plunder of Suratte, that Ringleader Seva-Gi,
like a Saint, had so much respect to the House of the Reverend Father Ambrose,
a Missionary Capucian, that he gave order it should not be plundered; because,
said he, I know that the Fathers Franguis are good men. He had also regard to
the House of the deceased de Lale, because he understood that he had been great
Almoner. He also considered the Houses of the English and Dutch, not from
Devotion, as he did the former, but because they were in a good posture of
defense; especially the English, who having had time to send for assistance
from some of their ships that lay near the Town, behaved themselves gallantly,
and saved, besides their own, several other houses near them. But a certain Jew
of Constantinople, who had brought Rubies of a very great value, to sell them
to Aureng-Zebe, carried away the Bell from all, by saving himself from the
hands of Seva-Gi; for, rather than to confess that he had any Jewels, he was
brought thrice upon his Knees, and the Knife held up to cut his Throat: But it
became none save a Jew, hardly in Avarice, to escape in such a manner.

Touching Jesseigne, King Aureng-Zebe made him content to go General of the
Army in Decan, sending Sultan-Mazum with him, without any power. He presently
and vigorously besieged the principal Fortress of Seva-Gi, and knowing more
than all the rest in matter of Negotiation and Treaty, he so ordered the
business, that Seva-Gi surrendered before it came to extremity; and then he drew
him to Aureng-Zebe's party against Visapour, King Aureng-Zebe declaring him a
Raja, taking him under his protection, and giving the Pension of a very
considerable Omrah to his Son. Some time after, Aureng-Zebe designing to make
War against Persia, wrote to Seva-Gi such obliging Letters touching his
Generosity, Ability and Conduct, that he made him resolve, upon the faith of
Jesseigne, to come to him to Debli. There a Kinswoman of Aureng-Zebe, the Wife
of Chah-hest-kan, (who was then at Court) by the influence she had upon the
spirit of Aureng-Zebe, persuaded him to arrest him that had murdered her Son,
wounded her Husband, and sacked Suratte: So that one evening Seva-Gi saw his
Pavilions beset with three or four Omrahs; but he made shift to get away in the
night. This escape made a great noise at Court, every one accusing the eldest
Son of the Raja Jesseigne to have assisted him in it. Jesseigne, who presently
had news that Aureng-Zebe was very angry with him and his Son, and was advised
no more to go to the Court, was day and night upon his guard, apprehending lest
Aureng-Zebe should take this for a pretense to fall upon his Lands, and possess
himself of them. Whereupon he also soon left Decan to secure his Estate; but
when he was at Brampour, he died. Yet notwithstanding Aureng-Zebe was so far
from expressing any coldness or resentment to the Son of Jesseigne, that he
sent to condole with him for the death of his Father, and continued to him his
Pension; which confirms what many say, that it was by the consent of
Aureng-Zebe himself, that Seva-Gi escaped, forasmuch as he could retain him no
longer at Court, because all the Women there had too great a spleen against
him, and looked upon him as a man that had embroiled his hands in the blood of
his Kinsmen.

But to return to Decan, we are to consider, that that is a Kingdom, which
these Forty years has constantly been the Theater of War, and upon the score
whereof the Mogol has much to do with the Kings of Golkonda, and of Visapour,
and diverse little Sovereigns, which is not to be understood, unless it be
known, what considerable things have passed in those Parts, and the condition
of the Princes that govern them.

All this great Peninsule of Indestan, cutting it from the Bay of Cambaja unto
that of Bengale, near Jaganrate, and passing thence to Cape Comori, was scarce
two hundred years since entirely (some mountainous Parts excepted) under the
Dominion of one only Prince, who consequently was a very great and very potent
Monarch: But now it is divided among many different Sovereigns, that are also
of different Religions. The cause of this division was, that the King Ramras,
the last of those that have possessed this mighty State entirely, did
imprudently raise three Slaves, gurgis, he had about him too high, so as to
make them all three Governors of places: The first, of the greatest part of
those Countries, which at present are possessed by the Mogol in Decan, about
Daulet-Abad, from Bider, Paranda, Suratte, unto Narbadar: The second, of all
the other Lands, now comprehended under the Kingdom of Visapour: And the third,
of all that is contained under the Kingdom of Golkonda. These three Slaves grew
very rich, and found themselves supported by a good number of the Mogols, that
were in the service of Ramras, because they were all three Mahumetans, of the
Sect Chyas, like the Persians. And at length they all revolted together with
one accord, killed King Ramras, and returned to their Government, each taking
upon him the Title of Chah or King. The Issue of Ramras, not finding themselves
strong enough for them, were content to keep themselves in a corner, viz. in
that Country which is commonly called Karnatek in our Maps, Bisnaguer, where
they are still Raja's to this very day. All the rest of the State was also at
the same time divided into all those Raja's Naiques, and petty Kings, such as
we see there. These three Slaves and their Posterity have always defended
themselves very well in their Kingdoms, whilst they kept a good mutual
Correspondence, and assisted one another in their grievous Wars against the
Mogols. But when they once came to think every one to defend their Lands apart,
they soon found the effects of their division. For the Mogol so well knew to
take his time upon that occasion, (which is now about Thirty five, or Forty
years since) that he possessed himself within a little time of all the Country
of Nejam-Chah, or King Nejam, the fifth or sixth of the Family of the first
Slave, and at last took him Prisoner in Daulet-Abad, the Capital, where he died.

After that time, the Kings of Golkonda have maintained themselves well enough;
not as if they could compare with the power of the Mogol, but because the Mogol
has always been employed against the two others; from whom he was to take
Amber, Paranda, Bider, and some other places, before he could conveniently
march toward Golkonda. And because they have always been so politic, being
very opulent, as to furnish underhand the King of Visapour with Money, and
thereby to help him to maintain a War against the Mogol: Besides that, they
ever have a considerable Army on foot, which is always ready, and never fails
to take the Field, and to approach to the Frontiers, at the time when there is
News that that of the Mogol marches against Visapour; to let the Mogol see, not
only that they are always ready to defend themselves, but also that they could
easily assist the King of Visapour, in case he should be reduced to any
extremity. Next, which is very considerable, they know also how to convey Money
underhand to the Chieftains of the Mogolian Army; who thereupon advise the
Court, that it is more to purpose to attack Visapour, as being nearer to
Daulet-Abad. Further, They send every year very considerable Presents to the
Great Mogol, by way of Tribute, which consist partly in some rare Manufactures
of the Country; partly in Elephants, which they send for from Pegu, Siam, and
Ceilan, partly in fair ready money. Lastly, The Mogol considers that Kingdom as
his own, not only because he looks upon the King thereof as his Tributary, but
chiefly since that Agreement heretofore spoken of, which the present King made
with Aureng-Zebe, when he besieged Golkonda; and there being also no place able
to resist, even from Daulet-Abad unto Golkonda, he judges, that when he shall
think fit to push for it, he may take in the whole Kingdom in one Campaign;
which, in my opinion, he would certainly have done, if he did not apprehend,
lest sending his Forces towaids Golkonda, the King of Visapour should enter
into Decon; as, no doubt, he would do, knowing it to be very important to his
Conservation, that that Kingdom may always subsist as now it is.

From all which, something may be understood of the Interests and Government of
the King of Golkonda with the Mogol, and what way he takes to support himself
against him. Yet notwithstanding all this, I find this State much shaken, in
regard that the King that now is, since that unhappy Affair of Aureng-Zebe and
Emir-Jemla, seems to have lost heart, and as 'twere abandoned the reins of the
Kingdom, not daring any more to go forth of this Fortress of Golkonda, nor so
much as appear in public to give Audience to his People, and to render
Justice, according to the custom of the Country: Which discomposeth things very
much, and occasions the Grandees to tyrannize over the meaner sort of People,
and to lose even their respect to the King, often slighting his Commands, and
considering him no more than a Woman; and the People, weary of the injustice
and ill treatment, breathing after nothing but Aureng-Zebe. It Is easy to judge
of the streights this poor King is in, by four or five Particulars I am about
to relate.

The first, that Anno 1667. when I was at Golkonda, King Aureng-Zebe having
sent an Ambassador Extraordinary to declare War to that King, unless he would
furnish him with Ten thousand Horse against Visapour, he did extraordinary
honor, and give excessive Presents to that Ambassador, as well for him in
particular, as for Aureng-Zebe, and made an agreement with him, to send him,
not Ten thousand Horse, but as much Money as is necessary to maintain so many;
which was all that Aureng-Zebe looked for.

The second is, That Aureng-Zebe's Ambassador in Ordinary, that is constantly
at Golkonda, commands, threatens, strikes, gives Pass-ports, and says and
does whatsoever he will, no man daring with the least word to cross him.

The third is, That Mahmet-Emir-kan, the Son of Emir-Jemla, though he be no
more than a simple Omrab of Aureng-Zebe, is yet so much respected through that
whole Kingdom, and especially in Maslipatan, that the Taptata, his
Commissioner, is, as 'twere, Master thereof, buying and selling, bringing in
and sending abroad his Merchants Ships, no Body daring to contradict him in any
thing, nor to demand any Customs. So great was once the power of Emir-Jemla his
Father in this Kingdom, which time has not yet been able to root out.

The fourth is, That the Hollanders scruple not to threaten him sometimes, to
lay an Embargo upon all the Merchants Ships of the Country that are in that
Port, and not to let them go out, until their demands be granted; as also to
put in Protestations against him: which I have seen actually done, upon the
account of an English Vessel, which they had a mind to take by force in the
Port of Maslipatan it self, the Governor having hindered it, by arming the whole
Town against them, and threatening to put Fire to their Factory, and to put them
all to death.

A fifth is, That the Portugueses, as poor, and miserable, and decayed, as they
are in the Indies, yet stick not to threaten that King also with War; and that
they will come and sack Maslipatan, and all that Coast, if he will not render
them that place of St. Thomas, which some years ago they chose to put into his
hands, rather than to be constrained to yield it up to the Dutch.

Yet for all this, I have been informed in Golkonda, by very intelligent
persons, that this King is a Prince of very great judgment, and that whatever
he so does and suffers, is only in policy, to the end to provoke no body, and
principally to remove all suspicion from Aureng-Zebe, and to give him to
understand, that he has in a manner no share any more in the Kingdom: But that
in the mean time a Son of his, that is kept hid, grows up, the Father watching
for a fit time to declare him King, and so to laugh at the Agreement made with
Aureng-Zebe. Of this, time will show us more; in the mean time, let us consider
somewhat of the Interests of Visapour.

The Kingdom of Visapour has also not been wanting to support it self, though
the Mogol do almost continually make War against it; not so much as if he of
Visapour were able to bid head to the Mogolian Forces, but because there is
never any great effort used against him. For it is not very frequent there, no
more than it is elsewhere, for Generals of Armies to desire the end of a War;
there being nothing so charming, as to be in the head of an Army, commanding
like little Kings, remote from the Court. It is also grown to a Proverb, That
Decan is the Bread and Life of the Soldiers of Indostan. Besides, the Country
of Visapour is on the side of the Mogol's Dominions of a very difficult access,
upon the account of the scarcity of good Waters, Forage, and Victuals; and
because Visapour, the Capital City, is very strong, and situate in a dry and
steril Country, there being almost no good Water but in the Town. And lastly,
because there are many Fortresses in that Country, seated on Hills hard to
climb.

Yet notwithstanding all this, that State is much shaken, if considering that
the Mogol has taken Paranda, the Key, as 'twere, of that Kingdom; as also that
fair and strong Town Bider, and some other very important places: But
principally, because the last King of Visapour died without Heirs Males, and he
that now calls himself King, is a Youth, whom the Queen, Sister of the King of
Golkonda, has raised, and taken for her Son (a favor for which he has made
an ill return, having showed no esteem for this Queen after her return from
Mecca, under the pretext of some ill demeanor in her on a Dutch Vessel that
carried her to Moka:) Lastly, because that in the disorders of that Kingdom,
the Heathen-Rebel, Seva-Gi, above discoursed of, found means to seize on many
strong Holds, mostly seated on steep Mountains, where he now acts the King,
laughing at the Visapour, and the Mogol, and ravaging the Country every where,
from Suratte, even to the Gates of Goa. This notwithstanding, if he wrongs
Visapour one way, he helps to support it another, forasmuch as he is resolutely
bent against the Mogol, preparing always some Ambush, and cutting so much work
for his Army, that there is no discourse, no apprehension but of Seva-Gi;
insomuch that he has come and sacked Suratte, and pillaged the Isle of Burdes,
which belongs to the Portuguese, and is near the Gates of Goa.

The seventh Particular, which I learned at Golkonda, when I was come away from
Dehli, is the death of Chah-Jehan; and that Aureng-Zebe had been exceedingly
affected therewith, having discovered all the marks of grief, that a Son can
express for the loss of his Father: That at the very hour of receiving that
News, he went toward Agra; that Begum-Saheb caused the Mosquee, and a certain
place, where he was at first to stop, before he entered the Fortress, to be hung
with richly embroidered Tapisteries: That at his entering into the Seraglio, she
presented him with a great Golden Basin, wherein were all her Jewels, and all
those of Chah-Jehan; and in short, that she knew to receive him with so much
Magnificence, and to entertain him with that dexterity and craft, that she
obtained his pardon, gained his favor, and grew very confident with him.

To conclude, I doubt not, but most of those, who shall have read my History,
will judge the ways taken by Aureng-Zebe, for getting the Empire, very violent
and horrid. I pretend not at all to plead for him, but desire only, that before
he be altogether condemned, reflection be made on that unhappy custom of this
State, which leaving the succession of the Crown undecided, for want of good
Laws, settling it, as amongst us, upon the eldest Son, exposes it to the
Conquest of the strongest, and the most fortunate, subjecting at the same time
all the Princes born in the Royal Family, by the condition of their Birth, to
the cruel necessity either to overcome, or to reign, by destroying all the
rest, for the assurance of their power and life, or to perish themselves, for
the security of that of others: For I am apt to believe, that upon this
Consideration, the Reader will not find Aureng-Zebe's Conduct so strange as at
first it appeared. However I am persuaded, that those who shall a little weigh
this whole History, will not take Aureng-Zebe for a Barbarian, but for a great
and rare Genius, a Great Statesman, and a Great King.

A Letter to the Lord COLBERT, of the Extent of INDOSTAN; the Circulation of
Gold and Silver, coming at length to be swallowed up, there, as in an Abyss;
the Riches, Forces, Justice, and the principal Cause of the Decay of the States
of ASIA.
My Lord,
SInce it is the Custom of Asia, never to approach Great Persons with Empty
Hands, when I had the Honor to kiss the Vest of the Great Mogol Aureng Zebe, I
presented him with eight Roupies, \[A Roupy is about Half a Crown\] as an
expression of respect; and the illustrious Fazel-kan, the prime Minister of
State, and he that was to establish my Pension as Physician, with a Case of
Knives garnished with Amber. My Lord, though I intend not to introduce new
Customs in France, yet I cannot forget this upon my Return from those Parts;
being persuaded, that I ought not to appear before the King, for whom I have a
far deeper Veneration, than for Aureng-Zebe; nor before You, my Lord, for whom
I have a much higher Esteem, than for Fazel-kan, without some little Present to
both, which is rare, at least, for its Novelty, though it be not so upon the
account of the presenting hand. The Revolution of Indostan, by reason of its
extraordinary Occurrences and Events, has to me seemed worthy of the Greatness
of our Monarch, and this Discourse, for the quality of the matters therein
contained, suitable to the rank you hold in his Counsels; to that Conduct, which
at my Return appeared to me so admirable in the Order, which I found settled in
so many things, that I thought incapable of it; and to the passion you
entertain to make it known to the Ends of the Earth, what a Monarch we have,
and that the French are fit to undertake, and with Honor to atchieve,
whatsoever you shall have designed for their Honor and Advantage.

It Is in the Indies, my Lord (whence I am lately returned, after twelve years
absence) where I learned the felicity of France, and how much this Kingdom is
obliged to your cares; and where your Name is so diffused, and so well known.
This were a fair Theme for me to enlarge upon; but my Design being no other
than to discourse of things New, I must forbear to speak of those that are
already so notorious to all the World. I shall doubtless please you better, by
endeavoring to give you some Idea of the state of the Indies, which I have
engaged my self to give you an account of.

My Lord, You may have seen before this, by the Maps of Asia, how great every
way is the Extent of the Empire of the Great Mogol, which is commonly called
India, or Indostan. I have not measured it Mathematically; but to speak of it
according to the ordinary Journeys of the Country, after the rate of three
whole months march, traversing from the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Golkonda,
as far as beyond Kazni near Kandahar, which is the first Town of Persia, I
cannot persuade my self otherwise, but that it is at least five times as far as
from Paris to Lions, that is, about Five hundred common Leagues.

Next, You may please to take notice, that of that vast Extent of Land, there
are large Countries that are very fertile, and some of them to that degree, (for
Example, that whole great Kingdom of Bengale) that they exceed those of Egypt,
not only upon the account of the abundance of Rice, Corn, and all other things
necessary for life, but also upon the score of all those Commodities so
considerable, which Egypt is destitute of, as Silks, Cottons, Indigo, and so
many others, sufficiently related by Authors.

Moreover, That of these same Countries there are many that are well enough
peopled and cultivated, and where Tradesmen, though naturally very lazy there,
are not wanting, either from Necessity, or other Causes, to apply themselves to
work, as to Tapisseries, Embroideries, Cloth of Gold and Silver, and to all
those kinds of Silk and Cotton Manufactures, that are used in the Country, or
transported to other Parts.

You may further observe; how that Gold and Silver circulating as it were upon
the Earth, comes at last, in part, to be swallowed up in this Indostan. For of
that which comes out of America, and is dispersed through the several Kingdoms
of our Europe, we know, that one part is carried into Turkey many ways, for the
Commodities drawn thence; and that another part is conveyed into Persia, by the
way of Smyrna, for the Silks afforded there: That all Turkey generally needs
Coffee, which comes out of Hyeman, or Happy Arabia, and is the common Drink of
the Turks: That the same Turkey as well as Hyeman and Persia cannot be without
the Commodities of India; and that thus all those Countries are obliged to
carry to Moka over the Red Sea, near Babel-mandel; and to Bassora the utmost
part of the Persian-Gulf; and to Bandar-Abbasi, or Gomoron near to Ormus, a
part of that Gold and Silver, that had been brought into their Country, to be
thence transported into Indostan, in Vessels, that yearly, in the season of the
Mounsons, come purposely to those three famous Parts: That on the other hand,
all those Ships of India, whether they be Indian ones, or Dutch, or English, or
Portuguese, that every year transport Merchandise out of Indostan to Pegu,
Tanasseri, Siam, Ceilan, Achem, Macasser, the Maldives, Mosambic, and other
places, bring back also much Gold and Silver from all those Countries, which
meets with the same Destiny, that the other-doth: That of that quantity of Gold
and Silver which the Hollanders draw from Japan, (which is stored with Mines) a
part also comes to be at length discharged in this Indostan: And that lastly,
what is carried thither directly by Sea, whether from Portugal, England, or
France, seldom comes back from thence but in Merchandise, the rest remaining
there, as the former.

I very well know, that it may be said, that this Indostan needs Copper,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Elephants, and sundry other things, which the
Hollanders carry thither from Japan, the Molueques, Ceilan, and Europe; as also
that it has occasion for Lead, which in part, it is furnished with out of
England; likewise for Scarlet, which it has from France: Moreover, that it
stands in need of a good number of Horses, it being certain, that from the side
of Vsbec it receives yearly more than 2500. That out of Persia also it is
furnished with abundance of the same; as also out of Ethiopia, Arabia, the
Ports of Moka, Bassora, and Bander-abbasy: Besides, that it needs that store of
fresh Fruit, which comes thither from Samarkand, Ball-bocara, and Persia, as
Melons, Apples, Pears, and Grapes, that are spent at Dehli, and bought at great
Rates, almost all the Winter long; as well as dry Fruit, which are had there
all the year long, and come from the same Countries, as Almonds, Pistaches,
Nuts, Prunes, Abricots, Raisins, and the like. And that lastly, it wants those
little Sea-cockles of the Maldives, which serve for common Coin in Bengale, and
in some other places, as also Ambergriece, carried thither from the said
Maldives and Mosambic, Rhinoceros-horns, Elephants-teeth, Musk, China-dishes,
Pearls of Babaren, and Tutucoury near Ceilan; and, I know not of how many other
things of this kind.

But all this makes not the Gold and Silver to go out of that Empire, because
the Merchants at their return freight their Ships with the Commodities of the
Country, finding a better account by so doing, than if they should bring back
Money, so that that hinders not, but that Indostan proves, as we have said, a
kind of Abyss for a great part of the Gold and Silver of the World, which finds
many ways to enter there, and almost none to issue thence.

In a word, you may take notice, that this Great Mogol makes himself Heir of
the Omrahs or Lords, and of the Manseb-dars, or petty Lords, that are in his
Pay; and (which is of very great consequence) that all the Lands of that Empire
are his Propriety, excepting some Houses and Gardens, which he gives leave to
his Subjects to sell, divide, or buy amongst them, as they shall think fit.

These are the things, which sufficiently show, both that there must needs be a
very great store of Gold and Silver in Indostan, though there be no Mines; and
also that the Great Mogol, the Sovereign of the fame, at least, of the best
part of it, has immense Revenues and Riches.

But on the other hand, there are also many things to be observed, which are a
poise to these Riches. The first, that among those vast tracts of Land there is
much, which is nothing but sand and steril Mountains, little Tilled or Peopled:
That even of those that would be fertile, there is much, that is not used for
want of Workmen, some of which have perished by the too evil treatment of the
Governors, who often take from them their necessary livelihood, and sometimes
their very Children whom they make Slaves when they are not able, or are
unwilling to pay: Others have abandoned the Field for the same reason, and
desponding out of the consideration that they labored only for others, have
cast themselves into Towns, or into Armies, to serve there for Porters, or
waiting men, and many have fled to the lands of the Rajas, because there they
found less tyranny, and more kindness.

The second is, That in this same Extent of Country there are sundry Nations,
which the Mogol is not full Master of, most of them retaining yet their
particular Sovereigns and Lords, that obey him not, nor pay him Tribute but
from constraint; many, that do little; some, that do nothing at all; and some
also, that receive Tribute from him, as we shall see anon. Such are those petty
Sovereigns, that are seated on the Frontiers of Persia, who almost never pay
him any thing, no more than they do to the King of Persia: As also the
Balouches and Augans, and other Mountineers, of whom also the greatest part pay
him but a small matter, and even care but very little for him: witness the
Affront they did him, when they stopped his whole Army by cutting off the
Water, which they kept back within the Mountains, when he passed from Atek on
the River Indus to Caboul, to lay siege to Kandahar; not suffering the Water to
run down into the Fields, where was the Highway, 'till they had received
Presents, although they asked them by way of Alms. Such are also the Patans, a
Mahumetan People, issued from the side of the River Ganges toward Bengale; who
before the Invasion of the Mogols in India, had taken their time to make
themselves potent in many places, and chiefly at Dehli, and to render many
Rajas thereabout their Tributaries. These Patans are fierce and warlike, and
even the meanest of them, though they be waiting Men and Porters, are still of
a very high spirit, being often heard to say by way of swearing, Let me never
be King of Dehli, if it be not so: A People that despife the Indians, Heathen,
and Mogols, and mortally hate the last, still remembering what they were
formerly, before they were by them driven away from their large Principalities,
and constrained to retire hither and thither, far from Dehli, and Agra, into
the Mountains, where now they are settled, and where some of them have made
themselves petty Sovereigns, like Rajas, but of small strength.

Such an one also is the King of Visapour, who pays to the Mogol nothing, and
is always in War with him; maintaining himself in his Country, partly by his
own Forces, partly because he is very remote from Agra and Dehli, the ordinary
places of Residence of the Great Mogol; partly also, because his Capital City
Visapour is strong, and of difficult access to an Army, by reason of the ill
Waters, and the want of Forage on the way; and partly because many Rajas join
with him for their common defense, as did the famous Seva-Gi, who, not long
since, came pillaging and burning that rich Seaport, Suratte, and who
sometimes will pay little or no Tribute.

Such is likewise that potent and rich King of Golkonda, who underhand gives
Money to the King of Visapour, and has always an Army ready on the Frontiers
for his own defense, and for the assistance of Visapour, in case he find him
too much pressed.

Of the like sort are more than an hundred Rajas, or considerable Heathen
Sovereigns, dispersed through the whole Empire, some near to, others remote
from Agra and Dehli: amongst whom there are about fifteen or sixteen that are
very rich and puissant; such as is Rana (who formerly was, as 'twere, Emperor
of the Rajas; and who is said to be of the Progeny of King Porus;) Jesseignae
and Jessomseignae, which are so great and powerful, that if they three alone
should combine, they would hold him tack; each of them being able, in a very
short time, to raise and bring into the Field Twenty five thousand Horse,
better Troops than the Mogols. These Gavaliers are called Ragipouts, or the
Children of Rajas. They are men, who, as I have elsewhere said, carry Swords
from Father to Son, and to whom the Rajas allot Land, on condition to be always
ready to appear on Horseback, when the Raja commands. They can endure much
hardship, and they want nothing to make them good Soldiers, but good Order and
Discipline.

The third thing to be noted is, That the Mogol is a Mahumetan, not of the Sect
called Chias, who follow Aly and his Offspring, (such as the Persians are, and
consequently the greatest part of his Court;) but of that, which follows Osman,
and thence are called Osmanlys, such as the Turks are. Besides, that he is a
stranger, being of the Race of Tamerlan, who was the Head of those Mogols, that
about the year 1401, overran India, where they made themselves Masters: so
that he is in a Country, almost all hostile; and that the more, because not
only for one Mogol, but in general, for one Mahumetan, there are hundreds of
Gentiles or Heathen; which obliges him, constantly to entertain (for his
defense amongst so many domestic and potent Enemies, and against the Persians
and Vsbecks, his Neighbors) very great Armies, whether in time of Peace or
War, as well about his Person, as in the Field; as well of the People of the
Country, (Rajas and Patans,) as chiefly Mogolians, or at least esteemed such,
because they are White, and Mahumetans; which suffices at present; his Court
being no more now as 'twas at first, consisting altogether of true Mogols; but
a mixture of all sorts of strangers, Vsbecks, Persians, Arabians, and Turks, or
their Children; but with this distinction, that the Children of the third or
fourth Generation, and that have taken the Brown color, and the soft humor of
the Country, are not so much esteemed as the new comers; being also seldom
raised to public Offices, but counting themselves happy, if they may serve as
simple Horsemen or Foot.

Of these Armies I am now going to give you some description, that thereby
knowing the great Expenses, which the Grand Mogol is obliged to be at, you may
the better judge of his true Riches; let us first take a view of the Field
Militia, he is necessitated to maintain.

The chief thereof are the Rajas, such as Jesseignae, Jessomseignae, and many
others to whom he allows very great Persions, to have them always ready with a
certain number of Ragipouts, esteeming them like Omrahs, that is, like other
Strangers, and Mahumetan Lords; both in the Army, that is always about his
person, and in those also, that are in the Field. These Rajas are generally
obliged to the same things, that the Omrahs are, even to the point of keeping
Guard; yet with this distinction, that they keep not the Guard within the
Fortress, as those, but without, under their Tents; they not liking to be shut
up Twenty four hours in a Fortress, nor so much as ever to go thither, but well
attended with Men, resolute to be cut in pieces for their service; as has
appeared, when they have been ill dealt withal.

The Mogol is obliged to keep these Rajas in his service for sundry reasons.

The first, because the Militia of the Rajas is very good (as was said above)
and because there are Rajas, (as was intimated also) one of whom can bring into
the Field above 25000 men.

The second, the better to bridle the other Rajas, and to reduce them to reason
when they cantonize, or when they refuse to pay Tribute, or when out of fear or
other cause, they will not go out of their Country to the Army, when the Mogol
requires it.

The third, the better to nourish jealousies and keenness amongst them, by
favoring and caressing the one more than the other, which is done to that
degree, that they proceed to fight with one another very frequently.

The fourth, to employ them against the Patans, or against his own Omrahs and
Governors, in case any of them should rise.

The fifth, to employ them against the King of Golkonda, when he refuses to
pay his Tribute, or when he will defend the King of Visapour, or some Rajas his
Neighbors, which the Mogol has a mind to rifle, or to make his Tributaries;
the Mogol in those cases not daring to trust his Omrahs overmuch, who most are
Persians, and not of the same Religion with him, but Chias, like the Kings of
Persia and Golkonda.

The sixth, and the most considerable of all, is, to employ them against the
Persians upon occasion; not daring then also to confide in his Omrahs, who, for
the greatest part, as was just now said, are Persians, and consequently have no
stomach to fight against their natural King; and the less, because they believe
him to be their Imam, their Caliph or High Priest, descended from Aly, and
against whom therefore they believe they cannot make War without a Crime, or a
great Sin.

The Mogol is farther obliged to entertain some Patans for the same, or
somewhat like reasons, that he does the Rajas.

At last he must entertain that stranger Militia of the Mogols, that we have
taken notice of: And as this is the main strength of his State, and which
obliges him to incredible charges, methinks it will not be amiss to describe to
you, of what nature it is, though I should be somewhat long in doing it.

Let us therefore consider, if you please, this stranger Militia, both Cavalry
and Infantry, as divided into two; the one, being always near the Mogol's
Person; the other, dispersed up and down in the several Provinces. And in the
Cavalry that is about his Person, let us first take notice of the Omrahs; then,
of the Mansebdars; next, of the Rousindars; last of all, of the simple
Horsemen. From thence let us proceed to the Infantry, in which we shall
consider the Musketeers, and all those men on foot that attend the Ordnance,
where something will occur to be said of their Artillery.

It is not to be thought, that the Omrahs or Lords of the Mogol's Court are
Sons of great Families, as in France; All the Lands of that Empire being the
Mogol's Propriety, it follows, that there are neither Dutchies, nor Marquisats,
nor any Family rich in Land, and subsisting of its own Income and Patrimony.
And often enough they are not so much as Omrah's Sons, because the King being
Heir of all their Estates, it is consequent that the Houses cannot subsist long
in their greatness; on the contrary, they often fall, and that on a sudden,
insomuch that the Sons, or at least the Grandsons of a potent Omrah are
frequently, after the death of their Father, reduced, in a manner, to Beggary,
and obliged to list themselves under some Omrah for simple Horsemen. It Is true,
that ordinarily the Mogol leaves some small Pension to the Widow, and often
also to the Children; or, if the Father lives too long, he may by particular
favor advance them sooner, especially if they be proper men, white of Face,
having as yet not too much of the Indian Complexion and temper, and so passing
yet for true Mogols: Though this advancement by favor do always proceed in a
slow pace; it being almost a general custom, that a man must pass from small
Pays and small Places, to great ones. These Omrahs then are commonly but
Adventurers and Strangers of all sorts of Nations, such as I have said; which
draw one another to this Court; men of a mean descent, some of them slaves;
most of them without instruction, which the Mogol thus raises to Dignities as
he thinks good, and degrades them again, as he pleases.

Amongst these Omrahs, some are Hazary, others Dou Hazary, others Penge, Hecht,
and Deh Hazary, and even (such was the King's eldest Son) Dovazdeh Hazary, that
is to say, Lord of a thousand Horse, of two thousand, five thousand, seven,
ten, and twelve thousand; their Pay being less or more in proportion to the
number of Horses; I say, of Horses, because they are not paid in respect of the
Horsemen, but of the Horse; the Omrahs having power to entertain Horsemen of
two Horses a man, to be the better able to serve in the hot Countries, where
it is a common saying, That the Horseman that has but one Horse, is more than
half a Footman. Yet we must not think, that they are obliged to entertain, or
that the King effectively pays so many Horse, as these great names of Dovazdeh
or Hecht Hazary do impart, that is, 12000, or 8000 Horse. These are specious
Names, to amuse and attract Strangers; the King determines the number of Horses
in actual service, which they are bound to entertain, pays them according to
this number; and besides that, he pays them a certain number which they are not
bound to entertain; and this is that which ordinarily makes the principal part
of their Pensions; not to speak of what they finger out of the Pay of every
Horseman, and of the number of the Horses; which certainly amounts to very
considerable Pensions; especially if they can obtain good Jah-ghirs, that is,
good Lands for their Pension. For I saw, that the Lord, under whom I was, that
was a Penge-hazary, or one of five thousand Horse, and who was only obliged to
entertain five hundred in effect, had, after all his Cavalry was paid,
remaining for his Pension near Five thousand Crowns a month; though he was
Nagdy, that is, paid in Money drawn out of the Treasury, as all those are, that
have not Lands. Yet notwithstanding all these great Pensions, I see none but
very few that are rich, but many that are uneasy and indebted: Not that they
are ruined by keeping too plentiful Tables, as elsewhere great Lords frequently
are; but that which exhausteth them, are the great Presents which they are
obliged to make to the King at certain Festivals of the year, every one after
the rate of his Pay; next, the vast Expenses they must be at for entertaining
their Wives, Servants, Camels, and many Horses of great value, which they keep
in their particular Stables.

The number of the Omrahs, as well of those, that are in the Field in the
Provinces and Armies, as of those that are at the Court, is very great. I never
could precisely learn it; nor is it determined: But I have never seen less of
them at Court, than twenty five or thirty, that are thus Pensionaries according
to a greater or lesser number of Horses to be entertained by them, from 12000
downward to 1000. These are the Omrahs, that arrive to the Governments and
principal Offices of the Court and Armies; that are, as they speak, the Pillars
of the Empire, and that keep up the splendour of the Court; never going abroad,
but richly decked, sometimes riding on Elephants, sometimes on Horseback,
sometimes carried in a Paleky or Chair, commonly attended by a good number of
Horsemen, to wit, of those that have the Guard at that time, as also by many
Footmen marching before, and on his sides, to make way, to drive away the
Flies, to take off the dust with Peacocks tails, to carry water for drink, and
sometimes Books of Accounts, or other Papers.

All those that are at Court, are obliged, under a considerable Penalty, to
come twice every day to salute the King in the Assembly, once about Ten or
eleven a clock in the morning, when he renders Justice; and the second time,
about six hours at night. They are also obliged by turns to keep the Guard in
the Castle once a week, during twenty four hours. Thither they carry at that
time their Beds, Tapisseries and other Movables, the King furnishing them with
nothing but Provisions of Meat and Drink, which they receive with great
reverence, making a treble obeisance, with their face turned to his Apartment,
their hands down to the ground, and then lifted up upon their heads. Besides,
they are obliged on Horseback to follow the King whithersoever he marches in
any weather, rainy or dusty, whether he be carried in his Chair, or on an
Elephant, or a Field-Throne, which last is done by eight men carrying him on
their shoulders, eight others marching on his side, to relieve the others;
himself being in all Marches well covered from the inconveniences of the
Weather, whether he go to War, or to Hunt, or to exercise his Soldiery. And
this attendance those Omrahs are to give, except some of them be exempted by
the Mogol, because of their peculiar Offices, or upon the account of sickness
or old age, or to avoid embarasment, as commonly it is practiced, when he goes
only to some neighboring Town to hunt, or to some house of Pleasure, or to the
Mosquee, there being then seldom any about him but those that keep the Guard
that day.

Mansebdars are Cavaliers Manseb, which is particular and honorable Pay; not
so great indeed as that of the Omrahs, but much greater than that of the
others; they being esteemed as little Omrahs, and of the rank of those, that
are raised to that dignity.

These acknowledge also none for their Head but the King, and they are
generally obliged to whatever we have said the Omrahs are. In a word, they
would be true Omrahs, if they had, as diverse heretofore have had, some Horsemen
under them; whereas they have ordinarily but two, four, or six Horses, having
the King's mark, and their Pay goes no higher than from 200, to 600 or 700
Roupies a month. Their number also is not fixed, but much exceeds that of the
Omrahs, there being of them at the Court always two or three hundred, besides
those that are in the Provinces and Armies.

Rouzindars are also a sort of Cavaliers, but such as have their Pay by the
day, (as the word it self imports) which yet sometimes is greater than that of
many Mansebdars, but not so honorable; but then they are not bound, as the
Mansebdars, to take at a set price (which sometimes is not too reasonable) of
those Tapisseries and other Household Stuff, that has served for the King's
Palace. Their number is very great; they enter into the meaner Offices, many of
them being Clerks, Under-Clerks, Signet-Men, and the like.

Simple Cavaliers, are those, that are under the Omrahs; amongst whom the most
considerable, and having most Pay, are those that have two Horses marked on the
Leg with the mark of their Omrah. Their Pay is not absolutely fixed, but
depends chiefly from the generosity of the Omrah, who may favor whom he
pleases. Yet the Mogol's intention is, that the Pay of a simple Cavalier or
Horseman be no less than twenty five Roupies, or thereabout a Month, stating
his account with the Omrahs upon that Foot.

The Pay of the Foot is the least; and their Musketeers are pitiful men,
unless they discharge when their Musket leans on that small wooden Fork
hanging to it; yet even then they are afraid of singeing their great Beards,
and of burning their Eyes, but most of all, least some Dgen or evil Spirit
burst their Musket. Some of these have 20 Roupies a Month, some 15, some 10.
But yet there are some Gunners that have great Pay, especially those of the
Franguis or Christians, as Portugueses, English, Dutch, Germans, French, that
retire thither from Goa, flying from English and Dutch Companies. Heretofore
when the Mogols did not yet know how to manage Artillery, their Pay was very
great. And there are yet some of that time, who have 200 Roupies a Month; but
now they will receive none for more than thirty two.

Their Artillery is of two sorts; the one is the great and heavy Artillery, the
other the light. As for the former, I remember, that when the King after his
Sickness went with his whole Army abroad into the Country, diverting himself
every day in Hunting, sometimes of Cranes, sometimes of the gray Oxen, (a kind
of Elks) sometimes of Gazels, Leopards and Lions, and making his progress
toward Lahor and Kachmire (that little Paradise of India) there to pass the
Summer, the Army had Seventy pieces of Cannon, most of them cast, not counting
the two or three hundred Camels, carrying each a small Field-piece of the
bigness of a good double Musket, fastened to those Animals. The other light
Artillery is very brave and well ordered, consisting of fifty or sixty small
Fieldpieces all of Brass, each mounted on a little Chariot, drawn by two very
fair Horses, driven by a Coachman like a Caleche, adorned with a number of
small red Streamers, each having a third Horse led by the Chariot for relief.

The great Artillery could not always follow the King, who often l^^t the
Highway, and turned sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left hand,
crossing the fields, to find the true places for Game, and to follow the course
of the Rivers. That therefore was to keep the Highway to go the more easily,
and to avoid the embarasments, which it would have met with in the ill
passages, especially in those Boat-Bridges made to pass Rivers. The light
Artillery is inseparable from the person of the King, it marches away in the
morning, when the King comes out of his Tent; and whereas he commonly goes a
little aside into the places for Game, this Artillery passes on straight with
all possible speed, to be in time at the Rendezvous, and there to appear before
the King's Tent, which is there made ready the day before; as are also the
Tents of the great Omrahs: And this whole Artillery gives a Volley just when
the King enters into his Tent, thereby to give notice to the Army of his
arrival.

The Militia of the Field is not different from that which is about the King:
There are everywhere Omrahs, Mansebdars, Rousindars, simple Horsemen, and Foot
and Artillery wherever any War is made. The difference is only in the number,
which is much greater in the Field-Army, than in the other. For that Army
alone, which the Mogol is constrained perpetually to maintain in Decan, to
bridle the potent King of Golkonda, and to make War upon the King of Visapour,
and upon all the Raja's that join with him, must consist at least of twenty, or
twenty five thousand Horse sometimes of thirty.

The Kingdom of Kaboul, for its ordinary Guard against the Persians, Augans,
Balouches, and I know not how many Mounteniers, requires at least Fifteen
thousand. The Kingdom of Kachmire, more than Four thousand; and the Kingdom of
Bengale, much more; not counting those that are employed in the War, which must
almost always be maintained on that side; nor those which the Governors of the
several Provinces do need for their defense, according to the particular extent
and situation of their Governments, which makes an incredible number.

Not to mention the Infantry, (which is inconsiderable) I am apt to believe
with many others, well informed of these matters, that the number of the Horse
in actual service about the King's Person, comprehending the Cavalry of the
Raja's and Patans, mounteth to Thirty five or forty thousand; and that this
number, joined to those that is abroad in the Field, may make Two hundred
thousand, and better.

I say, that the Infantry is inconsiderable; for I can hardly believe, that in
the Army which is about the King, comprising the Musketeers, and all the
Gunners and their Mates, and whatever serves in this Artillery, can amount to
much more than Fifteen thousand; whence you may make a near guess, what the
number of the Foot must be in the Field. So that I know not whence to take that
prodigious number of Foot, which some do reckon in the Armies of the Great
Mogol, unless it be, that with this true Soldiery they confound all the
Serving-men and Victuallers that follow the Army; for in that sense I should
easily believe, that they had reason to reckon two or three hundred thousand
men in that Army alone which is with the King, and sometimes more; especially
when it is certain, that he is to be long absent from the Capital City: which
will not seem so strange to him, that considers the multitude and confusion of
(...) Kitchens, Baggage, Women, Elephants, Camels, Oxen, Horses, Waiting-men,
Porters, Foragers, Victuallers, Merchants of all sorts, that must follow the
Army; nor to him, that knows the State and particular Government of that
Country, wherein the King is the sole Proprietor of all the Lands of the
Kingdom; whence it necessarily follows, that a whole Metropolitan City, such as
Dehly and Agra, lives of almost nothing but of the Soldiery, and is
consequently obliged to follow the King when he takes the Field; those Towns
being nothing less than Paris, but indeed no otherwise governed than a Camp of
Armies a little better and more conveniently lodged than in the open Field.

Besides all these things, you may also consider, if you please, that generally
all this Militia, which I have been representing to you, from the greatest
Omrah, to the meanest Soldier, is indispensibly paid every two months, the
King's Pay being its sole refuge and relief; nor can its Pay be deferred there,
as it is sometimes with us; where, when there are pressing occasions of the
State, a Gentleman, an Officer, and even a simple Cavalier, can stay awhile,
and maintain himself of his own Stock, Rents, and the Incomes of his Land. But
in the Mogol's Country, all must be paid at the time prefixed, or all disbands
and starves, after they have sold that little they have; as I saw in this last
War, that many were going to do, if it had not soon ceased. And this the more,
because that in all this Militia, there is almost no Soldier that has not Wife
and Children, Servants and Slaves, that look for this Pay, and have no other
hope of relief. And hence it is* that many wonder, considering the huge number
of persons living of Pay (which amounts to millions) whence such vast Revenues
can be had for such excessive Charges: Although this need not to be so much
wondered at, considering the Riches of the Empire, the peculiar Government of
the State, and the said universal Propriety of the Sovereign.

You may add to all this, That the Grand Mogol keeps nigh him at Dehly and
Agra, and thereabout, two or three thousand brave Horses, to be always ready
upon occasion, as also eight or nine hundred Elephants, and a vast number of
Mules, Horses, and Porters, to carry all the great Tents and their Cabinets, to
carry his Wives, Kitchens, Household Stuff, Ganges-Water, and all the other
Necessaries for the Field, which he has always about him as if he were at
home; things not absolutely necessary in our Kingdoms.

To this may be added those incredible Expenses upon the Seraglio, more
indispensible than will be easily believed; that vast store of fine Linen,
Cloth of Gold, Embroideries, Silks, Musk, Amber, Pearls, sweet Essences, etc.
consumed there.

All these Charges being put together, and compared with the Revenues the Mogol
may be thought to have, it will be easy to judge, whether he be indeed so very
rich, as he is made to be. As for me, I very well know, that it cannot be
denied, that he has very great Revenues; I believe, he has more alone than
the Grand Seignior, and the King of Persia, both together: But then, to believe
all those extravagant Stories made of the vastness of his Revenues, is a thing
I could never do: And if I should believe the best part of them, yet should I
not believe him in effect and (...) so rich, as the World rings of him; unless
a man would say, that a Treasurer, who receives great Sums of money from one
hand at the same time when he is obliged to disburse them to another, were
therefore truly rich. For my part, I should count that King rich indeed, who,
without oppressing and impoverishing his People too much, should have a Revenue
sufficient to keep a great and gallant Court, (after the manner of that of
ours, or otherwise) and a Militia sufficient both to guard his Kingdom, and to
make an important War for diverse years against his Neighbors; as also to show
Liberality, to build some Royal Edifices, and to make those other Expenses
which Kings are wont to make according to their particular Inclinations; and
who, besides all this, should be able to put up in his Treasury, for a Reserve,
Sums big enough to undertake and maintain a good War for some years. Now I am
apt enough to believe, that the Great Mogol enjoys very near these
Advantages, but I cannot persuade my self, that he has them in that excess, as
is thought and pretended. Those vast and inevitable Expenses, that I have taken
notice of, will certainly incline you to my Opinion without any other
consideration; but you will, doubtless, be altogether of my mind, when I shall
have represented to you these two things, which I am very well informed of.

The one is, that the Great Mogol, now reigning, about the end of this last
Revolution, though the Kingdom was everywhere in peace (except in Bengale,
where Sultan-Sujah yet ^eld out) was much perplexed where to find means for the
subsistence of his Armies, though they were not so well paid as at other times,
and the War lasted no longer than five years, or threabout, and though also he
had laid hold of a good part of the Treasury of his Father Chah-Jehan.

The other is, That all this Treasure of Chah-Jehan, who was very frugal, and
had Reigned above Forty years without considerable Wars, never mounted to six
Kourours of Roupies. A Roupy is about twenty nine pence. An hundred thousand of
them make a Lecque, and an hundred Lecques make one Kourour. [So that the six
Kourours would make about seven Millions and an half English Money.] It Is true,
I do not comprehend in this great Treasure that great abundance of Goldsmiths
work, so variously wrought in Gold and Silver; nor that vast store of precious
Stones and Pearls of a very high value. I doubt, whether there be any King in
the World that has more. The Throne alone, covered with them, is valued at
least three Kourors, if I remember aright: But then, it is to be considered
also, that they are the spoils of those ancient Princes, the Patans and Rajas,
gathered and piled up from immemorial times, and still increasing from one King
to another, by the Presents which the Omrahs are obliged yearly at certain
Festival-days to make him; and which are esteemed to be the Jewels of the
Crown, which it would be criminal to touch, and upon which a King of Mogol in
case of necessity would find it very hard to procure the least Sum.

But before I conclude, I shall take notice, whence it may proceed, that though
this Empire of Mogol be thus an Abyss of Gold and Silver, (as has been said,)
yet notwithstanding there appears no more of it among the people, than
elsewhere; yea, rather that the People is there less Monied than in other
places.

The first reason is, that much of it is consumed in melting over and over all
those Nose and Earrings, Chains, Finger-rings, Bracelets of Hands and Feet,
which the Women wear, but chiefly in that incredible quantity of Manufactures,
wherein so much is spent, which is lost, as in all those Embroideries,
Silk-stuffs, interwoven with Gold and Silver, Cloth, Scarf, Turbants, etc. of
the same. For generally all that Militia loves to be guided from the Omrahs to
the meanest Soldiers with their Wives and Children, though they should starve
at home.

The second, That all the Lands of the Kingdom being the Kings propriety, they
are given either as Benefices, which they call Jah-ghirs, or, as in Turkey,
Timars, to men of the Militia for their Pay or Pension (as the word Jah-ghir
imports:) Or else they are given to the Governors for their Pension, and the
entertainment of their Troops, on condition that of the surplus of those
Land-revenues they give yearly a certain sum to the King, as Farmers; Or
lastly, the King reserveth them for himself as a particular Domaine of his
House, which never or very seldom are given as Jah-ghirs, and upon which he
keeps Farmers, who also must give him a yearly sum; which is to say, that the
Timariots, Governors and Farmers have an absolute Authority over the
Countrymen, and even a very great one over the Tradesmen and Merchants of the
Towns, Boroughs, and Villages, depending from them: so that in those Parts
there are neither great Lords nor Parliaments, nor Presidial Courts, as amongst
us, to keep these People in awe: nor Kadis or Judges, powerful enough to hinder
and repress their violence; Nor, in a word, any person, to whom a Countryman,
Tradesman, or Merchant, can make his complaints to, in cases of extortion and
tyranny, often practiced upon them, by the Soldiery and Governors, who every
where do impunely abuse the Authority Royal, which they have in hand, unless it
be perhaps a little in those places that are near to Capital Cities, as Dehli
and Agra, and in great Towns and considerable Seaports of the Provinces,
whence they know that the complaints can be more easily conveyed to the Court.
Whence it is, that all and every one stand in continual fear of these people,
especially of the Governors more than any Slave does of his Master: that
ordinarily they affect to appear poor and money-less, very mean in their
Apparel, Lodging, Household Stuff, and yet more in meat and drink; that often
they apprehend even to meddle with Trade, lest they should be thought Rich, and
so fall into the danger of being ruined: So that at last they find no other
remedy to secure their Wealth, than to hide and dig their money deep under
Ground, thus getting out of the ordinary commerce of men, and so Dying, neither
the King nor the State having any benefit by it. Which is a thing not only
happens among the Peasants and Artizans, but (which is far more considerable)
amongst all sorts of Merchants, whether Mabumetans or Heathens, except some
that are in the Kings, or some Omrahs Pay, or that have some particular Patron
and support in power: But principally among the Heathen, which are almost the
only Masters of the Trade and Money, infatuated with the belief, that the Gold
and Silver, which they hide in their lifetime, shall serve them after death.
And this, in my opinion, is the true reason, why there appears so little money
in Trade among the People.

But thence arises a Question very considerable, viz. Whether it were not more
expedient, not only for the Subjects, but for the State it self, and for the
Sovereign, not to have the Prince such a Proprietor of the Lands of the
Kingdom, as to take away the Meum and Tuum amongst private persons; as it is
with us; For my part, after a strict comparing the State of our Kingdoms, where
that Meum and Tuum holds, with that of those other Kingdoms, where it is not, I
am thoroughly persuaded, that it is much better and more beneficial for the
Sovereign himself, to have it so as it is in our parts. Because that in those
parts where it is otherwise, the Gold and Silver is lost, as I was just now
observing: There is almost no person secure from the violences of those
Timariors, Governors, and Farmers: The Kings, how well soever they be disposed
toward their people, are never almost in a condition (as I lately noted) to get
Justice administered to them, and to hinder tyrannies; especially in those great
Dominions, and in the Provinces remote from the Capital Towns; Which yet ought
to be, as doubtless it is, one of the chief employments and considerations of a
King. Besides, this tyranny often grows to that excess, that it takes away what
is necessary to the life of a Peasant or Tradesman, who is starved for hunger
and misery; who gets no Children, or if he does, sees them die young for want
of food; or that abandons his Land, and turns some Cavalier's man, or flies
whither he may to his Neighbors, in hopes of finding a better condition. In a
word, the Land is not tilled but almost by force, and consequently very ill,
and much of it is quite spoiled and ruined, there being none to be found, that
can or will be at the charge of entertaining the ditches and channels for the
course of waters to be conveyed to necessary places; nor any body that care to
build Houses, or to repair those that are ruinous; the Peasant reasoning thus
with himself: Why should I toil so much for a Tyrant that may come to morrow to
take all away from me, or at least all the best of what I have, and not leave,
if the fancy takes him, so much as to sustain my life even very poorly? And
the Timariot, the Governor and the Farmer, will reason thus with himself; Why
should I bestow money, and take pains of bettering or maintaining this Land,
since I must every hour expect to have it taken from me, or exchanged for
another? I labor neither for my self, nor for my Children; and that place
which I have this year, I may, perhaps, have no more the next. Let us draw from
it what we can, whilst we possess it, though the Peasant should break or
starve, though the Land should become a Desert, when I am gone!

And for this very reason it is, that we see those vast Estates in Asia go so
wretchedly and palpably to ruin. Thence it is, that throughout those Parts we
see almost no other Towns but made up of earth and dirt; nothing but ruined and
deserted Towns and Villages, or such as are going to ruin. Even thence it is,
that we see (for Example) those Mesopotamia's, Anatolia's, Palestina's, those
admirable Plains of Antioch, and so many other Lands, anciently so well tilled,
so fertile, and so well peopled, at the present half deserted, untilled and
bandon'd, or become pestilent and uninhabitable Bogs. Thence it is also, that
of those incomparable Lands of Egypt it is observed, that within less than
fourscore years, more than the tenth part of it is lost, no people being to be
found, that will expend what is necessary to maintain all the Channels, and to
restrain the River Nile from violently overflowing on one hand, and so drowning
too much the low Lands, or from covering them with Sand, which cannot be
removed from thence but with great pains and charges. From the same root it
comes, that Arts are languishing in those Countries, or at least flourish much
less than else they would do, or do with Us. For what heart and spirit can an
Artizan have to study well, and to apply his mind to his work, when he sees,
that among the people, which is for the most part beggarly, or will appear so,
there is none that considers the goodness and neatness of his Work, every body
looking for what is cheap, and that the Grandees pay them but very ill, and
when they please. The poor Tradesman often thinking himself happy, that he can
get clear from them without the Korrah, which is that terrible Whip that hangs
nigh the Gate of the Omrahs. Further, when he sees that there is no help at
all ever to come to any thing, as to buy an Office, or some Land for himself
and Children, and that even he dares not appear to have a Penny in Cash, or to
wear good Clothes, or to eat a good Meal, for fear he should be thought rich.
And indeed the beauty and exactness of Arts had been quite lost in those Parts
long ago, if it were not that the Kings and Grandees there did give Wages to
certain Workmen, that work in their Houses, and there teach their Children, and
endeavor to make themselves able in order to be a little more considered, and
to escape the Korrah; and if also it were not, that those great and rich
Merchants of Towns, who are protected by good and powerful Patrons, paid those
Workmen a little better; I say, a little Better; for, what fine stuffs soever
we see come from those Countries, we must not imagine, that the Workman is
there in any honor, or comes to any thing; it is nothing but mere Necessity, or
the Cudgel, that makes him work, he never grows rich; it is no small matter,
when he has wherewith to live, and to cloth himself narrowly. If there be any
money to gain of the Work, that is not for him, but for those great Merchants of
Towns, I was just now speaking of; and even these themselves find it often
difficult enough to maintain themselves, and to prevent Extortion.

It Is from the same cause also, that a gross and profound Ignorance reigns in
those States. For, how is it possible, there should be Academies and Colleges
well founded, where are such Founders to be met with? And if there were any,
Whence were the Scholars to be had? Where are those that have means sufficient
to maintain their Children in Colleges? And if there were, who would appear to
be so rich? And if they would, Where are those Benefices, Preferments, and
Dignities, that require Knowledge and Abilities, and that may animate young men
to study?

Thence it is likewise, that Traffic languishes in all that Country, in
comparison of ours. For how many are there, that care to take pains, to run up
and down, to write much, and to run danger for another, for a Governor, that
shall extort, if he be not in league with some considerable Sword-man, whose
Slave he in a manner is, and that makes his own Conditions with him?

It is not there, that the Kings find for their service, Princes, Lords,
Gentlemen, Sons of rich and good Families, Officers, Citizens, Merchants, and
even Tradesmen, well born, well educated, and well instructed; men of Courage,
that have a true affection and respect for their King, that often live a great
while at the Court, and in the Army, at their own Expenses, entertaining
themselves with good hopes, and content with the favorable aspect of the
Prince; and who, upon occasion, fight manfully, covetous to uphold the honor
of their Ancestors and Families. Those Kings, I say, never see about them, but
men of nothing, Slaves, Ignorants, Brutes, and such Courtizans as are raised
from the Dust to Dignities; and that for want of good Education and
Instruction, almost always retain somewhat of their Offspring, of the temper of
Beggars, enriched, proud, unsufferable, heartless, insensible of honor,
disingenuous, and void of affection and regard for the honor of their King and
Country. Here it is, where those Kings must ruin all, to find means to defray
all those prodigious Charges, which they cannot avoid for entertaining their
great Court, which has no other source to subsist but their Coffers and
Treasure, and for maintaining constantly the vast number of Soldiers, necessary
for them to keep the People in subjection, to prevent their running away, to
make them work, and to get what is exacted from them, they being so many
Desperado's, for being perpetually under hatches, and for laboring only for
others.

Thence it is also, that in an important War that may happen (which may be
almost at all times) they must almost of necessity sell the Government for
ready Money, and immense Sums, whence chiefly that ruin and defolation comes to
pass which we see. For the Governor, which is the Buyer, must not he be
re-imbursed of all those great Sums of money, which he has taken up, perhaps
the third or fourth part, at high interest? Must not a Governor also, whether
he have bought the Government or not, find means as well as a Timariot and a
Farmer, to make every year great Presents to a Visir, an Eunuch, a Lady of the
Seraglio, and to those other persons that support him at Court? Must he not pay
to the King his usual Tributes, and withal enrich himself, that wretched Slave,
half famished, and deeply indebted when he first appeared, without Goods,
Lands, and Revenues of his House, such as they all are. Do not they ruin all,
and lay all waste? I mean*those, that in the Provinces are like so many small
Tyrants with a boundless and unmeasured Authority, there being no body there,
as has been already said, that can restrain them, or to whom a Subject can
have refuge, to save himself from their Tyranny, and to obtain Justice?

It Is true, that in the Empire of the Mogol, the Vakea-nevis, that is, those
Persons, whom he sends into the Provinces to write to him whatever passes
there, do a little keep the Officers in awe, provided they do not collude
together (as it almost always happens) to devour all; as also that the
Governments are not there so often sold, nor so openly as in Turkey; I say, not
so openly (for those great Presents, they are from time to time obliged to
make, are almost equivalent to Sales) and that the Governors ordinarily remain
longer in their Governments; which makes them not so hungry, so beggarly, and
so deep in debt, as those new Comers, and that consequently they do not always
tyrannize over the people with so much cruelty; even apprehending, lest they
should run away to the Raja's; which yet falls out very often.

It Is also true, that in Persia the Governments are not so frequently nor so
publicly sold as in Turkey; the Sons of the Governors also succeeding often
enough to their Fathers; which is also the cause, that the people there is
often not so ill treated as in Turkey, and occasions withal, that there is more
politeness, and that even some there are that addict themselves to study. But
all that is really but a slight matter; those three States of Turkey, Persia and
Indostan, forasmuch as they have all three taken away the Meum and Tuum as to
Land, and propriety of Possessions (which is the foundation of whatever is good
and regular in the World) cannot but very near resemble one another: they have
the same defect, they must at last, sooner or later, needs fall into the same
inconveniences, which are the necessary consequences of it, viz. Tyranny,
Ruin, and Desolation.

Far be it therefore, that our Monarchs of Europe should thus be Proprietors of
all the Lands which their Subjects possess. Their Kingdoms would be very far
from being so well cultivated and peopled, so well built, so rich, so polite
and flourishing as we see them. Our Kings are otherwise rich and powerful; and
we must avow that we are much better and more royally served. There would be
Kings of Deserts and Solitudes, of Beggars and Barbarians, such as those are
whom I have been representing; who, because they will have all, at last lose
all; and who, because they will make themselves too rich, at length find
themselves without riches, or, at least, very far from that which they covet
after, out of their blind Ambition and Passion, of being more absolute than the
Laws of God and Nature do permit. For, where would be those Princes, those
Prelates, those Nobles, those rich Citizens, and great Merchants, and those
famous Artizans, those Towns of Paris, Lions, Thoulouse, Rouen, London, and so
many others? Where would be that infinite number of Buroughs and Villages, all
those fair Country-houses and Fields, and Hillocks, tilled and maintained with
so much Industry, Care and Labor? And where would consequently be all those
vast Revenues drawn thence, which at last enrich the Subjects and the Sovereign
both? We should find the great Cities, and the great Boroughs rendered
inhabitable, because of the ill Air, and to fall to ruin without any bodies
taking care of repairing them; the Hillocks abandoned, and the Fields
overspread with the Bushes, or filled with pestilential Marshes, as has been
already intimated.

A word to our dear and experienced Travelers: They would not find those fair
conveniences of Traveling; they would be obliged to carry all things with
them, like the Bohemians; and all those good Inns, for example, that are found
between Paris and Lions, would be like ten or twelve wretched Caravans-serrahs,
that is, great Barns, raised and paved, such as our Pont-neuf is, where
hundreds of men are found pel-mel together with their Horses, Mules and Camels,
where one is stifled with heat in Summer, and starved of cold in Winter, if it
were not for the breathing of those Animals, that warm the place a little.

But it will be said, we see some States, where the Meum and Tuum is not, (as
for example, that of the Grand Seignior, which we know better than any,
without going so far as the Indies) that do not only subsist, but are also
very powerful, and increase daily.

It Is true, that that State of the Gr. Seignior, of such a prodigious Extent as
it is, having so vast a quantity of Lands, the Soil of which is so excellent,
that it cannot be destroyed but very difficultly, and in a long time, is yet
rich and populous; but it is certain also, that if it were cultivated and
peopled proportionably to ours* (which it would be, if there were propriety
among the Subjects throughout) it would be a quite different thing; it would
have people enough to raise such prodigious Armies as in old times, and rich
enough to maintain them. We have traveled through almost all the parts of it;
we have seen how strangely it is ruined and unpeopled; and how in the Capital
City there now need three whole months to raise five or six thousand men. We
know also, what it would have come to ere this, if it had not been for the
great number of Christian Slaves that are brought into it from all Parts. And
no doubt but that, if the same Government were continued there for a number of
years, that State would destroy it self, and at last, fall it by its own
Weakness, as it seems that already it is hardly maintained but only by that
means, I mean, by the frequent change of Governors; there being not one
Governor, nor any one man in the whole Empire, that has a penny to enable him
to maintain the least thing, or that can almost find any men, if he had money.
A strange manner to make States to subsist! There would need no more for
making an end of the Seditions, than a Brama of Pegu, who killed the half of
the Kingdom with hunger, and turned it into Forests, hindering for some years
the Lands from being tilled, though yet he has not succeeded in his Design,
and the State have afterward been divided, and that even lately Ava, the
Capital Town, was upon the point of being taken by an handful of China
Fugitives. Mean time we must confess, that we are not like to see in our days
that total ruin and destruction of this Empire we are speaking of, (if so be
we see not something worse) because it has Neighbors, that are so far from
being able to undertake any thing against him, that they are not so much as in
a condition to resist him, unless it be by those succors of strangers, which
the remoteness and jealousy would make slow, small, and suspect.

But it might be yet further objected, that it appears not, why such States as
these might not have good Laws, and why the People in the Provinces might not
be enabled to come and make their Complaints to a Grand Visir, or to the King
himself. It Is true, that they are not altogether destitute of good Laws, and
that, if those which are amongst them were observed, there would be as good
living there, as in any part of the World. But what are those Laws good for, if
they be not observed, and if there be no means to make them to be executed? Is
it not the Grand Visir, or the King that appoints for the People such beggarly
Tyrants, and that has no others to set over them? Is it not He that sells
those Governments? Has a poor Peasant or Tradesman means to make great
Journies, and to come and seek for Justice in the Capital City, remote,
perhaps, 150 or 200 Leagues from the place of his Abode? Will not the Governor
cause him to be made away in his journey (as it has often happened) or catch him
sooner or later? And will he not provide his Friends at Court, to support him
there, and to represent things quite otherwise than they are? In a word, this
Governor, hungry as well as the Timariots and Farmers (that are all men for
drawing Oil out of Sand, as the Persian speaks, and for ruining a World, with
their heap of Women-harpies, Children and Slaves) this Governor, I say, is he
not the absolute Master, the Superintendant of Justice, the Parliament, the
Receiver, and all?

It may perhaps be added, That the Lands, which our Kings hold in Domaine, are
no less well tilled and peopled, than other Land. But there is a great
difference between the having in propriety some Lands here and there in a great
Kingdom (which changes not the Constitution of the State and Government) and
the having them all in propriety, which would alter it altogether. And then we
in these Parts have Laws so rational, which our Kings are willing to be the
first to observe, and according to which they will that their particular Lands
shall be governed as those of their Subjects are, so as to give way, that
Actions of Law may be laid against their own Farmers and Officers, so that a
Peasant or Tradesman may have means to obtain Justice, and to find remedy
against the unjust violence of those that would oppress him: Whereas in those
Parts of Asia, I see almost not any refuge for those poor People; the Cudgel
and the Hammer of the Governor being in a manner the only Law that rules, and
decides all Controversies there.

Lastly, It may be said, that it is at least certain, that in such States there
is not such a multitude of long-lasting Suits of Law, as in these Parts, nor so
many Lawyers of all sorts, as amongst us. It is in my opinion, very true, that
one cannot too much applaud that old Persian Saying, Na-hac Kouta Beter-Ez hac
Deraz, that is, Short Injustice is better than long Justice; and that the
length of Lawsuits is unsufferable in a State, and that it is the
indispensable duty of the Sovereign, by all good means, to endeavor a remedy
against them. And it is certain, that by taking away this Meum and Tuum, the
Root would be cut of an infinite number of Law-Processes, and especially of
almost all those that are of importance, and long and perplexed; and
consequently there would not need so great a number of Magistrates, which our
Sovereigns do employ to administer Justice to their Subjects, nor that swarm of
men, which subsist only by that way. But it is also manifest, that the Remedy
would be an hundred times worse than the Disease, considering those great
inconveniences that would follow thereupon, and that in all probability the
Magistrates would become such as those of the Asiatick States, who deserve not
that Name; for, in a word, our Kings have yet cause to glory upon the account
of good Magistracy under them. In those Parts, some Merchants excepted, Justice
is only among the meanest sort of People, that are poor, and of an unequal
condition, who have not the means of corrupting the Judges, and to buy false
Witnesses, that are there in great numbers, and very cheap, and never punished.
And this I have learned every where by the experience of many years, and by my
solicitous Enquiries made among the People of the Country, and our old
Merchants that are in those Parts, as also of Ambassadors, Consuls and
Interpreters; whatever our common Travelers may say, who, upon their having
seen by chance, when they passed by, two or three Porters, or others of the
like Gang, about a Kady, quickly dispatching one or other of the Parties, and
sometimes both, with some lashes under the sole of their Feet, or with a
Maybale Baba, some mild words, when there is no Wool to sheer; who, I say, upon
sight of this, come hither and cry out, O the good and short Justice! O what
honest Judges are those in respect of ours! Not considering in the mean time,
that if one of those Wretches, that is in the wrong; had a couple of Crowns to
corrupt the Kady, or his Clerks, and as much to buy two false Witnesses, he
might either win his Process, or prolong it as long as he pleased.

In conclusion, to be short, I say, That the taking away this Propriety of
Lands among private men, would be infallibly to introduce at the same time
Tyranny, Slavery, Injustice, Beggary, Barbarism, Desolation, and to open a
Highway for the ruin and destruction of Mankind, and even of Kings and States:
And that on the contrary, this Meum and Tuum, accompanied with the hopes that
every one shall keep, what he works and labors for, for himself and his
Children, as his own, is the main foundation of whatever is regular and good in
the World: Insomuch that whosoever shall cast his eyes upon the different
Countries and Kingdoms, and takes good notice of what follows upon this
Propriety of Sovereigns, or that of the People, will soon find the true source
and chief cause of that great difference we see in the several States and
Empires of the World, and avow, that this is in a manner that which changes and
diversifieth the Face of the whole Earth.

The End of the SECOND TOME.
A LETTER TO Monsieur de la MOTHE le VAYER, WRITTEN At DEHLI, JVLY 1. 1663.
CONTAINING The Description of DEHLI and AGRA, and diverse Particulars
discovering the Court and Genius of the Mogols and Indians.
SIR,
I Know that one of the first Questions you are like to ask me, at my return in
France, will be, Whether Dehli and Agra are Cities as fair and large, and as
well peopled as Paris. Concerning its Beauty, I shall tell you by way of
Preface, that I have sometimes wondered to hear our Europeans, that are here,
despising the Towns of the Indies, as not coming near ours, in respect of the
Edifices. Certainly they ought not to resemble them; and if Paris, London, and
Amsterdam, stood in the place where Dehli is, the greatest part of them must be
thrown down, to build them after another manner. Our Cities indeed have great
Beauties and Embellishments, but they are such that are proper to them, and
accommodated to a cold Climat. Dehli also may have its Beauties peculiar to it,
and suitable to a very hot Climat: For you are to know, that the heat here
obliges all People, even the great Lords, and the King himself, to go without
Stockings, in a kind of Slippers only, a fine and slight Turbant on their
Heads, and the other Garments accordingly; that there are months in the Summer
so excessively hot, that in the Chambers one can hardly hold ones hands against
a Wall, nor ones head on a Cushion: And that People are obliged for the space
of more than six months to lie without covering, at the door of their Chamber,
as the Rabble does in the open Streets, or as the Merchants, and other People
of some Quality do, in some airy Hall or Garden, or upon some Terrass well
watered at Night: thence you may judge, whether if there were such streets as
that of St. Jacques, or St. Denis, with their Houses shut, and of so many
Stories high, they would be habitable? And whether in the Night, especially
when the heats are without wind and stuffing, it would be possible to sleep
there? And who is there (I pray) that would have a mind in Summer, when he
returns on Horseback from the City half dead, and in a manner stifled of the
heat and dust, and all in a Sweat, (for so it is) to go climbing up an high
pair of Stairs, which often is narrow and dark, to a fourth or fifth Story, and
to abide in this hot and suffocating Air? On such occasions they desire
nothing, but to throw down into the Stomach a Pint of fresh Water, or Lemonade,
to undress, to wash the Face, Hands and Feet, to lie down in some cool and
shady place all along, having a Servant or two to fan one by turns, with their
great Panhas, or Fans. But, to leave this, we shall now endeavor to entertain
you with the representation of Dehli as it is, that so you may judge, whether
it be truly said, that it is a fair City.

It is now about forty years that Chah-Jehan, Father of the Grand-Mogol
Aureng-Zebe now reigning, to eternize his memory, caused to be built a Town
contiguous to old Dehli, which he called after his Name Chah-Jean-Abad, and by
way of abbreviation Jean-Abad; that is to say, a Colony of Chah-Jehan,
designing to make it the Capital of the Empire, instead of Agra, where he said,
that the Summer heats were too violent. This nearness has occasioned, that the
ruins of old Dehli have served to build a new City; and in the Indies they
scarce speak any more of Dehli, but only of Jehan-Abad. Yet notwithstanding,
since the City of Jehan-Abad is not yet known amongst us, I intend to speak of
it under the old name of Dehli, which is familiar to us.

Dehli then is a Town altogether new, seated in a plain Campaign, upon a River
like our ^oire, called Gemna, and built along one side of the River only; there
being but one Boat-bridge to pass over into the Plain. This Town is surrounded
with Walls, except the River side: these Walls are of Bricks, and without a
considerable defense, they being without a Ditch, and having nothing to flank
them but round Towers after the old way, distant from each other an hundred
common paces, and a rampart behind them, four or five foot thick. The compass
of these Walls, comprizing the Fortress, is not so big as is commonly believed:
I have gone it round with ease in three hours; and I believe not, though I was
on Horseback, that I dispatched more than one league in an hour: it is true,
that if you will take into the Town a very long Suburb, which goes toward
Lahor, as also what remains inhabited of old Dehli, which is likewise a great
and very long Suburb, and besides, three or four small Suburbs more, all that
would make in a direct line above a league and a half, and such a compass which
I cannot well determine, because that between the Suburbs are great Gardens,
and large spaces not built; but I may say, that thus taken it would be of a
prodigious bigness.

The Fortress, in which is the Mehalle, or Seraglio, and the other Royal
Apartments, which I shall hereafter speak of, is built round upon the River;
yet there is between the Water and the Walls a pretty large and long sandy
space, where commonly Elephants are exercised, and where frequently the Militia
of the Omrahs and Rajas is mustered in the King's presence, who looks out of
the Windows of one of his Apartments. The Walls of the Fortress, as to their
round antic Towers, are very near like those of the Town, but they are partly
of Bricks, and partly of a certain red Stone resembling Marble, which makes
them look fairer than those of the Town; besides that, they are much higher,
stronger and thicker, being able to bear some Fieldpieces that are there
planted toward the Town; and encompassed also, excepting that side which
respects the River, with a fair Ditch, walled up with Freestone, full of Water
and Fish. But yet whether they are considerable for strength; a battery of some
middle sized Canons would, in my opinion, soon cast them down.

Round about the Ditch there is a pretty large Garden, at all times full of
Flowers and green Apricocks, which together with those great Walls all red,
makes a very fine sight.

About this Garden is the great Street, or rather the great Place Royal, to
which the two great and principal Gates of the Fortress do answer, and to these
Gates the two chief Streets of the Town.

In this great Place it is, where the Tents of the Rajas are, that are in the
King's Pay, to keep there every one in his turn their weekly Guard; whereas the
Omrahs and the Mansebdars, or small Omrahs, keep it within the Fortress. These
little Sovereigns are not pleased to see themselves thus and so long shut up in
a Fort.

In this very Place it is, where at the break of day are exercised the Horses
of a long Royal Stable, near it. And here it is also, that the Kobat-kan, or
great Commissioner of the Cavalry, carefully vieweth the Horses of those
Cavaliers, that have been received into Service, to the end that if these
Horses are of Turkistan, or Tartary, and large and strong enough for Service,
the King's Mark, and that of the Omrahs, under whom such Cavaliers are to be
listed, may be branded upon them: A thing not ill devised, to prevent the
mutual Loan of Horses in the Musters.

This same Place is also a kind of Bazar, or Market, of an hundred things sold
there, and a Rendezvous of Players, and Juglers of all sorts, as the Pont-neuf
at Paris. It is no less the Meeting Place of the poor Astrologers, as well
Mahumetan as Heathen. These Doctors (forsooth) sit there in the Sun upon a
piece of Tapestry, all covered with dust, having about them some old
Mathematical Instruments, which they make show of to draw Passengers, and a
great open Book representing the Animals of the Zodiac. These men are the
Oracles, but rather the Affronters of the Vulgar, to whom they pretend to give,
for one Payssa, that is, a penny, good Luck; and they are they, that looking
upon the Hands and the Face, turning over their Books, and making a show of
Calculation, determine the fortunate moment when a Business is to be begun to
make it successful. The mean Women, wrapped up in a white Sheet from Head to
Foot, come to find them out, telling them in their Ear their most secret
Concerns, as if they were their Confessors, and (which smells very strongly of
Stupidity and Folly) entreat them to render the Stars propitious to them
suitable to their Designs; as if they could absolutely dispose of their
Influences.

The most ridiculous of all these Astrologers, in my opinion, was that mongrel
Portuguese, fugitive from Goa, who sat in that Place with much Gravity upon
his piece of Tapestry, like the rest, and had a great deal of Custom, though he
could neither write nor read, and as for Instruments and Books, was furnished
with nothing else but an old Sea-Compass, and an old Romish Prayer Book in the
Portuguese Language, of which he showed the Pictures for Figures of the
Zodiac: A tal Bestias, tal Astrologuo: For such Beasts, such Astrologer, said
he to the Reverend Father Buze, a Jesuit, who met him in that Place.

I here speak only of the pitiful Astrologers of the Bazar; for there are
others in these Parts, that are in the Courts of the Grandees, and are
considered as great Clerks, and are very rich; whole Asia being overspread with
this Superstition. The Kings and the great Lords, who would not undertake the
least things without consulting them, allow them great Salaries, that they may
read to them what is written in the Heavens, (for so they speak here) and take
out for them that fortunate moment, I was lately speaking of; or find out, at
the opening of the Alcoran, the decision of all their Doubts.

To return; these two principal Streets, which I said do answer to the two
Gates of the Fortress, and to the Place, may have twenty five or thirty common
paces in breadth, and they run in a straight line as far as you are able to
see: Yet that which leads to the Gate of Labor, is much longer than the other;
but they are both alike as to the Houses. There is on both sides nothing but
Arches, as in our Place Royal; yet with this difference, that they are but of
Bricks, and that there is not any Building upon them, but only the Terrass.
There is also this difference, that they are not continued Galleries. These
Arches are generally severed by Rails that make Shops which are not to be shut,
where Tradesmen work in the day, where Bankers sit for their Business, and
where Merchants set out their Wares, which at night they lock up in a Magazin,
the little Door of which, to be shut, is in the bottom of every Arch.

It is upon this Magazin, which is in the back-part of the Arches, that the
Houses of Merchants are built and raised, which make a Show good enough toward
the Street, and are also pretty convenient, being well aired, out of the way of
the dust, and having for their Floor the terrasses of the Arches, upon which
they can walk to look out upon the Street, and to sleep at night in fresco. But
excepting these Houses of the chief Streets, and a few others, there are not
many of these fair Houses, that are thus raised upon Terrasses; nor are even
these two Streets universally furnished with them, there being mostly upon the
Magazin, or on the side, nothing but a small Building, not seen from the
Street, the great Merchants having their Houses somewhere else, whither they
retire at night.

Besides these two principal Streets, there are yet five others, which indeed
are not so long nor so straight, but for the rest are altogether like them.
There are also a great many other Streets crossing those on all sides, whereof
there are also some furnished with Arches; but because they have been built
piecemeal by such particular persons, as have not observed the Symmetry that
was requisite, they are, for the most part, neither so large nor so straight,
nor so well built as the others.

Amongst all these Streets are spread every where the Houses of the Mansebdars,
or little Omrahs, and those of the men of the Law, as also of many great
Merchants, and other private men; of which there is a good number that are
passable. It is true, there are but few that are all of Brick or Stone, and
there is even a good number of these, that are made all of Earth only, and
thatched; but for all that, they are convenient, because they are generally
airy, being furnished with Courts and Gardens. Nor are they disagreeable
within, forasmuch as besides the fine movables, these thatched Coverings are
supported by a layer of certain long Canes, that are hard and strong, and very
pretty, and because also these earthen Walls are plastered over with very fine
and very white Chalk.

Amongst these Houses I have been speaking of, that are tolerable, there is
also a prodigious number of other small ones, that are only made up of Earth
and Straw, where all the simple Cavaliers, and their Servants, and all those
little people of the Market, that follow the Court and the Army are lodged.

It is from these thatched Houses that Dehli is so subject to Fires. This last
year there were burnt above sixty thousand such, at two or three times that
they took Fire, when there blew certain impetuous Winds, that rise chiefly in
Summer. The Fire was so quick and so violent, that it surprised the Houses, and
many Horses also that could not be time enough loosened; and there were even
some of these poor Women burnt, that never had been out of the Seraglio, and
that are so weak and shamefaced when they see people, that they know nothing
else but to hide their Faces.

And it is upon the account of these pitiful Houses of Earth and Straw, that I
look upon Dehli almost no otherwise than as many Villages joined together, and
(which I have already said in another place) as a Camp of an Army, a little
better and more commodiously placed, than in the Field.

As to the Houses of the Omrahs, that are also up and down in this City, and
principally upon the River, and even in the Suburbs: You are to know that in
these hot Countries, to entitle an House to the name of Good and Fair, it is
required it should be commodious, seated in a Place well aired, and capable to
receive the Wind from all sides, and principally from the North; having Courts,
Gardens, Trees, Conservatories, and little jets of Waters in the Halls, or at
least at the Entry; furnished also with good Cellars with great Flaps to stir
the Air, for reposing in the fresh Air from twelve till four or five of the
Clock, when the Air of these Cellars begins to be hot and stuffing: or having
in lieu of Cellarage certain Kas-kanays, that is, little Houses of Straw, or
rather of odoriferous Roots, that are very neatly made, and commonly placed in
the midst of a Parterre near some Conservatory, that so the Servants may
easily, with their Pompionbottles, water them from without. Moreover it is
required for the beauty of an House, that it be seated in the midst of some
great Parterre, that it have four great Divans or Ways raised from the ground
to the height of a man, or thereabout, and exposed to the four Parts of the
World, to receive the Wind and the Cold from all the Parts it may come from.
Lastly, it is requisite for a good House to have raised Terrasses, to sleep
upon in the night, such as are of the same Floor with some great Chamber, to
draw in ones Bed-stead upon occasion; that is to say, when there comes some
Tempest of Rain or Dust, or when that rousing freshness of the break of day
awakens you, and obliges you to look for a Covering: or else when you apprehend
that small and light Dew of the morning, which pierces, and causes sometimes
benumming and paralitical Symptoms in the Limbs.

As to the interior part of an House, it is requisite that the whole Floor be
covered with a matteress of Cotton four inches thick, covered with a white fine
linen Sheet during Summer, and with a piece of silk Tapestry in Winter: That
in the most conspicuous part of the Chamber, near the Wall, there be one or two
cotton Quilts, with fine flowered Coverings, and set about with small and fine
embroidery of Silk, wrought with Gold and Silver, for the Master of the House,
or Persons of Quality coming in, to sit upon; and that every Quilt have its
cross Board, purfled with God, to lean upon: that round about the Chamber,
along the Walls, there be several of these cross Boards, as I just now
mentioned, handsomely covered with Velvet or flowred Satin, for Bystanders also
to lean upon. The Walls five or six foot from the Floor, must be almost all
with Niches, or little Windows, cut in an hundred different manners, or shapes,
very fine, well measured and proportioned to one another, with some porcelain
Vessels and Flower-pots in them; and the Ground must be painted and gilded,
yet without any figure of Man or Beast, their Religion not allowing thereof.

This is as near as I know, the Idea of a handsome and convenient House in these
Parts: And as there is a good number of them in Dehli, that have all these
Qualities mentioned, or at least in part, according to which they are more or
less fair and gallant: I believe one may say, without any injury to our Towns,
that Dehli is not without Houses that are truly handsome, although they be not
like ours in Europe.

Concerning the Appearance and Riches of the Shops, (which is the thing that
contributeth most to the beauty of our Towns in Europe) although Dehli be the
Seat of a very potent and magnificent Court, and consequently the resort of
infinite quantities and varieties of rich Wares; yet we are not to imagine,
that you shall find there our Streets of St. Denis; I know not whether there be
any such in all Asia. And even as to the most fine and the most rich Stuffs,
they are commonly but in the Magazins, their Shops are not furnished with them:
So that for one Shop that makes any show, that is, where there are sold those
fine sorts of Linen, those Stuffs of Silk streaked with Gold and Silver, Cloth
of Gold, Turbands embroidered with Gold, and other Commodities of great price;
you shall always find five and twenty and more, that are filled with nothing
but Pots of Oil and Butter, and Panniers one upon another full of Rice, Barley,
Pease, Corn, and many other sorts of Grain and Legume; which are the ordinary
Food not only of all the Gentiles, that never eat any meat, but also of the
meaner sort of the Mahumetans, and of a good part of those of the Soldiery.

It is true that there is a Fruit-market that makes some show. One may there
see in Summer abundance of Shops full of dry Fruit, that come out of Persia,
Balk, Bokara, and Samarkand, as Almonds, Pistaches, small Nuts, Raisins,
Prunes, Apricocks, and the like. And in Winter there are found excellent
Raisins fresh, black and white, brought from the same Countries, well wrapped up
in Cotton; also Apples and Pears of three or four sorts, and of these admirable
Melons that last all Winter. But all this Fruit is very dear; I have seen
Melons sold even for a Crown and an half a piece. And they are indeed the great
delicacy and expense of the Omrahs. I have often seen in the House of my Aga,
that there was eaten in Melons in one morning for more than twenty Crowns.
There are none but the Melons of the Country that are cheap in Summer, but
those are not so good. The Grandees only, that take care to send for Seed out
of Persia, and to get the Ground well fitted for them, may eat good ones; yet
that but rarely neither, the Ground being not so proper but that the Seed
degenerateth the very first year.

It is true, there is yet another Fruit called Amba, or Mangue, which in its
season, during two Summer months, is found in great plenty and very cheap; but
those of Dehli are none of the best, being very loose and flashly: those of
Bengala, Golkonda, and Goa, are admirable. It has a certain sweetness so
peculiar, that I doubt whether there be any Comsit in the World so pleasant.
There are also Pateques, or Water-Melons in abundance, and almost all the year
long; but they also do not thrive well at Dehli; they never have their meat so
ruddy, firm and suggary; and if there be any good, they are not to be found but
amongst the Great ones, who take the pains of making them grow as Melons, with
extraordinary care and cost.

There be also up and down in Dehli Shops of Comfit-makers; but all their
Comfits are very ill done, being full of Dust and Flies.

There are besides many Shops of Bread every where, but because they have no
Ovens like ours, it is never well baked: yet in the Fortress there is sold some
that is reasonably good; and the Omrahs cause such to be made in their Houses
that is very delicate, sparing no new Butter, Milk, nor Eggs: yet though they
leaven it, it is always much inferior in goodness to our Bread of Gonesse, and
to those other sorts of excellent Bread of Paris, it savouring always of the
Cake or Simnel.

In these Bazars there are also some Tents, where they trade in Rost-meat, and
in dressing I know not how many sorts of Dishes; but all that is but beggarly,
nasty, and ill meat. I fear you sometimes meet with the flesh of Camels,
Horses, or Oxen, dead of sickness: I do not much trust them; so that if you
will eat any thing worth eating, you must have it dressed at home.

There are also many Shops every where where they sell Flesh; but you must take
heed, lest they give you Mutton for Kid; the Mutton and Beef, but especially
Mutton, though well enough tasted, being here very hot, windy, and of ill
digestion. The best meat here is young Kid, but it is very rarely sold in the
Market by Quarters; so that if you have a mind to eat any, you must buy a whole
and a live one; which is inconcenient enough, because the meat is spoiled
between one morning and evening, and is commonly so lean, that it is tasteless.
Ordinarily you find in the Shambles nothing but the quarters of great Kids,
which often also are very lean and hard. It is true, that since I have learned
something of the manner of the Country, I find both Meat and Bread good enough,
because I send my Servant to the Fortress to the King's Caterers, who are very
ready to let him have what is good for good payment, though it cost them
nothing. And it was in reference to this, that one day I made my Agah smile,
when I told him that I had I know not how many years lived by artifice and
stealing, and that for all the 150 Crowns pay he monthly allowed me, I was
ready to be starved; whereas in France for half a Roupy, I could every day eat
as good a bit of meat as the King.

They have no Capons, all that People b^ing too tenderhearted toward all
Animals but Men, whom they need for their Seraglios. But the Markets are full
of Hens, that are very good and cheap: Among the rest there is one sort of
little ones, that I called Ethiopian Hens, because they have their skin black
like the Aethiopians, which are very tender and very delicate.

Pigeons there are, but no young ones, because they will not kill them young;
they would be (say they) too small, and it were ill done to kill such poor
little Animals.

There are also Partridges, but smaller than ours, and generally (seeing they
bring them afar off alive, knowing how to take them with Nets) they are worse
than our Pullets. The like may be said of their Ducks and Hares, of which they
also bring whole Cages full alive.

Concerning Fish, the People here are no great Fish-mongers; yet at times one
meets with very good Fish, especially of two sorts, the one resembles our
Pike, and the other our Carp; but that is only when it is not cold, for the
Indians fear that much more than we Europeans apprehend heat. And if at any
time you meet accidentally with any, the Eunuchs, who love them excessively, (I
know not why) carry them presently away. None but the Omrahs have power to make
men fish when they please, which they do with the Korrah, that great common
Whip always hanging at their Gates.

From all that I have said, you may by the By see, whether a man ought to leave
Paris to come to Dehli to make good cheer. Certainly the Grandees have all
things, but that is upon the account of their many Servants, of the Korrah, and
of the plenty of Money. And thence it was I once said, that at Dehli there is
no mean; there you must either be a great Lord, or live miserably: for I have
experienced it my self, in a manner dying of Hunger this good while though I
have had considerable Pay, and was resolved to spare nothing that way, because
commonly there is found nothing in the Markets but the refuse of the Grandees.
Besides that, the soul of a Feast which is good Wine, is not there; not that no
Grapes do grow there to make Wine, (for I have drunk some at Amadevad and
Golkonda, in the Houses of English men and Hollanders, that was not ill) but
because it is prohibited to make Wine, in regard that not only by the Law of
Mahomet, but also by that of the Heathen, it is not permitted to drink any: So
that it is very rare to find Wine, and that which we find comes out of Persia
from Chiras by Land to Banderabasy, from thence by Sea to Suratte, and from
Suratte hither by Land in forty six days: or it comes from the Canaries,
brought also over Sea to Suratte by the Dutch. And both are so dear, that the
cost (as the saying is) makes it lose the taste; for a Bottle holding about
three Parisian pints comes often to six or seven Crowns, and more. That which
is of this Countries growth is called Arac, a strong Water made of Sugar not
refined, and even this is expressly prohibited to be sold, and there are none
but Christians that dare drink of it, except others do it by stealth. This is a
Drink very hot and penetrant, like the Brandy made of Corn in Poland. It so
falls upon the Nerves, that it often causes shaking Hands in those that drink
a little too much of it, and casts them into incurable Maladies. Here we must
accustom our selves to fair and good Water, and to Lemonade, which is
excellent, and may be made with small charges, and does not spoil the Stomach.
But to say all, a man has no great inclination, in such hot Countries as these
to drink Wine; and I am willing notice should be here taken together with me,
that the abstinence from Wine in these Parts, joined to the general sobriety of
the Natives, and to the sweats and perpetual transpiration made by the pores,
are the cause (in my opinion) that we almost know not what is the Gout, the
Stone, Aches of the Kidneys, Rheumatisms, Quartans; and that those that bring
any of these Sicknesses hither, as I did, are at length totally freed from
them: and further, that the Pox it self, though very frequent, is not so cruel
nor so pernicious here as in Europe: so that People generally live here more
healthily than with us. But then on the other hand, there is not so much vigor
here in People, as in our cold Climat; and this feebleness and languor of body
is a kind of perpetual malady, very troublesome to all, especially in the great
heats of Summer, and especially to the Europeans, whose bodies are not yet
inured to heat.

As for Shops of excellent Handy-craftsmen, that is also a thing we must not
look for here: all we find is but very little; not that the Indians have not
wit enough to make them successful in Arts, they doing very well (as to some of
them) in many Parts of India, and it being found that they have inclination
enough for them, and that some of them make (even without a Master) very pretty
workmanship, and imitate so well our Work of Europe, that the difference
thereof will hardly be discerned. I have seen amongst them even of our kind of
Guns, very fine and very good; and pieces of Goldsmiths Work so well done, that
I doubt whether in Europe they could be made better. I have also seen in
Picture and Miniature such curious and delicate pieces, that I admired them.
Amongst others, I have seen the Combats of Eckbar, represented upon a Buckler
by a famous Painter, who was said to have been seven years working at it, which
seemed to me an admirable piece of Work. It is manifest, that they want nothing
but good Masters, and the precepts of Art to give them just proportions; and
above all, that life of the Face, to which they have not yet been able to
attain. The Reason therefore why in the Shops of Dehli there are rarely found
good Handy-craftsmen, is not want of Wit, but contempt of the Workmen, who are
ill treated, and whose Work is debased to too low a price. If some Omrah, or
Mansebdar, will have any thing made by a Workman of the Bazar, he will send for
him, and make him work in a manner by force, and afterward pay him as he
pleases; and the man will think himself happy too, if in part of payment he
receive not the Korrah. What heart then can a poor Workman have to take pains
to succeed in his Workmanship? He considers nothing but to dispatch his Work,
thereby to earn something to put Bread into his Mouth. So that if there be any
of them that succeed, they are of those whom the great Lords entertain in their
Service, and that work only for them.

Touching the things within the Fortress, where are the Seraglio, and some
other Royal Edifices, you must not look for a Louvre, or an Eseurial; those
Buildings do not resemble ours, nor by what I have said, ought they to resemble
them: it is enough that they have that stateliness, which is proper to the
Climat.

I find nothing remarkable at the entry, but two great Elephants of stone,
which are on the two sides of one of the Gates. Upon one of them is the Statue
of Jamel, that famous Raja of Chitar, and upon the other, that of Polta his
Brother. These are those two gallant Men, that together with their Mother, who
was yet braver than they, cut so much Work for Eckbar; and who in the Sieges of
Towns, which they maintained against him, gave such extraordinary proofs of
their Generosity, that at length they would rather be killed in the out-falls
with their Mother, than submit: and for this Gallantry it is, that even their
Enemies thought them worthy to have these Statues erected for them. These two
great Elephants, together with the two resolute Men sitting on them, do at the
first entry into this Fortress make an impression of I know not what greatness
and awful terror.

After you have passed this Gate, you find a long and large Street, divided
into two by a Channel of running Water, and having on both sides, as our
Pont-neuf, a long raised Wall five or six foot high, and four broad; and
further off some Arches shut, that follow one another all along in the form of
Gates. It is upon this long raised Place that those Clerks, Controllers, and
other small Officers sit to do their Office, without being incommoded by the
Horses and People that pass along beneath. And it is there also where the
Manseb-dars, or little Omrahs, are at night to keep the Guard. The Water of the
Channel runs dividing it self through the whole Seraglio, and at length
falls into the Ditches to fill them. It is drawn out of the River by a
Channel opened five or six leagues above Dehli, and conveyed cross the Field,
and that through some Rocks that have cost great pains to be cut in diverse
places. And this is very near what may be seen at the entry into one of the two
principal Gates, that answer to the great Piazza.

If you enter at the other Gate, you also find presently a pretty long and
large Street, having its risings on the sides as the other, together with Shops
upon them in lieu of the Arches. This Street is properly a Bazar, which is very
commodious during the season of the Rains and Summer, because it is covered by
a long and large Vault, which has on the top great openings to let in light.

Besides these two Streets, there are many other small ones on the right and
left hand, that lead to the Apartments, where the Omrahs keep their Guard, each
in his turn, once a week, for twenty four hours. These Places are stately ones
for Corpse de Gardes, the Omrahs striving to beautify them at their own
charges. These are ordinarily great raised Places respecting a Parterne, that
has its little Channels of running Water, small Conservatories and Jets of
Water. The Omrahs during the twenty four hours of Guard, take no care for their
Table, the King sending them all their Meat ready dressed, and they being but
to receive it, as they do, with very much Ceremony and Respect, making three
obeysances of thanks, by elevating their Hand upon their Head, and bowing down
to the ground, their Face turned toward the King.

There are also found many raised Walks and Tents in sundry Places, that are
the Offices of several Officers. Besides, there are many great Halls that are
the Kar-kanays, or Places where Handy-craftsmen do work. In one of these Halls
you shall find Embroiderers at work, together with their Chief that inspects
them; in another you shall see Goldsmiths; in a third Picture-drawers; in a
fourth Workmen in Lacca; in others, Joyners, Turners, Tailors, Shoo-makers; in
others, Workmen in Silk and purfled Gold, and in all those sorts of fine Cloth,
of which they make Turbands, Girdles with golden flowers, and those Drawers of
Ladies, that are so fine and delicate, as that sometimes they last them but one
night, though they often cost them ten or twelve Crowns, when they are of that
fashion, as I have mentioned; I mean, enriched with those fine Embroideries of
Needle Work.

All these Handy-craftsmen come in the morning to those Kar-kanays, and work
there all day long, and at night return to their several homes, every one
passing his Life quietly, without aspiring above his condition: for the
Embroiderer makes his Son an Embroiderer, the Goldsmiths makes his Son a Gold
smith, and a Physician in a Town makes his Son a Physician; and no body
marries but with those that are of his Trade: which is religiously observed,
not only among the Heathen, that are obliged to it by their Law, but almost
always among the Mahometans themselves: Whence it is that you may often see
very handsome young Women, that remain unmarried, passing their time as well as
they can, though they might meet with good Matches, if their Parents would or
could marry them into another Family, esteemed less noble than their own.

After all these Apartments, we come at length to the Am-kas, which is
something very Royal. This is a great square Court with Arches, as may be our
Place Royal: with this difference, that there are no Buildings atop, and that
the Arches are severed from one another by a Wall, yet so that there is a small
Gate to pass from one to the other. Over the great Gate, which is in the middle
of one of the sides of this Square, there is a large raised Place, all open on
the side of the Court, which is called Nagarkanay, because that is the Place
where the Trumpets are, or rather the Hoboys and Timbals, that play together in
consort at certain hours of the day and night: but this is a very odd consort
in the Ears of an European that is a new comer, not yet accustomed to it: for
sometimes there are ten or twelve of those Hoboys, and as many Timbals, that
sound altogether at once; and there is an Hoboy which is called Karna, a fathom
and an half long, and of half a foot aperture below; as there are Timbals of
Brass or Iron, that have no less than a fathom in diameter: whence it is easy
to judge, what a noise they must needs make. Indeed this Music in the
beginning did so pierce and stun me, that it was unsufferable for me; yet I
know not what strange power custom has, for I now find it very pleasing,
especially in the night, when I hear it afar off in my bed upon my Terrass;
then it seems to me to carry with it something that is grave, majestical and
very melodious. And there is some Reason for this melody; for seeing it has
its Rules and Measures, and that there are excellent Masters taught from their
youth to manage it, and perfectly know how to qualify and temper those strong
sounds of the Hoboys and Timbals, it cannot be otherwise, but they must thence
obtain some sympathy that cannot be displeasing to the Ear, provided (as I
said) that it be heard at a distance. And even for this Reason it is, that they
have placed the Nagar-kanay, very high, and remote from the Ears of the King,
as you will hear by and by.

Over against the great Gate of the Court, upon which is the Nagar-kanay,
beyond the whole Court, there is a great and stately Hall, with many ranks of
Pillars high raised, very airy, open on three sides, looking to the Court, and
having its Pillars and Ground painted and gilded. In the midst of the Wall,
which separateth this Hall from the Seraglio, there is an opening, or a kind of
great Window high and large, and so high that a Man cannot reach to it from
below with his hand: There it is where the King appears seated upon his Throne,
having his Sons on his sides, and some Eunuchs standing, some of which drive
away the Flies with Peacocks-tails, others fan him with great Fans, others
stand there ready with great respect and humility for several Services. Thence
he sees beneath him all the Omrahs, Rajas, and Ambassadors, who are also all
of them standing upon a raised Ground encompassed with silver Rails, with their
Eyes downwards, and their Hands crossing their Stomachs: somewhat further off
he sees the Mansebdars, or lesser Omrahs, which are also all standing in the
same posture and respect as the Omrahs do: and somewhat further off, in the
remaining part of the Hall, and in the Court, he sees a great crowd of all
sorts of People. For there it is where the King every day about noon gives a
general Audience to all; which is the Reason that this great Hall is called
Am-kas, that is, Place of Audience, or a Place of Meeting common to great and
small.

During an hour and an half, or thereabouts, whilst this Assembly lasts, the
King is diverted by seeing pass before him a certain number of the handsomest
Horses of his Stables, to see whether they be well dressed, and in good plight.
So he does see a good number of Elephants passing also before him, whose dirty
bodies are then well washed and cleansed, and painted black like Ink, except
that they have two great streaks painted red, which from the top of their Head
come down to their Trunk, where they meet. These Elephants have then also
certain deckings embroidred with a couple of silver Bells hanging down on the
sides, fastened to the two ends of a great silver Chain, passing over their
Shoulders; as also certain Cow-tails of the great Tibet, white and very dear,
hanging at their Ears like great Mustachoes: and two little Elephants well
accoutred going by their sides, as if they were their Slaves and appointed to
serve them. These great Colosses, as if they were proud to see themselves so
bravely adorned and attended, march with much gravity; and when they are come
before the King, the Conductor that sits upon their Shoulders, with a pointed
Iron in his Hand pricketh them, and speaks to them, and makes them bow with
one Knee, and lift up the Trunk into the Air and make a noise, which the People
take for a Taslim, or deep Salute.

After these Elephants there are brought diverse tamed Gazelles, which are made
to fight with one another; as also some Nilgaux, or gray Oxen, which in my
opinion are a kind of Elands and Rhinoceross, and those great Buffalos of
Bengala with their prodigious Horns to combat with a Lion or Tiger; likewise
Leopards, or Panthers tamed, which he uses in the hunting of Gazelles:
further, some of those handsome hunting Dogs of Vsbeck of all sorts, every one
with his little red Cover; store of Birds of prey of all kinds, some of which
are for Partridges, others for Cranes, others to fall upon Hares, and, as they
say, upon the very Gazelles, beating their Heads and blinding them with their
Wings and Claws.

Often also one or two of the Omrahs cause at that time to pass their Cavalry
for a review before the King: the Omrahs coveting that their Horsemen should
appear gallant, advantagiously decked with extraordinary Garments, and their
Horses trapped with Iron, and harnessed with I know not how many different and
odd fashions.

The King takes sometimes pleasure himself to cause Cutlases, or short Swords,
to be tried upon dead Sheep, brought to him without the bowels, and very neatly
packed up, where the young Omrahs, Manseb-dars and Gourze-berdars, or
Mace-bearers, strive to show their force and dexterity by cutting asunder the
four Legs joined together, and the Body of the Sheep all in one stroke.

Mean time all these Divertisements are nothing but an Interlude of serious
Affairs: for as I have said, the King omits not to make a Muster of his
Cavalry, and well to view them himself. We have seen, that the War being ended,
there is not one Cavalier, nor any other Soldier, but He has seen him and
examined him, either to increase his Pay, or to lessen it, or quite to cashier
him. Besides it is seen every day, that he commands the Petitions, which are
showed him afar off in the crowd of the People, to be brought to him and to be
read: ordering the Parties concerned to approach, and examining them, and often
causing Justice to be done them immediately, although he has the Adalet-kanay,
the Chamber of Justice, where he ordinarily is present once a week, attended by
his two first Kadys, or Chief Justices: and though also at one other time in
the week he has the patience to hear in private, for the space of two hours,
ten Persons of the common People, whom a good and rich old Man presents to him.
Whence it appears (to note that by the By) that those Kings, how barbarous
soever esteemed by us, do yet constantly remember, that they owe Justice to
their Subjects.

All what I have been relating to you of what is transacted in this Assembly of
the Amkas, seems to me great and royal; but that which has extremely offended
me there, is a kind of Adulation too mean and flat, commonly heard in that
Place. For the King cannot say a word to any purpose, but he is presently
exalted, and some of the first Omrahs lifting up their Hands, as if they were
to receive some Benediction from Heaven, cry out, Karamat! Karamat! Wonder!
Wonder! Neither is there any Mogolian but he knows and glories in reciting
this Proverb in Persian Verse:

Aguer chach ronzra Gouyed cheh est in
Bubayed Goust inck mah ou peruin.
If the King says at Noonday, it is Night, you are to say, behold the Moon
and the Stars. This Vice passes even unto the People. I have seen an hundred
times People of Mogol, who having need of me in some Business, made no scruple
to come and tell me to my Face for a Preamble, that I was Aristotalis, Bocrate,
and Abouysina Vlzaman; the Aristotle, the Hippocrates, and the Avicenna of the
Time. At first I endeavored to fence my self against it by this ordinary
Complement, that I was none such, and was far inferior to the merit of those
Men: but that made them worse; so that I thought it better to accustom my Ears
to their Flattery, as I have done to their Music. I cannot forbear imparting
to you this little piece of Flattery, because that will let you see the more
how far they carry it. A Pendet Brachman, or Heathen Doctor, whom I had put to
serve my Agah, at the entering into his Service would needs make his Panegyric,
and after he had compared him to the greatest Conquerors that ever were, and
told him an hundred gross and impertinent Flatteries, at last concluded
seriously with this; When you put your Foot into the Stirrup, my Lord, and when
you march on Horseback in the front of the Cavalry, the Earth trembles under
your feet, the eight Elephants, that hold it up upon their Heads, not being
able to support it. I could not hold laughing, and I strove seriously to tell
my Agah, who could not hold neither, that then he would do well not to go on
Horseback but very seldom, to prevent Earthquakes, which often cause so great
Mischiefs. Who quickly made this Reparty with a constrained Countenance between
serious and smiling: And it is therefore that I cause my self ordinarily to be
carried in a Palekey.

But no more of this: from the great Hall of the Am-kas one enters into a more
retired Place, called the Goselkane, that is, the Place to wash in. But few are
suffered to enter there; neither is the Court of it so great as that of the
Am-kas: but the Hall is very handsome, spacious, painted and gilded, and its
Floor raised four or five foot high. There it is where the King is seated in a
Chair, his Omrahs standing round about him, and gives a more particular
Audience to his Officers, receives their Accounts, and treats of the most
important Affairs of State. All the Omrahs are obliged to be without fail every
evening at this Assembly, as in the morning at the Am-kas; else something is
retrenched of their Pay. There is only my Agah Danechmend-kan, that because he
is a Person of Learning, and perpetually busy in studying, or in foreign
Affairs, is dispensed with, except Wednesday, which is his day of being upon
the Guard. These are indispensible Customs, and it is very just they should be
so in respect of the Omrahs, because they are in a manner so in respect of the
King: for he almost never fails to be at these two Assemblies, unless some
urgent Affair do supervene, or he be exceeding sick. And we did see, that
Aureng-Zebe, even in his last Sickness, which was very dangerous, failed not to
make himself to be carried thither once a day at least. It is true, he being
sick to extremity, that if he had not been seen there, the whole Kingdom would
presently have been in disorder, and the Shops shut up in the City.

Whilst the King in this Hall of Gosle-kanay is busy, as I was saying, they
omit not to let pass before him most of the things that are made to pass at the
Am-kas. There is only this difference, that this Assembly being held in the
evening, and the Court being then less, the review of the Cavalry of the Omrahs
is not made, as in the morning at the Am-kas: but then there is this of
particular, that all the Manseb-dars that are upon the Guard do salute the
King, and pass before him with Ceremony enough: before them marches with
sufficient Pomp that which is called the Kours, which are many Figures of
Silver carried at the end of some great silver Sticks, that are very fine and
very artificially made; of which there are two that represent two great Fishes,
two others that exhibit a fantastic Animal of an horrid figure, by them
called Eiedeha; others that represent two Lions, others two Hands, others
Scales, and many more whereof they make Mysteries. Amongst these Kours and
Manseb-dars, are mixed many Gourze-berdars, or Mace-bearers, who are chosen Men,
tall of Stature, and of a good Mean, (spoken of elsewhere) and appointed to
prevent Disorders in Assemblies, and to run about with speed to carry the
Orders, and to execute the Commands of the King.

I now wish I could lead you about in the Seraglio, as I have done in the rest
of the Fortress: but who is the Traveller that can speak of that as an
Eyewitness? I have sometimes entered into it when the King was not at Dehli,
and I think pretty far, upon the occasion of a great Lady, that was so sick
that she could not be carried to the Gate, according to custom; but I had
always a Covering of Kachemire over my Head, which like a great Scarf hung down
to my Feet, and an Eunuch conducted me by the Hand, like a blind Man, so that I
cannot particularly describe to you what it is. Only in general I can tell you,
according to what I have learnt from some Eunuchs, that in it there are very
handsome Apartments severed one from another, more or less great and stately,
according to the Quality and the Pensions of the Women; that there is almost no
Chamber but it has at its Door a Storehouse of running Water; that it is full
of Parterres, pleasant Walks, shady Places, Rivolets, Fountains, Jets of Water,
Grotta's, great Caves against the heat of the day, and great Terrasses raised
high, and very airy, to sleep upon in the cool: in a word, you know not there
what it is to be hot. They principally boast of a little Tower respecting the
River, being, say they, covered with Plates of Gold, as those two that are at
Agra, and within all Gold and Azure, very handsome and rich Pictures and
Looking-glasses.

This is very near what I can tell you of the Fortress, yet before we leave it,
let us return once more to the Am-kas. I am now going to represent it to you
after the manner I saw it at certain Festivals of the Year, especially at that
which was kept after the War for an extraordinary rejoicing; for this is one of
the most remarkable things I have seen.

The King appeared sitting upon his Throne, in the bottom of the great Hall of
the Am-kas, splendidly apparelled. His Vest was of white Satin flowred, and
raised with a very fine Embroidery of Gold and Silk. His Turban was of Cloth of
Gold, having a Fowl wrought upon it like an Heron, whose foot was covered with
Diamonds of an extraordinary bigness and price, with a great Oriental Topas,
which may be said to be matchless, shining like a little Sun. A Collar of big
Pearls hung about his Neck down to his Stomach, after the manner that some
Heathens wear here their great Beads. His Throne was supported by six high
Pillars, or Feet, said to be of massy Gold, and set with Rubies, Emeralds and
Diamonds. I am not able to tell you aright, neither the number nor the price of
this heap of precious Stones, because it is not permitted to come near enough
to count them, and to judge of their water and purity. Only this I can say,
that the big Diamonds are there in confusion, and that the Throne is estimated
to be worth four Kouroures of Roupies, if I remember well. I have said
elsewhere, that a Roupie is almost equivalent to half a Crown, a Lecque to an
hundred thousand Roupies, and a Kourour, to an hundred Lecques: so that the
Throne is valued forty millions of Roupies, which are worth about sixty
millions of French Livers. Chah-Jehan, the Father of Aureng-Zebe, is he that
caused it to be made, to show so many precious Stones as successively had been
amassed in the Treasury, of the Spoils of those ancient Patans and Rajas, and
of the Presents which the Omrahs are obliged to make yearly upon certain
Festival days. The Art and Workmanship of this Throne is not answerable to the
Matter: that which I find upon it best devised, are two Peacocks covered with
precious Stones and Pearls, which are the work of a Frenchman, called -- that
was an admirable Workman, and that after having circumvented many Princes with
his Doublets, which he knew how to make admirably well, fled unto this Court,
where he made his Fortune. Beneath this Throne there appeared all the Omrahs in
splendid Apparel, upon a raised Ground covered with a great Canopy of purfled
Gold with great golden Fringes, and enclosed by a silver Balistre. The Pillars
of the Hall were hung with Tapestries of purfled Gold, having the ground of
Gold; and for the roof of the Hall, there was nothing but great Canopies of
flowred Satin, fastened with red silken Cords, that had big tufts of Silk mixed
with threads of Gold hanging on them. Below there was nothing to be seen but
great silken Tapestries very rich, of an extraordinary length and breadth. In
the Court there was set abroad a certain Tent they call the Aspex, as long and
large as the Hall and more. It was joined to the Hall by the upper part, and
reached almost as far as to the middle of the Court; mean time it was all
enclosed by a great Balistre covered with Plates of Silver. It was supported by
three Pillars, being of the thickness and height of a Barge-mast, and by some
lesser ones, and they all were covered with Plates of Silver. It was red from
without, and lined within with those fine Chittes, or Cloth painted by a Pencil
of Maslipatan, purposely wrought and contrived with such vivid Colors, and
Flowers so natural drawn of an hundred several fashions and shapes, that one
would have said, it were an hanging Parterre. Thus was the great Hall of the
Am-kas adorned and set out.

As to those arched Galleries, which I have spoken of, that are round about the
Court, each Omrah had received order to dress one of them at his own charges.
And they now striving who should make his own most stately, there was seen
nothing but purfled Gold above and beneath, and rich Tapestries under foot.

The third day of the Feast, the King caused himself to be weighed with great
Ceremony, and after him diverse Omrahs, in great Scales, and with Weights said
to be of massy Gold. I remember that all the Omrahs expressed a great joy,
that the King weighed two pounds more now than the year preceding.

Every year there are held such kind of Festivals, but never any was seen done
with so much splendour and charge. It is said, that that which induced
Aureng-Zebe to celebrate this splendid Feast, was nothing else but to make the
Merchants of purfled Gold recover themselves, who had whole Magazins full of
it, much spoiled in those four or five years of War, wherein they could not
sell them. These Expenses of the Omrahs were great; but the simple Cavaliers
paid their share of it, because that the Omrahs after the Feast made them take
off that Commodity to make Vests thereof.

There is an ancient Custom accompanying these Feasts, which little pleases
the Omrahs: And it is this, that then they are by respect obliged to make some
fair Presents to the King in proportion of their Pay. There are some, that to
appear brave, or for fear of being searched for the Rapines by them committed
in their Offices and Governments; or to purchase the Favor of the King, in the
hopes of having their Pensions augmented, make him Presents that are
extraordinary. Some (which is ordinary enough) do present fine Vessels of Gold
set with precious Stones; others present fair Pearls, Diamonds, Emeralds, or
Rubies; others (which also is very common) give him, without other Ceremony, a
quantity of those pieces of Gold, that are worth about a Pistol and an half. I
remember, that Aureng-Zebe, being gone to visit (during this great Festival)
his Visir Jafer-kan, not as Visir, but as a Kinsman, and under the pretense of
desiring to see a piece of Building, which he had caused to be raised anew,
Jafer-kan presented him in these pieces of Gold, with the value of an hundred
thousand Crowns, some good Pearls, and one Ruby valued forty thousand Crowns;
but which Chah-Jehan, who was admirably well skilled in Jewels, discovered not
to be worth five hundred Crowns; the which perplexed the first Jewellers
exceedingly, that had been deceived therein.

There is another thing sometimes attending these Feasts, which is odd enough:
And that is a kind of Fair, then held in the Mehale, or the King's Seraglio.
The Women of the Omrahs and of the great Manseb-dars, or little Omrahs (I mean
those that are the handsomest and the most gallant) are the She-Merchants that
keep the Fair, and sell Commodities; the King is the Merchant that buyeth, as
also all those Begums or Princesses* and other great Ladies of the Seraglio.
The Wares are fine purfled Gold, or rich Embroideries of the new fashion, some
rich Ribbons well wrought upon Cloth of Gold, or some pieces of that fine Cloth
which is worn by the great Ladies, and other such Merchandise of great price.
If they have ever a handsome Daughter, they forget not to bring her along with
them to let the King see her, and so make her known to those Begums. The jest
of this Fair is, that the King comes to bargain with those She-Merchants, like
a petty Merchant, penny by penny, contesting that they are not in earnest, that
it is too dear, that he will give no more than so much; that the Merchandise of
such an one is far better, and the like. The Women, on the other hand, do their
best to make good their part, and without considering that it is the King,
(which is the best of the sport) they contend and stand upon their price, till
sometimes they come to high words, as that that is to be a Merchant of Snow,
(one of their phrases) that he understands nothing in the matter of Wares, that
he may go to another Place, that that Commodity is not for him, etc. The Begums
do the like, or worse, for they sometimes fall to downright railing, so that
there is such a cry and noise, and boufonnery, that it cannot be paralleled.
But when any price is agreed on, who ever buyeth on this or that side, the King
pays, and the Begums pay, all with ready money: and it also falls out often
enough, that the King and the Begums, instead of Silver Roupies, let slide (in
favor of the handsome She-Merchant, or her Daughter) some Roupies of Gold, as
if 'twere by mistake, and without taking notice of any thing. The She-Merchants
also take it in like manner, all passes with expressions of rallery and
gallantry. Chah-Jehan, who did not hate the Sex, would still multiply this
Fair, and have it at all Festival days, though he knew it did not very well
please some Omrahs. But there is one thing, which to me seems to be a little
too extravagant; which is, that the public Women, I mean not those of the
Bazar, but those more retired and considerable ones, that go to the great
marriages in the houses of the Omrahs and Manseb-dars to sing and dance, those
that are called Kenchen, as if you should say, the gilded, the blossoming
ones; that those, I say, did also enter in the time of Chah-Jehan into the
Seraglio at such Fairs, and there passed even the whole night in singing and
dancing. These are not of that sort which prostitute themselves promiscuously
to all; and they are most of them handsome and well apparelled, and excellent
singers and dancers, after the mode of the Country, surprising in the
suppleness of their body, and the nimbleness of their motions, yet in the
upshot of the rank of Public Women. Chah-Jehan was not content only to have
them come to the Seraglio at those Feasts, but when they came to salute him,
according to that ancient custom that obliges them to come every Wednesday to
do obeisance to the King in the Amkas, he often made them to enter there, and
to pass all night with him in such sports and boufonries, Aureng-Zebe is more
serious, he suffers them not to come into the Seraglio: he permits only (not to
abrogate the custom) that they may ordinarily come every Wednesday to give him
the Salam, or Salute, in the Am-kas, at a distance, but they must presently
return home again.

But since we are upon these Feasts and Fairs, and speak of these Kenchens,
what hurt were it if I should tell you a story to make you merry, of one of our
French Men; since Plutarch is of opinion, that little things are not always to
be passed by, and that they often mind us more of the genius and temper of men
than the greatest. This French Man called Bernard, was at this Court about the
latter years of King Jehan-Guire. He must needs have been some good Physician,
and withal Excellent in Surgery, according to the relations that are made of
him. He was welcome to Jehan-Guire, and became very familiar with him, to that
degree that they drank*and debauched together. Nor did this Jehan-Guire ever
think on any thing, but a good cup and merriment, leaving the management of the
State to his Wife, the renowned Nour-Mehale, or Nour-Jehan-Begum, which he used
to say, had wit enough to govern the Empire without his giving himself any
trouble about it. Besides that this our Countryman had of the King ten Crowns
daily pay, he gained yet more by treating those great Ladies of the Seraglio,
and the grand Omrahs, that all made use of him, and presented him who could
best, because he was both successful in his Cures, and extraordinarily favored
by the King: But he was a man that could keep nothing, what he received with
one hand, he at the same time gave away with the other, so that he was known
and loved by all, especially by those Kenchens, upon whom he made great
expenses, having always a set of them that passed the night at his house in
singing and dancing. Mean time he chanced to fall in love with one of these
Women that was young and beautiful, and danced exceeding well; but the Mother
apprehending least the Daughter, by prostituting her self, should lose her
strength and vigor (as it will fall out) would not let her go out of her sight:
so that Bernard could never find any other way to compass his ends but this.
One day when the King made him a Present in the Am^kas, before all the Omrahs,
for a considerable Cure he had done in the Seraglio, he very submissively gave
his Majesty thanks, waving the Present, but instead of it, begged this favor
of him, that he would vouchsafe to give him this young Kencheny, which he was
amorous of, and which stood behind him, ready to make the usual obeisance to
the King. The whole Assembly brake out out into laughter to see him wave the
Present, and to hear him make so ridiculous a demand, he being a Christian, and
the Woman a Mohammedan and a Kencheny. But Jehan-Guire, who never troubled his
head much with Mahometanism, and could not hold laughing aloud, presently
commanded that this young Woman should be given him, saying, Lay her on his
shoulders, and let him carry her away. So said, so done; and in the presence of
the whole Assembly this Kenchen was put on Bernard's back, who went away thus
charged, and carried her to his house.

I cannot forbear giving you here ^an account of a divertisement, which usually
these Feasts end with, and which is unknown to us in Europe: and that is the
combat of the Elephants, which the King, the Ladies of the Court, and the
Omrahs do behold from several apartments of the Fortress, and which is shown
before all the people in this great sandy place which looks to the River.

They raise a wall of earth three or four foot broad, and five or six foot
high. The two Elephants that are to fight, meet one another face to face, one
on the one side of the wall, the other on the other, each having two Riders
upon him, that so, if the first, who sits on his shoulders (having a great
pointed iron in his hand, to turn the Beast on the right or left hand) should
fall, the other, who sits backward, may cast himself into his place. These four
Riders or Guides, do animate their Elephants to the Combat, and vigorously to
fall upon their enemy, now flattering them, and by and by chiding them as
cowards, and very rudely kicking them with their heels. After they have been a
good while thus chafed and pusht on, then you shall see these two bulky masses
come to the wall, and bluntly assault one another, and give such cruel blows
with their teeth, head and trunk, that you would think they would soon strike
one another dead. This fight continues a while, then cease, and begins afresh
several times, until the mudwall being overthrown, the stoutest of the two
passes upon the other, makes him turn his back, pursues him with blows of
his teeth and trunk, and gets such an holdfast upon him, that there is no means
of seperating them, except it be with the Cherkys, that is, certain artificial
fires cast betwixt them, this Animal being very fearful of fire: whence it
comes, that since Firearms have been used in Armies, Elephants do almost no
good at all. It is true indeed, that some of those brave ones that come out of
Ceilan, are not so timorous; but that is not till they have been whole years
accustomed to it, by discharging every day Muskets before them, and by casting
squibs between their legs. Mean time, this conflict of the Elephants would be
no such displeasing fight, if it were not so cruel, it often happening, that
some of those poor Guides are trod under foot and perish: for the Elephants in
the combat have this malice, that they strive above all things to strike with
their trunk, and to pull down the conductor of their adversary; and thence it
is, that on the day when these poor Riders know they are to make the Elephants
fight, they bid farewell to their Wives and Children, as if they were condemned
to death. That which encourages and comforts them, is, that if they escape and
quit themselves well of their duty, the King increases their pay, and commands
a sack of Peyssas, which amounts to about fifty French Livres, to be forthwith
given them, or if they be killed upon the spot, he orders that pay to be made
to the Widow, and the Office to be given to his Son, if he have any. There is
another mischief, which often accompanies this combat; which is, that in this
great throng there are always some persons overthrown by the Elephant, or trod
under foot by the Horses and People, that on a sudden run away all at once, and
fall one upon another, when the Elephants are enraged, and the one pursues the
other, so that then one cannot at any nearness look on but with danger. For my
part, the second time I saw it, I did sufficiently repent for having approached
so nigh, and if I had not had a good Horse, and two good Servants, I believe I
should have paid for my curiosity as dear as others.

But it is time we should leave the Fortress, and return into the City, there to
observe to you two things I had forgot. The first is the great Mosquee, seen
afar off in the midst of the Town, standing upon a rock, flatted to build upon,
and to make round about a large place for four long and fair Streets to end
upon, and answering to the four sides of the Mosquee, viz. one to the principal
Gate, or Frontispiece, another behind that, and the two others to the two Gates
that are in the middle of the two remaining sides. To come to the Gates, there
are twenty five or thirty steps of fair and large Stones going round about,
except the back-part, which is covered with other great Quarry-stones to cover
the uneveness of the cut Rock: which contributes much to make this Fabric make
a show. The three Entries are stately, there is nothing but Marble, and their
large Gates are covered with Copper Plates exceedingly well wrought. Above the
principal Gate, which is much statelier than the two others, there are many
small Turrets of white Marble as well without as within; that in the middle is
much bigger and higher than the two others. All the rest of the Mosquee, I mean
from these three Domes unto the great Gate, is without covering, because of the
heat of the Country; and the whole Pavement is of large squares of Marble. I
grant willingly, that this structure is not according to the rules and orders
of Architecture, which we esteem is indispensably to be followed; yet I observe
nothing in it that offends the eye; but rather find all to be well contrived,
and well proportioned: And I do even believe, that if in Paris we had a Church
of this way of Architecture, it would not be disliked, if there were nothing
else in it but that'tis of an extraordinary and surprising aspect, and because
that, excepting the three great Domes and all the Turrets, which are of white
Marble it appears all red, as if all were nothing else but great Tables of red
Marble, though it be nothing else but a stone very easy to cut, and which even
flaketh off in time. I shall add by the by, that if it be true what is said of
the quarries of this stone, it is remarkable, that it grows again every year;
whether it be by a petrescent water yearly filling it, or otherwise, I decide
not.

This Mosquee it is to which the King repaireth every Friday (which is the
Sunday of the Mahumetans) to pay his devotion. Before he goes out of the
Fortress, the Streets he is to pass, are constantly watered because of the heat
and dust. Two or three hundred Musketeers are to stand and make a lane about
the Gate of the Fortress, and as many more on the sides of a great Street that
ends at the Mosquee. Their Muskets are small, but well wrought, and they have
a kind of Scarlet-case with a little streamer upon them. Besides there must be
five or fix Cavaliers well mounted ready at the Gate, and ride at a good
distance before the King, for fear of raising dust; and their office is to keep
off the people. Things being thus prepared, the King is seen to come out of the
Fortress seated upon an Elephant richly harnassed, under a Canopy with Pillars
painted and gilded; or else on a Throne shining of Gold and Azure, upon two
beams, covered with Scarlet or purfled Gold, carried by eight chosen and well
accoutred men. The King is followed by a body of Omrahs, some of which are on
horseback, some in a Palekey. Among these Omrahs there are many Manseb-dars,
and Mace-Bearers, such as I have before spoken of. And though this be not that
solendid and magnificent Procession, or rather Mascarade of the Grand Seignior,
(I have no properer name for it) nor the warlike order of our Kings, it being
altogether of another fashion, yet for all that there is something great and
royal in it.

The other thing I had forgot to acquaint you with, is an Edifice in the City,
called the Karvansarab of the Princess; the renowned Begum-Saheb, eldest
Daughter of Chah-Jehan, having caused it to be built at her charges, and
willing to contribute something to the decoration of the Town, as all the
Omrahs strove to do to please Chah-Jehan. This is another great Square, arched
like our Palace-Royal, but still with this difference, that one Arch is
separate from the other by a wall, and that in the bottom of every Arch there
is a little Chamber; and besides that, above the Arches there is a Gallery
which rangeth round about the building, to enter into as many high Chambers, as
there are below. This Place is the Rendezvous of all the great Merchants,
Persians, Vsbecks, and other Strangers that ordinarily do there find empty
Chambers convenient enough, to stay in for some time in great safety, the Gate
being shut every night. If there were a score of such Structures in diverse
parts of Paris, Strangers newly arriving would not be in that trouble, as often
they are to find safe Lodgings; for there they might be until they had seen
their Acquaintance, and looked for good Accommodation: besides that they would
serve for Magazins of all sorts of Commodities, and for the Rendezvous of all
Merchants Strangers.

Before we leave Dehli, I shall add a few lines in reference to this question,
which doubtless you will make, viz. Whether in Dehli there be as much People and
Gallantry as at Paris? Certainly when I consider those three or four Cities of
Paris that are one above another, all those Chambers and other Rooms full from
top to bottom; when I farther consider that incredible throng and confusion of
Men and Women, of Horsemen and Passengers on foot, of Chariots, Sedans and
Coaches, and that there are but few great Piazzas and Gardens in Paris; this
City seems to me a Nursery of the World, and I can hardly believe, that there
are as many People in Dehli. Yet notwithstanding when I reflect upon that
multitude of Shops on one side of Dehli, and on the other, upon the vast extent
of that City, and that there are never less in it then 35000 Cavaliers, not to
speak of the Houses of the Omrahs; that of all these Cavaliers, there are very
few but have Wives and Children, and a great number of Servants having their
Houses apart as their Masters; and that all these Houses swarm with Women and
Children: that in many places of Dehli, though the Streets be broad, and there
be but few Chariots and no Coaches, yet at the hours when the heat suffers
People to come abroad for their business, there is great confusion: When (I
say) I consider all this on the other hand, I do not well know what to
determine about the question, and I imagine, that if there be not altogether so
much People in Dehli as in Paris, at least there wants not much of it.

Concerning the number of gallant People, it must be acknowledged, that there
is this difference between those of Paris and Dehli, that of ten Persons met
with upon the Streets of Paris, you shall see seven or eight well clothed and
of some fashion, which no Man will count rascally or beggarly People; whereas
in Dehli, for two or three Persons that are pretty well covered, you shall
always find seven or eight poor and ragged People; the Army which is there
drawing after it all that crew of Beggars and Rascals. Yet this is to be
acknowledged for a truth, that in Dehli, as well as in Paris, one meets with a
very great quantity of Persons well made, gallant, well mounted, well dressed,
and well attended: And indeed, to be upon the great Place before the Fortress
at the hours when all those Omrahs, Rajas, and Manseb-dars go to the Assembly
and to the Guard, that has something, great and splendid in it: when you shall
see there every where arrive those Manseb-dars well accoutred, shining with
Gold, and well mounted, a couple of Men going before them to make place, and as
many behind; when you shall also see many of those great Omrahs and Rajas
riding upon proud Elephants, and some of them on Horseback like the
Manseb-dars, and most of them sitting in their rich Palekys, carried upon the
shoulders of six men, their back leaning against some thick Cushion of purfled
Gold, chewing their Betele, to have a good breath and vermilion lips, with a
Servant on the side carrying a Tooth-pick, and a Porcelain or silver
Spitting-Veslel; and two more, fanning him and keeping off the flies and dust
from him with Peacocks-tails; and three or four others marching before to put
by the People; to which is to be added part of their Cavalry (I mean the
bravest and best mounted of them) following after: When, I say, all this is
seen together marching, as has been said, with the crowd made there as well as
at Paris, it will not be denied to be something great and very gallant.

As to the Country about Dehli, it is considerable for its fertility; for it
bears Rice, Millet, and three or four other sorts of Legumes, (which is the
ordinary food of the common People) Corn, Sugar, Indigo, and all that in
abundance. At two leagues off the City on Agra's side, in a place by the
Mahumetans called Koja Kotubeddine, there is a very ancient Edifice which has
been a Temple of Idols, where are Inscriptions that must also be very ancient,
the Characters of them being such that no body knows what they are, and
different from those of all the Languages of the Indies,

On another side, at two or three leagues distance from the Town, you see an
House of pleasure of the Kings, which indeed is a stately and Royal House, but
yet you must not think it approach to Fontain-bleau, or to St. Germain, or to
Versaille. Neither must you imagine that in this Campaign of Dehli there are
any St. Cloux, Chantilly's, Meudons, Liancours, Vaux, Ruelles, and many such
others; or that you see there any of those other inferior Houses of pleasure
belonging to simple Gentlemen, Citizens and Merchants. The Maxim, That the
Subjects of a Kingdom have no propriety in any thing, hinders all that.

Lastly, to make you pass quickly those fifty or sixty leagues, which are
betwixt Dehli and Agra, you are not to think, that upon this road you shall see
any such large and rich buroughs as there upon our roads. Set aside Maturas,
where you see still an ancient and stately Temple of Idols, and excepting some
Karavan-sarrahs, that are well enough, found on the highway to serve for
night-lodgings, I find nothing considerable there, but that Royal Alley of
Trees planted by the command of Jehan-Guire, and continued by the same order
for an hundred and fifty leagues, with little Pyramids or Turrets erected every
half league, to mark the ways, and with frequent wells to afford drink to
Passengers, and to water the young Trees.

Of AGRA.
TO pass to the description of Agra, you have the Idea of it, if you have well
taken that of Dehli; at least in respect of its seituation, which is also upon
the Gemma, and in regard of the Fortress, or Royal House, and of most of the
Buildings. It is true, that Agra has this advantage over Dehli, that being a
City where the Kings have already resided a long while, viz. since Akber, who
caused it to be built, and called it after his name Akber-abad, it is of
greater extent then Dehli, and has more of those fine Houses of the Omrahs and
Rajas, and more of the fair Karvansarrahs, as also more of those pretty Houses
of Stone and Brick belonging to particular Persons; besides that it has two
famous Tombs, of which I shall speak hereafter: But then it has these
disadvantages, that it wants Walls; that having been built altogether by one
design, it has not those fair and large Streets of uniform buildings as Dehli;
and that excepting four or five of those principal Streets of Merchants, which
are very long and well enough built, all the rest for the most part, is nothing
but a number of little Streets, straight without proportion, and nothing but
windings and turnings; which causes strange confusions when the Court is there.
I see no other difference between Agra and Dehli, then that I have been just
now speaking of; except it be that Agra has more of a Country Town then Dehli,
especially when we look upon it from an higher place: But 'its not such a
Country-aspect as disgraceth it, but a very agreeable and divertising one; for,
there being betwixt the Houses of Omrahs, Rajas and others, store of big green
Trees mixed, every one having been curious to plant of them in his Garden and in
his Court for shade; and besides, those high Houses of the Banians, or Heathen
Merchants, appearing here and there between those Trees, as Relics of old
Castles of Forests; all that causes within the Town very pleasing sights and
perspectives, especially in a dry and hot Country, where Peoples eyes seem to
desire nothing but verdure and shade.

Mean time you need not go out of Paris, to find the most pleasing and the most
gallant sight in the World. Take only a walk upon the Pontneuf, attentively
beholding in the daytime all things surrounding you, together with that
incredible and strange confusion of People: and at night the infinite number of
lights in the windows, of those high buildings that are round about you; and
the same confusion which continues till after midnight; the good Citizen, and
(which you shall not see in any part of Asia) the fair She-Citizen walking
without fear of Robbers, and without the inconvenience of dirt: and then the
long files of Stars that brave the wind, the rain and darkness. Take only, I
say, such a walk upon that Bridge, observing all those things together, and
then (upon my word) you may boldly maintain it, that you are upon the spot of
the fairest, bravest and most magnificent artificial view of the Earth, unless
it be some part of China or Japan, where I have not been. What will it be then
when the Louvre, that work which was once thought would never be seen but in
desigu and upon paper, shall be finished? I have purposely added the word
Artificial, because speaking of the best Perspectives that are, we must always
except Constantinople, when one is in a Boat in the midst of that great
Channel, over against the point of the Seraglio: For there you shall find your
self altogether surprised, as 'twere in the midst of some great and vast
enchanted Amphitheater; but in this Perspective the Workmanship of Nature is
most considerable, whereas in that of Paris; Art and Dexterity is most
conspicuous, which doubtless renders it more eminent, forasmuch as thereby it
looks more like the Seat of a great King, the Capital of a great Empire, and is
really, without flattering our selves, and all those beauties of Debli, Agra,
and Constantinople, well considered and compared, the sairest, the richest, and
the chiefest City of the World.

In Agra the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits have a Church and a College, where
in private they teach the Children of some twenty five or thirty Christian
families, that have (I know not how) gathered and settled themselves there by
the charity of those Fathers the Christian Doctrine. It was Ekbar who (in the
time of the great power of the Pertuguezes in the Indies) called them, and gave
them a pension for their subsistence, permitting them to build Churches in the
capital Cities of Agra and Lahor. And his Son Jehan-Guire favored them yet
more. But Chah-Jehan, Son of Jehan-Guire, and Father of Aureng-Zebe now
reigning, took from them their pension, caused their Church at Lahor to be
pulled down, and the greatest part of that in Agra, overthrowing also the
Steeple of the Church, wherein that Bell was that could be heard over all the
Town.

These Fathers the Jesuits entertained great hopes of the progress of
Christianity in the time of King Jehan-Guire, because of his contempt of the
Mahumetan Law, and the esteem he professed to the Christian, even giving way to
two of his Nephews to embrace the Christian Religion, and to a certain
Mirza-Zul-Karmin (that had been bred in the Seraglio, and was circumcised) to
turn Christian too, under the pretense that he born of Christian Parents, and
Son of the Wife of a rich Armenian, which Jehan-Guire had caused to be brought
to him into the Seraglio.

The same Fathers say, that this King, to begin in good earnest to countenance
the Christian Religion, designed to put the whole Court into the habit of the
Franqui, and that after he had prepared all things for it, and even dressed
himself in that fashion, he called to him one of the chief Omrahs, asking his
opinion of this dress; but that this Omrah altogether surprised at it, having
answered him very seriously, that it was a very dangerous thing, he thought
himself obliged to change his mind, and turned all into raillery.

These Fathers affirm further, that he being upon the point of death, comm
anded that they should be called to make him a Christian, but that then they
were not made acquainted with it. Many say, that this is not so, and that he
died as he had lived, without any Religion, and in the design he had, as well
as his Father Ekbar, to set himself up for a Prophet, and to become the Head of
a particular Religion of his own composure. However it be, there is another
thing I have learned of a Mahumetan, that was Son to an Officer of Jehan-Guire,
namely, that this King being one day in a debauche, called to him a certain
Religious man of Florence, whom he called Father Atech, as being a little fiery
man; and after he had commanded him to say all he could against the Law of
Mahumet, and for the Law of Christ, in the presence of many knowing Mullahs, he
would have made this terrible trial of both those Laws, viz That a great Pit
should be made, and a good Fire in it, and that Father Atech with the Gospel
under his arm, and one of those Mullahs with the Alcoran under his, should cast
themselves both together into that fire, and that he would embrace the Law of
him that should not burn. But that the sad countenance of the Mullahs,
altogether astonished, and the compassion he had of the Florentine Father, who
accepted the condition, diverted him from it. Whatever the truth be of this
story, it is certain, that whilst Jehan-Guire lived, these Fathers were
respected and honored in this Court, and that they conceived great hopes of
the advancement of Christianity in those parts; but that since that time they
have had no great cause to hope much of it, except perhaps what they received
by that familiarity, which our Father Buze had with Dara. But I shall say no
more of this matter of our Missions, intending to give you a particular long
Letter of it another time.

Certainly I cannot but exceedingly approve of Missions, and the good
Missionaries, especially our Capucins and Jesuits, and some others of our
neighborhood, because they give meek instructions, without that indiscreet zeal
and transport which is expressed by some others, and they charitably entertain
the Christians of the Country in their Religion, whether they be Catholics, or
Greeks, or Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobites, or others; and forasmuch also as
they are the refuge and comfort of poor Strangers and Travelers, and by their
knowledge, sober and exemplary life, they confound the ignorance and licentious
life of the Infidels: which some others do not always practice; who therefore
would do better to keep themselves close in their Convents, and not come hither
and give us a masquarade of our Religion, and by doing so, and by their
ignorance, jealousy, looseness, and the abuse of their authority and character,
become a stumblingblock to the Law of Jesus Christ. But a particular thing
infers no general; and notwithstanding those miscarriages, I very much applaud
the Missions, and pious and learned Missionaries, they are absolutely
necessary: it is the honor and prerogative of Christianity, to have every
where through the World Substitutes of the Apostles. But after all that I have
seen, and after all the converse and discourse I have so often had with those
obstinate Infidels, I may take leave to say, that I almost despair to see
struck such great strokes, as the Apostles did, who converted two or three
thousand People in one Sermon: finding by experience, and knowing very well
upon other accounts, after I have traveled through all the places of the
Missions in the East, that all the Missionaries together, not only in the
Indies, but in all the Mahumetan Dominions, do indeed by their Instructions,
accompanied with Charity and Alms, made some progress among the Gentiles, but do
in ten years not make one Christian of a Mahumetan. Truly these Infidels have
high thoughts of our Religion, they never speak of Jesus Christ but with great
veneration; and they never pronounce the word Aysa, that is to say, Jesus,
without adding that of Azeret, which is Majesty. They even agree with us, that
he was miraculously born of a Virgin Mother, and that he is the Kelum-Allah,
and the Rouh-Allah, the Word of God, and the Spirit of God: but it is not to be
hoped, that they will approve the rest of our Religion, so as to abandon theirs
in which they were born, and their false Prophet, to embrace ours, what reasons
soever be given them. Our Christians of Europe ought to wish, and even to
employ their Power, Care and Charity, that Missionaries may be sent over all,
such as may be no charge to the People of the Country, and whom want may not
induce to do mean things, as well for the reasons already alleged, as for this
cause, that they may be ever ready to lay hold on all occasions, always to bear
witness to the Truth, and to labor in the Vineyard when it shall please God to
give them an overture. But for the rest we ought to be disabused, and not to
suffer our selves to be so easily persuaded of so many stories, and not to
believe the thing to be so facit as some make it. The Sect is too much
libertine, and too attractive to quit it; it is a pernicious Law, which has
been introduced by Arms and Force, and still gets ground by those means: and I
hardly know any other way capable to shake and root it out. If therefore there
intervene not some of those grand and extraordinary strokes of Heaven, and God
by his powerful and particular Providence interpose not, (as we ought always to
hope, according to the great appearance there have been in China, in Japan, and
in the Person of King Jehan-Guire) considering the irreverence of the
Christians in their Churches, so dissonant from our belief of the particular
presence of God upon our Altars, and so different from that deep and
astonishing respect which those Infidels bear to their Mosquees, where they
would not so much as turn their heads, or speak the least word to one another;
there will always be great obstacles to their Conversion.

In Agra the Hollanders have also an House, where ordinarily they keep four or
five persons. Formerly they had a good trade there in selling Scarlet, great
and small Looking-glasses, plain Lace, and Gold and Silver Lace, and some small
Wares; and in buying Indigo, which is gathered round about Agra, but especially
at Bianes, but two leagues distant from it, and whither they go once a year,
having an house there for that purpose; as also in buying those cloths of
Jelapour and Laknau, at seven or eight days journey from Agra, where they also
keep an house, and whither they send some Factors once a year. But now they
say, that there is little profit for them in that trade, whether it be that the
Armenians drive the same traffic, or that it is so far from Agra to Suratte, or
that commonly some mischief or other befalls their Caravanes, which must pass
by Amadavad over all the Countries of the Rajas to avoid the ill ways, and the
mountains that are on the side of Gonleor and Brampour, which is the nearer
way. Yet notwithstanding these discouragements, they will never (I believe)
abandon this Factory, as the English have done theirs in that place, if it were
for nothing else but their Spices, which there they sell very well, and for
having some of their People near the Court taking care of their concerns: since
it cannot be otherwise, but that frequently some trouble will befall their
Factories by the tyranny of the Governors and other Officers, now from the side
of Bengala and Patna, another time from Suratte and Amadavad.

We will conclude this part with those two wonderful Mausolees, or Tombs, that
give to Agra so much advantage over Dehli. It was Jehan-Guire that caused the
first to be erected to honor the memory of his Father Eckbar; and Chah-Jehan
raised the other in honor of Taje-Mehale his Wife, that extraordinary and
celebrated Beauty of the Indies, whom he loved so passionately, that it is said,
he never enjoyed any other Woman but her whilst she lived, and that when she
died, he was in danger to die himself.

I shall not stay to discourse of the Monument of Eckbar, because whatever
beauty is there, is found in a far higher degree in that of Taje-Mehale, which
I am now going to describe unto you. You may theresore represent to your self,
that at the going out of the City of Agra Eastward, you enter into a long and
broad paved street, which rises gently, and has on one side an high and long
wall, making the side of a square Garden that is much bigger then our
Palace-Royal; and on the other side a row of new houses arched, such as are
those of the principal Streets of Dehli above spoken of. Having gone the length
of half the Wall, you shall find on the right hand of the side of the Houses a
great Gate well made, by which one enters into a Carvan-serah, and over against
it on the walls side, a stately Gate of a great square Pavilion, by which you
enter into the Garden between two Conservatories built up with Freestone. This
Pavilion is longer then it is large, built of a Stone like red Marble, but not
so hard. The Frontispiece seems to me very magnificent after their way, and as
high as that of St. Louys in the Street of St. Antony. It is true, you do not
there see Columns, Archi-traves, and Cornishes cut out after the proportion of
those Five Orders of Architecture so religiously observed in our Palaces: it is
a different and particular kind of structure, but such an one as wants no
agreeableness even in the unusualness of its contrivance, and which in my
opinion, would very well deserve a place in our Books of Architecture. It Is
almost nothing but Arches upon Arches, and Galleries over Galleries, disposed
and ordered an hundred different ways; and yet all appears stately, well enough
contrived and managed. There is nothing that offends the eye; on the contrary
all is pleasing, and a man cannot be weary in beholding it. The last time I saw
it, I was there with one of our French Merchants, who also could not behold it
enough. I durst not tell him my thoughts of it, apprehending I might have
spoiled my gust, and framed it according to that of Indostan: but he being
lately come from France, I was very glad to hear him say, he had never seen any
thing so august and bold in Europe.

After you are somewhat entered into the Pavilion to pass into the Garden, you
find your self under an high Vault made like a Cap, which has Galleries above
round about and below, on the right and left side two Divans or Causeys, made
up of earth of eight or ten foot high. Opposite to the Gate there is a great
Arch quite open, by which you enter into an Alley, which cuts almost the whole
Garden into two equal parts. This Alley is by way of terrasse so large, as that
six Coaches can pass on it abrest, paved with great squares of hard Stone,
raised some eight foot high above the Gardenplots, and divided in the middle by
a Channel walled up with Freestone, having jets of water at certain distances.
After you have gone twenty five or thirty paces upon this Alley, turning your
eye to behold the Entry, you see the other face of the Pavilion, which though
it be not comparable to that which looks to the Street, yet wants not its
stateliness, being high and of a structure approaching the other. And on both
sides of the Pavilion, along the wall of the Garden, you see a long and
profound gallery by way of terrasse, supported by many low columns near one
another. And in this Gallery it is, that during the season of the rains, the
Poor are permitted to enter, who come there thrice a week, receiving Alms from
a foundation made there by Chah-Jehan for ever.

Advancing further in this Alley, you discover at a distance before you a great
Dome, where is the Sepulcher, and below on the right and left hand you see
diverse Alleys of a Garden set with Trees, and several Parterres covered with
Flowers. At the end of this Alley, besides the Dome before you, you discover on
the right and left two great Pavilions, built of the same Stone, and
consequently looking all red as the first. These are great and spacious square
Edifices, made by way of Terrasse, opening by three Arches, and having at the
bottom the wall of the Garden, so that you march under them as if they were
high and large Galleries.

I shall not stay to describe unto you the Ornaments within these Pavilions,
because in respect of their Walls, Ground-plot, and Pavement, they are not much
unlike the Dome, which I am going to delineate unto you, after I shall have
observed, that between the end of the Alley (which we have spoken of) and the
Dome, there is a pretty large space of a floor, which I call a Water-Parterre,
because that the diversely cut and figured Stones you march upon, are there
instead of the Box-Wood of our Parterres. And it is from the midst of this
Parterre, that you may conveniently see a part of this Edifice, where the
Sepulcher is, which remains now to be considered.

It is a great and vast Dome of white Marble, which is near the height of that
of our Val de Grace in Paris, surrounded with many Turrets of the same matter
with Stairs in them. Four great Arches support the whole Fabric, three of
which are visible, the fourth is closed in by the wall of an Hall, accompanied
with a Gallery, where certain Mullahs (entertained for that end) do continually
read the Alcoran, with a profound respect to the honor of Taje-Mehalle. The
mould of the Arches is enriched with Tables of white Marble, wherein are seen
engraven large Arabian Characters of black Marble, which is very agreeable to
behold. The interior or concave part of this Dome, and the whole wall from top
to bottom is covered with white Marble; and there is no place which is not
wrought with Art, and has not its peculiar Beauty. You see store of Agat, and
such sorts of Stones, as are employed to enrich the Chapel of the great Duke
of Florence; much Jasper, and many other kinds of rare and precious Stones, set
a hundred several ways, mixed and enchased in the Marble that covers the body of
the Wall. The Quarries of white and black Marble, that make the floor, are
likewise set out with all imaginable beauty and stateliness.

Under this Dome is a little Chamber enclosing the Sepulcher, which I have not
seen within, it not being opened but once a year, and that with great Ceremony,
not suffering any Christian to enter, for fear (as they say) of Profaning the
Sanctity of the place: but really by what I could learn, because it has
nothing rich or magnificent in it.

There remains nothing else, then to give you occasion to take notice of an
Alley in the fashion of a Terrasse, twenty or twenty five ordinary paces large,
and as many or more high; which is betwixt the Dome and the extremity of the
Garden, whence you see below you, at the foot of it, the River of Gemna running
along, a great campaign of Gardens, a part of the Town of Agra, the Fortress,
and all those fair Houses of the Omrahs that are built along the water. There
remains no more, I say, then to cause you to observe this Terrasse, which
takes up almost the whole length of one side of the Garden, and then to desire
you to judge, whether I had reason to say, that the Mausoleum, or Tomb of
Taje-Mehale, is something worthy to be admired. For my part, I do not yet well
know, whether I am not somewhat infected still with Indianisme; but I must
needs say, that I believe it ought to be reckoned amongst the wonders of the
World, rather then those unshapen masses of the Egyptian Pyramids, which I was
weary to see after I had seen them twice, and in which I find nothing without,
but pieces of great Stones ranged in the form of steps one upon another, and
within nothing but very little Art and Invention.

A Letter written to Mr. Chapelain, sent from Chiras in Persia, October. 4. 1667.
concerning the Superstitions, strange Fashions, and Doctrine of the Native
Indies, or Gentiles of Indostan. Whence may be seen, that there are no Opinions
so ridiculous, and so extravagant, which the spirit of Man is not capable of.
SIR,
IF I should live whole ages, I know not whether I could ever forget those two
Eclipses of the Sun, of which I saw one in France in the Year 1654. and the
other in the Indies at Delhi in the Year 1666. if I remember aright. The former
seemed very remarkable to me upon the account of the childish credulity of our
common people; and of that pannick terror which had so seized the heart, that
some bought Drugs against the Eclipse; others kept themselves close in the dark
in their Caves, and their well-closed Chambers; others cast themselves in great
multitudes into the Churches: Those apprehending some malign and dangerous
influence, and these believing that they were come to their last day, and that
the Eclipse would shake the foundations of Nature, and overturn it,
notwithstanding any thing that the Gassendi's, Robervals, and many other famous
Philosophers could say or write against this persuasion, when they demonstrate,
that this Eclipse was of the same nature with so many others that had preceded
without any mischief, and that it was a known accident, foreseen and ordinary,
which had nothing peculiar, but what some cheating Astrological Mountebanks
might have devised.

That which I saw at Dehli seemed also very considerable to me, by reason of
the ridiculous Errors and Superstitions of the Indians. At the time when the
said Eclipse was to appear, I went up to the Terrasse of my house, which was
situate on the side of the River Gemna, thence I saw both sides of the River,
for near a league in length, covered with the Heathen Idolaters, that stood in
the water up to their girdle, demurely looking up into the sky, to the end that
they might plunge and wash themselves at the moment when the Eclipse should
begin. The little Boys and Girls were stark naked; the men were almost so too,
but that they had a kind of scarf round about their thighs to cover their
nakedness: and the married Women, together with the young Maids that were not
above six or seven years old, were covered with a single cloth. Persons of
condition, as the Rajas, or sovereign Princes of those Gentiles, (who commonly
are about the Person, and in the pay of the King) and the Serrahs or
Exchangers, the Banckers, Jewellers, and other great Merchants, were most of
them gone to the other side of the water with all their family, and had there
put up their Tents, and fastened in the River certain Kanates, which are a kind
of skreens, to perform their Ceremonies, and conveniently to wash themselves
with there Wives, so as not to be seen by others. These Idolaters no sooner saw
the Eclipse begin, but they raised a great cry, and all at once plunged
themselves wholly into the water, I know not how many times one after another;
standgin up afterward in the water, and lifting up their eyes and hands to
Heaven, muttering and praying with great devotion, and from time to time taking
water with their hands, which they threw up toward the Sun, bowing down their
heads very low, moving and turning their arms and hands sometimes one way,
sometimes another, and thus continuing their plunging, praying and apishness
unto the end of this Eclipse; at which time every one retired, casting some
pieces of Silver a good way off into the water, and giving alms to the
Brachmans or men of the Law, who failed not to be at that Ceremony. I took
notice, that at their going out of the water, they all took new clothes that
were laid ready for them folded up on the sand, and that many of the devouter
sort left there their old garments for the Brachmans. And in this manner did I
see from my Terrasse this great solemnity of the Eclipse; which was celebrated
after the same manner in the River Indus and Ganges, and in all the other
Rivers, as also in the Receivers of water in the Indies, but especially in that
of the Tanaiser, where were met together above an hundred and fifty thousand
persons, come together from all parts of the Indies, because the water of it is
on that day reputed more holy and efficacious than on any other.

The great Mogol, though he be a Mahumetan, suffers these Heathens to go on in
these old superstitions, because he will not, or dares not cross them in the
exercise of their Religion, and besides it is not performed without presenting
him, by the hands of the Brachmansas Commissioners, a Lecque or an hundred
thousand Roupies, which are worth above fifty thousand Crowns, for which he
returns nothing but a few Vests and an old Elephant. Now you shall see those
solid reasons (forsooth) which they allege for this Feast, and for the
Ceremonies by them observed in it.

We have (say they) our four Beths, that is, Books of the Law, Sacred and
Divine Writings, given us by God through the hands of Brahma. These Books do
teach us that a certain Deuta, which is a kind of corporeal Divinity, very
malign and mischievous, very black and very filthy (these are their own
expressions in their language) seizes on the Sun, blackens it as 'twere with
ink, and so darkens it: That this Sun, which is also a Deuta, but of the best
and the most beneficent and perfect Divinities, is at that time in very great
pains and terrible anguish, to see himself thus seized on and misused by that
black villain: That it is a general duty to endeavor to deliver him from this
miserable condition; which cannot ^e effected but by the force of prayers,
washings and alms, and that these actions are of a very extraordinary merit to
such a degree, that an alms given at that time is worth an hundred given at
another. Who is there, say they, that would not give cent pour cent?

Sir, these are the two Eclipses I spoke of which I shall hardly ever forget,
and which minister occasion to me to proceed to some other extravagancies of
these Gentiles, whence you may draw what consequences you shall please.

In the Town of Jagannat, which is seated upon the Gulf of Bengala, and where
is that famous Temple of the Idol of the same name, there is yearly celebrated
a certain Feast, which lasts eight or nine days, if I remember well. There is
found an incredible number of people, as there was anciently in the Temple of
Hammon, and as it is at this day at Mecca. This number, it is said, amounts
sometimes to above an hundred and fifty thousand persons. They make a stately
Engine of wood, as I have seen of them in many other places of the Indies, with
I know not how many extravagant figures, almost such as we are wont to paint
Monsters with two heads or bodies, half man and half beast, or gigantick and
terrible heads, Satyrs, Apes or Devils; which Engine is put upon fourteen or
sixteen wheels, such as the Carriages of Cannons may be, which fifty or sixty
persons more or less do draw, or thrust forwards: Upon the middle of it appears
most conspicuously the Idol Jagannat, richly dressed and adorned, which is thus
transported from one place to another.

The first day that they show this Idol with Ceremony in the Temple, the crowd
is usually so great to see it, that there is not a year, but some of those poor
Pilgrims, that come afar off, tired, and harassed, are suffocated there; all
the people blessing them for having been so happy, as to die on so holy an
occasion. And when this Hellish Triumphant Chariot marches, there are found
(which is no Fable) persons so foolishly credulous and superstitious as to
throw themselves with their bellies under those large and heavy wheels, which
bruise them to death, having suffered themselves to be persuaded, that there is
no action so heroic nor so meritorious as that, and that Jagennat will at the
same time receive them as his Children, and cause them to be born again in a
state of felicity and glory.

The Brachmans for their particular advantage and interest, I mean that of Alms
and Respect given to them as Persons devoted to these Mysteries, do entertain
the People in these errors and superstitions, and they proceed even to such
infamous cheats and Villainies, that I could never have believed them, if I had
not fully informed my self of it. These Impostors take a young Maid, of the
fairest they can meet with, to be the Bride (as they speak, and bear the
besotted people in hand) of Jagannat, and they leave her all night in the
Temple (whither they have carried her) with the Idol, making her believe that
Jagannat himself will come and embrace her, and appointing her to ask him,
Whether it will be a fruitful Year, what kind of Processions, Feasts, Prayers
and Alms he demands to be made for it. In the mean time one of these lustful
Priests enters at night by a little backdoor into the Temple, deflowreth this
young Maid, and makes her believe any thing he pleases; and the next day,
being transported from this Temple into another with the same magnificence, she
was carried before upon the Chariot of Triumph on the side of Jagannat her
Bridegroom; these Brachmans make her say aloud before all the people,
whatsoever she had been taught of these Cheats, as if she had learnt it from
the very mouth of Jagannat. But let us go on (if you please) to follies of
another kind.

Before this Chariot, and often in the very Temples of the Idols, on Festival
days, you shall see public Women dance, making an hundred indecent and
extravagant postures; and yet the Brachmans find a way to accord all that with
their Religion. I have seen some Women, that are not only famous for their
beauty, but also for great reservedness, which refused very considerable
presents of certain Mahumetans and Christians, and even of Heathen strangers,
as if they were only dedicated to the Ministry and the Ministers of Deura, or
the Idol Temple to the Brachmans and these Fakires, which are there seated most
of them upon ashes round about, altogether naked with their fearful hair of
Megera, and in the posture I shall speak of hereafter. But let us stay no
longer upon these follies.

There are so many Writers of voyages relating the custom of the Indian Women,
burning themselves with their Husbands, that I think something will at last be
believed of it. For my part, I am going to take my turn also, and to write to
you of it like others; yet in the mean time observing withal, that it is not
all true what is said of it, and that now they do not burn themselves in so
great a number as formerly, because the Mahumetans, that bear sway at present
in Indostan, are enemies to that barbarous custom; and hinder it as much as
they can; not opposing it absolutely, because they are willing to leave their
idolatrous people, who are far more numerous then themselves, in the free
exercise of their Religion, for fear of some revolt: but by indirectly
preventing it, in that they oblige the Women, ready to burn themselves, to go
and ask permission of the respective Governors, who send for them, make
converse with their own Women, remonstrate things to them with annexed
promises, and never give them this permission, but after they have tried all
these gentle ways, and till they find them fixed in their sottish resolution.
Which yet hinders not but that many burn themselves, especially of those that
live upon the Lands of the Rajas, where no Mahumetan Governors are. I shall not
stay to give you the history of all those, which I have seen burn themselves;
that would too be long, and too tedious: I shall only relate unto you two or
three Examples of them, whence you may judge of the rest; but first you shall
have the relation of a Woman, which I was sent unto to divert her from such a
mischievous design.

A friend of mine, called Bendidas, the first Clerk of my Agah Danechmend-kan,
died of an Hectic, having been treated by me above two years. His Wife
immediately resolved to burn her self, together with the Body of her Husband;
but her Parents, by the order of my Agah, whose servants they were, endeavored
to dissuade her from it, representing to her, that though it were indeed a
generous and laudable resolution, and would be a great honor and happiness in
the Family, yet she ought to consider, that her Children were yet little, that
she could not abandon them, and that she was to prefer their good, and the
affection she had for them, to the love she had for her Husband, and to her own
satisfaction. These Parents not having been able to prevail with her by all
these representments, bethought themselves to desire me to go to her, as sent
from my Agah, and as an ancient friend to the Family. I went and when I came, I
did, as soon as I came in, see a cluster of seven or eight fearful old Women,
together with four or 5 infatuated and brainsick Brachmans, who all cried by
turns, beating their hands about the dead Corpse, and the Widow in her loose
hair, looking pale, yet with dry and sparkling Eyes, sitting and crying also
aloud, and beating her Hands, as the rest with a kind of Cadency, upon the Feet
of her Husband. The outcry and noise being ended, I approached to this Company
of people, and addressing my self to the Widow, I gave her softly to
understand, that I came from Danechmend-kan; that he had appointed a monthly
Pension of two Crowns, to each of her two Sons, but on condition that she
should not burn her self, to the end, that she might take care of them, and
breed them up as was fit; that else we knew ways enough to hinder her from
burning her self, if she were obstinate for it, and to make those repent, that
should allure and incite her to such an unreasonable resolution, especially
since none of her Kindred was satisfied with it, and that she would not be
counted infamous, as those are that want the resolution to burn themselves
after the death of their Husbands, when they have no Children. I often
inculcated to her all these considerations, without hearing a word of answer
from her; though at last she said, looking fiercely upon me: Well, if I am
hindered to burn my self, I am resolved to break my head against the Wall. Then
said I by my self; What Diabolical fury does possess thee? And to her I
answered, full of indignation: Then take thy Children, thou unhappy Creature,
and cut their Throats, and burn them with thee; for they will be starved, I
being now ready to return to Danechmend-kan, and to annull their Pension. These
words being spoken by me, with the loudest and most menacing tone I could, made
impression upon the spirit of this Woman, and upon that of all the assistants:
She presently, without any reparty, let her Head sink down upon her knees, and
most of the old Women and Brachmans went away. Whereupon her Relations, that
were come with me, entered and parlied with her. And I, thinking I had done
enough, took Horse, and came away to my Lodgings, supposing they would do the
rest well enough. In short, about evening, when I was going to give an account
to my Agah of what I had done, I met with her Parents, who thanked me, and
said, that the dead Corpse had been burnt, and the Widow persuaded to remain
alive.

Concerning the Women that have actually burned themselves, I have so often
been present at such dreadful spectacles, that at length I could endure no more
to see it, and I retain still some horror when I think on it. Yet I shall
represent to you some of them, but pretend not to express to the life, with
what courage and resolution these poor Women achieved such a direful Tragedy;
for there is nothing but the Eye it self that can exhibit a right idea thereof.

When I was passing from Amadevad to Agra, over the Lands of the Rajas, that
are in those parts, there came news to us in a Borough, where the Caravane
rested under the shade (staying for the cool of the evening, to march on in
their journey) that a certain Woman was then upon the point of burning her self
with the Body of her Husband. I presently rose and ran to the place where it
was to be done, which was a great Pit, with a Pile of wood raised in it,
whereon I saw laid a dead Corpse, and a Woman, which at a distance seemed to me
pretty fair, sitting near it on the same Pile; besides four or five Brachmans,
putting the Fire to it from all sides; five Women of a middle age, and well
enough dressed, holding one another by the Hand, and dancing about the Pit, and
a great Crowd of People, Men and Women, looking on. The Pile of Wood was
presently all on fire, because store of Oil and Butter had been thrown upon it,
and I saw at the same time through the flames, that the Fire took hold of the
Clothes of the Woman, that were imbued with well-sented Oils mingled with
Powder of Santal and Saffron. All this I saw, but observed not, that the Woman
was at all disturbed; yea, it was said, that she had been heard to pronounce
with great force these two words, Five, Two, to signify, according to the
Opinion of those that hold the Souls Transmigration, that this was the 5 th.
time she had burnt her self with the same Husband, and that there remained but
two times for perfection; as if she had at that time this Remembrance, or some
Prophetical Spirit. But here ended not this Infernal Tragedy: I thought it was
only by way of ceremony, that these five Women sung and danced about the Pit;
but I was altogether surprised, when I saw, that the flame having taken hold of
the clothes of one of them, she cast her self with her Head foremost into the
Pit, and that, after her, another, being overcome by the flame and smoke did
the like: And my astonishment redoubled afterward, when I saw, that the
remaining three took one another again by the Hand, continued their dance
without any apparent fear, and that at length they precipitated themselves, one
after another into the fire, as their companions had done. It troubled me
sufficiently, that I knew not what that meant; but I learnt shortly after, that
these had been five Slaves, who, having seen their Mistress extremely afflicted
at the sickness of her Husband, and heard her promise him, that she would not
survive him, but burn her self with him, were so touched with compassion and
tenderness toward this their Mistress, that they engaged themselves in a
promise to follow her in her resolution, and to burn themselves with her. Many
persons, whom I then consulted about this custom of Women burning themselves
with the Bodies of their Husbands, would persuade me, that what they did was
from an excess of affection they had for them: But I understood afterward,
that it was only an effect of Opinion, prepossession and custom; and that the
Mothers, from their youth besotted with this superstition, as of a most
virtuous and most laudable action, such as was unavoidable to a Woman of
honor, did also infatuate the spirit of their Daughters from their very
infancy: Although, at the bottom, it was nothing else but an Art of the Men,
the more to enslave their Wives, thereby to make them have the more care of
their health, and to prevent poisoning of them.

But let us proceed to another Tragedy, which I shall rather represent to you
than many others, at which I have been present, because it has something
uncommon in it. It Is true, I was not there my self; but you may do as I, who do
not stand out against crediting these things, because I have seen so many of
them which seemed incredible to me. This action is grown so famous in the
Indies, that no body doubts of it, and it may be, that even your self have
already heard of it in Europe.

It Is of a Woman, that was engaged in some Love-intrigues with a young
Mahumetan her Neighbor, that was a Tailor, and could play finely upon the
Tabor. This Woman in the hopes she had of marrying this young man, poisoned her
Husband, and presently came away to tell her Tailor, that it was time to be
gone together as they had projected, or else that she should be obliged to burn
her self. The young Man fearing, lest he might be entangled in a mischievous
business, flatly refused her. The Woman, not at all surprised at it, went to
her Relations, and advertised them of the sudden death of her Husband, and
openly protested that she would not survive him, but burn her self with him.
Her Kindred well satisfied with so generous a resolution, and the great honor
she did to the whole Family, presently had a Pit made, and filled with Wood,
exposing the Corpse upon it, and kindling the Fire. All being prepared, the
Woman goes to embrace and bid farewell to all her Kindred that were there about
the Pit, among whom was also the Tailor, who had been invited to play upon the
Tabor that day, with many others of that sort of Men, according to the custom
of the Country. This fury of a Woman being also come to this young Man, made as
if she would bid him farewell with the rest; but in stead of gently embracing
him, she takes him with all her force about his Collar, pulls him to the Pit,
and tumbleth him together with her self into the Ditch, where they both were
soon dispatched.

She which I saw burn her self, when I parted from Suratte to travel into
Persia, in the presence of Monsieur Chardin and Paris, and of many English and
Dutch, was of a middle age and not unhandsome. To represent unto you the
undaunted cheerfulness, that appeared in her countenance, the resolution with
which she marched, washed her self, spoke to the people; the confidence with
which she looked upon us, viewed her little Cabin, made up of very dry
Millet-straw and small Wood, went into this Cabin, and sat down upon the Pile,
and took her Husband's Head into her Lap, and a Torch into her own Hand, and
kindled the Cabin, whilst I know not how many Brochmans were busy in kindling
the fire round about: To represent unto you, I say, all this, as it ought, is
not possible for me; I can at present scarce believe it my self, though it be
but a few days since I saw it.

It Is true, that I have seen some of them, which at the sight of the Pile and
Fire, appeared to have some apprehension, and that perhaps would have gone
back, but it is often too late: Those Demons, the Brachmans, that are there with
their great Sticks, astonish them, and hearten them up, or even thrust them in;
as I have seen it done to a young Woman that retreated five or six paces from
the Pile, and to another that was much disturbed when she saw the Fire take
hold of her Clothes, these Executioners thursting her in with their long Poles.
Yet I have often seen one, that is still a handsome Woman, and had saved her
self out of their Hands, falling into the Hands of the Gadous, that sometimes
meet there in great numbers, when they know that it is some fair and young Woman
that is to be burnt, and that has no great Kindred, nor much Company with her:
For the Women that are afraid of the Pile, and fly away from it, knowing that
they cannot be received again amongst the Gentiles, nor live with them, because
they repute them infamous, after they have committed such a fault, and brought
such a disgrace upon their Religion, such Women, I say, are ordinarily the prey
of this kind of Men, who are also counted infamous in the Indies, and that have
nothing to loose. A Mogolian durst not save, nor receive any, for fear of
bringing himself into great trouble. Some P^rtugueses living in Seaports,
where they were strongest, have sometimes carried away some of them. For my
part, I have often been so enraged against those Brahmans, that if I durst, I
had strangled them. I remember, among others, that at Lahor, I saw a very
handsome and a very young Woman burned: I believe she was not above twelve
years of age. This poor unhappy Creature appeared rather dead then alive, when
she came near the Pile; she shook, and wept bitterly: Mean time three or four
of these Executioners, the Brahmans, together with an old Hag, that held her
under the Arm, thrust her on, and made her sit down upon the Wood, and least
she should run away, they tied her Legs and Hands, and so burned her alive. I
had enough to do to contain my self for indignation; but I was forced to
content my self with detesting this horrid Religion, and to say by my self,
what the Poet once said of such another, upon the occasion, of Iphigenia, whom
her own Father Agamemnon sacrificed to Diana, for the interest of the Grecians,
amongst whom he was one of the principal Leaders.

-- Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum!
These are certainly very barbarous and very cruel Customs, but that which the
Brahmans do in some other places of the Indies is yet more so: For instead of
burning those Women that will dye upon the death of their Husbands, they bury
them in the ground alive up to the very Throat, and then two or three of them
fall at once upon them, and wring their Neck round, and so choke them, covering
them quickly with some earth, and then marching over their Heads. But let us
pass to some other Customs of those Countries.

Most of the Gentiles burn their dead; but some there are, that do no more than
with some Straw broil them on a Rivers side, casting them thereupon from the
height of a steep Bank into the Water: Which I have often seen upon the River
Ganges.

Some of these Gentiles there are, who, when they perceive a sick person near
death carry him to the side of a River (at which barbarous action I have been
once present) and then first put his Feet into the Water, and afterward let
him slide down as far as to his Throat, and then when they think he is now
expiring, they sink him quite under Water, and there leave him, after they have
made a great clamor, and clapping with their Hands: And this, say they, to the
end that the Soul leaving the body may be washed from all the impurities, she
may have contracted in the Body. And this is not only a reason given by the
Vulgar; for I have spoken with the most Learned of them, who delivered the same
with great seriousness. But let us go on to other extravagancies.

Amongst that vast number and great variety of Fakires, Derviches, or Religous
Heathens of the Indies, there is abundance of them that have Convents, in which
there are Superiors, and wherein they make certain vows of Chastity, Poverty,
and Obedience, leading so odd a life, that I doubt whether you can give credit
to it. These are commonly called Jauguis, as if you should say, United to God.
You shall see many of them sit stark naked, or lie days and nights upon Ashes,
and commonly enough, under some of those large trees, that are on the sides of
the Talabs or Ponds, or else in those Galleries that are about their Deuras or
Idol-temples. Some of them have their Hair hanging down to the middle of their
Legs, and that wreathed into several parcels, as the large Main of our Barbes,
or rather as the Hair of those that have the sickness of Poland called the
Plica. Of these I have seen some in diverse places, who held one Arm, and
sometimes both, lifted up perpetually above their Heads, and that had at the
end of their Fingers wreathed Nails, that were longer by measure than half my
little finger. Their Arms were small and lean as of hectical persons, because
they took not sufficient nourishment in that forced posture, and they could not
let them down to take any thing with them, either meat or drink, because the
Nerves were retired, and the Joints were filled and dried up: wherefore also
they have young Novices, that serve them as Holy men with very great respect.
There is no Megera in Hell so terrible to look on, as those Men are, all naked,
with their black skin, long Hair, dried Arms, and in the posture mentioned, and
with crooked Nails.

I have often met in the Field, especially upon the Lands of the Rajas, whole
squadrons of these Faquires, altogether naked, dreadful to behold. Some held
their Arms lifted up in the posture mentioned; others had their terrible Hair
hanging about them, or else they had wreathed them about their Head; some had a
kind of Hercules's Club in their Hand; others had dry and stiff Tiger-skins
over their Shoulders. I saw them pass thus quite naked, without any shame,
through the midst of a great Borough, I admired how Men, Women, and Children
could look upon them so indifferently, without being moved no more than if we
should see pass some Eremite through our streets; and how the Women brought
them alms with much devotion, taking them for very holy Men, much wiser and
better than others.

I have seen for a long while a very famous one in Dehli, called Sarmet, who
went thus stark naked along the streets, and who at length would rather suffer
his Neck to be cut off, than to put on any clothes, what promises or menaces
soever Aureng-Zebe might send to him.

I have seen many of them, who out of devotion went long Pilgrimages, not only
altogether naked, but charged with Iron-chains, like those that are put about
the Legs of Elephants. Others, who, out of a particular vow, stood for seven or
eight days upright upon their Legs, which thereupon swelled as big as their
Thighs, without sitting or lying down, or without reposing themselves otherwise
than by leaning some hours of the night upon a stretched Cord: Others, who
stood for whole hours upon their Hands without wavering, the Head down, and the
Feet upward: And so of many others sorts of postures so constrained, and so
difficult, that we have no Tumbler able to immitate them; and all this it seems
upon the account of Religion, of which yet their appears not the least shadow
in it.

All these so extraordinary things did (to tell you the truth) exceedingly
surprise me at first, I knew not what to say or think of it. Sometimes I looked
upon them as a remainder, or rather as the Authors of that ancient and infamous
Sect of the Cynicks, but only that I found nothing in them, but brutality and
ignorance, and that they seemed to me a kind of Trees, somewhat moving from one
place to another, rather than rational Animals. Another time I considered them
as Men altogether Enthusiastical; though as I lately said, I could not find any
shadow of true Piety in all they did. Sometimes I thought, that this lazy,
idle, and independent Life of Beggars might have something attractive in it.
Sometimes I imagined that the vanity, which creeps in every where, and which is
as often found under the patched Mantle of Diogenes, as under the comely
Garment of Plato, there might lurk that Spring, which might set a going so many
Engines; and then reflecting withal upon the miserable and austere life they
led, I knew not what Judgment to make of them.

It Is true, that many say, that they do not exercise these strange austerities
but in the hopes they entertain of becoming Rajas in their renascence, or of
returning again in a more happy life. But, as I have often told them to their
Faces, how is it possible for any Man to resolve upon such a miserable life from
the hope of another, that is to be no longer, and has also, in the upshot, but
very little happiness in it, though one should return a Raja, and even a
Jesseingue or a Jessomseingue, which are the two most puissant Rajas of the
Indies? There must needs, said I, lie something else under it, which you have
no mind to discover to us, or you must be arrant Fools.

Amongst those I have been speaking of, there are such that are believed to be
true Saints, illuminated and perfect Jauguis, entirely united to God. These are
people that have altogether abandoned the World, and sequestered themselves
into some very remote corner or Garden, like Eremites, without ever coming to
Town. If you carry them any meat, they receive it; if they do not, it is
believed that they can live without it, and subsist by the sole favor of God
in perpetual fasting, prayer, and profound meditations: For they sink
themselves so deep into these raptures, that they spend many hours together in
being insensible, and beholding in that time, as they give out, God himself,
like a very bright and ineffable Light, with an unexpressible joy and
satisfaction, attended with an entire contempt and forsaking of the World: For
thus much one of them, that pretended he could enter into this rapture when he
pleased, and had been often in it, told me; and others that are about them,
affirm the thing with so much seriousness, that they seem to believe in
earnest, as if there were no imposture in it. God alone knows whether there be
any truth in it, and whether in this solitude and fasting the imagination
debilitated, may not suffer it self to be carried away into these illusions: Or
whether they be not of that kind of natural Raptures, into which Cardan said he
fell when he listed; and this the rather, because I see, there is used some Art
in what they do, forasmuch as they prescribe to themselves certain Rules, by
little and little to bind up their Senses: For they say, for Example, that
after they have fasted many days, using nothing but Bread and Water, it is
requisite first to keep themselves alone retired from all company, directing
the Eyes steadily toward Heaven for a while, then gently casting them down
again, and then fixing them both so as to look at one and the same time upon
the tip of their Nose equally, and as much on one side as the other (which is
troublesome enough) and remaining firm and intent in that posture, until such a
Light do come. Whatever the matter be, I know, that these Raptures, and these
ways of falling into them, make the great Mystery of the Cabala of Jauguis, as
the Soufys do also. I call it Mystery, because they keep it very secret amongst
them; and if it had not been for this Pendet or Indian Doctor, to whom
Danechmend-kan gave a Pension, and who durst hide nothing from him; and if also
Danechmend-kan had not known the Mysteries of the Cabala of the Soufys, I
should not have discovered so much of it. I know besides, that as for the
extremity of Poverty, of Fastings and Austerities, that also can do much to it.
We must not think (or I am much deceived) that any of our Religious Friars or
Eremites go in this point beyond those Men, nor generally beyond all the
Asiatick Monks; witness the Life and Fastings of the Armenians; Copththes,
Greeks, Nestorians, Jacobites, and Maronites. We must rather avow, that we are
but Novices, when compared with those Religious Men: But then we must also
acknowledge, according to what I have experimented, in respect of those of the
Indies, that they can much more easily bear hunger than we can in our colder
Climates.

There are others very differing from those, but very strange Men likewise;
they are almost perpetually traveling up and down, they deride all, take care
of nothing, Men that brag of secrets, and who, as the people say, know no less
than to make Gold, and so admirably to pepare Mercury, that a grain or two of
it taken every morning restores the body to perfect health, and so strengthens
the Stomach, that it feeds greedily and digests with ease. This is not all:
When two of these Jauguis, that are eminent, do meet, and you stir them up in
the point and power of their knowledge or Jauguisme, you shall see them do such
tricks out of spite to one onother, that I know not whether Simon Magus could
have outdone them. For they divine what one thinks, make the Branch of a
Tree blossom and bear fruit in less than an hour, hatch Eggs in their bosom
in less than half a quarter of an hour, and bring forth such Birds as you
demand, which they make fly about the Chamber, and many such other prodigies. I
mean, if what is said of them be true; for I remember, that one day my Agah
sent for one of these famous Diviners, and when he was come, agreed with him to
give him the next day 300 Roupies, which is about 150 Crowns, if he should tell
him, as he said he would, his present thought, which he was to write before him
upon a paper: As also, that I my self made a bargain with the same, to give him
25 Roupies, if he should divine mine; but the Prophet failed us, as also did at
another time one of those pretended producers of Birds, to whom I had also
promised 20 Roupies. I am still to be understood, if it be true what is said of
them. For, as for me, I am with all my curiosity none of those happy Men, that
are present at, and see those great feats; and if I should chance to see any of
such things as are thought strange, I am always considering and seeking,
whether the thing may not be done by some Juggle, Art, or Trick of Legerdemain:
and I am sometimes even so unhappy, or, if you will, so fortunate, as to find
out the cheat, as I did him, that made a Cup run, to discover who it was, that
had stolen money from my Agah.

Lastly, there are some in many places, that are quite of another way than all
those I have discoursed of. Their Life and their Devotion is more meek and more
polisht; they go over the streets barefoot and bare-headed, girt about with a
Scarf hanging down to their Knees, and having a white Sheet which passes
under their right Arm, and comes out over their left Shoulder like a Cloak,
without other Clothes under it. They are always very clean and neat in all
things, and commonly go two and two together with great modesty, holding in
their Hand a small Earthen Travet with two handles, very neat. They do not go
gossiping from Shop to Shop, as many of the other Fakires do. They go freely
every where into the Houses of the Gentiles, where they are welcome, and much
made of; they being esteemed a Blessing to the House. They are by no means to
be accused of any thing, though it be well enough known, what in such visits
among the Women passes. But it is the custom, they are in possession of being
Saints for all that, and any House thinks it self honored with their visit.
But it is not only there so; many other places there be in the World, where
things are not so strictly looked to. But that which I find most ridiculous in
those people is, That they are impertinent enough, to compare themselves with
our Religious Men, they meet with in the Indies. I have often taken pleasure to
catch them, using much ceremony with them, and giving them great respect; but I
soon heard them say to one another, This Franguis knows who we are, he has
been a great while in the Indies, he knows that we are the Padrys of the
Indians. A fine comparison, said I within my self, made by an impertinent and
idolatrous rabble of Men!

But we stay too long upon these Heathen-Beggers: Let us go on to their Books
of Law and Sciences: you may afterward judge, whether most of what I am going
to say of it, may be put, as I think it may, in the number of Extravagancies.

Do not wonder, if, though I know not the Hanscrit, the language of the Learned
(of which somewhat may be said hereafter, and which is perhaps the same with
that of the old Brahmans) do notwithstanding tell you many things taken out of
Books written in that Tongue. For you must know, that my Agah Danechmend-kan,
partly upon my solicitation, partly out of his own curiosity, took into his
service one of the famousest Pendets that was in all the Indies, and that
formerly had had a Pension of Dara, the Eldest Son of King Chah-jehan; and that
this Pendet, besides that he drew to our House all the most Learned Pendets,
was for three years constantly of my conversation. When I was weary of
explaining to my Agah those late discoveries of Harvey and Pecquet in Anatomy,
and of discoursing with him of the Philosophy of Gassendi and Descartes, which
I translated to him into Persian (for that was my chief employment for five or
six years) that Pendet was our refuge, and then he was obliged to discourse,
and to relate unto us his stories, which he delivered seriously and without
ever smiling. It Is true, that at last we were so much disgusted with his tales
and uncouth reasonings, that we scarce had patience left to hear them.

They say then, that God, whom they call Achar, that is to say, Immovable or
Immutable, has sent them four Books, which they call Beths, a word signifying
Science, because they pretend that in these Books all Sciences are
comprehended. The first of these Books is called Athen-habed, the second
Zager-bed, the third Rek-bed, the fourth Sama-bed. Conform to the doctrine of
these Books, this people ought to be distinguished, as really they are, into
four Tribes: The first is of Brachmans, Men of the Law; the second of
Quetterys, Men of Arms; the third, Men of Bescue or Trafick, commonly called
Eanians; and the fourth, Men of Seydra, that is, Handy-crafts Men and
Laborers. And these are so discriminated, that those of one Tribe cannot marry
into another, that is, a Brahman cannot marry with a Woman Quettery, and so of
the rest.

They all agree in one Doctrine, which is that of Pythagoras concerning the
Metempsychosis or Transmigration of Souls, and in this, that they must not kill
or eat of any Animal. However there are some of the second Tribe that may eat
of them, provided it be neither Cows nor Peacocks-flesh, they all having a
great veneration for these two creatures, especially the Cow, because they
fancy I know not what River lying between this Life and that to come, which
they are to pass by holding themselves fast on a Cowstail. Possibly their
ancient Legislators had seen those Shepherds of Egypt, crossing the Nile, by
holding with their left hand the Tail of an Ox, and in their right hand a
Stick to guide him with; or rather they have imprinted in them this respect for
Cows, because they draw from them Milk and Butter, which is a great part of
their subsistence; and because also they are so serviceable for the Plough, and
consequently for the Life of Man; and that the rather because it is not so in
the Indies as in our Parts, for maintaining so great a number of Cattle as we
do: if but half as many of them should be killed in the Indies, as there are in
England or France, the Country will quickly be destitute of them, and the Land
remain Untilled. The heat is there so violent for eight months of the year,
that all is dry, and that Oxen and Cows are often starved, or dye of eating
trash in the Fields like Hogs. And it is upon the account of the scarcity of
Cattle, that in the time of Jehan-Guire, the Brahmans obtained an Edict, that
no Cattle should be killed for a certain number of years, and that of late they
presented a Petition to Aureng-Zebe, and offered him a considerable sum, if he
would make the like Prohibition. They remonstrated, that for 50 or 60 years
past much Land had remained Unploughed, because the Oxen and Cows were become
too scarce and too dear. It may be also, that these Lawgivers considered, that
Cows and Ox-flesh in the Indies is not very savoury, nor wholesome, unless it
be for a little time in Winter, during the cooler season: Or lastly, that they
would take the People off from mutual cruelty, (to which they were too much
inclined) by obliging them, as by a Maxim of Religion, to exercise humanity to
the very Beasts, and by making them believe, that killing or eating an Animal,
it might happen that they did kill or eat one of their Grand-sires; which would
be an horrid crime.

According to the Doctrine of these Beths, they are obliged to say their
Prayers at least thrice every day, in the morning, at noon, and at night, with
their face turned to the East. They are also bound to wash their whole body
thrice, or at least before they eat; and they believe, that it is more
meritorious to wash themselves in running water then in any other. And it may
be, that the Legislators in this point also have had a respect to what is
proper and convenient for this Country, where nothing is more desirable then
washing and bathing. And they find it troublesome enough to observe this Law,
when they are in cold Countries: I have seen some of them that were like to
die, because they would there also observe their Law of washing their Body by
plunging themselves into Rivers or Ponds, when they found any near; or by
throwing whole buckets of water over their heads, when they were remote from
them. When I told them upon occasion, that in cold Countries it would not be
possible to observe that Law of theirs in Winter (which was a sign of its being
a mere human invention) they gave this pleasant answer: That they pretended not
their Law was universal; that God had only made it for them, and it was
therefore that they could not receive a Stranger into their Religion: that they
thought not our Religion was therefore false, but that it might be it was good
for us, and that God might have appointed several differing ways to go to
Heaven; but they will not hear that our Religion should be the general Religion
for the whole earth, and theirs a fable and pure device.

These same Books do teach them, that God having determined to create the
World, would not execute it immediately, but made first three Perfect Beings:
the first was Brahma, which signifies Penetrating into all things; the second
Beschen, that is Existing in all things; and the third Mehahden, that is, great
Lord. That by the means of Brahma he created the World, by the means of Beschen
he preserves it, and by the means of Mehahden he will destroy it. That it is
Brahma, who by the command of God did publish the four Beths, and that
therefore he is in some of their Churches represented with four Heads.

As to those three Beings, I have seen some European Missionaries that were of
opinion, that these Gentiles had some Idea of the Mystery of the Trinity; and
said, it was expressly contained in their Books that there are three Persons,
and one only God. For my part, I have made the Pendets sufficiently discourse
upon this point; but they declare themselves so poorly, that I could not
clearly understand their sense. I have even heard some of them, who said, that
these are three Creatures very perfect, which they called Deutas, y^^ without
explaining well what they understood by this word Deutas; as our ancient
Idolaters never explained what they meant by these words Genius and Numina,
which is (I think) the same with Deuta among the Indians. It Is true, that I
have spoken with others of the most knowing amongst them, who said, that these
three Beings were indeed nothing but one and the same God, considered three
manner of way, viz. as he is the Producer, Conservator, and Destroyer of
things; but they said nothing of three distinct Persons in one only Deity.

Moreover I have seen the Reverend Father Roa, a German Jesuit and Missionary
at Agra, who being well versed in their Hanscrit, maintained that their Books
did not only import, there was one God in three Persons, but that even the
second Person of their Trinity was incarnated nine times. And that I may not be
thought to ascribe to my self the writings of others, I shall relate unto you
word for word, what a certain Carmelite of Chiras has lighted upon, which he
related when the abovementioned Fathat Roa passed that way to come back to
Rome. The Gentiles (says he) do hold, that the second Person of the Trinity was
incarnated nine times, and that because of diverse necessities of the World,
from which he has delivered it: But the eighth Incarnation is the most
notable; for they hold, that the World being inslaved under the power of
Giants, it was redeemed by the second Person, incarnated and born of a Virgin
at midnight, the Angels singing in the Air, and the Heavens pouring down a
shower of flowers all that night. This savours much of Christianity: But then
there follows a Fable again, which is, That this God incamate killed first of
all a Giant that flew in the Air, and was so big as to obscure the Sun, and by
his fall to make the Earth to shake, and that by his great weight he sunk as
deep as Hell* that this God incarnate being wounded in the side, in the first
conflict with this Giant, fell, but by his fall put his Enemies to flight; that
after he had raised himself again, and redeemed the World, he ascended into
Heaven; and that by reason of his wound, he is commonly called the Wounded in
his Side. In the tenth Incarnation, which shall then be, when according to our
supputation Antichrist shall come, the World shall be delivered from the
slavery of the Mahumetans: But this is only a vulgar Tradition, which is not
found in their Books.

They say also, that the Third Person of the Trinity has manifested himself to
the World; concerning which they relate, That the Daughter of a certain King,
being fit ^o be married, and asked by her Father, whom she would marry,
answered, that she would not be united but to a Divine Person; and that at the
same time, the Third Person of the Trinity appeared to the King in the form of
Fire; that that King forthwith gave notice of it to his Daughter, who presently
consented to the Marriage; That this Person of the Trinity, though altogether
in a fiery appearance, was called before the King's Council, and seeing that the
Counselors opposed this Marriage, took hold of their Beards and burned them,
together with the whole Royal Palace, and then married the Daughter. Ridiculous!

They add, that the first Incarnation of the second Person, was in the nature
of a Lion; the second, in that of a Swine; the third, in that of a Tortoise;
the fourth, in that of a Serpent; the fifth in that of a Brahma She-Dwarf,
only a foot and a half high; the sixth, in that of a Monster, a Man-Lion; the
seventh, in that of a Dragon; the eighth, as has been said already; the ninth,
in an Ape; the tenth, in that of a great Cavalier.

Concerning this I shall acquaint you, that I doubt not but that the Reverend
Father Roa, has taken all he says of this matter out of the Books of the
Gentiles, and that is the main ground of their Mythology. I had written many
things of it at large in my Papers, and had also taken the Figures of their
Gods or Idols, which I had seen in their Temples, having also got of them the
Characters of their Language Hanscrit; but finding at my return all those
things, or at least the best part of it Printed in the China Illustrata of
Father Kircher, who had obtained it at Rome from the same Father Roa; I shall
content my self to have named the Book to you. It Is true, that the word
Incarnation, which the Reverend Father uses, was new to me, having never seen
it so expressly used; I had only heard some Pendets thus explaining the thing,
viz. That God had formerly appeared in those Figures when he did all those
wonders they relate. Others explained it to me after this manner, to wit, That
it was the Soul of certain Great Men, such as we might call Hero's, that had
passed into these Bodies, and that these Hero's were thus become Deutas, or to
speak in the phrase of our old Idolaters, some powerful and considerable
Divinities, Numens, Genio's, Demons, Spirits; for I see not that this word
Deuta can signify any other thing: But this second Explication of the Pendets,
comes in effect to the first, for as much as most of them believe, that our
Souls are Portions of God.

Others there were that gave me a much sublimer Explication, saying, That all
those Incarnations or Apparitions, which their Books speak of are not to be
understood according to the Letter, but Mystically, forasmuch as thereby are
explained the several Attributes of God. Some there were, and those of the most
learned, acknowledging to me heartily, that there was nothing more fabulous
then those Incarnations, and that they were only the Inventions of Legislators,
to retain People in some Religion: And though this were so, if there were
nothing else but this, (which is common to them all) that our Souls were
Portions of the Deity, it were to be exploded in sound Philosophy, without
making any Mysteries in Religion of it, seeing that in respect of our Souls we
should be God, and that in effect it should be our selves that had imposed upon
us a Religious Worship, Metempsychoses, Paradise and Hell, which would be
ridiculous.

I shall here add a few words, to declare that I am not less obliged to
Monsieur Henry Lor, and to Monsieur Abraham Roger, then to the Reverend Fathers
Kircher and Roa. I had compiled an hundred things relating to the Gentiles,
which I found in the Books of those Gentlemen, and which would have been a
great trouble to me to range them as they have done. I shall therefore content
my self to say something in General to you of their Studies and Sciences, not
indeed in that good order which possibly you might expect, but just as I have
learnt it, and as it is probably found in their Books; I mean by fragments, and
without coherence.

The Town of Benares, which is seated upon the Ganges in a very fine and rich
Country and place, is the General School, and as 'twere the Athens of the
Gentry of the Indies; where the Brachmans and the Religious (those that addict
themselves to study) come together. They have no Colleges nor Classes ordered
as with us, me thinks, it is more after the way of the School of the Ancients;
the Masters being dispersed over the Town in their Houses, and especially in
the Gardens of the Suburbs, where the great Merchants do suffer them. Of these
Masters some have four Disciples; others six or seven; and the most famous,
twelve or fifteen at most, who spend ten or a do^zen years with them. All this
study goes on very cooly, because most Indians are of a slow and lazy humor,
to which the heat and diet of the Country contributes much; and because they
are not animated to industry as we, by that great emulation, and by the great
hopes we have of coming thereby to great preferment. They study leasurely, and
without much tormenting themselves; eating their Kichery or mixture of Legums,
which the rich Merchants cause to be dressed for them.

Their first study is of the Hanscrit, which is a Language altogether different
from the common Indian, and not known but by the Pendets. And this is that
Tongue, of which Father Kircher has published the Alphabet received from Father
Roa. It is called Hanscrit, that is, a pure Language; and because they believe
this is to be the Tongue, in which God, by the means of Bra^^a, gave them the
four Beths, which they esteem Sacred Books, they call it an Holy and Divine
Language. They pretend also, that it is as ancient as Brahma, whose Age they do
not reckon but by Lecques, or hundred thousands of years. But I would gladly
have a warrant for such an extraordinary Antiquity. However, it cannot be
denied that it is very old, in regard that the Books of their Religion, which
certainly is very ancient, are written in this Tongue, and besides that, it
has it is Authors in Philosophy and Physic in Verses, and some other Poems,
and many other Books, of which I have seen a great Hall quite full in Benares.

After they have learned the Hanscrit (which is very difficult to them, because
they have no Grammar worth any thing) they commonly apply themselves to read
the Purane, which is as it were the interpretation and sum of the Beths, which
are very large, at least if those be they which were showed me at Benares: and
besides they are so very rare, that my Agah could never find them to be sold,
what industry soever he used in it. And they keep them very secret, for fear
least the Mahumetans should lay their hands on them and burn them, as they have
already done several times.

After the Purane some fall upon Philosophy, wherein certainly they go not far.
I have already intimated, that they are of a slow and lazy temper, and are not
excited by the hopes to obtain some good place by their study.

Among their Philosophers there have principally been six very famous, who make
so many different Sects; which causes also a difference and an emulation among
the Pendets or Doctors: For they know, that such an one is of this Sect,
another of another, and every one of them pretends his Doctrine to be better
than that of others, and more conform to the Beths. There is indeed another, a
seventh Sect, which is called Baute whence do proceed twelve other different
Sects; but this is not so common as the others, the Votaries of it being hated
and despised as a company of irreligious and atheistical people, nor do they
live like the rest.

All these Books speak of the first principles of things, but very differently.
Some say, that all is composed of little Bodies that are indivisible, not by
reason of their solidity, hardness, and resistance, but smalness; adding diverse
things which approach to the opinions of Democritus and Epicurus, but with so
much confusion that one knows not where to fasten, all seeming like a rope of
sand: which yet may be as much or more the fault of the Pendets, which seem to
me very ignorant, then of the Authors.

Others say, that all is made up of matter and form; but not one of them
explains himself clearly about the matter, and less about the form. Yet so much
I have found, that they understand them not at all as they are wont to be
explained in our Schools, by educing the Form out of the power of the Matter:
For they always allege Examples of things Artificial, and among them that of a
Vessel of soft Clay, which a Potter turns and shapes diverse ways.

Others hold, that all is composed of four Elements and a nothing; but they do
not at all explain themselves concerning Mixtion and Transmutation. And as for
their nothing, which comes near to our privation, they admit I know not how
many sorts of them, which (I believe) they understand not at all, nor are able
to make out to others.

There are also some, that maintain light and darkness to be the first
Principles, and say a thousand impertinent and confused things upon it, making
long-winded discourses, which savor nothing at all of Philosophy, but are like
the talk of the vulgar.

Others there are that admit privation for the Principle, or rather privations,
which they distinguish from nothing, and of which they make long enumerations,
so useless and little philosophical, that I can scarce imagine them to be in
their Books, or that their Authors could have entertained themselves with such
uncouth things.

Lastly, some of them do pretend that all is composed of accidents; of which
also they make odd, long, and tedious enumerations, and such as favor only
some Pettifogger, that can amuse the common People.

Touching these Principles in general, they all agree that they are eternal;
our production out of nothing not having come (it seems) into their thoughts,
as it has neither to many others of the ancient Philosophers: Yet they say,
that there is one of them that has touched something of it.

As to Physic, they have many little Books that are rather collections of
receipts then any thing else; the most ancient and chief wherefore is in Verse.
I shall here tell you. that their practice is sufficiently different from ours,
and that they ground themselves upon these Principles: That one who is sick of
a Fever, needs no great nourishment: That the main Remedy of sicknesses, is
Abstinence: That nothing is worse for a sick Body then Flesh-broth, nor which
corrupts sooner in the Stomach of a feverish Patient: That no Blood is to be
let but in great and evident necessity, as when you apprehend some translation
into the Brain, or find some considerable part, as the Chest, Liver, Kidneys,
enflamed.

Whether this Practice be better then ours, I leave to Physicians to decide;
but I see that it is successful among them. The same practice is not peculiar to
the Physicians of the Gentiles, but the Mogolian and Mahumetan Doctors, that
follow Avicen and Averroes, do also very strictly observe it, especially as to
Meat-broths. It Is true that the Mogols are somewhat more prodigal of their
Blood then the Gentiles, for in those sicknesses wherein they fear those
accidents lately specified, they commonly blood once or twice: but these are
none of those petty venesections of the new invention of Goa and Paris, but
they are of those plentiful ones used by the Ancients, of 18. or 20. ounces of
Blood, which often come to a swounding, and frequently choke the Disease in the
very beginning, as Galen says, and as I have often experimented.

Concerning Anatomy, I may safely say, that the Gentiles understand nothing at
all of it, and they can speak nothing as to that subject but what is
impertinent. Nor is it a wonder they are so ignorant in it, since they never
open any Body of Man or Beast: they do so much abhor it, that when I opened
some living Kids and Sheep before my Agah, to make him understand the
Circulation of the Blood, and to show him the Pecquetian Vessels, through which
the Chyle at last comes into one of the ventricles of the Heart, they trembled
for fear and ran away. Yet notwithstanding they affirm, that there are five
thousand Veins in Man, neither more nor loss, as if they had well counted them
all.

Touching Astronomy, they have their Tables, according to which they foresee
the Eclipses; and though they do it not with that exactness as our European
Astronomers, yet they come pretty near. Mean time they discourse of the Eclipse
of the Moon, as they do upon that of the Sun, believing that it is the Rah,
that black Villain, and mischievous Denta, who at that time seizes on the Moon
and blackens her. They hold also, that the Moon is an hundred thousand kosses,
that is, above fifty thousand Leagues above the Sun: that she is lucid of her
self; and that it is she, from whom we receive a certain Vital Water, which
gathers and disposes it self in the Brain, descending thence as from a
source into all the members for their functions. Besides this, they are of
opinion, that the Sun and Moon, and generally all Stars are Deutas; that it is
night when the Sun is behind the Someire, that imaginary Mountain, which they
place in the midst of the Earth, and make I know not how many thousand Leagues
high, and to which they give the shape of an inverted Sugar Loaf; so that it is
not day with them, but when the Sun gets out from behind this Mountain.

In Geography they have sped no better. They believe the Earth to be flat and
triangular, and that it has seven stories, all differing in beauty,
perfection, and inhabitants; each of which is encompassed, they say, by its
Sea; that of these Seas one is of Milk, another of Sugar, the third of Butter,
the fourth of Wine, and so forth: so that after one Earth there comes a Sea,
and after, Sea an Earth; and so on unto seven, beginning from Someire, which is
in the midst of these stories: that the first story, which is at the foot of
Someire, has Deutas for its inhabitants, which are very perfect; that the
second contains likewise Deutas, but less perfect; and so the rest, still
lessening the perfection unto the seventh, which they say is ours, that is, of
men far less perfect then all the Deutas; and lastly, that this whole Mass is
sustained upon the heads of diverse Elephants, which when they stir, cause an
Earthquake.

All these strange impertinences, which I have had the patience to relate, have
often made me think, that if they be those famous Sciences of the ancient
Brahmans of the Indies, very many have been deceived in the great opinion they
entertained of them. For my part, I can hardly believe it, but that I find the
Religion of the Indians to be from immemorial times; that it is written in the
Language Hanscrit, which cannot be but very ancient, since its beginning is
unknown, and it is a dead Language, not understood but by the Learned; that all
their Books are only written in that Tongue: All which are as many marks of a
very great Antiquity. Let us now add a few words about the worship of their
Idols.

When I descended along the River Ganges, and passed through Banares, that
famous School of all the Indian Gentility, I went to see the chief of the
Pendets, who has there his ordinary residence. This is a Fakire, or Religious
Monk, so renowned for his knowledge, that Chah-Jehan, partly for his Science,
partly to please the Rajas, gave him a Pension of 2000 Roupies, that is, about
1000 Crowns. This was a big and proper Man, goodly to look on; who for all his
Clothes had nothing but a white silken Scarf, tied about his waste, and hanging
down to his mid-leg, with another red Scarf about his shoulders like a little
Cloak. I had often seen him at Dehli in this posture before the King, in the
Assembly of all the Omrahs, and marching upon the Streets, sometimes on foot,
sometimes in a Palekey. I had also frequently seen and many times conversed
with him, when for a whole year together he constantly came to our conference
before my Agah, whom he courted, that he might procure him again that Pension
which Aureng-Zebe (being come to the Crown) had taken from him, that he might
appear a great Musulman. In the visit I made him at Banares, he was exceedingly
courteous to me, and even gave me a Collation in the Library of his University,
attended with six of the most famous Pendets of the Town. When I found my self
in so good Company, I prayed them all to tell me their sense about the
Adoration of their Idols; intimating to them, that I was leaving that Indies,
extremely scandalized upon that score; and reproaching them, that that worship
was a thing against all reason, and altogether unworthy such Scholars and
Philosophers as they were. Whereupon I received this Answer.

We have indeed (said they) in our Deuras or Temples, store of diverse Statues,
as those of Braham, Mehaden, Genich and Gavani, who are some of the chief and
the most perfect Deutas: and we have also many others of less perfection, to
whom we pay great honor, prostrating our selves before them, and presenting
them Flowers, Rice, scented Oils, Saffron and such other things with much
Ceremony, but we do not believe these Statues to be Brahma or Bechen, etc.
themselves, but only their Images and Representations, and we do not give them
that honor, but upon the account of what they represent. They are in our
Temples, because it is necessary for praying well, to have something before our
eyes that may fix the mind; and when we pray, it is not the Statue we pray to,
but he that is represented by it. For the rest, we acknowledge that it is God
that is absolute, and the only Omnipotent Lord and Master.

This is, without adding or subtracting any thing, the resolution they gave me.
But, to tell you true, this seemed a little too much accommodated to our
Christianity, in respect of what I had learned of it from several other Pendets.

After this, I put them upon their Chronology, where they pretended to show me
far higher Antiquities then all ours. They will not say, that the World is
eternal; but they make it so old, that I almost know not which is best. Its
determined duration, say they, is of four Dgugue. This Dgugue is a certain
determined number of years, as amongst us we have a seculum (an Age) with this
difference, that an Age of ours contains only an hundred Years, but their
Dgugue is made up of an hundred Lecques, that is, an hundred times hundred
thousand years. I do not precisely remember the number total of the years of
each Dgugue; but this I know very well, that the first, called Sate-Dgugue, is
of twenty five Lecques of years: that the second, which they call Trita, is of
above twelve Lecques: the third, called Duaper, of eight Lecques and sixty four
thousand years, if I remember well: and the fourth, called Kale-Dgugue, is of I
know not how many Lecques. The three first, say they, and much of the fourth,
are elapsed; so that the World shall not last so long as it has done, because
it is to perish at the end of the fourth, all things being then to return to
their first Principles. I made them compute again and again, to have their age
of the World aright; but finding that that perplexed them, and that they agreed
not among themselves about the number of the Lecques, I contented my self to
see that they make the World exceeding old. But being pressed a little to make
out this Antiquity, they pay you with nothing but little stories, and at length
come to this, that they find it so in their Beths, or the Books of their Law,
given them by the hands of Brahma.

After this I urged them concerning the nature of the Deutas, of which I
desired to be particularly instructed; but I received nothing but what was very
confused. They said, that there were three sorts of them, Good, Evil, and
Indifferent ones, that were neither good nor bad; that some thought, they were
made of Fire, others of Light; others that they were Biapek, of which word I
could not get a clear explication; only they said, that God was Biapek, and our
Soul was Biapek, and what is Biapek is incorruptible, and depends neither from
Time nor Place: That others would have them to be nothing else but Portions of
the Deity; and lastly, that some there were, that made them certain kinds of
Divinities severed and dispensed over the World.

I remember, that I also put them upon the nature of the Lengue-cherire, which
some of their Authors do admit: But I could obtain nothing else of it but what
I had long since understood from our Pendet, which was, That the seeds of
Plants and Animals are not formed anew, but were contrived in the first
production of the World, and dispensed abroad every where and mixed in all
things; and that they are (not only potentially but actually) the very and
entire Plants and Animals, though so small, that their parts cannot be
distinguished, but when being put into a convenient womb, and there nourished,
they extend themselves and increase: So that the seeds of an Apple and
Pear Tree are a Lengue-cherire, that is, a little entire and perfect Apple and
Pear Tree, having all its essential parts: And so the seeds of an Horse, an
Elephant, and a Man, etc. are a Lengue-cherire; a little Horse, a little
Elephant, a little Man, in which there wants nothing but the Soul and
Nourishment to make them appear what they are.

For a conclusion, I shall discover to you the mystery of a great Cabala, which
in these last years has made great noise in Indostan, because certain Pendets,
or Heathenish Doctors, had possessed with it the minds of Dara and
Sultan-Sujah, the two first Sons of Chah-Jehan.

You cannot but know the Doctrine of many of the Ancient Philosophers, touching
that great Soul of the World, which they will have our Souls and those of
Animals to be portions of. If we did well penetrate into Plato and Aristotle,
we might perhaps find that they were of this sentiment. It is in a manner the
general Doctrine of the Heathen Pendets of the Indies, and it is the same which
still makes the Cabala of the Soufys, and of the greatest part of the learned
Men in Persia, and which is found explained in Persian Verses, so sublime and
emphatical in their Goultchen-raz or Parterre of Mysteries: which is also the
very same of Dr. Flud's, whom our great Gassendus has so learnedly refuted;
and that wherein most Chemists lose themselves. But these Indian Cabalists or
Tendets I speak of, drive this impertinence farther than all those
Philosophers, and pretend, that God, or that Sovereign Being, which they call
Achar, (immutable,) has produced or drawn out of his own substance, not only
Souls, but also whatever is material and corporeal in the Universe; and that
this production was not merely made by way of an efficient cause, but by a way
resembling a Spider that produces a Webb, which it draws forth out of its own
body, and takes in again when it will. Creation therefore, say these Doctors,
is nothing else but an extraction and extension, which God makes of his own
Substance, of those webbs he draws from his own bowels; as Dest^^ction is
nothing else but a reprisal, or taking back again this Divine Substance, and
these Divine webbs into himself: So that the last day of the World, which they
call Maper^e or Pralca, when they believe that all shall be destroyed, shall be
nothing else but a general reprisal of all those webbs which God had drawn
forth out of himself. There is therefore nothing (so they go on) that is real
or effactive in all we think, we see, hear, smell, taste or touch: all this
World is nothing but a kind of Dream and a mere Illusion, in regard that all
this multiplicity and diversity of things that appear to us, is nothing but one
and the same thing, which is God himself; as all those several Numbers of 10,
20, 100, 1000, etc. are indeed nothing but one and the same unity many times
repeated. But if you demand any reason for this fantasy, or any explication
of the manner, how this issuing from and reprisal into the substance of God,
this extension, and this variety of things is made; or how it can be, that God,
being not corporeal but Biapek and incorruptible, (as they acknowledge) should
yet be divisible into so many portions of Bodies and Souls; they never make any
other return, but of some pretty comparisons, as, That God is like an immense
Ocean, in which if many Vials full of Water should be floating, they would,
wherever they should move, be found always in the same Ocean, in the same
Water; and that coming to break, their Water would at the same time be united
with their whole, and with that great Ocean of which they were portions. Or
they will tell you, that it is with God as with Light, which is the same
through the whole Universe, and which yet appears an hundred different ways,
according to the diversity of the Objects it falls upon, or according to the
several colors and shapes of Glasses through which it shines. They will pay
you, I say, only with such kind of similitudes, that bear no proportion at all
with God, and are good for nothing, but to cast dust into the eyes of the
ignorant people: And you must not expect any solid Answer from them, if you
should tell them, that those Vials would indeed be in a like Water, but not in
the same; and that it is indeed a like light over all the World, but not the
same: or if you should make any other objections against them, they return
always to the same comparisons, pretty expressions, or as the Soufys, to the
fine Verses of their Goultchen-raz.

Now Sir, what think you? Had I not reason, from this great heap of
extravagancies, I mean, from that panick and childish terror struck into those
Indians by Eclipses; from that superstitious compassion for the Sun to deliver
it from that black Demon, accompanied with those Apish Prayers, Washings,
Plungings, and Alms cast into the River; from that mad and infernal obstinacy
of the Women, burning themselves with the Corps's of their Husbands; from those
several madnesses of the Fakires; and lastly, from all that fabulous stuff of
the Beths and other Indian Books: Had I not reason, I say, to premise in the
title of this Letter; (which is but a poor advantage to me from so long
traveling) That there are no opinions so ridiculous or extravagant, of which
the mind of man is not capable.

To conclude, I have no more to add then to desire you, to do me the favor and
deliver with your own hands the Letter to Monsieur Chapelle. It is he that
first procured me that familiar acquaintance I had with Monsieur Gassendi, your
intimate and Illustrious Friend, that has been so advantageous to me; which
makes me acknowledge my great obligations to him, and exceedingly engages me
to love him, and to remember him in what part of the World soever I am: As I am
no less bound to honor you as long as I live; as well for the peculiar
affection you have always expressed to me, as for the good counsel you have
assisted me with in your many letters during the whole course of my voyages,
and for that favor of sending to me with so much generosity (without interest
or money) unto the end of the World: whither my curiosity had carried me, a
Chest of Books, when those, of whom I demanded them for money, ordered by me to
be paid at Marseilles, and who should have honestly sent them me, abandoned me
there, and laughed at all my Letters, looking upon me as a lost man, whom they
should never see again.

A Relation of a Voyage made in the year 1664. when the Great Mogol Aureng-Zebe
went with his Army from Dehli, the Capital of Indostan, to Lahor; from Lahor to
Bember, and from thence to the Kingdom of Kachemire, commonly called by the
Mogols, The PARADISE of the Indies, etc. By way of several Letters, written by
the Author to his Friends.
The first Letter to Monsieur de Merveilles, written at Dehli, December. 1664.
Aureng-Zebe being ready to march.
CONTAINING
The Occasion and Cause of this Voyage of Aureng-Zebe; together with an account
of the state and posture of his Army, and the Equipage and ordinary Provisions
of the chief of his Cavalry; and some curious particulars observable in the
Voyages of the Indies.
SIR,
SInce that Aureng-Zebe began to find himself in better health, it has been
constantly reported, that he would make a Voyage to Lahor, and go from thence
to Kachemire, to change the Air, and to be out of the way of the approaching
Summer heats, for fear of a relapse: That the more intelligent sort of men
would hardly be persuaded, that as long as he kept his Father Chah-jean
prisoner in the Fort of Agra, he would think it safe to be at such a distance.
Yet notwithstanding we have found, that Reason of State has given place to
that of Health, or rather to the Intrigues of Raucbenara-Begum, who was wild to
breath a more free Air than that of the Seraglio, and to have her turn in
showing her self to a gallant and magnificent Army, as her Sister Begum-sabeb
had formerly done during the Reign of Chah-jean.

He departed then the 6th of December, about three a clock in the afternoon; a
day and hour that must needs be fortunate for a great Voyage, if we may give
credit to the Gentlemen Astrologers, who have so decreed it. And he arrived at
Chach-limar, his House of Pleasure, distant about two Leagues from hence; where
he spent six whole days, thereby to give to all sufficient time to make
necessary preparations for a Voyage, that would take up a year and an half. We
have this day news, that he is gone to encamp on the way of Lahor, and that
when he has stayed there two days, he intends to continue his march without
any further expectation. He has with him not only the Thirty five thousand
Horse, or thereabout, and 10000 Foot, but also both his Artilleries, the great
or heavy, and the small or lighter, which is called, The drtillery of the
Stirrup, because it is inseparable from the person of the King, whereas the
Heavy sometimes leaves him to keep the high and well beaten Roads.

The Great Artillery is made up of seventy pieces of Cannon, most of them cast;
of which some are so ponderous, that they need twenty yoke of Oxen to draw
them; and some of them require Elephants to help all those Oxen, by thrusting
and drawing the wheels of the Wagons with their Trunks and Heads when they
stick in any deep way, or are to pass some steep mountain. That of the Stirrup
is composed of fifty or sixty small Fieldpieces, all of Brass, each carried
upon a little pretty and painted Chariot (as has been already said in another
place) beautified with many little red Streamers, and drawn by two very handsome
Horses, driven by the Gunner himself, together with a third Horse, which the
Gunners Assistant leads for a relief. All these Chariots go always a great
pace, that they may be soon enough in order before the Tent of the King, and
discharge all at once at the time of his entry, to give the Army notice.

All these great preparations give us cause to apprehend, that in stead of
going to Kachemire, we be not led to besiege that important City of Kandahar,
which is the Frontier to Persia, Indostan and Vsbeck, and the Capital of an
excellent Country, yielding a very great Revenue, and which for this very
reason has been ever the bone of contention between the Persians and Indians.
Whatever it be, there is now a necessity to dispatch at Dehli, any business
whatsoever notwithstanding; and I should find my self much cast behind the
Army, if I should tarry any longer: Besides I know, that my Navab, or Agab
Danech-mend-kan stays for me abroad with impatience: He can no more be without
philosophising in the afternoon upon the Books of Gassendi and Descartes, upon
the Globe and the Sphere, or upon Anatomy, than he can be without bestowing the
whole morning upon the weighty matters of the Kingdom, in the quality of
Secretary of State for foreign Affairs, and of Great Master of the Cavalry. I
shall depart this night, after I have given the last order for all my
businesses, and provided all necessaries for my Voyage, as all the principal
persons of the Cavalry do; that is, two good Tartarian Horses, whereto I am
obliged by reason of the one hundred and fifty Crowns of pay, which I have by
the month; a Camel of Persia, and a Groom; a Cook, and another Servant, which
must be had ordinarily to march in these Countries before the Horse, and to
carry a Flagon with water in his hand. I also have provided the ordinary
Utensils, such as are a Tent of a middle size, and a proportionate piece of
foot-Tapistry; and a little Bed with girdles, made up with four strong and
light Canes, and a Pillow for the head; two Coverlets, whereof one folded up
fourfold serves for a Matrasse; a round Table-cloth of Leather to eat upon;
some Napkins of dyed Cloth, and three small Sacks for Plate, which are put up
in a greater Sack, and this sack into a very great and strong Sack made of
Girdles, in which are put all the provisions, together with the Linen of the
Master and Servants. I have also made provision of excellent Rice for five or
six days, for fear I should not always find so good; of some sweet Biscuit,
with Sugar and Anis; of a linen sleeve with its little iron-hook, to let, by
the means thereof, run and to keep curdled milk; and of store of Limons with
Sugar, to make Limonade; such Milk and Limonade being the two great and
sovereign refreshments of the Indies: All which, as I said, is put into the
last named Sack, which is so large and heavy, that three or four men have pains
enough to lift it up: though two men do first fold and turn one side upon the
other when it is full, and though the Camel be made to stoop very nigh it, and
there need no more than to turn one of the sides of that Sack upon the Camel.
All this equipage and provision is absolutely necessary in such Voyages as
these. We must not look for such good lodging and accommodations as we have in
our Country. We must resolve to encamp and live after the Arabian and Tartarian
mode, without expecting any other Inns than Tents. Nor must we think to plunder
the Countryman; all the Lands of the Kingdom being in propriety to the King:
We are well to consider, that we must be sober and prudent, and that to ruin
the Country man, were to ruin the Demesne of the King. That which much
comforts me in this march, is, that we go Northward, and depart in the
beginning of the Winter after the rains; which is the right season for
traveling in the Indies, because it raineth not, and we are not so much
incommoded by heat and dust. Besides that, I find my self out of danger of
eating the bread of Bazar, or of the Market, which ordinarily is ill baked,
full of sand and dust; nor obliged to drink of those naughty waters which being
all turbid, and full of nastiness of so many people and beasts that fetch
thence, and enter into them, do cause such fevers, which are very hard to cure,
and which breed also certain very dangerous worms in the legs. They at first
cause a great inflammation, accompanied with a fever, and ordinarily come forth
a little after the Voyage although there have been some, that have stayed a
whole year and more before they appeared. They are commonly of the bigness and
length of a small Vial-string, so that one would sooner take them for some
nerve than for a worm; and they must be drawn out little by little, from day to
day, gently winding them about a little twig of the bigness of a needle, for
fear of breaking them. This, I say, comfort me not a little, that I find my
self exempt from these inconveniences; my Navab having vouchsafed me a very
particular favor; which is, that he has appointed to give me every day a new
loaf of his house, and a Souray of the water of Ganges, with which he has
laden several Camels of his train, as the whole Court does. Souray is that
Tin-flagon full of water, which the Servant, that marches on foot before the
Gentleman on horseback, carries in his hand, wrapped up in a sleeve of red
cloth. Ordinarily it holds but one pint; but I had some of them expressly
made, that hold two. We shall see, whether this cunning will succeed. The water
cools very well in this Flagon, provided that care be had always to keep the
sleeve moist, and that the Servant that holds it in his hand, do march and stir
the air, or else that it be held toward the wind; as is commonly done upon
three pretty little sticks, crossing one another, that they may not touch the
earth; For the moistness of the linen, the agitation of the air, or the wind,
are absolutely necessary to keep the water fresh; as if this moistness, or
rather the water imbibed by the sleeve did keep out the little igneous bodies
or spirits that are in the air, at the same time when it gives entrance to the
nitrous or other parts, which hinder the motion in the water, and cause
coolness; in the same manner as Glass keeps out Water, and gives passage to
the Light, by reason of the particular texture and disposition of the parts of
the Glass, and the diversity there must be between the particles of Light and
those of Water. We do not use this Tin-flagon for keeping our water cool but in
the field: When we are at home, we have Jars of a certain porous Earth, in
which it is much better cooled, provided it be exposed to the wind, and
moistened with a Linen Cloth, as the Flagon; or else, use is made of
Saltpeter, as all persons of quality do, whether in Towns, or in the Army.
They put water, or any other liquor, to be cooled, in a round and long necked
Tinflagon, such as are the English Bottles, and for the space of half a quarter
of an hour this Flagon is stirred in water, into which has been cast three or
four handfuls of Saltpeter; this makes the water very cold, neither is it
unwholesome, as I did apprehend; but only that sometimes it causes gripings at
first when one is not accustomed to it.

But to what purpose, to play so much the Philosopher, when we should think to
depart, and to endure the Sun, which at all seasons is incommodious in the
Indies, and to swallow the dust, which is never wanting in the Army; to put up,
to load, and to unload every day our Baggage, to help the Servants to fasten
sticks, to draw Cords, to put up Tents, and to take them down again, to march
in the day, and in the night, to devour cold and heat, and in a word, to turn
Arabians for a year and an half, during which time we are to be in the Field.
Adieu; I shall not fail to acquit my self of my promise, and from time to time
to inform you of our Adventures; and besides, since the Army for this time will
make but small Journeys in its march, and pass on with all that pomp and
magnificence, which the Kings of Indostan do affect, I shall endeavor to
observe the most considerable things, that I may impart them to you, as soon as
we shall arrive at Lahor.

THE SECOND LETTER;
CONTAINING
The Number and Magnificence, the Order and the Disposition of the Tents o the
Great Mogol in the Field: The Number of Elephants, Camels, Mules, and Porters,
necessary to carry them: The Disposition of the Bazars or Royal Markets: That
of the particular Quarters of the Omrahs, or Lords, and of the rest of the
Army: The extent of the whole Army, when encamped: The confusion there met
with; and how it may be avoided: The Order of preventing Robberies: The
different Manners of the March of the King, the Princesses, and the rest of the
Seraglio: The danger there is in being too near the Women: The several ways of
the Royal Hunting, and how the King hunts with his whole Army: The abundance of
people there is in the Army, and the method of making them all subsist.
SIR,
THis indeed is called marching with gravity, and as we speak here a la
Mogole,: it is no more but fifteen or sixteen days Journey from Dehli to
Lahor, which make little more than sixscore Leagues; and yet we have spent
almost two months on this way. It Is true, the King with the best part of the
Army went somewhat aside from the high way, the better to enjoy the
divertisements of Hunting, and for the convenience of the water of Gemna, which
we went to look for on the right hand, and which we leisurely followed long
enough in our hunting, crossing fields of tall grass, full of all sorts of
game, where the Horsemen could scarce be seen. At present, whilst we are at
rest, I am going to make good what I have promised you in the Title of this
Letter; hoping shortly to make you come to Kachemire, and to show you one of
the best Countries in the World.

When the King is in the field, he has usually two Camps, I mean two Bodies,
of Tents separated, to the end that when he breaks up and leaves one, the
other may have passed before by a day, and be found ready when he arriveth at
the place designed to encamp it: And it is therefore, that they are called
Peiche-kanes as if you should say, Houses going before: These two Peiche-kanes
are almost alike, and there are requisite above threescore Elephants, more then
two hundred Camels, above an hundred Mules, and as many more Porters to carry
one of them. The Elephants carry the most bulky things, such as are the great
Tents, and their great Pillars, which being too long and too heavy, are taken
down in three pieces. The Camels carry the lesser Tents: The Mules, the Baggage
and Kitchins. And to the Porters are given all the little movables, and such
as are delicate and fine, that might easily be broken; as Porcelain, which the
King usually imployeth at Table: those painted and gilded Beds, and those rich
Karguais; which I shall speak of hereafter.

One of these two Peiche-kanes, or Bodies of Tents, is no sooner arrived at the
place designed for encamping, but the Great Marshal that orders the Lodging,
chooses some fair place for the Kings Quarters; yet with a regard, as much as
is possible, to the Symmitry and order that is to be observed for the whole
Army; and he marketh out a Square, of which each side is above three hundred
ordinary paces long. An hundred Pikemen presently clear and level this pace,
making square planes to raise the Tents upon, and surrounding all this great
Square with Kanates or Skreens seven or eight foot high, which they fasten with
cords tied to sticks, and with perches fixed in the ground, by couples, from
ten to ten paces, one without, and the other within, inclining the one upon the
other. These Kanates are made of a strong cloth lined with stained Linen. In
the middle of one of the sides of this Square is the Entry or Royal Gate, great
and magnificent, and the Indian stuff which it is made of, as also those Stuffs,
of which the whole side of the Square of the face is lined without, are far
better and richer than the others.

The first and the greatest of the Tents, that is reared in this Enclosure, is
called Amkas, because it is the place where the King and all the Lords in the
Army do assemble about nine a clock in the morning, when the Mokam, that is,
the usual public Meeting is held. For, the Kings of Indostan, although they
are in a march, do not dispense but very rarely with this almost inviolable
custom, which is passed into a kind of Duty and Law, viz. to appear twice a day
in the Assembly, there to give order for State Affairs, and to administer
Justice.

The second, which is little less than the first, and a little further advanced
into the Enclosure, is called, Gosl-kane, that is to say, a place to wash in:
And here it is, where all the* Lords every night meet, and where they come to
salute and do obeisance to the King, as ordinarily they do when they are in the
Metropolis. This Assembly in the evening is very inconvenient to the Omrahs;
but it is a thing that looks great and stately, to see a far off, in an obscure
night, in the midst of a Campaign, cross all the Tents of an Army, long files
of Torches lighting these Omrahs to the Kings Quarters, and attending them back
again to their Tents. It Is true, that these lights are not of wax as ours, but
they last very long. They are only an Iron put about a stick, at the end of
which are wound rags of old Linen from time to time, which is moistened with
Oil, held by the Link-men in their hands in a Brass, or Latton-flagon, with a
long and straight neck.

The third Tent, which is not much less than the two first, and is yet further
advanced into the Enclosure, is called Kalvet-kane, that is to say, a retired
or the Privy Council-place, because none but the first Officers of the Kingdom
enter into it; and it is there where the greatest and the most important Affairs
are transacted.

Yet further into the Square are the particular Tents of the King, encompassed
with small Kanates or Skreens, of the height of a man, and lined with stained
Indian Stuff, of that elegant workmanship of Maslipatam, which do represent an
hundred sorts of different flowers: and some of them lined with flowred Satin
with large Silk fringes.

The Tents joining to the Kings, are those of the Begum or Princesses, and the
other great Ladies and She-Officers of the Seraglio, which are likewise
encompassed, as those of the King, with rich Kanates; and amidst all these
Tents are placed those of the lower She-Officers, and other serving-Women,
always, upon the matter, in the same order, according to their Office.

The Am-kas, and the five or six principal Tents are raised high, that they may
be seen at a good distance, and the better fence off the heat. Without it is
nothing but a course and strong red cloth, yet beautified and striped with
certain large stripes, cut variously and advantagiously to the eye: But within
it is lined with those fine Indian flowred Stuffs, of the same work of
Maslipatam; and this work is raised and enriched with silk, gold and silver
Embroideries having great Fringes, or with some fine flowred Satin. The
Pillars supporting these Tents, are painted and guild; One marches on nothing
but rich Tapestry, having matrasses of Cotton under them four or five inches
thick, and round about these Tapestries there are great square Rails richly
covered to lean upon.

In each of the two great Tents where the Assembly is kept, there is raised a
Theater richly adorned, where the King gives Audience under a great Canopy of
Velvet, or purfled with gold. In the other Tents are found the like Canopies,
and there you may see also set up certain Karguais, that is, fine Cabinets,
whose little doors are shut with Silver-locks. To conceive what they are, you
may represent to you two small Squares of our Skreens, set upon one another,
and neatly round about fastened to one another with a Silken-string; yet so that
the extremities of the sides of the uppermost come to incline upon one another,
so as to make a kind of a little Tabernacle with this difference from our
Skreens, that all the sides of these are of very thin and slight Firr-boards,
painted and guild without, and enriched round about with gold and Silk-fringes,
and lined within with Scarlet, or flowred Satin, or purfled with Gold.

And this is very near what I can tell you of what is contained within the
great Square.

What concerns the particulars that are without the Square; there are first two
pretty Tents on both the two sides of the great Entry or Royal Gate, where are
found two choice Horses sadled, and richly harnessed, and altogether ready to
be mounted upon occasion, or rather for State and Magnificence.

On the two sides of the same Gate are placed in order those fifty or
threescore small Fieldpieces, that make up the Artillery of the Sirrup above
mentioned, and which discharge all together to salute the King entering into his
Tent, and to give notice thereof to the whole Army.

Before the Gate there is always left void, as much as may be, a great place,
at the end of which there is a great Tent, called Nagar-kane, because that is
the place of the Timbals and Trumpets.

Near this Tent there is another great one, which is called Tchauky-kane,
because it is the place where the Omrahs keep guard, every one in his turn,
once a week twenty four hours together; yet notwithstanding most of the Omrahs
on the day of their guard, cause, close by, to be reared one of their own
Tents, to be the more at liberty, and to have more elbow room.

Round about the three other sides of the great Square are set up all the Tents
of the Officers, which are always found in the same order and disposition,
unless it be that the place permit it not: They have all their peculiar names;
but as they are hard to pronounce, and I pretend not to teach you the Language
of the Country, it will be sufficient to tell you, that there is a particular
one for the Arms of the King; another for the rich Harnesses of Horses; another
for Vests purfled with Gold, which are the ordinary Presents bestowed by the
King. Besides, there are four more, near one another; the first of which is
designed for keeping Fruit; the second for Comfits; the third for Ganges water,
and the Saltpeter to cool it; and the fourth for the Betele, which is that
Leaf, whereof I have spoken elsewhere, which is offered to friends, as Coffee
is in Turkey, and chewed to make ruddy lips, and a sweet breath. Next to these,
there are fifteen or sixteen others that serve for Kitchins and what belongs to
them. Amongst all these Tents are those of a great number of Officers and
Eunuchs. Lastly, there are four or five long ones for led Horses, and some
others for the best Elephants; and all those that are for hunting. For there
must needs be a retreat for all that great number of Birds of prey, that are
always carried for Game and Magnificence; and so there must be for those many
Dogs, and those Leopards serving to take wild Goats; for those Nilgaus, or gray
Oxen, which I take for Elcks; for these Lions and Rhinoceros's, that are led
for greatness; for those great Bufalo's of Bengale fighting with Lions; and
lastly for those tamed wild Goats, they call Gazelles, that are made to sport
before the King.

This vast number of Tents, now spoken of, together with those that are within
the great Square, make up the King's Quarter, which is always in the middle,
and as 'twere in the center of the Army, except the place do not allow it. It
will easily be thence concluded, that this Quarter of the King must needs be
something great and royal, and afford a very fine prospect, if one behold from
some high place this great body of red Tents in the midst of the Army, encamped
in a fair and even Campaign, where may be fully seen all that order and
disposition that is to be observed in the whole.

After that the Great Marshal of the Camp has chosen a place fit for the
Kings's Quarter, and has made the Am-kas to be set up highest of all the
Tents, and by which he is to take his measure for the ordering and disposing
the rest of the Army accordingly; He then marketh out the Royal Bazars or
Markets, whence the whole Army is furnished with necessaries; drawing the first
and the chief of all, like a great Street running straight, and a great free
way traversing the whole Army, now on the right hand, and by and by on the left
of the Am-kas and the King's Quarter, and always in the straightest line that
may be toward the encamping of the next day. All the Royal Bazars, that are
neither so long nor so broad, commonly cross this first, some on this, others
on the other side of the King's Quarter; and all these Bazars are discerned by
very high Canes like great pearches, which are fixed in the ground from three
hundred to three hundred paces or thereabout, with red Standards, and
Cows-tailes of the great Tibet fastened on the top of these Canes like Perirwigs.

The same Marshal designs, next, the place of the Omrahs, so as they may always
keep the same order, and be ever as near as may be the King's Quarter; some on
the right, others on the left hand, some on this side of him, others beyond
him; so that none of them may change the place that has been once appointed
for him, or that himself has desired in the beginning of the Voyage.

The Quarters of the Omrahs and Rajas, as to their particular order and
disposition, are to be imagined in a manner like that of the King: For commonly
they have two Peiche-kanes with a Square of Kanates, which incloseth their
principal Tent and those of their Women; and round about these are put up the
Tents of their Officers and Cavaliers* with a peculiar Bazar* which is a street
of small Tents for the lower sort of people that follows the Army, and
furnishes the Camp with Forage, Grains, Rice, Butter, and the other things
that are most necessary; whereby they are so accommodated, that they need not
always go to the Royal Bazars, where generally all things are to be found as in
the Capital City. Each Bazar is marked at the two ends by two Canes planted in
the ground, which are ast all as those of the Royal Bazars, that so at a good
distance the particular Standards fastened to to them may be discovered, and the
several quarters distinguished from one another.

The Great Omrahs and Rajas affect to have their Tents very high. But they must
beware lest they be too high, because it may happen, that the King, passing by,
might perceive it, and command them to be thrown down; of which we have seen an
example in this last march. Neither must they be altogether red from without,
since those of the King alone are to be so. Lastly, out of respect they must
all look toward the Am-kas, or the Quarter of the King.

The residue of the space between the Kings Quarter, and those of the Omrahs
and the Bazars, is taken up by the Tents of the Manseb-dars or little Omrahs,
and of that infinite number of great and small Merchants that follow the Army;
of all those that belong to the Law; and lastly, of all such as serve both the
Artilleries: Which makes indeed a prodigious number of Tents, and requires a
very great extent of ground. Yet it is not all true what is said of either of
them. And I believe, that when the whole Army is in a fair and even Campaign,
where it may encamp with ease, and that, following the ordinary plot, it comes
at length to be lodged, as near as may be, in a round (as we have often seen it
does, upon this road) the compass of it will not be above two Leagues, or two
Leagues and an half; and with all this there will yet be left here and there
several void places. But then the great Artillery, which takes up a great
tract of ground, very often a day or two go before.

Nor is all true, what is said of the strange confusion, which commonly strikes
an astonishment into all new comers. For a little acquaintance with the method
of the Army, and some heeding of the order observed in the Camp, will soon
enable one to avoid all embarasment, and to go to and fro about his business,
and to find his quarter again; forasmuch as every one regulateth himself by the
King's Quarter, and the particular Tents and Standards of the Omrahs, that may
be seen afar off, and by the Standards and Perriwigs of the Royal Bazars, which
may also be seen at a great distance.

Yet for all these marks it will sometimes fall out, that one shall be
extremely perplexed, and even in the day time, but especially in the morning,
when a world of people do arrive, and every one of those is busy and seeks to
lodge himself: And that not only, because there is often raised so great a
dust, that the King's Quarter, the Standards of the Bazars and the Omrahs
(which might serve for guides) cannot be discovered: But because a man finds
himself between Tents that are putting up, and between cords, which the lesser
Omrahs, that have no Peiche-kane, and the Manseb-dars stretch out to mark their
lodgings, and to hinder, that no way may be made nigh them, or that no unknown
person may come to lodge near their Tents, where often they have their Women:
If in this case you mean to get by on one side, you will find the ways
obstructed by those stretched-out cords, which a troup of mean Serving-men
standing there with big cudgels, will not suffer to be lowered, to suffer the
Baggage to pass. If you will turn back, you will find the ways shut since you
passed. And here it is, where you must cry out, storm, entreat, make as if you
would strike, and yet well beware of doing so, leaving the men, as well as you
can, to quarrel against one another, and afterward to accord them for fear of
some mischief; and in short, to put your self into all imaginable postures to
get away thence, and to make your Camels pass: But the great trouble is, when a
man is obliged to go in an evening to a place somewhat remote; because that
those offensive smoaks of the fire of green Wood, of Cowshares, of Camel-dung,
which the common people then make in their kitchins, do raise a mist
(especially when there is no wind) so thick, that you can see nothing at all. I
have been three or four times surprised with it, so as not to know what to do.
Well might I ask the way; I knew not whither I went, and I did nothing but
turn. Once, among other times, I was constrained to stay still this mist
passed, and the Moon risen. And another time I was forced to get to the
Aguacy-die, to lie down at the foot thereof, and there to pass all the night as
well as I could, having my Servant and Horse by me. This Aguacy-die is like a
tall Mast, but very slender, which can be taken down in three pieces, and it is
planted toward the King's Quarter, near that Tent which is called Nagar-kane.
In the evening is drawn up to the top of it a Lanthorn with a light burning in
it all night long; which is very commodious, as being seen a great way off; and
thither it is that people gone astray do retire, from thence to get again to
the Bazars, and to ask the way, or there to pass the rest of the night; for no
body hinders one from doing so, and a man may be there in safety from Robbers.
It is called Aguacy-die, as if you should say, light of Heaven, in regard that
from a far off it appears like a Star.

For the prevention of Robberies, each Omrah causes a guard to be kept all the
night long, in his particular Camp, of such men that perpetually go the round,
and cry Kaber-dar, have a care. Besides, there are round about the Army set
guards, at five hundred common paces from one another, that keep a fire, and
cry also Kaber-dar. And over and above all these, the Cotoual, who is, as
'twere, the great Prevost, sends out Troops of Guards every way, that pass
through all the Bazars, crying out and trumpetting all night long. Yet for all
this, some robberries there are now and then committed; and it is necessary
always to be upon ones guard, to go to sleep by times, that so you may be
awake the rest of the night, and not to trust your servants too much to keep
guard for you.

But let us now see, how many different ways the Great Mogol is carried in the
Field.

Ordinarily he causes himself to be carried on men's shoulders, in a kind of
Sedan or Litter, upon which is a Tact-raven, that is, a Field-throne, on which
he is seated: And this is like a magnificent, Tabernacle with pillars, painted
and gilded, which may be shut with glass, when it is ill weather; the four
branches of the Litter are covered with Scarlet or purpled Gold, with great
Gold and Silk-fringes; and at each branch there are two robust and
well-cloathed Porters, that change by turns with as many more that follow.

Sometimes also he goes on Horseback, especially when it is a fair day for
hunting. At other times he rides on an Elephant, in a Mik-dember, or Hauze;
and this is the most splendid appearance: For, the Elephant is decked with a
very rich and very magnificent Harnass; the Mik-dember, being a little square
House or Turret of Wood, is always painted and gilded; and the Hauze, which
is an Oval seat, having a Canopy with Pillars over it, is so likewise.

In these different Marches he is always accompanied with a great number of
Omrahs and Rajas following him close and thick on horseback without any great
order: And all those that are in the Army are obliged to be at the Amkas at
break of day, unless he do exempt them from it upon the account either of their
peculiar Office, or their great Age. This march is very inconvenient to them,
especially on hunting days; for they must endure the Sun and Dust as the
simple Soldiers, and that sometimes until three of the clock in the afternoon;
whereas, when they do not attend the King, they go at ease in their Palekys,
close covered, if they please, free from the Sun and Dust; sleeping in them
couched all along as in a bed, and so coming in good time to their Tent, which
expects them with a ready dinner, their kitchen being gone the night before,
after supper. About the Omrahs, and amongst them, there is always a good
number of Horsemen well mounted, called Gourze-berdars, because they carry a
kind of Silver-Mace of Arms. There are also many of them about the right and
left wings, that precede the person of the King, together with store of Foot
men. These Gourzeberdars are Choice-men, of a good men and a fair stature,
appointed to carry orders, and having all of them great sticks in their hands,
whereby they put people aside at a good distance, and hinder that no body march
before the King to incommode him.

After the Rajas marches a train mixed of a great number of Timbals and
Trumpets. I have already said in another place, that this Train consists of
nothing but of figures of Silver representing strange Animals, Hands, Scales,
Fishes, and other mysterious things, that are carried at the end of great
Silver-sticks.

At last a great troup of Manseb-dars, or little Omrahs, well mounted, and
furnished with Swords, Arrows and Quivers, follow after all the former: And this
Body is much more numerous than that of the Omrahs, because, besides that all
those that are of the Guard dare not fail to be at break of day, as the Omrahs,
at the gate of the Kings Tent to accompany him: There are also many, that come
amongst them, to make their Court, and to become known there.

The Princesses, and the great Ladies of the Seraglio are also carried in
sundry fashions; some are carried, like the King, on men's shoulders, in a
Tchaudoule, which is a kind of Tactravan, painted, gilded, and covered with
great and costly Network of Silk of diverse colors, enriched with Embroidery,
Fringe, and thick pendant tufts. Others are carried in a very handsome Palekys
closed, that are likewise painted and gilded, and covered with that rich
silken network. Some are carried in large Litters by two strong Camels, or by
two small Elephants, instead of Mules: and in this manner I have sometimes seen
carried Rauchenara-Begum; when I also observed, that in the forepart of her
Litter, being open, there was a little She-slave, that with a peacockstail kept
off from her the Flies and Dust. Lastly, others are carried upon Elephants
richly harnessed, and covered with ^mbroider'd d^^kings, and great
Silver-bells; where these Ladies sit, raised, as 'twere, into the middle region
of the Air, four and four in Mik-dembers latticed, which always are covered
with silken Network, and are no less splendid and stately than the Tchaudoules
and Tactravans.

I cannot forbear relating here, that in this Voyage I took a particular
pleasure in beholding and considering this pompous march of the Seraglio. And
certainly nothing more stately can be imagined, than to see Rauchenara-Begum
march first, mounted upon a lusty Elephant of Pegu in a Mik-dember, all shining
of Gold and Azur, attended by five or six other Elephants with their
Mik-dembers, almost as splendid as hers, filled with the principal She-Officers
of her House; some of the most considerable Eunuchs, richly adorned, and
advantagiously mounted, riding on her side, each with a Cane in his hand; a
Troup of Tartarian and Kachemirian Maids, of Honor about her, odly and
fantastically dressed, and riding on very pretty Hackney-horses; and lastly,
many other Eunuchs on Horseback accompanied with store of Pages and Lackeys,
with great sticks in their hands, to make way afar off. After this
Rauchenara-Begum, I saw pass one of the principal Ladies of the Court, mounted
and attended in proportion: And after this, a third in the same fashion; and
then another, and so on to fifteen or sixteen all, (more or less) bravely
mounted and accompanied according to their quality, pay, and office. Indeed
this long file of Elephants to the number of fifty, or more, thus gravely
marching with paces, as 'twere, counted, and withal this gallant train and
equipage, does represent something that is Great and Royal; and if I had not
beheld this Pomp with a kind of philosophical indifference, I know not, whether
I should not have suffered my self to be carried away to those extravagant
sentiments of most of the Indian Poets, who will have it, that all these
Elephants carry as many hidden Goddesses. It Is true, one can hardly see them,
and they are almost inaccessible by men; it would be a great misfortune to any
poor Cavalier whosoever, to be found in the Field too near them in the march;
all those Eunuchs, and all the crew of Servants are to the highest degree
insolent, and desire nothing more than such apretext and occasion to fall upon
a man and give him some Bastinadoes. I remember, I was once thus unfortunately
surprised, and certainly I had been very ill used, as well as many other
Cavaliers, if at length I had not resolved to make my way out by my sword,
rather than suffer my self to be thus maimed as they began to order the matter;
and if by good luck I had not been provided with a good Horse, that carried me
vigoronsly out of the press, when I put him on through a torrent of people, that
was to be repassed. And it is grown in a manner a common Proverb of these
Armies, That, above all, one must beware of three things: First, Not to let one
self to be engaged amongst the troops of the chosen led Horse, they never
failing to strike: Secondly, not to come into the places of Hunting: Thirdly,
not to approach too near the Women of the Seraglio. Yet notwithstanding by what
I hear, it is much less dangerous here than in Persia; for there it is death to
be found in the field in sight of the Eunuchs that attend them, though you were
half a league distant from them. It is required, that as many men as there are
in the Villages and Buroughs, where they pass, do all abandon them and retire
afar off.

As to the Hunting of the King, I knew not first how to imagine what is
commonly said, which is, that the Great Mogol goes to hunt with an hundred
thousand men: But now I feel, it may very well be said, that he goes to hunt
with above two hundred thousand, nor is it a thing hard to comprehend. In the
neighboring places to Agra and Dehli, along the river Gemma as far as to the
mountains, and even on both sides of the high way to Lahor, there is abundance
of untilled Lands, some of Copse-wood, and some of Grass above a man's height:
In all these places there are great numbers of Guards, uncessantly roving up
and down, and hindering all other people from huntin except Partridges, Quails
and Hares, which the Indians know to take with nets: So that every where in
those places there is very great store of all kind of Game. This being so, the
hunting guards, when they know that the King is in the field, and near their
quarters, give notice, to the Great Hunting-master, of the quality of the Game,
and of the place where most of it is: then the Guards do line all the avenues
of that quarter, and that sometimes for above four or five Leagues of ground,
that so the whole Army may pass by, either this or that way, and the King being
in his march may at the same time enter into it with as many Omrabs, Hunters
and other persons as he shall please, and there hunt at his ease, now in one
manner and then in another, according to the difference of the Game. And now
behold first, how he hunteth the Gazelles or wild Fawns with tamed Leopards.

I think, I have else where told you, that in the Indies there is store of
Gazelles, that are in a manner shaped as our Hinds or Fawns; that these
Gazelles commonly go in several troops, and that every troup, which never
consists of above five or six, is always followed by one only male,
discernable by the color. One of such troops being discovered, they endeavor
to make the Leopard see them, who is held chained upon a little chariot. This
crafty animal does not presently and directly run after them, but goes winding
and turning, stopping and hiding himself, so to approach them with more
advantage, and to surprise them: And as he is capable to make five or six leaps
with an almost incredible swiftness, when he finds he is within reach, he
lanceth himself upon them, worrieth them, and gluts himself with their blood,
heart and liver: If he fails (which often happens) he stands still, and it
would be in vain for him to attempt to take them by running after them, because
they run much faster, and hold out longer than he. Then the Master comes gently
about him, flattering him, and throwing him some pieces of flesh, and thus
amusing him, puts something over his eyes to cover them, and so chains him, and
puts him upon the chariot again. One of these Leopards gave us once in our
march this divertisement, which frighted store of people. A troup of Gazelles
appeared in the midst of the Army, as they will do every day; it chanced that
they passed close to two Leopards that were carried. as they use to be, upon
their little chariot. One of them not blinded, made such an effort that he
burst his chain, and darted himself after them, but without catching any of
them: Yet the Gazelles, not knowing which way to escape, being pursued, cried
after, and hunted on every side, there was one of them that was forced to
repass again near the Leopard, who, notwithstanding the Camels and Horses that
pestred all the way, and contrary to what is commonly said of this Beast, that
it never returns to its prey when it has once failed of it, flew upon it and
caught it.

The hunting of the Nilgaux or gray Oxen, which I said were a kind of Elcks,
has no great matter in it. They are enclosed in great Nets, that are by little
and little drawn closer together, and when they are reduced to a small compass
of enclosure, the King, the Omrahs, and the Hunters do enter and kill them at
pleasure with Arrows, Half-pikes, Sables or Muskets; and sometimes in so great
numbers, that the King sends quarters of them for presents to all the Omrabs.

The Game of the Cranes has something of divertisement. It Is a pleasure to see
them defend themselves in the Air against the Birds of prey; they sometimes
kill some of them; but at length, not being nimble in turning, many strong
Birds master them.

Of all the Games that of the Lion is the most Royal, because there is none but
the King and the Princes that can exercise it (unless it be by a very
particular leave;) but it is also the most dangerous. The manner of it is this.
When the King is in the field, and the Hunting-guards have discovered the place
of the Lions retirement; they tie fast an Ass there-about, which the Lion soon
comes to devour, and without caring to look out for other prey, as Oxen, Cows,
Mutton or Shepherds, he goes to seek for drink, and returns to his ordinary
lodging place, where he lies down and sleeps until next morning, when he finds
another Ass in the self-same place, which the Hunters have fastened there as the
day before; and when they have thus baited and amused him several days in the
same place, and now that the King is nigh, they at length tie fast another Ass,
but whom they have made to swallow a quantity of opium, to the end that his
flesh may the better lull asleep the Lion, and then all the Countrymen of the
circumjacent Villages spread large and strong nets made for that purpose, which
they also by degrees reduce to a small compass, as is practiced in the hunting
of the Nilgaux. All things thus prepared, the King mounted on an Elephant
trap'd with iron, being attended by the great Hunting-master, some Omrahs
riding also on Elephants, by abundance of Gourze-berdars on Horseback, and by
a numerous Hunting-guard on foot, armed with Half-pikes, approaches to the
Nets from without, and with a great Musket shoots at the Lion; who when he
finds himself wounded, comes directly to the Elephant, as his custom is; but he
meets with those big Nets stopping him, and the King shoots so often at him,
that at last he kills him. Yet in this last hunting there was a Lion that leapt
over these Nets, fell upon an Horseman whose Horse he killed, and then ran
away: But the Hunters met with him, and enclosed him again in the Net, which
caused a great disturbance to the Army; we were three or four days padling in
small torrents running down the mountains, betwixt underwood and such long
grass as that Camels hardly can be seen therein; and happy were these that had
some provision of victuals; for all was in disorder: The Bazars could not range
themselves, and the Villages were remote. The reason why we were to stop there
so long, was, that as it is a good Omen with the Indians when the King kills a
Lion, so it is a very ill one, when he fails, and they think that the State
would run great hazard if they should not master him. Hence it is also that they
make many Ceremonies upon the account of this Hunting; for they bring the dead
Lion before the King in the general Assembly of the Omrahs, and after he has
been well viewed and exactly measured, 'its recorded in the Archives, that such
a King, at such a time, slew a Lion of such a bigness, of such hair, of so long
and large teeth and claws, not omitting the least circumstances.

I shall here only add a word in reference to what is commonly said of the
Opium, that the Ass is made to swallow, viz. That one of the chief Hunters
assured me, that it was but a tale of the vulgar, and that the Lion slept
sufficiently without it, when he had his belly full.

Now to return to our march; when the great Rivers, which in these quarters
commonly have no Bridges, are to be passed, there are made two Boat-Bridges,
about two or three hundred paces distant from one another; which they know well
enough how to chain and fasten together. Upon them they cast earth and straw
mingled together, which preventeth the sliding of the animals. The first
passing upon, and the coming from it are only dangerous, because, that besides
the great crowd, which then commonly throngeth, and the great confusion and
embarasment, it often happens that pits or holes are made when it is moving
earth; and then you shall have Horses and burdened Oxen tumble upon one
another, over whom people do pass with an incredible disorder; which would be
yet greater, if all were to pass in one day: But ordinarily the King encampeth
but half a League from the Bridge, where he stays a day or two, and he never
almost encampeth farther than half a League from the River on the other side of
the Bridge, that so the Army may have at least three days and three nights to
pass more conveniently,

Lastly, as to the number of people that is found in the Army, it is not so
easy a thing to determine it. It is so differently spoken of, that one knows
not what to Judge of it. What I can tell you of it in the general, that is most
probable, is this: That in this march there were at least, as to Soldiers and
others, an hundred thousand Horsemen, and above an hundred and fifty thousand
Animals, as Horses, Mules or Elephants; that there were near fifty thousand
Camels, and almost as many Oxen or Asses, that serve to carry the grain, and
other provisions of these poor people of the Bazars, their wives and children:
For they lugg all with them, as our Bohcmians do. Upon this measure you may
reckon pretty near the number of the serving people, supposing that nothing is
there done but by the force of servants, and that I, who am but in the rank of
a Cavalier of two Horses, can hardly do my business with less than three men:
Some say, that in the whole Army, there is scarce less than between three or
four hundred thousand persons. Others reckon more; others less. No body ever
told them to determine the precise number. I can say nothing of certainty, but
only that it is a prodigious and almost incredible number; but then you are to
imagine, that it is all Dehli, the Capital City, that marches, because that all
the Inhabitans of that Town, living upon the Court and the Army, are obliged to
follow them, especially when the voyage is to be long, as this; or else they
must starve.

The difficulty is to know, whence and how so great an Army can subsist in the
Field, so vast a number of people and beasts. For that, we must only suppose
(which is very true) that the Indians live very soberly, and observe a very
simple diet, and that of all this great number of Cavaliers there is not the
tenth, or not the twentieth man, that in his march eats flesh: provided they
have their Kichery, that is, their mixture of Rice and of other legums, upon
which they pour butter when they are boiled, they are content. We are also to
know, that Camels endure labor, hunger and thirst extremely well, live upon a
little, and eat almost any thing, and that as soon as the Army encampeth any
where, the Camel-drivers let them to into the field to brouze, where they eat
whatever they light upon. Besides, that the Merchants that entertain Bazars in
Dehli, are obliged to entertain them in the field: and that all the small
Merchants, that keep shop in the Bazars of Dehli, keep them also in the Army,
either by force, or out of necessity, and lastly, that as to Forage, all these
poor people go roving up and down every where in the Village, to buy what they
can get, and to gain something by it; and their great and common refuge is,
with a kind of Trowel to raspe or knock down whole fields, to beat and wash
what they have there gotten, and so to carry it to sell to the Army, which they
do sometimes very dear and sometimes very Cheap; I forgot to mention one thing
that is remarkable, viz. that the King enters into the Camp, now on one side,
then on another; and that to day he passes near the Tents of certain Omrahs,
and tomorrow near those of others. Which he does not without design; for the
Omrahs, which he passes by so near, are obliged to meet him, and to make him
some small present or other; so that some will present him with twenty Roupies
of Gold, which makes thirty Pistols; others with fifty, and so others in
proportion, according to their generosity, and the greatness of their pay.

For the rest, you will excuse me, that I do not observe to you the Towns and
Buroughs that are between Dehli and Lahor; I have seen in a manner none of
them, for I went almost always cross the fields, and in the night, because my
Agah was not placed in the middle of the Army, where often is the high way, but
very forward in the right Wing. We went as well as we could by Starlight cross
the fields to gain the right Wing of the Camp, without seeking for the high
way; though sometimes we found our selves much perplexed, and in lieu of three
of four Leagues, which is the ordinary distance of one encampment from one
another, we sometimes made five or six; but when the day comes on, we soon
found our selves where we should be.

THE THIRD LETTER.
A Description of Lahor, the Capital of Penjeab, or, The Kingdom of the Five
Waters.
SIR,
IT is not without reason, that this Kingdom, of which Lahor is the Capital
City, is called Penjeab, or the Country of the Five Waters, because there are
actually Five considerable Rivers coming down from those Mountains, within
which the Kingdom Kachemire is locked up, and that run cross this tract of Land
to fall into the River Indus, discharging themselves together into the Ocean at
Scymdi, toward the entry of the Persian Gulf. Whether Lahor be that ancient
Bucephalos, I decide not. Mean time, Alexinder is sufficiently known here under
the name of Sekan-der Filifous, that is, Alexander Son of Philip; but as to his
Horse, they know it not. The City of Lahor is built upon one of these Five
Rivers, which is not less than our River Loire, and for which there is great
need of a like bank, because it makes great devastation, and often changes
its bed, and has but lately retired it self from Lahor for a quarter of a
League; which very much incommodeth the Inhabitants. The Houses of Lahor have
this peculiar above those of Dehli and Agra; that they are very high, but most
of them are ruinous, because it is now more then twenty years that the Court is
always at Dehli or at Agra, and that in these later years the rains have been
so excessive, that they have overthrown many of them, whereby also much people
has been killed. It Is true, there remain still five or six considerable
Streets, of which there are two or three that are above a League long; but in
them also are many buildings found that fall down. The Kings Palace is no
longer upon the River side, as it was formerly, because that the River has
left it. It is very high, and magnificent; yet those of Agra and Dehli do much
surpass it. It is now above two months that we are here, expecting the melting
of the Snow of the mountains of Kachemire, for a more convenient passage into
that Kingdom. But at length we are to depart tomorrow. The King has been gone
these two days. I have got a little Kachemirian Tent, which I bought
yesterday. I was advised to do like others, and to leave here my ordinary Tent,
which is big and heavy enough, because, they say, that between the mountains of
Kachemire, whither we are now marching, it will be difficult to find room
enough, and that the Camels not having place enough to pass, we shall be
obliged to get our Baggage carried by Porters, and that so my large Tent would
cost me much to carry.

Adieu.
THE FOURTH LETTER.
SIR,
I Believed, that after we had overcome the heats of Maok, near Babel-ma^del, I
could defy those of the rest of the Earth, but since these four days that the
Army left Lahor, I find I come very short of my reckoning, and I have
experimented to the hazard of my life, that it is not without reason, that the
Indians themselves did apprehend the eleven or twelve days march of the Army,
from Lahor to Bamber, the entry of the mountains of Kachemire. I protest unto
you, without any exaggaration, that the heats have been so excessive, that
sometimes they have reduced me to extremity, insomuch that I knew not in the
morning whether I should live till night. The cause of this extraordinary heat
is, that the high mountains of Kachemire being on the North of our road, keep
from us all the cool wind that might come and refresh us from that Quarter, and
do reflect the sunbeams upon us, and leave the field burnt up and choking.
But to what purpose, to play the Philosopher, and to seek reasons for that,
which perhaps will kill me tomorrow.

THE FIFTH LETTER.
SIR,
I Passed yesterday one of the greatest Rivers of the Indies, called the
Tche^au. The excellency of its water, of which the great Omrahs make provision
in lieu of that of Ganges: (whereof they have drunk hitherto) keeps me from
believing this to be some River to pass to Hell, rather than to Kachemire,
where they would make us believe we shall find Snow and Ice: For I find it grow
worse and worse every day, and that the more we advance, the more heat we feel.
It Is true that I passed the Bridge at Noonday; but I almost knew not, which was
best, to march in the field, or to keep ones self stuffed up under a Tent: At
least, I have succeeded in my design, which was, to pass the Bridge with ease,
whilst all men did repose themselves, expecting to leave the Camp toward
evening when the Heat is not so violent; whereas if I had staid as the rest
did, some mischief perhaps might have befallen me. For it has been, I hear,
the most terrible confusion, and the greatest disorder that ever was in any the
like former passage from Dehli; the entering upon the first Boat, and the going
off from the last, having been made very difficult, because it was mere moving
sand, which as people marched upon it, and stirred it, did slide away into the
water, and left a pit; insomuch that a great number of Camels, Oxen and Horses
were in the crowd overthrown and trampled under foot, and store of blows
distributed besides: There are ordinarily, upon such occasions, some Officers
and Cavaliers of the Omrahs, who to make way for their Masters and their
Baggage, are not sparing of them. My Navab has lost one of his Camels with the
Iron Oven it carried; which makes me apprehend, I shall be reduced to the
bread of Bazar.

Farewell.
THE SIXTH LETTER.
SIR,
IT is too much curiosity, it is folly, or at least temerity in an European to
expose himself to such heats and dangerous marches; It is putting ones self
into manifest peril of life. Yet notwithstanding, misfortune is good for
something. Whilst we stayed at Lahor, I was seized on by a Flux, and by
gripings, which did very much incommode me; caused by my constant lying upon a
Terrasse, and taking the cool of the night, as we use to do at Dehli without
danger. But since we have been marching these eight or nine days, the sweat
has dissipated all those humors. My body is become a right Sieve, very dry,
and I have no sooner taken into my stomach a pint of water (for less will not
serve our turn) but I see it at the same time issue out of my limbs like a dew
to the very ends of my fingers. I believe I have this day drunk above ten
pints. And this is some comfort, that one may drink of it as much as one lists
without danger, provided it be good water.

The SEVENTH LETTER, to the same.
Written from the Camp of the Army, marching from Lahor to Kachemire, the
tenth of March in the morning.
SIR,
The Sun is but just now rising, yet he is intolerable; there is not a Cloud in
the Sky, not a breath of Wind; my horses are spent, they have not seen a green
Herb since we came out of Lahor; my Indians for all their black, dry, and hard
Skin, sink under it. My face, hands and feet are peeled off, and my body is
covered all over with pimples, that prick me as so many needles. Yesterday one
of our poor Cavaliers, that had no Tent, was found dead at the foot of a small
Tree, he had seized on. I doubt, whether I shall outlive this days journey; all
my hope is in a little dry curdled Milk, which I am going to dilute with Water
and Sugar, and some Limons, I have left, to make Limonade. Farewell; the Ink
dries at the end of my Pen, and the Pen falls out of my hand. Farewell.

The EIGHTH LETTER, to the same.
Written from Bember, the Entry of the Mountains of Kachemire, after having
two days encamped there. What Bember is; the change of carriages for the
Mountains; the incredible number of Porters, and the order observed in the Army.
SIR,
WE are at length arrived at Bember, the foot of a steep, black, and burned
Mountam, and we are encamped in the channel of a large Torrent dried up, full
of sand and stones burning hot; It is like an hot Oven: And if it were not for
the shower of Rain, we had this morning, and for the curled Milk, the Limons,
and the Fowl brought to us from the mountains, I know not what would have
become of me, and you would perhaps never have seen this Letter. But, God be
thanked, I feel the Air a little cooler; my Stomach, Strength and Tongue are
returned. So then take this account of our new kind of march and trouble.

Yester-night the King first of all, together with Rauchenara-Begum, and the
other Women of the Seraglio, the Raja Ragnat that performs the Office of the
Vizir, and Fasel-kan the High Steward, went away from this burning place, and
last night the great Hunting-master departed with some of the greatest and most
necessary Officers of the Royal Family, and many considerable Women. This night
it is our turn; my Navab Danech-men^-kan will go away, and Mahmet-Emir-kan, the
Son of that famous Emir-jemla, of whom I have spoken so much in another place,
will be of our Company; and so will Dianet-kan, our good friend, with his two
Sons, and many other Omrahs, Rajahs and Manseb-dars: And after us, all the
other Lords, that are bound for Kachemire. will be gone all in their turns, to
avoid in these difficult and narrow ways of the mountains, the trouble and
confusion, during these five days of marching between this place and Kachemire.
All the rest of the Court, as Fedaykan, the great Master of the Artillery,
three or four great Rajas, and many Omrahs, are to stay hereabout for a guard,
during three or four months,, until the King do return after the great heats
are over. Some shall go to dress their Tents on the one side of the River
Tehenau, others in the neighboring Towns and Buroughs, and others will be
obliged to camp here in this Fire of Bember.

The King for fear of starving this small Kingdom of Kachemire, first carries
with him the least number of Women he can, the greatest Ladies, the best
friends of Rauchenara-Begum, and those that are most necessary for service. Nor
does he carry more of the Omrahs and Militia than he needs must: And the Omrahs
that have leave to come with him cannot take with them all the Cavaliers, but
only 25 of 100, yet without comprehending therein the particular Officers of
their Family. And that is to be religiously observed, because there is an Omrah
upon the Guard at the entry of the Mountains, that reckons all that pass, one
by one, and hinders the passing of that great number of Manseb-dars and other
Cavaliers, that would fain go and enjoy the cool Air of Kachemire; as also all
those small Merchants and little people of Bazar that seek to gain a
livelihood. The King, for the carriage of necessaries and the Women of the
Seraglio, takes with him some of the strongest and best Elephants: These
Beasts, though gross and unwieldy, are very sure-footed, and in ill way they
march very warily, assuring themselves first of one foot before they remove the
other. He takes also some Mules with him; but Camels, the most necessary, he
cannot make use of in this passage; these Mountains being too steep and craggy
for their long shanked and stiff legs: Porters must supply their places; and
what number you think must there be, if the King alone, as they say, has above
six thousand for his occasions, and I, a private man, though I have left at
Lahor my ordinary Tent and much of my baggage, as every one has done, even the
King himself and the Omrahs, find my self obliged to have three of them? It Is
believed, there are already no less here than fifteen thousand, partly of those
which the Governor of Kachemire and the Rajas here about have compelled to be
here, partly of those that come hither of their own accord out of the
neighboring Villages to earn something; for a man is obliged, following the
Kings order, to give them ten Crowns for an hundred pound weight. It Is said,
that, in all, there are above thirty thousand of them, without reckoning that a
month ago the King and the Omrahs sent away some baggage before, and the
Merchants, all sorts of Commodities.

THE NINTH LETTER.
An exact description of the Kingdom of Kachemire, and the present State of the
Neighboring Mountains; together with an Answer to five considerable Questions
of a Friend.
SIR,
THE Histories of the Ancient Kings of Kachemire tell us, that all that
Country was formerly nothing but a great Lake; and that there was an old Holy
man, called Kacheb, that gave an outlet to the Waters by a Miraculous Cut he
made in the Mountain of Baramoule. This may be seen in the Abridgment of these
Histories, which Jehan-Guire caused to be made, and which I am translating out
of the Persian Tongue. For my part, I would not deny, all this Land to have
once been covered with Water; the like is affirmed of Thessaly, and some other
Countries; but it is hard to believe, that this opening is the work of one man,
because the Mountain is very big and very high. I should rather think, that
some great Earthquake (those parts being subject enough to them) had opened
some Cavern under ground, which the Mountain did sink into, after the same
manner as the opening of Babel-Mandel is made (if it be true what the Arabians
of that Country say of it) and as whole Towns and Mountains have been seen to
be swallowed up in great Lakes.

However it be, Kachemire is no Lake now, but a very fair Campaign, diversified
by many little Hillocks, about 30 Leagues long, and 10, or 12 Leagues broad;
situated in the extreme of Indostan, North of Lahor, locked up within the
Mountains of Caucasus, between those of the Kings of the great Tibet, the
little Tibet, and the Raja Gamon, its next Neighbors.

The first Mountains surrounding it, I mean those that are next to the Plain,
are of a middle height, all green with Trees or Pasture, full of all sorts of
Cattle, as Cows, Sheep, Goats, Horses; and of Game of diverse kinds, as
Partridges, Hares, Gazelles, and of some Animals yielding Musk. There are also
abundance of Bees; and (which is rare in the Indies) there are found no
Serpents, Tigers, Bears, Lions, but very seldom. So that it may be said, that
these are not only very innocent Mountains, but flowing with Milk and Honey, as
were those of the Land of Promise.

Beyond those middle-siz'd Mountains, there rise others, very high ones, the
top of which are always covered with Snow, and appear above the ordinary
Clouds and Mists, always calm and clear as well as Mount Olympus.

Out of all these Mountains do issue innumerable Sources and Rivulets on all
sides, which the Inhabitants know how to convey to their Rice-fields, and even
through raised Ground unto their little Hillocks; and which, after they have
made a thousand other little Rivulets, and a thousand Cascata's every where,
come at last to meet, and to make a very fair River, that carries Boats as big
as our River of Seine, and after it has gently turned about the Kingdom, and
passed through the midst of the Capital City, finds its outlet at Baramoule
between two steep Rocks, and having afterward taken in many small Rivers that
come down from the Mountains, falls about Atex into the River Indus.

All these Rivulets descending from the Mountains, make the Plain and all those
Hillocks so fair and fruitful, that one would take this whole Kingdom for some
great Ever-green Garden, intermixed with Villages and Buroughs, discovering
themselves between Trees, and diversified by Meadows, Fields of Rice, Corn, and
diverse other Legumes, of Hemp, and Saffron; all interlaced with Ditches full of
Water, with Channels, with small Lakes and Rivulets here and there. Up and down
every where are also seen some of our European Plants, Flowers, and all sorts
of our Trees, as Apples, Pears, Prunes, Apricots, Nuts, Vines. The particular
Gardens are full of Melons, Watermelons, Skirrets, Beets, Radishes, all sorts
of our Pot Herbs, and of some we have not.

It Is true, there are not so many sorts of Fruit as with us, nor are they so
excellent as ours; but I believe that that is not the fault of the Soil, but
that, if they had as good Gardeners as we, knowing to cultivate and graft
Trees, to choose proper places and proper Stocks, and to send for Grafts from
Foreign Countries, they would have as many and as good as we; because among
that number of diverse sorts, which I often caused to be brought to me, I have
frequently met with very excellent ones.

The Capital City, which is of the same name with that of the Kingdom, is
without walls; it is three quarters of a League long, and half a League broad;
situate in a Plain, about two Leagues distant from Mountains, which seem to
make as 'twere a Semicircle; and standing upon a Lake of sweet Water of four
or five miles in compass, which is made up of Live-Springs, and of Rivulets
running down the Mountains, and disgorgeth it self by a Navigable Channel into
the River which passes through the midst of the Town. This River has in the
Town two wooden Bridges over it for communication. Most Houses are of Wood, but
well built, and of two or three Stories high; not as if they had not very good
Free Stone there (many old Idol-Temples ruined, and other Buildings made of it,
being yet to be seen;) but the abundance of Wood, easily descending from the
mountains by little Rivers, which it is cast into, makes people find that way
of Building turn to better account. The Houses that stand upon the River have
almost all of them their little Garden, lying upon the Water; which makes a
very pleasant Perspective, especially in the Spring and Summer, when men walk
on the Riverside. The other Houses that stand not upon the River, have also
almost all of them some Garden; and there are a good number of such, that have
a Channel answering to the Lake, and a little Boat to go and divert themselves
upon it.

In one end of the Town there appears an Hill, loose from all the rest, which
makes another very agreeable Perspective, because on its Declivity there stand
very fine Houses with Gardens, and on the top a Mosquee and an Heremitage well
built with a Garden, and store of fine green Trees: And it is upon the account
of these Trees and Gardens, that in the Language of the Country it is called
Haryperbet, as if you should say, the Mountain of Verdure.

Opposite to this Hill there is seen another, on which there is also a Mosquee,
but a little one, together with a Garden, and a very ancient Building, which
seems to have been a Temple of Idols, though they call it Tact Souliman, that
is, the Throne of Solomon, because that Soloman, as the Mahumetans say, caused
it to be built when he came to Kac^emire; but how they will prove, that Solomon
made this Voyage, I know no^.

The Lake*hath this peculiar, that it is full of little Isles, which are as many
Gardens of Pleasure, that appear all green in the mids^ of the Water, by reason
of those fruit-bearing Trees, and of the Walks* on both sides set with Arbors,
and because they are surrounded with large-leaved Aspen-trees, standing at two
foot distance from one another; the biggest whereof may be clasped about, but
as tall as Masts of great Ships, having only a tu^t of Branches at the top like
Palm Trees.

Beyond the Lake, upon the side of the Hills, there is nothing but Houses and
Gardens of pleasure, the place having been found wonderfully proper for it, as
being in a very fine Air, in the view of the Lake, the Isles, and the Town, and
full of Springs and Rivulets.

The most admirable of all these Gardens is that of the King, which is called
Cha^limar. From the Lake, one enters into it by a great Canal, bordered with
great green Tur^s. This Canal is above five hundred common paces long, and runs
'twixt two large All^^s of Poplars: It leads to a great Cabinet in the midst
of the Garden, where begins another Canal far more magnificent, which runs with
a little rising unto the end of the Garden. This Canal is paved with large
Freestone; its sloping side covered with the same; and in the midst of it,
there is a long Row of Jets of Water, from 15 to 15 foot. There are also, from
space to space, great Rounds of Water serving for Storehouses, whence many Jets
of Water, variously figured, do spring up: And this Canal ends at another great
Cabinet, which is almost like the first.

These Cabinets, which are in a manner made like Domes, situate in the middle
of the Canal, and encompassed with Water, and consequently between those two
great Allees of Poplars, have a Gallery that reigns round about, and four
Gates opposite to one another; two of which do respect the Allees, with two
Bridges to pass over, one on one side, and the other on the other; the other
two look upon the opposite Canals. Each Cabinet consists of a great Chamber in
the midst of four other lesser Chambers, which are in the four Corners: All is
painted and gilded within, the great Chamber as well as the little ones,
having Sentences with great Letters in the Persian Tongue written upon them.
The four Gates are very rich; they are made of great Stones with two Columns,
taken from those ancient Idol-Temples, ruined by Chah-Je^an. The price of these
great Stones and Pillars is not well known, nor what kind of Stone they be;
though it appears sufficiently, that it is a sort of precious Stone, finer than
Marble or Porphyre.

From all that has been said, one may easily conjecture, that I am somewhat
charmed with Kachemire, and that I pretend, there is perhaps nothing in the
world like it for so small a Kingdom. It de^erves very well to reign over all
those neighboring Mountains as ^ar as Tartary, and over all Indostan, as far
as Ceilon, as once it did: And it is not without some cause, that the Mogols
call it the Terrestrial Paradise of the Indies* that Eck^ar took so much pains
to make himself Master of it; and that his Son Je^an-Guire became so amorous
thereof, that he could not leave it; and often said, he would rather lose all
his Empire, than Kachemire. And from the time that we arrived there, all the
Poets, both Kachemirians and Mogolians, strove to make Poems to the praise o^
this little Kingdom, to present them to Aureng-Zebe, who gladly received and
rewarded them. I remember, that among others, there was one, that exaggerating
the extraordinary height of the Mountains encompassing it, and rendering it
almost inaccessible any where, said, that the top of these Mountains was the
cause, that the Heavens did retire into the Figure of a Vault, as we see it;
and that Kachemire being the Masterpiece of Nature, and the King of the
Kingdoms of the World, it was suitable it should be hard of access, and so enjoy
an undisturbed peace and tranquillity, commanding all, and not being liable to
be commanded by any. He added, that the reason why Nature had surrounded it
with Moun^ains, of which some, namely the highest and most remote, were always
white and covered with Snow, the lowermost and the next to the Plain, all green
and covered with Wood, was, because that the King of the Kingdoms of the World
was to wear the most precious Crown, the top whereof was to be of Diamonds, and
the bottom of Emeraulds. If the Poet had added (said I to my Nava^
Danech-mend-kan; who was willing to make* me admire all those Poems) that all
those great Countries of Mountains that ^nviron it, as the little Tibet, the
State of the Raja Gamon, Kachguer, and Serenaguer, are to be comprehended under
the Kingdom of Kachemire; since, according to the History of the Country, they
once depended from it, and consequently that the River Ganges on the one side,
that of Indus on the other, the Chena^ on a third, and the Gemma on the fourth,
do issue out of Kachemire; that these Rivers, with so many others that run
thence, do countervail the Gibon, the Pison, and the two others; Genesis 2. 11,
12, 13, 14.
and if at last he had concluded, that this was certainly the true Terrestrial
Paradise, rather than that in Armenia, this would have much enhaunced the worth
of all his Commendations.

The Kachemirians have the Reputation of being a very witty people, much more
intelligent and dexterous than the Indians, and as fit for Poesy and Sciences
as the Persians. Besides, they are very industrious and willing to take pains;
they make Palekys, Trunks, Bed-steds, Standishes, Boxes, Spoons,, and many
other pieces, and all of good and very handsome Workmanship, sent over all the
Indies. They know how to give it a good Vernish, and so dexterously to
counterfeit the Veins of a certain Wood that has very fine ones, by applying
Gold-strings upon it, that there is nothing finer. But what is peculiar and
considerable in them, and which draws the Trade and Silver into their Country,
is that prodigious quantity of Stuffs called Chales, which they work there, and
employ their little Childeren in. These Chales are certain kinds of Stuff an
Ell and a half long, and about an Ell broad, which are embroidered at each end
with a kind of Embroidery about a Foot large. The Mogols and Indians, both Men
and Women, wear of them in Winter upon their Heads, passing them over their
left Shoulder like a Mantle. They make two sorts of them; one, of the wool of
the Country, which is finer than that of Spain; the other, of a Wool* or
rather of an Hair, they call To^z, taken from the Breast of a wild Goat of the
great Tibet. These latter are of a far greater price than the former; neither
is there any Castor so soft and delicate. The mischief is, the worms get easily
into it, unless you have a particular care often to unfold and air them. I have
seen of these which the Omrahs purposely caused to be made, which cost an
hundred and fifty Roupies: Of the others that are made of the Wool of the
Country, I have seen none that costs above fifty.

It Is observed of these Chales, that, work them never so carefully in Patna,
Agra, and Lahor, you shall never make the Stuff so soft and fine, as in
Kachemire; which is commonly imputed to the particular Water of the Country:
As at Maslipatan they make those fine stuffs, which become fairer by washing.

The Kachemirians are also famous for their good complexion. They look as well
as our Europeans, and have nothing of a Tartarian flat-nos'd and little eyed
Face, as those of Ka^hguer, and most of the people of the great Tibet. The
Women especially are very beautiful; and therefore all Strangers, that are
new-comers to the Court of Mogol, are furnished from thence, that so they may
have Children whiter than the Indians, and which by these means may pass for
true Mogols. And certainly, if one may judge of the Beauty of the retired Women
by that of the common People, met with in the Streets, and seen up and down in
the Shops, we must believe, that there are very handsome ones. At Lahor, where
they have the repute of being proper and ^lender, and the handsomest of the
Brown Lasses of the Indies (as really they are) I used an Art which is ordinary
among the Mogols, which is, to follow some Elephants, especially those that are
richly harnessed; for as soon as those Women hear the two Bells hanging on the
sides of those Beasts, they all put their heads out of the Windows. The same
Trick I used here; and I made also use of another, in which I succeeded very
well* it was devised by an old and famous Master of a School, whom I had taken
to help me to understand a Persian Poet. He made me buy store of Con^its; and
he being known and welcome every where, carried me into above 15 houses, telling
them that I was his Kinsman, newly come out of Persia, that I was rich and to
be married: As soon as we came into a house, he distributed Con^its to the
Children, and presently all came about us, Women and Children, great and small,
to have their share, or to be seen* This curiosity alone cost me many a good
Ro^py; but it confirmed me, that in Kachemire there are as fair Faces, as in
any place of Europe.

There remains only to impart unto you what I observed most considerable
between the Mountains, from Bember hither, (with which perhaps I should have
begun;) and after having given you account of some other little Voyages I have
been obliged to make ^^er sparts of this Kingdom, you will learn all I could
come to know of the rest of the circumjacent Mountains.

Concerning therefore first our Voyage from Bember hither, it seemed to me
surprising enough, to find my self from the first night that we* parted from
Bember* and entered into the Mountains* pass from a To^^d to a Temperate Zone:
For, we had* no sooner mounted this dreadful Wall of the World, I mean, this*
high, s^eep, black*and bald Mountain, of Bember* but that in descending on the
other* side, we found an Air that was pretty tolerable, fr^sh, gentle and
temperate. But that which surprised me more in these Mountains, was, to find my
self, in a trice, transported out of the Indies into Europe. For, ^eeing the
Earth covered with all our plants and shrubs, exept Issop, Thyme, Marjoram and
Rosemary, I imagined I was in some of our Mountains of Auvergne, in the midst
of a Forest of all our kinds of Trees, Pines, Oaks, Elms, Plane-trees. And I
was the more astonished because in all those burning Fields of Indostan, whence
I came* I had seen almost nothing of all that.

Among other things relating to Plants, this surprised me, that one and a half
days journey from Bember I found a Mountain, that was covered with them on both
sides, but with this difference, that on the side of the Mountain that was
Southerly, toward the Indies, there was a mixture of Indian and European
Plants, and on that which was exposed to the North I observed none but European
ones; as if the former had participated of the Air and temper of Europe and the
Indies, and the other had been mee^ly European.

As to the Trees, I admired this natural course of Generations and Corruptions:
Below in these bottoms, where perhaps* no man ever was, I saw hundreds that
were falling, or fallen, one* upon another, dead and half rotten of age; and
other young and verdant ones growing out of the foot of those that were dead:
Some of them also I saw burnt, whether it* was from Lightning, or that in the
heat of Summer they had taken fire by rubbing themselves against one another,
when they were agitated by some hot and impetuous wind; or, as the
Country People say, that they*take fire of themselves, when they are grown old
and dry.

I admired also those natural Cascata's of water, which we found between those
Rocks. We met, among others, one of them so wonderful, that doubtless, it
cannot be paralleled. One sees a far off from the side of an high Mountain,
running down a Torrent of water in a Channel covered with Trees, and
precipitate it self in a trice to the bottom of a steep-Rock of a stupendous
height, with a noise that is able to strike one deaf, like a Cataract. There
was erected near it, a Theater, upon a Rock, which Je^an-Guire had caused
purposely to be made plain, that the Court passing, might there repose
themselves, and from thence with convenience behold this admirable
Work-man-ship of Nature; which as well as those old Trees, I was just now
speaking of, seems to resemble something of great Antiquity, and of the first
production of the World.

All these divertisements were blended with an odd accident. On the day, that
the King went up the Mountain of Pire-penjale, which is the highest of all, and
whence one begins to discover a far off the Country of Kachemire; on that day,
I say, that the King ascended this Mountain, being followed by a long row of
Elephants, upon which sat the Women in Mikdembers, and Embarys; one of those
Elephants was frighted by beholding, as the Indians would have it, such a long
and steep ascent, and fell back upon him that was next, and he upon the next,
and so on to the fifteenth, so that not one of them being able* to turn in this
way, which was extremely rude and steep, they all tumbled into the precipice.
It was good fortune for those poor Women, that the precipice it self was not
very steep* so that there were but three or four of them killed; but the
fifteen Elephants remai'nd upon the place. When these bulky Masses do once fall
under those vast burdens they are laden with, they never rise again, though
the way be never so fair. We saw them two days after, in passing by, and I
observed some of them yet stirring their Trunk. This accident put the whole
Army, which had marched four days along the Mountains in file, into great
disorder, because to recover these Women and all that wreck, a stop was made
for the remainder of that day and all the night, every one being necessitated
to stop where he was, because it was in many places impossible to advance or go
back, and none had near him those Porters that carried his Tent and Victuals.
As for my self, I was not in the wors^ condition, having found means to creep
out of the way, and to take the convenience of a small place to lie down i^*
for my self and my Horse. And, to my good luck, one of my servants that
^ollow'd me, had a little bread, which we shared together. I remember, it was*
there where stirring some stones we found a great black Scorpion, which a young
Mogol of my acquaintance took, and squeezed it in his own hand, and then in the
hand of my servant, and at last in mine, without our being stung by him. This
young Cavalier said, that he had charmed him, as he had done many others
before, by a passage of the Alcoran, which he would not teach me, because, he
said, the power of charming would pass to me and leave himself, as it had
passed to him by quitting his Teacher.

In traversing this same Mountain of Pire-penjale, where the Elephants tumbled
down, there occurred, those things which called to my mind some of my former
philosophical thoughts. The first was, that in less than an hour we felt Summer
and Winter; for in ascending we did sweat gross drops, all men going on foot in
a burning Sun; and when we came to the top of the Mountain, we yet found the
^cy Snow, that had been ^ut to open the way; there was a Frost upon a misling
Rain, and there blew a wind so cold* that all people shook and run away,
especially the ^illy Indians, who never had seen Ice or Snow, nor felt such a
cold.

The second was, that in less than two hundred paces I met with two quite
contrary winds; one from the North, which blew in my face ascending, especially
when I came near the top, and another from the South, which blew against my
back in descending; as if this Hill had protruded exhalations out of its bowels
from all sides, which coming forth had caused, a wind that had descended and
taken its course in those two opposite dales.

The third was the meeting an old Hermit, that had lived on the top of this
Mountain since the time of Jehan-Guire, and whose Religion was not known;
though it was said, that he did miracles, caused strange thunders when he
would, and raised storms of Hail, Snow, Rain and Wind. He looked somewhat
savage-like, having a long and large white Beard uncombed. He asked alms
somewhat fi^rcely; suffered us to take up water in earthen cups, he had ranged
upon a great stone; made sign with his hand, importing that we should speedily
march away, and grumbled at those that made a noise, because* said he to me,
(when I was come into his Cave, and had a little sweetened his looks with half a
Roupy, which with much humility I put into his hand) a noise raises furious
s^orms and tempests. Aureng-Zebe, said he further, did very well in following
my counsel, and not permitting to make a noise: Chah-Je^an always took care of
the same; but Jehan Guire once mocking at it, and causing Trumpets and Cymbals
to sound, was like to have perished here.

In reference to the little Voyages I have made in diverse parts of this
Kingdom, behold the particulars I took notice of as I passed. We were no sooner
arrived at Kachemire, but my Navah Danech-mend-kan sent me, together with one
of his Horsemen for a Convoy, and a Countryman, to one of the extremities of
this Kingdom, three small days journey from hence, upon the relation made him,
that this was the very time to see the Wonders (for so they speak of them) of a
Spring that is thereabout. These Wonders are, that in the month of May, the
time when the Snow begins but to melt, this Fountain, for about the space of
fifteen days, regularly flows and stops thrice a day, at break of day, at noon
and at night: Its flowing ordinarily lasts three quarters of an hour, more or
less, and that plentifully enough, to fill a square receptacle, having steps to
go down to it, and being about ten or twelve foot broad, and as many foot deep.
After the first fifteen days, its course begins to be less regular and less
copious; and at length, after a month or thereabout, it quite stops and runs no
more for the rest of the year, unless it be, that during some plentiful and
long rains, it f^^ws incessantly and without Rule, as other Fountains do. The
Gentiles have on the side of the Receiver a little Temple of the Idol of Brare,
which is one of their false Deities; and thence it is that they call this
Fountain Send-Brary, as as if you should say, *Water of Brare; and that thither
they come from all parts in pilgrimage, to bathe and ^anctifie themselves in
this miraculous water. Upon the origin of this Water they make many fables,
which I shall not recite to you, because I find not the least shadow of truth
in them. During the five or six days of my stay there, I did what possible I
could to find the reason of this Wonder. I did attentively consider the
situation of the Mountain, at the foot of which this Spring is found: I went to
the very top with great pains, s^arching and prying every where. I observed
that it extends it sel^ in length from North to South; that it is severed from
other Mountains, which yet are very near to i^; that it is in the form of an
Ass^s back; that its top, which is very long, has not much more than an
hundred paces where it is largest; that one of the side of the Mountain, which
is covered with nothing but green grass, is exposed to the East, yet so that
the Sun comes not to shine on it before eight a clock in the morning, because of
the other opposite Mountains; and lastly, that the other side, which is exposed
to the West, is covered with Trees and Bushes. All this being considered, I did
imagine, that the heat of the Sun, together with the particular situation and
the internal disposition of the Mountain, might very well be the cause of this
pretended Miracle, that the Mountain, Sun, coming briskly to strike on the side
opposite thereto, heats it, and melts part of the frozen waters, which during
the Winter, when all was covered with Snow, had insinuated themselves into the
inner parts of the earth of this Mountain; that these waters penetrating, and
by little and little running down unto certain beds of quick rock, which retain
and convey them toward the Springhead, cause the flowing of the Fountain at
Noon; That the same Sun, raised to the South, and leaving that other side, now
growing cold, for to strike with its beams as 'twere perpendicularly, the top,
does also melt other frozen waters, which likewise run down by little and
little as the other, but by other turnings, unto those rocky beds, and cause
the Flowing at Night: and that lastly, the Sun heating likewise this Western
side, produces the like effect, and causes the third flux in the Morning;
which is slower than the two others, either because this Western side is remote
from the Eastern where the Source is; or because that being covered with wood,
it is not so soon heated; or by reason of the cold of the night. Now I found
this my reasoning the more cogent, forasmuch as it seems to agree with what is
affirmed, that in the first days the water comes in greater abundance than in
the latter; and that at last it stops, and runs not at all; as if indeed in the
beginning there were of those frozen waters greater plenty in the earth than at
last. It seems also to agree with what is observed, that there are some days in
the beginning, in which one flux is found more abounding than the other, and
sometimes more at noon than in the evening or morning, or in the morning more
than at noon; it commonly falling out so that some days there are hotter than
others, or that some clouds arise which interrupt the equality of the heat, and
consequently make the flux unequal.

Returning from Send-brary I turned a little aside from the road to go and lie
at Achiavel, which is an House of pleasure of the ancient Kings of Kachemire,
and at present of the Great Mogol. That which most adorns it, is a Fountain,
the water where of diffuseth it self on all sides round about that Fabric
(which is not despicable) and into the Gardens by an hundred Canals. It breaks
out of the Earth, as if by some violence it ascended up from the bottom of a
Well, and that with such an abundance as might make it to be called a River
rather than a Fountain. The water of it is admirably good, and so cold that one
can hardly endure to hold ones hand in it. The Garden it self is very fine,
there being curious Walks in it, and store of Fruit-bearing Trees, of Apples,
Pears, Prunes, Apricocks and Cherries, and many jets of waters of various
figures, and Ponds replenished with Fish, together with a very high Cascata of
water, which by its fall makes a great Nape of thirty or forty paces long,
which has an admirable effect, especially in the night, when under this Nape
there is put a great number of little Lamps fitted in holes purposely made in
the Wall; which makes a curious show.

From Achiavel I went yet a little more out of my way to pass through another
Royal Garden, which is also very beautiful, and has the same pleasantness with
that of Achiavel, but this is peculiar in it, that in one of its Ponds there
are Fishes that come when they are called, and when you cast bread to them; the
biggest whereof have golden Rings in their Noses, with inscriptions about them,
which they say that renowned Nour-Mehalle, the Wife of Jehan-Guire, the
Grandfather of Aureng-Zebe, caused to be fastened in them.

I was no sooner returned from Send-brary, but Danech-mend-kan, well satisfied
with my Voyage, made me undertake one more, to see another sure Miracle, as he
called it, which should be capable to make me soon change my Religion, and turn
Musselman. Go, says he, to Baramoulay, which is not further from hence than
Send-brary; there you shall find a Mosquee in which is the Tomb of one of our
Pires or Saints, which still every day works Miracles in curing sick people,
that flock thither from all parts: It may be, that you will believe nothing of
all those miraculous Cures you shall see; but you will at least believe one
Miracle, which is done every day, and you may see with your own eyes: And that
is of a big round stone, which the strongest man is hardly able to raise in the
least from the ground, but yet eleven men, by praying to that Saint, lift up,
as if it were a straw, with the end of their eleven fingers, without any
trouble at all, and without being sensible of any weight. Hereupon I began this
journey also, accompanied with my Horseman and the Countrey-fellow, and being
arrived at Baramoulay, I found it a place pleasant enough. The Mosquee is
sufficiently well built, the Tomb of the pretended Saint well adorned, and
round about it there was store of people of great devotion, who said they were
sick. Near the Mosquee there was a Kitchen with large Kettles full of Flesh and
Rice, which, in my opinion, was the Mangnet drawing the sick people thither,
and the Miracle that cured them. On the other side was the Garden and the
Chambers of the Mullahs, who with great convenience, and delight spend their
life there, under the shadow of the miraculous Sanctity of this Pire, which
they are not wanting to celebrate: But as I am always very unhappy in such
occasions, he did no Miracle that day upon any of the sick. As for the great
Stone, which was the business I came for; there were Eleven Cheats of these
Mullahs that crowded together in a round, and by their long Vests hindered me
from seeing well in what manner they took and lifted it up, yet said all, that
they held it only with the end of one of their fingers, and that it was as
light as a feather. For my part, who had my eyes open, and looked on narrowly,
I perceived well enough, that they took great pains, and they seemed to me,
that they used also the thumb, which they held very firm upon the second finger
bent and closed: But yet I was not wanting to cry out as well as the Mullahs
and all the other assistants, Karamet, Karamet, Miracle, Miracle, giving at the
same time a Roupy for the Mullahs, and with great show of devotion praying them
to favor me with suffering me once to be one of the Eleven lifters up of the
Stone. They did hesitate long before they resolved to permit it, but having
given them another Roupy, and made them believe I was persuaded of the truth of
the Miracle, one of the Eleven gave me his place, they doubtless imagining,
that Ten of them joined together would be* sufficient to do the business,
though I should not add much to it, and that they would so range themselves and
crowd together, that I should perceive nothing of their imposture. But they
found themselves egregiously deceived, when they saw, that the Stone, which I
would not support but only by the end of my finger, always inclined and fell
to my side, until at length I found it necessary to put my thumb to it, and to
hold it with my finger as they did; and then we lifted it up from the earth,
yet not without much pain. Notwithstanding which, when I saw that they all
looked upon me asquint, not knowing what to make of me, I still went on crying
like the rest, Karamet, Miracle, Miracle, and over and above casting to them
another Roupy to secure my self from being stoned; and stealing away from among
the crowd, I presently took horse, without eating or drinking, and left the
Saint and the Miracles to those that had says enough to believe them:
Observing, as I passed along, that famous opening, which is an outlet to all
the waters of this Kingdom, of which I have already said something in the
beginning of this Book.

I left my way again, to approach to a great Lake, which I saw a far off,
thorough the middle whereof passes the River that runs 10 Baramoulay. It is
full of Fish, especially Eels, and covered with Ducks and wild Fowl, and many
other River Fowl. It Is where the Governor comes in Winter, at which time it is
covered with those creatures, to divert himself with fowling. In the midst of
this Lake there is an Eremitage with its little Garden, which, as they say,
does miraculously flote upon the water, and where the Eremite passes his Life
without ever going from it. Besides which, they make a thousand other
ridiculous tales of it, which are not worth reciting, unless perhaps you will
except what some have told me. That it was one of those ancient Kings of
Kachemire, who out of curiosity caused this Eremitage to be built upon thick
beams fastened to one another.

Thence I went to find out a Fountain, which has something that is rare enough
in it, bubling up gently, and rising with some little impetuosity, and making
small bubles of air, and carrying with it, to the top, some small Sand that is
very ^ine, which goes away again as it came, the Water becoming still, a
moment after it, without ebullition, and without bringing up Sand; and soon
after beginning afresh as before, and so continuing its motion by intervals,
which are not regular. But the Wonder, as they say, consists in this, that the
least noise, made by speaking, or by knocking ones foot against the ground,
moves the water, and makes it run and bubble as was said. Yet I found
plainly, that speaking or knocking avails nothing to produce that effect, and
that it moves as well when one says nothing, as when one speaks or knocks.
But now, to give the true cause of it, that requires more thinking than I have
bestowed upon it; unless one should say, that the Sand, by falling down again,
obstructeth the narrow Channel of this small and weak Spring, until the water,
being closed up and kept in, it make an effort to remove and raise again the
Sand, and so to disengage it self; or rather, that some wind, pent in the
Channel of the Spring, rises by turns, as it comes to pass in artificial
Fountains.

After we had considered this Fountain, we entered into the Mountains to see a
great Lake, which has Ice in Summer, and looks like a little icy Sea, having
heaps of Ice, made and unmade by the Winds. Afterward we passed through a
certain place, called Seng-safed, that is, White stone; which is famous for
being full all the Summer long of all sorts of Flowers like a Parterre, and for
this observation, that when much people goes thither, making a great noise and
much stirring the air, there presently falls a shower of rain. This is certain,
that when, some years since, Chah-Jehan went thither, he was in danger of
perishing by the great and extraordinary rain survening, though he had
commanded, they should make the least noise they could. This agreed with what
my Eremite of Pirepengale had told me.

And now I was going to a Grotta of odd congelations, which is two days journey
from thence; but I received news, that after my so long absence my Navah was
troubled about me.

As to the condition of the neighboring Mountains round about, I have, since
our being here, done what possibly I could to inform my self about them; but I
have profited but little, for want of people that are intelligent and observe
things; yet notwithstanding I will not omit to relate to you what I have
learned of it.

The Merchants of Kachemire, that go every year from mountain to mountain,
gathering fine Wool to make those Stuffs I have above been speaking of, do all
agree, that between the mountains, which still depend from Kachemire, there are
found very fine places of good land, and that amongst others there is one
place, which pays it tribute in Leather and Wool, sent for by the Governor
every year; and where the Women are extreme handsome, chaste and laborious; that
there is also another farther off from Kachemire, which also pays its tribute
in Leather and Wool* and has very pretty, though but small, fertile plains,
and most pleasant valleys, abounding in Corn, Rice, Apples, Pears, excellent
Apricocks and Melons; as also in Raisins yielding very good Wine; the
Inhabitants whereof have sometimes refused to pay the tribute, relying upon the
difficulty of access to their Country; but there has always been a way found
to enter and to reduce them. The same Merchants agree also, that among the
other Mountains, that are more distant and depend no more from Kachemire, there
are likewise found very pleasant Countries, peopled with very handsome Whites,
but such as almost never come out from their homes; of which some have no
Kings, nor, as far as could be perceived, any Religion; only that some of them
do eat no Fish, counting them unclean.

I shall add here, what I was lately told by a good ancient man, that had
married a Wife of the ancient Family of the Kings of Kachemire. He said, that
when Jehan-Guire made a strict inquiry after all those that were of that
Family, he was afraid to be taken, and thereupon fled with three Servants crose
these mountains, not knowing in a manner whither he went; that thus wandering he
came at last into a very fine small Canton, where when it came to be known who
he was, the inhabitants came to visit him and brought him presents, and that,
to make up their kindness, they brought to him in the evening one of the
beautifullest of their young Maidens, praying him that he would bed with her,
because they desired very much to have issue of his Blood: That passing from
thence into another Canton, not much distant from the former, the people
likewise came to see him, and to present him; but that the kindness of the
evening was far different from the other, in that these inhabitants brought to
him their own Wives, arguing that those of the other Canton were Beasts,
because that his Blood would not remain in their house, since the Maidens would
carry the Child with them into the house of him, to whom they should be married.

I may further add, that some years since, there being a dissension risen
between the family of the King of the little Tibet, which borders upon
Kachemire, one of the pretenders, to the Crown did secretly call for the
assistance of the Governor of Kachemire, who by order of Chah-Jehan gave him
powerful succors, and put to death or flight all the other pretenders, and
left this man in the possession of the Country, on condition of an annual
Tribute to be paid in Crystal, Musk and Wool. This petty King could not forbear
coming to see Aureng-Zebe, bringing with him a present of those things I just
now named; but he had so pitiful a Train, That I should never have taken him
for what he was. My Navah entertained him at dinner, that he might receive the
better information concerning those Mountains. I heard him say, that his
Country on the East side did confine with great Tibet; that it was about 30 or
40 leagues broad; that there was indeed some little Crystal, Musk, and Wool,
but for the rest very poor; and that there were no Gold Mines as was said; that
in some places there was very good fruit, especially Melons; that they had very
hard Winters, and very troublesome, because of the deep Snows; and that the
people, which formerly had been Heathen, was almost all become Mahumetan, as
himself, namely, of that Sect called Cbia, which is that of all Persia.
Besides, that seventeen or eighteen years ago Chah-Jehan had attempted to make
himself Master of the Kingdom of the Great Tibet, as formerly also had done the
Kings of Kachemire; that his Army after sixteen days difficult march, always
among Mountains, did besiege a Castle which they took; that there remained no
more for him to do, than to pass a River, which is famous and very rapid, and
thereupon to march directly to the Capital Town, which he would have easily
carried, the whole Kingdom being in a panick terror; but that the season being
far spent, the Governor of Kachemire, who was the General of that Army, did
apprehend he should be surprised by the Snow, and so returned, leaving in that
Castle a Garrison, which, whether it was from fear of the Enemy, or from want
of sufficient provision, he could not say, soon abandoned it; which broke the
design the Governor had of returning thither the next Spring.

Now that the King of this Great Tibet knows, that Aureng-Zebe is at Kachemire,
and threatens him with War, he has sent to him an Ambassador, with Presents of
the Country, as Crystal, and those dear White Cow-tails, by way of ornament
fastened to the ears of Elephants, as also Musk, and a Stone of Jachen of great
price, because of an extraordinary bigness. This Jachen is a bluish Stone with
white veins so hard that it is wrought with nothing else but the Powder of
Diamond, highly esteemed in the Court of the Mogol. They make Cups of it and
other vessels, of which I have some richly wrought with threads of Gold, of
very curious Workmanship. The Train of this Ambassador did consist of three or
four Cavaliers, and ten or twelve tall men, dry and lean, having three or four
hairs in their beards like the Chinese, and plain red Bonnets upon their heads
like our Seamen, the rest of their Garments suitable. I think there were four
or five of them with Swords, but the rest marched behind the Ambassador without
any rod or stick. He treated with Aureng-Zebe in his Masters name, promising
that he would suffer a Mosque to be built in the Capital City, wherein Prayers
should be made after the Mahumetan way; that the Money, henceforth to be
coined, should on the one side have the Impress of Aureng-Zebe, and that he
would pay him a certain annual Tribute. But it is believed, that as soon as this
King shall know that Aureng-Zebe is gone from Kachemire, he will laugh at all
this Treaty, as he did formerly at that, which he had made with Chah-Jehan.

This Ambassador had in his suit a Physician, which was said to be of the
Kingdom of Lassa, and of the Tribe Lamy or Lama, which is that of the men of
the Law in that Country, as the Brahmans are in the Indies; with this
difference, that the Brahmans have no Caliph, or High Priest, but the Lamians
have one that is not only acknowledged for such by the Kingdom of Lassa, but
also by all Tartary, and who is honored and reverenced like a divine person.
This Physician had a Book of Receipts, which he would never sell to me; the
writing of it seemed, at a distance, somewhat like ours. We made him begin to
write the Alphabet, but he wrote so slowly, and his writing was so bad in
respect of that in his Book, that we soon judged, this must needs be a poor
Doctor. He was much wedded to the Metempsychosis or Transmigration of Souls,
and was full of admirable stories of it; among the rest he related of his great
Lama, that when he was old and ready to die, he assembled his Council, and
declared to them, that now he was passing into the Body of a little Child,
lately born, that this Child was bred up with great care, and when it was about
six or seven years old, they brought to it store of household stuff pel mel with
his own, and that the Child was able to distinguish those, that were or had
been his from that of others: Which was, said this Doctor, an authentic proof
of the Transmigration. For my part, I thought at first he rallied, but I found
at last, that he spoke very seriously. I was once to see him at the Ambassadors
with a Merchant of Kachemire, that knew the Language of Tibet, and was an
Interpreter to me. I made as if I would buy some Stuffs he had brought to sell,
which were some kind of Ratines of about a foot and an half broad, but it was
really to learn something of that Country, yet it was no great matter I
obtained from him. He only told me in general, that all the Kingdom of the
great Tibet was, in comparison to his, a miserable Country, full of Snow for
more than five months of the year; that his King made often War with the
Tartars; but he could never distinguish to me, what kind of Tartars they were.
At length, after I had made a good many Questions to him, without receiving any
satisfaction upon them, I saw I lost only my time with him.

But there is another thing, which is so certain, that no body here doubts of
it. It Is not yet twenty years, that there went Caravans every year from
Kachemire, which crossed all those Mountains of the great Tibet, entered into
Tartary, and arrived in about three months at Cataja, notwithstanding the very
ill ways, and the rapid Torrents; which latter are to be passed over Cords
stretched from one Rock to another. These Caravans brought back Musk,
China-wood, Rubarb, and Mamiron, which last is a small root exceeding good for
ill Eyes. Repassing over the great Tibet they also loaded themselves with the
Merchandise of that Country, viz. Musk, Crystal and Jachen, but especially
with store of very fine Wool of two sorts, one of Sheep, and the other called
Touz, which is rather, as I have said, a kind of hair approaching to our
Castor, than a Wool. But since the attempt, which Chah-Jehan made on that
side, the King of the great Tibet has altogether shut up the way, and suffers
not any one from Kachemire to enter into his Country: And thence it is, that
the Caravans at present go from Patna upon the Ganges, not passing through his
Country at all, but leaving it on the left hand, and coming directly to the
Kingdom of Lassa.

Concerning this Kingdom, here called Kacheguer, which doubtless is that which
our Maps call Kascar, I shall relate to you what I was able to learn of it from
the Merchants of the Country it self, who, knowing that Aureng-Zebe was to
stay a while at Kachemire, were come thither with a good number of Slaves, of
both Sexes, whom they had to sell. They say, that the Kingdom of Kacheguer
lies East of Kachemire, drawing a little Northward; that the shortest way
thither was to go directly to the great Tibet; but that passage being
obstructed, they were forced to take their way through the little Tibet; that
first they went to a small Town, called Gourtche, the last Town depending from
Kachemire, and four days journey distant from the same; that from thence in
eight days they came to Eskerdou, the Capital City of the King of the little
Tibet, and thence in two days more to a small Town called Cheker, likewise
belonging to the little Tibet, and situate upon a River very famous for being
Medicinal; that in fifteen days they came to a great Forest upon the Confines
of the little Tibet, and in fifteen days more to Kacheguer a small Town, once
the Seat of the King of Kacheguer, which is now at Jourkend, lying somewhat
more to the North, and ten days journey distant from Kacheguer. They added,
that from the Town of Kacheguer to Katay it is no more but two months voyage;
that every year there go Caravans, bringing back of all those Commodities I
have named, and passing into Persia thorough Vsbeck, as there are others that
do pass to Patna in Indostan. They said moreover, that to go from Kacheguer to
Katay, Travelers must get to a Town that is eight days journey from Coten, the
last Town of the Kingdom of Kacheguer; that the ways from Kachemire to
Kacheguer are very difficult; that among others there is a place, where, in
what season soever it be, you must march for about a quarter of a League upon
Ice. This is all, I could learn of those parts, which though indeed it be very
much confused and very little, yet will it be found much, considering I had to
do both with people so ignorant, that they almost knew not to give a reason of
any thing; and with Interpreters, who, for the most part, know not how to make
the Questions to be understood, nor intelligibly to deliver the Answers made
thereto.

I thought once, I would have here concluded this Letter, or rather this Book,
and taken my leave of you until I came to Dehil, whither we are now returning:
But since I am in the vein of writing, and at some leisure, I shall endeavor
to give you some satisfaction to those Five particulars, you demanded of me in
your last Letter in the name of Monsieur Thevenot, that illustrious person, who
daily gives us more discoveries, without going out of his study, than we have
learned of those that have gone round the World.

The first of his demands is, Whether it be true, that in the Kingdom of
Kachemire there are Jews settled there from immemorial times; and if so,
whether they have the Holy Scripture, and if their Old Testament be altogether
conform to ours?

The Second is, That I would give you an account of what I have observed
touching the Mounsons, or the Season of the ordinary Rains in the Indies.

The Third is, That I would give you my Observations, and declare to you my
Thoughts concerning the wonderful regularity of the Current of the Sea, and the
Winds in the Indies.

The Fourth is, Whether the Kingdom of Bengale is so fertile, so rich, and so
beautiful, as it is said to be?

The Fifth is, That I would at length decide unto you the old Controversy
touching the Causes of the Increase of the Nile.

Answer to the first Demand, concerning the Jews.
I Should indeed be very glad, as well as Monsieur The, venote that there were
Jews to be found in the Valley of those Mountains, who might be such, as I
believe he would have them; I mean, of those Ten Tribes transported by
Salmanasser. But you may assure him, that if anciently there have been of them
in this place (as there is some reason to believe there were,) there are none
of them at present, and all the inhabitants of it are now either Gentiles or
Mahumetans; and that perhaps it is China, where they may be found. For I have
lately seen, in the hands of our Reverend Father, the Jesuit of Dehli, some
Letters of a German Jesuit written from Pekin, taking notice that he had there
seen some of them, that had preserved the Jewish Religion and the Old
Testament, that knew nothing of the Death of JESUS CHRIST, and that they would
even have made this Jesuit their Kacan, if he would have forborne to eat Swines
flesh.

Mean time here also are not wanting several marks of Judaism. The first is,
that at the entering into this Kingdom, after having passed the Mountains of
Pire-penjale, all the Inhabitants I saw in the first Villages seemed to me to
be Jews, in their garb and mien, and in something peculiar, which makes us
often discern Nations from one another. I am not the only person, that has
had this thought; our Father, the Jesuit, and many of our Europeans had the
same before me. The second is, that I have observed, that among the meaner sort
of the people of this Town, though they be Mahumetans, yet the name of Mousa,
that is Moses, is much used. The third, that commonly they say, that Solomon
came into their Country, and that it was he that cut the Mountain of Baramoule
to give an outlet to the waters. The fourth, that they say, Moses died at
Kachemire, and that his Tomb is one league distant from this Town. The fifth,
that they pretend, that that little and very ancient Edifice, which appears
from hence upon an high mountain, was built by Solomon, and that thence they
call it to this very day the Throne of Solomon. So that I would not deny, but
that some Jews may have penetrated hither; and that in length of time they may
have lost the purity of their Law, turned Idolaters, at last Mahumetans. In
short, we see store of the Jewish Nation that have passed into Persia to Lar,
Ispahan, and also into Indostan on the side of Goa and Cochin: I have been
informed, that there were of them in Aethiopia, even gallant and military men,
and some of them so considerable and potent, that there was one of them,
fifteen or sixteen years ago, that had attempted to make himself King of a
little Country of the Mountains of a very hard access; if it be true, what two
Ambassadors of the King of Aethiopia, that were lately in this Court, related
to me.

Answer to the Second Demand, about the stated Rains in the Indies.
THe Sun is so strong and violent in the Indies all the year long, and
principally for the space of eight months, that he would burn all, and render
the Country barren and inhabitable, if Providence had not particularly provided
and disposed things in so admirable a way, as that in the month of July, when
the heats are most violent, Rains begin regularly to fall, which continuing for
three months together, do temper the Earth, and render it very fruitful, and so
qualify the Air that it may be endured. Yet are not these Rains so regular,
that they fall always just at the same time; of which I have made many
observations in different places, and principally at Dehli, where I lived a
long while. The like is fourd in other Countries; and there is always some
difference in the time from year to year: For sometimes they begin or end a
fortnight or three weeks sooner, sometimes later; and there are also some
years, in which they are not so plentiful as in others; insomuch that two
years, together it did almost not rain at all; which caused much Sickness, and
great Famine. Besides, there is also this difference in respect of Countries
different and remote from one another, that these Rains ordinarily begin
sooner, or are more plentiful in one than in the other. For example, in Bengale
and along the Coast of Coromandel, as far as to the Isle of Ceilan, they begin
and end a month sooner than toward the Coast of Malabar: And in Bengale these
Rains are pouring down for four months, and sometimes continue for eight days
and nights together without intermission; Whereas at Dehli and Agra they are
never so strong, nor so durable, there passing sometimes two or three whole
days without any Rain; and ordinarily the whole morning from break of day until
about nine or ten a clock it rains but very little or nothing. But the most
considerable difference I have; observed, is, that the rains in diverse places
come from different quarters of the World, as about Dehli they come from the
East, where lies Bengale; whereas, on the contrary, in the parts of Bengale and
upon the Coast of Coromandel they come from the South; and upon the Coast of
Malabar they proceed almost always from the West.

I have also observed another particular about which they all agree in those
parts, viz. That according as the Heat of the Summer comes sooner or later, is
more or less violent, and lasts longer or a shorter time; the Rains also come
sooner or later, are more or less plentiful, last longer or a shorter time.

These Observations have given me ground to believe, that the Heat of the Earth
and the Rarefaction of the Air must be the principal causes of these Rains, and
draw them; forasmuch as the Air of the Seas, which lie near round about the
Lands, being colder, more condensed, and more gross, filled with clouds which
the great heats of the Summer raise from the waters, and which the winds drive
and agitate, discharges it self easily upon the Land, where the Air is hotter,
more rarefied, in more motion and less resisting than upon the Seas, so as that
this discharge is more or less tardy and abundant, according as the Heat comes
sooner and is more violent.

Suitable to the same Observations I was persuaded that if the Rains begin
sooner upon the Coast of coromandel than upon that of Malabar, it is by reason
that the Summer begins there sooner, it being possible that there it may do so
for some particular reasons, which perhaps would not be hard to find, if the
Country were well examined: For we know, that according to the different
situation of a Land in respect of Seas or Mountains, and according as it is more
Sandy, or Hilly, or Woody, the Summer comes there either sooner or later, and
with more or less violence.

I am further persuaded, that it is no wonder, that the Rains come from
different quarters; that upon the Coast of Coromandel, for example, they come
from the South, and upon that of Malabar from the West; because that in all
appearance it must be the nearest Seas that send them, and the Coast of
Coromandel, is nearer to the Sea, which lies Southerly in respect of it, and
is more exposed to it, as the Coast of Malabar is to the West of it, lying
toward Bahelmandel, Arabia, and the Gulf of Persia.

Lastly, I have imagined, that if at Dehli, for example, the Rains come from
the East, it may yet be that the Seas which are Southerly to it, are the origin
of them; but that they are forced by reason of some Mountains, or some other
Lands where the Air is colder, more condensed and more resisting, to turn aside
and discharge themselves another way, where the Air is more rarefied, and where
consequently they find less resistance.

I forgot to tell you, that I also observed at Dehli, that there it never rains
to purpose, till for many days there have passed store of Clouds Westward* as
if it were necessary that those spaces of Air which are beyond Dehli Westward,
should be first filled with Clouds, and that these Clouds finding there some
obstacle, as it may be some Air less hot and less rarefied, and consequently
more condensed and more able to resist, or some other contrary Clouds and Winds
repelling them, should become so thick, so burthensom and so heavy, that they
must fall down in Rain, after the same manner as it often enough falls out,
when the Wind drives the Clouds against some high Mountain.

Answer to the third Demand, which is concerning the Regularity of the Current
of the Sea, and of the Winds in the Indies.
AS soon as the Rains do cease (which ordinarily comes to pass toward s
themonth of October,) it is observed, that the Sea takes its course Southward,
and that the cold Northern Winds arises. This Wind blows for four or five
months without intermission and without storms, always keeping the same
equality as to its strength and quarter, unless it change or cease a day or so
by accident, but then it returns again unto its former place and temper. After
that time; for two months or there about the other Winds do reign without any
rule. These two months being past, which is called the Intermediate season, or,
according to the Hollanders, the Wavering or Changing Season, the Sea returns
back from South to North, and the South Wind rises to reign also in his turn
for four or five months, as the Current of the Sea does: so that there pass two
months of intermediate season; during which, Navigation is very difficult and
dangerous, whereas during the two Seasons it is very easy, pleasant and
without peril, except it be about the end of the season of the South Wind.
Hence you may find cause not to wonder, if you hear that the Indians, though
else very timorous and inexpert in the art of Navigation, do notwithstanding
make pretty long and considerable Voyages; as when they sail from Bengale to
Tanassery, Achem, Malaque, Sian and Makassar; or to Maslipatan, Ceilan, the
Maldives, Moka, and Bender-Abassy; because they take their time to go with one
good Season, and to return with the other. It Is true, that often enough they are
surprised and cast away; but that is, when they cannot dispatch their affairs
in good time, or fail of taking their measures. Our Europeans also do sometimes
lose themselves, though they be far better Seamen, bolder and more
understanding, and their Ships better conditioned and equipped.

Of these two intermediate Seasons, that which makes the South Wind is
incomparably more dangerous than the other, and much more subject to tempests
and storms: And even in the Season it self this wind is ordinarily much more
impetuous and unequal than that of the North. And here I must not omit to give
you a remark, which is, that about the end of the Season of the South Wind,
during the time of the rain, although there be a great calm out at Sea, yet
it is very tempestuous near the Coasts; to the distance of fifteen or twenty
leagues: whence the Ships of Europe or others, when they will approach the
Indian Coasts, for example, of Suratte, or Maslipatan, must be very careful of
taking their time to arrive just after the Rains; or else they run great hazard
of being split and lost upon the Coast.

This is very near what I could observe of the Seasons in these parts; of which
I much wish I could give you a good reason. I shall venture to tell you, that
it came into my thoughts, first, that the Air, which environs the Globe of the
Earth, ought to be esteemed to have a share in it, as also the Water of the Sea
and Rivers, forasmuch as both the one and the other gravitate upon this Globe,
tend to the same Center of it, and so are in some manner united and fastened to
it; so that from these three Bodies, the Air, the Water and the Earth, there
results as 'twere one great Globe. Next, that the Globe of the Earth being
suspended and balanced, as it is, in its place, in that free and un-resisted
space, where the Creator thought good to place it, would be capable to be
easily moved, if some adventitious Body should come against it and hit it.
Thirdly, that the Sun having past the Line to move toward one of the Poles,
for example, the Arctique, coming to cast its rays that way, makes there
impression enough to depress a little the Arctique Pole, and to do that more
and more according as it advances toward the Tropique; letting it rise again
by little and little, according as he returns toward the Line, until by the
force of his rays he do the like on the side of the Antartique Pole.

If these suppositions, joined to that of the Diurnal Motion of the Earth, were
true, it were not methinks, without reason what is commonly affirmed in the
Indies, viz. That the Sun conducts and carries with him the Sea and Wind. For
if it be true, that having passed the Line to go toward one of the Poles, he
causes a change in the direction of the Axis of the Earth, and a depression in
the Pole on that side, the other Pole must needs be raised, and that
consequently the Sea and the Air, being two fluid and heavy Bodies, run down in
this inclination: so that it would be true to say, that the Sun advancing
toward one Pole, causes on that side two great regular Currents, viz, that of
the Sea, and that of the Air which makes the Mounson-wind, as he causes two
opposite ones, when he returns toward the other Pole.

Upon this ground, methinks, it might be said, that there are no other but two
main opposite Fluxes of the Sea, one from the side of the Pole Arctique, the
other from that of the Antartique; that if there were a Sea from one Pole to
the other, that passed through our Europe, we should see, that these two
Currents would there be regular every where, as they are in the Indies, and
that that which hinders this regularity of the Flux from being general, is,
that the Seas are intercepted by Lands, which impede, break, and vary their
Course; in like manner as some say, that the Ordinary Flux and Reflux of the
Sea is hindered in those Seas that lie in length, as the Mediterranean does
from East to West. And so likewise might it be said upon the same Foundation,
that there are but two principal opposite Winds or Fluxes of the Air, and that
they would be universally regular, if the Earth were perfectly smooth and
equal, and one part like another every where,

An Answer to the Fourth Question, concerning the Fertility, Riches and Beauty
of the Kingdom of Bengale.
ALL Ages have spoken of Egypt as of the best and fruitfullest part of the
World* and Writers will not grant, there is any Country comparable to it: But
as far as I can see by the two Voyages I have made in the Kingdom of Bengale, I
am of opinion, that that advantage belongs rather to it, than to Egypt. It
bears Rice in that abundance, that it not only furnishes its Neighbors, but
many very remote parts. It Is carried up the River Ganges to Patna; and it is
transported by Sea to Maslipatan, and to many others Ports of the Coast of
Coromandel. Besides, it is sent away into foreign Kingdoms, and principally into
Ceilan and the Maldives. Further, it also abounds in Sugar, so that it
furnishes with it the Kingdoms of Golkonda and Karnates, where there grows but
very little. Arabia also and Mesopotamia are thence provided with it, by the
way of Moka and Baffora; and Persia it self, by Bander-Abassy. Moreover,
Bengale is also the Country of good Con^its, especially in those places where
the Portugueses are, who are dextrous in making them, and drive a great trade
with them. They ordinarily make store of those big Pome-Citrons, as we have in
Europe; and a certain Root, which is longish like Sarfaperilla, and very
delicate; and of that common Fruit of the Indies called Amba, and of Ananas,
and the same Mirobolans, which are excellent; as also of Limons and Ginger.

It Is true, that the Country of Bengale yields not so much Corn as Egypt; but
if that be a defect, it is to be imputed to its Inhabitants that eat very
little Bread, and much more Rice than the Egyptians: Yet it always bears what
is sufficient for the Country, and to afford excellent Biscuits, very cheap,
for the provision of our European Ships, English, Dutch, and Portuguese. You
may there have almost for nothing those three or four kinds of Legumes, which
together with Rice and Butter are the most usual food of the meaner people: And
for a Roupy, which is about half a Crown, you may have twenty good Pullets and
more; Geese and Ducks, in proportion. There are also kids and Sheep in
abundance, and such store of Pork, that the Portugueses, settled there and
accustomed to the Country, live almost on nothing else but that; and the
English and Dutch victual their Ships with it. There is also plenty of many
sorts of Fish, both fresh and falt: And, in a word, Bengale is a Country
abounding in all things; and it is for this very reason, that so many
Portugueses, Mesticks, and other Christians are fled thither from those
quarters, which the Dutch have taken from them. For, the Jesuits and
Augustinians, that have great Churches there, wherein they exercise their
Religion with all freedom, did assure me, that in Ogouli alone there were no
less than eight or nine thousand Souls of Christians; and (which I will easily
believe) that in the rest of that Kingdom there were above twenty five
thousands. And it is this affluence of all those things necessary for life,
joined to the Beauty and good Humor of the Women natives, that has occasioned
this Proverb amongst the Portuguefes, English, and Holanders, viz* That there
are an hundred open Gates to enter into the Kingdom of Bengale, and not one to
come away again.

As to the Commodities of great value; and which draw the Commerce of Strangers
thither* I know not, whether there be a Country in the World, that affords more
and greater variety: For, besides the Sugar I have spoken of, which may be
numbered amongst the Commodities of value, there is such store of Cottons and
Silks, that it may be said, that Bengale is as 'twere the general Magazine
thereof, not only for Indostan or the Empire of the great Mogol, but also for
all the circumjacent Kingdoms, and for Europe it self. I have sometimes stood
amazed at the vast quantity of Cotton-Cloth of all sorts, fine and others,
tinged and white, which the Hollanders alone draw from thence and transport
into many places, especially into Japan and Europe; not to mention what the
English, Portingal and Indian Merchants carry away from those parts. The like
may be said of the Silks and Silk-Stuffs of all sorts: One would not imagine
the quantity, that is hence transported every year; for, this Country furnishes
generally all this great Empire of Mogol as far as Lahor and Caboul, and most
of the other foreign parts, whither Cotton-Cloth is carried. It Is true, that
these Silks are not so fine as those, of Persia, Syria, Said and Barnt; but
then there is also a great difference in the price; and I know from good hands,
that whosoever shall take care of choosing them well, and of getting them well
wrought, may have very good Stuffs made of them. The Hollanders alone have
sometimes seven hundred or eight hundred men of the Natives at work in their
Factory of Kassem-Bazar; as the English and other Merchants have theirs in
proportion.

It is also in Bengale, where that prodigious quantity of Saltpeter is found;
which is so conveniently carried down the River Ganges from Patna, and where
the English and Dutch load whole Ships full for many places of the Indies and
for Europe.

Lastly, it is Bengale, whence the good Lacca, Opium, Wax, Civet, long Pepper do
come; and even Butter is to be had there in so great plenty, that though it be
a gross Commodity, yet notwithstanding it is thence transported into diverse
places.

It cannot be denied that the Air, in regard of Strangers, is not so healthy
there, especially near the Sea: And when the English and Hollanders first came
to settle there many of them dyed; and I have seen in Balasor two very fine
English Ships, which having been obliged, by reason of the War of the
Hollanders, to stay there above a year, were not able to go to Sea, because
most of their Men were lost. Yet since the time that they have taken care and
made orders, as well as the Hollanders, that their people shall not drink so
much Bouleponges, nor go so often a shore to visit the Sellers of Arac and
Tobacco, and the Indian Women; and since they have found, that a little Wine of
Bourdeaux, Canary or Chiras is a mavelous Antidote against the ill Air; there
is not so much sickness amongst them, nor do they now lose so many men.
Bouleponge is a certain beverage made of Arac, that is, of strong water, black
Sugar, with the Juice of Limon water, and a little Muscadine upon it; which is
pleasant enough to the taste, but a plague to the Body and to Health.

As to the Beauty of the Country, you are to know, that all Bengale, taking it
near an hundred leagues in length on both sides of Ganges, from Raje-mehale
unto the Sea, is full of great Channels, formerly cut out of the River Ganges
with vast labor, reaching far into the Country for the convenience of
transporting Commodities, and the Water it self, which by the Indians is
counted the best in the world. These Channels are on both sides lined with
well*peopled Villages and Buroughs of Gentiles, and the large Fields, lying
near them, bear abundance of Rice, Sugar, Corn, Legumes, Mustard, Sezamum for
Oil, small Mulberries of two or three foot high, to feed Silkworms. But then
the vast number of great and small Isles, that are in the midst of Ganges, and
fill all that great space of six or seven days journey, (as there is in some
places of this River from one side to the other;) this gives an incomparable
Beauty to the Country: For, they are very fertile, filled with fruit-bearing
Trees, Ananas's, and all sorts of verdure, and interlaced with a thousand
little Channels, which you cannot see the end of, as if they were so many
Water-mails all covered with Trees. The worst of it is, that many of these
Isles that are next the Sea, are now abandoned by reason of those Corsaires,
the Franguys of Rakan, elsewhere spoken of; and that they have at present no
other Inhabitants but Tigers (which sometimes swim over from one Isle to the
other) and Gazelles, and Hoggs, and Poultry grown wild. And it is upon the
account of these Tigers, that for people traveling between these little Isles
in small boats, as usually they do, it is dangerous in many places to land;
besides, great care is to be had, that the boat, which in the night is fastened
to Trees, be not too near the Bank; for there are now and then some men
surprised; and I have heard it said, that Tigers have been so bold as to come
into the boats, and to carry away men that were asleep, choosing the biggest and
fattest of them, if one may believe the Watermen of he Country.

I remember, I made once a voyage of ten days, from Pipli to Ogouli, between
those Isles and Channels; which I cannot forbear to relate to you, because
there passed not a day without some extraordinary accident. My Chaloupe of
seven Oars was no sooner got out of the River* Pipli, and advanced 3 or 4
leagues into the Sea along the coast, to gain the Isles and the Channels, but
we saw the Sea covered with Fishes like huge Carps, pursued by a Shole of
Dolphins. I made my men row that way, and saw, that most of those Fishes lay
along the Coast as if they were dead; that some advanced a little, others
played and tumbled as if they were drunk. We all labored to take some of them,
and we caught 124 with our hands without any difficulty. Viewing them I
observed, that out of all their mouths there came out a bladder (like those
that are in Carps,) which was full of Air, and reddish at the end. I imagined
easily, that this must be the bladder which kept them from sinking; but I could
not conceive, why it should thus come out of their mouth, unless it were that
they had been long and closely pursued by those Dolphins, and had made so great
an effort to fly away as to make this bladder thus swell, and color, and to
hang out of their mouth. I afterward told this thing to an hundred Seamen,
but they could not believe it, and I never found but one Dutch Pilot, who told
me, that sailing once upon the Coast of China, he had met with the like, and
that presently they put out their Boat to Sea, and took, as I did, with their
hands abundance of Fishes.

The day after, about even, we came among those Isles, and after we had looked
for a place, where 'twas likely no Tigers would come, we landed, made fire,
dressed a couple of Pullets, and our Fish, which was excellent. Presently after
Supper I made my men row until night, and for fear of losing our way between
those Channels in the dark, we retired out of the great Channel, and found a
good shelter in some small Creek, where we fastened our boat to a thick branch
of a Tree, far enough from the Land, for fear of Tigers. In the night, when I
was watching, there fell out a Philosophical accident, of which kind two had
happened to me before in Dehli. I saw a Rainbow of the Moon, which I showed to
all my Company, and which very much surprised two Portuguese Pilots I had taken
into my Boat at the desire of a friend, who had never seen nor heard of such a
thing.

The third day we went astray between these Channels, and if we had not met
with some Portugueses making Salt in one of the Isles, that directed us in our
way, I know not what would have become of us. But behold another Philosophical
accident. In the night, being got again under shelter in a little Channel, my
Portugueses that still were concerned about the Rainbow of the last night, and
whom that Observation had made more curious to behold the Heavens, awakened me,
and showed me another, as fair and as well formed as that was, which I had
showed them. Mean time I would not have you think, that I mistook an Iris or
Rainbow for a Corona, or Crown. There is no month almost but at Dehli these
Lunar Rainbows are seen in the season of the Rains, when the Moon is high above
the Horizon: And I found that it must be so; having seen of them three or four
nights one after another, and sometimes double ones. They were not Circles
about the Moon, but opposite to her, and in the like Position with Solar
Rainbows: And as often as I have seen them, the Moon was Westward, and the
Rainbow Eastward. The Moon was also near full; which in my opinion, is
necessary; because at other times she would not have light enough to form any.
Lastly, these Rainbows were not so white as the Crowns use to be, but much more
colored, insomuch that there might be discerned in them some distinction of
Colors. And thus you see, how I have been more happy than the Ancients, who,
according to Aristotle, had observed none such before him.

The fourth day about evening we retired out of the great Channel, as we used
to do, into a very fair place of safety; but had one of the most extraordinary
nights that ever I knew. There was not a breath of wind, and the Air was so hot
and stuffing that we could scarce breath. The Bushes round us were so full of
those little shining worms, that they seemed to be on fire; and there arose
fires here and there, which were like flames, and frightened my Seamen, who
said, they were Devils. Among the rest there arose two, that were very
extraordinary; one was a great Globe of fire, which in falling and spinning
lasted above the time of saying a Pater noster; and the other, which lasted
about a quarter of an hour, was like a little Tree all in a flame.

The night of the fifth day was terrible and dangerous. There arose so great a
storm, that though we were under the shelter of Trees, and that our small Boat
was well fastened, yet notwithstanding all that, the Wind broke our Cable, and
was casting us into the great Channel, where we had infallibly perished, if I
had not, together with my two Portugueses, presently laid hold on the Branches
of some Trees, where we held fast for above two hours, whilst the storm
lasted: For there was no assistance to be expected from my Indian Oar-men, whom
fright had made incapable to help us in this occasion. But, what was most
troublesome and amazing, there fell a Rain as if it had been poured down with
buckets, which filled our Boat, and was accompanied with such Lightning and
Thunderclaps, very near our head, that every moment we thought we should sink.

The remainder of our Voyage unto the ninth day, when I arrived at Ogouli, we
passed very well and with pleasure; for I could not be satisfied with beholding
such beautiful Countries: Mean time my Trunk and all my Baggage was wet, my
Pullets dead, my Fish spoiled, and all my biscuit drunk with water.

Answer to the Fifth Question, about the Increase of the Nile.
I do not know, whether I shall acquit my self, in respect of this Fifth
Question, as it were to be wished: But I shall faithfully impart to you what I
have set down of it, after I had twice observed the Nile's Increase, and
carefully examined the same, and taken notice withal of some things in the
Indies, which have afforded me greater aids for it, than that Learned Man could
have, that has so ingeniously written of it, though he never saw Egypt but in
his Study.

I have already said in another place, that at the time when the two
Ambassadors of Aethiopia were at Dehli, my Agah Danechmend-kan, who is
extraordinarily curious, sent often for them, to inform himself, in my
presence, of the Condition and Government of their Country; and one day,
amongst other things, we occasioned them to discourse of the Source of the
Nile, which they call Abbabile; whereof they spoke to us as a thing so known
that no body doubted of it, and where one of these Ambassadors, and a
Mogolian, that was returned with him out of Aethiopia, had been in person. They
told us, that it takes its Origin in the Country of the Agaus, and issues out
of the Earth at two big bubling Springs, near one another, which form a small
Lake of about thirty or forty paces long; that at the coming out of this Lake
it is then already a pretty River, and that from place to place it receives
other Rivers which enlarge it. They added, that it runs bending, and forming a
great Pen-insule, and that after several Cascata's from steep Rocks, it falls
into a great Lake, which is not above four or five days journey from its
Source, in the Country of Dumbia or Dembea, three little days journey from
Gonder, the Metropolis of Aethiopia; that having traversed that Lake, it
issues thence swelled with all the waters that fall there, passes through
Sonnar, the principal City of the King of Funges or Barharis, tributary to the
King of Aethiopia, running on and making the Cataracts, and so entering into the
Plains of Messer, which is Egypt.

After we had learned these particularities of the Source and Course of the
Nile, I asked him, (to judge whereabout the Source of the Nile might be)
toward which part of the World they believed the Country of Dumbia, wherein
is Gonder, to be, in respect of Babel-mandel? But they knew not what to answer
to this, but only, that they went always Westward, and especially the
Mahumetan Ambassador, (who was obliged to know better, and to take more Notice
of the Position of the World, than the Christian, because the Turks are obliged
in saying their Prayers to turn themselves toward Mecca) did assure me, that I
was not at all to doubt thereof: Which did astonish me very much, because,
according to their Description, the Source of the Nile should be much on this
side of the Aequinoctial, whereas all our Maps with Ptolomie place it a good
way beyond it.

We also asked them, at what time it did use to rain in Aethiopia, and whether
there were regular Seasons of Rain as in the Indies? To which they answered,
that it rained almost never upon that Coast of the Red Sea, from Su^ken-Arkiko,
and the Isle of Masouva to Babelmandel, no more than it does at Moka, which is
on the other side, in the Happy Arabia; but that in the Heart of the Country,
in the Province of Agaus, and in that of Dumbia and the circumjacent places it
rained much for two of the hottest months of the Summer, and at the same time
when it rained in the Indies; which was also, according to my computation, the
very time of the Increase of the Nile in Egypt. They said further, that they
knew very well; it was the Rain of Aethiopia which swelled the Nile, overflowed
Egypt, and fertilized the ground of it by the slime it carried upon it; and
that it was even therefore, that the Kings of Aethiopia pretended a Tribute to
be due to them out of Egypt, and that, when the Mahumetans made themselves
Masters of it, ill treating the Christians of the Country, they had a mind to
turn the Course of the Nile another way, viz. into the Red Sea, thereby to
ruin Egypt and to render it infertile; but that this design miscarried by
reason of the great difficulties in effecting the thing.

All these particulars, which I had already learned, when I passed over to
Moka, from a dozen Merchants, that come there every year in the name of the
King of Aethiopia to attend the Indian trading Vessels, are considerable to
make us judge, that the Nile increases not but by the Rains which fall without
Egypt toward the Source of that River: But the particular Observations, I have
made upon two Increases of this River, make them yet more so; for, in reference
to all those Stories, that are made of it, as, That it is on a determined day it
begins to increase; that on the first day of its increase there falls a certain
Dew, which makes the Plague cease, so* that no body dies any more of it after
that has once fallen; and that there are peculiar and hidden causes of the
overflowing of the Nile: In reference, I say, to these stories, I have found
during the said two Inundations, that they are but tales fancied and amplified
by the people of Egypt, naturally inclined to superstition, and amazed to see a
River swell in summer in a Country where it rains not: And I have found, that
it is no otherwise with the Nile than it is with other Rivers, that swell and
overflow by plentiful Rains, without any such fermentations of the nitrous soil
of Egypt, which some have suggested as the cause thereof.

I have seen it swelled above a foot, and very turbid, near a whole month
before that pretended determined day of its Increase. I have observed during
its increase, and before the Channels were opened, that when it had grown for
some days a foot or two, it afterward decreased little by little, and then
began to increase a new, and so went on to increase and decrease without any
other measure but that of the Rains that fall nigh the Source, and, as is often
seen in our River Loire, according to the fall of more or less Rain in the
Mountains whence it flows, and the days or half days of fair weather there.

In my return from Jerusalem, going up from Damietta to Cairo, I chanced to be
upon the Nile about a month before the pretended day of the Dew-fall, and in
the morning we were all wet of the Dew fallen in the night.

I have been in Rosette at supper with Monsieur de Bermon, Vice-Consul of our
Nation, eight or ten days after this day of the Dew-fall, when three persons
were struck with the Plague, of whom their died two within eight days, and the
third, which was M. de Bermon himself, had perhaps not escaped, if I had not
pierced his Plague Sore; which presently infected my self like other; so that,
if I had not forthwith taken some Butter of Antimony, I might have been as well
as they, an Example of the little certainty there is in the Plague after the
Dew; but this Emetic Medicine in the beginning of the Evil did wonders, and I
kept but three or four days within doors; during which, I remember, my Bedouin
that served me made no scruple ^o drink, in my presence, the remainder of my
broth, to encourage me, and from his principle of Predestination, to laugh at
the fear we have of the Plague. Yet Experience shows, that after the day of the
Dew the Plague is commonly not so dangerous as before, but the Dew contributes
nothing to that; it is only in my opinion, that then there is a greater opening
of the pores, which gives a vent to the malign and pestiferous spirits, that
were shut up in the body.

Moreover, I have carefully enquired of some Masters of Boats, that had gone up
as far as the end of the Plains of Egypt, that is, to the very Rocks and
Cataracts; who assured me, that when the Nile did overflow in the Plains of
Egypt, where that pretended fermenting Nitrous Earth is, it is at the same time
much swelled between those Mountains of the Cataracts, where, in all appearance
there is no such Nitrous Earth.

Besides, I have made diligent enquiry of those Negro's of Sonnars, that come
to serve at Cairo, and whose Country, being tributary to the King of Aethiopia,
as I have said, lies upon the Nile between the Mountains above Egypt; and they
have assured me, that at the same time when the Nile is high and overflowing in
Egypt, it is so also with them by reason of the Rains then falling in their
Mountains, and higher higher up in the Country of Hab^che or Aethiopia.

The Observations I have made in the Indies, concerning the regular Rains that
fell at the same time when the Nile swells in Egypt, are also very considerable
in this matter, and may make you imagine, that the Indus, Ganges, and all the
other Rivers of those parts are so many Niles, and the Land, that is near their
fall into the Sea, so many Egypts. This was my thought of it in Bengale, and
what follows are the very words I set down about it.

That great number of Isles which are found in the Gulf of Bengala at the Mouth
of the River Ganges, and which by lapse of time are joined to one another, and
at length with the Continent, put me in mind of the Mouths of the Nile, where I
have observed almost the same thing; so that as it is said, after Aristotle,
that Egypt is the Workmanship of the Nile, so it may be said, that Bengale is
the Work of Ganges, only with this difference, that as the Ganges is
incomparably bigger then the Nile, so he carries with him toward the Sea a
far greater quantity of Earth; and so forms greater and more Islands than the
Nile; and that the Islands of the Nile are destitute of Trees, whereas those of
Ganges are all covered with them, because of those four months of constant and
plentiful Rains that fall in the heart of the Summer, and render it needless to
cut Channels in Bengale, to water and enrich the Earth, as they do in Egypt. It
is just so with Ganges and the other Rivers of Indostan, as with the Nile; this
and those increase in Summer by the means of Rain, which ordinarily fall at
that time; except that then, and almost never, there are no Rains in Egypt, but
a little toward the Sea, and that it rains not about the Source of the Nile;
whereas in the Indies it rains in all the Countries, through which any Rivers
pass; except the Kingdom of Scymid toward the Persian, Gulf, where is the
Mouth of the River Indus; it happening that in some years it does not rain
there at all, though for all that the Indus swells there, and the Fields are
watered by the means of cut Channels, just as in Egypt.

For the rest, concerning the desire of M. Thevenot, to impart to you my
Adventures of the Red Sea, of Suez, of Tor, of Mount Sinai, of Gidda (that
pretended Holy Land of Mahomet, half a days Journey distant from Mecca;) as
also of the Isle of Camarane and Louhaya, and of whatever I could learn at Moka
of the Kingdom of Aethiopia, and of the most commodious way to enter into it;
these particulars, I say, I shall in time draw fair out of my manuscripts, if
God permit.

Some Particulars forgotten to be inserted in my first Book, to perfect the Map
of Indostan, and to know the Revenue of the Great Mogol.
TO understand the better what follows, it is requisite to know the
signification of these Terms, viz.

1. Soubah, that is, Government and Province.

2. Pragna, that is, the Principal Town, Borough or Village that has many
others depending from it, where Rents are paid to the King, who is absolute
Lord of all the Land of his Empire.

3. Serkar, that is, the Exchequer of the Kings Treasure.

4. Kazine, that is, Treasure.

5. Roupie, the Money of the Country, equivalent to 29 or 30 pence.

6. Lecque, that is, an hundred thousand Roupies.

7. Courour, that is, an hundred Lecques.

1. Jehan-Abad, or Dehli, is the first Soubah; it has sixteen Serkars in its
dependence, and 230 Pragna's: It yields to the King nineteen Millions and five
hundred and twenty five thousand Roupies.

2. Agra, otherwise called Akher-abad, is the second. It has 14 Serkars, and
260 Pragna's; yielding to the King twenty five millions two hundred and twenty
five thousand Roupies.

3. Lahor has 14 Serkars, and 314 Pragna's, bringing in to the King the Rent
of twenty four millions six hundred ninety five thousand Roupies.

4. Hasmer, which belongs to a Raja, yields to the King a tribute of twenty one
millions nine hundred and seventy thousand Roupies.

5. Gusarate, the Capital whereof is Amadavad, has 9 Serkars, and 190 Praguas;
yielding to the King thirteen millions three hundred and ninety five thousand
Roupies.

6. The Kingdom of Candahar belongs to the King of Persia; but the Pragna's
that remain unit'd to the Crown of the Great Mogol, are 15 and yield in rent
1992500 Roupies.

7. Maloua has 9 Serkars, and 190 Pragna's; bringing in 9162500 Roupies

8. Patna, or Beara, has 8 Serkars, and pays the rent of 9580000 Roupies.

9. Elabas has seventen Serkars, and 260 Pragna's; rendering 9470000 Roupies.

10. Haoud has 5 Serkars, and 149 Pragna's: It yields 6430000 Roupies.

11. Moultan has 4 Serkars, and 96 Pragna's: Brings in 11840500 Roupies.

12. Jagannat, in which is comprehended Bengale, has 11 Serkars, and 12
Pragna's: It yields 7270000 Roupies.

13. Kachemire has 5 Serkars, and 45 Pragna's: Yields 350000 Roupies.

14. Caboul has 35 Pragna's, and brings in 3272500 Roupies.

15. Tata has 4 Serkars and 54 Pragna's, and gives 2320000 Roupies.

16. Aureng-abad, formerly Daulet-abad, has 8 Serkars, and 79 Pragna's: Yields
17227500 Roupies.

17. Varada has 20 Serkars and 191 Pragna's; yielding 15875000 Roupies.

18. Candeys, whose principal Town is Brampour, has 3 Serkars, and 103
Pragna's: It brings in 18550000 Roupies.

19. Talengand, which borders upon the Kingdom of Golkonda on the side of
Maslipatan, has 43 Pragna's, and pays in rent 6885000 Roupies.

20. Baganala, on the Confines of the Lands of the Portugueses, and the
Mountains of Seva-gi (that Raja which plundered Suratte,) has 2 Serkars, and 8
Pragna's; paying the rent of 500000 Roupies.

According to these Particulars, which I take not to be the most exact or the
most true, the Great Mogol's yearly Revenue of his Lands alone would amount to
above two Kourours of Roupies.

A Letter sent from Chinas in Persia, June 10th 1668. To Monsieur Chapelle;
Concerning his Design of repairing again to his Studies, about some Points
relating to the Doctrine of Atoms, and to the Nature of the Mind of Man.
My dear Friend,
I Did always believe what Monsieur Luillier, said, That it would only be a
Transport of Youth, and that you would quit this kind of Life, so much
displeasing to your Friends, and at length return to your Studies with more
vigor than ever. I have been informed from Indostan by the last Letters of my
Friends, that you are now in good earnest, and are going to take a flight with
Democritus and Epicurus, far beyond the flaming Walls of the world, into their
infinite Spaces, to see and victoriously to report unto us what may, and what
may not be done, Et ultra processit long flammantia, etc. to take a Review,
and to fall upon a serious meditation of the nature of those Spaces, the
general Place of things; upon those infinite Generations and Corruptions of
their pretended worlds by their alleged fatal Concourse of Atoms; upon the
Nature, Indivisibility, and other Proprieties of their Atoms; upon Liberty,
Fortune and Destiny; upon the Existence, Unity, and Providence of God; upon the
use of the Parts of Animals; upon the Soul, and all the other sublime matters
they have treated of.

For my part, I cannot condemn this Design, the inclination we have to know,
being natural; on the contrary I am bound to believe, that it belongs but to
great Souls to elevate themselves to such high Enterprises, in regard it is
principally by this means, that a man can make appear what he is, and the
advantage he has above other Animals. But as the highest Undertakings are
commonly also the most dangerous, this certainly is not without much danger.
For though we seem to have a peculiar inclination and affection to Truth; yet
it seems also, that we have another very strong one to Liberty and
Independency, not to acknowledge a Master above us, and to say, to believe and
to do all according to our Fancy, without the fear of any, and without an
obligation to render an account for any thing; so that if we be not upon our
Guard, this latter Inclination will carry away the Bell; and if we stay upon
the Reasons that carry us to this liberty, and content our selves with slightly
considering those that might take us off from it; we shall soon find our selves
engaged in a strange life, or at least be in suspense between both, and tossed
up and down between a 'Tmay be that this is so, and 'Tmay be that it is not so;
lukewarm, or cold, slow, and indifferent to what concerns the End and Rule of
our life.

Moreover methinks, that most Philosophers suffer themselves easily to be
carried away to this vanity of believing, that to entertain Opinions beyond the
vulgar, is the way of being reputed Rare and Excellent Wits; they taking
pleasure even to vent such Opinions as something Mysterious, belonging to none
but men of great Knowledge, and grounded on deep and weighty Reasons; although
they be not too much persuaded themselves of what they affirm. So that if such
men do not take great care on that hand also, they shall not fail to be seized
on by the aforementioned vanity; and whilst they go about to persuade others of
what they are not persuaded themselves, they shall insensibly fall into that
very Belief; like a Liar, who after having often related one and the the same
Untruth, or at last believes it to be a Truth; Or at least they shall in the
end fall into those unquietnesses, may be's, and indifferencies, which I have
mentioned instead of attaining that state of solid tranquillity and sublime
knowledge, which they promised, and wherewith they flattered themselves.

Lastly, there is no doubt, that though we have this inclination to learn, yet
we are withal very lazy; we desire indeed Knowledge and Truth, but we would
have it very cheap, without much Labor and Watching, which are irksome things,
and often disturbing our health, yet necessary evils if we will know thoroughly
the least thing, and make our selves capable to give a soild Judgment thereof.
And thence it comes, that if we be not constantly upon our Guard, and contend
not perpetually with our slothfulness, we shall soon come to flatter our selves
with this belief; That to know things, there needs not so much painful study;
and so not being to resolve upon an uncessant Labor, we suffer our selves to
be easily surprised with that Appearance of Truth, which shines forth in the
Reasons commonly produced by these Gentlemen* called les Esprits sorts; instead
of seriously examining them* that so they may not be made to appear to us
beyond what they contain of strength, nor the force of those that make against
them be hid and disguised; as often enough happens, either by ignorance or
prevention, or else by the vanity and presumption of those persons, that make
it their business to dogmatize; or lastly, by, I know not what, unhappy
pleasure we generally take in suffering things to be exaggerated to us, or in
evaggerating them our selves, tending to nothing else, than pleasantly to
deceive one another.

Thus, my dear Friend* to tell you freely my thoughts of your Design; methinks,
that in Philosophy, and especially in the study of those high matters which you
undertake, there is no middle way: I mean, that either we must, without so much
subliming our Wits, suffer our selves to be sweetly carried away by the
Current, which so many men of good sense, and that are reputed honest persons
and good Philosophers, do follow (which to me seems to be the best and surest,
as well because of the great Labor, this study demands, as of the danger there
is, that in Philosophizing but by halves, and not penetrating things to the
bottom, we get nothing by the bargain but disquieting Doubts, making us unhappy
the rest of our days, and leaving us often very vicious, and uneasy to
Society;) Or else, if we will Philosophize, to do it to purpose, and that,
without fearing the labor, and without suffering our selves to be surprised by
the vanity of coveting to pass for extraordinary Wits, as also without
suffering our selves to be carried away by that unhappy inclination of desiring
to live without a Master and a Law; that, I say, without these, we fall
resolutely upon the study, and from a pure love to Truth, we become obstinate
in weighing and weighing again all that comes before us, in meditating,
writing, conversing, debating; in a word, in forgetting nothing of what may
contribute to improve our understanding, and to render it more intelligent.

As to what at present you demand of me by your last, viz. that I should impart
to you what came into my thoughts when I was discoursing with our
Danechmend-kan, the Learned Gentleman of Asia, about all those matters, you are
now applying your Studies to: I shall tell you freely, and without flattering
my self, that you might address your self to a more intelligent person than me,
but to none, that has studied them with more care, then I have done. For I
have not only contented my self, exactly to weigh the reasons of all that ever
I could come to see of both Ancient and Modern Authors, Arabians also, and
Persians, and Indians; but I have farther conferred an hundred times with
whatever great men I could any where meet with, so far as that I have often
feigned, when I was with those Esprits sorts, as they will be called, that I was
not averse from their Sentiments, to the end that they might conceal nothing
from me. But that being a thing of great prolixity, it will be better, since
you are now on the way to return into Europe, to refer that matter to our
Meeting there, when we shall be able by word of mouth better and more
conveniently to declare our thoughts to one another. Yet notwithstanding, that
I may not seem to be careless of your desire, I shall in the mean time tell you
thus much of the nature of our Understanding, That it seems to me very rational
to believe, that there is something in us more perfect and excellent, than all
that which we call Body or Matter.

You know, according to the Idea that Aristotle has given us of the First
Matter of things, that nothing can be imagined so imperfect, as it. For, in
short, to be nothing but a certain Neque quantum, neque quale, is, methinks, to
approach to a Nothing as near as may be. You know also, that all the
perfections and proprieties, which Democritus and Epicurus attribute to their
Primitive Bodies, or to the first and sole Matter of things, comes in a manner
to this, that there are certain small and very solid Beings, without any
vacuity in them, and indivisible; all having some particular and essential
figure, so that there is an infinite number of round ones, (for example) an
infinity of Pyramidal, an infinity of Square, and infinity of Cubick, Hooked,
Pointed, Triangular ones; and so an innumerable number of other kinds of
different Figures; all moveable of their own nature, and of an unimaginable
Celerity; yet some of them more proper for the sensible motion of Concretions
than others, that is to say, for disengaging and separating themselves, or for
flying sooner and more easily away than others in the dissolution of Compounds,
according as they are more or less small, or more or less round, or more or
less polished and slippery: And lastly, that they are all eternal by their
nature, and consequently all incorruptible and independent (as they pretend;)
though they be without any sense, reason and judgment. You know, I say, that
all the Proprieties of their little Bodies come, very near, to what I have now
said; of which I desire you to be mindful, that so we may hereafter judge,
whether they be capable of what is ascribed to them.

Yet, to take nothing from the force of their Principles, and to undeceive you;
if you believe, I have cast off Atoms, I shall avow to you frankly, that the
more I consider that Division to Infinity of any portion of Finite matter, the
more absurd and unworthy of a Philosopher it seems to me: and I believe the
Reasons, which are alleged to prove it, to be as captious as those, which
Zeno, supposing this same divisibility, brought to prove, that there was no
motion since Mathematical Points, Lines and Superficies, which have no being
but by the Understanding, and are without profundity, ought not to be
transferred and applied to Bodies Physical, which cannot be without all the
dimensions, and are the workmanship of Nature: To which add, that a Philosopher
ought to avoid, as much as is possible, to dive into Infinity, that being a
deep and dark Abyss, which often serves men for nothing else but to hide
themselves, and in which the wit of man is at a perfect loss.

Moreover, I acknowledge, I am still of that opinion, not only, that Atoms are
indivisible, because they are little portions of Matter, or little hard Bodies,
resisting and inpenetrable (proprieties as essential to Matter, as Extension)
and because they are pure, matter continued, without any parts that are only
contiguous, and of which each has its particular and determinate Superfice;
but also that the separation, disjunction or dissociation of parts merely
contiguous in a compound, is, in my judgment, the only division conceivable: so
that it is not possible, not only to divide any Atome, that is, any portion of
matter purely continuous, though we should suppose it as long as a Needle,
since that to divide it with Scissers; for example, or otherwise, you must come
to some penetration, which is inconceivable to us; and that it must needs be,
that something of the Needle, some portion or some part (if it may be said,
that there are parts in a whole, where there are no contiguous ones) do yield,
and yet that it is inconceivable, how it were able to yield to the Scissers that
should press it, or to make other, anteriour ones, yield without penetration;
and that the more, because the parts pressed, and the part of the Scissers that
should press, are both of them of the same Nature and the same force, both
hard, resisting and impenetrable. So that the Doctrine of Atoms has this great
advantage, that it does not so much as suppose its Principles, by demanding to
grant out of mere favor the Indivisibility of the Primitive Bodies; forasmuch
as it even cannot be conceived that they are divisible; nor, how out of soft,
yielding and divisible Principles there should result a Compound that is hard;
nor, how two most subtle portions of Matter, coming to hit one against another,
should not resist each other by their hardness, without reducing themselves
into some dust of smaller Particles. Besides, this Doctrine demands not, to
have it granted out of mere Grace, that there must be little void spaces
betwixt the parts of Bodies compounded, how subtle soever you may devise a
matter to fill them up; seeing it is likewise unconceivable, not only how a
motion should be able to begin in pleno (where all is perfectly full) but how
the parts themselves of this most subtle matter, that must have their
particular figures defined and determined as well as the bigger, can be so
perfectly disposed as that there should not still remain some of those little
Spaces betwixt them.

I shall further acknowledge to you, that I think, it may, in the Atomical way
of Philosophizing, be very well and very rationally conceived, that there is no
compound of so admirable a figure, composition, order and texture of parts,
taking in the Body of Man it self, but that it may be formed by the concourse,
order and particular disposition of their little Bodies, the Atoms, provided
there intervenes a guiding and regulating cause, intelligent enough for that
purpose.

I shall likewise confess, that from their Principles there might result a
Compound so perfect, as to be capable of the most difficult Local Motions that
could be imagined, such as are, To walk like a Living and Animal Substance; as
also, perfectly to imitate the singing, weeping, and all the other local
motions of the most perfect Animals; there being no contradiction at all in it,
all Watches and so many other artificial Engines evincing it, and not suffering
us to doubt of the possibility of the thing.

Lastly, I shall very willingly agree, that the Sect of Democritus and
Epicurus, (it being supposed, that the Atoms are the workmanship of the
Almighty and All-wise hand of God,) has very great advantages above the rest,
in that it can give a more probable reason of a great number of considerable
effects of Nature, where others come short; and in my opinion, there are none
but such as have not examined things thoroughly, and compared other Sects with
it, that can doubt thereof. But to imagine and to persuade my self, that their
Principles, with all those advantages, at length are capable, as they would
have it, by a particular concourse, order, union and disposition, how admirable
soever, and even by an intelligent guidance intervening, to arrive to the
forming of such an Animal as is Man in his operations; This is that, my dear
Friend, which I could never think possible; it has ever appeared to me
contrary to Reason and good Sense, and will doubtless, appear so to you,
provided you have the patience to recollect what you have heard and hundred
times, and which I am now going to repeat to you after my own way.

It is not that I mean to preach to you, and to make you believe I am become a
very good man after my return (a Traveller like my self, and brought up in the
School of Atoms, might possibly do Miracles, which I know not whether men would
believe any thing of;) Be persuaded, that if I take upon me to discourse to
you, it is not out of any vanity or affectation, but from my inmost sense, and
with all possible sincerity. Nor is it, that I pretend, with all this Asiatick
Preamble, to have found any new Reasons in the Indies; expect no such thing, I
pray: I do almost despair as well as Cicero, that men should ever find any
thing more upon this Subject beyond what has been already found. It would be
no hard task for me to show, that all what the Moderns have said concerning it,
is either nothing, or nothing new; There would need no more, than to begin with
taking up again, what Gassendi and Arnault have written about it against Des
Carts, to which I find not, that he has made any Answer: And it were to be
wished, that he had been able to answer them so demonstratively and
magisterially, as it seems he would have men believe he did: I should embrace,
and little less than adore the Author of a Demonstration upon this Argument;
and to such an one the following Verses would be much more deservedly
applicable, than to that ancient Atomist; Qui genus humanum genio superavit,
and omnes
Praestinxit Stellas, exortus uti Aethereus Sol.
I shall therefore desire but one thing of you, which is, That you would please
to make (which seems to me the only thing to be done here) a serious reflection
upon what passes within us, and upon the operations of our Understanding; and
that thereupon you would tell me sincerely, Whether you think, that there is a
proportion between the perfection of those operations, and the imperfection of
what we call Body or Matter; supposing (what you will easily grant me) that how
much soever you strain your mind, you shall never conceive any other thing in
Atoms, and generally in all that is Body or Matter, than those proprieties
already enumerated, Size, Shape, Hardness, Indivisibility, Motion; or, if you
will (which matters not here) Softness and Divisibility.

I promise my self, that you will readily grant me this Request, which is, to
go over again those ingenious and agreeable thoughts of yours, that have been
drawn out of your Memories; and those many other Fragments of the same force of
Wit, that have been left behind, and generally all those other Poetical
Transports and Raptures of your Homer, Virgil, and Horace, which seem to have
something of Divine in them: And you will not refuse in that serenity of mind
and Philosophical temper, wherein sometimes you are in the Morning, to make
some reflection upon four or five things, that seem to me to deserve very well
the attention of a Philosopher. The first is, That our Senses are not only
struck by Bodies so, as the Eyes of a Statue or an Automaton, but that we feel
their impression, the titillation and pain, and that even we perceive that we
feel, when we say, I perceive that this or that pleases my taste much more or
much less than ordinarily; that my pain is much less or much more than it was;
and so of an hundred things else. The second, That often we stay not there, but
deduce these particular Conclusions; We ought therefore to follow this; or we
ought to shun that: And afterward, these general ones; All what is good, is to
be followed; and all what is evil, is to be avoided. The third, That we
remember what is passed, and consider what is present, and foresee what is to
come. The fourth, That sometimes we endeavor to penetrate into our selves,
into that which is inmost in us, as I now do, when I am searching what I am;
what is this Reasoning power that is within me; what are these thoughts; these
ratiocinations, and these reflections I make, reflecting thus upon my self and
my Operations. The fifth, That being resolutely set to meditate upon a thing,
we sometimes make new Discoveries, find new Reasons, or at least see those that
have been found already, weighing them, and comparing one with another, and
sometimes drawing thence such Consequences, as shall depend from a greater
number of antecedent Propositions, which may be seen as 'twere in one view, and
concur all to deduce such a Conclusion; as it comes to pass in all Sciences,
especially the Mathematics; wherein our Spirit shows I know not what force and
admirable extent.

These few reflections might suffice for what I demand of you; and that the
rather, because as I can say more comes almost to the same thing. But you must
resolve for once to endure the Style of these Countries of Asia, the Air of
which I have breathed so long, and to have the patience further to cast your
Eyes on a thing that seems to me very considerable, which is, That we know not
only particular things that make impression upon our Senses, but that our
Understanding, by I know not what admirable force and capacity, takes occasion
to know and to form to it self Idea's of a thousand things, that fall not
immediately and wholly as they are under the Senses; for example, that Man is a
Reasonable Animal; that the Sun is much bigger than the whole Earth; that it is
impossible, one thing should be at the same time and not be; that two things,
being equal to a third, are equal among themselves; that the absence of the Sun
causes the Night, that all what is generated is subject to corruption; that of
nothing nothing can be naturally made; as not any thing that is, can naturally
return to nothing; that of necessity there is something Eternal and Un-created
in the Universe, God, or the first Matter of things, or both, or that God
created this Matter, and that either from all Eternity or in Time: And an
infinity more of other great and vast thoughts, and remote from Matter, of
which we scarce know by what door they have entered into our Mind.

Now, all these actions, I have been speaking of, that argue so great a force
and power, capacity and extent of the Mind of Man; all those intern Motions;
that peculiar State which we cannot perfectly explain, but yet plainly feel and
perceive in our selves, when we attentively reflect on what passes within us,
and consider our operations; All those Actions, I say, and interior Motions,
or whatever you will call them, can they indeed to be ascribed to Spirits, to a
Wind, to Fire, to Air, to Atoms, to Particles of a Subtle Matter, and, in a
word, to any thing that has no other Qualities or Proprieties than what can be
comprised under this word, Body, how small and fine and nimble soever it may
be, into what texture or disposition soever it may be cast, and of what motions
soever it may be made capable? It cannot: we shall never be able to imagine
that these things are mere Local Motions of some Engine barely Artificial,
dead, insensible, without Judgment, without Reason: These can never be any of
those inward actions I have mentioned, as, That I see or know that I know; that
I see I reason; that I see those reasonings, and perceive that I see them.

Moreover, let us a little cast our Eyes upon some of the main Propositions of
Euclid, (not to speak of those of Archimedes, Apollonius, and so many others;)
For my part, when I think only on the 47 th. of the 1st. of Euclid, I there
find something so great and noble, that I avow to you, I can hardly believe
that it was an Humane Invention: So that I should imagine, that it was
therefore that Pythagoras, after he had been so happy as to find this
incomparable Proposition, was so ravished and transported, that he made that
famous Sacrifice to thank the Gods, and had a mind to declare thereby, that
this Invention surpassed the reach of an Humane Understanding.

Yet I would not therefore say, that there is reason to believe, that in Man
there is a particle of Divinity, or some such thing. This is an unreasonable
Tenet of some Stoics, and of the Cabalists of Persia, and of the Brachmans of
India, who, to acknowledge openly the Nobleness and Perfection of the Spirit of
Man, chose rather to cast themselves into this extremity, than to believe it to
be so base and imperfect, as to be all Body and Matter. I am far from
entertaining such a Sentiment; you will see in the Letter to Mounsieur
Chapelain, that I cannot believe this to be an opinion defensible by a
Philosopher: But this I do, I observe in Man, as well as those Stoics and
others, something so perfect, so great and high, that their opinion seems to me
an hundred times less absurd, than that, which holds that in Man, and even in
the whole Universe, there is nothing but Body, but bodily and local Motions,
but Atoms, but Matter.

Lord! When I think on it, who is that man, how little of good sense soever he
may have, that can persuade himself, that when an Archimedes, a Pythagoras, and
others of those great men, had those effects of the Mind, and were in their
deep Meditations, there was then nothing in their Heads and Brains but what was
Corporeal, nothing but Vital and Animal Spirits, nothing but a certain Natural
Heat, nothing but Particles of a very subtle Matter, or nothing but Atoms,
which, though they be Insensible, and without all Understanding and Reason, and
do not so much, (according to the Doctrine of the Atomists,) as move but by a
fatal and blind motion and hit, should yet come to move and concur so luckily
and wonderfully, that, as once by such a concourse they had formed the Head of
those Great men, such as it is with those innumerable Organs so industriously
ordered and disposed; so also they should then be so lucky as to form and
produce those subtle thoughts, and profound meditations; or rather that they
should come to move themselves in all those Organs in so wonderful a manner, as
at last to fall into a certain Order and into a certain Disposition and State,
so mavelous, that they themselves were that Conceiving, Seeing, Meditating,
those admirable Propositions, and those Divine Inventions?

Add to this, when we find our selves, upon some Affront, or other Displeasure
received, ready to fall into Choler and Rage, and yet stop our Passion; I pray,
this internal Commander and Command, which we feel, this kind of Obedience, of
moderation and retreat, that is made, for example, upon the account of some
consideration of Honesty, of Honor and Virtue, and against that natural
Inclination we have to be revenged; what is that interior motion and state?
Can it be rationally said, that it is nothing but some Rollings,
Counter-motions, Reflections, and peculiar conjunctions and textures of Atoms
or Spirits, or of little Masses or Particles of Matter, which are made within
those Nerves, those fine Membranes, those very subtle Channels and Organs of
the Brain, Heart, and other parts of the Body? These are pure Chimera's.

A word more concerning Liberty: When in the apprehension of taking an ill part
for a good, we keep our selves in a poyse, seeking within our selves all the
reasons that are for and against, and seriously pondering and examining them;
this apprehension, this research, this ballancing, and the resolution we at
last take to do or not to do the thing; all that, all those motions, all that
inward state and way of Being (I speak in no other terms than they) shall it be
nothing but a fortuitous and blind concourse of little Bodies? Is It possible
that you can imagine or persuade your self this? Lucrece himself, that sworn
Partisan of the Epicurean Sect, could not do it, nor resolve to attribute to
Atoms alone those free motions of the Will. For if the Will, says he, is drawn
away from fatality, and raised above Destiny, E^ fatis avulsa voluntas, etc.
How can he, with all his clinamen or deviation of Principles, have believed in
good earnest and without scruple, that there is nothing but Body, and nothing
done in us, more than elsewhere, but by a natural, eternal, independent,
immutable and inevitable concourse of Atoms? He was not ignorant, that that
being so, neither the Will, nor any other thing whatsoever could be drawn and
exempted from that concatenation and eternal and inmmutable Sequel of Motions
and Causes, that would follow and succeed one another by eternal Orders
absolutely necessary and unchangeable.

Besides all this, I could put you in mind of many Reasons that are wont to be
alleged upon this Subject. You know that great man, who has collected more of
them than a score of very good ones. But that would be to abuse your Patience
too much* and besides I see not, that there is much more of any importance to
be considered hereupon, than what I have lately represented unto you.

I could also tell you, how I judge that all Objections, made upon this point,
may be most rationally answered; but I know, that you are not a person, for
whom Books are to be made. I shall only mention two things to that purpose.

The first is, That it is true what they say, That Eating, Drinking, Health;
Natural Heat, the Spirits, and a good Disposition of Organs, (all which are
natural things, and as they speak, depending from Atoms as Principles and the
first Matter) are things necessary to all those Thoughts, Reasonings and
Reflections; and, in a word, to all those Internal Operations I have mentioned.
This is a thing that cannot be denied, and which every one does too sensibly
experiment not to aver it: But thence to conclude, that whatsoever intervenes
and concurs to form those Operations, is only and merely Body, Atoms, Spirits,
Subtle Matter, is that which, after the least Reflection made upon their
Excellency, and upon the imperfection of Bodies or Atoms, or upon the little
resemblance there is in their Qualities to those Operations, can never with any
good sense be granted: So that, methinks the most that might be allowed, would
be, that the Atoms, and Spirits, and all those other things alleged, are
indeed necessary as conditions or dispositions, or the like, and not as the
first and absolute Principles, and as the Total cause of the Operations; but
that there is requisite some other thing than all that, something nobler,
higher, and more perfect.

The second thing is, That it is true also, that we cannot form a right, or, as
they speak, a next and positive Idea of what is above a Body or of any thing
that is not Body: This, indeed, we cannot do, in my opinion, whilst we are in
this mortal state so strictly united to the Body; the dependence of the Bodily
Senses, that so much confine and obscure the light of our Understanding,
hinders us from it: But I see not that thence it is to be concluded, that
therefore there is really nothing above Body, or Atoms, or Matter. For, how
many things are there, of which we have no such positive Idea, which yet Reason
obliges us to avow that they have a real Being? Or rather, how few things are
there, of which we have any True Idea's? Have these Philosophers themselves any
positive Idea of their Atoms? They acknowledge that their smalness is such,
that it cannot be so much as imagined by hearing this word Atom pronounced or
explained: so far are they from being capable to fall under our senses, and
from imprinting in us a true and positive Idea; and yet notwithstanding they
believe, and conclude from Reason, that they are. A Mathematician, has he the
positive Idea of the Magnitude of the Sun? It is so prodigious, and so far
remote from the capacity of the Senses, that we are not able even so much as to
imagine it such as it is; and yet for all this, there is none that is not fully
persuaded and convinced thereof by the force of Demonstrations, and that knows
not perfectly, that he exceeds by far the bigness of the Globe of the Earth.
And besides, it is not true, that the nature of a thing may be known two manner
of ways; either positively, as when it falls under some one or more of our
Senses, or as when we give a positive Definition thereof; or negatively, by
saying what it is not: Now I shall grant, that we are not capable to know the
Principle of our Operations or Ratiocinations by the first way, to say what it
is, and how those Operations are made and produced. Alas! we are not so happy;
we should need other Senses far more perfect than all those we have. We are not
born to dive and Philosophize so far: Invida praeclusit speciem natura videndi.
But we ought also to acknowledge, that at least we are capable to know it after
the second way: So that, if we cannot say truly and positively what it is, we
can at least say, and certainly know what it is not: I mean, that from the
perfection of the Operations, which we do evidently see to be such as that they
have no proportion with all those proprieties and perfections of Atoms, and do
universally surpass the reach of what is merely Body; we can deduce a certain
Conclusion, that the Principle of such Operations, and those Operations
themselves must needs be something above all that is Body or Corporeal. Which is
here sufficient for me, who at the beginning engaged my self no further, and
pretend not, that we can make a true and positive Idea of that Principle; but
only that we can and ought to conclude by Ratiocination, that there must needs
be something, as has been said, that is far more perfect and far more noble
than all that is in the rank of Bodies, whatever its being or Nature may be.

But shall I make an end, fully to discover unto you my thought? You well know,
whether I am a person that takes pleasure in vaunting, or in forging Untruths,
or to speak things at random in a matter so important as this. It cannot be
denied, that there is a very great difference between the Operations of Brutes,
and those admirable Operations of Man, of which we now treat: I speak not only
in respectof those of their outward senses, but also in reference to those of
their inward ones, or their Imagination. All that is so much beneath the
Reasoning of man, that we must avow, there is not any proportion, and that
those of Man proceed from a very differing and infinitely more perfect
Principle. Notwithstanding all that (and this is the thought I would declare to
you) I should think that person an hundred times less absurd, that should go
about to maintain, that in the Principle of those Operations of Brutes, whether
it be of their internal or even their external Senses, there were somewhat more
perfect than Corporeity and all that may be understood and comprehended under
the name of Body, or Matter, or Spirits; than him, that should pretend the
Principle of the Operations of Man were merely Corporeal: So much do I take
this Opinion to be out of all reason, and unworthy of a man of good Judgment.
Certainly it can be no serious Philosophy; it can be nothing but an Excess of
Vanity, that has cast those Philosophers, we have spoken of, into such an
irrational Extreme. They doubtless saw, that their Sect had great Advantages
above all the rest, in being able to explain with much Ease and Probability
abundance of the most considerable Effects of Nature, only by Local Motion, and
the Order and particular Disposition of their Matter, Corpuscles or Atoms: And
thence they would make us believe, that by the same Principles they could give
an account of all, and explicate whatever concerns the Spirit of Man, and the
Operations thereof.

My Dear Friend, have not you and I concluded an hundred times, that how much
soever we strained our Understanding, we could never conceive, how from
Insensible Corpuseles there could ever result any thing Sensible without the
intervention of any thing but what is insensible; and that with all their Atoms,
how small and how nimble soever they make them, what motions and figures soever
they give them, and in what order, mixture or disposition they range them, yea
and whatever industrious hand they assign them for guidance, they would never
be able (still supposing with them, that they have no other proprieties or
perfections than those recited) to make us imagine, how thence could result a
Compound, I say not, that should be Reasoning like Man, but that should be
merely Sensitive, such as may be the vilest and the most imperfect Worm on
Earth. How then dare they pretend, that they will make it out, how thence can
result a thing Imagining, a thing Reasoning, and such an one as shall be the
Imaginations and Ratiocinations themselves?

For my part, if you will believe me, let us lay aside all that presumption and
vanity of those Esprits forts; let us not pretend to be able to explicate the
nature of the Principle of our Reasonings in the same manner, as we might do
the other things that fall under our Senses, and let us not play the Geometers
upon it. We are not, as I have already said, happy enough for that; it is a
thing which cannot be done in this mortal state, and in this great dependence
from the corporeal senses in which we stand. Yet notwithstanding we ought to
form a higher Idea of our selves, and not to make our Soul to be of such base
alloy, as those Philosophers, too corporeal in this point, would have us do. We
ought to believe for certain, that we are infinitely more noble and more
perfect than they make us, and resolutely maintain, that though we cannot
exactly know what we are, yet we know very well and very certainly, what we are
not; which is, that we are not altogether of Mire and Dirt, as they pretend.
Farewell.

FINIS.
THE PREFACE.
THE World being an ample Volum, in whose Extent and Varieties the Framer's
Wisdom and Attributes are manifestly read and set out, it seems that great
Travelers are the best Scholars and Proficients in this Book; since on's
Native Country is but as a single Leaf, where all the Singularities are not to
be seen which are found in the other.

-- Non omnis fert omnia Tellus. And the truth of it is, those Ancient
Philosophers, who have first laid the Foundations of Arts, Sciences, and
Commonwealths in the World, were Travelers into these very Eastern Parts,
(partly described by us here) whence they brought home all their Knowledge; it
being here that Man and Knowledge it self had their first beginning. So that
wise Travelers are not unlike those rich laden Vessels which through many
dangers bring wholesome and profitable Cargo's, Drugs, and other Conveniences,
to be dispersed among the several Societies of their ow^ Country: They are
like those diligent Master Bee^, who run diver^ miles t^ extract out of many
bitter Herbs that sweet Liquor, which they afterward kindly refund to be
enjoyed at home in common, in the hardest Seasons of the Year, by their
Fellows. What costs them dear, others have it cheap: And there is scarce any
Private Persons in the Commonwealth, to whom we owe greater Honor and Thanks,
than to Worthy Travelers and Discoverers of Foreign Countries.

Yet it may be truly said, That Ancient Travelers and Geographers have but as
course Lininers and Coast-Drivers, drawn a very rough Draught in their
Relations of those Countries they described unto us, in comparison of some
later Writers, who also sometimes do but copy their Predecessors Stories; and
Merchants, with most other Travelers, are weather-driven by their private
Occasions or Misfortunes, to take but a Cursory Survey of Places, and so give
but an answer able account of the same to the World.

But among all the Ancient and Modern Travelers, none had such fair
Opportunities and Advantages as the Illustrious Monsieur Tavernier had, to make
a true, profitable, and exact Relation of the Singularities of those Remote
Parts of Asia, where he past so many Years in great Splendor, as shall appear
by the ensuing Considerations and Qualifications of a good Traveller.

1. He from his Youth had a strong Inclination to Travel, which secret Instinct
is certainly a Preordination of God for an Undertaking; and this unseen
Impulsion carries such extraordinary Instruments cheerfully and prosperously
through all the Difficulties, others of a contrary disposition would never wade
thorough, for whom it would be in vain to strive against the current of Nature.

2. This Traveling Genius made him begin early to fit himself for his design,
and soon to go about it. He was therefore sufficiently imbued in his
Intellectuals with all due knowledge of Sciences, Language, and Geography, and
precedent Travelers Maps and Books, without all which common Travelers cannot
conceive so soon and so orderly, nor reap so much benefit for themselves or
others.

3. But Speculations without Experience are but unprofitable Notions; and the
Experiments of this kind are not to be had without great Means and Expense, for
want of which many a good Undertaking is Still-born. Haud facile emergunt,
quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi --
is an old and true Saying. But our noble Tavernier had an ample Estate, drove
a great Trade, had Money in abundance, and a Prince's or Embassador-like
Retinue, without which and great Presents none is scarce looked upon in
Luxurious Asia, fit for admittance into great and worthy Companies, where
Knowledge may be attained; so that he thereby soon got into the Presence,
Familiarity, and Closets of the Emperors, the Ministers of State, and the
Philosophers of Persia, Mogol, etc. and got into the Acquaintance and
Conversations of the leading and common Merchants, Traffiquers, and People; and
knew their Languages very well: for it is in vain to have Eyes, if one have not
also a Tongue in such cases.

4. And whereas Learning and Riches do sometimes render narrow Souls of a more
proud and unsociable temper, Monsieur Tavernier is by Nature and Education, and
obliging, cheerful, and insinuating Traveller, and of a graceful Countenance.
Comely Personages are beloved almost as soon as they are seen; and those that
have but fair Souls, are not so till after they are known. Now Monsieur
Tavernier having both these Advantages, had a free entrance into the Friendship
and Notions the Indians (great or small) had concerning the Natural,
Mechanical, Political, Religious, and Trading State of their own Country;
which he made more his business to know, than to grow more rich. And at some
times he would reckon Thousands of Pounds as nothing to attain his ends in this
point of Knowledge and further Experience; as the perusal of this his own Work,
and Persons now in London, that knew him in and after his Travels, can fully
testify.

5. Moreover, Mutual Help of Persons equally understanding and curious, is a
great advantage in such Researches and Observations as these. Now John Baptista
Tavernier, besides many other Heads and Hands, had herein the Assistance of a
Brother, as complete a Traveller as himself in those furthest Parts of Asia,
and had no less the foregoing Qualifications in Person and Estate than this his
Brother John Baptista had, as the Reader may well perceive by this Volum of
Travels.

6. And as for the Time; Six Voyages, and about Forty Years Abode in those
Countries they do describe, did render these Brethrens Knowledge vast, their
Experiments tried over and over, and this their Account more sure and exact (as
I said) than that of any other Traveller heretofore.

7. And finally, to confirm the undoubted Credit that is to be given to this
Nobleman and his Relation, (who is above all design of Flattering or Deceiving
the Reader) you may meet with several Worthy Persons in this City and the Court
of England; and I my self, who was at Paris some few years ago at Monsieur
Tavernier's Arrival, and who can witness the grand Esteem, the solemn Honors
and Thanks, that were then given him by Persons of all Ranks and Degrees, the
French East India Company's Admiration and Recommendation of him, that he had
done his King and Country more Credit in those proud Eastern Courts than ever
any did before him; the French King's employing of him there; the Rarities he
brought home to the Learned; the vast Riches and Memoirs he gained for himself,
and the incomparable Jewels and Singularities he brought to the French King;
the Titles of Lord and Baron conferred upon him extraordinarily, though he were
a Merchant and a strict Protestant. These (I say) Public and Private
Testimonials do show what Credit other Nations and his own (which is Singular)
had given to him. But in a word his own Observations herein gathered will prove
it better.

But if any desire to have some Account of the Work it self, the Newness,
Profit, and Satisfaction the very Subject must needs yield to all Persons and
Professions cannot but be acceptable.

The Naturalist shall have Plants, Minerals, Animals, and Phoenomena's never
seen in our Climate. And about Physic, the Law, Music, and Poetry, more Time
and Trials are required in those Countries than here; and you shall accordingly
read of Cures done that draw near to natural Miracles.

The Divine will see things worth his Observation in their Religion and Morals,
wherein they may confound the very Christians; whereof I Will only touch but
thus much: That by the Light of Nature those Heathens own a Supreme Deity, and
a Future State of Happiness and Torments; and do in view of the same most
strictly keep the Civil and the Ten Moral Commandments, much answer able to
ours, which their Prophets have left to them. So that they punish Murder and
Adultery even in Tunquin chapter 7. p. 18.
Princes and Princesses; terrible Examples whereof you may here read at large.
And the Church and State Government are subservient in a Subordination, the one
being a Prop to the other.

Even Statesmen may find Subject of weighty consideration, in the Antiquity,
Model, and Exactness of their Government. As for instance: Though they have a
special regard to Monarchy, so as to keep the Succession within the same Line;
yet the Tunquin c. 11. p. 35.
Great Constable, and the King's Council have Power left them to propose and
choose the fittest Person among the Royal Children, or Collateral Successors,
who is nominated in the King's Lifetime, to prevent after Disturbances. They
have also on the other side very singular and unimitable ways to prevent the
Insurrections, Divisions, and Rebellions of the Militia and the People.

But above all, the Traveller and Traffiquer into those Parts will be like to
run into a thousand Inconveniences, and Losses of Health, Life, and Estate,
without being guided by such Directions as he carefully gives herein, which
others cannot possibly so soon and so well know.

It is in fine herein declared, by what means the French, Holland, and Portugal
East India Companies were Settled, Improved, and Worsted in those Countries;
also the Coinage, and the Reduction thereof to ours; the particular places
where all sorts of East India Commodities are best and cheapest had; the Rates
and Exchange Returns are here to be found; the manner how to know their
Falsifications in Gold, Silver, Jewels, Drugs, Silks, Linen, and all the other
Merchandises which are brought from those Nations are here set down: It being
otherwise hard or impossible to escape the Cheats of the Persians, Chinese,
and Japoners, without such Instructions.

I Will say no more, but that in this Work was employed the Help of another
Worthy Gentleman, who labored in the first Volum of Tavernier's Translation;
but it was brought to an end and perfection by me, who had the occasion to be
more particularly acquainted with Monsieur Tavernier himself, his Native
Tongue, and other Particularities abroad.

Edmund Everard.

The TABLE to Tavernier's Volum of Japon, China, and Tunquin, etc.
A Relation of Japon, and of the cause of the Persecution of the Christians in
those Islands. page 1. A Relation of what passed in the Negotiation of the
Deputies which were sent to Persia and the Indies, as well on the behalf of the
French King, as of the French Company, for the settling of Trade. 26
Observations upon the Trade of the East Indies. 51 Of the Commodities which are
brought as well out of the Dominions of the Great Mogul, as out of the Kingdoms
of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighboring Territories. And also of the
Weights and Measures of the said Commodities. 57 Chap. 1. A discourse in
general concerning the City of Tunquin, and of the manner how the Author came
to have knowledge thereof. 1 Chap. 2. Of the Situation and Extent of the
Kingdom of Tunquin. 5 Chap. 3. Of the Quality of the Kingdom of Tunquin 7 Chap.
4. Of the Riches, Trade, and Money of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 13 Chap. 5. Of
the Strength of the Kingdom of Tunquin by Sea and Land 14 Chap. 6. Of the
Manners and Customs of the People of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 16 Chap. 7. Of the
Marriages of the Tunquineses, and their Severity toward Adulteresses. 18 Chap.
8. Of the Visits, Feasts, and Pastimes of the Tunquineses. 21 Chap. 9. Of the
Learned Men in the Kingdom of Tunquin. 24 Chap. 10. Of their Physicians, and
the Diseases of the Tunquineses. 28 Chap. 11. Of the original Government and
Policy of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 31 Chap. 12. Of the Court of the King of
Tunquin. 38 Chap. 13. Of the Ceremonies observed when the Kings of Tunquin are
advanced to the Throne. 40 Chap. 14. Of the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of
Tunquin, and of their manners of burying their Dead. 46 Chap. 15. Of the
Religion and Superstition of the Tunquineses. 49 Chap. 1. Of the Island of
Formosa, and how the Hollanders possessed themselves of it, and how it was
taken from them by the Chinese. 57 Chap. 2. Of Maurice Island, where they cut
Ebony. 61 Chap. 3. Of the Grandeur of the General at Batavia, and what befell
his Wife and his Niece. 65 Chap. 4. Of General Vanderbroug, and of the Original
of the City of Batavia. 69 Chap. 5. Of the Country about Cochin, and how the
Holland General crowned one of the Indian Princes. 74 Chap. 6. Of the Sieur
Hollebrand Glins, President of the Factory at Ormus. 77 Chap. 7. Touching the
Islands of the Prince. 79 Chap. 8 How the Hollanders sent to declare War
against the Persians, and of the ill success of their Fleet. 80 Chap. 9. Of the
Severity of the Holland Commanders in the Indies. 83 Chap. 10. Touching the
Women. 85
Tunquin page

The Order of the March of the Queen Mother and Reigning Queen of Tunquin when
they go abroad out of the Palace.



A New and Particular RELATION Of the KINGDOM of TUNQUIN: With a MAP of the
COUNTRY and several FIGURES.
CHAP. I.
A Discourse in general concerning the City of Tunquin, and of the Manner how
the Author came to have knowledge thereof.
THE Kingdom of Tunquin has been long unknown to the People of Europe; neither
have they, who have given us Relations thereof, well understood the Country, as
having trusted too much to defective and fabulous Descriptions and
Observations. Not that I am willing to be over severe in censuring; but
submissively I am bold to affirm, That this which I here make Public was
extracted out of my Brother's Writings, of which I had the overlooking in my
second Voyage that I made to the Indies; and of which I was the more confident,
for that the Author had been one who had made Eleven or Twelve Voyages from
Batavia, Bantam, and Achem, to Tunquin. Other Observations I collected from the
Tunquinesi themselves, with whom I have had several Discourses, during the time
that I was at Batavia and Bantam, where they principally trade. And that which
gave me the more light was this, That those Merchants several times bring along
with them some of their Bonze's or Priests, as also some of their Learned Men
to teach their Children to Write and Read. For these Merchants when they make a
Voyage by Sea, carry all their Families along with them. And from these Bonze's
and other Learned Men I had several Observations and Memoirs in Writing, as
being desirous to be informed by me of the Government and Situation of our
France. And as I was never without an Atlas and some other particular Maps,
they were ravished with admiration, when I showed them the Structure and
Composure of the whole World, and the Situation of its several Kingdoms and
Estates.

Therefore may the Reader with the more pleasure and delight peruse these
Relations, when he has so much reason to be persuaded that they are cordially
done, and that they are made public by a person whose sincerity has no design
to abuse him. My Brother, who was a person both cunning and courageous, and one
that loved to Travel as well as my self, having heard much talk in the Indies
of the Grandeur of the Kingdom of Tunquin, resolved to go thither, and as he
had a particular gift to learn a Language in a little time, he soon grew
familiar with the Malaye, which is the Language of the Learned in those
quarters of Asia, as Latin is among Us in Europe. He understood that Silk,
Musk, and other Commodities of the like nature, were much cheaper there then in
other places adjoining, and that the People dealt with more fairness and
honesty. Upon the encouragement of which Information he prepared a Ship, and
made his Voyages with good success.

He always carried with him a good Sum of Money; and more then that, he stored
himself with a considerable number of small Curiosities, to present the King
and his Nobility, according to the general Custom of all the Eastern Countries:
Thus he came to be well received the first time that he set foot in the
Country; so that the Customer being by him obliged with a small Clock, a pair
of small Pistols, and two Pictures, which were the Pictures of two Curtesans,
immediately gave notice to the King of his arrival. Thereupon having order to
attend the Court, and coming to kiss the King's hands, the whole Assembly was
surprised to hear a Stranger, born in a Country so far distant, speak the
Malaye Language so fluently. The King gave him a favorable reception, and
kindly received the Present which he brought along with him. It was a very
noble Sword, of which the Handle and Hilt were all over enchac'd with Rubies
and Emraulds, with a Backsword Blade. To this he added a pair of Pistols,
adorned and inlaid with Silver, a Persian Saddle and Bridle, embroidered with
Gold and Silver, a Bow and Quiver full of Arrows, and six Pictures, like those
which he had given the Customer. These things highly pleased the King, who
presently drew forth the Sword out of the Scabbard, the better to look upon and
consider it. At length one of his Sons took it up, to try whether it would fit
his hand as well as those of his own Country, and offered to make a blow. My
Brother, seeing the young Prince handle the Weapon gracefully enough, after the
manner of the Country, told the King, that if he pleased, he would show the
King how they handled that Weapon in France, of which the King readily
consented to be a Spectatour.

This was my Brother's first Reception at Court; for he made several Voyages to
Tunquin, and every time that he returned, they still the more and more
obligingly entertained him. But that which fixed him more in the good opinion
and favor of the King and Lords of the Court, was his frolic and gentile
behavior in playing with them for several large Sums, insomuch that being one
that ventured deep, he lost above 20000 Crowns in one Voyage. However the King,
who was a generous Prince, would not suffer him to be a loser, but gave him
those considerable Presents that supplied his losses. By means of my Brother's
thus long so journing in Tunquin, and the familiar acquaintance which he had at
Court, together with the Trade which he drove in the Kingdom, as he was
diligent to inform himself of all the Curiosities of the Country, it was easy
for me upon the same foundation to lay the Structure of these Memoirs. Though I
may safely say, I was no less laborious in my own particular, and by the
frequent Discourses which I had with a great number of the Tunquineses, with
whom I met both at Bantam and Batavia that came thither to Trade, and whom I
often treated at my own Expenses, to inform my self of the particular
Ceremonies and Customs of their Country.

Thus you see the Grounds and Foundations of this Relation, which is both
faithful and exact, and by which that noble Country, of which the Descriptions
hitherto have been so obscure and uncertain, shall be truly discovered and set
forth, such as it is; declaring withal, that no other Consideration or
Interest, then that of speaking truth, has incited me to undertake this
Description.

For the better observation of a right Method in pursuance of this Relation,
and to conduct the Reader gradatim to the more perfect knowledge of this
Kingdom, I will speak first of its Situation, its Extent, and its Climate. Next
I shall come to discourse of its Qualities, its Riches, and its Trade, which
are the three Springs and Sources of the Strength and Force of a Nation. Next I
shall give an Account of the Customs and Manners of the People as well in their
particular Economy and Civil Society, as in relation to their Marriages, their
Visits and Festivals. Next to this we shall give a brief Account of the
Learning, and learned Men, and among them of their Physicians, and the Subject
of their Art, that is to say, of the Diseases particular to the Country. We
shall also give a Relation of the Original of the Government and Policy of the
Kingdom of Tunquin, of the Condition of the Court, of the Inauguration and
Funerals of their Kings, and in the last place of the Original of the
Inhabitants.

And I dare engage, that the Map of the Country, and the Cuts which were drawn
upon the place, will no less contribute to the Divertisement of the Reader,
then to the Explanation of the Matter which they contain.

CHAP. II.
Of the Situation and Extent of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
WE shall have the less reason to admire wherefore our Predecessors had so
little knowledge of this Kingdom, when we consider that having formerly been a
considerable part of China, the Inhabitants in the same manner as the Chinese
did, kept themselves close within their own bounds, never minding to have any
Commerce with other People, whom they contemned and looked upon as Barbarians
come from the other part of the World. But now that they find that Strangers
come to find them out in their own Territories, they begin to see that other
People have as good Government as themselves; which has bred in them a desire
to Converse and Trade with Foreigners; so that now they associate themselves in
friendly manner with all other People, as I have observed them to do both at
Batavia and Bantam. Most people believe this Country to lie in a very hot
Climate; nevertheless it is now known to be very temperate, by reason of the
great number of Rivers that water it; which, together with the Rains that fall
in their Seasons, cause a brisk freshness of the Air; which indeed happ'ns most
usually over all the Torrid-zone, as I have observed in my Indian Travels. From
whence we may also have reason to believe the Country to be very fruitful and
thick inhabited.

To the East this Kingdom lies upon the Province of Cauton, one of the best of
China.

To the West it is bounded by the Kingdom of Brama.

To the North it borders upon two other Provinces of China, Junnan and Quansi.

To the South it lies upon Cochinchina, and the great Gulf of the same name.

To return to the Climate, the Air is so mild and temperate, that all the year
long seems to be but one continual Spring; Frost and Snow are never there to be
seen; and besides, the Pestilence, the Gout, the Stone, and other Diseases so
frequent in Europe, there are never known. There are but two Winds, which
divide the whole Year between them; the one blowing from the North, the other
from the South, and both continuing the same for six months together. The first
refreshes the Earth in that manner, that there is nothing so delightful as the
Country of Tunquin. The other begins to blow from the end of January to the end
of July; and the two last months are their months of rain. The greatest
inconvenience is, that there arise once in seven years, as well in this
Country as in other parts of the Indies, those hideous and terrible Tempests,
that blow down Houses, tear up Trees by the roots, and make strange
Desolations. They seldom last above four and twenty hours, nor are their sad
Effects to be felt but only upon the Seas of China, Japon, Cochinchina,
Tunquin, and the Manilles, being rarely known in any other Seas.

The Astrologers of those parts believe that these terrible Tempests proceed
from the Exhalations that rise out of the Mines of Japon. It comes with that
sudden force that when it surprises a Vessel out at Sea, the Pilots have no
other remedy then to cut down all the Masts, that the storm may have the less
force upon the Ship.

In this fair extent of Land, almost equal to that of France, are several
Provinces, whose limmits are not well known; the Tunquineses being no great
Geographers, nor having bin over curious to write the Annals of the Nation. But
the most understanding and knowing among them assured me at Batavia, that the
whole Kingdom contained above twenty thousand Cities and Towns. They also
affirmed that there might be many more, but after the manner of their
Neighbors the Cochinchineses, many of the People choose rather to upon the
Water then upon the Land; so that you shall see live the greatest part of their
Rivers coverd with Boats, which serve them instead of Houses; and which are
very neat, though they also keep their Cattle in them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Quality of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
THis Country for the most part is a level Extent, which rises up and down into
pleasant Hillocks; the greatest Hills which it has lying to the North. It is
watered by several Rivers which inter-cut and glide through the Country: some
of which carry Galleys of good burden, and large Shallops, very commodious for
trade. Yet in all the Country there grows neither Corn nor Wine, by reason of
the want of rain, which never falls but in the Months of June and July. But it
bears an infinite quantity of Rice, which is the chief sustenance of the
People. Of this Rice also they make their Drink, besides which they have good
Aqua Vitae or Strong-water. Their Fruits are excellent, but much different from
ours, as are also the Trees that bear them. The chiefest of these Trees are the
Palm Tree, which bears a Fruit bigger then in any part of Asia. The Nut is
about the bigness of a Man's Head, in shape like a Coco-nut; the Shell is very
hard, and being opened, the Pulp within is as white as Snow, having a taste like
our Almonds, and every one of the Fruits contains about two glassfuls of
Liquor, very refreshing and pleasing to the Palate. The Gogavier, very much
resembles our Laurel, of which there are two sorts; the one bears a Plum, green
without and red within: but the Fruit of the other Tree, which is in much more
esteem, is yellowish without and white within, the top of the Fruit being like
a small Nosegay: the Pulp is full of small Kernels, less then those of a
Pomegranate; and if they be eaten before they are ripe they bind the belly,
whereas being eaten when they are come to full maturity they work a contrary
effect. Formerly this Fruit was not known in the Kingdom of Tunquin, but after
the Portugals seated themselves at Macao, they carried several Plants thither,
so that now the Fruit is grown very common. The Papager bears a Fruit which
very much resembles a small Melon, the taste whereof is very delicious. The
Arager grows upright and straight, like the Mast of a Ship* bearing no Branches
but at the top, which makes it appear like a Crown. The Fruit which it produces
is like a Nutmeg, but a little more round. The People break this Nut, and
bruising it together with Betle leaves, mix both with a little Chalk, and make
use of the Powder to keep their Teeth clean, to dye their Lips of a Vermilion
color, and to keep their Breath sweet.

They have but two sorts of Figs, the one like ours, and the other like those
which are called Adam's Figs, as long as a Man's finger.

There is also another Tree, very like our Willow, which they call the Powder
Tree, because that of the Wood they make Charcoal, and of the Coal a Powder
which they make use of in their Wars.

The Jambager is another Tree, that grows very high, which bears a Fruit about
the bigness of a Citrul-Cucumber, the Pulp whereof is full of Kernels like a
Granate, very cooling and pleasant, and very frequently eaten in the Season of
heat.

The Highways are also planted with Trees on both sides for the convenience of
Travelers: And there are some of these Trees so big that two or three thousand
men may stand under them, like that at Ormus, or Bandar Abassi, by me described
in my Relations of Persia, and of which many other Travelers have made
mention. When the Branches of these Trees are about ten or twelve foot long,
there issue forth other little Branches which turn downward, and by little and
little descending to the ground, take root and afterward become as it were so
many Pillars to support the Master-Branches. There are some of the
Master-Branches three hundred Paces long, which are supported by these
outgrowing Branches at the distance of every ten or twelve foot. The Fruit is
of the bigness of one of our great Nuts, the Shell whereof is red, containing
within nothing but a Kernel like a grain of Millet. The Rere Mice feed upon
'em, and also make their Nests in the trees. These Rere-mice are as big as a
good Pullet, insomuch that their Wings are above a foot and a half long. They
never light upon the tree like other Birds, but you shall see them all the day
long hanging at the branches of the trees, fastened by their Claws to the tree
with their heads downward. Upon every Wing they have seven as it were little
Hooks or Claws, so that being shot, they never fall to the ground, but remain
fixed to the branches, that at a distance you would take them to be some great
Pears that hung upon the tree. They are accounted a great dainty among the
Portugals, who leave their Pullets to eat them. It Is true that their Flesh is
very white, and when they are young they are a delicate sort of Diet. I
happened to eat of them two or three times with the Portugals, who thought they
had obliged me with a great dainty; and had I not known what they were, I
should have taken them for Pullets. And now I am talking of the Delicacies of
the Country, I will tell you of one sort of Diet which is very singular. This
Food is the Nest of a certain Bird which is no where to be found, but in the
four Islands that lie upon the Coast of Cochinchina, and of which you have the
Figures in the Table A, B, C, D. These Birds are about the bigness of a
Swallow, and build their Nests in such a manner, that they are neither too
close compacted, nor altogether transparent; they are like an Onion composed of
several rings and envelopings; that compose a Nest of a certain sort of Gunim,
which is steeped in warm water, and mixed with all the Sawces which are made
both for Fish and Flesh. It is transported all over India and into Holland for
Curiositie's sake. You would believe in eating those Meats which are seasoned
therewith, that those Nests were composed of all the Spices in the Orient. I
have not only brought this Diet into France, and presented of it to several
Persons of Quality, but I have also my Vouchers for the truth of what I relate,
several of my Friends who have brought it from Holland, among the rest M. de
Villermont, whose Name is famous for his Travels into the East Indies. He and
all those that have eat thereof agree with me, that all the Spices of the East
put together, do not give that effectual relish and savor as these Nests do,
to the Meats and Dishes wherein they are used.

Near to these four Islands, where these Birds Nests are found, are five others
marked in the Map 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In these five Islands are such infinite number
of Tortoises, and such excellent Food, that the Tunquineses and Cochinchineses
do not believe they have entertained their Friends at a Banquet as they ought
to do, till the Tortoises are brought in. Those two Nations pickle up great
quantities of them, and send them abroad, which is a vast trade among them; and
indeed the chiefest occasion of the Wars between them is, because the
Cochinchineses do all they can to hinder the Tunquineses to fish for them,
alleging that those Seas and Islands belong to them. Neither is the Meat but
the Shell also of great esteem, and one of the greatest Commodities for Trade
in Asia.

Tunquin also affords great store of Anana's and Orange trees, of which there
are of two sorts: the one that bears a Fruit no bigger then an Abricot; the
other bigger then those of Portugal: both alike in taste, and being to be
gathered from the tree for six months together. They have also two sorts of
Citrons, the one yellow, the other green; but both the one and the other so
tart and sow'r, that they cannot be eaten without offense to the Stomach.
Nevertheless, the Juice is made use of as we do here of Aqua fortis, to cleanse
Copper, Tin, and Iron, before we gild those Metals, as also for Tinctures,
especially those of Silk. They are also made use of for Lies to whiten Linen,
and to take out Spots. Through all the Territories of the Great Mogul they make
use of this Juice of Citrons to whiten their Calicuts; whereby they make them
sometimes so white that they dazzle the sight.

They make great quantities of Silk in the Kingdom of Tunquin, of which both
rich and poor make themselves Garments. The Hollanders, who thrust themselves
in every where, where there is any hope of gain, carry off such a quantity
every year, that it is now become the chiefest part of that Commodity which
they carry to Japon; whereas before they fetched their Commodities from Persia,
Bengala, or China.

As for sweet smelling Flowers, the Tunquineses have but one sort, which they
call the Flower of Bague. It grows like a large Nosegay, and the Branches of
the Shrub that bear it, spread themselves crawlingly upon the ground. As they
have great store of Sugar, so they eat very much, while it is yet in the Cane,
not having the true Art to refine it: and that which they do grossly refine,
they make into little Loaves weighing about half a pound. They eat very much,
making use of it always after Meals to help digestion.

Through the whole Kingdom are neither Lions, Asses, nor Sheep; but the Forests
are full of Tigers, Hearts, and Apes, and the Fields are full of Beeves, Cows,
and Hogs. As for Hens, Ducks, and Turtles, they are not to be numbered, which
is the general Provision for their Festivals. Their Horses are very well
shaped; of which there are always five or six hunder d in the King's Stables;
He also keeps the same number of Elephants, of which some are for the Service
of his House, the rest bred for the Wars. These Elephants are of a prodigious
bigness, neither are there any so tall nor so nimble in any part of Asia; for
they will bow themselves, and stoop so low, that you may get upon their backs
without help. They have no Cats, but they have Dogs that serve for the same
purpose, and will watch all night to kill the Rats and Mice, which are very
large and very troublesome. Very few Birds are to be seen in the Air; which
toward the evening grows duskish, by reason of those vast number of Gnats that
get into the Houses in the night time and hinder people from sleeping, not only
by the noise which they make, but with their continual stinging; which is one
of the greatest inconveniences of the Country. For remedy whereof in some
measure, an hour before they go to sleep they take the Husk or Chaff of the
Rice, which flies from the Rice when it is beaten, and strew it upon a small
Fire in a Fire-shovel, and so let it smoke, and by that means they kill or
drive those Flies away. Besides this, they cover the Bed with a Pavilion or
Tent that trails upon the ground, made like a Net with very small holes to let
in the Air. But notwithstanding all the prevention can be used, they will be
about a man when he rises in the morning. But there is yet a far greater
inconvenience in this Country, which proceeds from the infinite numbers of
white Emmets, which though they are but little, have teeth so sharp, that they
will eat down a wooden Post in a short time. And if great care be not taken in
the places where you lock up your Bales of Silk, in four and twenty hours they
will eat through a Bale, as if it had been sawed in two in the middle. Several
of them have fallen from the Cieling into my Neck, where they raised Blisters
upon the Skin, which presently fall again being washed with cold Water.

I have told you that Hens and Ducks are infinitely numerous in Tunquin, I will
now tell you how they preserve the Eggs of these Creatures, which they will
keep for two or three years together without being spoiled. They salt them, and
to make them take salt, they fill a Vessel full of Water, and throw a good
quantity of Salt into it. If the Egg sink to the bottom, the Pickle is not
good; then they throw in more Salt, till they find that the Eggs swim. The
Pickle being thus made, they take Ashes, and make them up into a Past with this
Pickle: and in this Past they enclose every Egg by it self, and then wrap it up
in a leaf of an Herb, not unlike one of our Pear Tree leaves, but much larger,
and then put the Eggs into Earthen Pots close covered: after which manner they
keep their Eggs for two or three years together.

In other parts of the Indies where there is great store of Oil, as in the
Dominions of the Great Mogul, the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Arochan, they put their
Eggs into great Earthen Pots well varnished, and then fill the Vessel with an
Oil which is made of a small Seed like Rape-seed. For as for Sallad Oil, after
you are once passed Aleppo, you see no more Olive Trees over all Asia, but only
in one place of Persia near Casbin, where between the Mountains lies a little
Valley, about a League long and half a League broad, full of Olive Trees, but
they make but very little Oil, preserving the Olives only to eat. But to return
to the Eggs; they are the chief Provision which they eat a Shipboard. But the
Eggs which are preserved in Salt are preferred much before those that are kept
in Oil; because that in using the first, there is no need of carrying Salt to
Sea, or of boiling Salt with their Rice. When they eat them, they boil them
till they are hard, and with every mouthful of Rice they eat a Pea's bigness of
Egg, which is as good and better then Salt with their Rice. As to what remains,
there are neither Mines of Gold nor Silver in the Kingdom of Tunquin, neither
do they Coin any Money.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Riches, Trade, and Money of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
THE chief Riches of the Country of Tunquin consist in the great quantity of
Silks which they sell to the Hollanders, and other Foreigners, and in their
Lignum Aloes. Of which there is some worth a thousand Crowns the Pound,
according to its goodness and oyliness. There is some that is not worth above
three Crowns, but it is dry and good for nothing but to make Cabinets, or Beads
to hang about Women's Necks. All the Mahumetans, especially such as let their
Beards grow, make great account of this Wood; and when they give a Visit, they
presently bring a little Chasing-dish, and cast a small piece of this Wood upon
the Coals, which yields a smoke and pleasing mist; with which they perfume
their Beards, at the same time lifting up their hands to Heaven, and crying,
Elhemed Illah, or God be thanked. If the Wood be oily, the bigness of a Pea
will serve to throw upon the fire, which being a little moistened in Water,
will yield as much smoke as a dry piece as big as a Man's fist. Which is the
reason, that if it be oily and good it wants no price. One of the chief
Presents, as I have observed in another part of this Book, which the Portugals
of Goa sent to the Emperor of Japon, was a piece of Lignum Aloes, six foot
long, and two round. It cost 40000 Pardo's or 54000 Livres.

It is so much the more pleasure and profit to trade with the People of
Tunquin, by how much the more faithful and frank they are in their dealing then
the Chinese, who will deceive you if they can; so that it is a hard thing to
be too cunning for them, as I have often found by experience. When you have
fold them any Commodity, and they find that their Bargain is not very
advantageous, their general way of getting off is this: As they have generally
three forts of Reals, one sort that is full weight, others which are light,
four, others eight per Cent. if they have no mind to stand to their bargain,
they offer to pay you for your Goods in light Reals, which they have clipped
themselves, and so you are deceived. There are no such People for Trade in the
World: they refuse to deal in nothing, even in old Shoes, and if you will sell
them but one of them too, they will buy it, without ever enquiring why you will
not sell the other. But for those of Tunquin they are more blunt and plain in
their dealing, so that it is a pleasure to have to deal with them. I have told
you, there are neither Mines of Gold or Silver in Tunquin, neither do they Coin
Money there. So that in Trade they make use of certain Lingots of Gold, as they
are brought out of China, some of which amount to 300 Livres of our Money,
other to six hundred. They also make use of Bars of Silver as they are brought
from Japon. As for small Payments they either cut the large Bars into small
pieces, to which purpose they have their Scales, like our Stelleers; or else
they pay in Foreign-Coin, which are the Reals of Spain generally. This Gold and
Silver is brought from China, and Japon, in lieu of those vast quantities of
Silk which are exported out of the Country, which with Musk and Lignum Aloes
are the chief Riches of the Kingdom.

CHAP. V.
Of the Strength of the Kingdom of Tunquin by Sea and Land.
THey who have written before me concerning the Kingdom of Tunquin, have spoken
largely of its Forces both by Sea and Land, and allow it a prodigious number
both of Soldiers and Galleys. They write that the Forces which were usually
wont to meet at the Rendevouz were 12000 Horse, 2000 Elephants, as well to
carry the King's and the Nobilities Tents and Baggage, as for the Service of
the War, 300000 Foot, and 300 Galleys. And in regard the Kingdom is well stored
with Provision and Ammunition, that in time of War the whole Army exceeds
500000 Men. But the number which my Brother

The King of Tunquin's Setting out for the War.
1. The King going out of his Palace is carried in his Palanquin or Chair by
the Chief Officers of his Household.

2. The Order of the King's March when he goes to the War.

3. The Musicians and Trumpeters who follow his Chair.

4. An Officer who carries a Basin full of Water, on which does float a Brass
Boul with a hole in the bottom of it; so that exactly in an hour this Boul
becomes full of Water, and suddenly sinks to the bottom.

5. Then presently two other Officers do strike the Hour upon two great Brass
Platters, N. 5. of about a Yard Diameter, and much after the Form of our
Burning Glasses, yet of the Metal that Bells are made of, which causes that
they are heard a very far off.

Afterward he that carries the Basin of Water takes up the Cup from the
bottom, and sets it again a swimming atop of the Water, just as it was before.
When it is full and sinks, they after the same manner strike on the said
Platters. And this is their way of reckoning the Hour and Times in Tunquin, as
well as in the Indies, and almost throughout the Eastern Parts betwixt the
Tropicks; for that the Clocks which are made in Europe become useless in those
Countries during the Rainy Season, the Air being there so heavy and damp, that
all Iron and Steel, nay the very Knives and Watches in peoples Pockets do grow
rusty, though you wrap them up never so well in Cotton or Leather, and take all
the care imaginable to keep them dry; yet it will be impossible otherwise to
preserve them from Rust, than by letting them lie in Oil while that Weather
lasts.

This Foggy Dampness of the Air is predominant as soon as you are past Persia,
in all the Mogol's Country, from the Fifteenth of June to the end of
September. The further one goes on toward the East, the later these Rains do
begin and are met withal.

It Is good likewise to observe, that in the Empire of the Great Mogul, in
Tunquin, and in other Easterly Parts between the Tropicks, they do as we divide
the Day and Night into 24 Hours, making the Day of 12, and the Night to be of
as much; so to proportion equally the Times of Working and of Rest. But they do
subdivide both the Day and the Night into 4 equal parts, and this Division is
made known by the Strokes given upon those Platters. As for Example: The first
Hour of the first Watch of the Night is marked by one Blow, the second by
another, and the third likewise by another. In the second Watch of the Night
the first Hour is made known by two Blows one after another, and so of the rest
until the third Watch; then at the first Hour of that they give three Strokes.
And this Order is observed till the last Hour of the fourth Watch, which is
marked by four Knocks. In this manner they continue to marck the first Hour of
the day with the same Regularity.

All Persons of Quality do keep Eight Officers on purpose for this Employ; who
likewise are to have a care of keeping the Palace Gates. This Engine for the
marking of the Hours is ordinarily hung up at the Entry of great Palaces near
the Porter's Lodge.

Place this Page 14.



The Order of the March of the Queens of Tunquin, when they go abroad out of
the Palace.
A. Six Elephants go in the Front, drawing a kind of a Sedan close shut up,
with Grate-like Windows.

B. Fifteen Captains or Officers walk next, Armed with Firelocks.

C. The Sedan wherein the Queen is.

D. Six of the Queens Gentlemen do carry Parasols, for to guard the Queens
Chair from the Scorching of the Sun.

F. Six Ladies of Honor of the Queens go next. The first has the Command of
the Queens Eunuchs: these Eunuchs, though thoroughly Spaded, yet are never
admitted into the Queens Apartment; the Kings of Tunquin being in that
particular more jealous than other Kings and Mohammedan Princes, who allow this
sort of Eunuchs to serve their Queens within the Palace. The next in Office of
these Ladies presents the Queen with Sweet Meats when she is about to drink;
for they usually eat some before they drink, they alleging that this keeps
them from having the Cholic, to which they are very subject in Tunquin. The
third in rank carries a Box of Perfumes and Betel. The others usher the Queen
when she gets into the Sedan, or alights.

G. Here is a Chariot drawn by Eight Maids of Quality, when she gets out of the
Sedan; but before she appears, all the Men and Eunuchs do withdraw into such
places, whence they cannot have the sight of her, it being a Crime to look upon
her: then the Ladies help her out of the Sedan, and the Maids draw her along to
whatever place she has a mind to go in unto.

Place this next to, The King of Tunquin setting out for the War.

Order Of The March Of The king Of Tunquin When he goes Out Of his Pallice.

The Order and March Of the king Of Tunquin When He goes To War.





saw in the year 1649, when the King was preparing to make War against the King
of Cochinchina, for certain Ships which the Cochinchineses had taken from the
Tunquineses: though the Quarrel was taken up by certain Ambassadors which the
King of Cochinchina sent to the King of Tunquin, to whom the former made
satisfaction.

The Army that was then prepared to march upon this Expedition was composed of
8000 Horse, 94 thousand Foot, and 722 Elephants; 130 for the War, and the rest
to carry the Tents and Baggage of the King and the Nobility; and 318 Galleys
and Barks, very long and narrow, with Oars and Sails; and this was that which
my Brother saw. The Condition of the Soldiery is very toilsom and laborious,
and of little advantage in the Kingdom of Tunquin. For they are all their life
time so ti'd and engaged to the Service of the Wars, that though they are
capable of other Labors for the support of their Families, they are not
permitted to undertake it. Those days that they are not upon the Guard, they
are obliged to attend their Captains wherever they go, and two days in a week
they are compelled to Exercise with their Bows and Arrows in their presence.
Their Companies consist of a hundred or a hundred and thirty Men; and they of
each Company that have made the best shot, have one of them two Months Wages,
the other one, which is paid them in Rice. He that makes the worst shot, next
time he mounts the Guard, is obliged to stand Sentinel double his time. All the
Captains look upon it as a great piece of glory to have their Soldiers Arms
and Weapons neat and bright. If they find any rust upon them, they sconce them
eight days Wages for the first fault, and for the second they are very severely
chastis'd. As for those that serve in the Galleys, they are entertained and
listed proportionably. And sometimes the Captains send their Soldiers aboard
for some days, that they may learn to row. For it is one of the chiefest
Pastimes of the Kings of Tunquin to see the Mock-fights of the Galleys. When he
has a mind to delight himself with this Divertisment, the King, with some part
of his Court, removes to one of his fair Palaces, that stands upon one of the
largest Rivers in his Country; and it is a great Honor for any of the Captains
whose Soldiers carry the Victory. Now as the Victory is only got by the force
of the Oars, it happens sometimes that there are some Soldiers who strain
themselves so hard, that they fall down dead with the Oar in their hands: for
the King is the only Judge of the Combat. Wherein the pleasure that he takes is
such, that he sends an Elephant to the Captain that obtains the Victory, and
gives him three Months Wages besides. If any Soldier chance to die in this
Exercise, his Widow or his Heirs have two years Pay. But notwithstanding all
their pain and labor, their Wages are so small, that they are not able to
maintain their Wives and Children. But in regard they Marry very young in this
Country, the Wives as well of the Soldiers as of all the meaner sort of
people, take care to learn some Trade besides, that they may be able to
maintain their Families. The Captains also have their work prepared for them.
For they are obliged to look after the King's Elephants, and to manage them for
the Wars, and so to breed them, that they may not be afraid of Wildfire, or
any other Artificial Fires: as also to build places all along the Rivers, for
the Galleys to ride sheltered in, when they can no longer live out at Sea. All
these Officers and Captains, and Lords of the Court, which are generally called
Mandarins, have but four days in a Month to divert themselves, two at the first
change of the Moon, and two at the full.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Manners and Customs of the People of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
THe People of Tunquin are naturally mild and peaceful, submitting easily to
reason, and condemning the Transports of Choler. They esteem the Manufactures
of strange Countries far beyond those of their own; though they are not very
curious of seeing any other Countries but those where they were born; and
where, as they say, they always desire to live, to honor the Memory of their
Ancestors. They have a tone in speaking, naturally page. 17. Tunquin.

N* The Great Chancellor of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 2: 3: 4* The Mandarins or
officers of War. 5 Chief Chancellor of all the (...) of The Kingdom* 6* ^
Mandarins of Learning (...) officers of Judicature* ^8* The Chieif Usher*

soft and pleasing; happy memories, and in their Language, which is very
florid, they use several apposite Comparisons. They have good Poets among them,
and People that love Learning; in which respect they are no way inferior to
the Chinese, their Neighbors.

The Tunquineses, as well Men as Women, are for the most part well
proportioned, of an Olive Complexion, very much admiring the whiteness of the
Europeans. Their Noses and Faces are not so flat as those of the Chinese, as
being generally better made. Their Hair is very black, which they usually wear
as long as it will grow, being very careful in combing it. The Common People
plait it in tresses, and tie it like a great Roll upon the top of their Heads.
But the Nobility, Men of Law, and Soldiers, tie their Locks about their Necks,
that they may not flutter in their Faces. They do not believe their Teeth to be
handsome, till they have made them as black as jet; and they suffer their Nails
to grow; the longest being accounted the fairest.

Their Habit is grave and modest, being a long Robe that reaches down to their
heels, much like that of the Japonneses, without any distinction of Sex. This
Habit is bound about at the wast with a Girdle of Silk, interwoven with Gold
and Silver, the Workmanship whereof is alike on both sides. As for the
Soldiers, their upper Garments reach no farther then their Knees; only their
Breeches reach down to the mid Leg, without either Hose or Shoes.

The vulger sort of People are altogether slaves for one part of the year. For
unless they be the Citizens of the Capital City, where the King keeps his
Court, all the other Handicrafts of what Trade soever, as Joyners, Carpenters,
Locksmiths, Masons, and the like, are obliged every year to work three Months
at the King's Palace; and two Months* or Moons more (For the Tunquineses reckon
their Months by the Moon) for the Mandarins, or great Lords. The rest of the
year is for themselves, all which time they have liberty to work for the
support of their own Family. This Service in their Language is call d Viecquan,
or the Condition of a Slave. But they are liable to other drudgeries worse then
those before mentioned; as to lop Trees, with which they chiefly feed their
Elephants. This is a severe days work, to which they were condemned by the
great Grandfather of the King that now reigns, after he had put an end to the
Civil Wars that turmoil'd his Kingdom, and that he had brought his rebellious
Subjects to submit themselves. They had occasioned him a great deal of trouble,
and in regard he could not subdue them without a great hazard of his Army, his
Council advised him to famish them; but he rather chose to give them their
Lives, and to condemn them and their Posterity to this laborious Service, of
which he might in time reap the benefit.

I have told you elsewhere that the Tunquineses take great delight to live upon
the Rivers, which are there free from Crocodiles and all other dangerous
Animals, which haunt the Waters of Nile and Ganges. Where we are to observe,
that these Rivers overflow their Banks every year, after the Rains are fallen,
with that terrible violence, that many times they carry away whole Towns and
Villages, at what time a good part of the Kingdom looks like a Sea, resembling
the lower Egypt under Water upon the Inundation of Nile.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Marriages of the Tunquineses, and their severity toward Adulteresses.
THE Tunquineses cannot Marry without the consent of the Father and Mother, or
if they be dead, without the allowance of their nearest Kindred. They must also
have the permission of the Judge or Governor of the place where the Marriage
is to be made, for the obtaining of which they must give him some Present. But
in regard they were wont to exact upon the poor people more then they were able
to give them, so that many Marriages were disappointed, to the great damage of
the Public; the King, who reigned in the year 1639, being informed of these
Extortions, and their ill Consequences, set forth a Law to regulate those
Abuses, and to curb the Authority of the Governors. He ordered that the young
Man who was desirous to Marry, should pay no more then such a Sum, according to
the proportion of his Estate, amounting to one or two fourths per Cent. and
that they that were not worth above a hundred Crowns should pay nothing. Now in
regard the Common People, both Men and Women, are naturally laborious, all that
the Maids can get they preserve for their Portions, and to buy them two or
three handsome Garments, with a Neck-lace of Coral or yellow Amber, and a
certain number of Beads, to garnish their Locks; which they suffer to hang down
upon their Backs, accounting the beauty of their Hair to consist in the length.

There is no Wedding kept without a great Feast; and they must be very poor
when the Feast lasts not above three days; for sometimes they junket for nine
days together. The next day after the Wedding the Bridgroom calls the Bride his
Sister, and she calls the Bridegroom Brother. The Law of the Land permits the
Man to divorce his wife when he pleases, which they do many times for very
slight causes. But the Woman has not the same Privilege: or at least, if she
desire a separation, it is much more difficult to obtain; and the occasion must
be very notorious. The Tunquineses say that this Law was made to keep the Women
in subjection, and to oblige them to be respectful to their Husbands. When the
Husband desires this separation, the Ceremony is this. You must know that many
of the Eastern People never touch their Victuals with their hands, but make use
of two little sticks about six inches long, gilt and varnished, which serve
them instead of Forks. The Husband then, when he goes about to repudiate his
Wife, takes one of his own sticks, and one of his Wife's, and having broken
them, they take each one half, and sow it up in a piece of Silk, in which they
keep it. Then the Man is bound to restore the Woman what she brought with her,
and to keep the Children which they had between them. But these Divorces are
not half so frequent as formerly.

The Laws are also very rigorous against Adulteresses. So that if a woman
accused of this crime be convicted thereof, she is cast to an Elephant bred up
to this purpose, who presently throws her up into the Air with his Trunk, and
when she comes to the ground, tramples her under his feet, till he can perceive
no life in her.

While my Brother was at the Court at Tunquin, he was a witness of the severe
Punishment, to which a Princess was condemned, for being taken in the Act with
a certain Prince. It is the Custom in the East, when a Prince dies, to shut up
in the most private and retired part of all his Palace all the women which he
made use of in his life time. There they are allowed two Maids to attend them,
they eat alone, and see no person living any more to the very day of their
deaths. I cannot tell by what means one of the Princes of the blood had got a
view of one of the deceased King his Uncle's wives; but being desirous to see
her again, and to overcome all difficulties that opposed him, and to deceive
the Guards that watched the Doors, he made use of a slight not easily
discovered. For you must know, that in the Kingdom Tunquin, as in all the
Kingdoms of Asia, in the Houses of the Kings and other great Lords, the Kitchen
is usually separated from the House, and that the Garden is between them; so
that for the better carrying the Meat from one place to another, the Servants
make use of a kind of Flasket, or rather Iron Chest. And to keep the Meat warm,
the Dishes are supported by little sticks laid athwart, about an inch distant
one from another, under which is an Iron Plate with holes pierced quite
through, about half a foot above another, which makes the bottom of the Chest;
between which Plates they put lighted Coals, to keep the Meat warm. These
Chests being to be carried by two men, the Tunquinese Prince played his game so
well, that he was put into one of these Chests wherein the Princesses Meat was
wont to be carried up into her Apartment. But he was not there many days before
the thing was discovered. He was presently brought before the King, who caused
him to have several weighty Chains to be put about his Neck and Wast, and upon
his Hands and Legs; and thus chained and manacled, he ordered him to be led
about for five Months together, to be seen by the People. After that he was
shut up in a close Prison, where he remained seven years, till the death of the
King, whose Son coming to the Throne, set him at liberty, upon condition he
should serve as a private Soldier upon the Frontiers of the Kingdom. As for
the Princess she was shut up in a little Chamber upon the top of a Tower, where
she remained twelve days without having any thing given her to eat or drink;
after that the Chamber was all uncovered at the top, that the sun might come at
her, and scorch her to death, and so she di'd in three days. The two Maids that
served her had a little more favor, for they were thrown to the Elephants, who
presently trod them to death. The two Porters of the Chest, or Flasket, were
ti'd to four small Galleys, by the two Hands, and two Legs, and as they Rowed
several ways were presently dismembered. Being at Daca, in the Kingdom of
Bengala, I saw the same Justice done to a Bramere, who would have betrayed
Cha-Est-Can to the King of Arachan.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Visits, Feasts, and Pastimes of the Tunquineses.
AMong all the Eastern People the Tunquineses are the most sociable, and most
frequently visit one another. Generally they make their Visits about Noon, in
the hottest time of the day, and then every one walks with a Train suitable to
his Condition. The Princes and Mandarines ride upon their Elephants, or else
they are carried in a kind of Litter, where they may either sit or lie. Six Men
carry it, and behind them follow six more to ease them by times. Their Train
consists generally of fifty or sixty Persons; neither are they permitted to
exceed that number. As for the ordinary Gentry, and Officers of the Court, they
ride a Horseback, not being allowed above seven or eight Servants to attend
them. They chew Betle continually, as all the other Asiaticks do in such places
where it is to be had. And when any one comes to visit another, it would be
taken for a great affront, if at his taking leave, he should not be presented
with a Box of Betle, to take what he pleased.

The richer that Box is, the more Honor is given to the Person to whom the
Betle is presented: Insomuch that when a Prince is about to be married, he
usually sends three of these Boxes to his Spouse, of which I have seen some at
Tunquin page 23

The Representation of the Theater where they Act their Comedies for the
Divertisement of the King of Tunquin and his Court. (...) the Kings Box* ^ the
box (...)



(...) All these Plates are brought up, ranged in order, in a large Voyder,
lacker'd like the Plates. Usually the Voyder holds ten or twelve Plates, and
the Meat is cut in little pieces, about the bigness of a Hazle Nut. They make
use neither of Spoons, nor Knives, nor Forks, but only of those little Sticks*
of which I have made mention in the foregoing Chapter, never touching their
Meat with their fingers.

When there are several sitting at the Table, either at their ordinary Meals,
or upon some Festival, they account it a great piece of Manners to be silent;
or if they have a desire to Discourse, they always allow the Eldest the honor
of beginning, bearing a great respect to them that are aged. But the Youngest,
at the Table, is never permitted to begin the Discourse. They wash their Hands,
their Mouths, and Faces before they sit down, but never after Meals. And when
they desire to know whether every one has had his fill, they ask him whether he
have eaten his Rice, according to the Custom of the Ancient Fathers in
Scripture, who, by Bread, meant the whole Repast. Neither is it a Custom among
them to ask one another how they do? but how many Measures of Rice he eat for
his Dinner, and whether he eat with an Appetite. This is a general Custom among
all the Idolatrous Indians, unless in the Dominions of the Great Mogul, where
they eat not Rice only, but Bread, and there they ask in civility how much Rice
they boiled, and how much Meal they baked for Bread; for the more he eats, the
better in health they think a man is.

Among all the Pastimes of the Tunquineses there are none wherein they take so
much delight as in Comedies, which are only Acted in the Nightime; but those
which are presented the day that they first behold the new Moon are the best.
They last from Sunsetting to Sunrising, and they are set out with beautiful
Decorations and Machines, very pleasing to behold. They are excellently well
skill*d in representing the Sea and Rivers, and making a show of Seafights, and
Combats between Galleys and Barks, though they have seldom more then eight
Actors, Men and Women. The places appointed for these sights, are great Halls,
the third part whereof the Theater takes up, the rest being filled with Benches
for the Spectators. Upon each side of the Theater is a Box very sumptuously set
out, reserved for the King when he pleases to come. The Actors and Actresses
are very magnificently clad. The dress for the Women's heads being a kind of
Miter or Diadem, which exceedingly becomes them, from the hinder part whereof
two Ribonds, three fingers broad, hand down below their wastes. Both the one and
the other Act their parts very perfectly, and, according to their manner,
observe an exact time in their Dancing.

At one of the corners of the Hall sit the two Judges of the Comedy, one of
whom beats time upon a Brass Drum. Their other ordinary Pastimes, especially
for the Lords and Mandarins, are Fishing and Hunting, though they take more
pleasure in the former, by reason of the plenty of Fish which their Rivers
afford them. But, as I said before, they follow these sports only upon the days
that are permitted them, as being better husbands of their time then we, not
sparing any part of it from business. So that they who at the beginning of that
little knowledge which we had of these People, wrote that their Manners and
Customs were wild and barbarous, were misinformed. For as there is no reason to
doubt of the truth of what I affirm, and what others have confirmed by other
Relations, we may well conculde from what I have said, That all the Duties of
Civil Society and Politeness are not confined within our Europe; but that the
Kingdom of Tunquin, anciently a part of China, still retains the good
Government and Civility of the Chinese themselves.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Learned Men in the Kingdom of Tunquin.
CErtain it is, that the Tunquineses have a very great inclination for
Learning, and that they apply themselves to their Studies with diligence and
success: for that they cannot be advanced without it to the Offices and
Dignities in the Kingdom. I do not here, by Learning, mean the understanding of
the Languages of our Learned Men of Europe, which are altogether unknown to the
Eastern People, and much less the Philosophy of Aristotle, of which they never
so much as heard. But we mean the knowledge of the Laws of their Country, by
means whereof they obtain the charges of Judicature; the Mathematics, and
particularly Astronomy, to which all the Orientals have a great inclination, as
being great observers of the Stars, by whose assistance they flatter themselves
to be able to foretell things to come. The Tunquineses are also passionate
lovers of Music and Poetry, as being great admirers of Comedy and Tragedy, of
which those two Sciences are the main Composition; so that the Musicians and
Actors of Tunquin are accounted the best in the whole Eastern part of the World.

That you may acquire Nobility by Learning, in your Youth, you must pass
through three degrees, of the Synde, the Doucan, and the Tansi, from which
degree you may ascend to that of the Nobility.

To attain the first degree, it behooves the Youth of Tunquin to apply
themselves for eight years together to their Studies, and that very close, to
enable themselves for the Office of a Notary, Proctor, and Advocate, to which
there is nothing more conducing then to speak Eloquently in public. At the end
of eight years, they are examined concerning the duty of those Employments; and
if any one*fail to give an Answer to the Questions propounded, he is sent back
again as incapable to obtain any Employment for the future, or to study any
longer. For those that acquit themselves well of their Examination, which is
very rigorous, their Names are set down in a Register, and presented to the
King, who first grants them the liberty to take upon them the Title of Synde,
and then if it be their aim to enjoy the Quality of Doucan, they are commanded
by the Tansi's to study Music, Astrology, and Poesy, not only to be able to be
judge of it, but also to perform themselves upon occasion. For to be good
judges of Comedy, which is a great Honor among them, it behooves them to be
both good Comedians and Musicians. Nor indeed is there any Pastime more
frequent then that of the Theater in this Country; for there is never any
solemn Festival among them, which is not accompanied and set forth with
Artificial Fireworks, in making whereof these People are exquisite; after
which they have their Comedies, with Machines, and change of Scenes in every
Act. Besides this, their Actors have a prodigious memory, so that let the part
be never so long, they never make use of Prompters to assist them, as we do in
Europe.

They that will learn the Mathematics, must make their own Instruments
themselves, and spend five years in this study. They are examined every year,
and if they fail to answer such Questions as are asked them, for the first four
they are pardoned; but at the end of the five years, if upon the grand
Examination, they fail to answer the Questions demanded them by the Tansis,
they are utterly degraded; whereas if they satisfy their Examinors, they are
permitted the Name and Dignity of Doucan. After thirteen years thus spent,
before they can arrive to the degree of a Tansi, they must spend four years
more in learning to write and read the Chinese Character to such a certain
number of Words. For the life of a Man would not suffice to learn to write and
read the Chinese quite through. The reason is, because that as to this
particular, it is not in China as in other Nations, where one Word is composed
of several Letters. The Chinese for every Word have a different Figure, all
which Figures are very numerous, as you may easily conjecture. By the by let me
tell you, that these Figures are made with small Pencils, and that the Chinese
make use of a certain Ink, which is made up into a Paste, and so moistened in
Water as you make use of it. They have also another sort of Color for certain
Words. But they cannot make use of Pens, as our Europeans, which are made of
Quils; nor of those of other Eastern People, which are made of small redish
brown Reeds, the best of which grow in certain Mershes in the Kingdom of Pegu
and Arachan.

But to return to the Students of Tunquin, they are also obliged to understand
the Laws and Customs of the Chinese, as well as their own; and the last four
years being at an end, the last and great Examination is made in the great
place, within the Enclosure of the Palace of Tunquin, which is a stately Marble
structure. There the King is present, with the Princes and great Lords of the
Court, the Manderins for Learning; and all the Tansi's; and many also come on
purpose from distant Provinces to the Solemnity. Some Relations of Tunquin have
been a little too ridiculous in this particular, asserting extravagantly, that
sometimes there are above 30 or 40000 Students present at these Examinations,
but by what I could learn from my Brother, or gather by that discourse which I
have had with the Natives, the number of Students never exceeds three thousand.
There are in the place nine Scaffolds set up* of which the one is for the King
and Princes, the other for the Examiners, and those that are to be Examined:
And for the better hearing what is said, the Scaffolds are built like an
Amphitheater. But whereas there are eight days spent in this Examination, the
King and the Mandarins are never there but only the two first days. The last
day all the Names of them who have been Examined, as well they who have
answered well, as of them that have falter'd, are left in the Hands of the
sixteen chief Manderins, who are as it were sixteen Counselors of State, and
then it is at the King's pleasure to favor whom he thinks fit, of those, who
have not given full satisfaction to the Questions propounded to them. As for
those who were found very ignorant, they are degraded with shame, and there is
no more said of them. All those Names are usually written upon large Tables,
set up at the Gate of the King's Palace for eight days together, to the end,
that all the People may know who are received into the Rank of Nobility, and
who not.

The eight days being passed, they are all to appear again upon the same
Scaffolds, where in the view of all the World, they who have had the misfortune
to have falter'd in their Examinations, are dismissed as unworthy of any
Employment: while they who have behaved themselves worthy of approbation, are
honored with a Vest of Violet Satin, which they presently put on, and then
take upon them the Name of Tansi's. Then they have given them a List of the
Towns and Villages, where they are to receive the Rents which the King allows
them; wherein however they have not an equal share; some being allowed more,
some less, according to their merit, or the favor of the Prince. Presently
they send notice to the places assigned them of the time, at which they intend
to be there: and then all the Inhabitants come forth to meet them, in Honor of
their Dignity, with all sorts of Music, and a Gilded Branquar, carried by
eight Men. There they are permitted to stay three Months to divertize
themselves, and for their own recreation. After that they return to Court, to
instruct themselves in the affairs of the Kingdom, and the King's House, and to
perfect themselves in the knowledge of those things, which is the way to obtain
the Dignity of a Mandarin. All Ambassadors who are sent to the Princes
adjoining, especially to the Chinese, are chosen out of these Tansi's, among
whom they always make choice of the ablest, and not of the richest, the King
allowing them sufficient to maintain their Port, and defray the expenses of the
Embassy.

CHAP. X.
Of their Physicians, and the Diseases of the Tunquineses.
THe Physicians belonging to the Kingdom of Tunquin do not make it their
business much to study Books; spending their Youth in searching after the
nature and qualities of the Roots and Simples, and how to apply them according
to the nature of the Distemper. But more particularly they apply themselves to
the beating of the Pulse, and its diversity of Measure, by which they chiefly
pretend to understand the cause of the Disease, and what Remedy to make use of
for cure. And therefore when they go to feel a Pulse, they feel it in several
parts of the Body; and according to the diversity of the part, and the beating,
they judge of the quality of the Distemper. Therefore upon their first coming,
they feel the Patient in three places, first upon their right sides, and
secondly upon their left. By the Pulse which they feel upon the wrist of the
right hand, they guess of the condition of the Lungs; by that which they feel
upon the Vein of the Arms, where generally People are let Blood* they guess at
the Distempers of the Stomach; and the Region of the Kidneys. The Pulse of the
left Wrist discovers to them the condition of the Heart: By that in the Veins
of the left Arm, where usually they let Blood, they are informed of the estate
of the Liver. By the Pulses of the Temples, both right and left, they give a
more exquisite judgment of the Kidneys. They are very careful to count how many
times a Pulse of a sick Person beats in the time of one Respiration; and
according to these several Pulses, they tell you which part of the Body is
particularly distempered, whether the Heart, the Liver, or the Lungs; or
whether the Distemper proceed from any outward cause, as from Cold, Sadness, or
any other disorderly Passion.

They never make use of any other Remedies but of Herbs and Roots, which they
choose themselves; there being no distinction among them of Apothecary and
Physician. These Herbs they mingle sometimes with a little Ginger, which they
boil in Water, and give the Decoction, being strained, to the Patient. They
have very good Receipts for the Purples, Epilepsie, and several other Diseases
which are accounted incurable in Europe. They make use of China Ink to stop a
Dysentery, and for the cure of Wounds. When the Sea Ebbs from the shore upon
these Coasts, they find upon the Sand a little small kind of Crabs, which dye
immediately, and by the heat of the Sun, which is there extraordinary, become
as hard as a Stone in a short time; these the Tunquinese Physicians beat to
Powder, and give to their Patients in Dysenteries, and Fevers, sometimes in
Aqua Vitae, sometimes in plain Water. They mightily admire the Herb Tea, which
comes from China and Japan; which latter Country produces the best. It is
brought to them in Tin Pots close stopped, to keep out the Air. When they would
use it, they boil a quantity of Water, according to the proportion they intend
to use, and when the Water seeths, throw a small quantity into it, allowing as
much as they can nip between their Thumb and Forefinger to a Glass. This they
prescribe to be drank as hot as they can endure it, as being an excellent
Remedy against the Headache, for the Gravel, and for those that are subject to
the Griping of the Guts; but then they order a little Ginger to be put into the
Water when it boyls. At Goa, Batavia, and in all the Indian Factories, there
are none of the Europeans who do not spend above four or five Leaves a day; and
they are careful to preserve the boiled Leaf for an Evening Sallad, with Sugar,
Vinegar, and Oil. That is accounted the best Tea which colors the Water
greenest; but that which makes the Water look Red, is little accounted of. In
Japan. The King and great Lords, who drink Tea, drink only the Flower, which is
much more wholesome, and of a taste much more pleasing. But the Price is much
different, for one of our ordinary Beer Glasses is there worth a French Crown.

The most dangeroug Distempers that befall the Tunquineses, most usually happen
when the bad Air surprises the People; for of a sudden it deprives them of
their Speech, and then Death suddenly follows without a speedy Remedy. The best
Remedy for this sudden Distemper is to mix some Counterpoison with Aqua Vitae
instead of Wine, and to let the Patient drink it as hot as he can. The Patient
also must at the same time* be rubbed with a Cloth dipped in Aqua Vitae* where
Cinger has been boiled. This takes away the pains caused by cold Winds, and
unwholsom Airs. Though some for the more speedy cure of these pains. lay the
Patient upon a Bed made only of Girts, four Fingers distant one from the other;
and then setting a Chafing Dish underneath, cause the sick Person to sweat in a
Cloud of Frankincense, till the pain is gone, repeating the same thing Morning
and Evening.

As for Blood-letting, it is by no means used in that Country. They make use of
Fire, especially for the Purple-Feaver, a Disease so dangerous in France. For
the cure of this, the Physicians of Tunquin take the Pith of a Reed, which they
dry very well; dip it in Oil, and set it on Fire: and then apply to every
Purple Spot one of these lighted Wicks. The Spot will give a whif like a small
Squib, and that is an infallible*sign that the Venom* is gone out of the body.
This Remedy is seldom applied but in the night time, because the Spot does not
appear so well in the day time. And the Physician must be very careful, that
when this Venom flies out of the Patient's Body, it does not find a way into
his own; for then there is no Remedy* but Death. There are some Physicians that
will prick the Purple Spot with a Needle, and let out the Pestilential Blood;
after which they burn the part so pricked, and then rub it with Ginger, not
permitting their Patient to take the Air in 20 days after they are cured. While
they are under cure, they drink nothing but Water, with Citronpeel boiled in
it, and abstain from Flesh and Butter. They give them to eat Rice boiled in
Water, and salt Fish; but the more they abstain from eating and drinking, the
sooner they are cured. And indeed it is a wonderful thing to see the excellent
effects of their Remedies in so short a time; for they have no lingering
Distempers to hold them years together, as they do among us.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Original, Government, and Policy, of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
IT is not above six hundred years since Tunquin was first governed by
particular Kings, in regard it was anciently a part of the Dominion of the
Chinese. What is reported of the first Tunquineses, That they were without
Governors, and without Kings, is altogether fabulous* like to that which is
related of a certain Infant of three years of Age, who appearing before a great
Assembly of the People, exhorted them to free themselves from the power of the
Chinese, who were their Oppressors. Upon which a lovely Horse miraculously
appearing to the said Infant, he mounted the Horse, and immediately setting
forward with those that were gathered after him, as also others that appeared
as wonderfully to assist him, he set upon the Chinese, and defeated them in
such manner, that they never durst venture after that to return any more to
reconquer what they had lost. But the most certain truth of Tunquin History
assures us, That for these six Centuries last past* it has been governed by six
various Families. The first that assumed the Title of King was a famous Robber,
whose Name was Din, who having gathered together a great Number of
Malcontents, and Vagabonds, became so powerful and formidable through his own
Valor, that after several bloody Battles gained, it was no difficult thing for
him to seize upon the Throne. But he did not reign long in peace, for the most
part of the People rebelled against him; and in the first Battle that he
fought, he lost his Life. However his own Party won the day; and having left
two Sons, his eldest reigned three years; after whose death, the younger
Brother ruled in his stead, but died soon after, neither of the Brothers
leaving any issue behind them. After that the Kingdom was miserably distracted
by several Civil Wars, till the weaker Party calling in the Chinese to their
Assistance, became the most puissant. Then it was that a certain Mandarin, of
the Family of Lelequel, was advanced to the Throne, who being a valiant and
prudent Prince, restored tranquillity to the whole Kingdom. Who, when he saw
himself Established in peace, built that large Palace, which they, who have
seen it, admire, as well for it is Circuit, as for its magnificent Structure,
being all of Marble of diverse Colors, both within and without. This King had
but one Daughter, who soon after her Father's death, the better to secure her
self, married one of the most powerful Mandarins in the Country, of the House
of Tran. But soon after, one of her Subjects rebessing against her, gave her
battle, took her Prisoner, and put her to death. Having thus got the Power into
his hands, the Rebel usurped the Throne; but nine years after, he was also
slain in Battle by his own Subjects, who had called the Chinese to their
Assistance. They being thus Masters of the Kingdom, held it for twenty years,
and set Governors over every Province. But at length the Mandarins grew weary
of their Oppression, because of the heavy Tributes which they laid upon the
Tunquineses; so that a valiant Captain of the House of Le, having assembled a
numerous Power together, gave the Chinese three Battles, and in every one
overcame them. The Chinese thus expelled out of Tunquin, the Conqueror seized
the Crown, and in his Family the Regal Government continued for above fourscore
years. After which time, a great Lord, of the Family of Mar, which had
formerly enjoyed the Scepter, to Revenge himself of an affront which the King
had put upon him at Court, found a way to escape his hands, and being assisted
by a great Number of discontented Persons, of which the best regulated Kingdoms
are always full, and the Chinese, who always sought an opportunity to regain
what they had lost, after a bloody Battle, he possessed himself of the Kingdom,
it being never known what became of his Predecessor. But this new King enjoyed
the Fruits of his Victory but a small while. For two years afterward; a
Mandarin, of the House of Trin, having espoused the Daughter of another great
Lord, openly declared War against his Sovereign, with a design utterly to
extirpate the House of Mar. Unhapplly for him, death put a stop to his
designs, though he left two Sons behind him, able enough to have pursued his
undertakings. But the eldest, naturally timorous, and fearing to engage himself
in a dangerous War, voluntarily submitted himself to the King, who gave him the
Government of a Province, and married him to one of his Sister's Daughters. The
younger Brother being a valiant Prince, and having his deceased Father's Army
at his Devotion, though the King proposed him great advantages, would give ear
to nothing, but out of his ambition to Reign himself continued and successfully
accomplished what his Father had begun: In the second Battle which he gave the
King, who was there in person, he took him Prisoner, together with his Brother,
who had submitted to him, and some few days after he put them both publicly to
death at the head of his Army; the one as an unjust usurper of the Throne; the
either as a desertor, who had abandoned his Father's Army, and so ill followed
his intentions.

Now though as Victor he might easily have ascended the Throne, and taken upon
him the Name and Title of King* yet he would not accept of any higher Title
then that of General of the Army; and the better to Establish himself in his
Authority, and to gain the affection of the People, he-caus'd Proclamation to
be made through all the Provinces of the Kingdom, that if there were any Prince
of the House of Le yet remaining alive, he should show himself, with full
assurance that upon his appearing, he should be put into possession of the
Kingdom. There was but one to be found, who had been so closely pursued by the
House of Mar, while it ruled, that to save his Life he was forced to abscond
himself in the Frontiers of the Kingdom, under the Habit of a private Soldier.
The General was overjoyed to find that there was yet a lawful Heir of the House
of Le to be found, that he might place him upon the Throne. So that so soon as
he was known to be of the Legitimate Race, all the Equipage and Attendance of a
King was sent to him, with Order to all the Provinces as he passed along, to
receive him as if he were already crowned. The whole Army marched two days
march to meet the King, and brought him to Checo, the capital City of the
Kingdom, where he was placed in the Throne of his Father, and with great Pomp
proclaimed King of Tunquin. But General Trin, who cared not so much for the
Royal Title, as the Royal Power, so ordered his business, that leaving to Le
all the outward show and Pomp of Royal Authority, he reserved to himself the
whole command of the Army, and the greatest part of the Revenues of the Kingdom
absolutely to dispose of at his own pleasure. So that from that time to this
hour, we may affirm that there has been, and still are, two Kings of Tunquin,
of which the first has only the Name and Title of King, and is called Boua, and
the second Choua, who has all the Authority, disposing of all things at his
pleasure, while the other remains shut up in his Palace like a Slave, not
permitted to stir abroad but upon certain days: and then he is carried through
the Streets of Checo, like an Image, though with a magnificent Train and Royal
Equipage. He has generally 2000 Soldiers for his Guard; and sometimes 20000
which are quartered upon the Frontiers, chiefly toward Cochinchina. He also has
ready upon the Frontiers 50 Elephants for War. And upon the Rivers of the
Kingdom where the Enemy can come to damage him, he usually keeps 100 great
Galleys, with a vast company of small Galliots, to which the Soldiers and
Rowers that belong, have more pay then the others at Land. And these, that they
may row with more strength, row standing, with their Faces toward the Prow,
quite contrary to our Rowers, who turn their backs.

The King gives public Audience almost every day; but he makes no Edict, or
public Decree, that is of any effect, if it be not also Signed by the Choua. At
these Audiences he has with him thirty two Counselors of State, and besides
these, a hundred others to judge of all Appeals of the Kingdom. The Eunuchs
have a very great Power at Court, as in all other Courts of Asia, and the King,
as to his most important affairs, confides more in them then in his own
Children. The eldest Children do not always succeed their Father; for the
Choua, or General, with all the Counselors, which are generally his Creatures,
thought it convenient, that when the King should have more Sons then one, he
should make choice of whom he pleased to succeed him. So that so soon as he has
named him, the Choua* attended by the principal Officers of the Army*
Counselors of State, and Eunuchs, come to congratulate him, and to give him
their Oaths to set him upon the Throne after the death of his Father; and for
the other Brothers they are always shut up in the Palace, as in a Prison,
without meddling with any affairs of State. They never ^^tir out of the Palace
but four times a year, and they never stay abroad above six days at a time, the
Officers that attend them being put upon them by the Choua, who is as it were
Lord high Constable of the Kingdom. The first of these six days of liberty they
go to visit the Temples, and the Priests, to whom they give large Alms; the two
next days they take their pleasure in hunting; and the three last days they
spend their time upon the Rivers, in Galleys sumptuously trimmed and adorned*

The Kingdom* of Tunquin is divided into eight large Provinces, every one of
which has its Governor, and its Magistrates, from whose sentence there lies an
Appeal to the Court. We should wrong this Country to say that there were no
Nobility therein* as indeed there are none in most Kingdoms of Asia. But they
must all (...) to this degree their merit; some by the Wars, and some by their
Learning* They who (...) them Nobility by Arms, have where with all to live
handsomely at home; and they begin to learn their Exercises betimes* at farthest
by eleven on twelve years of* Age. The first thing they are to understand, is
how to handle their Swords* the Blades of which are straight, long, and broad,
like those of the Switzers, having but one Edge. They are also taught to aim
with their Bows, and to fire a Musket with Matches, (for they know not the use
of Firelocks) to ride the great Horse, to shoot running, and to manage their
Zagay's, which are a sort of Staves, cheek'd with Iron, like a Half-Pike. When
they are ready in all these Exercises, then they learn to make all sorts of
Artificial Fireworks; as also how to invent new ones, to make use of them
against the Elephants. By the way I must needs tell you, there are some of
these Elephants as I have seen several times, that are so accustomed to these
Artificial Fires, that they regard them not at all, neither are any way
disturbed at the Squibs that are thrown, and go off under their very Noses and
Bellies. Nevertheless of 200 of these Creatures* which the Eastern Kings carry
to their Wars at a time, you shall have hardly fifteen that are so hardy and
valiant. So that unless their Governors take not great care, instead of
running upon the Enemy, they turn upon their Friends, and put the whole Army
into a most dismal confusion; as you shall hear by the following Story. For
Aurenge-Zebe, the present Great Mogul, being then a young Prince, obtained of
Cha-geha^, his Father, to let him have the command of an Army of three score
thousand Men, and fourscore Elephants; and with this force, out of his
Antipathy to the Christians, he laid Siege to Daman, a Town belonging to the
Portugals, fourteen Leagues from Surat. The Governor wa^ a person of great
Valor, and had also two Sons with him, who, together with himself, had both
served the King of France. He had also in the Town eight hundred Gentlemen, who
voluntarily put themselves into the Garrison for its defense, from all parts of
India where the Portugueses had to do* and were all excellently well mounted.
For the Portugals at that time made use of none but Arabian Horses, the worst
of which cost a thousand Crowns at least. The Governor finding that the Indian
Prince began to press hard upon him, having already made two Assaults, resolved
with all his Cavalry and Infantry to make a Salley upon Sunday Morning, causing
them to fix at the ends of their Spears and Lances certain Artificial
Fireworks, to which they were ordered suddenly to give fire, as soon as they
should gain the Elephants Quarter. This design was so successful, that when it
came to be executed, the Elephants were so suddenly terrified, that running
impetuously through the Indian Army; they trod to the ground, and cut in pieces
with the Swords and Scithes which were fastened to their Trunks, what ever
stood in their way. The Portugals taking advantage of this confusion, made no
less havoc among the amazed Multitude, whom they had surpised securely and
profoundly asleep. For they had an opinion, that the Portugals would never
attack them upon the Sabbath day, believing they had the same veneration for
that day which the Jews had. But they were utterly deceived, in so much that
the Portugals, by virtue of this Stratagem so closely pursued, obtained a
notable Victory, to the utter destruction of 20000 of Aurenge-Zebe's Army, the
spoils whereof are reported to have amounted to above twelve Millions.

But to return to the Kingdom of Tunquin, I must tell you, that the Tunquineses
have often waged War against the Chinese, because the first would not pay the
latter the Tribute which was accorded them by a Treaty made by one of their
Kings, of the House of Le. But in the year 1667; the Chinese; seeing that the
Tartars had made themselves Masters of their Country, made a Peace with the
Tunquineses, wherein it was agreed, that the said Tribute should be no longer
paid; but that they should every year send an Ambassador only to Pequin, to do
homage to the Emperor of China.

As for their Justice and Policy, they observe a very exact Order and
Regulation over all the Kingdom of Tunquin, as well in their Cities, as in the
Country. So that few of the best regulated Kingdoms exceed them. More
especially they have a great care, for the public good, to repair the Bridges
and Highways; and every quarter of a League there is such Provision made, that
any Traveller may there meet not only with Water, but Fire also to light his
Pipe, being generally great smoakers of Tobacco.

As for Murder, they are very exact in punishing that crime. For they carry the
Person apprehended before the Judge; and then he must hold to his Mouth a
little wisp of Grass, to show, that by his disorderly life he had made himself
a Beast. Not much unlike this is the custom in Persia, where the King and his
Council condemn or pardon all but such as have murdered a Man that has any
Kindred. For then all the favor that the King can show him is, to deliver him
into the hands of the next of kin to the Person killed, who has power to agree
with the Criminal for a Sum of Money, which is rarely done, as being accounted
an Act both infamous and ignominious. So that if there be no agreement made,
then it behooves the next of kin to be the Executioner himself, and put the
Criminal to that death to which he is before condemned.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Court of the Kings of Tunquin.
ALthough the King, as I have already said, have not much Authority in his
Kingdom, which is governed altogether by the General, who has the whole Militia
at his Devotion, yet he is highly honored by his Subjects, and he keeps a very
splendid Court. The first and fifteenth day of every Month, all the Mandarins
who are the Grandees of the Kingdom, are bound to come in their Chinese Habits
to kiss the King's hands. The Constable, or General, was formerly wont to
perform the same Office, but by degrees he has obtained a dispensation, and
only sends another Prince in his stead. As for all the other Mandarins,
Governors of Provinces, Justiciaries, and Military Officers, every year they
go to kiss the Choua's hands, and to congratulate him upon the first day of the
year, which is the fifteenth of the fifth Month; as also when he has obtained
any great Victory over his Enemies. So that the General has more Honor done
him then the King himself. It Is also the custom of the Tunquineses, among the
Men, that when they meet any Person higher in condition then themselves, they
make four profound obeysances to the very Earth* But for the Women, what over
their condition be among themselves, they never make but one. They who are
desirous to be admitted into the Palace to see the King, are obliged to put on
Violet Robes, and their Servants must be clad in the same color. They that
approach the King's presence, to obtain any favor, must carry a Present along
with him. For though the Constable be the person that disposes of all Offices
and Commands over all the Court and Kingdom, yet every year upon the fifteenth
day of the seventh Month, the King distributes several considerable Gifts and
Largesses to his Courtiers; as also to the Children of such Fathers who have
performed any important Service for the good of his Kingdom. He gives them
Pains of Gold, every one worth six hundred Livres; and Bars of Silver,
amounting each to forty six Livres. The same day he also releases all
Prisoners, both Criminal and Debtors, provided the crime do not deserve death;
and that the debt do not exceed two Bars of Silver. Also every year, the three
last days of the last Month, the 40 Mandarins, who are the chief Counselors of
State, take the Oaths of all the Lords and Officers of the Court, and of their
Wives; causing them to swear to be faithful to the King, and if they know of
any thing that concerns the King's person, or his Kingdom, to discover it. All
Governors of Provinces give the same Oaths to the Lords and Gentlemen under
their Jurisdictions; and the Governors of Cities to the Citizens, and other
Inhabitants. They that discover any Treason never fail of any reward; only with
this distinction, in reference to the quality of the Persons that reveal it.
For as for the Mandarins and Gentlemen, the King rewards them according to his
own pleasure: But as for the meaner sort, whether Men or Women, they are
ennobl'd, and gratified with a reward of 50 Pains of Gold, and 500 Bars of
Silver, which in all amounts to 53000 Livres. But they esteem their Nobility
far beyond their Money.

At certain times of the year, there is a Muster of the Youth of the several
Provinces; and all those who are found not to be either of the Nobility, or not
to have learnt any Trade, are presently enrolled for the Service of the King,
who every five years make choice of such as he intends for his Guard, and sends
them to the Frontier Garrisons. There are some who endeavor to get off by
Money; but if they be discovered, both the Officers and the Soldier are
punished without redemption. For they hang a little Bell about his Neck, Fetter
his Arms, and in that posture send him to the Constable, who presently orders
his Head to be struck off. But in regard the Tunquineses are very averse from
seeing any Blood shed, the Kindred or Friends of the condemned Person,
intercede that he may be hanged, believing that death to be most honorable
which is not defiled with Bloodshed; wherein they seem to be of the Opinion of
the Turks.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Ceremonies observed when the Kings of Tunquin are advanced to the
Throne.
BEfore we speak of the Enthroning the Kings of Tunquin, and of the Ceremonies
that attend it, it behooves us to relate the manner of their setting out of the
Palace, when they go at any time to take their pleasure. The King is seated
upon a most magnificent Palanquin, carried by eight Men, where he may be beheld
by all the People; the Lords and Officers of the Court attending him on foot,
provided he do not go out of the City: for when he goes into the Country he
rides upon an Elephant, and the Lords follow him on Horseback. When the Queen
Mother, or his first Wife go abroad, they are likewise carried upon a close
Palanquin, with Lattice-Windows, to the end, they may see and not be seen; and
behind the Palanquin follow the Maids of Honor on foot.

The Mandarins, and great Princes, solemnize their Birthdays every year, with
great Feasting, Pastimes, Comedies, and Fireworks, and all their Friends and
Kindred fail not to attend them to honor the Solemnities. In the year 1645,
the eldest Son of the King, who was by his Father appointed for his Successor,
upon one of his Birthdays showed the Court all the divertizements he could
imagine, and the King who had a great affection for him, sent him a thousand
Pains of Gold, and five hundred Bars of Silver, to the value of 120000 Livres.
At which time, large Alms are distributed, especially to poor Widows and
Prisoners.

When the King dies, and leaves several Sons, they set up him whom (when alive)
he chose for his Successor. The third day after the Decease of the King, the
Constable with all the Military Mandarins, the Lords of the Council, and all
the Governors of Provinces, repair to the Prince's Appartment, where they
present him with a Chinese Habit, after which having mounted him upon an
Elephant, they bring him into one of the great Courts of his Palace, which is
all covered with Cloth of Gold and Silver as with a Tent. There it is, that
being placed upon a Throne magnificently enriched, all the Mandarins prostrate
themselves upon the Earth with their Heads downward; in which posture having
lain for some time, they rise, and closing their Hands together, with their
Arms and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, they swear to the new King to be faithful to
him till death. This first Ceremony being over, the new King, to show himself
liberal upon his first coming to the Crown, causes four Panes of Gold, and six
Bars of Silver, to be given to eve y one. But to distinguish the Constable from
the rest, he gives him twenty Panes of Gold, and forty Bars of Silver: and to
the President of the Council or Chancellor ten of Gold and twenty of Silver.
These Presents being thus made, several Pieces of Artillery are fired round the
Palace, accompanied with several Volleys of small Shot, there being then in
Arms above 30000 Horse and Foot; and then the King is set upon a magnificent
Palanquin, and the Constable and chief of the Council ride before upon lovely
Horses. Sixteen of the principal Officers of the Court carry the King, viz.
eight Military Mandarins, and eight of the Council. And in this manner they set
forward to the Apartment of the deceased King, from whence all the Lords retire
for two hours, except the Eunuchs; and then it is, that the Princesses, Ladies
of the Court, and chief Wives of the Mandarins, come to kiss the King's Hand,
and congratulate his Advancement to the Throne. Which done, all the Lords
return again to a noble Feast after the manner of the Country ready prepared.
Their Viands are not so delicate, nor so deliciously dressed as ours, neither
have they so much variety. It Is true, they have those Birds-nests, already
mentioned, which they mix in the most part of their Dishes, which gives the
Meat a taste of almost all sorts of Spices. Of all the Meats which they eat
Colts Flesh is in most esteem, and Dogs Flesh, neither of which agree with our
Palates. The Festival is concluded with Comedies and Fireworks, which la allst
the night. The next day the 30000 Men that gave their Volleys of small Shot the
day before, are drawn up in good order in a Field next, and all the principal
Officers of War, Colonels, Captains, and Lieutenants, leave the Frontiers to be
at the same place. Then the King mounted upon his Palanquin, and carried by
sixteen of his principal Officers, the Constable and grand Squire riding
before, and attended by several other Commanders on foot, with several Mummers
that play and dance before the Pallanquin, goes forth of his Palace, the Drums,
Trumpets, Cornets, and other Warlike Instruments, filling the Air with their
Martial Sounds. In this Pomp, and with this Equipage, the King being come to
the Camp, quits his Palanquin, and mounts one of his great Elephants of War,
which are used to the noise of the Guns and sight of the Fireworks. Being thus
mounted, he rides into the middle of all his Troops, in which place all the
Officers swear Fidelity to him; after which he bestows his Gifts upon them, to
every Colonel two Panes of Gold, and forty Bars of Silver; to every Captain the
half of what he gives a Colonel, and to every Lieutenant the half of what he
gives a Captain: and as for the Soldiers, they have every one a Months Pay.
These Presents being made, the whole Army discharges three Volleys, and then
every Company retreats into a large Hutt, where they have Meat and Drink
prepared for them, enough to serve them a whole day and a night. In the same
Field is also set up a fair wooden Palace, sumptuously enriched within with
Paintings and several pieces of Workmanship in Gold. There the King spends all
the night, some part in Feasting, some part in Plays and seeing the Mummers
dance, and the rest in beholding the Fireworks. The next day the King leaves
his wooden Palace, which is afterward fired by the Soldiers, as well as their
own Hutts, and so returns to the City. Being arrived at his Palace with the
same pomp that he went forth, he seats himself upon his Throne, and there shows
his Liberality to those that made the Fireworks, to the Comedians and Dancers,
and all the rest that were any way contributary, to the setting forth the Pomp
of the Ceremony. Then he gives Access to all the People, and two Commissioners,
one for the Merchants, and the other for the Handicrafts, make a Speech to the
King, the substance whereof is; that all the Burgesses and Inhabitants of the
good City of Checo do acknowledge him for their King, and that they will be
faithful to him till death. The Speech being ended, the King presents the Body
of the Merchants with 50 Panes of Gold, and 300 Bars of Silver; and the Body of
the Tradesmen with 20 Panes of Gold, and 100 Bars of Silver. The People gone
home, every one strives who shall spend most in Feasting and Comedies, adding
of their own to the Kings Bounty; so that every Quarter of the City is full of
Jollity and Rejoicing for a week together. Some days after come the
Commissioners for the Commonalty, from all parts of the Kingdom, who in the
behalf of their Cities and Towns make known to His Majesty the universal Joy of
the People for their lawful Prince, assuring him of their Fidelity, and of
their Service against the Chinese. They name particularly the Chinese,
because the Tunquineses have no greater Enemies than they, and for that the
Hatred between them is irreconcilable. The King observing the good will of his
People, testifies his Acknowledgment in this manner: All that have not time out
of mind been Rebels to their lawful Sovereigns, but have constantly taken up
Arms for their Defense, are discharged for a year from all Taxes and
Impositions; and for the rest, who have at any time formerly assisted the
Enemy, they are only exempted for six months. All Prisoners for Debt partake
also of the King's Bounty, so that after the President of the Council has made
a Composition with the Creditors for half the Sum, the King pays the rest.

It is a thing almost incredible, what a vast number of Sacrifices the King
sends to the Temples of his false Gods, to be there offered to the Idols.

The number of Beasts is said to exceed an hundred thousand, besides the value
of a million in Panes of Gold, Tissues, and ^ilks, to adorn the Idols, and
Orange-coloured Calicuts for the Bonzes, and those that attend the Service of
the Pagods. Among the rest of these Presents he sends a vast number of Pieces
of blue Calicuts for the poor people that are kept in the Pagods, as our Poor
are kept in Hospitals. The Idolatrous Princes also consume incredible Sums to
adorn the Pagods and Images of their false Gods. There are some of them three
foot high, all of massy Gold; others of Silver bigger than the Life.

The new King after all these Ceremonies are over, takes his time to go and
give thanks to his false Deities for his coming to the Crown when the Moon
first changes, shutting himself up for the first week with the Bonzes, and
living in common with them with a great deal of Frugality.

During this time he visits the principal Hospitals, to see how the poor people
are used, especially the old Folks, whom they have in great Veneration, to whom
he distributes new Alms; for naturally the Tunquineses are very charitable. To
conclude, he makes choice of some fair Situation, where he orders the building
of a new Pagod, which he devotes to some of his Idols. Thus his Devotion being
ended, upon the first day of the second Quarter, he mounts one of his Elephants
of War, attended by all the Officers of his Court on Horseback, and ten or
twelve thousand men on foot, chosen out of the whole Army to attend him. All
the second Quarter the whole Court stays in a certain Plain, where are three
Houses set up, one for the King, one for the Constable, and one for the
President of the Council; with a world of Huts for the rest. There are also
several small Cabins set up, which are not covered and closed but upon one
side, which they turn as the Wind blows; and these are the places where they
dress their Victuals: For at that time the King allows two meals a day to all
his Attendants.

Through this Plain runs the River of -- which is very broad in that place.
Upon this River are several Galleys richly gilded and painted, but especially
the Admiral, which exceeds all the rest in Magnificence. The Prow, the Poop,
the Ropes, the Oars, but only that part which goes into the water, glitter all
with Gold; the Benches very ingeniously painted, the Rowers well clad. For
there the Rowers are all Soldiers and Freemen, contrary to the Custom in
Europe. The Soldiers in their youth are taught to handle their Oars, and have
somewhat better Pay than the Land-Souldiers. The Galleys are not so big as
ours, but they are longer, and cut the water better. While the King stays in
this place, he diverts himself with seeing these Galleys row one against
another. In the Evening the Rowers come ashore with their Captains to kiss the
King's Hand, and they that have behaved themselves most stoutly and nimbly,
carry off the Marks of his Bounty. The seven days being past, the King calls
before him all the Soldiers of the Galleys with their Officers, and gives them
two months Wages extraordinary, as he does to his Land-Souldiers. It Is a
wonderful thing to behold the vast number of Fireworks which they throw about,
as well upon the Land as upon the Water. For my Brother, who has been present
at all these Shows, has told me, that for these seven days together you would
think the Air and Water all on fire. Being at Bantam I once saw one of these
artificial Firework-Shews which the Tunquineses that were there played off
before the King, and I must confess it was quite another thing from what we
make in Europe.

The seven days being past, the King returns to the City in the same order, and
with the same pomp, as he went forth* and being come to his Palace, he goes
directly to the Apartment of his Princesses* where none but his Eunuchs
accompany him, where he stays all the rest of the month. Every Evening he
diverts himself with new Fireworks, which are played off before the Women's
Lodgings; where also the Eunuchs, together with the Comedians and Mummers,
contribute to divertise the Ladies.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of Tunquin, and of their manner of Burying
their Dead.
When the King of Tunquin dies, he is presently Embalmed and laid in a Bed of
State, where for sixty five days the People have liberty to come and see him.
All that time he is served as he was when he was alive; and when the Meat is
taken from before the Body, one half is given to the Bonzes, and the other half
to the Poor. So soon as the King has breathed his last gasp, the Constable
gives notice thereof to the Governors of Provinces, and orders them how long
they shall Mourn.

All the Military Mandarins and Judges wear Mourning generally three years, the
King's Household nine months, the Nobility six, and the meaner sort three
months. During these three years there is a Cessation from all Divertisements,
except those that attend the Ceremony of the King's Advance or Elevation to the
Throne. All the Viands which are served up to the King are vernish'd with
Black. The King cuts his Hair, and covers his Head with a Bonnet of Straw, as
do likewise all the Princes and Counselors of State; neither do they leave off
that Habit till the King's Body be in the Galley which is to carry him to his
Enterment. Three Bells which hang in one of the Towers of the Palace, never
leave tolling from the King's expiring till the Corpse be put into the Galley.
The third day after his Decease all the Mandarins repair to Court, to testify
their sorrow which they have for the Death of the deceased King, and ten days
after that the People are allowed to see the Body lie in State, till it be put
into the Galley.

During the sixty five days that the Body is thus exposed, the Constable is
busy in preparing for the Funeral Pomp. From the Palace to the place where the
Galleys wait for the Body, it is about two days Journey, and all the way

The Order observed in the March of the Funeral Pomp at the Interrment of the
Kings of Tunquin.



The Order observed in the March of the Funeral Pomp at the Interment of the
Kings of Tunquin.
1. Two Messengers of the Chamber proclaim the deceased King's Name; each of
them bears a Mace, the Head whereof is full of combustible stuff for Artificial
Fire or Fusees.

2. Next proceed Twelve Elephants; on each of the four foremost is one bearing
the King's Standard. Then follow four other Elephants, with Wooden Turrets on
their Backs, and in every one of these are Six Men, some being armed with
Muskets, others with Fire Lances. The four last Elephants do severally carry a
kind of Cage; some of which are on all sides shut up with Glass Windows, the
other with a sort of Grates; the first being of a Square, the other having six
sides and facing.

3. Then rides the Master of the Horse, attended with two Pages on Horseback.

4. Twelve Horses are led by the Bridle two and two, by as many Captains of the
Guard. The Harness of the first Six Horses is very rich, the Bit, and all the
Furniture of the Bridle and Saddle are of pure Gold, the Saddles are
embroydered likewise with Gold: But the Six other Horses Harness is all covered
over with Gold Plates.

5. The Chariot which bears the Mausolee, wherein is the King's Corpse, is
dragged by Eight Stags trained to this Service. Each of these Stags is led by a
Captain of the Life Guard.

6. Then follows the new King afoot clad in White Satin, with a Straw Cap on
his Head. If he has any Brothers, they attend on him in the like Attire; and
they are surrounded with Musicians and Players on the Hoboys, and other
Instruments.

7. There proceeds afterward Six Princesses in White Satin, who carry Meat
and Drink for the deceased King. These are attended by two Ladies of Honor in
Purple Garments; and about these Ladies are several Musicians.

8. Eight Princes of the Royal Blood go in Purple Garments with Straw Hats.

9. Four Governors of the four chief Provinces of the Kingdom, each bearing a
Stick on his Shoulder, on which hangs a Bag full of Gold and several Perfumes;
and these Bags contain the Presents which the several Provinces make unto the
deceased King, for to be buried with his Corpse, that he may make use of the
same in the other World.

10. Two Chariots go next, each drawn by Eight Horses, and every Couple being
led by Two Men. In each Chariot is a Coffer or Trunk full of Bars of Gold and
other Riches, for the deceased King's use in the Life to come.

11. A great Crowd of the King's Officers, and of the Nobility, do follow this
Funeral Pomp, some afoot and some on horseback, according to their Offices and
Qualities.

Place this Page 46.



A Continuation of the Order observed at the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of
Tunquin, setting out from the City of Bodlego.
The King's Body is put into a Galley, which is drawn up the River. This River
is increased by several Brooks that come down from the Mountains, and it runs
through barren and Desert Countries. In some of these places they are wont to
bury the Corpse very privately; for six only of the chief Eunuchs of the Court
are to know where the King has been buried. An Oath is tendered to them never
to reveal the place. And this is done perhaps on some Religious Motive, and
likewise through Fear, that the Treasures which are buried by him should be
dug up. These Riches are ordinarily some Massy Bars of Gold and Silver, as
likewise some Pieces of Cloth of Gold and Silver, and such kinds of other rich
Furnitures, which he is to make use of (as they say) when he has need of them
in the other World. Many Lords and Ladies of the Court will needs be buried
Alive with him, for to serve him in the places where he is to go. I have
observed in passing through the Estates of the Raja or Prince of Velouche,
which border on the Easterly parts of the Kingdom of Visapour, that the Wives
suffer themselves to be buried Alive near their deceased Husbands, instead of
being burned, as they practice in other Provinces of the Indies.

A. Here you see the Prospect of the City of Bodlego.

B. The Galley where the King's Corpse is.

C. Two Galleys do carry the Lords who go to be buried Alive with the King.
That which is grated about is full of Ladies, who likewise offer themselves to
be interred Alive with him.

D. Other Galleys, wherein are the Treasures which are to be buried with the
Corpse.

Place this next to, The Order in the March of the Funeral Pomp, etc.

Tunquin page 47

A Representation of the Wagons and Boats which in form of a Convoy carry
the Beasts and provision necessarry for the sustenance of those that (...) the
Funeral Pomp at the interrment of the Kings of Juquin from Choco to
Bodlego-where the body is put in a Galley to be conveyed to the Sepulcher*





spread with Violet-colour'd Calicut, which is the King's Color. But in regard
the King and all the Court march afoot both going and coming, they make it
seventeen days Journey. At every quarter of a Leagues end are set up Huts,
where is ready prepared Water to drink, and Fire to light their Tobacco. After
the Pomp is over, and that the King is returned home, the Cloth is taken up and
given to the Bonzes.

As to the order of their March it is thus: The two men that go foremost of all,
are the two Ushers of the Door of the King's Chamber, who go repeating aloud
the Name of the deceased King, carrying each of them a Mace of Arms, the bole
whereof is full of artificial Fireworks. The twelve that follow, are the twelve
chief Officers of the Galley, which draw the Tomb whereon the King's Name is
written. Then follows the grand Squire on Horseback, attended by two others.
Next appear twelve led Horses, which are led two by two, six of which have
their Bridles enriched with thin Plates of Gold, and their Saddles embroydered.
The other six with Bridles of Gold, and Housses embroidered, and fringed about
with a Gold and Silver Fringe; every Horse being led by two men. Next to them
follow twelve Elephants, four which carry each of them a man carrying a
Standard; four others which carry each of them a Tower with six men apiece,
some with Muskets, others with Fire Lances; the four last carry each of them a
kind of a Cage, of which one is made with Glass Windows before and upon each
side; the other like a kind of a Lattice, and the other with four kinds of
Ruffs: and these are the King's Elephants which he rode upon when he went to
the Wars. Behind them follow eight Horses, every one of them led by a Captain
of the Guard, who draw the Hearse. The new King, and his Brothers if he have
any, or the Princes of the Blood, follow the Hearse, clad in Robes of White
Satin, which is their Mourning Color. Lastly follow two Chariots, each one
drawn by eight Horses, and carrying two Coffers, wherein are the Panes of Gold,
Bars of Silver, rich Tissues and Habits, which are to be buried with the Body
of the deceased King.

The Funerals of the Tunquineses.
AS fer the ordinary Funerals of the Tunquineses, they are more or less
pompous, according to the Quality of the Persons.

At their Enterments they use great store of artificial Fireworks, which are
the Companions as well of their Sorrow as their Joy. They set upon the Tomb of
the deceased good store of Victuals and Comfitures, out of a belief that the
dead are the better for them. For their Priests keep them in that blind Error
for their own advantage, and so well order their business, that there is
nothing left by morning. The same thing is practiced by the Chinese at
Batavia, where they have a place without the Town to bury their dead, which
puts me in mind of this Story: Every evening the Guard is relieved as well in
the City as in the Fortress. At the same time also they put forth eight
Soldiers and a Corporal at each Gate of the City, who go the Rounds about the
Walls of the City, and as far as within Canon-shot of the Walls, being fearful
of being surprised by the King of Mataran, or Bontam, their Capital Enemies.
Now because the Chinese burying place lay in the Walk of these Soldiers, when
they saw the Provant upon one of the Tombs, took it away to their Guard, and
there feasted themselves. The Chinese Priests, that usually came about midnight
to take away the Victuals, finding themselves several times bereaved of their
Expectations, and suspecting the Soldiers belonging to the Holland Garrison,
first complained to the General and Council; but that not taking effect, they
resolved to poison both the Meat and the Drink, to prevent the like Fraud for
the future. This took so good effect, that afterward many of the Dutch
Soldiers being poisoned, deterred the rest from any more such Licorish
Attempts.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Religion and Superstition of the Tunquineses
THe Tunquineses as to matters of Religion are divided into three Sects: The
first takes its original from an ancient Philosopher called Confutius, whose
Memory is very famous over all China, and the neighboring Countries. Their
Doctrine asferts that Man is composed of two parts, the one fine and subtle,
the other material and gross; and that when Man dies, the subtiler part goes
into the Air, and the grosser part stays in the Earth. This Sect maintains the
use of Sacrifices, and adores the seven Planets. But among all their Gods and
Idols they have four in particular veneration; the Names of these Gods are
Rauma, Betolo, Ramonu, and Brama. They have a Goddess also, whose Name is
Satisbana, which is she whom the Women adore; but for the King and the
Mandarins, especially the more studious sort, they adore the Heavens. The
second Sect had so its Founder a certain Hermit called Chacabout; and is
followed by the most part of the meaner people. He has taught them the
Transmigration of Souls, and has enjoined his Followers to observe 10
Commandments.

The first is, That they shall not kill. 2. That they shall not steal. 3. That
they shall not defile their Bodies- 4. That they shall not lie. 5. That they
shall not be unfaithful in their words. 6. That they shall restrain their
inordinate Desires. 7. That they shall do injury to no man. 8. That they shall
not be great Talkers. 9. That they shall not give way to their Anger. 10. That
they shall labor to their utmost to get Knowledge.

As for them that design to live a Religious Life, they must renounce the
Delights of this Life, be charitable to the poor, overcome their Passions, and
give themselves up to Meditation. He taught moreover, that after this Life
there were ten distinct places of Joy and Torment: and that the Contemners of
this Law should feel Torments proportionable to their Offenses, without any end
of their Torments. That they that endeavored to fulfill his Law, and had
failed in any point, they should wander in diverse Bodies for 3000 years before
they entered into happiness. But that they who had perfectly obeyed his Law,
should be rewarded without suffering any change of Body. And that he himself
had been born ten times, before he enjoyed the Bliss which he possessed, not
having in his first Youth been illuminated with that Knowledge which he
afterward attained. This Chacabout was one of the greatest Impostors that ever
was in Asia, having spread his Opinions over all the Kingdom of Stam, over a
great part of the Provinces of Japon, and from thence into Tunquin, where he
died.

The third Sect is that of Lanthu, to whose Fables the Japonneses and Chinese
give great credence, but the Tunquineses more. He was a Chinese by Nation, and
one of the greatest Magicians in the East. He made a great many Disciples, who
to authorize this black Impostor, and the more to impose upon the people, made
them believe that the Birth of Lanthu was miraculous, and that his Mother
carried him in her Womb, without losing her Virginity, seventy years. He taught
much of Chacabout's Doctrine; but that which won the Hearts of the people was,
that he still exhorted the Grandees to build Hospitals in all Cities where
there had been none before. Insomuch that several of the Nobility betook
themselves to those places to look after the Sick, as did also a great number
of the Bonzes for the same reason. While my Brother was there, the Choua, a
great Enemy to these Vagabonds, sent for a great number of Bonzes and Says, or
idle Fellows, and picking out the strongest and best proportioned, sent them
away to the Frontiers for Soldiers.

It Is the Custom of the Tunquineses to adore three things in their Houses: The
first is the Hearth of their Chimney made of three Stones The second is an Idol
which they call Tiensa, which is the Patroness of Handicrafts, as Sculpture,
Painting, Goldsmith's work, etc. So that when they put forth a Child to learn
any of those Trades, before they let him work they set up an Altar; and
sacrifice to this Idol, to the end he may infuse into the Lad wit and aptness
to learn. The third is the Idol Buabin, which they implore when they design to
build an House. For then they erect an Altar, and send for the Bonzes and Says
to sacrifice to this Idol. To this purpose they make great preparation of all
sorts of Viands, and then present him with several gilt Papers, wherein are
written several Magic words, endeavoring by that means that he may not suffer
any misfortune to befall the House they are going to build.

There are some Tunquineses that adore the Heaven, others the Moon, and others
the Stars There are also some that adore five parts of the Earth, making a
fifth part in the middle of that which is known to us, and to them also, but
confusedly. When they worship them, they have for each of the parts a
particular Color. When they adore the Northern part, they clothe themselves in
black; and the Dishes and Table whereon they lay their Sacrifices are likewise
black. When they worship the South their Habit is red; when the East, green;
when the West, white; and when they adore the middle of the World, they wear
Yellow.

They offer Offerings likewise to Trees, Elephants, Horses, Cows, and almost to
all other sorts of Animals. They that study the Chinese Characters are
accustomed every fifth month of the year, to sacrifice for the Souls of the
dead who were never buried. They believe that by so doing their Understandings
shall be more enlightened for the apprehending of all things.

Every year, at the beginning of the year, they have a great Solemnity, to
honor after their death those who in their lifetime have done any noble
action, and were renowned for their Valor, reckoning in that number those that
have been so hardy as to rebel against their Princes, as being men of Courage.
Three days before this great Solemnity, which is performed in a large Field,
they set up several Altars, some for the Sacrifices, others for the Names of
the Illustrious Men whom they design to honor. The Eve before above 40000
Soldiers spend the night in this Plain, where all the Princes and Mandarins
are ordered to meet with their Elephants and led Horses, and the King himself
goes thither in person. After they have finished all their Sacrifices, and
burnt good store of Incense to the Honor of the dead, the King and all the
Mandarins make three profound Reverences where the Altars are; then the King
shoots with his Bow and Arrows five times against the Altars, where lie the
Names of those that were so rash as to rebel against their Sovereigns. After
that the great Guns go off, and the Soldiers give three Volleys of small Shot,
to put all the Souls to flight. Then they burn all the Altars, and a great
number of gilt Papers, which were made use of at the Sacrifices; concluding all
with a most hideous shout of all the Soldiery. Which done, the Bonzes, Says,
and such like people, come and devour the Meat that was made use of for the
Sacrifices.

The first and fifteenth days of the Month it is a wonderful thing to hear the
Chiming Din of their great Bells. For those are the more especial Holydays set
apart for the Worship of their Gods, and all the Bonzes and Says give them more
than ordinary Worship upon those days, redoubling their Prayers, and repeating
upon those days every one of them a strange kind of Charm six times over. At
these times several people bring Meat and Drink to the Sepulchers of their
Kindred, to sacrifice for the good of their Souls to eat. The Bonzes fail not
to be there, and when the others have paid their Devoirs the Bonzes fall to,
and what they cannot eat they give to the poor. But for all the austere Lives
of these Bonzes and Says, neither the King nor the Mandarins make any account
of them, so that they are in credit only with the common people.

In the Kingdom of Tunquin, where the great Cities have several Pagods, there
is hardly a Town or Village that has not one, and for every Pagod at least two
Bonzes and two Says. But there are some Pagods that maintain forty Bonzes and
as many Says, who live in common under a Superior, they keep to the Doctrine
of Chacabout, and a Goat is the Idol which they adore. They wear about their
Necks a kind of Necklace, consisting of 100 Beads, very big and made of Wood.
In their Hands they carry a Staff, which is headed with a Bird of varnished
Wood. They beg for their living, and are not like the Bonzes in other Kingdoms,
who beg Alms as it were their due; these on the contrary use all the modesty
and humility that may be, never taking more than is needful for them: and if
they have any thing to spare, they give it to the poor Widows or Orphans that
cannot get The Representation Of The Pagod's Or Temples Of The Idolators In
Tunquin, With The Figures Of Their Dieties, and Their Different Posturs Which
They Use When They Do Penance, And Accomplish Their Superstiti^s Vows, Or
When They Practice Their Magic Imposturs Which They Are Much Addicted Nj.
Thaibout. 2. Thaiphou Thoui. 3. Bagoti, Magitians, And Witches

their living. Their Orders permit them to marry, provided they leave their
Monastery. They assist at the Funerals of great men, where they say a kind of
Orizon, sounding their Trumpets and Cornets, while the Bells in their Pagods go
at the same time.

The Tunquineses also have a great veneration for two Magicians, and one
Magicianess. The first of their Magicians, whom they call Tay-bou, makes them
believe that he knows the Events of things to come; so that when they have any
occasion to marry their Children, build a House, buy Land, or undertake any
business of Consequence, they consult this Oracle to know what shall happen to
them. The Magician courteously receives them, and with a counterfeit modesty
demands of them (for Example) the Age of the person concerned. Then taking into
his hands a great Book about three fingers thick, wherein are the Figures of
Men, half Men, and several sorts of Land and Water Animals, of Circles,
Triangles, and Squares, he goes to work, and at the same time puts into a
Goblet three Pieces of Copper, whereon are engraven several Characters only
upon one side. After he has shaken the Pieces in the Cup, he throws them upon
the ground as at Cross and Pile; if all the Characters lie undermost he looks
no further in his Book, but looks upon it as an unfortunate sign; but if one or
two Characters come up, he looks in his Book, and makes the person believe what
he pleases. But if all the Characters happen to turn uppermost, then the
Magician cries out, that the Party is the most fortunate in the world.

The second Magician is called Thay-Phou-Thouy, to whom they have recourse in
all their Sicknesses. When any sick person comes to him, he takes a Book full
of Figures like the former; only the Form of the Book is different, for this
is not above an inch thick, and about four fingers long, with eight Panes full
of Ciphers. If after several Apish tricks which he acts before the sick person
to amuse him, he affirms that the Distemper comes from the Devil, he himself,
together with the sick party and they that brought him, do Homage to the evil
spirit: this Homage consists of several Sacrifices, and the Friends of the sick
party present to the Devil, or rather to the Magician, a Table furnished with
Rice and other Viands. But if after all these Offerings the sick party do not
recover his health, all the Friends and Kindred of the sick party, with as many
Soldiers as they can get, surround the sick persons House, and shoot off their
Muskets three times, to drive away the Devil. Sometimes the Magician makes the
sick party and his Friends believe, that the God of the Waters is the cause of
the Distemper, especially if the sick person belongs to the Water, as being a
Mariner, Boatman, or Fisherman. And to the end he may be cured, and that the
appeased God may return to his watery Habitation, he orders that all the way
from the sick parties House to the next River may be spread with all the Pieces
of Stuff which all the Kindred have, and that they set up Huts at such and such
distances, and keep in every one a several Table furnished with all sorts of
Viands for 3 days. And all this to oblige the Deity to retire, and to entertain
him till he gets home. But the better to know the rise of the Disease,
Thay-Phou-Thouy makes them believe, that they must go and consult Thay-Bou, who
is the chief Magician, and if he answer that the Souls of the dead have caused
the Distemper, the Magician imploys all his tricks and devices to draw to him
those mischievous Souls; and when he has got into his Clutches, as he pretends,
the Soul that is the Author of the Disease, he shuts him up in a Bottle full of
Water till the party be cured; and then breaking the Bottle he sets the Soul at
liberty to go about his business. When the party recovers, he makes him and his
Friends believe, that if the Bottle had not been well stopped to keep in the
Soul, their Kinsman would have died infallibly.

The Magicianess, which the Tunquineses also consult, is called Bacoti, and she
keeps a great Correspondence with the Devil, to whom, if she has a Daughter,
she offers her as soon as she is born, the more to oblige him. If any Mother
bewail the death of her Child, and be desirous to know in what condition the
Soul of the Child is in, in the other world, she goes to Bacoti, who to
satisfy the Mother presently falls a beating her Drum, to summon the Soul to
come to her, who presently appears, as she pretends, and tells her its
Condition whether good or bad. But most commonly she makes the silly Mothers
believe that the Soul is happy, and bids them be of good cheer.

The Superstitions of these people are very numerous, but the most remarkable
are these:

The studious sort of people are very diligent to learn, how by looking in a
Mirror to foretell things to come.

There are some that present Aqua Vitae to the dead, and sprinkle their Ashes
with it; but this only upon the Ashes of their Ancestors, from whom at the
same time they beg for Health, Honor, and Riches.

Others there are, that upon the first day of their year take a piece of Chalk,
and make several Figures round, square, and triangular, upon the Threshold and
Steps of their Doors. They say those Figures fright away the evil spirits. Some
there are that make great Observations upon the Feet of their Hens, and draw
strange Conclusions of bad or ill fortune from thence. Others traveling into
the Country, if they sneeze but once by the way, return to the place from
whence they parted in the morning, saying, That had they gone on, some mischief
would have certainly befallen them: but if they sneeze twice, they pursue their
Journey, never fearing any danger for that day.

There are some so superstitious, that going out of their Houses, if they meet
a Woman, they return home again for two or three hours; but if they meet a Man,
it is a good Omen.

The first Fruit which they gather at the beginning of the year, is that which
the Araguer bears, spoken of in the third Chapter. And this is the first which
they eat with great Ceremony, during the first Quarter of their second Month.
To which purpose they are so possessed with the Devil, that they poison one of
these Fruits, and give it to a Child to eat, believing that by taking away the
life of the poor innocent Child, they shall thrive the better all the year
after.

When the Moon is eclipsed, they say there is a certain Dragon that assails
her, and endeavors with all his might to overcome her, with an intention to
devour her. Then to assist the Moon, and to put the Dragon to flight, they
discharge their Muskets, ring their Bells, beat up their Drums, and make a
hideous noise till the Eclipse be over: and then they believe that they have
rescued the Moon, for which they make as great a rejoicing, as if they had
obtained some eminent Victory over their Enemies.

They are also very superstitious in reference to the hours of the day. They
divide the natural day into twelve hours, and to every one they give the name
of some Beast, as of a Tiger, a Lion, a Bear, a Horse, a Dragon, an Ape, etc.
The Months also and Days have their particular Names: and when a Child is
born, presently the Father and Kindred go to see the name of the Beast by which
the Hour was called wherein the Child was born; believing that Animal will
prove fatal to it. At the time that my Brother was at the Court at Tunquin, the
King then reigning being born in the hour of the Horse, would never give
Audience, nor ever stir out of his Palace at that hour, for fear some mischief
should befall him at that time. That Prince was so superstitious, that one of
his Children dying in the fifth month, which bears the name of the Horse, he
would never permit him to be enterr'd, but caused him to be burnt, and
scattered his ashes in the Air.

This is that which I could gather of most remarkable and most considerable
matters concerning the State of the Kingdom of Tunquin, either out of the
Manuscripts which my Brother (who died in the Indies) left me, or from the
Discourse which I have had with the Tunquineses themselves both at Bantam and
Baravia.

OF THE ISLAND OF FORMOSA.
CHAP. I.
How the Hollanders possessed themselves of it, and how it was taken from them
by the Chinese.
THE Island of Formosa is about Eighty Leagues in compass; so that the
Hollanders were never in possession of the whole Island, but were only Masters
of four Fortresses, and two and fifty Villages, wherein they could number about
fourteen or fifteen thousand Inhabitants. As for that part which is under the
Indians, the best discovery that we can give, is only such as was made by a
young Hollander upon this occasion.

There was in the chief Fort belonging to the Hollanders a young man, employed
there as an under Factor, who being wild and extravagant, was put out of his
place and made a Soldier. He not able to undergo that miserable course of
life, resolved with himself rather to die, than live in that mean condition.
Thereupon having at several opportunities made a shift to make up a little Pack
of what he thought was most fit for the Mountainiers of the Island, he watched
his time and stole out of the Fort, and took his way directly toward the
Mountains. With these Highlanders he lived four years, in which time having
learnt the Trade and Language of the Country, he ventured to return to the
Hollanders again, who received him kindly, as being willing to understand the
Government of the People, and by what means they might traffic with them.
Whereupon the young man made them this Relation.

As for the Government of the People he said, that over every six Villages
there was an Overseer with four Counselors, who administer Justice, and punish
the smallest Theft with Death. The Men are crucified; the Women are laid along
upon a thick Beam of Wood, and then with a Scimitar their Bodies are divided
into three parts. The Men are so punished for Theft or Murder, and the Women
for Theft or Adultery. If it be a Pety Larceny, not above the value of a
Shilling, they give them an hundred Lashes with a Whip, and burn them in the
Cheek. They that believe themselves to be unjustly dealt with, whether in Civil
or Criminal Causes, enter their Appeal to go to the North East part of the
Island, in which division of the Island there stands a City by the Seaside,
where he that commands all the Highlanders resides. At the end of our Month of
March several of these Highlanders resort to this City, especially the
Merchants, who carry along with them all their whole Stock that they had
hoarded together the year before in Horns of Oxen, Hearts, Bufulo's, and Raw
Hides, and then return again at the end of April, bringing back in return of
their Commodities Japon and China Stuffs, Clothes, and Linen of the same
Country, and Gold and Silver Japonese Money, of various Coyns and Value. He
told them also, that he believed that in the Mountains near the Sea, there are
certain Mines of Gold and Silver, or some River where they find it in Powder,
and that the Japoneses fetch it in their Vessels. He did all he could to
discover the truth, but after he had traveled two or three days Journey, the
People would let him go no further. For at the end of every three or four hours
travel there are Guards set, who examine all Travelers whither they go;
neither will they let their own Countrymen pass, but such as go about their Law
or to trade. Moreover he told them, that if they would give him Goods to trade
withal, as Amber, Coral, Looking Glasses; but chiefly some Skins of the Sea
Fish, which is rougher than Seal-skin, he would endeavor to get to the very
City it self where the Ships ride. These Skins are greatly esteemed by the
Natives to adorn the Scabbards of their Cutlasses and Swords. For usually upon
the back of this Fish you shall find nine little Stones, which make a kind of a
Rose, eight in a Circle and one in the middle, as you see these nine disposed
in their exact order. When the Portuguezes traded only to Japon, it is
incredible how dear they sold these Skins. For if Nature had well set these
Stones at an equal distance, and even in bigness, one of these Skins would
yield above ten thousand Piasters, and more. This Fish is caught in the Persian
Gulf, where I have seen of them, but I saw but very few so perfect as that
which I have described, which would in those Countries yield ten thousand
Crowns.

But to return to the Story; the Governor gave the young man what he desired,
and sent him going: but the Chinese soon after expelling the Hollanders out of
the Island, it was never known what became of the young man.

It may be wondered why Formosa was taken so soon: but here were two Reasons,
first the faint-heartedness of the Governor, and secondly his breach of word
to a French Soldier of Rouen, called Abraham du Puys; for he having served out
his time of seven years, desired leave to be gone, but the Governor, after he
had promised him fair at first, at length absolutely refused him. Soon after
the Chinese came to besiege the place. The Soldier thus disappointed, and
seeing himself cooped up who might have been free, had the Governor so
pleased, studied a fatal revenge upon all his Countrymen; for being by this
means grown desperate, watched his opportunity, and flinging himself from the
Fort into the Sea, swam directly to the Enemy. The Governor offered 200 Pieces
of Eight to any person that would venture after him, and bring him back dead or
alive. A Sergeant accepted his offer, but it was to get loose as the other had
done; and so they got both safe into the Enemies Quarters. The Chinese
presently carried them to the General Coxima; and he being a person of Valor
and Discretion, made very much of them, whereupon they readily and willingly
informed him of the strength and condition of the Fortress. They also advised
him to remove his Batteries to the weakest part of the Town, whereas he was
then assailing it where it was most strongly fortified: which if he would do,
they assured him he should be soon Master of the Fort. The General was thinking
a little before they came to have raised his Siege, but upon their
encouragement he fell on again according to their direction; and as he was
preparing for a general Assault, the Holland Commander, fearful of losing his
Life and his Estate, beat a Parley, and surrendered the place upon Articles.

During the Siege the Hollanders made a Salley, but were beaten in again, and
fourteen of their men were taken Prisoners. The Chinese finding those fourteen
men in their power, and remembering how cruel the Hollanders had been to their
Nation when they took any of them at Sea, brought the fourteen men all
together, put out one eye of each, cut off their Noses, Ears, and one hand, and
so sent them back to the Fort, with order to tell the Commander, that the Dutch
had taught them that kind of Mercy.

CHAP. II.
Of Maurice Island, where they cut Ebony.
THE Island called Maurice Island lies almost in 84 degrees of Longitude, and
21 degrees of Southern Latitude, being but 2 degrees and 30 minutes from the
Tropic of Capricorn, right over against the middle of the great Island of
Madagascar, which it has upon the West, from whence it lies 140 Leagues, and is
in compass about 60 Leagues. It bears great quantities of Ebony: and here it
was that the Hollanders did formerly send their Slaves, their banished and
condemned Persons, to cut that sort of Wood, which is Labor much more severe
and cruel than that of Rowing in the Galleys. The whole Island is subject to
those violent and outrageous Tempests called Ouragans, which nothing can
withstand, so that the People are forced to dig themselves Holes in the ground,
not being able to keep their Huts standing. Neither had the poor Creatures any
other Food than a little boiled Rice, and about a Farthings worth of Salt-fish
among four for a whole day. Since that the Price of Ebony being brought very
low, the Dutch have forsaken the Island, the Profit not bearing the sorry
Expenses which those poor Creatures put them to.

So soon as this Tree is cut down it must be sawed into Planks, and then buried
seven or eight foot deep in the Earth, which ought to be somewhat moist. There
those Planks must lie two years, and sometimes three, if the Wood be very
thick. After that the Wood is fit to be wrought upon, neither will it splinter
or split, and will the sooner admit of a glittering Polishment.

This Maurice Island puts me in mind of a Story, that the Sieur Loocker told
me, concerning what befell him in his Voyage from Holland to Batavia in the
Year 1643. Cha Abbas the second of that Name, King of Persia, having a great
desire to learn to paint, signified to the Hollanders at Hispahan, that he
desired them to send into Holland for some person who was excellent both in
Designing and Painting. Thereupon the Chief of the Factory wrote into Holland,
and upon his Letters the Company sent away Loocker, to oblige the King; and to
do him the greater honor, gave him the charge of Merchant of the Vessel, who
is equal with the Captain, during the Voyage; to whom the Wind and Season was
very favorable till they came to the Cape of Good Hope; but after they had
doubled the Point, the Pilots bare too much to the North, whereas they should
have steered directly East; so that when they had made the Height of the Island
of Madagascar, they met with nothing but contrary Winds. For it is observable,
that all the year long there blows but one Wind toward Maurice Island; so that
a Ship may go thither in eight or nine days, but cannot return in thirty or
forty. For you must steer Westward to 30 degrees, and from thence Eastward to
14 or 15 degrees, and then you light upon Maurice Island. Five days together
the Ship was but rudely handled by the storm; which at length grew so violent,
and the Sea so boisterous, that all the great Cabin was broken to pieces, the
Beak of the Ship carried away, and the Foremast made unserviceable. Thirteen
days together they remained in this miserable condition, tossed up and down by
the Sea and Wind, all which time they never saw the Sun, unable to take any
height or observation where they were. The fourteenth day it cleared up, and
the Sun appeared, and then taking the Height they observed themselves to be not
far from the Maurice Island, which was very true; for the next day by break of
day they found themselves not above two Leagues from the Island; and they found
themselves upon the North side of the Island, whereas the Hollanders lived upon
the South. And therefore perceiving that if the Wind did not change, it would
be a long time, and that with great difficulty too, before they could fetch a
compass about the Island to come to the Fort where the Hollanders were, they
called a Council, where it was resolved that Loocker with ten Soldiers should
be put on shore, and that he should endeavor to get to the Fort by Land, there
to make provision of Water and Refreshments for the rest of the Company,
against they could come about. Maurice Island has this advantage, to be
furnished with excellent Water, and great store of Goats, Oranges, Citrons, and
other Fruits: but when the Ouragans happen there is not one to be seen upon the
Trees, unless only upon those which are sheltered by the Ebony Boughs, which
are thick and strong, and the Trees deeply rooted in the Earth. Loocker
thereupon with ten Soldiers was put on shore in a Shallop, with Provisions for
six days. Nor was the Island in that part above eight or ten Leagues broad,
which they thought to travel in few days: but the Woods were so thick, that had
they not been well provided of Carpenters Hatchets and Axes, they could never
have made their way. The first day they traveled not above a League, and the
next day not above as much more, being still forced to hack their way along
with great travel and pains. So that being now weary and spent, they laid
themselves upon the ground to repose themselves, and get a little sleep. When
they waked they heard the voices of several people, which much rejoiced them,
believing them to be the Slaves and poor Creatures that were cutting Ebony not
far off. Thereupon they fell to work to get as near them as they could: but the
Woods proved so thick, that they despaired of doing any good. Nevertheless the
further they advanced, the clearer they could hear the voices of the people,
some speaking Dutch, others Portuguese. Whereupon Loocker caused one of the
Soldiers in his company that had a strong voice, to call out in the Portuguese
Language, to the people to come and help them. But instead of that they all
betook themselves to their heels, and fled to the Commander's Lodge, telling
him that there were Devils in the Woods, and that they had called to them in
the Portugal Language. The Commander feeing both the Soldiers and the Slaves
in such a dismal amaze and terror, knew not at first what to think; however he
endeavored to resettle their distraction, and to revive a sort of people that
were half dead with fear. The next day he persuaded them to return to their
Work, persuading them to lay aside their vain Fears, which proceeded only from
idle Apprehensions: but they flatly denied him, telling him that they would
rather die, than return to be torn in pieces by the Devil. However, others that
had not been present at the accident, and therefore gave not so much credit to
the report, proffered to see the utmost of this business, provided any one that
had heard the voice would bring them to the place. Away upon this went a good
number of them together, and coming to the place fell to work. Now because
Loocker and his Companions having labored all the night before, were fallen
asleep; for a good while the Workmen heard no voice at all, nor so much as any
thing stirring, so that they began to laugh at those that had brought them
thither, who still obstinately maintained the truth of what they had heard.
This Dispute at length began to grow so hot and so loud, that at length they
waked Loocker and his Fellows, who being now got nearer to them by means of
their last nights labor, heard distinctly every word they said, and
notwithstanding their distress could not choose but laugh. Soon after Loocker
and the Soldiers called out again, Work toward us, they cried, we are
Hollanders, come and help us out of the Wood, and we will put an end to the
dispute. But the Workmen no sooner heard them, but away they ran for their
Lives, and when they came to the Lodge, they were so har'd, so scared, and
quite out of breath, that the Governor in vain endeavored to get the least
tittle of a word from them. At length being come to themselves, they assured
him that it was too true that the Devils were in the Wood, and that the more to
deceive and wheedle them, to day they had not only spoken Portuguese, but
Dutch too. This put the Governor and all into a deep Consternation, insomuch
that they were all at their Wits end. But the next morning Loocker and his Gang
having made their way through, the Sentinel spied them first from the Fort, and
by the discharge of his Musket gave notice of the approach of the Devils. And
then it was that the poor affrighted Mortals, laying aside their fears, and
going forth to meet their own Shapes, found them to be a company of their
Countrymen in distress, whom they then received into their kindness, to give an
account of their Misfortunes. Three days after the Ship came into Harbor,
though in a miserable condition.

CHAP. III.
Of the Grandeur of the General at Batavia, and what befell his Wife and his
Niece.
THe Company to maintain their Authority and Commerce in the Indies, believe it
to be to their advantage, that the General whom they send to Batavia, and who
commands in all the places in Asia where the Dutch traffic, should keep up the
Port of a Prince. There is no Cavalry in Europe so well clad or mounted as his;
the Horsemen all upon Persian or Arabian Steeds. Nor is his Foot Guard less
sumptuous: His Halberdiers wear their yellow Satin Doublets, Scarlet Breeches
laced with Silver Lace, and their Silk Stockins. But this only for the
General's Guards; for those which they send abroad to their Forts and
Garrisons, it is a great pity to see how poorly they are attired, and how
meanly fed. When the Dutch Fleet arrives at Batavia, the Soldiers which they
bring are drawn up in the Parade of the Fortress by the Major, who chooses out
the handsomest to remain at Batavia, the rest are sent and distributed into
other places. When the General and his Wife go abroad, they always ride in
their Coach and six Horses, with six Halberdiers attending at each Boot, and a
Troop of Horse and two Companies of Foot for their Guard. The Authority of the
General is very great, though he may be sometimes commanded by his Wife:
neither is it safe for them that depend upon them, to do or say any thing that
may offend them. But for others, who have their Employments immediately from
the Company, they never oblige themselves to be so circumspect. For truth
whereof I will relate the following pleasant Story.

The Wife of General Matsuker having one day undertaken to play upon a Captain
of a Ship called the Lucifer, and to laugh at him, for having lost a Bale of
Goods which had been seized by the Company, in regard no particular person is
permitted to trade. The Captain nettled at her Discourse, resolved to be
revenged. Nor was it long before he found the means; for being commanded away
for Maslipatan in the Kingdom of Goleonda, where being arrived, laden, and
ready to set Sail to return to Batavia, the chief of the Factory desired him to
take in four Bales of Goods for the General's Wife, as belonging to her, and to
deliver them privately to her. This was Nuts to the Captain: so that being
returned to Batavia, he went he went immediately to visit the General, and
deliver him the Letters which concerned the Cargo. Immediately according to
custom the General invited him to dinner, at which time it is usual for the
General to inform himself of the Condition of the Factory. Among the rest of
the questions the General asked the Captain whether he had any Counterband
Goods aboard, or any that were not upon the Company's sole account. To which
the Captain answered, that all the Goods belonged to the Company, except four
Bales, which the chief Factor at Muslipatan had particularly recommended to his
care, as belonging to Madam General. This being publicly spoken in the
presence of a great many that were at Table, the Lady that was not aware of
such a blow, was not a little surpised, and the General himself was not a
little in wrath, sternly asked her how she durst undertake to trade without his
knowledge. Presently she denied the whole matter, and averted that the Captain
was mistaken, and took her for some other person. But the General sent for the
Piscal, and ordered him to go forthwith with the Captain, and fetch the four
Bales ashoa^; which being done, he ordered further that the Goods should be
carried into the public Hall of the Town House, with a Writing fixed upon them,
that whoever owned those Goods should come and claim them; but no body came. So
that the Captain had the pleasure to see the Lady in a delicate raging passion,
and the Goods disposed of to the Fiscal, and the Poor of the Hospital.

The same General and his Wife having no Children, they began to consider to
whom they should leave their Estates. At length the General bethought himself
of a Niece he had at Amsterdam, and therefore wrote to the Directors of the
Company to send her to him. This Niece of his cried Potherbs and Onions about
the street to get her living; in which Calling she was at last found out, and
brought to the Directors; who presently changed her Habit, and of a Crier of
Cabbage made her a little Lady; who though she were of such a low condition,
was not without a good proportion of natural Beauty.

The Fleet being ready to depart, there was a Cabin built on purpose for this
Niece, and the Company having presented her with several pieces of Tissue and
Silks, recommended her to C. Rosse, the Viceadmiral's care. This Captain had
been several times at the Indies before, and was both rich and a Batchelour: so
that when the Ship was out at Sea, he failed not to show all the respects
imaginable to this Niece. Now this young Virgin not being accustomed to the
Sea, upon the least gust of Wind she was half dead; and all that time the
Captain would not stir from her Bedside, for fear any Accident should befall
her. And as he was thus diligent not to stir from her Bedside in fowl, it is
verily believed he was seldom far from it in fair weather; and that instead of
sitting by her Bedside, he sometimes got fairly into it. But whether he were
within or without, most certain it is, that before Madam Niece arrived at
Batavia, she found her self to be with child, though she so discreetly
concealed it, that none in the Vessel perceived it.

The Vessel had no sooner passed the Strait that lies toward Bantam, but Madam
General with a great number of her Friends in several little Barques came out
to meet Madam Niece, and were not a little surprised to find her to be a person
so well clad and handsome withal, without any appearance of what she had been
before.

A Coach and six Horses, and six Halberdiers, a Troop of Horse, and a Company
of Foot, waited upon the shore for Madam General. And thus was Madam Niece
conducted to the Fort with great pomp, and as kindly received by Monsieur
General. Some few days after several of the Gallants of Batavia came
picquiering to the House to see Madam Niece; and so it was, that all being
smitten, every one desired her in Marriage: but both Uncle and Aunt were deaf
to all their Suits, as having designed her to a young rich Merchant, who was
then out of the way. C. Rosse laughed in his sleeve at the bustle that was
made, and still continued his former respects and double Diligences, which were
the more willingly permitted him in regard of the great care of their Niece,
for which the Uncle and the Aunt thought themselves obliged to him during their
Voyage. But at length seeing such a swarm of Sweethearts about her, he thought
it but charity to undeceive so many poor Gulls, and without further ceremony to
go to her Aunt, and to demand her Niece for his Wife. The She General who
looked upon herself to be a kind of a Queen at Batavia, looked upon it as a
high offense and indignity for a Tarpaulin Captain of a Ship to dare to make
her such a Proposal, having already refused such Matches, persons that might
come to be Privy Counselors of all the Indies. Nevertheless within a day or
two after the Captain renewed his Charge, but then in a Majestic Fury she
utterly forbid him the Fort. He taking little notice of her rage, goes to the
General, and after some Discourse makes the same Proposal, and receives the
same Answer. But then the Captain gave the Husband such a Bone to pick, that he
would not give the Wife; Sir, said he, twice already have I demanded your Niece
in Marriage, this is now the third time that I make the same demand; if you
refuse me, you shall ask me four times before I accept of her: and so saying
briskly left him. The General reflecting upon the Captain's words, went to his
Wife and told her the Story, who guessing at the effects of a long Voyage
Familiarity, called Madam Niece into examination: She not being used to
Dissimulation confessed the whole matter, and without any more to do was
married to the Captain, to the great wonder of the whole City, till the birth
of a Boy at the end of six months unfolded the Riddle. But this lying in was
her ruin; for about five or six days after, the Mother and the Nurse being ill,
the chief Surgeon of the Fort ordered them to take a little Cremor Tartar;
and to that purpose sent a young man to the Master Surgeon of the Town, to
send him two quantities of Cremor Tartar in two Papers. He being drinking with
his Friends, sends a young Barber newly come from Holland, to put up the two
quantities according to direction. But the Barber mistook the Glass, and put up
Sublimate instead of Cremor Tartar. So the two Women taking their Doses,
dissolved in two Silver Cups of fair Water, died in 24 hours after.

CHAP. IV.
Of General Vanderbroug, and of the Original of the City of Batavia
GEneral Vanderbroug was of Anverse, and having studied in the Jesuits College,
retained some tincture of Learning, which he endeavored to improve as much as
his business would give him leave. While he was General he caused the Alcoran
to be translated out of Arabic into Dutch. He was also a man of courage, and
several times exposed himself to great hazards for the Service of the Company,
as you shall see by the following Relation.

After the Hollanders had taken several Prizes from the Portuguezes by Sea,
they wanted a place of Retreat, where they might repair their endamaged Ships,
and repose after the toils of the Sea. At first they cast their eyes upon the
Island of Java, in that place where the English had built a small Convenience
for their Trade. There is a Road in that part, where Vessels ride securely all
the year, into which a River discharges it self that will receive Shallops of
good burden, for above a thousand Paces. The Water of this River is most
excellent; for being carried never so far to Sea, it never stinks, nor
engenders Worms; which can only be said of the Thames and Ganges besides.

The Hollanders therefore came and lay upon the point of a River, over against
the place where the English had their small House. They had with them then the
greatest part of the Ships which they had in the Indies, laden with those great
Bales of Cloth which come from Bengale and the Coast of Surat, so big that a
dozen men can hardly manage them. These Bales they landed, and of them made a
kind of Fortification, planting a good number of great Guns between them: For
they never wanted great Guns ever since they traded alone to Japon, the only
Kingdom of the World abounding in Copper; from whence they brought prodigious
quantities to Macao and Goa, where they cast their Artillery.

Thus the Hollanders thought that by Sea no body could endamage their small
Fortification, made of Bales of cloth, which was defended by their Vessels
which they had in the Road: But by Land they were afraid that the King of the
Island, viz. either of Materan or Bantam, might disturb them. Observing
therefore the Situation of the Island, which on that side was all covered with
Woods, which reached on that side within a League of the Sea; and that where
they ended, to the Shore there was no other way but a Bank, which separated the
Marsh from the River: So that the Hollanders the better to secure themselves
against the two Kings, resolved to raise a Tower upon the Bank. In this Tower
they planted several Culverins and small Pieces, crammed with artificial
Wild^ire, and every evening relieved their Guards. The King of Materan
perceiving this, and believing that the Hollanders would not stop here,
advanced a powerful Army to pull down the Tower. To which purpose he brought
with him great Chains of Iron, and Cables made of the Coco Flax; believing that
by the favor of the Night, having got his Chains and Ropes about the Tower, by
the strength of his Men and Elephants he might easily pull it down. But having
failed in his Enterprise, and for that the Hollanders Artillery killed him
abundance of Men, he retreated with his Army. But it was not long before he
returned again with a more powerful Force by Land, and also a great Fleet of
small Vessels to assist him by Sea. With these Forces he gave a furious Onset a
second time, which the Hollanders with no less vigor sustained, and beat him
off. But nothing discouraged with his loss, he resolved to give a third Onset,
only he staid some few days in expectation of more Forces.

In the mean while one of the most considerable Captains of his Army was
accused to the King not to have done his Duty: though seasonably advertised
that the King was resolved to seize upon his person, and cut him to pieces. For
you must know, that among the Javans when any person has merited Death, they
tie the Offender all along upon a great piece of Timber, and the next Lord or
great person that has a mind to try the goodness of his Scimitar, comes and
cuts the Body into four pieces, the first stroke being made upon the Breast, the
second upon the Pit of the Stomach, the third upon the lower part of the Belly.
The four pieces if they be Men, are burnt; if Women, thrown to the Dogs, which
they keep for that purpose. For the Javans never burn any person.

This Javanese Lord therefore knowing what he was to trust to, made his escape
to the Hollanders, and was kindly received by Vanderbroug. To ingratiate
himself, he told the Dutch General all the King's Designs in reference to the
carrying the place; where he would make his Onset, and what number of men he
had. This however did not sufficiently cheer up the General, who knew his own
weakness. So that the Javanese perceiving him still pensive, I find (said he)
that thou art afraid of the King's strength, and reason thou have, but be ruled
by me: Thou art not ignorant that the Javanners are rigid Observers of the Law
of Mahomet, and that if any Uncleanness from a Christian hand falls upon their
Clothes, they ^^ing them away, and spend six whole days in washing themselves,
before they believe themselves clean. Hear then, said he; let all the Ordure
and Dung of the People that are with thee be heaped in a place together, and
made ^^ui^ in Pots for that purpose; and when they mount their Ladders, spare
not for Showers of that Liquor, and I warrant ye they will retreat faster than
they came on. Farther continued he; I know that the points of their Arrows and
Cric's are poisoned, and that this poison is so strong, that whoever are
wounded therewith die suddenly, unless they have recourse to this only Remedy;
which is to preserve their own Excrement, and to dry it to powder; and when
they find themselves wounded, to take a little of the powder, and drink it off
in a small Beer-glass of Water. The General observing what the Javan Lord had
said, when the Enemy mounted their Ladders, lustily besmeared them with the
Liquor, which he caused to be prepared against their coming; so that instead of
gaining the tops of their Ladders, they made all the haste they could down
again; but being hindered by those that followed them, they threw themselves
headlong to the ground; by which means several of them were maimed, and several
killed outright. Thus the Army disbanded in a moment, and the Emperor was the
first that took his flight. Vanderbroug observing the disorderly Retreat of the
Enemy, took a small Party with him, and pursued the flying Enemy, who being
enclosed by those in the Fort, that sallied out upon them, were miserably cut
in pieces. But the General having left the greatest part of his men, and
returning only with a small and very inconsiderable Company, the Javanners who
had hid themselves in the Mershes for fear, resumed courage, and suddenly fell
upon him in his return, and so encompassed him on every side, that it was
impossible for him to escape. However they defended themselves stoutly for a
while, but being wounded with the Arrows and Cric's of the Indians, and not
being provided of the forementioned Antidote, they died immediately. The
General was taken alive, not so much as wounded; for as he told me afterward
himself, he found they had no desire to kill him. So soon as he was taken they
carried him to the Emperor, who as soon as he saw him bid him not fear any
thing, but told him withal, that it was his pleasure, that he should command
his Men to quit the Fort and Tower, and be gone; otherwise that he would make
both him, and all those that should fall into his Hands, perpetual Slaves. At
the same time the Emperor with his principal Officers, and the General with a
good Guard, came to the Foot of the Wall of the Tower, where the General in the
Malay Language, laying before them his own misfortune, and the improbability of
their holding out long, commanded them to quit the Fort, after they had
embarked whatever they saw fitting, but only 6 Pieces of small Canon, 200
Bullets, and 500 Quintals of Powder. The Emperor was overjoyed to hear what
the General said, and thought himself sure of the Fort and Tower. But then the
General turning to the Emperor, told him, that none of his men understood
Malay, and that therefore it would be convenient for him to repeat the same in
Flemish. Which being granted, he spoke to the Soldiers in Flemish, and ordered
them quite the contrary; that is to say, that they should not be Traitors to
their Country, but hold out the place till death, not minding what became of
him; and to that end, that they should bid the Infidels forthwith retire, or
else they would immediately fire all their Guns upon them. The Emperor
astonished at their Resolution retreats, and carries the General with him.
Being thus retired, the General made him believe that he would find a means to
write to the Company, to give them an account of what had passed, and that he
was confident they would give such order for an Accommodation, as should
satisfy His Majesty, which satisfied the Emperor for that time. In the mean
while the General found an opportunity to get into a small Barque, and to get
to the Fort, where he was joyfully received. This Recital I had from his own
mouth.

The General having done this and several other eminent Services for the
Company, and acquitted himself with Reputation and a fair Estate, was desirous
to return home, where the Prince of Orange, and several of the States had no
less a desire to see him. Straight he took up his Habitation at the Hague, and
for a good while lived splendidly, gave great Presents and Entertainments to
the Prince, and several other Grandees of Holland, by which means he ran
himself into so great an Expense, that he was forced to desire of the Company,
that he might return into their Service.

One day the Prince of Orange asking him what Rarities he had brought out of
the Indies, he called for five Silver Plates, and setting them upon the Table,
drew out five little Bags out of his Pocket, and emptied a several Bag upon a
several Plate; which surpised not only the Prince, but several others of the
States then present, to see such a number of Diamonds and other Jewels of a
vast value.

It was not without some difficulty that he was again entertained by the
Company; but at length they sent him Admiral of two Ships to Batavia, where
being arrived, the General and Consuls made him Admiral of the Fleet that was
just bound for the Coast of Coromandel, Surat, and Persia.

Being returned to Batavia, General Vandyme and the Council sent him to Malaca,
which the Hollanders then besieged, and where they found a stouter resistance
than they imagined. There in an assault upon the Town he received a slight
Wound, of which he was quickly cured; but soon after he fell sick, and died
before the Town was surrendered.

CHAP. V.
Of the Country about Cochin, and how the Holland General crowned one of the
Indian Princes.
ALL the Country about Cochin is planted for the most part with that sort of
Tree which they call Cocos, the Fruit whereof produces that sort of Wine which
the Inhabitants call Tarry, whereof they make their Strong Water. They mingle
this Wine with course black Sugar unrefin'd, together with the Bark of a Tree
which bears nothing but Thorns. This Bark causes the Tarry and Sugar to boil and
ferment like new Wine. When the Tarry and the Sugar have fermented for above
seven or eight hours, they distill them in an Alembic, and make Strong Water,
which is stronger or smaller, by how much the more often or seldomer it is
distilled.

Besides the Coverture of these Trees the whole Country is full of Cows; for
they are all Idolaters in this Country, that only worship their Cows for their
Gods, feed upon their Milk, and eat nothing that has Life.

When you leave the Countries of these Princes, which they call Rajas,
traveling toward the North East you enter into the Territories of the Raja of
Velouche, which are of a large extent. He and all his Subjects being Idolaters,
unless it be about nine or ten thousand poor People called Christians of S.
John, as being baptized after the same manner that S. John baptized the People
in the Wilderness.

After the taking of Cochin, of which we have given a full Relation in our
Indian Travels, General Vangous, who commanded at the Siege, became so haughty
that he despised all the other Officers, as well Military as those that
belonged to the Government and Justice of the City. However to recompense one
of the Raja's by whose means he had taken the City, he persuaded him to quit
the Name of Raja, and to assume the Title of King, that he might have the
Honor to set the Crown upon his Head. To this end he made great inquiry
through his whole Army for a Goldsmith, and having found out one that undertook
it, and caused him to make a Crown of massy Gold, that weighed near ten Marks,
which I believe the Raja found more inconvenient and weighty upon his Head,
than an old Muckender with three corners bound about his Head, which is the
mark of the Raja's Sovereignty.

While they were making this Crown there were great preparations for the
Ceremony: It was performed in a Garden near the Town, where was set a large
Tent spread all over with painted Calicut. Within was a Throne erected with a
Canopy of China Damask, and all the Steps to the Throne were covered with
Persian Tapistry.

The day being come, the greatest part of the Army, Officers and Soldiers,
went to fetch the Raja, who lay in his Hut a quarter of a League off; where
they mounted him upon one of two Elephants which the General sent him, being
attended likewise with two led Horses, and two Palanquins for more State. Being
come to the place, he was clad in a Scarlet Robe with great Hanging Sleeves,
and so brought in where Vangous was sitting upon his Throne, with a Sword and a
Crown by him. The Raja being come to the Foot of the Throne, the Major of the
Army took the Sword, delivered him by the General, and girt the Raja, who then
ascending the Steps of the Throne, prostrated himself before the Holland
General while he put the Crown upon his Head. Then the new King rises up, and
lays his Hand upon the Head of a Cow that stood near the Throne. Which done,
kneeling with his Hands clasped, and lifted toward the Head of the same Cow, he
took his Oath to be true and faithful to the Company, and to embrace their
Interests. On the other side the General promised him on the behalf of the
Company, that they should assist him when he should have occasion against his
Enemies. Which Solemnities being very gravely performed the Musquettiers gave
three Volleys, and the new King was conducted back to his Hut with the same
Pomp that he was brought. Thus you see the Pride of a Pepper Merchant, to make
Kings and domineer over Crowns.

One other famous Act of Vangous must not be forgotten. You must know, that at
the taking of Cochin the Jesuits had in that City one of the fairest Libraries
in all Asia, as well for the great quantity of Books sent them out of Europe,
as for several rare Manuscripts in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, Persian,
Indian, Chinese, and other Oriental Languages. For in all the Conquests of the
Portugals, their first care was to summon all the Learned People of the several
Nations, and to get all their Books into their hands. During that little time
which the Jesuits staid in Aethiopia they had copied out all the good Books
that came to their knowledge, and sent all those Books to Cochin. They had
staid longer in Aethiopia, had it not been for the Jealousy of the Patriarchs,
and their Bishops, which are very numerous; so that if there be two men in one
Village that belong to one Church, the chiefest calls himself Bishop. At their
Ceremonies of Baptism when they name the Holy Ghost, they apply a hot Iron to
the neck of the Infant, saying that the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles
in the shape of Fiery Tongues. The Patriarchs and Bishops were jealous of the
Jesuits, finding that they had insinuated themselves into the favor of the
King and Grandees of the Court. Which so enraged the Aethiopians, that they
caused the People to mutiny, preaching that the King was about to alter the
Religion of the Country, and to draw along with him several of the Lords. And
the Fury of the People grew to that height, that whatever the King could do or
say, he could not appease their Fury: So that they put him in prison, and
elected his Brother in his place. The cause of this disorder was laid upon the
Jesuits, and was the reason that they were expelled the Kingdom; neither had
they escaped so, but they were afraid of the Governor of Mozambique, and the
Portugals that inhabit all along the Coast of Africa. But to tell ye what
became of this Library, General Vangous made no conscience to expose it to the
ignorance of his Soldiers, so that I have seen the Soldiers and Seamen tear
several of those beautiful Volums to light their Tobacco.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Sieur Hollebrand Glins, President of the Factory at Ormus.
When the Ships come to Ormus, it is a great prejudice for the Goods to lie
out of doors. For such is the extremity of the Heat in that part, that if the
Spices, especially the Cloves, be not carried to the Waterside every foot, and
there laid to steep in the Water for four and twenty hours, they would turn to
a mere powder.

Sugar is brought thither in great Wooden Chests, but if there be the least
Cleft for a Fly or an Emmet to get in, in a small time the Chest will be half
emptied.

As for Camphire, which is brought from Borneo in Pipes, if it lie a little too
long in that warm Air, it will exhale above half away.

To remedy these Inconveniences Sieur Hollebrand resolved to build a bigger
Warehouse. Among the rest of the Workmen that were employed in this Building
was a Gunsmith, who came in the interim in a Ship from Batavia. This poor
Fellow was employed to make Locks for the Warehouse; for in those Parts they
have no other Keys, or Locks either, than what are made of Wood: So that it was
a Crime for him to be found idle at any time. And therefore the President
finding him one Sunday in the Afternoon drinking with two of his Companions
that came from the Ship to see him, gave the Fellow half a dozen good Licks
with his Cane, and would have given him more, but that the Smith being a sturdy
Fellow, and feeling the Blows smart, wrested the Stick out of the President's
Hands, and flung it out of the Window. For which the President, upon pretense
that the Fellow had struck him four Blows, which was untrue, as I my self being
there could witness, sent him laden with Chains to the Ship, where he would
have tried him for his Life, in a full Court of the Merchants of the Factory:
but they refusing him, for very madness he took two Notaries, that he had a
power over, went to the Ship alone, made the Officers of the Ship, and
condemned the Fellow to be hanged. And he had certainly been executed but for
me and some other of my Countrymen, (for the Fellow was of Geneva) that
threatened the President out of his design. Yet he caused him to be drubb'd
Naked at the Main Mast after that inhuman manner, that he lost the use of one
of his Arms. This the Genevese could never forget, and therefore sought all
opportunities to kill him; to which purpose he put himself in the same Ship
with Hollebrand when he returned for Holland. But coming to the Cape of Good
Hope, and being sent ashore in the Shallop for Provisions, the Shallop was
overset in a stormy Sea, and Hollebrand's Life thereby secured.

But before we leave Ormus, where Hollebrand was building his Warehouse that
caused all this mischief, let us take notice of this by the way, that there is
no abiding at Ormus till April, lest you pay for your stay with some Malignant
Fever, that may hold a man as long as he lives; or if he be cured by chance,
yet will the White of his Eyes be more yellow than Saffron. This same sort of
Fever seizes our Europeans in the Port of Alexandretta in Syria, and in the
Islands where the Hollanders lade their Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace.

By the way observe, that there is a particular sort of Nutmeg which the
Hollanders call Maneque, and we the Male Nutmeg, as long again and a little
bigger than the ordinary Nutmeg; and this sort they never carry into Europe,
because they sell it to better profit in Persia and the Indies. This I shall
also further add, that the ordinary Nutmeg condited, fuddles more than the
strongest Wine, eating but only one either at the beginning or ending of the
Meal.

CHAP. VII.
Touching the Islands of the Prince.
THE Fort of Batavia has four fair Bastions, and is well built but upon an ill
Foundation, those Bastions being plainly observed to sink, and requiring
Reparation from time to time. For the perfecting of which Work the Hollanders
wanted Slaves: whereupon a Consultation was had where to get Slaves. To which
Answer was made, that there was no better place than the Prince's Islands.
Which being concluded, the General of Batavia dispatched away three the biggest
Ships belonging to Batavia. These Ships visited every one of these Islands,
feigning that they came from Holland and wanted Refreshment. So soon as the
Inhabitants discovered the Vessels, they flocked to the Shore Men, Women, and
Children, as they wont to do, bringing along with them the best of their
Provision, as Coco Wine, Nuts, and other Fruits of the growth of the Islands.
Happy were they that could first get aboard, for they always get more by the
Mariners and Soldiers, than by those that go ashore to trade. Now so soon as
they were ashore, they gave them Strong Water to drink till they were drunk;
and when the Masters of the Ships saw them in that condition, they immediately
sent a good number of their men well armed ashore, who bound them that were
upon the Sand to truck for their goods, and carried them away to their Ships,
killing all those that made any resistance. But they did them little service;
for finding themselves so inhumanly used as the Hollanders use their Slaves,
they took a resolution to eat nothing, and to starve themselves to death,
rather than to be forced to labor and be beaten every day.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Hollanders sent to declare War against the Persians, and of the ill
Success of their Fleet.
MUch about the same time Charles Constant was sent by the Company with a Fleet
of seven great Ships, to declare War against the Persians, in case they would
not comply with the Dutch in reference to their Silk Trade and their Customs.
Being arrived at Ormus he left the Fleet there, and hastened to Ispahan, and
from thence to Casbin, where then the King was. But his Embassy had not that
effect as he expected: For he thought that the King would have been frighted at
the noise of a Fleet of seven great Ships that lay at Ormus, but he was
mistaken. For the Persian knew he need not send any Force against the said
Fleet, in regard it would be ruined without: It being impossible for our
Europeans to stay at Ormus in the heat of Somer, as well by reason of the Heat,
as for want of Water; for there is no good Water at Ormus, nor upon any part of
the Coast of Persia, but what is kept in Cisterns, and that full of Worms. It Is
true, that upon the Coast of Arabia there are Wells of good Water, but when the
Arabians discover any Ships upon the Coast, they come down all in Arms to
defend their Wells; for it is their profit to sell their Water, and that at a
very dear rate, to those that are in necessity.

Now the King and Council not being ignorant, that the longer the Fleet lay at
Ormus, the worse would be its condition, would not give the Commander his first
Audience in two months. During which time there died above half the Men; for
from six a clock in the morning till four in the afternoon, if any of the
Seamen went to take a little Air upon the Deck, he presently fell down dead.
The Admiral was to blame not to make provision of Water being bound for such a
place as Ormus.

The Commander Constant did not take the right course to effect his business,
by publishing what he intended to present the Ministers of State withal. For
the Lords of Persia never take any Presents themselves, for fear it should come
to the King's Ear. But there is a private Bill sent to the Party for whom it is
intended, and he sends whom he thinks fit to receive it. Had he so done, and
doubled his Sum of 5000 Venetian Ducats, perhaps the Athemadoulet might have
used him more kindly, especially for so long time as that King had. For
whatever a Predecessor does, a Successor changes many things. So that if the
deceased King have given any House or Land to any person, it must be confirmed
by the succeeding King in his first Year, or else the Gift returns to the King.
It is the same thing if any person builds a House upon the King's Demesns:
which has been a great inconvenience to the Austin Friars and barefoot
Carmelites, because their Houses are built upon the Lands which Cha Abbas gave
them of the Royal Demesns. So that every time a new King ascends the Throne,
they are forced to make the Athemadoulet new Presents, sometimes to the Value
of the Land: for it is a rare thing to find a prime Minister that is a Friend
to the Christians. But the Jesuits and Capuchins, who came after them, provided
better for themselves, each of those Orders having bought the Ground upon which
their Houses are built.

The Commander seeing that he could not compass his Design, and that the
Athemadoulet would abate nothing of the forty four Tomans which he demanded,
went to the Divanbegai and told him, that buying the same Goods of particular
persons, they might be had for thirty two, or at most for thirty three Tomans.
To which the Divanbegai answered him, That all those particular persons paid
the King Custom, and Convoy upon the Road, the Custom alone amounting to
Eighteen per cent. which the Hollanders did not pay: and that there was not a
Year wherein they did not bring in Goods to the Value of 30000 Tomans; and that
if account should be taken of the Silks which they carried away, and of the
Goods which they brought in, the Athemadoulet ought to make them pay near 50000
Tomans for Duties. The Commander ill satisfied with this Answer went to his
Lodging, and without asking the Advice of the Merchants that were with him, or
of his Frenchman, who better understood the Practice of the Court, or without
taking his leave of the King, returned privately to Ispahan, intending for
Bander where the Fleet lay. The Athemadoulet being advertised of his sudden
departure, was very much offended; so much the more because at the Commanders
first Arrival he had done him great Civilities, even to the furnishing his
Lodgings after the European manner, with a Bed, Stools, and Tables. Thereupon
he gave notice thereof to the King, who when he heard of it uttered these
words, Has any one given him any distaste, or is he turned Fool? He shall be
glad to come back again.

Being come to Ispahan, to the great wonder of the Franks, who heard nothing of
his taking leave of the King, he began to make up his Pack, intending for
Gomrom, in case the King did not send for him again; which he did, it is true,
but not with those Compliments which he expected; for he flattered himself that
the King would have petitioned him to return. The King sent for him indeed, but
his Compliment was not very pleasing; for the person that brought the Message
told him, That it was the King's pleasure he should speedily return, and if he
would not go willingly he had order to carry him by force. But notwithstanding
the King's Command and the Counsel of his Friends, he set out from Ispahan for
Bander, according to his first intent. We accompanied him some part of his way,
and being just ready to take our leaves, we saw a Persian Gentile and well
mounted, (he was a Captain of an hundred men) who calling the Interpreter to
him, Go (said he) and tell thy President, that he must return to his Lodging,
and to morrow make haste to the King, according to the Order he has already
received: and with that he rode away full speed. The Interpreter told the
Commander what the Captain said; but notwithstanding all this the Commander
being a person of a hot and obstinate humor, continued his way. Neither the
Merchants of Zulpha, nor any of the Persian or Armenian Servants would follow
him, fearing the Bastinado, and believing he was secure enough; as it happened:
for he had not rode far, before three Captains with their Bows and Arrows in
their hands bolted out upon him, one of which riding up directly to the
Commander, Art thou (said he) the only person that ever set foot in this
Empire, that refusest to obey the Companion of the Sun, whom so great a part of
the World obeys? At the same time came up fifty stout Horsemen, and one of them
who cammanded them made at Mr. Constant with his Mace. Then the Admiral was
forced to lower his Sails and return back, forced to receive an Affront which
he might have avoided When he was come to his Lodging, the Persian Officer
without alighting called the Interpreter, and bid him go forwarn the Commander
in the Name of the King, that neither he nor any of the Hollanders presumed to
stir out of their Houses till further order; for that if any of them were seen
abroad, they should be taught to obey the King's Commands. Thus the Hollanders
having been cooped up nine days, word was brought the Commander he might return
to Cusbin, where he found that all his Rodomontado's signified nothing, but
that he must comply with the Athemadoulet.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Severity of the Holland Commanders in the Indies.
GEneral Speck, before he came to his Employment, had a Daughter by a Woman
which he kept only as his Mistress, not as his Wife. After his time was out he
returned into Holland, and not being willing to carry his Daughter along with
him, knowing that she would go off better at Batavia than in Holland, left her
to the care of General Com, who succeeded him in his charge. The Girl was fair
and left rich, so that her Father was no sooner gone, but she had many Suitors
that courted her, without any consideration of her Birth, among all which there
was none that she fancied, like one that was a Superior Merchant of the Fort,
for whom she had a particular esteem. Neither did she believe but that General
Com would have given his consent upon the first request, knowing the young man
to be of a good Family. Nevertheless they were both deceived; for being asked,
he utterly denied to yield to any such matter. However, the young Man and the
Maid continued their Fidelity to each other, and that with such a close
respect, that at length the Virgin's Belly began to swell. Whereupon she made
one of the Ladies of the City acquainted how the case stood, as also of her
Council, believing that the General upon notice how Affairs went, would marry
her to keep all things private. But so soon as the Lady had revealed the
Mystery, he was so far from answering their expectation, that he threw the
young Man laden with Fetters into prison, and shut up the young Woman close
Prisoner in her Chamber. Next day he called a Council, declared to them the
Matter of Fact, and gave his Opinion, that the young man deserved to lose his
Head, and that the Maid should be whipped. The Council were of a contrary
Judgment, and advised him to reconcile the Mischance by a Marriage. But
notwithstanding all their persuasions the General resolved to have his own
humor, the next day privately sent for the Executioner, and causing the young
Man and the Maid to be brought into his Hall, commanded the Man's Head to be
forthwith struck off, and the Virgin to be whipped though big with Child.

The S^eur Goyre commanded the Holland Fleet that was sent to the Manilles, he
landed all his Soldiers, and most of his Mariners. When they began to march,
he commanded that not a man should stir out of his Rank upon pain of death. It
happened that a young Soldier, who was troubled with the Bloody Flux, stepped a
little aside to ease Nature, which the said Commander perceiving, caused him to
be apprehended and bound, and calling a Council of War would have had him
hanged; and when the Officers refused to give Sentence against one that had
committed no offense, he caused seven or eight Blacks of the Low Countries to
hang him up upon a Tree. But the Sieur Dirk Hogel, Lieutenant General, marching
by in the nick of time, and seeing the poor Fellow in that condition, presently
ordered him to be cut down, and so saved the poor Fellow's Life; who returning
into Holland, and making his Complaint to the Company, the Directors wrote
smartly to the General and Council at Batavia about the business; who upon
Examination of the matter, in regard the Lad was sent by the Directors of the
Orphans House at Amsterdam, condemned the Sieur Goyre to pay four thousand
Crowns to the Orphans House, and three hundred Crowns yearly to the poor
Soldier.

CHAP. X.
Touching the Women.
OFttimes when Women think that their Amors are most secret, they are by some
strange and unexpected accident odly discovered. While I was at Batavia, the
Secretary of the Hospital, as handsome a person as any was in the City, had a
Wife that passed for a Batavian Beauty, neither indeed was she despicable. This
Couple had been seven years married without any Children; so that the Woman
despairing of her Husband's Abilities, and to know where the fault lay,
resolved to bestow her Favors upon one of her Slaves, who was well shaped but
very black; choosing rather a private Familiarity with him, than with any young
Hollander, whose frequent Visits might breed suspicion. It seems the fault did
not lie in her, for her Sable Gallant had so improved his Talent, that in a
short time she found the effects of Change. In short, the Woman's Belly swelled,
and her Husband thinking his time had been come, began to boast of his Manhood,
and great Joy there was among the Friends of the Woman upon the hopes of Issue.
Great Provisions were made against the Lying in, and the General himself made
choice of for Godfather. But when the good hour was come, and the Woman
delivered, their Joy was turned into Mourning, for the Child proved one of the
sooty Offspring of the Sunburned race, a perfect Black. The Husband and Mother
of the Woman blushed as red for shame as the Child was black, and the Gossips
hung down their heads like Bulrushes: nay the Husband was so transported with
fury, that he could not hide his resolution to murder his Wife, for bringing
such a piece of live Charcole into the world. But he was prevented, and secured
in the Fort by the General, till by the intermission of Friends, who wisely
laid before him the original cause of his Wifes Transgression, they were at
length made Friends, and the Slave for having showed himself a Man, was
condemned to tug at the Oars in the Galleys that go to fetch Stone for the use
of the City.

Now as a White Woman may bring forth a Black, so sometimes a Black may be
delivered of as White Child. For at Bacaim a Cafer's Wife, as black as himself,
was delivered of a white Child. The Cafer seeing his Child white, would have
immediately fallen upon his Wife and strangled her, had not the good women that
assisted at her Labor prevented him, and one of those Gossips was so cunning
as to run to the Jesuits House, who are well respected by those Blacks, to
desire Father Thomas de Bare, who had a long time been Rector at Agra, to come
to the Cafer's House. Presently the Father came with another of the Fraternity,
and finding the Cafer stamping and staring almost out of his wits, and in open
hostility without all reason, to appease his fury asked him whether he kept any
Hens, and whether he had any that were black. The Cafer answered that he did
keep Hens, and that he had likewise black Hens. Presently the Father ordered
one to be brought him; and then holding it in both his hands before the good
Women, Does this Hen (said he to the Cafer) lay thee any Eggs? Yes, replied the
Cafer. Of what color are they, said the Father? White, answered the Cafer.
Well then, said the Father, thou art worse than thy silly Creature, and have
far less reason; for if this Hen which is black lay thee white Eggs, why may
not thy Wife which is black bring thee a white Child? This Comparison so
wrought upon the Cafer, who was no Disputant, that he embraced his Wife, kissed
his Child, and all was well again. Though for all the Jesuit's Comparison it
was believed that some Portugal Soldier had quartered with his Wife, which was
the reason of that more than usual Production.

To conclude, there was a certain woman, the wife of one of the Counselors of
Batavia, who had both kindness and affection for a Merchant of the Fort, who
was both young and handsome. And it is the Custom in that Country to be not
only kind but free, she had for several years so well supplied his wants, that
he was Company for the best. It happened that this Counselor was sent abroad
upon some Negotiation, and staid longer than he thought he should have done.
For this reason Money grew short with the Lady; so that her Gallant coming for
a Supply, and she not having ready money to answer his Expectations, she gave
him a Gold Chain worth 400 Crowns to pawn for his present Necessities till she
could redeem it. But this Fatal Chain was the dissolution of all their former
Love: For the young Gentleman being streighten'd for Money, and finding no
person that would lend him so much Money as he wanted upon it, very fairly goes
and offers it to a Goldsmith to sell. While this unfortunate Lover was driving
his Bargain in the Shop, who in the name of ill luck should come by but one of
his Mistresses Slaves, and spying the Chain in his hand, runs and tells her
Patroness how she had seen her Gallant employed. Who surpised that her Gallant
should go about to sell the Chain, when he had only promised to pawn it in
private and sure hands; now (quoth she) all will out, there will be the Devil
upon Dun when my Husband comes home; and I forsooth that have lived credibly
thus long, must be the sport of my Neighbors and the talk of the Town. This
produced a Duel between Love and Interest, wherein Interest getting the
victory, away she immediately sends to all the Goldsmiths, to give them notice
that she had been robbed of a Gold Chain, desiring them to apprehend the Party
that brought it. She also gave the same notice to the chief of the Chinese,
and desired the Advocate Fiscal to make a public Search. Well, by these means
the Chain was quickly found, and the Merchant whatever he could say for himself
was apprehended and put in prison; soon after he was condemned for a Thief, and
sentenced to row all his life in the Stone Galley, which is the Galley that
fetches Stones for the use of Batavia. But happy for him, General Vanderlin's
Lady falling into a hard Labor before the time of Execution, and desiring his
Pardon at such a solemn Juncture, easily obtained it, seasonably recovering him
from the Misfortunes of Folly and Necessity.

An Alphabetical Index to the Map of Tunquin, made on the place by B. Tavernier.
The first Figures are Longitude, the second Latitude.
BOdego, whence they embarque the King's Body: as also the Huts for those that
attend the King's Body 144-21 Bonten, an excellent Haven 151-9 Camelee, a great
River, but bad Port 146-13 Chancon, an Isle where S. Xavier died February 4.
1552. 155-21 Checo, the Capital City of Tunquin, and King's Seat 144-21 Colaure
146-14 Cuaci, the Bounds between Tunquin and Cochinchina 142-16 Cuadag, a Lake
140-22 Cuadag, the Port where all the great Ships lie, not able to enter the
great River of Cheche, being stopped up 142-20 Dinphoan, a good Port, but
difficult entrance 149-10 Haifo, this Isle is a Forest of Orange and Pomgranat
Trees 145-14 Hainanen, an Island wherein is two Rivers, one is very hot and
smells of Sulphur, and the sick come from all the adjacent parts to bath in it
148-19 Island of Fishes 146-19 Pulociampelio Isle 146-15 Sansoo, one of the
greatest Cities of Cochinchina, and greatest Trade, but the Port failing, it
now decays 143-15 Tacan* an Isle where the Fowls retire during the heat 148-12
Tortose Islands 152-11 Tulatan Isle 147-14
An Alphabetical Index of all the Towns in the Map of Japon.
A
AChas 175-34 ACosaqui 177-34 Aizu 184-38 Akas 174-34 Amessima 171-34 Amusana
175-34 Anai 174-34 Anzuqui 176-35 A^ui 173-34 Aquita 182-40 Arcy 177-34 Ava
174-33 Ava 181-34 Autua 170-33 Axicanga 182-36 Aximot 181-36
B
Bandel 179-34 Bigen 174-35 Bingo 173-34 Bipchu 173-34 Bugen 172-34 Bungo
171-33
C
Camba 179-34 Cango 177-36 Cansula 182-35 Cataizu 175-33 Caucani 175-34 Cochite
170-33 Coreer Isles 169-34 The Sea 171-34 Coyssina 171-34
D
Daura 180-34 Deva 182-38 Dongo 172-33
F
Facoua 180-34 Fairma 174-34 Favissida 178-34 Fintsautwa 177-34 Firanda 170-33
Firazima 172-34 Fitaqui 182-37 Flagway 177-34 Foncorai 178-34 Foqui 174-35
Forissauva 180-35 Fucha 179-36 Fumay 172-33 Fuximi 176-35
G
Ganamisaqui 171-34 Ganomi 172-34 Ginkay 171-34 Gold Mines 184-38
I
Jaai 178*34 Jamman 171-34 Idiumo 173-35 Idzumi 175-35 Jedo or Jendo 181-35
Jesse 184-40 Jesare 179-34 Inaba 174-35 Ingo 176-34 Jobeco 170-33 Jokeits
176-34 Jofinda 177-34 Isakuts 176-34 Juani 172-35 Jussimara 179-34
K
Kakinkw 179-34 Kakingaren 178-34 Karaye 178-34 Kisma 170-33
M
Maicazima Isle 183-36 Marganni 174-34 Mia 177-34 Miaco or Meaco 175-34 Micava
177-35 Mimalaca 173-35 Mino 177-34 Mirico 179-34 Mulaxi 181-35 Muro 174-34
N
Nanastgamma 170-33 Namba 184-39 Nangati 171-34 Nangisaqui 171-33 Nayma 178-37
Nibarasacq 178-34 Niborasaca 178-34 Nivata 181-37 Not^ 178-37
O
Ocambe 179-34 Ocasaqui 177-34 Okais 179-34 Omodo Key 170-33 Oquayama 174-34
Ormeda 176-34 Oseaca 175-34 Ova 176-34 Owaeri 177-35
Q
Quano 176-34 Quinocuni 175-33 Quirenoxo 176-36
R
Roches 171-33
S
Sacca 178-34 Saccaiia 175-34 Sace 176-34 Saikock 171-33 Samma 176-34 Sando
180-37 Sangani 180-35 Sanuqui 173-34 Saquio 171-34 Sapui 175-34 Sateuma 170-32
Sateque 183-37 Savoia 174-34 Scabarei 179-34 Silver Mines 179-37 Simanda 178-34
Simissima 170-33 Sinagawa 181-35 Sincubi 170-33 Sintsi 176-34 Sino Sima 171-34
Sirion 177-34 Sirack 178-34 Stintgo 175-34 Surunga 179-34 Suva 180-36 Suvo
172-34
T
Tambo 175-35 Tanegaxima 172-32 Tango 175-35 Tatomi 178-35 Tauma 175-35
Tucnocuni 175-34 Tenri River 178-34 Toia 172-33 Tokoesi 173-33 Toi Isle 183-34
Tomo 173-34 Tondozima Isle 180-38 Tottori 174-35 Tsumgaer 184-40
V
Vacosa 176-35 Vasumi 171-32 Ubama 176*35 Vitchu 178-36 Vomi 176-35 Vouri
177-35 Voxu 183-37
W
Waka 176-34
X
Xendai 183-38 Xidaibama 182-37 Xikoso 173-33 Ximo 171-32 Ximosakock 170-33
Ximolu 182-36 Ximomaxoqui 171-34 Xinan 178-35 Xio 173-33 Xiva 177-36
Y
Yamamguela 172-34 Yamato 176-34 Yamaxico 175-34 Yazuqui 174-35 Yechigen 177-36
Yechingo 180-36 Yhe 176-34 Yonazaua 183-38 Yynoxima Isle 183-33
Z
Zetta 170-33 Zima 176-34
FINIS.
A MAPP OF THE ISLES IAPON


A RELATION OF JAPON, AND Of the Cause of the Persecution of the Christians in
those ISLANDS.
THE Modern Geographers have made Descriptions of Japon, by means of such
conjectures as they have drawn from the Relations of certain Merchants who have
traded in those Countries. But in regard there are very few Merchants who are
skilful in Geography, as being such who only mind the profit and advantage of
their Voyages, those Descriptions have proved very uncertain. As to the
knowledge of the Ancients, in reference to this part of the World, it is no
less imperfect; and it is but only by conjecture to this day, that we believe
the Abadii of Ptolomy to be that Island which is now called Niphon. That which
I could learn of most certainty, was by the Relation of several persons who
have Traveled these parts, that the Empire of Japon is at present composed of
several Islands, of which some perhaps may not be absolute Islands, but rather
Peninsula's, and particularly those that make a part of the Land of Yesso, the
Inhabitants whereof are Vassals and Tributaries to Japon. Nevertheless a
Holland Pilot, who has been industrious to discover whether the whole Country
it self were an Island, or a Continent adjoining to that vast Tract of Land
called Corca, unknown to this day, in those parts where it extends it self
behind China to the bottom of Tartarie Niulhan, says, that it is separated
from Japon by a narrow Sea, which at this day is called The Streights of
Sanguar. Through all the Islands of Japon, where formerly were accounted to
have been 66 Kingdoms, there are three remarkable for their largeness, of which
that of largest extent is called Niphon, the next Ximo, and the third Xicock.
The Japonners account it a Journey of twenty seven days from the Province of
Quanto, to the Country of Yesso; and they say farther, that this Country of
Yesso, in those parts which are remote from the Sea, is so full of inaccessible
Mountains, that those Japonners who have attempted a discovery by Land, could
never accomplish their design, being discouraged by the length of the Journey,
and the difficulties and badness of the ways.

The Island of Niphon is four times as big as the other two; and there is also
a Mountain therein that vomits up Flames of Fire, like Mount Etna in Sicity;
formerly it was distinguished into thirty five Kingdoms, but at this day it is
only divided into five parts, the names whereof are Jamasoit, Jetsen, Jetsesen,
Quanto, and Ochio, lying all in order as you travel from West to East. These
five parts are again divided into several Provinces. The Island of Ximo, or
Saycock, is situated to the South-West of Niphon, being about 160 Leagues in
circuit. The Island of Xicock is seated by the South of Niphon, being about 120
Leagues in compass. The other Islands that lie round about are not so
considerable, for in those Seas lie several Islands scattered up and down, as
in the Archipelago, between the Morea and the Coasts of Asia the less. As to
the rest, I refer the Reader to the Map annexed, believing it to be very true,
as having been made upon the places themselves.

The Emperor at present keeps his Court in the City of Yeddo, in regard the
Air is there more temperate, and the Heats not so violent; but when he has a
Son that is arrived to the Age of fifteen years, he sends him to Surunga, there
to reside, till the death of his Father makes him way to the Throne.

Since Yeddo has been made choice of for the Seat of the Empire, it has so
greatly enlarged it self from day to day, that it is at present three Leagues
in length, and three in breadth, very populous, and the Houses standing very
close together. When the Emperor rides through the City, or that there is any
public show to be seen, it is impossible to get by the crowd of the people,
though the Women are not permitted to be of the number. The Emperors Palace is
covered with Plates of Gold, to which the Palaces of the Lords are every way
correspondent in Magnificence; so that afar off the City affords the richest
and most magnificent Prospect that was ever beheld: Though it be not so
beautiful within, by reason that the ordinary Houses are built only of Wood.
The Great Dairy keeps his residence at Meaco, which is also a very large City,
containing above a hundred thousand Houses; it was formerly the capital Seat of
the Empire, at what time the Dairy's were laid aside. So soon as he is Crowned
by the Bonzes, who are the Priests and Lawyers, he is then no more to expose
himself to the light of the Moon, nor to shave his Head, or cut his Nails. The
Natives report, that the Empire of Japon was formerly governed by a Prince
called Dairy, who had acquired so high a reputation for Holiness, that his
Subjects adored him as a God, and that to increase the awe and reverence of the
people, he suffered his Hair and Nails to grow, affirming, that it it was a
piece of Sacrilege to make use either of Razor or Sizzars. The Princes that
succeeded him, though they had only the name of Kings, have still preserved the
same custom, believing that it becomes not their Grandeur to appear in view of
the Moon, as being Sons of the Sun. If he have a Daughter that is ripe for
Marriage, the Emperor is obliged to Marry her, and she it is that bears the
Title of Empress, though she should happen to have no Children, which is
contrary to the Maxims of all the Eastern Monarchs, who give the Title of Queen
and Sultaness only to her, among all the rest of their Wives, that is first
brought to Bed of a Male Successor to the Crown.

At the end of every seven years, the Emperor sends one of the chief Princes
of his Court to the Dairy with a Basket full of Earth, and to tell him, that
all the Lands which the Emperor commands, are at the Dairy's Devotion; and
indeed the Empire belongs to him by right of Succession, though at present he
enjoys only the Title, and very large Revenues, which render him highly
considerable in the Empire.

The Japonners are Idolaters, and adore the Sun; but though they have a great
number of Temples and different Idols, yet they are not over obstinate in their
Devotion, only the Emperor is very severe against all other Religions. They
never stir out of their Native Country to travel, unless it be to China, and
the Land of Yesso; and within these few years the Emperor has prohibited his
people under extreme penalties, from having any Commerce with Foreigners, the
Chinese and Hollanders excepted. He had received Ambassadors at several times
from several Princes, but never sent any of his own to them again. Nevertheless
it is affirmed, that several Lords of these Islands newly converted to the
Faith, in the year 1585, sent their Children to Rome, to render their
acknowledgments to Gregory the Thirteenth; and that being returned back in the
year 1587, to Goa, they were afterward received, and welcomed again into their
own Country with great marks of joy. The little inclination which they have to
Navigation and Traffic, proceeds in part from the great abundance of all
things necessary for Human support, which their own Country produces; and then
in the next place from the jealousies of the Emperor, who is afraid of the
alterations which new Religions may make in his Government; for they are very
fickle, and easily seduced after Novelties, which has been the occasion of many
Revolts, and Civil Wars, till Quabacondon wrested the Empire out of the hands
of the Dairy, and reunited all the Provinces. They are so fiery and revengeful,
that upon the least affront given them, if they cannot have an opportunity of a
present revenge, they will rip up their own Bellies, and kill themselves. I was
told a Story to confirm this. Two young Lords that served the Emperor met in
the Palace, and jostl'd one the other by accident; and most furious of the two
was immediately for drawing his Sword. The other told him, the place was not
convenient, that he was going to wait; but that if he would stay for him in
such a place, he would give him satisfaction. Accordingly the party that
thought himself affronted went and stayed, but his impatience was such, that
after he had stayed a while, not finding the other to come, he ripp'd up his
own Bowels for very vexation. Upon which the people crowding about him, asked
him the reason of his killing himself; to which they could draw no other answer
but this, A cowardly Raskal has affronted me. By and by the other comes, makes
way through the throng, and surpised with what he beheld; Poor Creature, said
he, thou need'st not have doubted my being as good as my word, this Dagger
shall assure thee of it: And so saying, he killed himself upon the place, and
fell by the others side.

There is no Nation under Heaven that fears Death less than this, or that is
more inclined to cruelty. If any Prince or great Lord makes a Feast for his
Friends, at the end of the Feast he calls his principal Officers, and asks 'em,
if there be any that has so much love for him as to kill himself before the
Guests for his sake. Presently there arises a dispute among them who shall have
the Honor; and who ever the Prince is pleased to name, rips up his Belly with
a Cric, which is a kind of Dagger, the point whereof is Poisoned. This custom
is also practiced upon the Death of their Masters, or when they lay the
Foundations of any Palace; for they are so superstitious as to believe, that
these Victims are necessary to render both the Owners of the Building, and the
Habitation fortunate.

They punish all manner of Theft with Death. It Is also a capital Crime among
them to play for Money. Adultery is only punished in the Women: But Coynage of
false Money, setting Houses on Fire, Deflowring and Ravishing of Virgins, are
not only punished in the persons of the Criminals, but also of those who are
next of kin to them. The Women live retired, and are very faithful to their
Husbands. The Emperor having put to Death one of the Lords of his Court, out
of hopes to enjoy his Wife; she fearing violence, besought the Emperor to give
her time to consider, which was granted for some few days. At the end whereof
she shut her self up in a Room with her Children; and after she had delivered a
Paper to one of her Servants to carry to the Emperor, she set the Chamber a
Fire, and burnt both her self and her Children. The Emperor met with nothing
else in the Paper but reproaches of his Tyranny, and attestations of joy from
the Lady, that she had the opportunity to Sacrifice her self to the memory of
her Husband. Several other stories I have heard, which make me believe, that
this Nation is not incapable of doing actions worthy a Roman Virtue.

The Portugals were the first people of Europe that discovered the Islands of
Japon. They were thrown upon the Coast by a violent Storm, in the year 1542,
and understanding that there was great store of Gold and Silver in the Country,
they returned with a resolution to settle themselves. The first place where
they thought to fix was near Surunga, a City which stands about four Leagues
from the Sea: But because there is but one Road, and that not very secure
neither for Shipping, they remained there not above five years. At length they
took possession of a little forsaken Island called Kisma, which they peopled
afterward's; but since the last Persecution of the Christians, the Portugals
were forced to abandon it, having no more Commerce with the Japonners. How the
Hollanders came to erect their Factories there, I shall tell the Reader in
another part of this Relation.

Seven years after the first coming of the Portugals to Japon, St. Francis
Xavier made a Voyage thither to Preach the Gospel. The first place where he
Landed was the Island of Niphon, where he stayed two years and some Months, and
traveled several parts of these Islands; but his principal design being to go
to China, he took shipping accordingly. The Vessel was no sooner out at Sea,
but St. Francis fell sick, so that the Captain put him ashore again in the
Island of Sechen, by others called Haynan, belonging to China, where in a few
days after he died, and never was in China, as some have reported and believed.

After his death the Christian Religion spread it self very much in China, the
people being very docible, and apprehensive of the instructions which were
given them; but the behavior of the Portugals displeasing the Principal
Governors, and those who had most Power at Court, they did them ill Offices to
the Emperor, and the Bonzes misliking the new Religion, and jealous of the
effects thereof, were the fomenters of continual persecutions against the new
Converts, pretending they favored the designs of the Portugueses.

Nevertheless the Christian Religion daily got footing, and perhaps the whole
Nation would have embraced it, if the covetousness and wickedness of the
Christians themselves had not been the chief impediment of their conversion.
The Hollanders did all they could to lay the fault upon the Portugals, but the
truth will easily appear by the Letter written to one Leonard Campen, a
Hollander, wherein it is said, that when the Hollanders were asked by the
Natives what Religion they were of, they made this answer, We are no
Christians, we are Hollanders. I do not go about to blemish a whole Nation for
the fault of a few, but only to show what a dangerous thing it is, to make an
ill choice of Officers upon the settling of a new Commerce in Regions so remote.

The Holland East India Company having set out a Vessel for Batavia, put aboard
about a dozen young Boys, and as many Girls, taken out of the Hospitals in the
Country. Among these Boys there was one who was designed to serve in the
Kitchen, but Fortune made him an Instrument of one of the greatest Misfortunes
that ever befell our Age. During the Voyage, the Merchant having observed him
to be a Boy of a ready wit, and for that reason believing that he might one day
prove serviceable to the Holland Company, caused him to be taught to write and
read; wherein he improved so well in a short time, that being come to Batavia,
he was thought capable of a higher Employment. The Vessel being arrived, the
General and his Council resolved to send the same Vessel to Japon, with some
part of the Lading which was brought from Europe. Thereupon the Merchant was
commanded upon this Voyage, and the under Accomptant happening in the mean time
to dye, this Boy was by him advanced to the place, and by the Merchant
carefully instructed in the knowledge of the East India Trade.

The Vessel being arrived at Firando, the new under Accomptant believing no
place more proper for him then that to raise his fortune, resolved to leave his
Benefactor, and therefore when the Ship was to return, he hid himself out of
the way, till he knew the Ship to be far enough onward on her Voyage, and by
that means becoming a Member of the Factory, he grew so perfect in the Language
of the Natives, and so useful to the Company, that at length he came to be
President of the Factory; the Authority of which Employment so puffed him up,
that he was not only for continuing and upholding the Commerce of his own, but
excluding all other Nations. Now, as I have already observed, the Portugals
were the first Traders, and the first that propagated the Christian Religion in
those parts; therefore it was that the Christian Japonners would not Trade with
any but the Portugals, as having known them longer, and finding them more true
to their words. This the President observed, and made it his business to render
them obnoxious at Court, and by virtue of his Presents, engaged the Governors
of Provinces, and other great Lords, to favor his design.

However, the Portugals wanted neither friends nor confederates. And though
they were not in a condition to be so liberal as the President, yet they made
ashift to defend themselves, and render his underhand Dealings ineffectual.
Thereupon finding that those Tricks would not take, he had recourse to the
foulest of Calumnies; for he counterfeited a Letter written in the Portuguese
Language, containing a discovery of a design of the Christian Japonners to have
made a general Insurrection, and a particular Conspiracy against the person of
the Emperor. This Letter he carried to a Lord of the Country, into whose
favor and confidence he had wrought himself, who presently thought it to be
his duty to give intelligence of so important a design to the Court.

The President informed him by what accident the Letter came to his hands, and
gave an account of such circumstances, as made his Imposture look with a
probable countenance, relating, how that the Hollanders had taken a Portugal
Vessel returning from Japon to Goa, and that the Holland Captain having taken
this Letter among other Papers, opened it, and perceiving of what consequence
it was, had sent an Express to the President to proceed as his prudence, and
the affection of the Dutch Company toward the Emperor should guide him. That
the Portugals, who were but Subjects to the Spaniards, had a pernicious Maxim,
not to suffer any Religon but their own in any place where they had to do, and
that for their own ends they never spared either the Life or Liberty of Man;
that they thought it an acceptable Sacrifice to God, to cut the Throats of
those whom they could not convert. And lastly, that the Hollanders were a
people that accorded with all Nations and Religions, and minded nothing but
their Trade.

The Lord believed all these fraudulent Calumnies, and sent a Copy of the
Letter to the Emperor, the substance whereof was, That the Spaniards in the
Philippine Islands, and the Portugals in Japon, being in confederacy with the
Christians of the Country, had sent to the Governor of Goa to send by a time
prefixed eight or ten Vessels, with Men and Arms, but especially a good number
of Officers to command the Revolters, for that then there would be a numerous
Army ready, and that they should easily make themselves Masters of Japon.

The Portugals were then under the Dominion of the Spaniard, and though they
would suffer no Spaniard in their Indian Acquisitions but the Viceroy, yet
several of the Religious Orders did slip into Japon, carried thither by a true
and real zeal; yet this zeal, when once indiscreet, does as much mischief as
covetousness it self. The Father Paulists, for so they call the Jesuits in the
Indies, by reason that their Church in Goa is dedicated to St. Paul; these
Jesuits I say, had made a fair progress, and gained great credit among the
people, notwithstanding their continual persecutions, according as the Lords of
the Country were well or ill affected toward them. Their number therefore
increased, and the new Converts had this advantage, that they enriched
themselves by Trading with the Portugals, who had made a positive Agreement not
to Trade with the Bonzes. This provoked the Bonzes against them, and the
multitude of the Christians so far augmented the Emperor's jealousies and
fears, that in a short time they produced the effects of open rage and cruelty.

The jesuits had converted to the Faith a great Lord of the Kingdom, who lived
most commonly at Bugen, in the Island of Ximo, a person of great Interest and
Power in the Island. He had four Sons, two of which lived with him, and
following his Example, had embraced the Catholic Faith. The Father was
Baptized by the name of Ignatius; the eldest of the two was called Francis, and
the youngest Charles: the two eldest Sons were at Court in great favor with
the Emperor. The younger of the two that had embraced the Christian Religion,
addicted himself wholly to the study of the Scripture, and retired with the
Jesuits to their Seminary. His Example had wrought with a great number of young
Lords, and as he was eloquent besides, he was of great use to the Jesuits in
preaching the Gospel, and reclaiming the people from the grossness of their
Errors.

The Japonners are naturally endowed with a noble mind, and great inclination
to Learning; so that there is nothing wanting in that Nation but able Teachers.
Not but that they have Doctors of their own: the Dairy's Court is full of them;
where they preserve the Annals of their Country, and pretend that Printing and
Artillery were in use among them before they were known in Europe. From this
Court come all their Books, in regard the persons that attend upon this Prince
apply themselves only to their Studies. It is reported, that they learnt all
these things by their frequent Commerce with the Chinese, and that they are
also originally descended from them. And in truth, the greatest Province of the
Island of Niphon is called Quanto, according to the name of the Seacoast part
of China, where lies the greatest Traffic between the Japonners and Chinese.
Moreover, if there be any credit to be given to the Chinese Histories, they say
it was but a small part of their vast Empire, which extended it self from North
to South 56 Degrees of Latitude, from the Frozen Sea to the Equinoctial Line,
being bounded to the West by the Caspian Sea, and extending Eastward over all
the Southern America to New Spain.

Father Thomas Bar, a Portuguese, has often told me when I was at Agra, a
capital City of the Great Mogul, where the Jesuits have a very sair House, that
this and several other young Lords improved themselves so far in six or seven
years, that they were as Learned as their Masters themselves, and that they
were more zealous in converting those of their Nation. Now the Jesuits at that
time had no House for the Instruction of Youth and Proselytes, and therefore
they desired this young Lord to lend them one of his. Thereupon he having four
very fair ones, with great Revenues belonging to them, gave that which was
nearest to the City to his Converters. A while after, the youngest of his Sons
fell sick, and was carried to this House for the Air's sake, where he recovered
by the care of the Fathers, and the Prayers of the Christians; but his Father
did not long enjoy the pleasure of so great a Cure, which seemed almost
miraculous; for he died at what time both his Sons and the Christians stood
most in need of his protection.

The two eldest, who were with the Emperor, understanding the the Death of
their Father, came to take possession of their Inheritance, and demanded of the
Jesuits the House which their Father had given them, for in Japon no Parent can
alienate the Estate of his Children; nay, when they come to such an Age, he is
obliged to put them in possession of their Estates, reserving only such a
proportion to himself. The Jesuits, loath to part with so fair a convenience,
would not quit their hold, though it were for their own quiet, and to engage
the whole Family to stand by them in their time of trouble. This refusal
provoked the two Brethren, and this quarrel between them and the Jesuits
happened at the same time that the Dutch President was laboring to bring about
his designs. He had notice of this dispute, and as he was a great Impostor, he
made it his business to inflame the two Brothers, not only against the Jesuits,
but against the Portugals in general, giving them a Copy of the Letter which he
had framed, as is beforementioned.

These two Lords, who were Favorites of the Emperor, joining Interest of
State to their particular Interest, made their complaints at Court, with
extraordinary aggravations; urging that there was no security for the Estates
of particular Men, for the quiet of the Empire, nor the Life of the Prince,
unless not only all the Portugals, but also all the Natives of Japon, who had
sucked their Errors, were exterminated out of the Island. To make good the
reasons of their Exasperation they showed the Emperor a Copy of the Letter,
and put him into such a fright, as well for his Person, as the Empire, that he
would admit of no justification on the other side.

Some of his Lords, who were Friends to the Portugals, besought him to examine
the truth of what was alleged, before he proceeded to utmost extremities
against a whole Nation, and against his own Subjects. But he was inexorable,
and presently gave private Orders to certain Commissioners, to go through all
the Provinces of the Empire, and to banish not only the Portugals, but also all
the Christian Natives. Now in regard they had their private confederates, as
well in the Court, as in other places, they had intelligence, in all parts, of
the cruel resolution taken against them, though none were more zealous and
faithful to them then the two Lords of Ximo, Francis and Charles. Thereupon the
Christians met together to consult for their own safety, and their common
preservation, and seeing all attempts to justify themselves prove ineffectual,
they resolved to stand upon their guards, and to dye in the defense of their
Innocence and Religion. The two Lords put themselves at the head of the
Christians Army, the elder of which had been a Soldier, and understood the Art
of War; the younger kept up their Spirits and Courages by his continual
Exhortations.

The Emperor's Commissioners understanding that the Christians were thus
embodied, gave him speedy notice thereof, but said nothing either of the number
of their Forces, or of their designs. The Jesuits and Austin Friars at Goa,
told me, that the Army of the Christians consisted of above 40000 Men, besides
those recruits that came up to them before and after the Battle was fought.

The Emperor not beleiving that the Army was so numerous, sent against them at
first not above 25 or 30000 Men, under the Command of the youngest of the two
Lords of Ximo, that lived at Court. But those Troops were no sooner upon their
March, but he raised new Forces, and sent another Army after them, consisting
of 40000 Men, commanded by the young Lord, to whom the Dutch President had
showed the Letter first of all.

The Christians having intelligence of the approach of these two Armies,
prepared to receive them, choosing an advantageous place to entrench
themselves. The first Army soon appeared in sight of the Christians, who lay so
encamped, that the Imperialists could discover no more than one part of them.
However, before the Engagement, the youngest of the Christian Brothers advised
his other Brother to send to the General of the Emperor's Army, who was their
Brother likewise, to desire Peace, and to beseech him to intercede for them to
the Emperor, and to assure him, that they were ready to lay down their Arms,
and throw themselves at his Feet, and to justify their Innocence. To this
purpose a Letter was framed and sent to the General, but the Messenger that
carried it was nailed to a Cross in sight of the whole Army of the Christians,
and at the same time the Enemy came on with great fury to assail them.

The Fight lasted almost three hours with equal advantage; the Captain of the
Imperialists seeking every where for his Brothers, while they strove to avoid
him. The Christians, who knew that all their safety consisted in their Victory,
and that there was otherwise no hope of pardon, fought with so much valor,
that the Imperialists were forced to give ground. Their General was slain upon
the place, and at length the whole Army of the Idolaters was cut in pieces.

This Victory wrought the Conversion of several of the Idolaters; and the
Christians, after they had given thanks to God three days together, prepared
themselves for a second Combat, not doubting but the other Army would set upon
them while they were weary, and weakened by the last Battle. But that General
more prudent then the former, only posted himself where the Christians could
not come at him, and writ to the Court the particulars of the Defeat of the
first Army, upon which he expected the Emperor's Orders.

In the mean while, the Army of the Christians daily increased, so that in a
few days they were above fifty thousand strong. The Emperor, resolved to
stifle this Revolt in the beginning, sent Orders through all his Empire to make
new Levies; and all the while the Dutch President's Confederates ceased not to
aggravate him against the Christians, not suffering the other Courtiers to open
his Eyes, and prevent so unjust a prosecution. The defeat of his Army had put
him into such a rage besides, that though the Captains of the Christians Army
did all they could to clear themselves from the false accusations laid upon
them, and to obtain their pardons, there was no possibility of being heard.

The Emperor called his Council, where the wisest were of opinion, that it
would prove the best way to receive the submissions of the Christians, who
offered to lay down their Arms upon a general pardon, and the free exercise of
their Religion. But the President's Cabal carried it beyond this sober advice,
and the Emperor, exasperated by his Impostures, took the wrong course.
Thereupon the Council resolved with all speed to rai^e a vast Army, which was
to join with the other, and so to rum the Christians all at a blow. The Dairy
also, who is consulted upon all important affairs, approved this Council.
Thereupon the Lords who are obliged to furnish the Emperor with Men, strove
who should bring their Troops and Companies first to the Randevouz appointed,
which was near the place where the second Army lay; so that when both Armies
were joined together, there was in the Field a Body of 150000 Men. The Brother
of the General, who was slain in the first Battle, commanded under the
Emperor, who resolved to go in person.

But first of all he caused a Proclamation to be made in his Camp, whereby he
forbad any Quarter to be given to any Christian, unless it were the two
Brothers, whom he intended to punish openly; and that they who left the Field
before the Christians were banished, should be put, they and their Kindred, to
the most cruel Deaths that could be imagined; but that they should be rewarded
that brought the Head of a Christian to the Emperor. The Copies of this
Proclamation were scattered in the Army of the Christians, though they did no
harm but only encouraged them against the Idolaters, seeing there was no hope
of pardon.

Nevertheless the youngest of the two Brothers offered to go and throw himself
at the Emperor's Feet, to implore his clemency in the name of the whole Army;
saying withal, That he should account himself happy to suffer Martyrdom to
show his Innocence; but they would not suffer him to stir. All he could obtain
from them, was to write a Letter full of respect, submission, and repentanoe
for what had been already done, declaring that they were ready to lay down
their Arms, if the Emperor would grant them pardon, and the free Exercise of
their Religion* offering with the hazard of their Lives to make out the falsity
of all those things wherewith they had been accused.

This was by an Idolater carried to a certain Lord who secretly favored the
Christians; but the Emperor toar it without reading it, vowing at the same
time, that he would never return to his Court 'till the Idolaters were all
extirpated. The Christian Army understanding the Emperor's resolution, minded
nothing more then their own defense. It Is true, the Ground where they lay was
advantageous enough for the smallness of their Number, but the Idolaters were
three to one; besides that the Idolaters of the Country, who favored the
Christians before, now declared all against them so soon as they saw the
Imperial Army. So that now both Armies lying so near together, several hot
Skirmishes passed between 'em* and at length it came to a general Battle. At
first the Christians overthrew the Idolaters, not able to stand before them:
with so much vigor did the youngest of their Chieftains assail them. He was
remarkable for his Habit that day, but more remarkable for his courage; so that
the Field was covered with the Bodies of the slain, fear and dread possessing
the yielding Enemy. But while the Victor forgot his Brother's advice, and
pursued too far from the Body of the Army, he was encompassed on every side,
wounded, and being carried away by the press of his Enemies, was at length
taken, and lead before the Emperor. His eldest Brother, more experienced in
War, rallied and recalled those that had followed his Brother, and till Night
maintained the advantages, which he had got over the Imperialists, who were
still supplied with fresh Succors, as necessity required. The next day the
Fight was renewed again by break of day, and with a success as honorable, but
more bloody to the Christians.

The third day the Emperor enraged at such a resistance, caused them to be set
upon in several places at one time. The General of the Christians Army rode
from Rank to Rank, encouraging the Soldiers both by his Exhortations, and his
Example: but at length having received several wounds, he was overlaid by the
multitude of his Enemies that crowded to his destruction. And now the General
being lost, and the Christians having no person to command them, it ceased to
be a Combat, and became a Massacre. However, resolving to dye with their Swords
in their hands, they flung themselves into the thickest of their Enemies, and
Sacrificed themselves to their own Innocence. Their Camp was soon forced, and
all the old Men, Women, and Children put to the Sword, except some few that
escaped and hid themselves in the Mountains, who afterward made a relation of
this bloody Story to them who rehearsed it to me.

This was the deplorable end of the Christians, and indeed of the Christianisme
of Japon, which the President procur*d by his impostures and fallacies. And it
has been made appear by three exact accounts, that there has perished, either
in Battles or by Tortures, above 60000 Christians. The eldest of their Captains
suffered a most cruel Martyrdom for seven days, neither could any offer, that
the Emperor could make him for his Brothers and his own Valors sake, induce
him to renounce the Christian Faith. After that, there was a kind of
Inquisition set up thorough the whole Empire, which lasted for several years,
whereby those that persever'd in the Faith, were condemned to most intolerable
Torments, in so much that the Relation which Van Varen, a Hollander, whose
credit it would be a vanity to question in this particular, cannot be read over
without Horror. In sixteen years, that is, from 1613 to 1629, the Christians
were so multiplied, that there were above 400000; but in the year 1649, the
same Hollander relates, that those Japonners who were brought from thence by
the Company's Ships to Amsterdam, affirmed, that Christianity was utterly
extirpated out of the Island.

Being at Ogli, a large Town upon the fairest Arm of the Ganges, I met a
Holland Merchant, who had served the Company in Japon a long time, and had made
several Voyages. He came thither with two Ships laden with Bars of Silver and
Copper, which he had exchanged for Silks, which the Hollanders buy at Bengale.
This Merchant knowing I was there, came to visit me; and I finding him to be a
sincere honest Man, and well verst in the affairs of Japan, especially in
reference to the last persecution of the Christians, grew covetous of his
converse, and invited him often to my House. In our familiar discourses
concerning the settlement of the Hollanders in the East Indies, and of the
extraordinary gain which they make by their Trade there, and passing thus from
one thing to another, at length I asked him who was the Author and Contriver of
a Massacre so horrid, as that was reported to be. Whereupon he related to me
all the particulars of which I have here made a recital, and*many more which I
have forgot or omitted, as being either not pertinent to my subject, or else
already related by others. He had his information from such of the Natives that
had escaped out of the Battle, and several of the Idolater Merchants, in whose
memories the fact was then fresh: and indeed he was so ingenious in his Story,
that I could not find any motive to incite me to misdoubt the truth of it. For
many times he could not forbear shedding tears, and to interrupt his discourse
with his sighs, often imprecating Heavens Vengeance upon the President, and
protesting he wondered the Company employed him so long. But God reserved his
punishment to himself. For the deserts of his crimes always attending him, and
provoking judgments and misfortunes upon whatever Enterprise he took in hand,
he miserably perished in sight of Lisbon in fair weather. All the men in the
Ship were saved; only he returning to recover a certain Cabinet of Jewels which
he had there, the Ship split, and the Portugals had the satisfaction to see him
swallowed up in the Sea, who had been the occasion of the Ruin of so many of
their Countrymen in Japon; and immediately they rang their Bells in the City
for joy of his Death.

In my last Voyage to the Indies I was at Bandar-Abassi, where the Hollanders
have a Factory. Thither arrived two Vessels from Japon to take in Silks, which
the Hollanders buy of the Persians to exchange in Japon. The Captain of one of
the Ships told me, that during several trading Voyages which he had made to
that Island, the Emperor had caused two Inquisitions to be made after the
Christians; in the first of which the Inquisitors met with 247, who were all
most exquisitely tormented to Death; in the latter they only found 63, among
whom were seventeen Children, twelve Girls and five Boys, of which the eldest
were not above thirteen years of Age.

Among all the persecutions which the Christians suffered, there was none
comparable to this for extremity of Torments: For the Japonners are the most
ingenious in cruelty of any people in the World, and the most constant in
suffering. For there have been Children from ten to a dozen years old, who for
60 days together have endured to have their Bodies fastened to the Cross, half
burnt, half torn in pieces, while their Executioners forced them to eat, on
purpose to prolong their Lives in misery; and yet they would not renounce the
Faith which they had embraced. Neither did this barbarous Inquisition extend
only to the Christians, but to their Kindred and Relations, nay, to their very
Neighbors. For if a Priest were taken in any House, all the people in that
House, and the Houses adjoining, were hall'd to Execution, for not having made
the discovery.

At the beginning of every year there is a new Inquisition, at which time all
that can write are required to subscribe, or else the chief of the Family
subscribes for all the rest, that they neither are Christians, nor are
acquainted with any Christians, and that they abominate Christianity as a
Religion dangerous to the State.

Don John of Braganza, being advanced to the Crown, that sudden change which in
one day, and without the least Tumult in Lisbon, wrested the Crown of Portugal
from the King of Spain, wrought the same effect at Goa. All the Portugals at
Goa at the same time acknowledged their new Sovereign; the Viceroy who was a
Spaniard, was sent away to Spain by the first Vessels that were homeward bound;
and Don Philip de Mascarennas, a Portugal, Governor of Ceylan, came to Goa,
and took upon him the command of Viceroy.

So soon as he came to the Government, his first thoughts were how to Establish
the Trade of the Portugals in Japon, which when they were expelled, amounted to
three Millions of Pardo's yearly, one Pardo being worth twenty seven Sous of
French Money. The hopes therefore of regaining so great a loss, made him toward
the end of the year 1642, take a resolution to send a solemn Embassy to the
Emperor of Japon, furnished with magnificent Presents: For which reason he
made choice of what was most rare, and most likely to be acceptable to the
Emperor, and the Grandees of his Court. The most costly of these Presents was
a piece of Lignum Aloes, otherwise called Wood of Calambour, four Foot in
length, and two Foot in Diameter; a larger piece then which the Indies had
never seen, having cost 40000 Pardo's. To this he added a great quantity of
fair Coral Beads of an extraordinary bigness. This is the most acceptable
Present that can be sent to the Lords of Japon, which they fasten to the
Strings wherewith they draw their Pouches together. With these he sent a great
number of Carpets and Hangings of Cloth of Gold, Silver, and Silk, and several
pieces of Tissue of Gold and Silver. It Is said the whole Present cost the City
of Goa above eight hundred thousand Pardo's, which amounts to about 86666 l. 13
s. 4 d. of English Money. Besides all this, the two great Ships which were
prepared for the Ambassador, carried one of them 50 Pieces of Canon, and the
other 35, both laden with all sorts of Commodities which are esteemed and
prized in Japon, amounting to about 83333 l. 6 s. 8 d. Sterling. The Equipage
of the Ambassador was no less sumptuous. And because the Viceroy would not be
thought to give any occasion of offense to the Emperor, he would not suffer
one Jesuit in the Train, but only four Augustins for the Admiral, and four
Jacobins for the other, Men of discretion and conduct. While I was at Goa, in
the year 1648, I met with some of these Fathers, who gave an exact account of
the Embassy.

They made a prosperous Voyage, and arrived happily at their intended Port. But
you must understand, that when any Ship arrives at Japon, no persons are
permitted to come ashore, 'till the Governor of the place have an account who
they are, that they may give notice thereof to the Emperor, and know his
pleasure, whether they shall be received or no. In the mean time the Ships rode
in a very dangerous place, at the entry of the Haven, into which there was no
steering, without the assistance of the Native Pilots.

The Governor of Nangasaqui surpised to understand that they were
Portugueses, wrote in all have to the Emperor. The Dutch President being
informed of the news, played all the pranks he could, used all the contrivances
imaginable to frustrate the success of the Embassy, and to ruin the Vessels
that brought the Ambassador and his Presents. To which purpose he found a way
to bribe the Courrier, who was sent with the Emperors Orders; so that instead
of twenty days, which were sufficient for his journey, he made it above two
Months before he delivered his dispatches. During which time the two Ships had
suffered very bad weather upon the Coasts, and endured many a severe Storm. At
length the Orders came that none should be permitted to Land but the
Ambassador, the two Captains, and the two Pilots, to give an account of the
subject and cause of their coming. The Ambassador being Landed, acquainted the
Governor that he came to compliment the Emperor in the behalf of the King his
Master, and to assure him that they were no longer under the Power of the King
of Spain. That about a year since, a lawful Heir of Portugal had recovered the
Diadem of his Ancestors which the Spaniard had usurped. That this new King was
so just and generous a Prince, that understanding that some of his Subjects had
deserted the Island of Japon, without paying their Debts, he had now sent to
make a general satisfaction; but chiefly out of that respect which obliges all
Sovereigns newly come to the Crown, to give notice thereof to those Princes,
whose friendship they desire.

The Governor informed the Emperor of all these things; but the President
having as good intelligence by means of his Friends at Court, alleged to the
Emperor that they were Rebels, who came from the utmost parts of the West, to
bring the News and Example of their Revolt to Japon: That the natural
restlesness of this Nation caused frequent disturbances and revolutions among
them. That they were never long at rest themselves, nor would suffer others to
be at quiet. That considering the experience he had had, he could not be either
too cautious for the security of his person, or the tranquillity of his Empire.
Lastly, that the Emperor and the Empire would be ruined past recovery, if
those people were ever admitted to set footing therein.

This Counsel well seconded by the rest of the Cabal, easily made an impression
in the Heart of the Prince naturally Barbarous, and an Enemy to the Christians.
Thereupon he sent an Order to the Governor to invite all the Whites aboard,
and to treat them for eight days in the best manner he could. At the end of
eight days they were ordered to repair aboard again, and at the same time he
made a Present to the Ambassador, and chief of his Train, consisting of six
great Cabinets, and six Coffers lacker'd with black, with Figures in Relief,
intermixed with spangles of Gold, all the Embellishments being of Massy Gold.
With them were six Cabinets, and six Coffers, lacker'd with Red, Embellished
after the same manner with Silver. I saw some of them when I was at Goa, and I
must confess I never beheld any so rare and beautiful in that kind, which made
me admire the ingenious Industry of the Artists of Japon; Our European
imitations of their workmanship being no way comparable to them.

The Ambassador having received his Present, had Order to remove all the Goods
in the second Vessel into the Admiral. He would have made great Presents to the
Governor, who refused them; telling the Ambassador withal, that he had
express command to refuse them, and to declare to the Ambassador, that if he
did not make have away, he would sink his Ship. That the Emperor his Master
had made a new prohibition, forbidding all Portugals and Spaniards to venture
near his Dominions upon any pretense whatsoever; nay, though it were upon
pretense of an Embassy, upon pain of being crucified upon the place, without
liberty to speak for themselves. As for the Debts of the Portugals, he had
undertaken to discharge them himself; only he had sent that Present to the King
his Master to thank him for that Embassy. The Ambassador had no sooner removed
the Goods out of the second Vessel into the Admiral, but they sank her before
his face. And not contented with that affront, the Governor sent for all the
Blacks that were in the Admiral, and cut off their Heads, pretending they were
Indians, and that, as such, they could not be ignorant of the Rigorous
prohibitions which the Emperor had put forth, forbidding all Strangers, except
the Hollanders, to set footing in Japon.

After the Portugal Ambassador was thus barbarously frustrated and dismissed,
he sent News thereof to the General at Batavia, urging him to execute the
design which the Hollanders had upon Macao; telling him also, That though there
were a probability of a League between the Hollander and the Portugal against
the Spaniard, yet that it could be no harm to seize Macao beforehand, as they
had made themselves Masters of several places, while the Portugals were under
the King of Spain. The General taking the President's advice, was ready to set
Sail upon this enterprise, when a Messenger from Portugal brought him the News
of the Treaty concluded between Portugal and Holland; as also of the Navy which
the Hollanders had sent to Lisbon to aid the Portugals. At first he made as if
it had been a false Rumor, and put the Messenger in Prison; nevertheless while
he delayed the departure of the Fleet, he received express Orders from his
Superiors to Treat the Portugals as Friends and Allies. So that he was
constrained to turn all his Forces against the Molucca Islands, then in the
possession of the Spaniards.

The President was very sorry for the last News, by reason that the General and
he had great designs upon the Conquest of that place, and had promised the
Company by that means to make them absolute Masters of the Trade of China, and
of all the East. True it is, that Macao is very advantagiously seated for those
that design to be Masters of those Seas, especially upon the Coasts of Quantung
and Fockien, which are the Provinces, whither are brought down all the
Merchandises of this Empire. It lies at the Mouth of the Gulf of Canton, in a
small Peninsula adjoining to a larger Island, and built upon a kind of a
Promontory, on three sides environed with the Sea, which no Ship can come near
by reason of the Flats, unless it be on that side next the Port, which is
defended by a strong Fortress. This City drew from the only Fair of Quanchiu
1300 Chests of Silks of all sorts, every Chest containing 150 pieces, and 2500
Lingots of Gold, not reckoning the raw Silks, the Gold Wire, and other
Merchandises: whence it may be easily judged what advantage the Portugueses
made of it; and wherefore the President desired so much to expel them from
thence.

But his Designs were disappointed, not only by the revolution in Portugal, but
also by the loss which the Hollanders sustained of the Island of Formosa, which
the Chinese took from them, following the advice of a French Soldier, whom
the Governor of Tayovan had refused to dismiss after his time was out. For the
better understanding this accident, you must know that the Hollanders being
settled in Japon, and having excluded all other Nations from thence, except the
Chinese, whom the Emperor permitted to return, after that the Massacre
committed by the Japonners in a City of China, of which they had a desire to
make themselves Masters, had caused a Cessation of the Commerce between the two
Kingdoms, and constrained the Emperor of China to set a price upon the Heads
of the Japonners. Nevertheless the Hollanders did all they could to make a new
Rupture between the people, or else themselves to seize upon some place that
lay proper to ruin the Trade of the Chinese to Japon.

To this purpose, not daring to attempt upon the Portugueses, they overran the
Seas which environed the neighboring Islands, and took the Vessels of the
Chinese which were bound for Macao, exercising strange Cruelties upon the
people that had escaped into those Islands, after the irruption of the Tartars
into China. Coxinga, the Son of Chinchilunge, that famous Pirate, who saved the
remainders of that ruined Empire, then commanded those people, and was become
formidable to the Tartars themselves. Who to revenge himself upon the Dutch
Pirates, undertook the Siege of Tayovan, where they usually retired, and by
gaining that place drove them wholly out of Formosa.

This is a large Island placed at the point of the Phillippines, stretching out
in length from North to South, and to the West lying opposite to the Provinces
of Fockien, and Quantung. The Chinese call it Talieukieu. Since which time,
it is very probable that the Spaniards gave it the name of Formosa, from its
beauty and fertility. They being the first people of Europe that discovered it,
and inhabited it; and upon one of its Promontories to the North built the Fort
of Kiling. The natural Inhabitants live almost all in the Woods and Mountains,
where they maintain themselves by hunting the Heart, and wild Boar, whose dried
Flesh, Skins, and Horns they sell to the Sangleys, who in exchange bring them
other necessaries. The little Island of Tayovan lent its Name to the little
Fort which the English built, over against the great Island; it was very
convenient for the Hollanders, who made great advantage of the Cattle, Hides,
and Horns, both of Hearts and Bufalo's, which they carried from thence, and sold
to the Chinese and Japonners, who make great use thereof in several of their
Trades and Manufactures. But the chiefest advantage which the Hollanders made
of this Island consisted in this, that it lay in the middle way between Batavia
and Japon, and served as a place of security for their Ships in bad Seasons,
and to take in refreshments. There also they laded off several of the Goods of
the Chinese, which they took by way of Piracy from the Chinese, or which were
brought them by the Sangleys, who are the Original Merchants of the Chinese,
settled at the Philippines, but who drive the greatest Trade of that Country,
independent from the Spaniards.

Coxinga, though an Idolater and a Pirate, banished out of his Country, and
provoked by the Hollanders, had so much humanity as to send to the General at
Batavia to send away Vessels to fetch away his Men, and delivered them all
without suffering them to receive the least injury. He had his Friends and
Favorers in the Emperor of Japon's Court, as being a declared Enemy to the
Tartars, whose near Neighborhood the Japonners cannot endure. For so quick a
Conquest of so many Lands and Provinces in seven years, as it were only upon
sight of the Enemy, had very much alarmed them. He by his Friends acquainted
the Emperor of the acts of Hostility, committed by the Hollanders against the
Chinese Merchants: Adding moreover, that they had made private propositions to
league themselves with the common Enemy; and that it was one of the Nations of
the North, born for the desolation of other Countries, and to invade the Peace
of Empires. That they had settled themselves in the Islands of the East only by
treachery and violence. That for some years since, they had made it their
business to cruise the Seas between China and Japon, on purpose to make
themselves absolute Masters of the Trade, and that if he did not take a speedy
course, they would do the same mischief in his Dominions which the Tartars had
done in China.

The President had much ado to divert the Storm, for the most potent Lords at
Court, although his Pensioners and Friends, began to open their Eyes, and in
some measure took Coxinga's part, saying, That the Chinese's were unfortunate
enough, in being laid wast by the Tartars, without being persecuted and
afflicted by the Hollanders. That seeing that after they had been expelled
their Country, they had nothing left but their Boats, and some few Rocks for
their places of refuge, it was a piece of inhumanity to disturb them in their
last Sanctuaries* and to deprive them of their liberty of the Sea, and their
Commerce with Japon, from whence those miserable Exiles had their chiefest
support. The Bonzes, the Merchants, the vulgar People, all took the Chinese
part. Thereupon the Emperor sent for the Dutch President, and told him, I
understand, said he, that thy Company abuses my Protection, and that their
Vessels, instead of being contented with the Trade which I have permitted them,
presume to play the Pirates upon the Chinese, and to trouble the Seas
adjoining to my Empire. If I hear any more of these complaints, I will cause
thee and all thy Nation to be Crucified. I know not how the President appeased
the Emperor's fury; this I know in general, that the Hollanders made a secret
alliance with the Tartars against Coxinga. Him the Inhabitants of Fockien
called to their assistance, having raised an Army of 200000 Men; whereupon he
went to aid them with a very powerful Navy. After several Skirmishes, the
Tartars and Chinese came to a pitched Field, where the Captain of the Tartars
having placed the best part of his Cavalry in Ambush, ordered his Men to
retreat by degrees, 'till they had drawn the Chinese into the Ambuscade; at
what time the Tartars encompassing them on every side, killed 80000 upon the
place; Coxinga with his Navy not being able to relieve them.

During this War, the Hollanders took their opportunity, and made themselves
Masters of the Island of Fishers, between Formosa and the Coast of Fockien. In
a short while after Coxinga died, and Savia his Uncle, the richest Merchant of
China, who out of his own revenue had disburs'd the expenses of the last War,
grew weary of the charge, and was desirous to make Peace with the Tartars. Of
which one of the Sons of Coxinga being advertised, seized upon his Uncles
person, and shut him up in a close Prison, where he killed himself for madness.
The Hollanders overjoyed at the Death of Savia, who had always hindered them
from the Trade of the Province of Fockien, sent a Navy against his Nephew in
favor of the Tartars, who made War against him all along the Seacoast.
Several Combats happened between the Juncks of the Islanders and the Holland
Vessels in view of the Tartars, who satisfied themselves with being only
Spectators. But all the benefit which the Hollanders reaped from the advantages
which they obtained over the Islanders, was only to put into the Hands of the
Tartars the Cities of Bemos and Quesmoy, and all the places thereabouts, which
Coxinga's Party possessed before. For notwithstanding all their kindness, the
Tartars would not assist them to retake Tayovan; so that they only were content
to build certain small Forts in the small Islands adjoining to Formosa: and
since my return from the Indies, I never could inform my self of the truth of
the issue of that Enterprise.

But the Hollanders were not content with their settlement at Firmando, which
was an Island both desert and barren, seated upon a Straight, which separates
the Point of the Land of Corea from Japon, a place no way commodious for their
Designs of Engrossing the Trade of China, as being too remote from Nangisaqui:
Besides, that the North and South Winds are so violent at their Seasons in this
Straight, between the two Coasts, that it is impossible to come near the shore
when they blow. The President therefore having such good luck in the Expulsion
of the Portugals out of Japon, doubted not but that he might obtain the small
Island of Kisma, an Island that had been wholly deserted ever since the
Habitations of the people had been destroyed. At first he only desired leave to
build a small Tenement for the convenience of the Factors. Now between this
Island and Nangisaqui, there is only a narrow Frith, not above a Musket Shot
over. Here the President desired the Governor that he might make a Bridge of
Boats for a more easy intercourse between the City and the Port. The Governor
gained by Presents, gave him leave to build the Bridge; but seeing that the
Hollanders made an ill use of it, and that they came too frequently and
numerously into the City, he built two Forts at both ends of the Bridge, and
furnished them with Soldiers, who were to take notice who passed to and fro.
He also published an Order, That such Hollanders as came by day into the Town,
should return to their Lodgings before night, upon pain of Death. This Order,
and the little convenience which they had for Lodging in their own Quarters,
very much troubled them; so that the President made new Applications at Court,
and obtained leave to build a Factory, and Warehouses for their Goods.

The Governor thereupon sent a Surveyor to the Hollanders, to mark out the
Ground which the Emperor had given them to build upon. This person being
largely rewarded, made them good measure, and yet they were not contented; so
that in the Nightime they had enlarged their Quarters, by removing the first
marks. The Governor, being advertised thereof, began to be very angry; but
they found means to appease him with their Presents: so that he easily
condescended to the slight reasons which they gave him for what they had done.
Thus in a short time they finished their work, which was without encompassed
with a Wall, much like a Garden Wall, but within contained a real Fort,
flanck'd and lined according to all the Rules of Art; and which, the outward
Wall being beaten down, not only defended their Bridge, but commanded the entry
into the Haven of Nangisaqui.

They took great care not to admit any but Hollanders, for fear their Design
should be discovered. So that when the whole was finished, the President gave
advice to the General at Batavia what he had done, desiring him to send him
eight Brass Guns, so broken, as to be easily put together in the places where
they were broken. He adviz'd him also to put them up in Hogsheads, packed up
like other Goods; and instead of Mariners, to send a good number of Soldiers,
habited like Mariners, for the security of the Factory. But this Stratagem had
not that success which he expected; for about that time the Emperor had sent a
new Governor to Nangisaqui: So that when the Ships arrived at Batavia, the new
changed Officers, being more vigilant then the former, coming to weigh the
Bales as they were put ashore, and finding certain Hogsheads at the bottom of
the hold, which they could not remove by reason of their weight, they presently
brake them up, and perceiving there the broken pieces of Canons, carried some
of them to the Governor, who immediately sent intelligence thereof to Yeddo,
of which the President had as sudden notice by his Pensioners. He having his
invention at command, repairs forthwith to the Emperor's Court, and there
tells the Emperor, That he had received Orders from his Superiors to present
him with certain Pieces of Canon, made according to the newest Invention of his
Country, the use whereof was so convenient, that they were with little
difficulty and trouble to be drawn up, and made use of, where others could not
possibly be brought to play: and that he thought no Present could be more
acceptable or serviceable to him, to render him Victorious over his Enemies.
Upon this the Emperor was very well satisfied, and sent to the Governor of
Nangisaqui to send him those Guns, and withal, not to molest the Hollanders,
either in their Factory, or in vending their Wares.

Having so fortunately disengaged himself out of these Briers, he lays another
design, and sends to the General at Batavia, a person of a turbulent and
unquiet Spirit like himself, to set out two Vessels, to make a discovery of all
the Coasts of Japon, and particularly of those Coasts which were next the Gold
Mines, and to see if they could find any safe Harbor for Ships to ride in, in
those tempestuous Seas, or any places proper to fortify, that they might no
longer depend upon the uncertain humor of the Court of Japon, which was as
inconstant as their Seas. The General provided two Ships, and furnished them
with excellent Pilots, good Soldiers, expert Mariners, and Provisions for two
years, with all other Necessaries and Instruments, as well for delving as
building. One of the seven of the General's Council was chos'n Supervisor of
the Enterprise. It Is said, that those two Vessels skirted all along the Coast
of Japon, from the East to the South, and from the South to the North, fetching
a compass about the Islands to the 47 degrees. of Northern Latitude, and that they
discovered one Islands which they called The States Island, and afterward
touched upon another Land which they named The Company's Land, inhabited by
White people, with long Hair, habited after the Japon fashion, which they found
to be a Continent adjoining to Niulhan, and Corea; and that after they had
wandered a long time upon the Sea, without any other design then to make new
Discoveries, they passed through the Streights of Sanguar, which separates the
Land of Yesso from Japon, and kept along those Coasts of Japon to the East, to
observe the Bays of Aizu, and Xendai, where are the Gold Mines. In that part a
furious Tempest took them, in sight of the Mountains, where the Gold Mines lie,
which lasted four days together. The second of these Vessels run full against a
Rock, and split her self, with the total loss of every Mothers Son in the
Vessel. The Admiral held out a longer time, but coasting the Land where the
Mountains of Sataque appear, the Tempest grew so violent, that she also brake
against the Rocks. In this second Shipwreck only the Admiral, and thirteen
persons more escaped, partly by the help of the Planks, and partly by Swiming.
The Japonners upon the Coast presently ran to view them, and wondered to see
people in those parts, whose Language they did not understand. Nevertheless,
they entertained them civilly enough; but in regard they were Strangers, and
that there was a strict prohibition not to receive any Strangers among them
upon any pretense whatsoever, they were at a great loss what to do with 'em*
One, wiser then the rest, advised his Brethren to carry them to the Emperor,
whose counsel was followed; and so they took their journey toward Yeddo, which
was above a hundred Leagues off.

The Emperor, being informed of their arrival, ordered that they should be
civilly used; and at the end of eight days sent for them, and caused them to be
asked, of what Country they were, and what Design brought them into his Seas?
The Admiral, who was a person of a ready ingenuity, answered, That he was a
Hollander, who all his life time had served his Country as a Soldier, where he
had the command of a thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot, at what time
Fortune, or rather the care of preserving his Honor, forced him from his
Native Soil. I was, said he, one of the chief Commanders in the Army, and
though I say it, my Service had gained me a fair reputation. The Prince, who
commanded us, had a great confidence in me, which made one of his near
Relations jealous of me; so that he was not only content to do me all ill
Offices with the General, but sought all occasions to pick a quarrel with me. I
dare be bold to say, that had he not been so nearly related to the Prince, I
should not have taken his affronts so long patiently. But at length he provoked
that patience to such a degree, and so deeply and openly affronted me, that I
was constrained to meet him with my Sword in my hand. His misfortune and mine
so ordered it, that I killed him at the first push. My Friends assisted me to
make my escape, and kept me hid for some days, thinking to have appeased the
Princes anger; but it continued so violent, that they advised me to absent my
self for some years. Therefore to render my Exile less tedious, and that I
might be still doing something for the Service of my Country, I desired my
Friends to furnish me with two Ships, with a resolution to seek out and destroy
all those Pirates that infested the Indian Seas. I have been in chase of them
for a whole year together; and sometimes we met with Tempests so violent, that
drove us we know not whither our selves, my Pilots not being experienced in the
Eastern Seas. Soon after meeting with another Tempest no less rude and
boystrous, we were forced to let our Ships drive as the Winds themselves were
pleased to force them, which at length drove us upon the Coasts of this Empire,
where we have suffered Shipwreck, not having saved above fourteen of four
hundred, which I brought along with me. Happy in such a misfortune, to be cast
upon the Territories of a Prince so potent and generous, that, no question,
will have compassion upon our miseries.

When the Interpreter had repeated this Relation to the Emperor, the Prince,
and all the Lords of the Court were very much concerned, and admired both the
Courage and Aspect of the Stranger. The Emperor sent him very rich Presents,
and to all those of his Company; and gave Order, that he should be conducted to
Kisma, to the Holland Factory, and that he should be well treated upon the way,
during the whole journey, which was five and twenty or thirty days Travel.
There this famous Champion stayed four Months, in expectation of the Ships that
come every year from Batavia to Japon; so that he had time enough to make a
full Relation of the Lands which he had observed, and of all the particulars of
the Shipwreck. One day as he was telling how he had cajoll'd the Emperor, and
that the President was applauding the quickness of his wit for inventing such
an imaginary piece of Knight-Errantry, a Japonese Boy that served the
President, heard all the discourse, without being observed by his Master. Some
Months after, the President had beaten this Boy, which he, as all the Japoneses
are of a fiery and vindicative Nature, resolving to revenge, went to the
Governor of Nangisaqui, and repeated to him the whole Discourse between his
Master and the Admiral. The Governor, finding it to be a business of
importance, sends advice thereof to the Court. The Emperor was so enraged at
the injury and affront put upon him, that he commanded the Governor to stop
the Admiral and his Train, and to send him with a good Guard to Yeddo, and not
to let any Ship enter the Harbor, 'till he had had a full Examination of the
matter.

This Order was not so secret, but that the Presidents Friends had notice
thereof, who presently gave him intelligence of it so seasonably, that the
Admiral was sent a way before the Order came to the Governor. Eight days
after, three Holland Vessels arrived at Kisma, to whom the Governor sent
express command to keep out at Sea, and not to come ashore. The President
feigning to be surpised at this Prohibition, went to the Governor to know the
reason, who gave him this Answer, The Emperor, said he, is acquainted with
your tricks, you shall have no more kindness from me; I have sent to Court to
give notice of the arrival of your three Ships, and I shall follow my Orders
when they come. Upon this the President made no doubt but the Admiral's story
was discovered; and recollecting with himself that he had beaten his Japonese
Boy, and that he was run away from him, he soon conjectured at the Author of
all the mischief. In short, the Governor receives his Orders, the Tenor
whereof was, That he should send away the three Vessels, without permitting
them to land either Men or Goods; and that he should tell the President. That
the Emperor was satisfied that the Admiral was a Cheat and a Spy, whom he
intended to punish severely; and therefore, if he did not send for him to Japon
by the first opportunity of the Winds, he would put to Death all those of his
Nation, and fling their Goods into the Sea.

Upon the return of three Ships to Batavia, there was no small hurly burly in
the Island; for by them they understood the danger that their Countrymen were
in, if they did not send back the Admiral. Thereupon an extraordinary Council
was called, to deliberate upon an affair of so great importance, who were all
of one mind, that the Admiral was to be sent back, and that it was better for
one to suffer, then a whole Nation.

The Admiral being advertised of this their resolution, publicly protested
against the violence and injustice they were about to do him; telling them,
that he was born a Subject of the Republic of Holland, who had only the Power
of his life and death; that in their Service, he would expose his life to a
thousand hazards, but that he was not obliged to sacrifice himself for the
particular Interests of a private Trade. The Ministers took his part, and made
it a case in Religion. The common people mutiny'd against the General, and the
Tumult grew to that heat, that the Seamen were sent for from aboard their
Ships to disperse the multitude. At length, by the interposition of a Minister,
the business was brought to a conclusion; who persuaded the Admiral by his
smooth Language, to appease the disorder of the people, by submitting to the
Result of the Council. Thereupon he promised to return to Japon, propvided they
would allow him what he demanded, not only for his reward, but also that which
should bear him out in that same new part which he had in his head to act.

First he demanded two Ships magnificently trimmed, a Train of fifty chosen Men,
every one of which was to have three changes of Habit, of the richest Stuffs
that could be had: Moreover 50000 Crowns for his Voyage, a Cupboard of Gold and
Silver Plate, with all Equipage proportionable, and that those that accompanied
him should respect him, as a person of great Quality.

All this was allowed him, and the Admiral departed from Batavia, and arrived
well at Nangisaqui. The Governor surpised at the beauty of the Vessels, could
not believe them to be Merchants, and therefore sent to know who they were; but
he was more surpised when he knew that it was the Admiral. Forthwith he
dispatched a Courrier to the Emperor, to give him notice, and to inform him
with what magnificence the Admiral was returned. The President also sent, that
he might have a favorable reception, and to desire his Friends to let the
Emperor know, that this was a Person of great Quality, whom an Honorable
Action had driven from his Country, and that he no sooner understood the
accusation that lay against him, but that he was returned with that Equipage
that became him, to justify himself.

'Till the Order came, the Governor, according to custom, caused all the Sails
and Rudders of the Ships to be brought to him, not permitting any person to
come ashore. At length the Order came, that the Admiral and his Attendants
should be received into the City, together with all things necessary for their
persons, and that they should be convoyed to Yeddo, and that in all places
where they came, they should be nobly treated. The President accompanied the
Admiral to assist him, as well with his Councils, as with the favor of his
Friends. Their Entry was very magnificent, and the richness of their Habits
brought the people from all parts, as being mainly greedy after Novelty, so
that the noise thereof was spread all over the Court: Yet the Emperor would
not admit them to their Audience upon the day which they desired.

Two Months were elapsed, during which time the Admiral kept open Table, and
displayed his dasling Riches to the Eyes of the Japoneses, and being of a quick
and apprehensive wit, he caused himself to be instructed in the Language of the
Island, and in a short time he began to understand many Words. When the
Emperor sent for him, he clad himself and his Train in a richer Habit then
that which they had on when he made his Entry. At first the Emperor seemed to
be angry; I understand, said he, that thou art an Impostor and a Traitor, that
thy Birth is obscure, and that thou art come as a spy into my Kingdom, and
therefore I am resolved to punish thee according to thy merits.

When the Interpreter had explained the Emperor's words, the Admiral with an
undaunted countenance, Sir, said he, a Prince so great as you are, should
rather be a comfort and support to the unfortunate, then add to their
affliction. Fortune, that persecutes me, has in nothing been more cruel to me,
then in raising those Calumnies, with which she has endeavored to blemish my
reputation with your Majesty. She might expel me my Country, and cast me upon
unknown Coasts at the other end of the World* but she can never inspire into me
thoughts unworthy of my Birth. This is the second time I have been within your
Dominions, the first by occasion of Shipwreck, the second to obey your
Majesty's commands. The first accuses none but the Winds. And had I been guilty
of what I am accused, I should never have ventured my self into your hands so
far off from your Power. But, Sir, my Accusers have one advantage which I have
not; they speak your Language, I understand it not, nor how to make you
apprehend the truth of my justification. Allow me eight Months to learn the
Speech of your Country, and then, if you will be so gracious as to hear me, I
make no doubt but to confound my Accusers, and to satisfy your Majesty in all
things.

The Emperor was surpised, and moved with his Answer, but more especially at
his request of eight Months to learn the Japonick Language. I grant it thee,
said the Emperor, for it is but just that a person accused should have both
the Liberty and means to do it. And in the mean time I will take care that thou
be honorably entertained in all places where thou have a desire to reside.

The Admiral us*d this Liberty with so much prudence, and got so much the love
of the Courtiers by his carriage and his liberality, that by their converse, he
not only learnt the Language, but by virtue of their good Character, the
Emperor would often send for him, and ask him several Questions concerning our
Europe, in reference to the Qualities of the Countries, the Manners of the
People, the several Forms of Government, the Extent of the several Kingdoms,
their Riches, Strength, and Warlike Discipline; of all which, the Admiral gave
him so handsome an Account, that the Prince took great delight in his
Discourse. And at length he had gained so much the favor and confidence of the
Emperor, that he utterly laid aside all the ill thoughts which he had of him,
and condemned to Death, as a false Witness, and a Traducer, the Japonese that
had accused him.

After so fortunate an escape, the Admiral thought it but common prudence to
make a fair retreat in the Grandeur of his Reputation, and thereupon he took
leave of the Emperor, who loaded him with Honors and Presents. The Courtiers
were also sorry for his departure, so that some of them accompanied him back,
and took order for his entertainment, which was very magnificent all the way to
Nangisaqui, where he took Shipping a few days after, and returned to Batavia.

All the People thronged to the Port to see him when he Landed. He told them in
few words the success of his Voyage. Some applauded his ingenuity and courage;
others extolled the Service which he had done the Company and Nation. The
Council received him also with thanks and praises, and gave him all the Gold
and Plate which he had brought back. A while after he departed for Amsterdam,
where he was no sooner arrived, but he presented a Petition to the States
General against the East India Company, for sending him back to Japon, and for
reparation of the violence and injury done him. The business was long in
debate, but at last the Company was condemned to pay him great damages, and
Interest for the same.

But to return to the President: He began now to be weary of being confined to
one Factory, though he made up his Pack well enough where he was. But his
Ambition carried him farther, and he thought he had done Service enough to be
advanced to a higher Dignity. Neither was his presence so necessary at Japon,
where he had settled the Dutch Trade in as good a condition as it could well
be. And in truth, the Hollanders had then almost the whole Trade of the
East Indies. They had taken from the English, Formosa, Amboyna, and Pooleron,
and by that means engrossed all the Trade of Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs. They
had taken Baton by surprise. The Inhabitants of the Celebes, Ternate, and
Tidor, were become their Vassals; and the King of Macassar having made an
Alliance with them, had expelled the Portugueses out of his Dominions. By means
of their Factories in Sumatra, they had got all the Pepper Trade of the
Western-Coast of that Island into their hands, besides several other advantages
which they had in several other places, where they had encroach'd upon the
Portugals, Spaniards, and the English themselves. The East India Company at
that time entertained 140 Ships, part Men of War, and part Merchantmen,
provided with great Guns, Ammunition, and Provision of all sorts, and in these
Ships above 6000 Men, part Soldiers, part Mariners. Batavia was the Soul of
their Conquests, made upon the Ruins of the Portugueses, which had they lain
all together, would have made a large Empire, and by which they might have
grown infinitely rich, had not the expenses of their Navies and Soldiers eaten
out the gains of their vast Trade. One of their wisest Generals told me
frequently, We have, said he, but too many Fortresses, we need no more then the
Cape of Good Hope, and Batavia, Factories well settled, good Ships, and honest
Men to serve us. For in short, their Officers pillage unmercifully, and cause
the Commerce and Dominion of their Countrymen to be detested by the Indians,
through their Covetousness and Cruelty.

I know my self, that in the year 1664, the Expenses of the Hollanders in the
East Indies amounted, communibus annis, to twelve Millions a year, not to
reckon Shipwracks, decay of Ships, and wast of Goods, and yet their Cargo's for
Asia and Europe have not amounted to above ten Millions; and sometimes the
Cargo's are so mean, that the Receipts do not answer the Expenses. Nevertheless
their perseverance and courage were worthy of admiration. For what could be
more to be admired, then to see that a small number of Merchants, assembled at
first upon the single score of Trade, should afterward presume to make War in
Regions so far distant, assail so many Princes and Nations, plant so many
Colonies, besiege so many Cities and Forts, and lastly, set forth so many
Navies at such prodigious Expenses, that it would put many potent Sovereigns to
a plunge to do as they did?

This was the Estate of the Holland East India Company, at what time the
President, the principal Subject of this Relation, was recalled from Japon to
Batavia, there to take upon him the Office of Chief Director. He carried
thither great store of Wealth, and built several magnificent Houses in the
City. His Authority also was very large; but he exercised it according to his
usual custom, and was hated by all the Officers of the Company, and the
Citizens themselves. He thought himself secure of the Employment of General,
but he was deceived in his hopes; upon which he took pet, and returned for
Amsterdam, where he lived quietly for some years. At length his turbulent and
ambitious Spirit put him upon new Designs, to revenge the injury which he
thought he had received. To which purpose he returned to the Indies. His
undertaking was not so prosperous for those that employed him, and who merited
to have been better served. He pillaged, cozened, and caused several disorders
in their affairs, and at length returning home again, perished in the River of
Lisbon with his Money and Jewels, as has been already related.

The End of the First Part.
A RELATION OF What passed in the Negotiation of the DEPUTIES Which were sent
to PERSIA and the INDIES, As well on the behalf of the KING, as of the FRENCH
COMPANY, for the settling of Trade.
IN the Relation which I have undertaken, I shall make a faithful Report of
things in such manner as I saw them transacted by the Deputies sent to Persia,
and the Indies, as well on the behalf of the King, as of the French Company,
for the settlement of Trade.

The Thirteenth of July, 1665. the Sieur Lalin, Gentleman in Extraordinary to
the King, and the Sieur de la Boulaye, a Centleman of Anjou, with the Sieurs
Beber, Marriage, and du Pont, Deputies of the new French Company, for the
settling of Trade in Persia and the Indies, arrived at Ispahan, and took up
their Lodgings at Zulpha, being the Suburbs of the same City, where also at
that time lived the Sieur L' Estoile, a French Merchant. Lalin and Boulaye,
without saying any thing to the Deputies, delivered to L' Estoile the Letters
which Monsieur de Lyonne had written to him; the Inscription whereof was thus.
To Mr. L' Estoile, first Valet du Chamber to the King of Persia, or in his
absence, to Mr. Logis, his Son in Law. Which was not a little to be admired at
by the Franks, who had sojourned any time in that Country, to find that Monsier
Boulaye, who had been before in Persia, and should have better understood the
Custom of the Court, should be no better able to instruct a Secretary of State,
then to let him give L' Estoile the Title of Valet du Chamber to the King of
Persia, who has none to serve him in his Chamber but Eunuchs, and never suffers
a Christian to touch his Habits, for fear of being defiled.

The purport of the Letters, was to admonish L' Estoile to support, assist, and
protect the Deputies in the Business upon which the Company had sent them; and
in case of losses by the way, to furnish them with such necessaries as they
should want.

The King of Persia was then three days journey from Ispahan; for which reason
a Messenger was dispatched with a Letter to the Nazar, or Grand Master of the
House, and another to the Mirzateker, or his Lieutenant, to know whether his
Majesty would command them to wait on him there, or whether they should expect
his return to Ispahan.

In the mean while the Deputies could not agree amongst themselves: For the
three Merchants Beber, Marriage, and du Pont affirmed, that the two Gentlemen
were only interested by the by in this Negotiation; and that having no right to
take cognizance of the Affairs of the Company, they ought not to trouble
themselves any farther, then the King's Letters directed them, in the affairs
of the Company. That the Effect of the King's Letters was no more, then that
two Gentlemen, desirous to see the Court of Persia, were joined with the
Deputies of the Company; and therefore it belonged to them only to treat with
the Ministers of the King of Persia. That the Gentlemen had no more to do then
to deliver the King of France's Letter to the Persian King, and to desire a
nomination of Commissioners to treat with the Deputies. This contest, which all
the Franks in vain endeavored to compose, came at length to the Nazar's Ears;
who was strangely surpised at it, having then a design to procure an Order
from the King to remove out of Ispahan and the Suburbs, all the Christians of
what opinion soever, and place them over against Zulpha.

However, the Deputies raised new objections and difficulties every day; which
Father Raphael of Man's, Superior of the Order of Capuchins in Persia, employed
all his credit and industry to accommodate. He wrote them out several forms of
a Letter, which they were to send to the Nazar; but those that pleased the one
Party, did not like the other. At length Father Raphael, weary of scribbling and
altering, amending and correcting, and all to no purpose; told them seriously,
they did ill to act in such a manner, and to insist upon idle formalities; that
the Persian Style, wherein they ought to write to the Nazar, ought to be
concise and plain, without superfluities, or impertinencies; and lastly, that
all their contentions did but redound to the disadvantage of the Company, whose
Interests they pretended to manage. After several contests, Father Raphael, at
last, finished the Letter to the content of both Parties, which was transcribed
into the Persian Language; with another to the Mirzateker, and both were
dispatched away. The Nazar having read it, presently informed the King of the
French Companies design, and of the arrival of the Deputies. His Majesty
commanded him to let them know that they were welcome, and that in a short
time, he would return to Ispahan, and give them Audience.

Some few days after, the Court returned to Ispahan, and while the King
stopped at one of his Houses near the Gates of the City, the Nazar sent for
Father Raphael, to know of him who the French Deputies were, and who had sent
them into Persia, to which the Father gave him the best satisfaction he could.
For the Nazar wondered that they were come into the Kingdom, and sent, as they
said, from such a potent Prince, and yet that the Governors of Erivan and
Tauris should know nothing of their passage through those Cities. The
Athemadoulet also was in the same Astonishment; and it gave them reason to
suspect both the Quality of their Persons, and the Reality of their Commission.
For either they were ignorant of the custom of the Country, or else they did
ill to travel incognito, like ordinary Tradesmen, and Persons of mean
condition. But Father Raphael having assured them, that they were sent by the
King of France to settle a Company of Trade, and that he had Letters of Advice
thereof out of Europe, the Nazar bid Father Raphael tell the Deputies they
should be in a readiness, for that the King would give them Audience in a few
days.

But the former misunderstanding, still continuing between the Gentlemen and
Deputies, Father Raphael fearing some mischievous consequence of it in the
presence of the King, or that they should make some dispute for priority, the
Father represented to the Nazar, that whereas the Deptuies were of two Orders,
the one of Gentlemen, and the other of Merchants; therefore to take away all
suspicion of jealousy, it would do well, that His Majesty would be pleased
when he admitted them to their Audience, to permit the Gentlemen their seats on
the one side, and the Merchants on the other. Which the Nazar approved, and the
King allowed of the same day.

The 27th of September, the King being at his Palace of Scader-Abbas, upon the
bank of the River, between the Bridge of Zulpha, and the Bridge of Schiras,
caused a preparation of Artificial Fireworks to be made, which came to above
2000 l. and early in the Morning caused notice to be given, that he intended
that day to give audience to the King of France's Deputies. Father Raphael also
had Order to be ready with the Deputies, to the end, the Mehemender, or Master
of the Ceremonies, might not be obliged to wait. Accordingly that very day the
Mehemender came to L'Estoile's House, and from thence conducted the Deputies,
with all their Train, and the rest of the Franks then resident in those parts
all mounted on Horseback, with a march so slow and grave, and for the
advantage of the sight so far about, that it was almost Night before they
arrived at Scader-Abbas; at what time the Mehemender entered the Palace alone,
leaving the Merchants at the Door. In the mean while, the Merchants believing
that Father Raphael did not favor them so much as the Gentlemen, cried out
aloud, that they would have an Interpreter also for themselves, or else would
go no farther. Father Raphael, who acted only by the Nazar's Order, and for the
advantage of the French Nation, told them, that whither they went any farther
or no it was all one to him: that for his part he was not there as an
Interpreter, either for the one or the other, but only in obedience to the
King's commands.

In the midst of this debate the Mehemender returned to carry the Deputies to
their Audience; five hundred Musketeers being ranked in order upon the bank of
the River, to give them a Volley as they passed along. The Mehemender's march
at first was slow and grave, but approaching the place where the King was, and
from whence he had a view of the Deputies, he caused them to double their pace
to the foot of the Steps, where the Lackeys took off their Shoes; and from
thence they proceeded into the Hall of Audience, where the Kans, and other
great Lords were sitting. Upon each side stood the Youth of Quality, sumptously
clad in Tissue of Gold and Silver, their Cloaks and Mantles being lined with
Martins, Sables, and other rich Furs. The Deputies being come into the King's
presence, the Mehemender caused them to kneel, and bow their Heads to the
Ground three times: That done, he caused them to rise, and lead up Lalin by the
hand alone, as being the person who had in charge the presenting of the Letter
to the King. After him followed Boulaye, and the rest of the Deputies, and thus
they mounted up to the place where fate the Athemadoulet, and the Nazar. The
King was seated upon a Scaffold some what higher then the rest, encompas'd with
150 young Gentlemen magnificently clad, to whom the Sieur Lalin, at the head of
the Deputies, made his compliments in French, and then humbly presented the
Kings Letter, sealed with a flat Seal upon a flying Label, enclosed in an
Embroidered Box, with the Arms of France and Navar, in relief, upon the Lid.
Father Raphael explained to the King the effect of Lalin's Speech. After which
the King gave a little bow with his Head, and at the same time gave a sign to
the Master of the Ceremonies to carry them back to their places. Being come to
the bottom of the Hall, where the Officers had Order to separate the Gentlemen
from the Merchants, the Officers by mistake put Boulaye with two of the
Merchants, and Marriage one of the Merchants with Lalin, which made Boulaye cry
out aloud in the Turkish Language Menbeg-Zadde, I am a Gentleman; but the thing
being done, and the King being present, there was no help. Then the Persian
Music began to play for a quarter of an Hour; which having given over, the
Master of the Ceremonies came again, and carried up Father Raphael, and the two
Gentlemen, as he supposed, of which Marriage by the forementioned mistake
happened to be one, again to the King: at what time Lalin with a comely grace
made his Harangue, and set forth the occasion of his Deputation of His Majesty,
of which His Majesty testified his good liking by a nod of his Head. For Lalin
had a handsome presence, and spoke with an acceptable Tone, and his magnificent
Habit very much added to the comely Air of his Person. The Speech was expounded
by Father Raphael; which when he had done, the King asked the Deputies several
Questions, and then with his hand made them a sign to retire to their places,
beck'ning at the same time to Father Raphael to stay; and causing him to come
near him, more particularly informed himself of the Power of the King of
France, the Extent of his Dominions, his Military Discipline, and his Councils:
of all which the Father gave him the best account he could, and then with the
King's leave, retired to his place. This Scene being over, a Flagon of Gold,
and a Glass were sent to the Deputies, attended with a short Banquet of Fruits,
and other sorts of Food; the Instrumental and Vocal Music playing all the
while. Which being over, the King again sent for Lalin, Marriage, and Father
Raphael, and after a short Discourse, having dismissed all but father Raphael,
he fell into a dispute with him touching the Unity of the Divine Nature, the
necessity of one Prophet, and how Mahomet was the Seal and Crown of all
Prophets. He seemed to admire that the Franks, who had the Reputation of being
People of Wit and Discretion, could think Jesus Christ to be a God: to all
which particulars, the Father endeavored to give the King the best
satisfaction he could. But then, Father Raphael being desirous that the three
Deputies should partake of the King's favor as the other two had done.
Whereupon the King sent for the other three Deputies, and having discoursed a
while with Boulaye, while Father Raphael interpreted between them, in a short
while he dismissed them all again, but Father Raphael, with whom he entered
into a more jocular Discourse then the former, of the Colors, Black and White,
and of the Beauty of the French Women, the King confessing that naturally he
did not love Brown Women, the White complexion being more agreeable to him, as
being that complexion which alone composed the Beauty of Women. The Father
modestly made his answer, that Beauty consisted only in fancy; for that the
Persians loved thick and full Eyebrows, which were not at all esteemed in
France. Then the King casting his Eyes upon the Box wherein the King of
France's Letter lay, he took out the Letter, and observing it to be a small
piece of Parchment, and not such a one as he had received from several Princes
and Potentates of Europe, nor indeed like those which the Jesuits had brought
him formerly from the King of France himself, in a fair piece of Parchment,
with a large Seal deep cut, he gave evident Demonstrations of his contempt of
it, and was about to have thrown it away. Father Raphael perceived him to be
out of humor, to whom the King in pursuance of his dislike, said, Raphael, I
never receive open Letters without a Seal, take it, and let me see it no more,
for I do not believe it comes from so great a King as the King of France, and
at the same time made him a sign to retire. He durst do no otherwise then take
the Letter, and so returning to his place, he told both Lalin and Marriage what
had passed in his Discourse between him and the King. Two hours, after that,
were spent in beholding the Mummeries of their common Dancers, a pastime very
usual in Persia. Which being over, the King sent again for Lalin, Marriage, and
the Father; and after some few Questions, to which they gave the best Answers
they could, he again dismissed both the Deputies, retaining only Father Raphael
with him. The Father, then taking his opportunity, told the King, that he had
always observed it to be the custom of the Athemadoulet to cause the Letters,
which the European Princes sent His Majesty, to be interpreted in his presence.
And therefore, added the Father, I beseech Your Majesty to permit me to give
the King of France's Letter to the Athemadoulet, to the end, it may be truly
interpreted to him according to usual custom. Thereupon the King made a sign to
the Father to give it him, and glad he was to be so rid of it. The Father
observing the King in a good humor, spoke to him in behalf of the other three
Deputies, that he would be pleased to admit them to be sent for a second time,
in regard the others had been sent for three times. But the King told him, it
was enough for him to speak to the Gentlemen, let his Ministers talk with the
Merchants. The Father being then dismissed, he sent for Lalin alone, for whom
he showed himself to have a very great kindness and affection; and at the same
time commanded the Nazar to bring him the next day, together with Father
Raphael, and Lagis the Genevese, who was retained in his Service, to Court, for
that he intended to be merry with them. Then he went on, and told Lalin, that
so soon as the French Ships were arrived, he would send an Ambassador to the
King of France, and make a strict Alliance with him. Lalin replied, that His
Majesty of France desired nothing more. Why then, replied the King, is not my
Alliance sufficient, but that you must go seek the Alliance of the Blacks, from
whom you will not draw those advantages, with which you flatter your selves?
For you must know, that the Deputies kept their affairs so secret, that no body
knew of them but all the World, the Servants as well as the Masters. Not
considering, that the Persians are good Politicians, and that that Court is
never without Spies. Therefore the King knew, that as soon as the Deputies had
dispatched at his Court, they were to depart for the Indies, with which Nation
he keeps no good Correspondence. And for that reason, he was not a little
offended with them, though they endeavored to persuade him, that their Errand
to the Indies was only for Linen and Spices.

The Deputies presented to the King a very fair Fuzee, together with the Kings
Picture, in little, drawn to the Life, which was so much the more esteemed,
because at the same time several large Cuts had been brought to Ispahan, and
presented to the King, which perfectly agreed with the Picture in Oil, by which
the whole Court was convinced that it was the real Portraiture of the King.
When these Presents were laid before the King, he asked the Deputies, for which
of the Eastern Nations the French had most affection; to whom M. Lalin made
answer, that certainly for the Persian; thereupon the King returned, that
certainly they had reason; for that the Persians were white, like the French,
and that it was impossible for them to have any affection for the Indians who
were black.

At length the King, to show the Deputies his highest favor, would have them
drink the HEZARD PICHE, in a golden Cup, which holds about a Pint of Paris. He
ordered the Wine to be the same which he drank himself, which was in a Bottle
of Crystal Glass, studded with Diamonds. Lalin drank courageously, and so did
Marriage; but Father Raphael made a fair excuse, and got off. After midnight the
Zerhaftes, or Table-Cloaths of Cloth of Gold were spread upon the Floor, and
several roasted Viands very hot of the Spice, and Dishes of Salt Fish,
purchased from the Caspian Sea, were brought and set upon the Clothes; together
with several Pastrie Meats, dried Raisins, Comfits, Almonds, and Pistaches, and
other provocatives to drink. The repast being ended, several Buffons were
brought in, who Sung and Danced after the Turkish fashion, and made a hundred
wry Mouths and ugly Faces. Among the rest of the Divertisements, there were two
Men introuduc'd, that played one against another with each a Battoon in his
hand, with a piece of Linen dipped in Naphta, tied to the end of the Stick,
which cast forth a very clear brightness in the dark; at the same time four
artificial Whirle-Winds were made to rise one after another, which were all
hovering in the Air at once, and in a continual Agitation.

Three Hours after Midnight the Masters of the Ceremonies came to raise the
Deputies to take leave of the King; and so leading them to the lower end of the
Hall, after a profound reverence, they retired, not one person beside stirring
out of his place, to the end they might have time to take their Shoes without
confusion. When they were gone, the King dismissed the Court, and then it is
that the crowd is so great, that not one in twenty but loses their own, and
gets whose-ever Shoes he can lay his hands on.

The Deputies and Father Raphael being upon their return home, by that time
they got half way, met an Officer belonging to the Athemadoulet, who told
Father Raphael that his Master expected the French Begzades at his House by Ten
a Clock next Morning, to treat them, by his Majesty's Order.

Father Raphael, Lalin, and Boulaye, were punctual to their time, and no sooner
did the Athemadoulet know of their arrival, but he came down into his Hall of
Audience, to receive them, where he had also ordered a very fair Banquet to be
ready for their entertainment. There Father Raphael left them, while he went
with the Athemadoulet's Secretary, to Translate the King of France's Letter
into the Persian Language; which being finished, and he come again into the
Hall, after several Civilities past on both sides, the Father and the Deputies
returned to Zulpha.

The Merchant Deputies offended at the Honor which the Gentlemen had received,
would have gone in their Turn; but Father Raphael told them, that it was not
the Custom in Persia to visit the Prime Minister, without being sent for. In
the Evening, Father Raphael, and the Begzades received new Orders to attend the
King, but the King stirred not out that Evening, so that their Journey was in
vain.

The Merchants still perceiving the Honors which were done the Gentlemen, and
believing Father Raphael to be the cause of all, they began to rail at him, and
give him soul Language, and threatened to write into France to give an account
of his behavior. Father Raphael netled at the Language of the Deputies, told
them, that he had done what in him lay to procure them the same Honors, which
the others had received, though they were so little sensible of it. That he
would continue his endeavors for the Advancement of their Affairs, though not
for their own sakes, yet for the sake of the Company, that had sent them. Which
answer, though it were sharp enough, and showed that the Father was angry, yet
he did not forget, that they were his Countrymen; so that he ventured to carry
them twice to the Prime Minister of his own accord, contrary to the Custom. The
first time he was not to be spoken with. The second time, he made an Errant to
him with the three Deputies, to present him a Copy of the Letter from the
Directors of the Company, in the Persian Language; at which time he showed them
the Deputies, acquainting him withal that those were the Persons with whom he
was to treat in point of Trade. To which the Athemadoulet replied, that he had
no Commission from the King to meddle with those Deputies, but only, to
entertain the Bagzade that brought the King's Letter, which he had already
done. Thereupon the Father desired him he would be pleased to speak to the King
to nominate Commissioners to treat with them, which the Athemadoulet promised
to do. That day in the evening, a Messenger was sent to Father Raphael, to
acquaint him, that the King had appointed the Nazar to treat with the Deputies
the next day, and to know their demands. Of which the Father gave the Deputies
quick intelligence.

The next day, being the First of September, Father Raphael failed not to be
with the Deputies very early in the Morning, to bring them to the Nazar; but he
was very much surpised to see, that they would not go altogether, but still
loo'k with an evil Eye one upon another, and continued their former
differences. To the end therefore that he might set things to rights, he went
to the Nazar, and told him, that he thought it would be the best way for the
Merchants Deputies to come because that they were the Persons with whom he was
chiefly to Treat. The Nazar answered, that the King understood that they were
all five in the same Commission jointly. To which, when the Father answered the
second time, that it would be the best way to do as he had proposed; The Nazar
with a Surly Countenance, why, What Is the matter now? said he to the Father;
Are not you Frenchmen ashamed to be thus at odds one with another, and to give
all the World, nay the very Foot-boys occasion to discourse of your Divisions?
What would they have us think of them and their Commission? Are they so little
afraid of offending the King? Or, is their King more indulgent then the King of
Persia, who would never pardon such faults in his Subjects? To this rebuke the
Father made no reply. Only he desired the Nazar, that he might have two
Horsemen to attend the Deputies at Zulpha, telling the Nazar not a word of his
design to bring the Merchants an Hour sooner then the Gentlemen. This fell out
to the Fathers desire; For the Father sent one of the Horsemen to Zulpha, to
the Gentlemen, with order to drink with them, and not to be over hasty, but to
bring them fair and softly along with him; with the other he made have to the
Merchant Deputies, and causing them to double their pace, they got betimes to
the Nazar's House, where they were civilly received. Dupont presented the Nazar
with the Deputies Commission, translated into the Persian Language; after which
they fell into a discourse, which lasted above three quartes of an Hour,
concerning the Customs, Tolls, and Quality of the Merchants, and the justness
of the French in their Dealing. They had just finished their Discourse of
Trade, when the Nazar was advertised, that the three Gentlemen were arrived;
who thereupon desired Father Raphael to go and receive them. The Father went
and waited upon them in, neatly chiding them for having stayed so long, and
making the Nazar wait. Well said he, now you are together, go into that
Cabinet, and write down you demands, and the Articles of your Commission. The
Merchant Deputies, which had now discoursed with the Nazar what they had to
say, were well enough content to enter into a General Conference with the
Gentlemen. Then calling for Pen, Ink and Paper, they made a draught of their
Demands, the chief of which were, three Years Immunity from Customs and Tolls,
to begin from the time of the arrival of our Ships; and that after that, they
should enjoy all the Privileges and Favors granted to other Nations. They
also desired precedence above all other Nations, when they should be called to
Court, as they suggested, that they had at the Court of the Grand Signior. And
lastly, they required a House for those that belonged to the Company, to live
in the City.

These demands were dictated word for word by Father Raphael, to the Nazars
Secretary, in the Name of all the five Gentlemen; and because the Nazar's
Secretary knew not how to pronounce them, the Father undertook to write them in
the Persian Character; which being done, and the writing read in the hearing of
the Deputies, the Nazar took the Paper to present to the King.

Thus after a fair Banquet, accompanied with Music, both Vocal and
Instrumental, the Deputies were dismissed by the Nazar, who bid them rely upon
his care; for that he would do them all the Favor that lay in his power, and
give them his Majesty's Answer in a short time. The Deputies very well
satisfied with the Nazar's reception, sent him afterward a Present, which was
a Shame both to the Nation and the Company, that pretended to such great and
high things, and endeavored to fix an opinion of their Wealth and Grandeur
among Strangers. For they sent him only a Tin Cup Enameled, and eight little
Cases of Perspectives, or Looking-Glasses, the whole not amounting to above 40
Crowns. They also made much such another Present, but meaner, to the
Mirzateker, consisting of about a Dozen Pair of Gilt Scissars for Women. We
must speak the Truth: For they were not a little laughed at for their ridiculous
Presents, which were the Scorn and Contempt of those that received them, when
the Deputies were gone.

To Father Raphael they presented a Purse, with 40 Tomans, or Six Hundred
Crowns in it, believing that he would never accept of it; and indeed he refused
it with scorn; not a little angry with them, that they should have such mean
thoughts of him, as to believe him Mercenary.

Two days after, the Nazar gave notice to the Father, that the King had granted
the French their Demands; and had ordered every one of them a Calaat, or a
Vest-Royal, and in respect of Superiority, a Horse for Monsieur Lalin. That the
Kings Answer and the Grant were both ready for the Directors of the Company,
according to their desire.

The King was then onward upon a journey to Mazandran, three days Travel from
Ispahan, at one of his Palaces, called Tajabat. A Pleasant Situation, in the
midst of a great Valley, shaded with Trees, and full of Villages.

The Ninth of October, came a Letter from the Nazar, to Father Raphael,
signifyiug the King's Pleasure, that both he and the Deputies should repair to
Tajabat with all speed. Thereupon the Father and they made such have, that in
less than three days they got to Tajabat, where the Nazar ordered them to lie
in the House of an Armenian Renegado. The King sent them immediately eight or
ten bottles of Wine, with four Gold Dishes, full of lovely Fruits, and
Tapistries for their Dining Room. But these Presents occasioned new Quarrels;
For there being two Factions, and both living apart, there was a great dispute
who should have this present. Father Raphael, having done all that possible he
could to reconcile the business, and not being able to persuade them, in a just
Passion, bid them take their Swords and Pistols, and go and decide the Quarrel
in the Field. Till now, said he, I have done all I could to conceal your
detestable divisions from the Court, which nevertheless, is but too well
acquainted therewith: Is it your design to publish your own Ignominy, and to
make not only your selves, but the whole Nation of the French ridiculous to the
Persians? At length they were so far reconciled, that one Room served them to
Feed, and consequently the same Furniture. For the Father's reproofs had put
them a little out of Countenance.

The Seventeenth of October, the Mehemander came to the Deputies Lodgings, and
brought five Royal Vests; The Richest, which was of Tissue of Gold, was for
Monsieur Lalin; the next, not altogether so rich, for Monsieur Boulaye; and the
other three of a lower price, for the Merchants; The value of the whole might
amount to 600 Crowns, for which the French Deputies most generously gave the
Officers that brought them 25 or 30 Crowns, as a Gratuity. The Officers of the
Stable also brought two Horses for the Gentlemen, for which they received six
Crowns in Gold, as a reward. I confess, I should have been ashamed of such a
poorness of Spirit, at such a time as that.

At length also the Ragan or Patent for the Company was delivered into the
Hands of the Deputies, faithfully Translated by Father Raphael to this Effect.

That whereas the Merchants of the Kingdom of France, who are favored by the
Favor extreemly Royal, and the Justice excessively Royal, being made constant
in the hope and participation in the time, have presented their Petition, which
is arrived at the Ear of the Ministers Commissioners for the Court of Grandeur
and high Fortune; Their Intentions and Demands have found the Visage of
Acceptance, and we have strictly commanded, that the Conservatours of Rights,
Tolls and Privileges, acknowledge them for exempt and priviledg'd, during the
space of Three Years; and that there be nothing demanded upon their Goods and
Factories, conformable to the request of the Deputies, etc.

The next day, the Mehemander Bachi, came early in the Morning to attend the
Deputies, and bring them with all speed to the Court: Where being admitted into
the Garden, they met the King a Horseback, and all the Court a Foot. The
Athemadoulet held the King's Answer to the King of France, in a Bag of Cloth of
Gold, Sealed with the Kings Seal upon red Spanish Wax. The Sieur Lalin then,
and the rest of the Deputies were ordered to go near and Kiss the Kings Boot,
who kept his Grandeur, without speaking a word. When they had so done, the
Athemadoulet calling them to him, there, said he, there is the Answer for the
Grand Cha, that is, for the King of the Kings of France. The Deputies having
made their Obeysances to the King, the whole Court took Horse; and the King
took the Road of Cachan; and within an Hour, that Campaign, which looked like a
thick peopled City, became as Desert as the most part of Persia.

The Deputies, having read over the Patent, began to find many defects, and
Marriage would fain have followed the Court for amendments, and would have
persuaded Lalin and Father Raphael to have gone along with him. But Father
Raphael over-persuaded them to return first to their Lodgings at Zulpha, and
there to hear the Patent distinctly read over, and to consider better of it.
When they came to Zulpha, and that they had debated upon the mere Letter of the
Patent, then they were worse mad then they were before. Then there were so many
Cavils, so many Disputes, so many Exceptions, and so many Expositions put upon
the Words Conformably and Reasonably, that they must get a Horse back
immediately. Boulaye stopped this fury for a while; So that after many Disputes
and Consultations, it was agreed, that Marriage, as chief of the Negotiation,
and Lalin, should follow the Court; and that Boulaye, Breber, and Dupont,
should proceed forward to the Indies. The Sieur L'Estoile, and all the rest of
the Franks, were of opinion, that Lalin should forthwith depart for France,
with the King's Letter. But their Counsel was not followed, and so the Deputies
divided themselves: Lalin and Marriage to follow the Court, which was then
removed as far as Mazandran: And the other three to pursue their Journey to the
East Indies. The two former fain would have had Father Raphael have accompanied
them to the Court; but he fairly excused himself. Neither would L'Estoile
permit his Son, to whom he allowed 20 Tomans a Year, to return to the Court,
choosing rather to send him to Bander with the other three. Whereupon, the
Seventeenth of November, they set forward upon their Journey.

Du Pont, without doubt, was the most solid and judicious of all the Merchants,
but he took it so to heart, to see the disunion among them, that he fell into
a languishing Disease at Ispahan, and died not far from Schiras.

As for Lalin and Marriage, they left Ispahan the Fifteenth of December, and
arrived at Court soon after, where they lay a long time neglected, their
Divisions still continuing, which made them contemptible to the Persians, and
ruined the Affairs of the Company. One Evening, the Nazar sent them a Flower,
advising them, that as that Flower never changed; so it became them not to vary
in their Resolutions. After a long and tedious stay, Marriage obtained some few
impertinent Alterations in his Patent; and permission to make Wine at Schiras,
as the English, Hollanders, and Portugueses had.

With these Alterations they both leave the Court; and Marriage would certainly
have accompanied Lalin, who had an intention to see Ardevil, Tauris, and Kom,
had he not been solicited to return to Zulpha, by a Young Dalilah, that had
smitten his heart. For by the means of an old Woman, the Mother of one of his
Lacqueys, he had debauched a young Armenian Virgin, whom he kept privately to
himself; yet not so privately, but the noise thereof was quickly spread all
over Zulpha. All the Armenians were scandalized at it, and sent to seize the
Baud, to punish her, by their Laws, as she deserved. Marriage advertised
thereof, flew out of his Lodging to her assistance, and to protect her from
Justice. But seeing the People in an uproar, and finding the Stones to fly too
thick about his Ears, he was forced to mind his own safety, and to seek for
shelter in the next House where he could be admitted. But the Business was not
so put up, for the Armenians, wondering to see that a Deputy of an Illustrious
Company, who was come to the Court of Persia upon so serious an Affair, should
do so much wrong to his Nation, by publicly appearing in so shameful an
Action, and so unworthy of a Person in public Employment, that they resolved to
prosecute him all manner of ways. They were resolved, to that end, to have sent
into France an Express, to have Complained to the King of his ill Management
and bad Behavior. But Marriage at length restored the Armenian Girl which he
had kept close locked up; after which time the Armenians never looked upon him
but with scorn and contempt.

Lalin being returned to Ispahan, departed thence the 22 th of November, 1666.
for Bander, with a Resolution, to Travel into the Indies. But he fell sick at
Bander, and thinking to return to Schiras, for the Air's sake, he died by the
way at a Village called Bend-Ali. A Gentleman endowed with noble Qualities, and
whose Gentile and Generous behavior was an honor to his Nation.

The Thirtieth of the same November, Marriage also left Ispahan, and departed
for Bander, with one Father Mercier, a Jesuit, whom he took along with him as
his Almoner, and Lewis L' Estoile, his Kalmachi, or Interpreter: There he
stayed four Months for the arrival of the Ships, but none coming, and the heats
increasing, he resolved to spend the rest of the Year at Schiras. As for the
Jesuit, and young L' Estoile, because there was no Converse but with the people
of the Country, they returned back to Ispahan.

Boulaye and Beber arrived at Suratte the first of April, 1666. Being come to
the Bar, they sent to Father Ambroise, chief of the Mission of the Capuchins,
who presently attended them with a Sloop, which he had obtained of the
Governor, and brought them home to the Capuchin's House, where they stayed
till they departed for Agra. Sometime before was arrived there a Merchant of
Aleppo, who had run himself out at heels, and of a Maronite Christian was
become a Roman Catholic, in hopes to patch up his broken Fortune, being in
truth a mere Counterfeit, and a Hypocrite: For these Levantine Christians
seldom change their Religion, but upon some motive of Interest; and when they
have got a good Sum together, they presently whip back again into their own
Country, and for a small piece of Money obtain absolution of their Patriarch.
Thus several of the Religious Franks that travel out of Europe into Asia are
often deceived, making a great noise of their Conversion of the Levantines,
when the Conversion, at the bottom, is only an outward Conversion, and a mere
piece of Gullery. Among many others that I could relate, I will only mention
one, of a Franciscan, called Paul Stella, who coming with 400 Crowns, or
thereabouts, in his Pocket, for his subsistence, a Maronite smelt him out, and
under the pretense of giving him the Honor of his Conversion to the Catholic
Religion, never left him till he had sucked him dry, and turned the Channel of
his Money. This Maronite Merchant before mentioned, whose Name was Chelebi,
showed himself very zealous for the Capuchins, and he had reason enough; for
the Capuchins of Aleppo had been very serviceable to him, and had helped him in
his Affairs when they were at the lowest ebb. They were overjoyed at his
arrival at Surat, and gave it out immediately that it was he that had given
them Money for the building their House and Church. But when I came to look
over my Accounts, I found that the Money that had paid for the Ground and a
good share of the building, came out of my Purse; Father Ambroise having
promised that I should be reimburs'd upon my return to Paris. But I never heard
more of my Money, nor indeed did I ever look after it.

The reason why the Capuchins were willing that the Aleppo Merchant, who never
had disburs'd a Penny, should own the Expenses of their House and Church, is
this; because no Frangui Christian is permitted in the Indies to enjoy the
propriety of Houses, or to make any reparations of those which they hire,
without the leave of the Governor of the place. Both the English and Holland
Companies are only Lessees to the Indians; the Great Mogul having suffered from
the Christians in several places, where under pretense of repairing or adorning
certain Houses, which they possessed by way of propriety, they have so well
fortified them, that when the Governors have come to require any Duties from
them, they have made them good so long, till they have forced the Governors to
yield to their demands.

So soon as the Deputies were landed at Surat, they presently spread abroad a
report, that there were seven or eight Ships belonging to the French Company
that would suddenly follow them. The Aleppo Merchant was overjoyed to hear the
News, and was in great hopes, that by the favor of the Capuchins, and the
advantage which he had of speaking several of the Asiatick Languages, that the
greatest part of the French Merchandise would pass through his hands. Upon
these hopes he made great Treats, and presented large Presents to the Deputies,
and maintained their Servants at his own Charges. He found the Deputies to be
sufficiently covetous, but he was still in great expectations, that his civil
Entertainments, and the Presents which they received from him, would oblige
them to acknowledge his kindness, and that one day he should find himself
repaid by the management of their business; but he was foully mistaken. For it
cost him above 1500 Rupies, part which he spent upon them himself at Surat, and
partly what his Nephew furnished them withal at Agra for their present
occasions.

Three or four days after their arrival at Surat, the English President sent to
visit them by some of his Council, and would have waited on them himself, but
that he lay then ill of the Gout. The Holland Commander did the same with his
Council, showing all the civilities and kindnesses that lay in his power; and a
few days after invited them solemnly to a great Feast, with as many as they
could bring along with them. In the midst of their Jollity the King's Health
was sent about, and after that, the Prosperity of the French Company; which
obliged Boulaye to begin another Health to the happy Progress of the Holland
Company. But when it came to Mr. Beber's turn to drink it, notwithstanding all
that Boulaye, and the rest of the Company could say to him, they could not
oblige him to pledge it. Nay, he did worse then this, for he threw the Glass,
Wine, and all at his Feet; and when he had so done, he rose in a heat from the
Table, and after a pitiful manner left the Company, and went home to his
Lodging, though without any attendance. The Hollanders were so discreet as to
take little notice of his folly, but remained very merry at the Table with Mr.
Boulaye till Midnight. But they could not forbear telling their Friends, that
they wondered, in regard there were so many discreet and ingenious Men in
France, that the Company should make choice of such a Fool for the management
of such an important Affair as he was sent about; and that they foresaw he
would do the Company no small injury.

While the Deputies stayed at Surat, the Governor of the place, at the request
of Father Ambroise, entertained them, and showed them all the respect that
could be showed to Strangers. One day that they were in Discourse together, he
told them, that if they would follow his Counsel, he adviz'd them not to go to
Court till their Ships were arrived. But seeing that they were resolved to the
contrary, he offered them Money, Horses, and Soldiers, to attend them, with
Letters of Recommendation to some of the Grandees of the Court. The Chabander,
or Provost of Merchants, made them the same offers that the Governor had done;
all which they refused very obstinately. More then this, they behaved
themselves very ill, in reference to the Presents which the Governor and the
Cha-Bander sent them, for they gave their Servants that carried them not a
Doight, which is looked upon as a very dirty action in the Indies. For the
Indians never give their Servants any other Wages, then what they get by
carrying Presents from their Masters. And the more they have given them, the
more Honor it is, both for him that receives, and him that sends the Present.

The Deputies then being resolved for Agra, hired their Waynes, and their Oxen
to carry their Luggage, and five and twenty Soldiers for their Convoy. They
likewise made a great noise, of their being honored from so Great a King, and
so Noble a Company. Upon which score, they ought to have had five or six Wains
for their Baggage, every one their Pallaquin and a Led-horse, and every one a
Flag with their Arms or their Ciphers, which is the gentile way of Traveling
in India, and as I was always wont to travel. But they took but five and twenty
Soldiers, whereas they ought to have hired an hundred and fifty at the rate
they talked.

But instead of so doing, three Days Journey from Surat, Beber began to quarrel
with Boulaye, that they had too great a Train at their heels, for which he
blamed the Advice of Father Ambroise and the Merchant of Aleppo: That for his
part he would pay for no more than four Soldiers, and that if he would not
send the rest back, he should pay them himself. Upon which, they agreed to send
back the six Soldiers which the Governor had ordered to attend them as far as
Brampour; upon their dismissment, not giving them so much as the Worth of a
Pipe of Tobacco.

When they came to Agra, the Nephew of Chelebi, the Aleppo Merchant, failed not
to wait upon them, and to offer them his service. There was at that time a
French Surgeon, whose Name was James, he spoke good Indian, and was married
in the Country to the Daughter of a Portugal: The Nahab, the King's Uncle and
Grand Vizier, had a great kindness for this Surgeon; and by his procurement
it was, that the Deputies had Audience of Giafer-Kan, for so was the Nahab
called. They requested of him, that by his favor they might present a Letter
from their King to the Great Mogul, as also that they might be admitted to
treat concerning the Settlement of a French Trade in the Country. The Nahab
told them, that he would speak to the King, and take care that they should be
admitted to their Audience in a little time. With that he ordered them to be
conducted to the Lodgings appointed for them, which they found ready furnished
with all necessary provision for the Belly; but their Lacqueys and Servants
were to cook it themselves; for it is not here as it is in Persia, where the
Meat is sent ready dressed out of the King's Kitchen to the Ambassadors Table.

The Nahab, who understood that they had brought no Presents, neither for him,
nor any of the Grandees of the Court, nor for the King himself, was not over
hasty to admit them to their Audience. So that it was above a Month before the
Deputies could set Eyes upon the Nahab again, though the Surgeon, and other
Franguis, used all their Interest in their behalf. Being very weary of this
Delay, they gave it out, that they could stay no longer at Agra, in regard they
were to be at Surat upon the Arrival of the French Vessels. Upon which false
Report, the Nahab sent to them for the King their Master's Letter, that he
might present it to the Great Mogul himself. Upon this Demand of their Letter,
they were quite blank, not being acquainted with the manner how the Kings of
India re^eive those Letters which are brought them by Ambassadors: For they
never receive any with their own hands, but such as come from the Grand
Signior: All other Letters, according to the Grandeur of the Kings that send
them, are put into the hands of the Grand Officers of the Court, who present
them to the King: And the more potent the King is, from whom the Letter comes,
through the fewer hands it passes before it is presented to the Great Mogul.
For the present State of Europe and Asia is very well known in the Court of the
Great Mogul, and the Difference between the Sovereigns of both, in reference to
their Grandeur and Puissance. Neither is there a Stranger that enters into the
Kingdom, of whom the Governor of the Frontier Province does not give advice to
the Nahab; and if he appear to be a person of Ingenuity, there is no help for it,
but he must go to Court, where he is caressed, on purpose to get information of
the Country from whence he comes.

But to return to the Deputies, they obstinately refused to send the Letter to
the Nahab: At which he was not a little troubled; fearing lest upon the Arrival
of the French Vessels, it might be the occasion of a Rupture, and hinder the
conclusion of the Treaty of Commerce. Moreover he was not a little jealous,
lest they should seize upon the Great Mogul's Vessels in their Voyage to Mecca,
as Hugh Lambert the Holland Pyrat did, who took all the Baggage belonging to
the Queen of Visapour, when she was going to Mecca and Medina. The Nahab having
made these Reflections to himself, so wrought with the King, that he consented
that the Deputies, contrary to custom, should be admitted into his presence,
there to give the Letter into the Hands of the Prime Minister, to be by him
presented to the King. This, as I said before, was an unusual favor; and yet
the Deputies were so obstinate, as to reject this Proposition, saying, that
they would rather return home, and carry back their Letters, then not present
them to the King themselves. This obstinacy of theirs, to maintain their own
conceited humor against the Custom of the Country, was very much blamed by
all people, that admired at the patience of the Nahab, who at length sent them
word, they might take their own course, since they refused the Honors which he
would have done them. After that, the Deputies staid ten or twelve days in the
City, flattering themselves, that the Nahab would comply with their Folly; but
they were deceived. For the Nahab offended at their idle carriage, took such
order, that not one person living, either Merchant or other, went to visit them
all the while. So that they resolved to return to Surat, in expectation of
their Ships.

When they left Agra, they went and lay two Leagues off from the City in the
Field, setting up one Tent apiece, (and those pitiful ones Heaven knows) to
serve for them and their Servants, whereas they might have lodged with more
security in a fair Inn that stood not far off. Now it is the Custom at the
Great Mogul's Court, that every Night some Prince or great Lord keeps Guard in
his turn for a Week together, having under him five or six thousand Horse, that
beat the Road for three or four Leagues round the place where the King
quarters. A Party of these Horsemen scouting by the Deputies Tents, and
enquiring whose they were, one of the Servants replied, that they were the
Tents of the French Deputies: of which the Horsemen gave immediate notice to
their Captain, at that time the Grand Provost of the Empire. A Person handsome,
well endowed, and a great Lover of Strangers, who had raised himself by his
Valor, as being an Abyssin by Nation. So soon as he understood that they were
the French Deputies, he sent one of his principal Officers, with fifty Horse,
to desire them to give them leave to guard them that Night, because they were
in no security, and for that if they came to any mischief the Head of their
Captain must answer for it. But they very ill received the kind proffer of the
Provost, proudly answering, that they were strong enough to guard themselves,
and the first that came near them should know whether the French had Courage or
no, adding withal, that if their Captain were afraid, they would guard him,
with a deal of other scurrilous riffraff which very much surpised the Officers.

The next day they set up their Tents about a quarter of a League farther,
because they expected something to be brought them from Agra. The Conteval or
Grand Provost admiring they made such slow journeys, and that they had now
pitched in a more dangerous place then before, sent the same Horsemen with the
same proffer, or else that they would be pleased to lie in an Inn where they
might be safe. Boulaye was of the mind that so kind an offer should not be
refused: but Beber gave them nothing but bad language; reviling their Captain,
that he was afraid they should go and lie with his wives, offering if he
pleased to go and guard them. He spoke half Portuguese, half Italian, which
being a kind of Lingua Franca, some of the Horsemen made a shift to understand
him, and having made a report to the Grand Provost of his Insolent Answer, the
Lord was not a little nettl'd at it, and therefore resolved to be revenged.
About midnight fourscore or a hundred Horse came and cut all the Cords of
Bebers Tent, thinking to have let it fall about his ears. But he found a way to
quit himself by the assistance of his Servant; and endeavored to escape to the
House of a Dervich on the other side of a small Rivolet, nere the place where
the Tents were set up. But the Moon shining as bright as day, he could not hide
himself from the pursuit of the Horsemen, who shot at him, and with their
Arrows wounded him in three places, once in the thigh and twice in the
buttocks. Boulaye hearing the noise which the Horsemen made, peeped out of his
Tent, and seeing so many Horsemen in pursuit of Beber, was not a little
daunted. He was afraid of running the same risco; but not having long to
consider, he took his purse of Ducats, and fled till he got about half a
league off, where he lay all night under a great Tree. But by the consequence
he found that the Horsemen had nothing to say to him; being satisfied when they
saw Beber fall, as believing him dead. For had they not thought him so, they
would never have left him, till they had quite done his business. But to color
the business, that it might not seem a point of revenge they broke open all
Beber's Chests; that it might seem as if he had bin robbed; but they found very
little or nothing to enrich themselves.

So soon as Beber's boy saw that the Horsemen were gone, he ran to the Town for
a Pallanquin to carry his Master thither. Being brought to the Town they laid
him in the Jesuits house, where Boulaye also arrived not long after and took up
his Quarters, to the great consolation of the Jesuits, whose Revenues are but
small in those parts, where there are no devout people to leave them Legacies.
Their Ordinary was very sparing; but it was such as the Deputies must be glad
of. Though it were a feast for Boulaye, who was not wont to make better cheer.
For a Sheeps head, of his own purchase, usually served him two meals. Which
made him ridiculous to the Franks, who lived after a more splendid rate. At
Smyrna and Aleppo, when he was not invited by the Franguis, he had recourse to
his Sheeps tongues, or a cold piece of double Tripe, which he carried to the
poor Cabaretts of the Greeks, taking his Chopin of Wine to wash it down: and
such was his good husbandry that what was left was ordered to be set up for his
supper. One day he had drank a little more then he had bled, and the Franguis
found him a sleep in the street, about a hundred paces from the Cabaret. They
had so much charity for him as to remove him to his lodging, lest other Nations
should laugh at the choice which they had made of an Envoy to settle the Trade
of such a considerable Company. As for Beber, who loved good Cheer when it cost
him nothing, as being a true exemplar of covetousness, he complained of the
Jesuits entertainment, though they outrun the Constable to treat him like a
Deputy. His man who had more wit than he, and plainly saw what a trouble he was
to his Hosts, made them a merry relation of the Noble Table which his Master
kept for him, how he had made provision of a Barrel of Herrings; which when
Invitations failed, he warily fed upon, rubbing his bread with the tail to give
it a haut goust. For my part, said the Boy, I am but a poor Servant, yet I have
made a shift to spend an hundred and fifty Crowns which I had got in the
service of the Consul of Smyrna. 'Twas my misfortune to be inveigl'd out of his
service, for I was with a Noble Master where I got Money; but in this man's
service I have eaten all that I had got before. Two days after I arrived at
Agra, and heard of Beber's being wounded and where he lay, and went to give him
a visit. And as I never went unprovided in my travels with all things
necessary, I had some Ointments and Plasters, which were very serviceable to
him.

It was an easy thing to observe that Boulaye was glad of the opportunity of
Beber's being wounded, that he might have the sole honor of giving the Letter
to the King. For he pretended to be the true Envoy from the King of France, and
that Beber was only sent to bear him company. La Boulaye therefore believing
that the business would take effect, persuaded the Chyrurgion already mentioned
to solicit the Nahab who had a kindness for him, so close, that thereby the
Nahab permitted him to bring the Letter. But Boulaye who thought he should give
it himself to the King, was much surpised when he saw that the Nahab, who had
got the Letter into his own power, gave it to one of the meanest Officers of
his Court, who by the Prime Minister's order, gave it to another, and he to a
third, who brought it back to the Nahab, who at length presented it to the
King, but not in the presence of Boulaye.

And thus you see the Effect of the ridiculous pride of the Deputies, Boulaye
was forced to stay in an outer Court, having two more to pass thorough before
he came into the King's Quarter. Where, while he remained big with expectation,
word was brought him, that the King would return an Answer to the King his
Master, so soon as the Ships should be arrived; and so he was forced to go back
to his Lodging with the melancholy dissatisfaction of a frustrate hope.

The wounded Gentleman being new cured, but still very lame, desired Audience
of the Nahab, that he might have justice for the mischief done him by an
Assassination and a Robbery. The Nahab readily admitted him, limping when he
came into his presence worse then when he first left his bed. The first
Compliment he made was of the Wounds he had received, and then he demanded
satisfaction for the loss of his Blood, and the Goods which had bin stolen from
him. The Nahab promised him to inform the King of the business, assuring him
that he should have no wrong done him upon the highway within the Territories
where he had to do. Four or five days after, the Nahab sent to Beber to know
how much the Loss which he pretended to have received amounted to Beber brought
in an account of four and twenty thousand Roupies, or 12000 Crowns, and for the
loss of his Blood, he left it to the Kings Generosity.

His Accompt^ie made out thus*

Imprimis. A Note for the value of six thousand Roupies which he had lent ^
Merchant when he departed for Marseilles, which Note was among the Papers he
had lost. As to that, the Nahab asked him whether the Notaries in France did
not make an Entry of such public Acts as were signed before them? Beber made
answer, that he should never be paid, if he could not produce the same Paper
that had bin taken from him, and that he could not demand his Money without it.
The Nahab replying, that that was contrary to the Custom of all Nations, and
that he knew it could not be as he said, added withal, that he should take no
care for his satisfaction in that particular. After that he read on.

Item. Five thousand Roupies in Gold and Silver Money.

Item. Four thousand Roupies in Gold Lace and Galoon to trim his Clothes.

Item. Two Diamond Rings at two thousand one hundred Roupies.

Item. Two other Rings, a Topaz, and another of seagreen water, which cost
three hundred Roupies.

Item. His Clothes, his Linen, and for a Chest of Medicaments, which might be
worth 4000 Roupies; of which he had procured his Surgeon to give in a Bill.

Item. A Chain of Gold valued at 500 Roupies. In all amounting to 24000
Roupies, as I said before.

Two or three days after, the King caused an Order to be delivered to him for
the payment of his Money at the Treasury-Chamber. Upon which Order, he agreed
with a Merchant to be paid at Surat. And when he was ready to depart, the King
commanded 12000 Roupies to be paid him for the loss of his Blood. But that sum
he never received. For being in haste to be gone to Surat, and failing to
present the Treasurer, he drilled him out so long, that his patience was quite
tired, and so he was forced to go without it.

I could never understand the Policy of the Great Mogul to pay Beber the sum
which he said had bin taken from him; when the Nahab knew to a thread what he
had lost, and had given in an account thereof to the King the whole not
amounting to 2000 Roupies. And as for the Franguis, so soon as they understood
that he had demanded 4000 Roupies for his Surgeons Chest, they all cried out
that it was a mere cheat. For a few days before Beber arrived at Agra, the
Surgeon had received 200 Roupies by the Charity of the Franks to return to
Surat, and he fell sick the next day that this Bill was presented to the Nahab.

After the (...) had read the King of France's Letter, the Nahab by order of
his Master, ordered a Lodging to be provided for the Deputies, which (...)
e^joy'd the Jesuits, who were by that means rid of two very troublesome Guests
As for Boulaye, in regard the King had signified his pleasure, that he would
not return any answer to the King's Letter till the arrival of the Ships, he
never troubled himself any farther, but stand till the waters were fallen, that
he might go to Bengale, and from thence to Golconda to settle a Trade in those
parts. But Beber moil'd like a horse, and did nothing but run to and fro, to
know the King's pleasure touching the settlement of Trade. But the Nahab either
laughed at him, or took little notice of what he said. For indeed by Beber's
outward appearance, and deportment, no man could make any other judgment of
him, but that he was a poor spirited fellow, and one that knew not what it was
to live. For all the Europeans that travel into Persia and the Indies are
always richly habited, nor would any of them keep Beber company, who by his
Habit looked rather like a Footman, than a Deputy of a Royal Company of Trade.
At length a whim took him to make himself a suit of painted Calicut, after the
French Fashion, the like whereof had never been seen in the Country; the whole
Suit no^ standing him in above 13 Livres and 13 Sous. For the trimming of his
new Suit he took off the Ribbands of his old Clothes, which he was two days
lathering, and smoothing with a Taylers Goose. When he had got this rare Habit
upon his back, he went to visit the Nahab, who was then attended by the
Principal Lords of the Court. Who when they saw him enter, fell all a gazing
upon him, and asked one another whether that Frangui were turned Faquir, or a
Dervich of Hossen Mamout, which they usually call the ragged Saint. For you
must know, that all the Faquirs or Derviches that are of this Order, never
apparel themselves but with such rags as they pick up in the streets, and if
they meet with any pieces better than other, they make of them a kind of Galoon
to trim the rest. They also carry half Pikes, with a great company of Tatters
fastened to the end of them, to make a show of their beggary. Beber's Habit
very much surpised the Nahab, and all others that beheld him so ridiculously
accouter'd. As the passed one morning by my window, I bid him good morrow,
telling him withal, that he looked more spruce and gay than he used to do. He
replied, he had reason so to do, for that he had received Letters from Surat,
by which he had advice, that the Country people upon the Coast of Cape St. John
had decry'd four Vessels out at Sea, which they could not make to be either
English, or Hollanders, from whence he concluded that they were the Companies
ships; and that he was going to the Nahab with the News. But I prevented him at
that time, telling him that I had often observed that rascally sort of people
to come both to the English and Hollanders, with such kind of Intelligence, on
purpose to get Money; when indeed they had never seen any such sight, and
admonishing him not to believe Reports upon such slight foundations. I asked
him what date his Letters bore? he told me, thirty days ago. Then, said I, if
the discovery had bin true, the Nahab would have had notice of it in fourteen;
and then he would certainly have told you of it, or my self; for it is but two
days since I took my leave of him. Thereupon he took my counsel and resolved
for Surat in a few days.

Three days after that the Surgeon had given in his Bill for the Chest of
Medicaments that he had lost among Beber's Baggage, he was so touched in
Conscience, that he fell sick, and died in two days. Upon his deathbed he
asked pardon of God for the Cheat which he had consented to, to ask 4000
Roupies for that which was really worth but four hundred; 200 of which he had
received from the Charity of the Franguis, the rest upon the sale of a Horse.

For my part, finding that Beber was resolved for Surat, I made what have I
could out of Agra, to be quit of his company. But the second day after my
departure, having set up my tent by a Rivers side, just as I was going to
dinner I spied Beber coming, nor could I get rid of him afterward till I came
to Surat. So that we were forced to travel together, though he committed a
thousand Impertinencies by the way. Among the rest, he put one trick upon the
Chief of the Cheraffs or Bankers at Brampour, not to be passed over in silence.

In regard the ways were bad, and that he had but one pitiful weak Chariot, and
four weak Boys, which with the help of Oxen, were hardly strong enough to help
him out when he stuck in the mire, he seldom came to his journeys end till two
or three hours after me. Now upon the report that ran of the French ships being
seen out at Sea, and the general belief that Beber would be one of the
Principal Trustees of the Company, several, as I said before, courted him, and
sought to engage his Friendship. Being arrived at Brampour, the Chief of the
Cheraffs, attended by a dozen of his servants came to visit us. Upon the first
acquaintance Beber told him that he wanted a Pallaquin to go to Surat,
whereupon the Cheraff civilly offered him his, and caused it to be trimmed up
for his better accommodation. Beber thought that trimming would have bin
finished in one day, when indeed it required three or four. The next day I
ordered my Coach to be got ready, and ordered my Pallaquin to be carried away.
Beber, who verily believed that the Company*s ships were already in the Road of
Surat, began to curse and bann the Cheraff, who presently came to him and
endeavored to appease him with good words. He told him, it could be no
prejudice to him to stay a day or two; for by that time the Roads would be
better, and he might travel the faster. But Beber, being transported with
passion, was so far from taking the Cheraffs reasons for satisfaction, that
snatching a Cudgel out of his Waggoners hands that stood next to him, he gave
the Cheraff three or four good Licks cross the shoulders. The Merchants and
other people that were in the Inn, were strangely surpised at such a piece of
rudeness, and ran out presently, some with Stones, and others with Cudgels,
making a hideous noise, and crying out, that they had never seen the like. They
took it for a most enormous Crime, to strike the Chief of the Cheraffs, above
fourscore years old, whose very age ought to have bin protection enough from
such an Affront. Good luck it was for Beber, after such a rash action
committed, that I was well known at Brampour, having been there ten or twelve
times, and in some of my Travels having dealt for above 200000 Roupies. There
were none of the Cheraffs with whom I had not dealt by Letters of Exchange, and
very few Merchants or Brokers who had not had some business or other upon my
account. They cried out, speaking of me; See there the Monsieur Franqui, with
whom we have dealt so often, yet never heard him give us an ill word. Another
good chance he had to meet there the Coutevall's Lieutenant, and three
Merchants of Surat; and thus between us, having disengaged Beber out of the
Brabble wherein he had so sillily bemir'd himself, we made him get into my
Coach, and so packt him out of the City. I followed him two hours after: for
had he staid longer in Brampour, I believe the Faquirs and Derviches would have
beat out his brains. For he was no sooner gone, but a great number of that sort
of rabble came to the Inn, crying out, Where was that Dog of a Cafer that had
beaten the Cheraff. Thereupon, seeing the Multitude increase, I stole out of
the Town, without saying a word, and rid on till I got three leagues from
Brampour, to an old Town called Badelpoura, where I overtook Beber, who had
hired a Coach made after the fashion of the Country. It was but reason, that I
should have my own Coach to sleep in the night: For though in all places where
you come to lie in the night, the Indians will offer you a little bed to lie
on, yet in regard the rains were but just over, the bedsteads were so full of
Punies, that there was no resting. These Punies are ingender'd by the moisture
which the ^ains, that fall for four months together, cause in those Countries.
Which being over, and the Sun recovering its wonted heat, the women carry forth
their beds every morning, and beating them well with good big sticks, never
leave till the Punies fall to the ground, and there turning up their bellies
presently dye. These beds consist of four feet and four round staves, as broad
and as long as you please. To the staves are fastened girths about four fingers
broad, which are much more commodious than the bottoms of our beds that are
plank'd with Deal or other wood. Over the girths they only lay a single
Coverlet or Sheet, which is a manner of lying easy enough, considering the
heat of the Country.

The fourth day after our departure from Brampour, being near a great Town
called Semqueles, in a flat Country, we perceived all the Plain covered with
Tents. It appeared to be the Camp of one of the chief Kans, or Lords, whom the
Great Mogull had sent with 50000 men against the Rebel Raja Sevagi. This Lord,
understanding who we were, very civilly sent us Melons, and Mango's, and bid
his Officers tell us withal, that we were out of all danger, and might safely
pursue our journey. Whatever I could say to Beber, to persuade him that it was
but an act of civility and good manners, to wait upon the Prince, I could by no
means engage him. I seeing his impertinency, shifted my habit, and sent one of
my servants to the Camp, to learn whether the Kan drank Wine; and understanding
that he did, I took a bottle of Spanish, and another of Schirus Wine, and a
small pocket Pistol delicately embellished with silver; and with this small
Present away I went to wait upon the General. Being come into his Presence, I
excused Beber, as not being well, and immediately presented him the little
Pistol, which he took, and bid me charge, being desirous to try it. After he
had shot it off, said he to his Lords that stood by, Now must we confess these
Franqui's to be ingenious. This man sees that I am going to the Wars, and
presents me wherewithal to defend my life. Then casting his eyes upon the
little Hamper, where the Bottles were, he asked what it was? They told him in
his Ear. Oh, said he, looking at the same time upon two or three Mim Bachi's,
or Colonels that were present, This Franqui Gentleman has given me a bottle of
Wine, well we must drink it, for I find I shall please him in so doing. When
the Mollah's heard him talk of Wine, they slunk away; which made the Kan laugh
heartily. These are Agi's, quoth he; they have bin Pilgrims to Mecca, and never
drink Wine after they come home again. Having taken my leave, he sent me a
Pomere, which is a kind of Scarf that may also serve for a Girdle. It was made
of white Satin with flowers of Gold, and might be worth about a hundred
Roupies. He that brought it, told me, I should do the Kan a great kindness, to
send him another bottle of Wine: thereupon I sent him two or three, which was
all my store. He sent me six Horsemen to conduct us three days journey, till we
had passed a great River that flows from the Mountains of the South, which
washing the City of Baroche, from whence it takes its Name, falls into the Bay
of Cambay.

When we came to our last stage, which is a great Town, called Barnoli, from
whence it is but 14 Leagues to Surat, Beber sent one of his Hirelings to give
notice thereof to Father Ambrose. When the News came, the Father went with the
Aleppo Merchant, often already mentioned, to borrow the English President's
Coaches: and there were about 15 or 16 more Coaches all in a train, with
several Horsemen and Merchant Banians that made have to meet the Deputy. This
happened upon the first of November, 1666. They carried with them Provision
enough to make merry, and every Banian had his Present ready. For my part, I as
soon as I had saluted the Father Capuchin, I went directly to my Lodging, where
I had left two Servants to take care of a Sum of Money which I had received of
the King of Persia, unwilling to hazard it upon the Road. For in whatever part
of the Indies I came, I had credit enough to buy without Money. I only gave my
Bills for payment at Agra, Visapour, Golconda, or Surat, where I generally left
my Money, as having received it there for the most part of the Lords or Kings
of the Country.

As for Beber, he was no Changeling, the follies that he committed are too
numerous to be related: but how he began the year 1667, is not to be omitted.

M. Thevenot, upon his return from Madraspatan and Golconda, lodged in the
Capuchins house. Beber going to visit him, told him, that the Capuchins were
the Hollanders Spies, and that he had often advised Father Ambrose to break
with them, and not to go any more to their House. That while he frequented
their Society, the French Company would be sure to find some obstacle in their
Trade when the Ships should arrive; and that if the Hollanders had not been at
Agra, they might have done what they pleased with the King. That the hundred
thousand Roupies which they had presented to the King and Grandees of the
Court, had hindered them from obtaining what they designed. By which it
appeared, he understood not the humor of the Hollanders; for they are not so
liberal: nor would all their tricks, or presents have any thing availed them,
the Great Mogul being desirous that all Nations should be welcome to his
Dominions, especially Merchants, as well they that import little, as they that
bring in much. M. Thevenot told him, that he had never observed so much of the
Hollanders in all his travels; for if it were true, that they had such a desire
to hinder the Trade of other Nations, they would not afford them passage in
their Ships, or to put their Goods aboard, as they often did. Moreover, they
send away many times one or two Ships according to the quantity, laden all with
strangers Goods, from Maslipatan or Surat, in which Ships, there is not
ofttimes so much as one Bale belonging to the Company. And this, added he, is
farther observable, That they afford their Freight cheaper then the English, or
any other Nation, who have Ships in these parts. Thus Monsieur Thevenot
endeavored to convince M. Beber; who would have had Father Ambrose have fallen
out with the Hollanders. But he knew better things then to disoblige persons to
whom he was so much beholding as he was every day. For every week they allowed
the house a certain quantity of Bread and Meat, and upon Fast-days sent them
Fish, Eggs, Brandy, and Wine, which were no such unkindnesses to be quarreled
with. Monsieur Thevenot at the same time told Beber, that he should do well to
repay Father Ambrose the Money which he had borrowed to pay for the Coach which
he had broken to serve him, as also that which he had given the Seamen, for
trying if they could discover the Companies Vessels upon the Coast. But he
turned his deaf ear to that discourse, and would never be persuaded to
reimburse the Money which Father Ambrose laid out for him. Monsieur Thevenot
perceiving his unwillingness, and pressing him to do things handsomely, put him
into such a chafe, that he fell a swearing after such a violent rate, in a
Parlour, that was parted only by a thin board from the place where the Mass was
said, that one of the Friars, just ready to go to the Altar, came forth to
desire him to leave his blaspheming. But Beber's insolence took his admonition
so ill, that he very rudely beat the Friar in Mr. Thevenot's presence;
swearing, That had it not been out of respect to him, he would have knocked him
of the head. The Capuchin being so injuriously used, came to Me, being hardly
able to stir his neck, by reason of one of the blows that Beber had given him.
I chaft his neck with Oil of Coco's, and wrapped it up warm: but we durst not
speak a word of Beber's idle action, for fear of exposing our selves to the
laughter of the English and Hollanders, who would have made good sport with it.
Besides these Enormities, he put away his Servant that had saved his Life, and
kept his Wages. After that he went to lie at an Apothecaries house, whose Name
was Mouillon, who came from Goa, with a good quantity of Portugal Wine, and
kept a Tavern at Surat. While he lay there he had a great Contest with the
Merchant, who received the 24000 Roupies, which the King had given him for the
loss which he alleged that he and his Chyrurgeon had sustained. For the
Merchant would acknowledge the receipt of no more then 23900 Roupies, the other
Hundred being deducted for Fees of the Treasury. He also maintained, That the
Merchant had received the 12000 Roupies which the King had allowed him for the
loss of his Blood: but it was known that the Grand Treasurer would never pay
that Money. Thus when he saw that his Cheats were discovered to all the World,
he began to bethink himself how to get away: and we observed, that he would
fain have quitted Surat without noise. But there is such good Order taken both
by Land and Sea, that no person can go away without the knowledge and leave of
the Governor. For as the Countrymen that come from the other side of the water
cannot return unless they show a mark in their hands made with red Earth at the
Custom-house; neither Horse nor Coach can stir without a Note from the
Chabander, and another for the Radars, who lie sometimes two or three Leagues
from the Town. Beber nevertheless had some assurance from his Vintner, that he
might get into a Boat, by bidding the Boatmen carry him to Reynel, a large Town
on the other side of the water. The Master of the Boat asked him for his
Ticket, but Beber answered him with his Cudgel, forcing him forward, and
telling him, he was not to demand Billets of such a person as he was. As he was
got half way the River a great number of Soldiers hollowed after the Boatmen,
to row the Strangers back ashore. But Beber laid his hand upon his Sword, and
compelled the Boatmen to go forward. That evening, Beber being returned, the
poor Boatmen were apprehended, and bastinado'd till they were almost maimed.
The people cried out, that it was the Frangui that ought to be so served, and
not the poor Watermen, who had done nothing but by constraint.

Thus did this Envoy behave himself both in Persia and India, to the great
hindrance of the French Nation. Now let us see what became of both Boulaye and
Beber after all their Extravagancies.

The Sieur de la Boulaye, according to the account given by the Hollanders that
were at Agra, left the Town five or six days after my departure. Knowing I went
to Surat, he had played his game so well with me, that he got a Hamper of twelve
large bottles of Wine for 138 Roupies, though they cost me more, for which he
gave me a Note of his hand, that I have still in my custody, to be paid at
Surat, upon the arrival of the French Companies ships. From thence he traveled
to Patna, where he staid nine or ten days, partly with the English, partly with
the Hollanders: from whence he departed for Daca, the Residence of the
Governor of the Province. The Governor of the Province of Bengale was then
the Great Mogul's Uncle, whose name was Cha-Est-Kan, a potent Prince, who has
always under his Command thirty or forty thousand men.

At Patna, Boulaye had a project, that from thence he might easily pass into
China, and to that purpose he there embarked with some Persian Soldiers, who
were going to list themselves under Cha-Est-Kan. But after that, to this hour,
it never could be certainly known what became of him: but by all probable
conjectures, it is verily believed, that the Persian Soldiers murdered him and
his little Slave, in hopes of some good booty. Of the truth whereof, the
Observation that follows was no small evidence. About a quarter of a mile from
Daca lies a Town, where live several mungrel Portugal Officers, belonging to
the Governor of Bengale, as Canoneers and Carpenters, and some of the same
Nation that serve in the Cavalry of Cha-Est-Kan. There they have also a small
Church very well built, where an Austin Friar officiates, to whom, about three
months after Boulaye's departure from Patna, a certain Persian in the Habit of
a Soldier, with two more companions, brought two large Books, the one in
Folio, and the other in Quarto to sell. The Friar, who was a mungrel also,
understood no Latin; but finding them not to be in the Portugal Language, would
have stopped the Books as stolen from the Hollanders, had not the Soldier been
too strong for him. These Books were thought to have been Boulaye's; who, to my
knowledge, had two Chests full, well bound; in reading whereof he spent the
greatest part of his time. His Avarice was his Ruin; for had he taken a Bark
by himself, as I did when I went from Patna, and had obliged the Watermen to
give him good security, he could have run no hazard. For my part I took one
with four and twenty men; and every one, knowing I never spared for cost, gave
me excellent security. These Barks are little Galliots, which will undertake to
carry you to your journey's end, and name your own day. If you will lie ashore
every evening, they will set up your Tents; and stop at any Town or City to
take in Provisions. I never made so pleasant a Voyage in my life, nor with less
trouble. For in these Barks, there is a Room where the Sun cannot come in,
where you may repose in the day time, and sit in the cool Air on that side from
whence the Breez comes. There is another place covered for your Kitchen; and
another little Garderobe for the private deeds of Nature. By the way I killed
great store of large Geese, Cranes, and Crocodiles, which I gave the Watermen,
who were very glad of them; for they sold them in the Towns as they rowed
along. The people in those quarters are very good natured and officious. Diet
is little worth, as being the place where you may buy a hundred Pullets for a
Crown: and for three or four Pence, you may buy a Fish of a prodigious length
and bigness.

Beber's end was no less sad. For when the French Companies Ships were arrived,
M. Caron, who commanded them, and M. Rambos, with an Armenian, who had the
management of the chiefest part of the business, had been acquainted with what
had passed at Surat, between Beber and the Capuchins. Presently Affections and
Interests parted. Caron and Rambos took Beber's part; the Armenian held for the
Capuchins, which was at length the ruin of Beber and Rambos. The Holland
Commander going aboard to visit the Sieur Caron, upon his return would not
permit the Captain to stir out of his Cabin, so that Rambos and the Armenian
took upon them to wait upon the Commander. Upon this Occasion the Armenian took
upon him to precede Rambos, and briskly threw himself before the Frenchman;
who being provoked at the Affront, gave the Armenian a swinging cuff of the Ear
before all the company. To be short, the Sieur Caron, Rambos, and Beber holding
all together, the Armenian found himself too weak to resist: and in regard he
had the Management of the Cash, he was accused of Misbehaviour, and was
condemned to be hanged. But because they could not execute the Sentence which
they had given at Surat, they sent him away to the Council Royal of the Island
of Madagascar, of which M. Mondevergue was chief; who was so far from
confirming the Sentence given at Surat, that he admitted the Armenian to
justify himself; and finding that he was not only innocent, but that he might
be very useful to the Company, he sent him back to Surat with more power then
he had before. This put Beber and Rambos into a fit of Despair, to see the
person whom they thought to have ruined, now above them. Thereupon they found a
way to get 12000 Roupies a piece for their Wages, which they pretended to be
due from the Company: and with that and 24000 Roupies which Beber had of his
own they Embarked both together for Goa. Where, being arrived, Beber died soon
after: But as for Rambos, he returned home again through Ispahan.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE TRADE OF THE EAST INDIES.
THat Nation which has a design to settle a Trade in the East Indies, must be
sure in the first place, to possess themselves of a convenient place in that
Country, to carine their Ships, and shelter themselves during the tempestuous
Seasons. This want of a good Haven is the reason that the English have not made
those advantages which otherwise they might have done; because it is impossible
that any Vessel should remain in those Seas without being carin'd, or else
eaten by the worms.

Therefore, because it is a long way from Europe to the East Indies, it would
be requisite to have a retreating place at the Cape of good Hope, to take in
fresh Water and Provisions, whether going or coming; but especially in their
return, in regard that the Ships being then laden, cannot take in Water for any
long time.

The Road of the Island of St. Helen's, where the English have built a Fort, is
a very commodious place: and if the Water be not so good upon the North-side,
yet the Plain is an excellent spot of Ground to sow, with convenience of all
things necessary for human support.

This advantage the English and Dutch have deprived all other Nations of, by
their Forts upon the Cape of good Hope, and St. Helen's. And therefore some
River's mouth, near the Cape of good Hope, ought to be fought for, for the same
purpose, which would be far more convenient then the Dauphin Island, where
there is no Trade but that of buying Cattle for their Hides; which being a
Trade of so little consequence, would ruin a Company to follow it.

The reason why I make this Proposal is, because that in the year 1648, two
Portugal Vessels being bound from Lisbon to the East Indies, and resolving to
touch at the Cape, to take in fresh Water, mistook their just Depths, so that
the Sea running high, they fell into a Bay, 18 or 20 Leagues from the Cape,
upon the Coast that looks to the West. In that Bay they found a River, whose
Water was very good; and the Blacks of the Country brought them Refreshments of
all sorts of Fowl, Fish, and Bullock's flesh. There they staid above 15 days,
and before they set sail, they took two of the Negro's, which they carried
along with them to Goa, to teach them the Portuguese Language; on purpose to
try if they could discover by them any knowledge of the Trade of the Country.
The Dutch Commander at Surat desired me, to inform my self, when I went to Goa,
what the Portugals had learnt from those two Negro's. But one St. Amand, a
French Ingeneer, who was Supervisor of the Fortifications of Goa, told me, That
he could not make them learn one word of the Language; and that he could only
guess by their signs, that they had some knowledge of Ambergreece and Elephants
Teeth. The Portugals however made no question but to meet with Gold, if they
could find a way to trade higher up in the Country. The Revolutions of
Portugal, and their Wars with Spain have hindered them from making any more
particular discovery of the Coast. Which it were to be wished the French would
undertake, provided they gave no cause of jealousy to the Hollanders, of what
they were going about.

There is also a necessity of possessing, or at least having the liberty of
some place near Surat, to ride safe in, and to wash and tallow in, in case they
should be staid by the Rain-Seasons. The reason is, because that during that
ill season, at what time it is impossible to keep the Seas, the Mogul jealous
of his Fortress of Surat suffers no Foreign Vessel in the River, where
nevertheless, the Ships being unladen, may ride securely from the terrible
Tempests that last for five Months.

The only secure place for the Companies Vessels would be the Town of Dia,
belonging to the Portugals.

The advantage of the situation is considerable for several reasons. The
circuit of the City contains almost 400 Houses, and might be capable to receive
a greater number of people, where the Ships would find all conveniences during
their stay. It is seated upon the Coast of Guzerat, upon a point of the Gulf
of Cambaye, looking toward the South-east. The form of it is almost round; and
above half the Circle environed by the Sea. It is not commanded by any Hill;
and the Portugals have begun those Fortifications, which might be easily
finished. It contains several Wells of very good Water, and a River which falls
into the Sea near the City, whose Water is better then that of Surat, or
Souali, and the Harbor is very commodious for Shipping.

The Portugals, when they had first settled themselves in the Indies, kept
there a Fleet composed of Galleys, Brigantines, and other light Vessels,
whereby they made themselves Masters, for a long time, of all the Trade of the
Places we have treated of. So that no Ship could trade, without the Governor
of Dia's Passport, who made it in the Name of the Viceroy that lived at Goa.
The Imposition, which the Ships paid, was sufficient to maintain the Fleet and
Garrison, and to enrich the Governor besides.

When the Rain-Seasons are over, that the wind sits at North and North-east,
you may sail from Dia to Surat in three or four Tides with light Vessels; but
great Ships that are laden must fetch a compass about the Bank.

The City has no Land belonging to it, but what it stands upon, yet it would be
no difficult thing to agree with the Raja, or Govervour of the Province, and to
obtain as much as should be sufficient for the Inhabitants.

Neither is the Land about it very fertile, and besides, the people are the
poorest in the whole Empire of the Mogul. Nevertheless the Country is so well
stored with Cattle, that an Ox or a Bufalo will not cost above two Piasters.

The English and Hollanders make use of these Cattle to feed their People, and
to spare the Provisions of their Ships, while they stay at Souali.

But it is observable that the Bufalo's flesh in those parts causes frequent
Dysenteries, which the Bullocks flesh or Beef never does.

The Raja that commands the Country has only the Title of Governor for life.
Which is common to most of the Raja's in the Mogul's Empire, whose Ancestors
were Lords of Provinces, where now their Descendants only enjoy the Titles of
Governors.

Having thus got possession of a good Post; the next thing of Importance is to
choose out two men considerable for their Honesty, Prudence, and Skill in
Trade, who are to be allowed the full of their Expenses.

These two persons are to serve the Company, the one in the nature of a
President, with a Council, consisting of a certain number of persons, to assist
him. The other in the quality of a Broker, who must be an Idolater of the
Country, and not a Mahumetan, in regard all the Workmen he has to deal with are
Idolaters.

Civility and Faith of Promise are altogether requisite to gain Credit among
strangers. And these particular qualities are required in the particular
Broakers, who are under the Broaker-General in the Provinces where the
Factories are settled.

Good Intelligence is necessary for these two persons, to understand the
alteration of Manufactures.

This alteration happens either through the craft and subtilty of the Workmen
and the Merchants themselves, or by the correspondence of the Broakers and
Workmen.

Which alteration may cause so much damage to the Company, that the Broakers
shall gain ten and twelve in the hundred by it.

If the President and Broaker-General combine with the particular Broakers and
Merchants, it will be a difficult thing for the Company to avoid being
deceived; but if these two persons are but faithful and honest, the fraud may
be easily remedi'd by changing the particular Broakers.

The Officers of a Company may be unfaithful to their Trust in this respect:

When a Vessel arrives in Port, the President for the Nation receives the
Company's Letters, and the Bills of Lading; upon which he calls his Council,
sends for the Broaker, and gives him a Copy of the said Bills.

The Broaker shows them to three or four of the principal Merchants of the
Country, who are wont to buy by whole sale. If the President and the Broaker
hold together for their own profit, the Broaker instead of facilitating the
sale as he ought to do, advises the Merchants to be shie, and to offer only
such a price: Then the President sends for the Broaker and these two or three
Merchants; and in the presence of the Council he asks the Merchants what they
will give for the Goods in the Bills of Lading mentioned. If the Merchants are
resolute to give no more then so much; The President puts off the sale 15 days
longer, more or less, as he pretends himself pressed to sell. In the mean time
he sends for the Merchants several times for a show, and at length, to avoid
suspicion, and to discharge himself, he asks the advice of the Council, and as
they approve, orders the delivery of the Goods to the Merchant.

But though the Temptations be very great, to which these two Officers are
subject, by reason of their power, their frequent opportunities, and their
distance from their Superiors, the Company, besides their being wary in their
Election, may remedy these disorders by depriving them of that pretense, which
the Dutch Commanders and Broakers have, of being constrained to sell off
presently to the Merchants in gross, to avoid the expenses of delay.

The Error which the Hollanders commit in this respect is, That their Officers
bespeak every year upon Credit all the Goods which they have occasion for in
the Empire of the Mogul, according to the Orders which they receive from
Batavia.

The credit of this Advance costs them sometimes twelve, sometimes fifteen per
Cent; so that so soon as their laden Vessels are arrived in the the Port where
they are to be sold, they are obliged to sell them presently off at the
Merchants rate first offered to their Broakers, to make up a present stock to
pay off their credit for the Goods bespoke for their Ships to carry back again,
and to get more credit for the next year. This is that which cherishes that
confederacy between the President, the Broaker and the Merchant, who makes
advantage enough of this necessity of selling.

Whereas the better way were, for them that carry the same Commodities which
the Hollanders do, to carry Money also to pay the Workmen for the Goods
bespoken for the next year.

The Company making this advantage shall not be put to pay that great Interest
of 12 and 15 per Cent.: and besides, they shall have better Goods, and better
cheap. The Ships loading shall be ready before they arrive in Port; and being
quick laden they may return before the bad Season. Neither shall the Company be
put to sell their Goods at a low price; because their Broakers will have time
to stay for the coming of Merchants from other parts; or else because they have
time enough to send them to other places, where they are sure of a quicker sale.

Observe also, That it is far more profitable to carry to the Indies Gold and
Silver in Ingots, rather then ready coined; for being coined the Money is
valued only according to their Alloys; and there is always a defalcation made
for the charge of Coinage.

The Broaker also, if he be dishonest, may combine with the Master of the
Mogul's Mint, which is settled in several parts of the Empire, and put a lower
value upon the Gold and Silver then it deserves, by telling the President and
Council, that upon the touch it appears to be no more worth.

But it is an easy thing to avoid this deceit, provided the President be a
person of credit and prudence, by sending for one of the Refiners of Gold and
Silver, that live in the Country, who perfectly understand the Touch of Metals,
and to let him Essay the Gold and Silver before the Broaker's face.

This is that which the Sieur Walkenton did for the Holland Company in their
Factory at Casambazar, where he bought every year six or seven thousand Bales
of Silk. For by this Essay he found, that his Broaker being in confederacy with
the Master of the Mint, had cheated the Company of one and a half and two per
Cent; in the value of the Gold and Silver which was brought him from Japan, as
well coined as in bar, to a very considerable sum of Money.

The Broaker also may confederate with the Master of the Mint to cousen the
Merchant in weghing his Gold or Silver, by making use of false Weights or
Scales unduly poised.

But that fraud is easily avoided, if the President and his Council will be but
so patient as to see their Metal weighed themselves, and take care that the
Weights be right, and the Scales true.

One of the most important Observations in reference to the Trade of the
Company, and discipline of their Factories is this:

To prevent the Merchants or under-Merchants, Accomptants and
under-Accomptants, who officiate under the Commanders and Broakers, from
driving any particular Trade by themselves, for they having a familiarity with
the men of Manufacture, and finding by the Letters of Advice what Goods are
likely to be most vendible next year, buy them up upon their own accounts, and
find a way to lade them off in the Company's Vessels, to the great damage of
the whole, though to the great gain of particular people.

And this the President permits them to do, either for his own Interest, or by
connivance under the pretense of their small Wages. The Captain of the Vessel
also winks at what they do, because he has a spell for loading and unloading.
And because these people having no great Stocks, are desirous to put off their
Goods with the first opportunities, they give order to their Correspondents to
under-sell the Company ten or twelve in the Hundred, which is the absolute ruin
of a Trade.

To remedy this disorder there ought to be a Fiscal, or King's Proctor, in
every of the chief Factories belonging to the Company, to act in the King's
Name, and by his Authority.

He is to be independent from the President and the Broaker, in the Exercise of
his Office; so that he may have an eye, as well upon their behavior, as upon
the demeanor of the under Officers.

He ought to be a person of good Credit, resolute and vigilant; and he must
have a strength of men correspondent to his Employment, and a Deputy to act
under him.

He is to have good Information of the departure of all Ships when they are
once laden, and when they are ready to set sail for the Port whither they are
bound. When he hears of the Arrival of any Ship, he ought to go himself, or
send his Deputy with a sufficient Guard, to take an Account of the Ship's
Lading.

If it be a place near to which there are any small Islands, or by-Nooks, it
behooves him to take care that no Goods be privately conveyed ashore in those
private corners, where there are receivers a now ready: and whatever he finds
thus privately unladen he shall have power to confiscate.

He shall also confiscate whatever he finds not Marked with the Company's Mark.

He may also discharge any inferior Officers to whom any such Bales shall
belong; and for the superior Officers, he shall complain of them to the
Company.

He shall have power to open all private Letters, to inform himself of
Prohibited Goods, and Private Correspondencies.

This Prohibition of Private Trading cannot be too severely imposed, and it is
observed with so much exactness in Holland, that when one of the Company's
Ships is ready to set sail from Amsterdam, a Burgomaster gives the Captain and
all the rest of the Seamen their Oaths, that they shall be contented with their
Wages, and meddle with nothing of Trade.

All the Officers of the Factory should be advanced by degrees, so that a
sub-Accomptant may have hopes to be a President; that the hopes of Advancement
may oblige them to live with more credit, and cause them to study to make
themselves more capable of all the Intrigues and Subtilties of the Trade of the
Country.

It is of great importance not to show any favor in this particular of
preferment, unless he have passed through all particular Degrees and Offices
beforehand. And thus much concerning the Discipline of the Factories.

OF THE COMMODITIES WHICH ARE Brought as well out of the Dominions of the GREAT
MOGUL, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighboring
Territories; And also of the Weights and Prices of the said Commodities.
Of their Silk.
KAsembasar, a Village in the Kingdom of Bengala, sends abroad every year two
and twenty-thousand Bales of Silk; every Bale weighing a hundred pound. The
two and twenty Bales make two millions and twohunder'd-thousand pound, at
sixteen ounces to the pound. The Hollanders usually carry away six or
seven-thousand Bales, and would carry away more, did not the Merchants of
Tartary, and the Mogul's Empire oppose them: for they buy up as much as the
Hollander; the rest the Natives keep to make their Stuffs. This Silk is also
brought into the Kingdom of Guzerat, the greatest part whereof comes to
Amadabat, and to Surat, where it is wrought up.

In the first place they make Carpets of Silk and Gold; others of Silk and
Silver, others all of Silk: for the Worsted Carpets are made at Vettapour, some
twelve leagues from Agra.

In the second place they make Satins with streaks of Gold and Silver; others
plain: with Taffata's after the same fashion.

In the third place they make Patoles, which are a sort of Silk-stuff very
thin, but painted with all sorts of Flowers, the manufacture whereof is at
Amadabat. They cost from eight Roupies to forty the piece. This is a Commodity
wherein the Dutch will not suffer any one of the Hollanders to trade in
particular: for they transport it to the Philippine-Islands, to the Islands of
Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other neighboring Islands.

The raw-Silk of Kasembasar is yellowish, as are all the raw-Silks that come
from Persia and Sicily; but the Natives of Kasembasar have a way to whiten it,
with a Lie made of the ashes of a Tree which they call Adam's Fig Tree; which
makes it as white as the Palestine-Silk. The Hollanders send away all their
Merchandise which they fetch out of Bengala, by water, through a great Canal
that runs from Kasembasar into Ganges, for fifteen leagues together; from
whence it is as far by water down the Ganges to Ouguely, where they lade their
Ships.

Of the Calicuts: and first of the painted Calicuts, called Chites.
CHites or Painted Calicuts, which they call Calmendar, that is to say, done
with a Pencil, are made in the Kingdom of Golconda; and particularly about
Maslipatan* But there is made so little, that though a man should employ all
the Workmen that understand the Art of weaving Calicuts, he would hardly find
enough to make three Bales.

The Chites which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogul are all printed;
and nothing so beautiful, neither for the figures nor the fineness of the
Linen. Those which are made at Lahor, are the coarsest, and consequently the
cheapest of all. They are sold by Corges, every Corge consisting of twenty
pieces, which cost from 16 to 30 Roupies.

The Chites which are made at Seronge, are sold from 20 to 50 Roupies the
Corge, or thereabouts.

These Chites serve for Coverlets for Beds, for Sofra's or Table clothes after
the Country-fashion, Pillowbears, Handkerchiefs, but more especially for
Wastcoats as well for the men as women in Persia.

The fine Calicut- Chites are made at Brampour; and are used for Handkerchiefs
by those that snuff Tobacco.

The women also, over all Asia, make Veils of these Calicuts, to wear over
their heads, and about their shoulders, which Veils are called Ormis.

The Basta's or Calicuts painted red, blue, and black, are carried white to
Agra, and Amadabat, in regard those Cities are nearest to the places where the
Indigo is made that is used in coloring. They cost from two Roupies to 30 or
40 a-piece, according to the fineness and the quantity of Gold at the ends, and
sometimes upon the sides. The Indians have a way to dip some of these Calicuts
in a certain water that makes them look like Water'd-Chamlets, which adds also
to the price.

That sort which is sold for two Roupies, and so onward till ye come to twelve,
is transported to the Coast of Melinda, and it is the greatest Trade the
Governor of Mosambique drives, who sells them to the Cafres, that vend them
again among the Abyssins, and into the Kingdom of Saba: for those people not
understanding the use of Soap, need no more but only to wash these Calicuts in
water. That sort which is valued from 12 Roupies upward, is transported to the
Philippine-Islands, the Islands of Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other adjacent
places. Where the women wear no other clothes, then a single piece of this
Calicut. One part whereof, without cutting it, serves for a Petticoat; the
other they wind about their stomachs and their heads.

White Calicuts.
White Calicuts come partly from Agra, and about Lahor, part from Bengala:
some from Brouda, Baroche, Renonsari, and other places. They are brought out of
the Loom to Renonsari, and Baroche, where they are whitened by reason of the
convenience of their Meadows, and the great store of Limons that grow
thereabouts. For the Calicuts are never so white as they should be, till they
are dipped in Limon-water.

The Calicuts that come from Agra, Lahor, and Bengala, are sold by the Corge,
and they are of several prices, from seventeen Roupies to three or
four-hunder'd, as the Merchant will have them wov'n.

The Calicuts that come from Renonsari, and Baroche, are one and twenty cubits
long, new out of the Loom; but in the whitening they shrink to twenty cubits.

Those of Brouda twenty cubits from the Loom, and shrink in the whitening to
nineteen and a half.

All the Calicuts or Bafta's that come from these three Cities, are of two
sorts: for some are broad, some are narrow. The narrow are those I have already
mentioned, the prices whereof are various, from two Mamoudi's to six.

The broad Bafta's are a cubit, and one third part wide; the whole piece twenty
cubits long. The usual price of them is from five Mamoudi's to twelve: but a
Merchant being upon the place, may cause them to be made much more large and
fine, till they are worth five-hundred Mamoudi's a-piece. I saw two pieces sold
for a thousand Mamoudi's.

The English bought one, and the Hollanders another, each Piece containing
eight and twenty cubits.

Mahamed Alibeg returning into Persia out of India, where he had been
Ambassador, presented Cha-Sef the second with a Coco-nut, about the bigness of
an Austrich-egg, all beset with Pearls: and when 'twas opened there was taken
out of it a Turbant that had sixty cubits of Calicut in length to make it, the
Cloth being so fine, that you could hardly feel it in your hand: For they will
spin their thread so fine, that the eye can hardly discern it, or at least it
seems to be but a Cob-web.

Twisted-Cotton.
COtton twisted and untwisted comes from the Provinces of Brampour and Guzerat.
Untwisted Cotton is never transported into Europe, being too cumbersome, and of
little value; only they send it to Ormus, Balsara, and sometimes to the
Philippine-Islands, and the Islands of Sinde. As for the twisted Cottons, the
English and Hollanders transport a good quantity, not of the finest, but of
that sort which is pric'd from fifteen to fifty Mamoudi's: It serves for wieks
for Candles, for Packsaddles, and for the ground of Silk-stuffs.

Indigo.
INdigo comes from several parts of the Great Mogul's Empire; and according to
the diversity of the places it differs in quality, and consequently in price.

In the first place, it comes from the Territories of Biana, Indouae, and
Corsa, a day or two's journey from Agra: which is esteemed the best of all. It
is made also eight days journey from Surat, in a Village called Sarquess, two
leagues distance from Amadabat. Here the flat Indigo is made. There is also
Indigo little inferior in goodness and price, which comes from the King of
Golconda's Territories. The Mein of Surat, which contains 42 Serre's, or 34 and
a half of our pounds, is valued from 15 to 20 Roupies. They make as good as
this at Baroche. That which is made up about Agra is made up in half Balls, and
is the most sought for in all India. It is sold by the Mein, which in those
places contains 60 Serres, or 51 and three quarters of our pounds. The usual
price is from 36 to 40 Roupies. There grows also Indigo some 36 leagues from
Brampour, about a great Village called Raout, and round about the neighboring
Towns in the road to Surat: Of which the Natives usually make above a
hunder'd-thousand Roupies.

There comes Indigo also from Bengala, which the Holland-Company transports for
Maslipatan. But they buy this Indigo, and that of Brampour and Amadabat,
cheaper by 24 in the hundred, then that of Agra.

Indigo is made of an Herb which they sow every year after the rains are over:
which when it is grown up, is very like our Hemp. They cut it three times a
year; first when it is about two or three foot high; and they cut it within
half a foot of the ground; the first cutting far exceeds the two latter. The
second cutting is worse then the first by ten or twelve in the hundred. And
the third worse then the second by 12 in the hundred. The difference is found
by breaking a piece of the Paste, and observing the color. The color of that
Indigo which is made of the first cutting, is a Violet-blue, but more brisk and
lively than the two others: and that which is made of the second is more lively
then the third.

When they have cut the Herb, they throw it into Pits which they make with
Lime, which becomes so hard, that you would judge it to be one entire piece of
Marble. They are generally fourscore or a hundred paces in circuit; and being
half full of water, they fill them quite up with the Herb. Then they bruise and
jumble it in the water till the leaf, for the stalk is worth nothing, becomes
like a kind of thick mud. This being done, they let it settle for some days;
and when the settling is all at the bottom, and the water clear above, they let
out all the water. When the water is all drained out, they fill several baskets
with this slime, and in a plain Field you shall see several men at work, every
one at his own basket, making up little pieces of Indigo flat at the bottom, at
the top sharp like an egg. Though at Amadabat they make their pieces quite flat
like a small cake. Here you are to take particular notice, that the Merchants,
because they would not pay custom for an unnecessary weight, before they
transport their Indigo out of Asia into Europe, are very careful to cause it to
be sifted, to separate the dust from it; which they sell afterward to the
Natives of the Country to dye their Calicuts. They that sift this Indigo must
be careful to keep a Linnen-cloath before their faces, and that their nostrils
be well-stopt, leaving only two little holes for their eyes. Besides, they must
every half hour be sure to drink milk, which is a great preservative against
the piercing quality of the dust. Yet notwithstanding all this caution, they
that have sifted Indigo for nine or ten days, shall spit nothing but blew for a
good while together. Once I laid an Egg in the morning among the sisters, and
when I came to break it in the evening it was all blew within.

As they take the Paste out of the Baskets with their Fingers dipped in Oil, and
make it into Lumps, or Cakes, they lay them in the Sun to dry. Which is the
reason that when the Merchants buy Indigo, they burn some pieces of it, to try
whether there be any dust among it. For the Natives who take the Paste out of
the Baskets to make it into Lumps, lay it in the Sand, which mixes with the
Paste, and souls it. But when the Merchants burn it, the Indigo turns to Ashes,
and the Sand remains. The Governors do what they can to make the Natives leave
their Knavery; but notwithstanding all their care, there will be some deceit.

Saltpeter.
GReat store of Saltpeter comes from Agra and Patna; but the refined costs
three times more then that which is not. The Hollanders have set up a
Warehouse fourteen Leagues above Patna, and when their Saltpeter is refined,
they transport it by water by Ogueli. A Mein of refined Saltpeter is worth
seven Mamoudi's.

Spice.
CArdamom, Ginger, Pepper, Nutmegs, Nutmeg-Flowers, Cloves and Cinnamon, are
all the different sorts of Spices known to us. I put Cardamom and Ginger in the
first place, because that Cardamom grows in the Territories of Visapour, and
Ginger in the Dominions of the Great Mogul. And as for other Spices, they are
brought from other Foreign parts to Surat, which is the grand Mart.

Cardamom is the most excellent of all other Spices, but it is very scarce; and
in regard there is no great store in the place where it grows, it is only made
use of in Asia, at the Tables of great Princes. Five hundred pound of
Cardamoms, are pric'd from a hundred to a hundred and ten Rials.

Ginger is brought in great quantities from Amadabat, where there grows more
than in any other part of Asia; and it is hardly to be imagined how much there
is transported candited into Foreign parts.

Pepper is of two sorts. There is a sort which is very small, another sort much
bigger; both which sorts are distinguished into small and great Pepper. The
larger sort comes from the Coast of Malavare; and Tuticorin and Calicut are the
Cities where it is brought up. Some of this Pepper comes from the Territories
of the King of Visapour, being vended at Rejapour, a little City in that
Kingdom. The Hollanders that purchase it of the Malavares, do not give Money
for it, but several sorts of Commodities in Exchange; as Cotton, Opium,
Vermilion, and Quicksilver; and this is the Pepper which is brought into
Europe. As for the little Pepper that comes from Bantam, Afchen, and some other
parts toward the East, there is none of it carried out of Asia, where it is
spent in vast quantities, especially among the Mahumetans. For there are double
the Grains of small Pepper in one pound, to what there are of the great Pepper;
besides that the great Pepper is hotter in the mouth.

The little Pepper that comes to Surat, has been sold some years for thirteen
or fourteen Mamoudi's the Mein; and so much I have seen the English give for
it, to transport it to Ormus, Balsara, and the Red Sea. As for the great
Pepper, which the Hollanders fetch from the Coast of Malavare, five hundred
pound in truck brings them in not above thirtyeight Reals; but by the
Commodities which they give in Barter, they gain Cent. per Cent.

The Nutmeg, the Nutmeg-Flow'r, the Clove, and Cinnamon, are the only Spices
which the Hollanders have in their own hands. The three first come from the
Molucca Islands; the fourth, which is Cinnamon, from the Island of Ceylan.

It Is observable of the Nutmeg, that the Tree which bears it is never planted,
which has been confirmed to me by several persons that have lived several years
in the Country. They related to me, that the Nutmeg being ripe, several Birds
come from the Islands toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forced to
throw it up again before it be digested. The Nutmeg then besmeared with a
viscous matter, falling to the ground takes root, and produces a Tree, which
would never thrive were it planted. This puts me in mind of making one
observation upon the Birds of Paradise. These Birds being very greedy after
Nutmegs, come in flights to gorge themselves with the pleasing Spice, at the
season, like Felfares in Vintage time; but the strength of the Nutmeg so
intoxicates them, that they fall dead drunk to the Earth, where the Emets in a
short time eat off their Legs. Hence it comes, that the Birds of Paradise are
said to have no Feet; which is not true however, for I have seen three or four
that had Feet; and a French Merchant sent one from Aleppo as a Present to Lewis
the Thirteenth that had Feet; of which the King made great account, as being a
very lovely Fowl.

But notwithstanding all the Hollanders Projects, you may buy Cloves at
Macassar without purchasing them of the Hollander; in regard the Islanders buy
them of the Dutch Captains and Soldiers, which the Hollanders have in those
places where the Cloves grow, giving them in exchange Rice, and other
necessaries for the support of life, without which they would starve, being
very sadly provided for.

When the Natives of Macassar are thus furnished of Cloves, they barter them in
Exchange for such Commodities as are brought them; sometimes they give
Tortoise-Shells in exchange, and Gold Dust; by which the Merchant gains six or
seven in the hundred, being better than the Money of the Island, though it be
Gold, by reason the King ofttimes enhances the value of it. The places where
Cloves grow, are Amboyna, Ellias, Seram, and Bouro.

The Islands of Banda also, in number six, viz. Nero, Lontour, Poulcay,
Roseguin, and Grenapuis, bear Nutmegs in great abundance. The Island of
Grenapuis is about six Leagues in compass, and ends in a sharp point, where
there is a continual fire burning out of the earth. The Island Damme, where
there grows great store of Nutmegs, and very big, was discovered in the year
1647, by Abel Tasman, a Dutch Commander.

The Price of Cloves and Nutmegs, as I have known them sold to the Hollanders
at Surat, was as follows.

The Mein of Surat contains forty Serres, which make thirty-four of our Pounds,
at sixteen Ounces to the Pound.

A Mein of Cloves was sold for a hundred and three Mamoudi's and a half.

A Mein of Mace was sold for a hundred and fifty-seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Nutmegs for fifty-six Mamoudi's and a half.

Cinnamon comes at present from the Island of Ceylan. The Tree that bears it is
very much like the Willow, and has three Barks. They never take off but the
first and second, which is accounted the best. They never meddle with the
third, for should the Knife enter that, the Tree would dye. So that it is an
art to take off the Cinnamon, which they learn from their youth. The Cinnamon
Spice is much dearer to the Hollanders then people think; for the King of
Ceylan, otherwise called King of Candy, from the name of his principal City,
being a sworn Enemy to the Hollanders, sends his Forces with an intention to
surprise them, when they gather their Cinnamon; so that they are forced to
bring seven or eight hundred men together to defend as many more that are at
work. Which great expense of theirs very much enhances the price of the
Cinnamon. There grows upon the Cinnamon Tree a certain fruit like an Olive,
though not to be eaten. This the Portugals were wont to put into a Caldron of
Water, together with the tops of the Branches, and boiled it till the Water was
all consumed. When it was cold, the upper part became a Paste like white Wax;
of which they made Tapers to set up in their Churches, for no sooner were the
Tapers lighted, but all the Church was perfumed. Formerly the Portugals brought
Cinnamon out of other Countries, belonging to the Raja's about Cochin. But the
Hollanders have destroyed all those places, so that the Cinnamon is now in
their hands. When the Portugals had that Coast, the English bought their
Cinnamon of them, and usually paid for it by the Mein fifty Mamoudi's.

Drugs that are brought to Surat, and brought from other Countries, with the
price of every one by the Mein.
Salt Armoniack, according to the usual price, costs by the Mein twenty
Mamoudi's.

Borax, comes unrefin'd from Amadabat, as does Salt Armoniack, and costs by the
Mein thirty-five Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lack, seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Gum-Lack washed, ten Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lack in sticks of Wax, forty Mamoudi's.

There are some of these Sticks that cost fifty or sixty Mamoudi's the Mein,
and more when they mix Musk in the Gum.

Saffron of Surat, which is good for nothing but for coloring, four Mamoudi's
and a half.

Cumin White, eight Mamoudi's.

Cumin Black, three Mamoudi's.

Arlet small, three Mamoudi's.

Frankincense, that comes from the Coast of Arabia, three Mamoudi's.

Myrrh, that which is good, called Mirra Gilet, thirty Mamoudi's.

Mirth Bolti, which comes from Arabia, fifteen Mamoudi's.

Cassia, two Mamoudi's.

Sugar Candy, eighteen Mamoudi's.

Asutinat, a sort of Grain, very hot, one Momoudi.

Annise-seed gross, three Mamoudi's and a half.

Annise-seed small and hot, one Mamoudi and a half.

Oupelote, a Root, fourteen Mamoudi's.

Cointre, five Mamoudi's.

Auzerout, from Persia, a hundred and twenty Mamoudi's.

Alloes Succotrine, from Arabia, twenty eight Mamoudi's.

Licorice, four Mamoudi's.

Lignum Aloes, in great pieces, two hundred Mamoudi's.

Lignum Aloes, in small pieces, four hundred Mamoudi's.

Vez-Cabouli, a certain Root, twelve Mamoudi's.

There is a sort of Lignum Aloes very Gummy, which comes to, by the Mein, four
thousand Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lake for the most part comes from Pegu; yet there is some also brought
from Bengala, where it is very dear, by reason the Natives fetch that lively
Scarlet color out of it, with which they paint their Calicuts. Nevertheless,
the Hollanders buy it, and carry it into Persia for the fame use of painting.
That which remains after the color is drawn off, is only fit to make sealing
Wax. That which comes from Pegu is not so dear, though as good for other
Countries. The difference is only this, that it is not so clean in Pegu, where
the Pismires foul it, as in Bengala, where it grows in a heathy place, full of
Shrubs, where those Animals cannot so well come at it. The Inhabitants of Pegu
never make any use of it in painting, being a dull sort of people, that are in
nothing at all industrious.

The Women of Surat get their livings by cleansing the Lake after the Scarlet
color is drawn from it. After that they give it what color they please, and
make it up into Sticks for sealing Wax. The English and Holland Company carry
away every year a hundred and fifty Chests. The price is about ten Pence the
pound.

Powdered Sugar is brought in great quantities out of the Kingdom of Bengala;
it causes also a very great Trade at Ougeli, Patna, Daca, and other places. I
have been told it for a very great certainty, by several ancient people in
Bengala, that Sugar being kept thirty years becomes absolute poison, and that
there is no Venom more dangerous, or that sooner works its effect. Loaf-Sugar
is also made at Amadabat, where they are perfectly skill d in refining it; for
which reason it is called Sugar Royal. These Sugar Loaves usually weigh from
eight to ten pound.

Opium is brought from Brampour, a Town of good Trade between Agra and Surat.
The Hollanders buy great quantities, which they truck for their Pepper.

Tobacco also grows in abundance round about Brampour; sometimes there has been
so much that the Natives have let vast quantities rot upon the ground, for want
of gathering.

Coffee grows neither in Persia nor in India, where it is in no request; but
the Hollanders drive a great Trade in it, transporting it from Ormus into
Persia, as far as Great Tartary, from Balsara into Chaldea, Arabia,
Mesopotomia, and the other Provinces of Turkey. It was first found out by a
Hermit, whose name was Sheck-Siadeli, about twenty years ago, before which
time it was never heard of in any Author either ancient of modern.

Deceits in Silk Wares.
PLain Silk Wares may be altered in length, breadth, and quality. The quality
shows it self when they are of an even thread, when the weight is equal, and
when there is no Cotton thread in the West.

The Indians not having the art of gilding silver, put into their stripped Wares
threads of pure Gold, so that you must count the quantity of Gold threads to
see whether the Silk have its due number. And this also you must observe in
your Silks wov'n with Silver. As for Taffata's, you are only to mind whether
the pieces be all of a fineness, and to see by unfolding some of them, that
there be nothing within to augment the weight, and then weighing all the pieces
by themselves, to see that they all agree.

The colors of those Carpets which are made in India, do not last so long as
the color of those which are made in Persia; but for the workmanship it is
very lovely. The eye of the Broaker is to judge of the largeness, beauty, and
fineness of those Carpets which are wrought with Gold and Silver, and whether
they be fine and rich. But whether they be Carpets, or other Stuffs mixed with
Gold and Silver, it behooves the Buyer to pull out some of the Gold and Silver
Threads, to see whether they be of the right value or no.

Deceits in the White Calicuts.
THe deceits usually put upon Calicuts, are in fineness, length, and breadth.
Every Bale may contain two hundred pieces; among which they will juggle in five
or six or ten, less fine, or less white, shorter or narrower than according to
the scantling of the Bale, which cannot be found out but by examining them
piece by piece. The fineness is discerned by the eye, the length and breadth by
the measure. But the Indians practice a more cunning way, which is to count the
number of threads which ought to be in the breadth, according to the fineness
of the scantling. When the number fails, it is either more transparent, more
narrow, or more course. The difference is sometimes so difficult to be
perceived, that there is no way to find it out but by counting the threads. And
yet this difference in a great quantity comes to a great deal. For it is
nothing to cosen a Crown or two Crowns in a piece that comes but to fifteen or
twenty Crowns. Those that whiten these Calicuts, to save charges of a few
Limons, will knock the Calicuts excessively upon a Stone, which does fine
Calicuts a great injury, and lowers the price.

As for their Calicuts died blew or black, you must take care that the Workmen
do not knock them after they are folded, to make them look sleek; for many
times when they come to be unfolded, you shall find holes in the creases.

As for your painted and printed Calicuts, which are painted and printed as
they come out of the Loom, the Merchant must take care that what he bespeaks be
finished before the end of the Rains, for the thicker the Water is where they
are washed, the more lively will the printed and painted colors appear. It is
easy to distinguish between the printed and the painted Calicuts; and between
the neatness of the work: but for the fineness and other qualities, they are
not so easily discerned; and therefore the Broaker must be more careful.

Cheats in Cotton.
THe cheat in the weight is twofold. The first, by laying them in a moist
place; and thrusting in the middle of every Skain some thing to add to the
weight. The second; in not giving good weight when the Broaker receives it from
the Workm^n, or Merchant that delivers it.

There is but one cheat in the quality, that is by putting three or four
Skains, of a coarser Commodity then that which is uppermost, into one Mein.
Which in a great quantity mount* high; for there are some Cottons that are
worth an hundred Crowns the Mein. These two cheats being often used by the
Holland-Company, there is no way but to weigh your Commodity in the presence of
the Dutch-Commander, and his Council, and to examine every Mein Skain by Skain.
When this is done, they who are ordered to be at his examination, are obliged
to fix to every Bale a ticket of the weight and quality: for if there be a
faileur, they who fix the ticket are engaged to make good what is wanting.

Deceits in Indigo.
I Have told you, that when the Workmen have made up the Indigo-Paste int
^umps, with their fingers dipped in Oil, they lay them in the Sun a drying. Now
those that have a design to cheat the Merchants, dry them in the sand, to the
end that the sand sticking to the Indigo, should increase the weight. Sometimes
they lay up their Paste in moist places, which makes it give, and consequently
renders it more heavy. But if the Governor of the place discovers the cheat,
he makes them severely pay for it: and the best way of discovery is to burn
some pieces of Indigo, for the sand will remain.

Indian Broakers.
THe Broakers are as it were the Masters of the Indian Families; for they have
all Goods at their disposal. The Workmen choose the most aged and most
experienced, who are to endeavor equal advantages for the whole Tribe they
undertake for. Every evening that they return from their business, and that,
according to the custom of the Indians, who make no Suppers, they have eaten
some little piece of sweet-meat, and drank a glass of water, the eldest of the
Tribe meet at the Broaker's House, who gives them an account of what he has
done that day, and then they consult what he is to do next. Above all things,
they caution him to look to his hits, and to cheat, rather then be cheated.

FINIS.

