A True and Perfect Copy of the Whole DISPUTATION AT THE SAVOY, That was
managed by the Episcopal Divines, AS OPPONENTS, To prove that there is nothing
sinful in the LITURGY.

Published to make intelligible the Fragment already published by the Lord
Bishop of Worcester, under the hands of Dr. Pierson, and Dr. Guning; and so
much of his Lordships Book against Mr. Baxter, as concerns that Disputation.

Printed in the year 1662.

A True and perfect Copy of the Whole Disputation at the Savoy, that was
managed by the Episcopal Divines, as Opponents, to prove that there is nothing
sinful in the Liturgy.
Oppon. MY Assertion is, Nothing contained in the Liturgy is sinful.

This general Assertion I am ready to make good in all particulars, in which
our Brethren shall think fit to charge the Liturgy with sinfulness.

And because our Brethren have as yet by way of Disputation, charged no other
part of it with the imputation of sinfulness, but that which concerns
kneeling at the Communion; therefore my first Assertion as to that particular
is this,

The Command contained in the Liturgy concerning kneeling at the Communion, is
not sinful.

This Truth I am ready to prove by several Arguments.

First, This only command [The Minister shall deliver the Communion to the
people in their hands kneeling] is not sinful.

The Command contained in the Liturgy concerning kneeling at the Communion is
this only command [the Minister, etc.]

Ergo,

Resp. Neg. Major.

Op. Prob. Major.

That Command which commands only an Act in it self lawful, is not sinful.

This only Command [the Minister shall deliver the Communion to the people in
their hands kneeling] commands only an Act in it self lawful; Ergo,

This only command [the Minister shall deliver the Communion to the people in
their hands kneeling] is not sinful.

Resp. Negatur Major and Minor.

Op. Prob. Major.

That Command which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act, or
Circumstance unlawful, is not sinful.

That Command which commands only an Act in it self lawful, commands an Act in
it self lawful, and no other Act or Circumstance unlawful: Ergo,

Resp. 1. We deny the Major; and (for brevity) give a double reason of our
denial; one is, because that may be a sin per Accidens, which is not so in it
self, and may be unlawfully commanded, though that Accident be not in the
Command. Another is, that it may be commanded under an unjust penalty.
2. We deny the Minor, for both the same reasons.


Op. Prob. Minor.

The delivery of the Communion to persons kneeling is an Act in it self lawful.

This only Command [the Minister shall deliver the Communion to the people in
their hands kneeling] commands only the deliver of the Communion to persons
kneeling.

Ergo* This only Command [the Minister, etc.] commands only an Act in it
self lawful.

Resp. We distinguish of Delivering to persons kneeling it signifies either
exclusively ( to those and no other) or not exclusively to other. In the first
sense we deny the Major, in the second sense we deny the Minor.

Op. You deny both our Propositions, for two Reasons, both the same; we make
good both our Propositions, notwithstanding both your Reasons.

The Major first.

That Command which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act,
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any Circumstance whence directly,
or per Accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide
against, is not sinful.

That Command which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act, or
Circumstance unlawful, commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act,
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any Circumstance, whence directly
or per Accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide
against.

Ergo,

Resp. 1. The Proposition denied is not in the Conclusion.

The Major is denied, because the first Act commanded may be per accidens
unlawful, and be commanded by an unjust penalty, though no other Act or
Circumstance commanded, be such.

Op. The Minor next.

That Command, which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any Circumstance whence directly,
or per Accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide
against; commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act or Circumstance
unlawful.

That Command, which commands only an Act in it self lawful, commands an Act
in it self lawful, and no other Act whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor
any Circumstance whence directly, or per Accidens any sin is consequent, which
the Commander ought to provide against.

Ergo,

Op. We prove our Major, notwithstanding your Reason alleged.

That Command which has in it all things requisite to the lawfulness of a
Command, and particularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per Accidens
unlawful, nor of commanding an Act under an unjust penalty, is not sinful,
notwithstanding your Reason alleged.

That Command, which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act,
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any Circumstance whence directly or
per Accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide
against, has in it all things requisite to the lawfulness of a command, and
particularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per Accidens unlawful, nor
of commanding an Act under an unjust penalty.

Ergo, per Accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide
against, is not sinful, notwithstanding your Reason alleged.

Resp. The Minor is denied upon the same Reasons, which you do nothing to
remove; such a Command has not in it all things requisite to the lawfulness of
a Command, because though no other Act be commanded, whereby an unjust penalty
is enjoined, yet still the first Act may be commanded sub poena injusta And
though no other Act, or Circumstance be commanded, that is a sin per
Accidens,yet the first Act it self commanded, may be a sin per Accidens.

Op. Either our Minor is true, notwithstanding your Reason, or else the first
Act may be a Command commanding an unjust punishment, and be an Act lawful, or
the first Act it self being lawful in it self, and all Circumstances, may yet
be a sin per Accidens, against which the Commander ought to provide.

Posterius utrumque falsum, both the latter Members are false.

Ergo prius verum, therefore the first is true.

Resp. 1. Neg. Major; Because 1. The subject is changed; you were to have
spoken of the first Act commanded, and you speak of the first Act commanding,
in the first Member; you should have said [else the first Act may be commanded
sub poena injusta, and yet be in it self lawful which is true. 2. Because in
the second Member, where you should have spoken only of the commanded
Circumstances of the Act, you now speak of all its Circumstances, whether
commanded, or not. 3. We undertook not to give you all our Reasons, the Minor
may be false upon many other Reasons.


And were your Major reduced in the points excepted against, we should deny
the Minor as to both Members.

And we should add to our Reasons,

1. That Command, which commands an Act in it self lawful, and only such, may
yet be sinful privatively, by omission of some necessary part, some Mode, or
Circumstance. 2. It may sinfully restrain, though it sinfully command not. 3.
It may be sinful, in modis, commanding, that universally, or indefinitely, or
particularly, or singularly, that should be otherwise; though in the
Circumstances (properly so called) of the Act, nothing were commanded that is
sinful. 4. It may through culpable ignorance be applied to undue Subjects, who
are not Circumstances, as if a people that have the Plague be commanded to keep
Assemblies for Worship; the Lawgiver being culpably ignorant that they had the
Plague. Many more Reasons may be given.
Op. We make good our Major, by showing that the Subject is not changed: thus,

If whenever the first Act is commanded sub poena injusta, and no other Act
is commanded, whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined (which were your words)
the first Act commanding, must command an unjust punishment (which were ours)
then we have not changed the Subject.

But the Antecedent is true, therefore the consequent.

FINIS.

