THE TRUE COPYS OF SEVERAL LETTERS FROM PORTSMOVTH, Directed By Col. Sir ARTHUR
HASLERIG, Col. HERBERT MORLEY, Col. VALENTINE WALTON,
Commissioners by Act of Parliament for governing the Armies: To the Lord
Fleetwood at VVallingford-house.

With the Lord Fleetwoods Answers thereunto.

Also, Their several Letters to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen
and Common Council of the City of London.

Together with their Letters from Portsmouth, to the several Militia's
appointed by Act of Parliament, for the Cities of London, Westminster and
Borrough of Southwark.

And their Answers thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, and Published by special Command, 1659.

A Letter to the Lord Fleetvvood, from Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Col. Morley, and
Col. Walton, Commissioners of the Army by Act of PARLIAMENT, for the Governing
the Armies of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
My Lord,
SInce the sad and woeful day, when your self (that the Parliament so much
trusted and believed) brought their own forces and besieged the House, we have
been silent: The Act was so horrid it could not but amaze, to our best
understandings, we observing your steps ever since, it appears; That your
ways are not the Nations settlement, but that confusion and the greatest of
miseries and sorrows will unavoydably overflow these Islands; And we are
thereby made a shame and reproach, not only at home but throughout the
Christian World where England is named.

We are told we shalI have our Liberties, How can that be? when the Foundation
of all our Liberties is in the Parliament, that being the Representative of the
people, in whom is the Original of all just Power. And is not the Parliament
the Foundation of successive Parliaments destroyed, so far as you can do it;
can you imagine that we and many thousands that have hazarded our lives, and
spilt our blood for our Libertyes and Religion, will now yield up the Cause so
long and sharply contended for, and that God so miraculously owned; And suffer
Parliaments to be imposed upon, and the people to be compelled to Governments,
not made by their own Representatives in Parliament; Does not God command that
one should do to another as he would be done unto? Is not this a General
Command given to all mankind? Woe therefore to Kings and every other person that
assume power over man, and walk not according to that Scripture Rule; can you
oppress, can you impose, can you restrain Liberty, can you take away
propriety, and above all, can you overthrow your Governors and destroy
Parliaments, and not break this rule; Is not the Cause we contended for, the
enjoyment of our Liberties and Religion; We are sure God would have man to be
free and not oppressed; we only desire the maintenance of our Good Old Cause
which our gracious God so signally owned, when our potent Enemies at Sea, and
at the same time those in England, Scotland, and Ireland rose up to oppose;
where is the humble self-denying Spirit to be found? We have most seriously
considered the great trust reposed in us by the Parliament, and desire to find
out what is the duty incumbent upon us, And we cannot satisfy our selves, but
that we are justly by Parliament, not only to be questioned, but censured; If
we own not the Parliament in this time of so great defection, and endeavor not
now to our utmost the preservation of it: The great and good God by his
providence brought us most seasonably to this Town, where we found Captain
Brown (sent down by you) endeavoring to withdraw the Officers of this
Garrison from the Parliament, persuading them to betray and falsify their
trust, and to Act contrary to their Commissions; When a person becomes false,
it follows he would have all others like himself, we hear he brought several
Commissions of yours, we cannot but trouble you in this particular, do you
think it a light matter to murder men? Has not God given man power over the
lives of all other Creatures, and only reserved the life of man to himself,
Sacred Writ holds it forth, That he that spils man's blood, by men shall his
blood be spilt; From whom comes your power to give Commissions to kill men? it
is not to be found in Scripture, If it came from man, we wish it could be made
clear to the world and your own Conscience, that you have a lawful Authority;
could you gain all the power and wealth of these Nations, it would do you but
little good if thousands murdered by your Commissions, rise up at the day of
Judgment against you: We have no particular ends of our own that we aim at, we
only desire the restoring of the Parliament, and the speedy settlement of the
Commonwealth; so that we may enjoy our Religion, Liberties, and properties;
Here lies in this Port many Ships not paid off, which is great expense to the
public; And had not the Parliament been lately interrupted by you, they had
not been now to pay; The Mariners are ready to go to Foreign parts for
employment, having spent their Arreares in attendance, and are not able to
expect longer. Thus the great debt of the Nation increases. The Spring of the
year approaches; Dangerous Enemies from abroad threaten us, there is nothing
but Confusion and general discontent at home; If you take not some speedy
course to give satisfaction to those that have been, and we hope yet may be
your Friends, it will be too late, and destruction must needs follow; we wish
if misery do come, that those who stated this our Cause destroying quarrel,
upon personal accounts, may only feel it. And that our merciful God will find
out some extraordinary ways to preserve our Liberties and Religion to
posterity: We think fit to acquaint you that we find this Garrison of
Portsmouth very faithful to the Parliament, and resolved to perform their
duties and trusts according to their Commissions, we encourage them what we
can, and we hope your Lordships may do the like; And we shall be ready to
assist you in any thing, wherein we are equally entrusted by the Parliament, we
hope that infinite Wisdom and power will yet so order our affairs that the
Good Old Cause shall be preserved; The Declarations of General Monck are both
sober and Religious; We own them, and exceedingly rejoice in his faithfullness
and constancy to the Parliament; He is a Soldier of true honor and worth, and
abhorrs falsness to his trust; We and all well affected to the Nations
Libertyes have cause to bless God for him, as the great Assertor of our
Parliaments Cause, and this we hold forth to your self, and all well wishers to
public interest; We are

Portsmouth, December. 7. 1659. My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servants, Arthur
Haslerigg, Herbert Morley; Valentine Walton.

For the Lord Fleetwood at Wallingford-House.
The Lord Fleetwoods Letter in Answer to the Commissioners first Letter.
Honorable Gentlemen,
IN Answer unto yours from Portsmouth, I shall exercise that Freedom, which I
hope the present state of our Affairs will give me liberty to do; You are
pleased to charge me with a Horrible and Amazing Act, in my breach of Trust,
and why you should accuse me who are so guilty your selves, I do not know,
unless by your Accusation you think your selves freed from that confidence and
trust that was put in you, That you would make good your word, which I must
say, some of you have sadly forfeited; engaging so solemnly as you have done,
and yet being in that Hostile manner in the place where you now are; I will not
take your course by excusing my self, further to aggravate your crime; But in
short, Answer that for my breach of Trust, you well know through some of your
means, That trust the Parliament was pleased to deliver me from, and quit me of
that Confidence, which they had been pleased to favor me with, which I must
needs say, did deliver me from a great exercise of trouble, which otherwise I
should have been under, had their trust continued in me; Who they were, that
were Instruments to take the Parliaments good opinion from me? you well know, I
served them faithfully, and as for what you charge me with, destroying
Parliamentary Authority; I desire the Lord may give you hearts to consider how
much you have been isntrumental therein, and how sadly your own Actions did
put the Army upon doing such things, which I know were grievous to their
thoughts to be necessitated unto. The memory of that Parliament, in what God
did make use of them as instruments, I hope I shall always own and Honor, and
were all our actions weighed in a due Balance from the first time of their
last Sitting, to their Rising; I doubt not but I shall appear to be a more
Innocent person, and even more faithful to them, then by some of your actions
it will appear you are. I delight not in changes* It is neither my Principle
nor Interest; The Government of Parliaments is that I own and Honor; And
though my steps you mention may be displeasing to your selves, yet I hope the
Lord will not leave me so without His presence, but to manifest I design
nothing of self Interest, but the good of these poor Nations, and the Interests
of the people of the Lord, and the Liberties of men (as men might be preserved)
But how easily is your Rule, (To do to another, as one would be done to,)
broken by your selves, and yet directed to be observed by others; And therefore
as to that of imposing upon Parliaments, who has more, had a hand in things of
that Nature, then some of your selves; I delight not in words of Provocation;
but for Oppression, Imposing, Restraining Liberty, taking away Property, and
Advizing and Abetting to the Overthrowing of Government and Authority which you
urge; I beseech you give me leave to use the words of Freedom, who has had a
hand in things of that Nature, more you or my self. Indeed I can truly say, the
thoughts of doing any thing of that sort, or what may lead thereunto at any
time is that which I dare not give way unto, not for fear of displeasing men
only, but because I know such actions will be judged and condemned of the Lord;
And wherein I have in anything been guilty upon any of those accounts, I desire
to take the shame thereof to my self; I would be loath to be found a wilful
Transgressor therein, the thoughts thereof are with abhorrancy to my self; I
have no Interest of my own to mind; I had rather be in a Corner, then in the
Station where I am, and if my silence and Retirement might but save this Cause,
it would be the chearefullest work that ever I did engage in, and as by your
Letter, it seems you judge me the great troubler of our Peace; If I be so, My
desires to the Lord are to Convince me thereof, and to make a way for my
silence, rather then continue me in a Condition to trouble these poor Nations;
But alas! how little is your actions considered by you in order to this thing?
What can it tend unto, but only to give a further encouragement to our Common
Enemy to endeavor the destruction of the whole. I know you are persons of
Interest, and I speak it not therefore with reflections upon your own Merrits;
But give me leave to tell you that I am confident, in the way you are in, you
will be Blasted, and only give the Advantage to those who would destroy both
the Parliament and their Friends; so far will you be from restoring the
Parliament that your actions will lead (if the Lord prevent not) to the
destruction of Parliamentary Power; As to your Authority I will only say this:
I am confident the Parliament never intended you should make use of any of
their forces against the rest; And the truth is, I believe it will be found you
are mistaken in your Commission: for you have only that Power which I had as
Lieutenant General, and not as Commanders in chief. And what Authority I had to
Command the Forces was by virtue of my Authority as Commander in Chief, and not
as Lieutenant General; Besides I had no Power to Levy Forces, but to Command
those which were raised, and I am sure you have no greater power given to you
then I had: When yet you extend your Authority to the Levying of new Forces,
which I dare confidently say you cannot justify by that Commission; As for my
Authority of granting of Commissions, I have the call of all the Forces in
England, except where you are; which I hope I shall not so manage, but that
either the Power I have may be confirmed by a Supreme Authority, or disposed of
to a fitter person then I am, to which I shall readily yield obedience. Your
words are very severe, calling me little better then a Murderer. Its well
known I have as little practiced severity as any Person that has borne Arms:
And to be looked upon as a person greedy to shed blood, I have a Conscience
otherwise exercised, and wish that may not be laid to your charge which you do
readily apply to me. As to Mariners which you take notice of, that they spend
the States money as not being paid off their Arreares; They may thank you that
they are not paid, for it is well known there was money assigned for them, and
would have been with them before this time, had not you interrupted the peace
of that Town where you are: And as soon as you return to your former
Peaceableness and Friendship the Mariners shall certainly be paid. If you have
nothing in design but the good of this Cause, I hope what we are doing may
give you satisfaction, and if you are in the Capacity of Friends, as formerly
you have been, your advice would be hearkened unto in any thing, wherein we
might be satisfied that the good of this Cause might be preserved thereby. As
for General Monck, your good Opinion of him* I hope he will make good by his
speedy Agreement with us; A return of which I expect to have by the next: The
Lord persuade your hearts to resolutions of peace, and that these sad breaches
may be healed is the desire of

Your Humble Servant, Charles Fleetwood.
VVallingford-House, December. 10. 1659. If we must be looked upon as Enemies, I
shall desire you will release Cap. Brown, Cap. Peacock, and Cap. Hopgood; I
will release Col. Markham, and Col. Atkins, whose offense I am sure was much
greater then any you can charge them with, and are persons much more
Considerable.



For the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
WE conceive it is not unknown to you, the Trust the Parliament reposed in us
before theit late interruption; We have waited ever since, expecting that the
force would have been removed from the Parliament House at Westminster, that
the Members might have returned to their Duties, but finding confusions and
discontents to increase, we came to this Town of Portsmouth, which is of great
concernment to the City and Public; The Governor and this Garrison have
declared their faithfulness to the Parliament, there are many Ships not paid
off, and Mariners ready for want of pay to go into Foreign parts for
employment, there must some speedy course be taken for preventing the great
mischiefs which will otherwise follow. We cannot but approve of General Monks
Declarations, and concur with him fot the restoring of the Parliament, We hope
you do the like, and entreat you that no time may be delayed, but all
endeavors may be used that the Parliament doors may be forthwith opened, and
the Speaker desired forthwith, to send Letters to the several Members to
perform their Trust in Parliament. We know no other way under God, to preserve
your City and the Nations from inevitable ruin, and to deliver us out of these
miserable and woeful confusions we are now in. We beseech you move speedily in
this, for our Cause and the safety of the whole lies bleeding. We entreat to
hear a word of your intentions, Our affections as you well know, being very
great for the welfare and prosperity of the City and we find such absolute
necessity of the Parliaments meeting, though but in Order to the settlement of
future Parliaments, that if you cannot prevail that they may sit quietly at
Westminster, we shall write to the Speaker, that he would be pleased to meet
at Portsmouth, where we doubt not, through the mercy and goodness of God, they
may sit with honor and safety, and Act freely for the good and preservation of
the your City and Nations. We present our humble services to your Lotdship, the
Aldermen and Common Council, We are

Portsmouth 7. December. 1659. My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most faithful and
humblest servants. Arth. Haslerig, Herb. Morley, Val. Walton,


For our Honorable friends, the Commissioners of the Militia of the City of
London, appointed by Act of Parliament.
Gentlemen,
YOu know very well, that we have the chief Command of all the Forces in
England and Scotland by Act of Parliament, We are now at Portsmouth, a place of
great concernment; We hope you believe that we desire Peace and settlement, not
a new War, we have no particular design, we apprehend there is no other means
for the preservation of our Cause, the City and Nations, and deliver us out of
the woeful Confusions that we are now in; but the opening the Parliament doors,
that the Members may return and perform their trusts; We desire you to act
your parts in pursuance of the trust reposed in you by the Parliament* for
removing the force from the Parliament; we shall assist you to the utmost of
our power, and remain Gent.

Portsmouth, December. 7. 1659. Your affectionate Friends and Servants, Arth.
Haslerig, Herb Morley, Val. Walton.

The same Letter was sent to the Militias at Westminster and Southwark.



For the Right Honorable the Lord Fleetwood at Wallingford house.
My Lord.
WE shall not trouble you with any tedious reply to your Letter, but this we
must affirm That neither jointly nor seperately did we or any of us, either to
your self or any other person, pass our Engagements, to do otherwise then we
have done; And if you had given any of us a particular Charge, we should
readily have vindicated our selves: Neither did we endeavor to remove the
Parliaments good opinion from you, though we well perceived your coldness in
their service, else the Paper sent from the Northern Brigade, had never
produced the sad consequences that since have ensued; And if it was against
your Conscience, to act as one of the seven Commissionets appointed by Act of
Parliament to govern the Army, we marvel with what satisfaction you can now act
by the Call of private men, without any public Authority; and yet pretend you
desire retyrement: Whether you have not been instrumental to destroy the
Parliamentary Authority, and how far we have been isntrumental to any such
ends, we leave it to the Lord and all indifferent men to judge; Neither shall
we dispute the necessity that induced the Officers to interrupt the the
Parliament, for if you and they say it was necessary no man must dare to say
otherwise; It is an easy matter to pretend to good things for the Nation,
Oliver did the like, but the sequel manifested h^s own advancement to be at
the bottom; And it is well known when you remove us from our Foundations you
may carry us whether you please: We all deny to have been isntrumental in any
breaches made upon the Parliament; but if we had we should not be ashamed to
ask God and the world forgiveness, and resolve by our future deportments to
repair such breaches. Concerning oppression, imposing, restraining Liberty,
taking away property, Governments and Authority, we shall only say, That
whosoever takes away our Parliaments, takes the ready course to let them all in
like a flood upon us; neither do we think the Council of Officers competent per
sons to Judge of Government, and to break Parliaments, and put new fancies of
their own instead thereof as they please; How far your actings against the
Parliament or outs in persuance of the PARLIAMENTS Commands have given
encouragement to the Common enemy, we leave to your own consideration: or,
because the Parliament will not Act what some Officers of the Army please, they
must be inte^^upted. And if any prove faithful to discharge the Trust reposed
in them, they are the only troublers of the Nation, and give advantage to the
Common enemy* We are not ambitious of Commands, having more given us by the
Parliament then we desired; but conceive we have more Authority to gran^
Commissions, in Order to the Parliaments restitution, then you can have from
the Call of any private persons to continue their interruption. You say, The
Mariners had been paid if we had not been here; We suppose some of them are
gone to London for their pay, and if money were sent to discharge the rest, we
should be far from hindering their payment, or diverting the money. You pretend
good intentions to the Nations settlement, We are sure our hearts thirst after
it, and that we are not guilty of any Hostility in this place. In the interim,
we resolve by Gods blessing, to defend the same for the Parliament; If what you
are doing might satisfy all the Parliaments party, and secure Parliamentary
Authority, the Rights, Liberties, Properties of the people and Religion: which
is the Good Old Cause, so much owned by God, and valued by all goodmen; we
should really rejoice and bless God for it, and readily return to our former
friendship, it being the desire of our hearts, that all misunde standings may
be removed, the Parliament restored, old friends reconciled, and the
Commonwealth settled upon righteous and lasting Foundations; And if you are as
peaceably minded as we, you may make it appear by directing the withdrawing of
the Forces you sent toward this place, that so esfusion of blood may be
prevented; If otherwise we cannot believe you in^end Peace. We are

Portsmouth, December. 14. 1659. My Lord, Your Lordships Servants, Arth.
Haslerig, Hetb. Morley, Val. Walton.


For the Honorable Sir Arthur Haslerig, Col. Walton and Col. Morley at
Portsmouth.
Honorable Gentlemen,
I Have received yours, and finding that our personal reflections does but
provoak each other, and therefore I shall rather desire to commit my case unto
the Lord, then to argue it with man, not doubring but that he will plead my
innocence, for me, and convince me wherein I may be found guilty, being
desirous to bow before him in any thing wherein I may be found faulty, and take
the shame unto my self, rather than be a reproach unto his name by any action
of mine, the Lord grant that this may be more and more yours and my frame,
whatsoever our contests are; yet I am sure of this, by reason thereof, the
Common enemy is like to have the advantage, and which of us may have the
Conquest? We shall none of us be but loosers; I wish ir be not found, that
whilst you dispute the form you destroy the end, and though I may with others
so much justify our selves, yet that old friends that have but one interest
should engage as enemies, is that which we have cause to take up as a
lamentation, and let us take heed that Saints blood be not laid to our Charge;
it is a strange hand of God upon us, that there should not be found a wise man
amongst us, who might direct some Medium to make up these Breaches. Your
actions have greatly widened our Breach; I have that comfort that I have no
personal design of my own, but that this Common Cause and Interest wherein we
are all concerned may prosper, is my design; and whatsoever you may satisfy
your selves in the treachery and falsness of some persons, who after assurances
given of their faithfulness, have lately forfeited the same; Be confident the
Lord will not prosper such practices. It is very well known, I am no enemy to
Parliamentary Authority, and vvha^soever you may charge me with therein; Yet I
hopeing actions shall manifest the contrary. And as for the Forces which are
before Portsmouth, if you will engage that the Nations Peace shall not be
disturbed by your endeavors to raise Forces against us, We shall easily be
persuaded to withdraw ours, and in any thing with a Saving to this Cause, shall
be ready to express the respects which I have had formerly for you; and being
in some haste, I have only this to desire further of you, that would release
one M. Jennyns and Mr. Lucas, who though they are strangers to me, yet hearing
they are under restraint upon our account, I desire their Liberty, And shall
give the same return of friendship, as their occasion offered to

Your humble servant, Charles Fleetwood.
Wallingford house 17. Dec. 1659.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Fleetwood.
My Lord,
HAving received and read your Letter, dated the 17th instant, we find the
expressions to be so mild, and to savor so much of godliness, and selfdenial,
that we cannot but speedily return you this, hoping that if the Lord be pleased
to give you a heart really to act what you write, the Nations may yet be made
happy; We shall not labor to convince you of your being faulty, because you
appeal unto God, who only is able to make you bow down before him; And for our
parts, we have examined our heatts, and we find joy and comfort, believing our
selves to be in the way that God commands. We begun no contest, we waited two
Months, and nothing was brought forth but confusion; We believe the Common
enemy may gain great advantage by our divisions; But who gave the occasion, we
are innocent; and we know for either of us to conquer the other, is no gain to
our Cause. If you look upon the Parliament but as a Form, and disputing for
that but disputing for a Form: we differ from you, and take it to be the
Foundation upon which our Liberties are upheld, and our Religion under God to
be preserved. That we old friends should engage as enemies; it is indeed great
cause of lamentation; and we are not only sensible of it, but those that truly
fear God, sigh and mourn in secret, for the great shame and reproach, that the
Authors the^eby have brought upon the professors of godliness. We have been
tender of Saints blood, and very careful that poor innocent Soldiers should
not be destroyed, being sent by your Commands, to oppose the Authority of
Parliament; but we have waited their coming in to us, and they have not as yet
received any hurt from us. If the great providence of God working contrary to
your expectation, and the wonderful confusions and distractions, may work upon
you, and stir you up to be that wise man to make up these breaches while you
have time, we shall have cause to bless God for it. We hear Vice Admiral
Lawson declares for the restoring thu Parliament, and is in the Thames with the
Fleet in Order to it. His Declaration is sober, General Monck desires the like;
we believe thousands will join with them, Why should we divide upon this point?
We have seen a Paper for a Parliament to sit down the 24 of January, we cannot
think the people will choose upon that Authority, we are sure no Qualifications
can be made without Parliament: so that the time will either be lost, or the
Cause hazarded by such proceedings; We cannot but grieve to see the delay in
restoring the Parliament; We believe God will again restore it, and those that
contest against it, will in Conclusion be found fighters against that which God
has owned, and will yet make instrumental for his glory, and the Nations good;
For our own parts; We are most ready and willing to lay down all, or any of our
employments for the public Peace: neither do we desire to hurt the persons or
Estates of any of those that have formerly been instrumental in the
Parliaaments, service; We desire to be, not mistaken, we write not this as
being under any fear of the place wherein we are; for if ten thousand should
come against us, our good God being with us, who has furnished us with men and
Provisions sufficient, we need not too be afraid: Only our sense of poor
England's misery, and having earnest bowels after a speedy removal of our
woeful distractions moves us to press you to take off the Force from the
Parliament doors, that the Members may return to the exercise of their Trust,
without which we cannot expect Peace or settlement; and what you do, do
quickly, for we know not what mischief a day may bring forth, and the sad
consequences that may follow thereupon, and then you may repent when it will be
too late. We are

My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servants, Arth. Haslerig Herb. Morley,
Valentine Walton.


For the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the
City of LONDON.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
UPon our first coming to this Garrison, we writ to your Lordship, the
Aldermen and Common Counsel, but fear it never came to your hands; We now
understand that Vice Admiral Lawson has declared for restoring the Parliament,
and in order to that has brought the Fleet into the Thames, we hope you will
join with us, and cause the force to be withdrawn from the Parliament doors,
that so there may be an Authority which the Nations will own that may heal
the breaches, and remove Confusions, which otherwise may suddenly destroy us,
we have seen a paper that mentions a Parliament the 24th of January next, we
conceive that Authority will not be owned, neither can any quallifications be
made but by Parliament, so that the loss of time may prove our ruen the
interrupted Parliament is ready and know their work, and must lay the
Foundation for future Parliaments, what has caused all our miseries, but the
first interruption of the Parliament, all things done since by other
Conventions, being void and Null, as you desire peace and settlement, we
entreat your best assistance for the safety of the City and Nations which are
highly concerned in the speedy sitting down of the Parliament; We are

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most faithful and Humble Servants. Arthur
Haslerigg. Herbert Morley. Valentine Walton.

Portsmouth, December. 20. 1659.
December 22, 1659.
THe Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, in Common
Counc^l Assembled, read two letters from Portsmouth, dated the 27th. instant,
sent by Col. Sir Arther Haslerig, Col. Herbert Morley, Col. Valeutine Walton,
Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament for governing the Army, and
ordered that the thanks of that Court should be given to them, and appointed
three Commissioners, Alde man William Thomson, Col. Edward Brumfield, Mr.
Richard Foord, to go to Portsmouth to signify so much to them, and to confe^
with them about the peace and safety of the Commonwealth of this City.

Right Honorable,
AT our general meeting this day, your Lords hip received of the 7th. instant
were communicated to ns and taken into our most serious consideration; and
thereupon in performance of your desire and the discharge of our own duty in
order to the preservation of the Cause of God these Nations and this City, We,
resolved to use our endeavors for composing the late unhappy diffetences
between the Parliament and Army, and that the Parliamene may spedily be
restored to the exercise of their Trust, and accordingly appointed a Committee
to signify the same as our opinion unto the Council of Officers, which we
thought meet to certify in answer to your Honors abovementioned letter, and
that we are

Guildhall, London 22th. December 1659. Your Honors and the Commonmonwealths
most affectionate and falthfull servants. The Committee of the Militia
appointed by Act of Parliament for the City of LONDON. These for the Right
Honorable, Sir Arther Haslerig, Barronet, Col. Morley, and Col. VValten at
Portsmouth, present.
The Committee of Militia for Westminster acted very readily, and raised all
their Forces for the defense of the Parliament.



FINIS.

