THE TRUE CONFESSION OF THE Three notorious and Bloodly Murderers of Thomas
Thynn Esquire Viz. Captain Vratz. Lieutenant Stern and George Boraskie,
To two worthy Divines IN NEWGATE, Before they went to the place OF EXECUTION:
Which was at the place where they Committed the Fact on Friday the 10th of this
Instant March. 1682.
LLast Sunday in the afternoon the learned and famous Doctor Burnet was
Charitably pleased to bestow his pains on the poor condemned Prisoners in
Newgate, and not unsuccesifully, for God gave his labors the blessing to be
answered both with conviction, and confession, his words were so melting and
powerful that the most Stubborn heart did bow before them, his Sermon was taken
out of the 5. chapter of St. Lukes. Gospel and the 32. verse. Viz. I came not
to call the Righteous but sinners to repentance: when he had ransackt their
wounds and made them Sensible of the heynousness of the Offense for which they
were condemned, then (after the Sermon was ended) he went to the Communion
Table in that Chapel to exhort them to a full and ingenuous confession what
moved them to be concerned in so Barbarous a Murder. To which question
Lieutenant Stern meekly, (and with a due Sense of the foulness of the crime)
replied, that he had now lived thirty years and was never concerned in any ill
thing but this, and that now he was merely drawn in, not knowing any thing of
the Captains design to Murder the Gentleman, but that he was desired to go
with Captain Vratz, to be his second, the Captain telling him they were to
fight on Horsback and accordingly he fitted himself with necessarys Suitable
for such an undertaking; and being told that was the person in the Coach, he
rode up and stops it, thinking the Captain would have challenged the Gentleman
out, but contrary to his inclinations and expectations Boraski the bloody
Polander fired the Musquetoon into the Coach and Murdered him, whereupon they
all fled.

Then the Polander being asked by the Doctor upon what account the committed
such a base Villainous and Barbarous Murder as that was? answered that he was
sent for over by the Captain and promised a great reward to commit that
dreadful fact.

The Captain was not there, his Obstinate, Haughty and lofty Spirit, would not
stoop to a Sermon of repentance, his courage would not trickle to the advice of
a Servant of Christ Jesus, tho he came in love to his poor Soul, No, the Doctor
that had taken all this pains to go to Newgate, to Preach to them, and
discourse with them, must it seems take a little more to wait upon him: he went
to visit this hardened Hero, this Stiffnecked Son of Belial who was the chief
actor of this Tragedy, and when he come to him, all the arguments he could use,
could not extort any other confession from him then this, that he had
challenged him, and because he refused to fight him, he designed to Shoot him,

The Doctor asked him and the rest what they thought when they received
Sentence, they made answer that they thought nothing more but that they should
be saved as well as the Count he being indicted as well as they, so Ignorant
they seemed to be in our English Laws. This was the chief part of their
confession, indeed the Lieutenant and the Polander do seem afflicted with the
horror of their guilt, and well they may, for few Kingdoms can inform us of a
more bloody murder, the Circumstances being duly considered: To kill a
Gentleman they had hardly ever seen from whom they had no provocation, not so
much as an angry word, nor a cross look! this looks like the second part of Sir
Edmund Bury; Godfrey's murder methinks I see the Nobles of Poland Germany and
Sweedland blush at the very report of it. The Counts Countenance and favor
might be the Captains Commission, a piece of unnecessary Gallantry is the
Lieutenants Plea, and money made the Polanders Mare to Ride. It was matter of
money or rather Matrimony I doubt that made Mr. Thynn so untimely fall. And let
their confession be never so slightly slubberd over here, he that commanded,
thou shall not kill, when he makes inquisition for blood will not be mocked.

To another Doctor of Divinity of eminent worth and piety he said he had no
intention to Murder Esquire; Thynn, but that the Polander misapprehended him,
but being asked by the same person who discoursed him in his own Language,
whether he went not with an intention to kill or be killed? the Captain made
answer he did, but designed not his death after so cowardly a manner, the
Doctor then said that as he had lusted after the death of a person who had
never injured him, and whom he knew not, he had committed as great a sin as he
that lusts after a woman with whom he ouhgt not to be concerned, to which the
Captain replied that he had then been guilty after that rate 500 times, and
further added, that rather then he would take an affront, or a box on the ear
from any man, he would have his Soul damned in Hell, upon these unchristian
like words the Gentleman left him.

Liuetenant Stern did acknowledge that he had not been above a month in the
Captains Service, and that in all that time he had not said his prayers, and
therefore did verily believe that if he had not left God, he had not been any
way instrumental to accomplish so heinous a Murder as this was.

Boraski being asked how he durst undertake so Barbarous a Murder, replied
that when the Captain tempted him to it (in their Language) he answered, how
can I Murder a person that I never received any injury from, to which the
Captain made answer, it is not you that shall suffer but I. But it seems he was
deceived in this particular, for they are all three like to suffer here, happy
for them if their repentance prevent their suffering hereafter.

The Day and the Night before their Execution great interest was made both by
money and friendr in the several Houses adjoining to the place of Execution,
which was at St. Albanstreet and where that never to be forgotten fact was
committed. the crow'd might parallel the crime for greatness for a greater
number of people have been seldom seen upon such like occasions: and
notwithstanding strict care was taken to prevent all disorders by the
Constables Head-boroughs Beadles and Watchmen, yet it was too hard a task for
them to keep of a Rabel, who so eagerly pressed upon them as if they itch'd to
see Justice done upon such vile, mercinary, Villainous and Barbarous Murderers.

LONDON, Printed By D. Mallet. 1682.


