A True COPY of SEVERAL AFFIDAVITS And other PROOFS of the Largeness and
Richness of the Mines, LATE OF Sir CARBERY PRYSE, The Original whereof are
Filled in the High Court of Chancery.
Published at the Request of several Persons of Quality, Subscribers to the
MINE-ADVENTURE.

The Affidavit of John Bevans, Gent. concerning the Mines of Bwlchyr Eskirhyr.
JOHN BEVAN, of Austin-Fryars, London, Gent. makes Oath, That he, this
Deponent, was sent down by the Old Partners of the Mines late of Sir Carbery
Pryse, about Six Years ago, sometime before the last Trial in Westminster Hall
between the Partners and Patentees of Royal Mines, to bring up a quantity of
Oar out of the said Mines, in a Place called Bwlchyr Eskir Her, in
Cardiganshire, in order to be tried by some Artists in London; and accordingly
this Deponent went down, and several times viewed the said Mines under Ground;
at which time a Shaft was sunk about Twelve or Fourteen Yards deep, to the best
of this Deponent's Remembrance, and a particular Friend of this Deponent's
being greatly concerned in the said Mines, this Deponent took particular Notice
of the great Vein, and as near as this Deponent could guess by his Stick, with
which he measured the same, the great Vein was then about Six Foot wide in Oar;
which was the largest Bed, and the most beautiful Sight of Oar, that this
Deponent ever saw, though he has been concerned and seen several other Mines.
And this Deponent says, That there were, in the same Mountain, several other
Veins, some of which, he, this Deponent, was informed, was richer in Quality
than the great Vein. And that all the Workmen and other Persons this Deponent
discoursed with, who had seen the same Veins, did all agree that they were
extraordinary good.

Jur' 8o die Decemb', Anno Dom' School. coram me S. Keck. Jo. Bevans.

Mr. Hoyle's Affidavit, concerning the Mines.
JOHN HOYLE, of the Still-Yard, in the Parish of All-Hallowes-Thames-Street,
Gent. makes Oath, That he, this Deponent, lived in Cardiganshire for the space
of Three or Four Years, within this Seven Years last past, and was an
Adventurer in a Lead Mine in that County, within Eight or Nine Miles of Bwlchyr
Eskir Her, where the Mines late of Sir Carbery Pryse do lie, and was well
acquainted with several of the Miners and Workmen belonging to the said Mines
of Sir Carbery Pryse; who upon all Occasions, represented to this Deponent,
That One of the (...) Veins, called the Great Vein, was the largest they ever
saw or hear^ of, and that it grew wider in Oar as it grew deeper, and never
heard them say that it was less than Six Foot wide in Oar, at any time. And
this Deponent says, that he was once down to view the said great Vein under
Ground himself, and as well as this Deponent could guess, by Striding the said
Vein, it could not be less than Six Foot wide in Oar, as this Deponent verily
believes. And this Deponent says, That he has been concerned in, and has
seen several other Lead Mines, but never saw so large a Vein as the said Great
Vein, in his Life. And farther says, That he saw great Quantities of Oar lying
on the Bank of the said great Vein: and that he is no ways interested in the
said Mines.

Jur' 10 Die Decembris, An' Dom' School. coram me Ri. Holford. John Hoyle

Mr. Rilston's Affidavit, concerning the Mines
VALENTINE RILSTON, of Chirton, in the (...) Northumberland, Gent. Makes Oath,
That he, (...) ponent, about Six or Seven Years ago, before the first (...)
Westminster Hall between the Partners of the Mines (...) Sir Carbery Pryse, and
the Patentees of Royal Mines, went (...) to Bwlchyr Eskir Her, in the County of
Cardigan, where (...) Mines do lie, and viewed the said Mines under Ground, and
(...) up Three Boxes of several sorts of Oar cross the Vein, and brought it up
sealed with several Seals: and at that time one of the said Veins, commonly
called the Great Vein, was measured by this Deponent, and was seven Foot and an
half wide in Oar, from side to side, and something better. And this Deponent
farther says, That after the said first Trial, and before the second Trial,
this Deponent went down a second time to view the said great Vein under Ground,
and fetch up more Oar to London of the several sorts in the said Vein; which he
did in the Presence of William Corbet, of the Middle Temple, Gent. and others,
and caused the same to be carefully sealed up in Boxes, and carried up to
London, and this Deponent then measured the said Vein a second time, and found
it near Eight Feet wide in Oar; and this Deponent saw great Quantities of Oar
lying on the Banks of the said Vein, and on the Land of the Lady Pryse; and
heard several Derbyshire Miners, and others, who came there to veiw the said
Mines, say, That they never saw (...) large a Vein in their Lives. And this
Deponent further says, That he has no Interest or Concern in the said Mines.

Jur' 10 Die Decembris, An'Dom' School. coram me S. Keck. Val. Rilston.

Mr. Ducket's Affidavit.
JOHN DUCKET of Salisbury-street in the Strand, in the Parish of St. Martins in
the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. makes Oath, That he this
Deponent, about October, 1694. was employed by the Partners of the Mines late
of Sir Carbery Pryse, Barrt. for building a Cupulo, for Smelting the Lead-Oar
by Sea-Coal; and accordingly this Deponent did erect a Cupulo at a place called
Bwlchyt Eshirhir in the County of Cardigan, where the said Mines do lie; and
having lived two years and upwards in the same County, has several times
viewed the said Mines under Ground: And this Deponent further says, That one
of the Veins of the said Mines, commonly called the Great Vein, was Measured by
this Deponent, and contained above six Foot wide in Oar; the firm sides of
which Vein was much broader; and this Deponent also further says, that all the
time he lived there, he frequently Conversed with the Miners and Workmen
belonging to the said Works, and never heard from any of them, but a very great
Character of the Mines; but has often heard them say, it was pity such vast
rich Mines should not be wrought to the best advantage. And further this
Deponent says, That he has seen the hard Oar from the said great Vein,
several times smelted into Lead in a Furnace by Sea-Coal; and that the same
sort of Oar was carried and Smelted into Lead at Bristoll, and was sold to
several Plummers and Glasiers there; And this Deponent was informed by the said
Plummers and Glasiers, That the said Lead was as good, and as fit for all
manner of uses, as any other Lead they had wrought. And this Deponent has
several times tried the Lead himself, by an Assay, and found it to be very
good, being of a good Grain and very Tough; and believes it to be as good Lead
as can (...) brought to a Market. And this Deponent further says, That ^^lliam
Waller of Kavongwyn, in the said County of Cardigan, (...) having informed this
Deponent, that he had discovered by his Workmen some Copper Veins, in the
carrying up of the East Level to the said Mines, desired this Deponent to try
the several Oars arising from the same, and what Proportion the same yielded in
Copper; and accordingly this Deponent did try two several sorts of Oar, which
was delivered to him by the said Mr. Waller; and found that one sort thereof,
being of a reddish Brown Color, did yield above Four Tun of Copper out of
Twenty Tun of Oar; and that another sort thereof, which was of a Green Color,
did yield about Three Tun of Copper out of Twenty Tun of Oar; and after words
this Deponent went down to the said Mines, to see the places where the said two
sorts of Oar was Raised; and at the East end of the said Mountain, called
Bwlchyr Esyairhyr, where the said Mines do lie, he this Deponent, did see the
said two several (...) of Oars lying on the Banks, and raised out of the
Shafts, sunk (...) the East end of the said Mountain.

(...)2o die Decemb' (...) Dom. School. co^^^ me Rog. Meredith. John Ducket.

Certificate of the Committee.
(...) whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, being Members (...) of the
Committee, chosen for the Management if the (...) of Bwlchyr Eshirhir, late of
Sir Carbery Pryse, Barrt. (...) County of Cardigan, Do hereby Certify, That
Thomas ^^toman (formerly employed by Sir Edward Blakett, as a Clerk, to keep
the Accounts of his Lead Works) was about the Month of April, 1694 at the
request of Sir Christopher Wren, sent down to Inspect the said Works of Bwlchyr
Eskirhir, and Management thereof, And upon view of the said Mines, sent us a
Letter directed to Sir Christopher Wren, (who was then our Chairman) ^ated at
Bwlchyr Eskirhir, the Ninth of May, 1694 with several Papers enclosed,
containing his Observations on, and Directions concerning the Management of the
said Mines; whereby it appeared to us, that he had then a very great Opinion of
the Mines; saying the Concern was weighty, and did Comport with great Minds and
Purses; and Encouraged us to send successive Funds for the Advantageous
carrying on the Works; alleging, that the more was (...) out in an Undertaking
that had the Prospect of Success, the more considerable would the Profit be.
And amongst other things, he particularly informed us, That 1875. Tuns of Oar,
would yield 1250 Tuns of Lead, which is just two thirds; and That 15000 of Oar,
or 10000 Tuns of Lead would require 32 Hearths, or 8 Mills and 64 Smelters,
with as many Servers. By all which, and several other Calculations and
Proposals for carrying on the said Works, which would have been very Chargeable
and Expensive; and by his own Discourse, when he appeared Personally amongst
us, we did conclude he had a very great Opinion of the Richness of the said
Mines; and but little, if any thing inferior to Mr. Waller's Valuation.

Will. Freeman. Anthony Forty. Tho. Phipps. Ja. Blake. Richard Chauncy.


THese Affidavits and Certificates are published for the Satisfaction of
several Persons of Quality, who had been informed by some malicious Persons,
that we had never a Vein one Foot wide in Oar; we presume we need make no
Observations upon them, being so very plain in themselves, and deposed by
Persons of good Credit and Reputation, who have no Interest in the Mines, though
some of them forgot to mention it in their Affidavits: And it is to be
observed, That some of the Affidavits were made of the Wideness of the great
Vein before, and some of them after Mr. Bateman was down to view the Veins,
which was in May, 1694.

We can have many more Affidavits of the Truth of this Matter, if desired; but
these seeming to be sufficient, we forbear giving this trouble to any other
Gentlemen: And if any Persons of Quality desire it, they may not only see the
Original Affidavits, which are filed in Chancery, but also discourse with the
Persons that made them, and be farther satisfied in any other Particular.

And now we desire to know, what can be objected against this Undertaking. If
the matter of Fact be true, a^cording to these Affidavits, the great Vein
alone, without the other five Lead-Veins, without the Copper-Veins, and without
the Silver, being so near the Sea, so near the Surface of the Ground, with two
advantageous Levels of Soughs to drain the Water from them, at each end of the
Works, must be, to any rational Person (especially if he be acquainred with
Mineral-Works) a sufficient Fund to answer very considerable Profit to all the
Adventurers: But if he will make any (though ever so moderate Valuation) of the
other Lead-Veins; and if he considers the Richness of the Copper, and the
Probability of the Silver, as the Mine (...) sunk deeper, certainly he cannot
but say, this is a fair Ove^ture to the World. Is it so strange a thing for an
Origin^^ Undertaker to gain Eight Hundred Pound per Cent. Profi^ Has it not
been done formerly in the Hudson-Bay Company in the Post Office, in the
New-River Water? Nay, was not one Share in the New-River Water sold at first
for a Hundred Pounds, and yields now Four Thousand Pound, which is Three
Thousand Nine Hundred Pound per Cent. Profit. But then (says the Objector) Why
should any Person part with such a Profit, it looks too generous, and too like
(...) Drawer? There Is the Mistake, the Objector thinks tha^ Sir H. M. gives
this Eight Hundred Pound per Cent. ou^ of his own Pocket; no, Sir H. M. shares
all the Prof^^ along with the rest of the Adventurers, he sees an advan^^gious
bargain, cannot compass to purchase the whole, goes (...) deep as his
Circumstances will admit, and then invites h^^ Friends to gain with him; and
since they cannot compass the whole, he offers it to the World. What need he
care who has the Benefit along with him, so long as he has his share of it, he
loses nothing that he was able to get, and without Partners, he was not able to
get any thing at all.

But to return, If the Matter of Fact be true, why cannon we make the same
common and usual Advantage of a Mine that every other Person does? Are we like
to manage it worse than others, because we have a greater Stock? No; the the
Case is no more but this: Some of the Objectors plainl^ tell us, if you
succeed, you will ruin our Works; therefore you will excuse us, if we endeavor to
ruin yours. Others, who are not so generous Adversaries, tell us, our Oar is
bewitched and will not melt, it may indeed melt in a Fire-shovel, but not in a
Furnace; and the Reason is plain, because every Adventurer has, or may try it,
either in a Fireshovel or a Tobacco pipe, but they cannot so easily come at a
Furnace.

It is a wonderful thing with what Confidence Men can assert the most notorious
and ridiculous Falsities, when either Envy or Self-Interest moves them to it.

We had the Happiness, Two or three Days ago, to be introduced into the Company
of Sir George Strode of Worcester, Barronet, who is a Person of Quality and
great Reputation, he was pleased to tell us, That he admired that any Person
could have the Confidence to speak against the Largenese of the great Vein, or
against the Smelting of the Oar; since every Person in the County of Cardigan,
especially near the Mines, knows the Contrary; and told us, That in September
and October, 1696. he was in that Country to see a Relation, and out of
Curiosity went down to view the great Vein in Bwlchyr Eskirhyr, where he had
worked in Oar till he had blistered his Hands, and that he measured the said
great Vein, and put it down in Writing, and that he very well remembers that it
was above Six Foot wide in Oar; and farther, that he took some of the Oar with
him, and smelted it himself in an Iron Ladle on a Kitchen Fire, and that it did
run into good Lead. He says, he saw great Quantities of Oar raised there; and
that it lies convenient to the Sea, and believes it to be a very rich Mine, and
so did all he met with in the County of Cardigan, he has been so kind as to
give us leave to mention these things; and is pleased to say, that if any
Gentleman comes to him at his Lodgings over against the Rose-Tavern, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, and desires it, he will be so kind as to give
them a full Account of his Knowledge of this Matter.

There are many of the old Partners, Persons of great Credit and Reputation,
who could make Affidavits to the same Purpose as the former; but being Parties
concerned, we have not given them that Trouble; but what Reports were made by
any of them some time ago, long before this Undertaking was thought of, may
perhaps, not be improper just to take Notice of.

And therefore we will acquaint the Reader, That in Nov. 1694. which was after
Mr. Bateman was down to view the Mines. Mr. Thomas Phipps and Mr. Anthony
Fortye, were sent down by Order of a Committee, to view the said Mines and to
inspect the Management thereof; who do certify amongst many other things, That
the Mines did appear to them nothing inferior to what they had been
represented, several very considerable Veins being discovered between the two
Levels, lying East and West, for the space of above a Thousand Yards; that the
great Vein was four Foot wide in good Oar, and grew wider, and before Mr.
Phipps left the Country, which was less than two Months, he measured it six
Foot wide in Oar; that the carrying up of these Levels is a necessary Work,
they being finished, will ease us of a troublesome Water charge, and it will
make us capable of putting on as many Hands as we please, and none without
Benefit.

Mr. London, of the Royal Gardens, in a Person of great Credit, and has been
three several times in three several Years to view the Mines, viz. in 1694 with
Mr. Bateman, in 1695, and 1696. And we need not tell the World what he says of
the Greatness and Richness of these Mines; because his Actions has
sufficiently proved his great Opinion of them: For when he saw such a vast Rich
Treasure lie dead and unwrought, merely for want of good Agreement amongst the
Partners, and a Stock to carry on the Works. He voluntarily advanced Fifteen
Hundred Pound on the Credit of the Mines, at Six per Cent. without any Premium;
thereby plainly demonstrating, That he looked upon the Security of the Mines to
be as certain and good, as any Land-Security; and we believe, That if any
Person considers who are the old Partners, and will take the pains to read over
the Names of them, he will not easily be of Opinion, that all those Gentlemen
would combine together to impose upon the World.

But as to the Wideness of the great Vein, to avoid all Mistakes for the
future, we will for once, acquaint the Reader, That all sorts of Veins are
subject to Twitches, especially so near the Surface of the Ground as these
Mines are; but generally the Vein proves much richer and broader after a Twitch
than before: The Nature of which, that you may more fully understand, we beg
leave to explain it thus.

The great Vein (for instance) is Eleven Foot wide betwixt its firm and solid
sides; and all that lies between those firm sides, is either Oar or something
that lies in the Place of Oar, which we call Vein-stone and differs in many
respects from any other Stones, most other Veins are full of Vein-stone,
betwixt the firm sides, till they are sunk fifty or sixty Yards deep; and all
that time the Vein is said to be a dead Vein, because it has no Oar, but only
Vein-stone, and when it comes to Oar, then they say the Vein is a quick Vein,
and as the Vein grows deeper, the Oar eats out the Vein-stone by degrees, and
so grows wider and wider, till it comes to be all Oar betwixt the firm sides of
the Veins; and all the dead Vein-stone is vanished and gone.

But yet before it comes to this Perfection, it is very usual for the
Vein-stone (now and then) to get ground of the Oar, and to pinch in the Oar
into a narrower compass, which is called a Twitch; but then the Oar (like an
angry Warrior) certainly recovers it self, and never leaves off getting
ground, till at last, after several Combats of the like nature, it has gained
the Field and conquered the Enemy.

For as in all other natural Productions above ground, so in things below,
Nature is regular; but yet in such manner, as admits of some seeming
Irregularities to exercise the Wits of Men, and make us more industrious, till
at length we have arrived to a great Experience, and then we may be able to
reduce all those Irregularities to certain standing Rules; as for instance,

In this Case of a Twitch, it is a constant Observation, that as the Twitch
comes in, so it goes out again; if it comes in slow in a sharp Angle, then it
goes out by Degrees in the same form; but if it comes in of a sudden in an
obtuse Angle, it goes out as sudden in the same manner; and many more such
Rules are to be observed.

But we shall forbear to give any farther account thereof at this time, or the
Philosophical Reasons for these Twitches, though it would not be difficult to
do it, from the common Observations of the Mineral Water that feeds the Vein,
which when restrained by such a Twitch from ascending upwards, always makes the
Vein the more rich below; and the more Twitches in a Vein, the richer still is
the Oar; so that these Twitches seem to be designed by Nature to enrich the
Mines below, for if there were none, the Mineral Feeder would easily ascend to
the Surface to the ground and evaporate.

Now to give you a short History of this great Vein; It was at first Discovery
thereof about Seven years ago, about One Foot wide in Oar, at the very Surface
of the ground and all the rest was Vein-stone betwixt the said firm sides and
as the Mines were sunk down, the Oar still increased, and the Vein-stone
decreased, till the Vein was Six Foot wide in Oar, and then about the beginning
of the year 1694. the Twitch came in by degrees in a sharp Angle, and the
Vein-stone got ground considerably of the Oar, till the Oar came to be a Yard
wide, and in some places three quarters of a Yard; and at last not above a
Foot, but as the Twitch came in so it went out by degrees in the same
proportion, and then the Oar got ground and increased to seven foot six
inches, and became much richer, as well as broader and thus we must expect the
Battle will continue between the Vein-stone and the Oar, till we have sunk to
that deepness, that the Oar has got the entire victory, and become Eleven Foot
wide, betwixt its firm and solid sides, which we have great reason to believe
it will do, when our Levels are carried home, at Sixty four Yards deep; and
then we may challenge the whole World to show such another Vein.

There is also another constant Observation in Mineral-Works, and that is
betwixt a Limestone, Sill or Side, and a Rag-stone Sill or Side, in which
there is always observed a manifest difference in relation to these Twitches.

For when the Vein lies betwixt a Lime-Sill, or side, as in Darbyshire and
Flintshire, there the Sides of the Vein often make the Twitch, which is the
worst sort of Twitches; but yet, even in these Cases, the Vein is never lost by
such a Twitch: but where the Vein lies between a Rag-sill or Side, there the
Sides are more firm and regular; and the Twitch is always made by the
Vein-stone (which some call a Rider) and no Man can ever instance that any Vein
was ever lost by such a Twitch; but that the Oar afterward was richer and
broader, as aforesaid. But some ignorant and unskilful Persons, who know
nothing of these Matters, are frightened at such a Twitch, and think the Vein
is going off from them; whereas an experienced Artist rather rejoices at it,
and at first sight tells his Workmen, that then he has great Hopes of a richer
Mine; but of this we will trouble the Reader no more at this time; only we will
acquaint him that a certain Person (not having any Judgment in Mineral-Works)
did imagine that this great Vein might possibly be no more than a Belly of Oar,
such as they have in Darbyshire, and the rather, because on each side the first
Shaft that was sunk there is a little Descent of Ground which had cast down the
Rock upon the Vein; but that Opinion appeared to be a great Mistake to every
Artist at first Sight, and to all others when the Trials and cross Cuts were
made, and the Vein found from the End of the Hill to the other, Twelve hundred
Yards in length (whereas it is a mighty Belly of Oar that is Fifty Yards in
Length); but especially when the parralel Veins were found, which are
sufficient to demonstrate to any skilful Artist, that the great Vein is of the
same kind, and in all probability, the main Body of all the other Veins.

But we cannot help the Ignorance nor the Malice of Men; but (God be thanked) we
are now in a Condition to help our selves; we have a noble Stock to manage the
Mines, actually paid in Bank-bills, and Goldsmiths Notes; and now we are
printing Affidavits, we were once in the mind to have added one more in pure
Revenge, and that was to let our Adversaries know, that all our Money is paid
in to a small matter, there not being above Fifteen hundred Tickets unpaid for;
and of these the greatest part are Subscribers out of the Country, and have
sent notice that they really want their Money, and not a good Affection to the
Cause. They say, we came a little too quick upon them, before they could get
their Money returned out of the Country and paid above. But we don't hear that
all the industrious Contrivances of our Adversaries has made one false Brother
amongst us of Twenty Pounds Value.

When Men are about an unprofitable Undertaking, the World is seldom so good
natured as to be at so much Trouble and Expense to undeceive them: And
therefore the Envy and Opposition this meets with, is one very great Argument,
amongst the rest, to convince us of the Value of the Mines, and of the
greatness of this Undertaking.

But that the World may judge by a clearer Light of the unreasonableness of
this Opposition, we will desire them to consider, whether they would think it
reasonable for a powerful Man to send to his Neighbors and forbid them to sow
any Corn in their Ground; for if you do (says he) more Corn will come to the
Market, and consequently the Price thereof lessened to my Damage; therefore
either desist, or else I will blast your Credit some way or other: I will tell
the World your Ground will not yield good Corn, that poisonous Weeds grows up with
it, that if any Corn be had, yet that it will not grind in the Mill, nor make
Bread; or else the Bread will not be good for any Use whatsoever; and by this
Means, when you have been at great Charges, I will ruin your Undertaking.

Just thus they deal with us, some say we have no such Mountain, or if we have,
there is no Oar in it, but if we have Oar, yet it will not Melt; and if it should
happen to Melt, yet the Lead is worth nothing. But if you whisper a Friend in
the ear, and ask him why all this? it may be, he may trust you with the Secret,
and tell you, it must be so, for if it were otherwise, all the Mines in England
will be Ruined; And we could show you something to this purpose in Writing, but
that we have a respect for the person that writ it.

But although we do not owe all our Adversaries that kindness, yet since there
are some persons of great Honor and Reputation, who are pleased to do us
Justice, though against their own Interest; and since we think it our Duty to
return-Good for Evil, we will inform them, That we are in Consultation upon
another Undertaking, that shall Advance the value of all the Mines in England
and Wales, and shall be ready to receive any persons really concerned in the
same Interest, to assist at our Debates and Consultations on this Subject.

We have forbore to make any farther Observations on Mr. Bateman, because he
has publicly, at the last General Meeting, by the Mouth of Sir Christopher
Wren, denied that he had spoak any thing against these Mines. But however, if
he or any person else has any thing to offer to the World on this Subject, we
hope they will be so fair as to answer us on Oath, and File their Affidavits in
Chancery, as we have done; and then the Pillory shall make an end of the
Controversy, and prevent an impertinent Paper War.

UPON the whole Matter, we hope by this time, the Reader is satisfied we have a
MINE, and perhaps such a one as cannot be paralleled in the Christian World.

And we doubt not, but when the Levels are carried home to the several Veins,
every Adventurers Share will as freely sell for One Hundred Pounds, as they do
now for Twenty; and perhaps this Company, under so good a Constitution as they
now enjoy, may in a reasonable time, be as considerable as any other in the
whole Kingdom, especially if the Stock be enlarged, and the Charity given out
of the clear Profit: For since no Mines can be worked to any considerable
Profit, without a large Stock; which few Proprietors, are able to raise, it
will be their Interest to offer them to this Society, under whose Management
with so great a Stock, a Tenth Duty will yield more Profit to the Lord than a
fifth from any private Person; so that in time this Company will have the
working of many more Mines, to the great Advantage of the whole Kingdom; and,
since a part of the Profits is appropriated to Charitable Uses, we humbly hope
we may in time be instrumental, in some Measure, toward accomplishing that
great End his Majesty has been graciously pleased to recommend to both Houses
of Parliament; that is, to Employ the Poor, and improve our Manufactures; and
consequently, to add considerably to the National Stock, and bring more Wealth
to England than any Foreign Trade whatsoever.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, in the Old Bailey, School.


