24 November. 1642.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Relation, concerning
the Passages of the Kings Army at Old- Brainceford, be forthwith Printed and
Published; And further, That no Person, upon any pretense whatsoever, shall
presume to Print the same Passages but Edward Husbands and John Frank, until
the 25 of December next ensuing the date hereof.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl Dom. Com.

A True and Perfect RELATION Of the Barbarous and Cruel PASSAGES Of the Kings
Army, At Old- Brainceford, near London: Being presented to the House of
Commons, by a Committee of the same House, who was sent thither, on purpose to
examine the Truth of the particular Actions of the said Army.

Printed for E. Husbands and J Frank, and are to be sold at their shops, in the
middle Temple, and next door to the King's Head in Fleetstreet. 1642. November.
25.

The Preamble.
Unnatural, Inhumane, and strange Cruelties, send forth a voice; and the voice
which they send forth is so loud and piercing, that it awakes even secure and
sleepy Man kind, and stirs up their bowels to an in flamed and united
Indignation. The divided pieces of a woman abused to death, needed not the
Eloquence or Voice of an Orator; they spoke themselves, and they spoke so loud,
that they were heard by a whole Nation, and drew forth this Answer; There was
no such deed done nor seen, from the day that the children of Israel came out
of Egypt. Neither did they fetch only an Answer of words, but of deeds: All
the men of Israel gathered together as one man, against the Authors and
Abettors of that abominable wickedness.

It is a Lamentation, and to be taken up for a Lamentation, That in England
such horrid acts should be done, that yield forth this high, crying, and
affrighting voice. Yet such have lately been done; and there will be no need
but only to bring them into view, and then to let them speak themselves. And
when they speak, if they get not the same Answer in Deeds, they cannot but get
the like Answer in Words; No such thing has been done, since England came out
of the Egypt of Rome.

For hear are Acts represented, so far out of ken, and view of Christianity,
that they are void of humanity; Yea, so void of humanity, that they are short
of the good Nature of wild, savage, and unreasonable Creatures. Even Bears
and Wolves, agree with their own kinds, but these have robbed, spoiled, and
tormented not Christians only, for those perchance may be thought not to be of
their own kind, nor men, which these savages have seemed to put off, but
partners and associates in their own cause, and friends to that Quarrel for
which they seemed to fight.

But let their own works speak, and when they speak, I say not, Let Grace, but
let Nature hear, and it shall suffice.

A true and perfect RELATION OF The Barbarous and Cruel Passages of the KINGS
Army at Old BRAINFORD.
THe Kings Army upon Saturday the 12. of Nov. instant (after His Majesty's
Assent to Treaty of Accommodation) surprised Colonel H^lls his Regiment at Old
Brainford; and after they had possessed themselves of the Town, they plundered
it, without any respect of persons (except the house of one Brent a
Church-Papist (whose Wife is a known Popish Recusant, and he suspected to give
Intelligence to the Kings Army:) First they drank, and wasted the Beer and
Wine in the several Inns, and other places in the Town; and such Beer and Wine
as they could not drink, they let it run out (in some Cellars as deep as to the
mid leg.)

They also took from the Inhabitants, their Money, Linen, Woollen, Bedding
wearing Apparel, Horses, Cows, Swine, Hens, etc. and all manner of Victuals.
Also, Pewter, Brass, Iron pots, and Kettles, and all manner of Grocery,
Chandlery, and Apothecary ware: Nay such was their barbarous carriage, that
many of the Featherbeds which they could not bear away, they did cut the Ticks
of them in pieces, and scattered the Feathers abroad in the fields and streets;
They did also cut the Cords of the Beds, and broke down the Bedsteads: They did
cut in pieces, and burn the poor Fishermens Boats and Nets, by which they got
their livings, (having pillaged them besides of all that ever they had:) They
did cast Beef into the dirt, which they carried not away with them: They
littered their Horses with Wheat-sheaves: They spoiled Nurceries of Fruit Trees
of good value; and near upon Three hundred Bushells of Apples from one man they
took away, spoiled, and trampled to dirt with their Horses feet; besides,
Fifteen pair of Sheets, his Bedding, etc. They also took Candles, to the value
of Twenty pounds and upwards, from one man, and burnt them all night through
the Army, and such as they carried not away, either they broke in pieces, or
threw into the fire, or trod in the mire.

Had they rested with robbing of the richer sort, it had been some degree of
mercy; but they left not unplundered, the blind Beggar at Old Brainford,
taking from him and his Wife, their Apparel, Linen, Woollen, and Bedding; and
the like they did to the Four Alms-women in the Spittle there, and took from
them their Wheel or Rocks, by which they got something toward a livelihood.

And when they had thus plundered, and taken away all the goods (except here
and there a Bed) they defaced some houses, and set one of fire (of purpose, as
is conceived, to fire the Town) which was afterward quenched by an Inhabitant.

Had their wicked carriages here ended in the loss of the Inhabitants goods,
without hazard of their persons, they had undergone it with more patience; but
such was their inhumane behavior, that they did set drawn Swords and Pistols
cockt to men and women's breasts, threatening them with death, if they brought not
out all their money; and threatening others, to cut off their Noses, and pull
out their Eyes, calling them Parliament dogs, Round-headed rogues, beating and
wounding some of them, (one of them being a lame Cripple) taking others of the
Inhabitants prisoners, and putting Irons upon them; others they tied with
Ropes, and stripped some to their Shirts; and as one of them that was led next
day in Irons toward Oatlands, stoopt to take a little water in his Hat to
drink, they beat him, and bruised him for offering to do it; Their hearts were
so seared, that they would not extend compassion to the aged and gray headed,
for they took one grave old Gentleman, (above Fourscore years of age) and put
him with other of the Inhabitants of the Town, into the Pound, where they were
diverse hours, and afterward were removed into the Slaughterhouse, where they
lay all night, it being a most nasty and noisome place; and the old Gentleman
being bound head and feet together all night: They also plundered an ancient
Gentlewoman of about Threescore and ten years of age, (whose age and weakness
would not permit her to go to Church for these Seven years last past) they took
from her all her Bedding, Linen, Pewter, etc. and even her Mantle from her
back, leaving her in a poor and miserable condition.

Their plundering was so universal, that even diverse of the richer, as well as
the meaner sort, were, and to this day still are, enforced to live of the
charity of the Earl of Essex his Soldiers; the CAVALIERS leaving scarce one
piece of Bread or Meat in all the Town: It would pierce a heart of flint, to
see the tears dropping from the old men's eyes, in expressing their sad
condition:

And a great addition to these Cruelties, was the barbarous, merciless, and
unheard of usage of the PARLIAMENT Soldiers by the CAVALIERS, for they did put
them into a Pound, and there tied and pinioned them together, where they so
stood for many hours, some of them they stripped to their Shirts, others to their
Breeches, most without Stockings or Shoes, and in that condition removed them
to the Slaughterhouse, where they lay all night, and next day were dragged
away over Hunslow-Heath, toward Oatlands, diverse of them bare foot and bare
leg, over Furrs and Thistles, till their feet and legs did bleed, and were fore
gauled: But these may be accounted but Acts of Grace and Favor, in comparison
of what they did toward others of them; for when diverse of Master Hollis his
Soldiers fled into the River of THAMES, for safeguard of their lives, they
shot at them as they were swimming, and so diverse of them were drowned.

They took after the Fight ended, Five of the Earl of Essex his Soldiers, and
tied them by the hands with Ropes, and enforced them into the River of THAMES,
who standing in the water to their necks, casting their eyes on their Enemies,
in hopes of Mercy; but such was the merciless condition of their Adversaries,
that a Trooper rid into the water after them, and forced them to fall into the
depth of the water, saying to them (in a jeering manner) Swim for your lives,
when it was past all possibility to escape.

Had their barbarous carriages begun and ended in heat of blood and revenge, it
had a little qualified then offense; but so full of inhumanity were their
hearts, even before the Fight begun at Old Brainford, with Colonel Hollis his
Regiment, that they placed Ten of the Earl of Essex his Soldiers (whom they
had formerly taken prisoners at Keynton) pinioned, in the Front of their men,
to be as a Brestwork to receive the Bullets that came from Colonel Hollis his
Regiment, that the CAVALIERS might escape them; but such was the providence of
God, that not one of them was hurt, though shot through the clothes in many
places; and one of the Ten escaped (who was formerly a Sergeant to a Company in
Colonel Essex his Regiment) and in the presence of diverse Witnesses, averred
the truth of this particular.

And now since it appears by these prodigious Acts of Rapine, Destruction, and
Tyranny, that these men delight in cruelty, and fight against their own
Associates, and spoil those that favor their own cause, with those that
oppose it; what remains, but that they be taken, not for such as endeavor the
defense of the King, but the ruin of the Kingdom; and not as Enemies of some
kind of men, but as the common Enemies of mankind.

FINIS.

