A True and Perfect NARRATIVE OF THE Great and Dreadful Damages Sustained in
Several Parts of England, by the Late Extraordinary SNOWS: Whereby above Twenty
Families of Poor People, Men, Women, and Children, were Distressed, and some
Destroyed at Langsdale, in the Bishopric of Durham: The Snow from the Hills
covering the Tops of their Houses, that they could not get out: having burnt
all their Goods to keep them warm.

As also of a Family in Somersetshire near Bath, so beset with the Snow, that
they were forced to live Three Days on nothing but Grains.

And several Persons, and Great Quantities of Cattle and Sheep lost in
Northumberland, Darbyshire, Glocestershire, Shropshire, Lincolnshire, Isle of
Ely, and other places.

Faithfully Extracted from Letters lately sent from Persons of Good Credit and
Quality in all those parts.

Printed for P. Brooksby, in VVest-Smith's field.

THE Wonderful SNOW.
BY a Letter Dated the 7th. of March instant, sent to an eminent Shopkeeper in
Thames Street, from a Chapman of his living at (...) in the Bishopric of
Durham, we are ascertained of a most sad accident occasioned there by the late
excessive Snows, which is since confirmed by several other Posts from those
parts, to have happened as follows.

In a place called Langsdale, situated toward the North of the Bishopric of
Durham, lying between two hills, the valley being very long, but exceeding
narrow, so that it was above a hundred paces over; there stood several small
Houses or Cottages inhabited by Shepherds and other poor people, their
dwellings being only made of Loam-walls, one story, and thatcht over head: Here
the Snow (which began earlyer, and was far more violent and excessive in those
parts than in these Southern Counties) came so furiously driven down the Hills
by North-East Winds, that the poor people could hardly stir abroad, it was
grown so deep on a sudden, insomuch that some of them began to apprehend
danger, and thought to have got away over the hills, to some place of more
security, but this wholesome advise (which might have preserved their lives) was
slighted by others more bold, who alleged that it could not Snow always, and
that no question but it would be over in short time; and indeed (as if their
unhappy Fates had overruled the Weather, to flatter them to their ruin) after
the first two or three days (which had covered the ground generally four or
five foot deep, but in drift at some places, it lay at least ten or tw^lve foot
high) The heavens seemed more clear, as if they should have been troubled with
no mote, but behold on the third day of March, being Shrove-Tuesday, it fell a
snowing again with greater violence (the weather being excessive cold; and the
wind continuing high as before) all that day and night, so that the whole
Valley was filled with Snow, and almost levelled with the tops of the Hills, the
houses were Covered over, and not to be seen; the miserable people when they
had slept long, and waited tediously for the aproach of day, at last get up,
and think to look abroad, but this they endeavor in vain, for they find
themselves buried alive in Snow, and though they used their best skill, and
greatest strength, could by no means get out: They that had any wood or fireing
made use of it, hoping by that means to melt themselves out a way, but found
not that so effectual as Hannibal's Project, famous in History, when he eat a
passage for his Army, through those vast Mountains of the Alps, with Vinegar;
for having thus to no purpose wearied themselves, and wasted their Fuel, Cold,
Hunger, Darkness, Horror, and Despair begin all at once to seize their hearts:
their poverty for the most part was such, as did not allow them to keep much
store of Provision in their houses beforehand, and the weather had been so bad
for above a Fortnight before, that they could not conveniently either work to
earn, or go abroad to buy Victuals; so that their Stock was soon exhausted, and
after having made shift as long as possibly they could, were at last reduced to
the worst of Humane evils, a necessity of starving for want of food.

There needs no Rhetoric to set forth the miserable condition of these poor
souls, which of it self was so deplorable, that it cannot in the bare Relation,
but affect the hearts, and draw Carnation-tears from the eyes of each
Compassionate Reader. The dismalness of living in continual darkness, as in a
Grave: The Extremity of the Frost, the Lamentations of half distracted Women,
and cries of dying Children for Bread, whilst they to whom they make their
moans are starving themselves, may easily present the imaginations with
spectacle of Horror. Let it suffice to say, That cold and want at last brought
welcome death to rid them of their Torments, where paying a shore of Tears as a
Just Tribute to the Tyranny of their sad fate, let us leave them, and now look
abroad and inquire how they are found.

The Neighboring People (whom better Situation of their dwellings preserved
from such Calamity) Seeing Langsdale Valley so overwhelmed with an Inundation
of Snow, and touched with a generous Commiseration of the poor Inhabitants,
whom they had all the reason of the world to conclude, lost, or in a desperate
condition, assemble in great numbers, and with mighty toil in clearing a
passage, at last get to these Cottagers, the greater part of whom they found
destroyed as aforesaid, whereof some lay dead with raw meat in their mouths,
having no fire left to dress it (...) others that had a better stock of fireing
made shift to keep themselves alive by eating Cats-flesh, Dogs, or whatever
they could get, and these they charitably removed thence and made provision for
them.

This Story as it is most sad in it self, so is it most true and certain, and
we wish we were not so unhappy as to be able almost to parrallel it by another
miscrable Accident in the West, occasioned by the very same means, as we have
it in a Letter from an Ingenious Gentleman of Bath: Thus

The Snow was so great in those parts, that a poor man living with his Wife,
and a great charge of Children, on a Common about 10 m. from Bath, at a great
distance from Neighbors, were almost shut up in the like manner. The good man
however made a salley out, and endeavored with his Gun to shoot Birds, or what
he could meet with for the sustenance of his wanting Family, but found so
little booty, that still they were almost ready to starve. Insomuch that for
several days they lived upon nothing but a few Grains, till a Gentleman's man
riding that way chanced to see some of the biggest children greedily feeding on
these miserable dainties, the sight whereof affected the good natured fellows
heart so far, that he made further inquiry, and being soon convinced of their
sad necessitous condition, when he came home acquainted his Lady, who being of
an excellent charitable disposition, immediately ordered him to carry them as
much good wholesome victuals as he could, we need not relate with what Joy they
received this blessing, which yet (alas! how fate befools the hopes of silly
mortals) occasioned their deaths, who perhaps might have made shift with their
Grains to have supported their lives, for being so near famishing, they fell so
geedily on this unexpected Cheer, that they oppressed nature so fatally that the
same night the Woman and five of her Children Expired.

To these unhappy relations we might add diverse others no less true and
certain, as that of a Baker and his Bride at Twexsbury in Gloctershire, who
riding out the very next day, after they were married to visit some friends
about ten miles, were both destroyed, grim death treading on Hymen's heels, and
their Nuptial delights child with a cold eternal sleep in sheets of Snow,
wherein they were afterward found dead embraceing each other.

Of a Minister lost horse and all by the same means in Darbyshire, three poor
women destroyed as they endeavored to go to a Market in Shropshire, two
Carryers servants stiffled by the Snow in Lincolnshire, and a Post-boy frozen
to death in it near Morpeth in Northumberland.

What shall we say of great quantities of Cattle killed in Rumney Marsh, whole
flocks of Sheep perished in Huntingtonshire, great mischiefs done in the Fenns,
and Isle of Ely. In brief, this Superabundant Snow was no less General, then
prejudicial, and there is scarce a County in England but may bring in several
Indictments against it for damages sustained to a considerable value, not to
speak of the mischiefs occasioned by great Floods when melted by the Thaw.

Nor is it only England has been a sufferer, our Foreign Letters give us an
Account that other Nations have at the same time been sharers in miseries of
the like kind: Perticularly in Germany the Snow has not been only great, but in
a sort Prodigious. Letters from Vienna, of the ^6th. of February, S. N.
informing, That thereabouts there had been great quantities of Worms and
Cobwebs falling in the Snow, of which abundance also were observed in Inspr^ike
in the County of Tyrol, of which great notice had been taken by several Curious
Enquirers after such strange Accidents: Though it seems often to have been seen
before: For so says the Ingenious Johannes Heidfeildius, in Sua Sphing^
Philosophica, Alicubi in ipfis nivibus nascuntur vermiculi and Tinea: This we
are sure of, that we could never more properly than of late repeat that of the
Poet:

Ecce ruit densum tacitarum vellus Aquarum:
A Feathered Rain, came in abundance down,
And with dry Inundations did us Drown.
FINIS.

