A Short ACCOUNT, Or STATE of Mr. Sheridans CASE Before the Late House of
Commons, In a LETTER to J. T.

LONDON, Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Bull in Cornhill,

A short Account or State of Mr. Sheridan's Case before the late House of
Commons, in a Letter to J. T.
SIR,
SOME Years since, I sent you a long Letter under the Title of J. L. relating
to an affair, wherein Mr. S. was deeply concerned; this gave you so much
satisfaction, that I have thence sufficient encouragement to venture another;
especially considering his vindication is much more necessary in the present
instance, and that you are still his Friend, and the person to whom of all Men
living he is perhaps the best known. Under that Character you were mentioned in
the Copy of a Letter carried among other of his Papers to the House of Commons,
writ in his favor to a great Minister by the late E. of Or. for whom living,
and for whose memory, both your Gr. and he had, and ever must have, a just
value and veneration.

You will find you may still own this Gentleman without blushing, and to show
you were not deceived in the opinion of his Integrity, I have taken the pains,
for your sake, as well as for his, whose Friend I own my self, to gather up,
and convey to you, the History and occasion, that has made him as publicly
known in this, as he was before in another Kingdom. I promise you an impartial
Relation, and by it you will see, that Envy and Malice, where with he has been
long assaulted, have to little purpose spit their Venom.

You are not to learn the cause of his coming for England in June, 1677. nor
knowing his temper, to wonder that havi^^ received some favors from his R. H.
gratitude obliged him to an acknowledgment, and honor and generosity to make
and avow it in the time of that great Prince's adversity, whom he found by the
unsteddy course of Humane affairs, and the craft and malice of designing Men,
fallen from being the Peoples greatest Favorite into their highest Displeasure.

Soon after, when the D. in obedience to his Royal Brother's commands went into
a temporary Exile, which however otherwise uneasy, was cheerfully undergone by
him, who al-always resigned his own, to the will of his Prince: Your Friend
having little to hinder, laid hold of that opportunity, followed him to
Bruxels, and there spending most of the time he was abroad, expressed his
Obligations and Duty in the best manner he was able.

This, and his openly owning himself devoted to his R. H's interest, while
consistent with Loyalty, gave occasion to his Adversaries, whom envy had
increased, to vent their Spleen, and endeavor to sully his Reputation, of all
things to him most dear, by many false Insinuations, and indeed Diabolical
Inventions, hoping thereby to disable him from rivalling them in any future
pretension. He is not ignorant of the Authors, nor the train, who the better to
compass their honest Design, hatched by one, that Mole-like, works under
ground, and he thinks in the dark, they resolved at once his ruin, by rendering
him odious to the Public, to the Country, to the King, and to the Court; and
therefore he was no sooner brought before the House of Commons, than he was
represented to his Sovereign, as one that had spoken ill of His Majesty, and to
the wonder of himself and others, this was first whispered to, and after
suggested by, a great Lord, to whom Mr. S. owns himself obliged for several
favors. and in particular for a very kind recommendatory Letter some Years
since to Mr. Secretary Coven -- But that which makes his surprise the greater,
is, his not being able to find, on his part, any cause for the change of this
Noble-man's greatly valued good opinion, of which he hoped ^^mself still
possessed, because certain he never disobliged his Lordship, and defies any Man
to make out that in word or action, he ever spoke or did irreverently or
disloyally of the King, whose Service, you know, no man has more zealously
promoted, nor less ineffectually, according to his Station and Power. However,
in the height of his-misfortune, when to all he did not appear guiltless, he
had the happiness to have a Gentleman of Honor and Quality (who by the
recommendation of our deceased, and never to be forgotten noble Friend, several
Years ago, took him into his particular favor and acquaintance) publicly to
assert his Integrity, his Service, and his Loyalty. An Act of Friendship, he is
bound by all the ties of Gratitude, ever to remember and acknowledge; few Men
in this Age having the courage, or the honesty, to own any Man in adversity, or
to defend innocence, when endeavored to be run down by faction, n^ise, and
tumult. The ground of this Discourse in public at the King's Dinner, was the
Copy of a Letter found among Mr. S's Papers, which plainly appears to have come
from another, but not to him, to whom had it been directed, he could not be
therefore criminal, it being in no Man's Power to prevent any Post-Letter. And
yet give me leave to say, that ingenuity and good nature may easily and very
naturally make a candid interpretation of this Paper; wherein what ever Injury
was contained, they are mostly, if not only, guilty, who since the seizing Mr.
S's Writings, have sent Copies of it to all the Coffe-houses of London.

But to give you the Story from the beginning, you are to understand, that the
first week the Parliament met, Mr. S. was told by a Person of Honor, that he
was designed to be brought into Trouble: This was overheard from several, among
whom were some Members then looking on at Mrs. C. standing in the Pillory,
whereupon he was advised to withdraw: Receiving the same account from many
others, and yet confident in his Innocence, he resolved not to stir. Every day
he was alarmed afresh, and told of great enquiries made after his Actions, and
himself censured for a Papist, a Coleman, and a Jesuit. At length one Peter
Norris makes complaint of his being Imprisoned at Daver by Mr. Secretary
Jenkin's order. Mr. Secretary said, as I am informed, what he did was not
unknown to the King and Council. Upon this occasion Mr. S. was named and a
Committee appointed to examine the matter. Mr. S. appears, and acknowledges, he
had given a description of Peter Norris to Mr. Secretary about the latter end
of May last, and acquainted him that he was told, this Man knew as much of the
bottom of the Plot, as any in England, and was gone into France to fetch over a
Priest supposed equally knowing.

It Is not necessary to entertain you withal the questions, very foreign to
this matter, by some of the Committee put to Mr. S. it is enough to tell you
that he truly, though perhaps not satisfactorily, answered all, attended their
pleasures a whole week, was thrice before them, once with Dr. D. from whom as
News he publicly had the story, and after, the Description, as the Dr. himself
openly confessed. I know not whether it be necessary to acquaint you, that
whatever account the Dr. had, Mr. S's was not exact as to Norris's bringing the
Priest into England; for it appeared at the Committee by Papers taken with
Norris at landing, that he was to Conduct him to Amsterdam, to Sr. W. W. then
there, and that he had pretended to be sent by Dr. T. in conjunction with the
E. of Sh. and another Noble Peer, that the Priest had been dead above 8 Months,
before he began his Journey; a Journey undertaken upon as good an account and
sure information, as that of a Justice of Peace of Westminsler, who rid Post
100 Miles to bring alive from the Country Beddingfield the Jesuit, Buried 12
Months before out of the Gate House. It happened the evening of that Day Mr. S.
was Commanded to attend the Committee, I was in Company with several Persons,
of Quality, when news was sent that the E. of P. was carried to the Tower, and
Mr. S. to the Gate House, who in half an hour after came in himself, and
guessed the Person, and concluded what the other could not deny, that the story
was from one that wished it had been true, not out of Malice to Mr. S. beyond
his name a Stranger, but to a very great Person. After Mr. S's first
Examination, he received by the Penny-post two Letters in unknown hands,
without any name, the one directed to his Lodging, the other to the Royal
Coffee-house; the one in Friendship to three Persons of Honor, his
acquaintance, named in the Letter, advising him to fly, if he did not resolve
to discover, as to him at least impossibilities against the D. the other was
more Terrible, though both mixed with threats and promimises, and in this place
for receiving his answer, and after for meeting appointed. But these he looked
upon as bugbears, fit only to work upon Children and Cowards.

Having produced the Dr. who was his Author, he looked upon himself acquitted
from any further trouble, yet some angry Persons, displeased a hole was not
found in his Coat, offered wagers he would be laid by the Heels in ten days,
of which, by two very great Persons, notice was given him, with advice to
retire, at the Tria! of my Lord Stafford; but resolved to encounter the worst
could happen, he utterly rejected the Motion.

On Thursday, December 9. He sound it was no longer a jest, for it was then
ordered that Mr. S.'s and D. D's Papers should be seized, and themselves
brought in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms to the Bar of the house. In
pursuance of this, some Members were sent to their Lodgings between 12 and 1,
who coming to Mr. S. 's were told he was abroad; they meeting one of his
Servants, sent for him, who finding his Master at the Coffee-house, acquainted
him that Four of the House of Commons whom he knew not, stayed for him; he goes
to 'um immediately. They after a diligent search for his Papers, spoke of his
being sent for by a Messenger. He answered, that was unnecessary to one that
was ready to wait on them to their house, whither as he was going, they met
their Officer, and took him into the Coach. Mr. S. not long after being called
to the Bar; was asked wheter a Paper then showed him was his Writing: He
answered it was not, then two lines at the bottom of Norris's description were
shown, which he acknowledged. After some other questions he was Commanded to
withdraw, and a Committee ordered to see the Sergeant search his pockets. But
to prevent that trouble, Mr. S. had delivered them all his Papers, so that
nothing could be found save a purse of Gold, out of which in order to be
searched for Papers, more Guinnies were said to be tumbled, than it could
possibly contain. But excepting your Friends fortune, every Molehill relating
to him was reputed a Mountain, and no doubt many were big with expectations
what he should bring forth, who was said to have several Colemans in his belly;
and therefore perhaps it was, that the Sergeant sent him to Lodge at a
Mid-wifes, where being laid, in spite of all art and labor, the long hoped
for conceived great issue, upon delivery, was found dwindl'd to a Mouse.
Parturiunt montes -- He was 4 or 5 times at the Bar that day, and as often the
next; his story being matter of fact, was found to agree exactly with the
Doctor's, who was not seldomer examined, and tho no crime was objected, nor any
information made, yet was he confined a close Prisoner, and the Messenger told,
if he suffered his escape, his own Life would be in danger: an opinion, that
cannot be sufficiently admired by those who consider, that, had he any
apprehension of guilt, he might with ease have avoided that days fury.

The worthy Coll. M. whom you knew in Ireland by the Title of Capt. came in to
accuse Mr. S. but of a Circumstance, that if true, could not amount to a Crime.
Yet this seemed so great, that the Gent. could hardly bring it out in Mr. S.'s.
presence, whatever he had done before, uttering then his words so like a Mouse
in a Cheese, that the Speaker was forced twice to command the raising his Voice.

After Mr. S. was committed, great and narrow Enquiries and Endeavors were
made to find or make him more obnoxious; but in vain: His Innocence was his
security from peril, though not from charge and trouble. Among others, Doctor
Tongue's Son in Newgate was examined, whom Mr. S. never saw, having
industriously avoided all that were or stood related to the Kings Evidence. The
Servant-maid of his Lodgging was sent for, not only to the Bar, but to
Coffee-houses and Taverns, promised and encouraged, threatened and advised; but
alas, she could not answer expectations. Even a little young Girl of about
Eleven years old, not above Ten days his Acquaintance, was very strictly
Catechized, concerning his Discourse and Conversation about the Parliament.
Sure, these persons believed him Master of none, or of much less understanding,
than they have since reported him.

But on Saturday following Dr. D. who confessed himself a R. C. was without
Fees (though he was sore'd to pay them) or Petition, discharged. Mr. S. hearing
of this, writes a long Letter to an honorable Member of the Committee, praying
his Lordship to represent to the House what he thought most material. On Monday
his Lordship by an Order of the House was allowed to see Mr. S. and bring him a
Letter opened by the Speaker, relating to a particular concern of another, from
whence mighty Discoveries were expected, but they came to nothing. By this
Member he prayed to have liberty to speak for himself the next day, but hearing
nothing from him, he wrote to the Speaker on Tuesday, entreating he might
appear before them, and not suffer under Arbitrary power so much dreaded from
others. Hereupon Mr. Speaker was pleased on Wednesday the 15th, to have him
sent for; being called in, he was told, if he had any Discovery to make, the
House was ready to receive it. To this he replied, That as to the Plot, he
could have none, but he had another relating to himself; viz. To know what was
his Crime, and who his Accusers, and that he might according to the Laws of the
Land, answer for himself. To this was said, They knew his Parts were not much
short of the Person's he succeeded, and that he must not think to impose upon
so great and wise an Assembly, by studi'd Words and Speeches. Mr. S. replied,
If he could, he would not endeavor by any Rhetorical flourishes to deceive
them with Falsehoods; That he designed nothing but Truth very plainly worded;
That he hoped their Justice would give him leave to vindicate himself, and show
the unreasonableness of running down a Man upon general Sarmises and malicious
Reports, or of concluding him guilty, before he was Heard or Convicted.
Hereupon he was ordered to withdraw, and after some short Debate called in, and
allowed the Favor he desired; but with Caution, not to be tedious. Being thus
permitted, he began the following Speech, out of which he omitted very little,
and is the same in Substance with what he writ in several Letters to Members of
the Committee appointed for his Examination; viz. The Lord Aunesley, Sir R.
Clayton, and Sir Rovel. Gwin.

The Speech of Mr. Tho. Sheridan, after his Examination before the late House
of Commons, On Wednesday the 15th. of December, 1680.
It Is, I confess Sir, a great Misfortune to fall under the Displeasure of the
Honorable House of Commons, it is a Burden, no Man, though never so great, is
able to bear; It cannot then be a wonder, if so inconsiderable a Person, and of
so little strength as I, should stoop under the weight; Not that I fear any
Danger to my Person, but grieve for the wounds it gives my Reputation, which I
have always valued above my life, and that it might be preserved spotless, I
have ever made it my study to keep a good Conscience, void of Offense, toward
God, and toward Man; And Therefore I little expected to be brought as a
Criminal to This Bar, or any Tribunal.

But I am convinced, Innocence is no security against the Darts of Envy or
Malice, and that he who will hazard his Body or his Soul, may take away the
Life and Fame of any one at pleasure; it is to men of such principles I owe my
present Trouble: I do not say this to reflect upon any Member of this Great and
Honorable Assembly. My Evil is from without Doors, and I know the Authors, and
the Contrivance, so well, that, if it were convenient, I could name them, and
trace the whole Chain, Link by Link, to the first, hammered by Prejudice, and
particular Interest.

I do not wonder that, in the present Circumstances, you should have one Ear
open to all reports that any way relate to the public, this is due to your
Station, and to your Prudence; And because Justice and your Honor require it,
I as little doubt your reserving the other Ear for the Pleas and Defense, of
the Accused, or that you will Condemn any Man unheard. Upon this assurance it
is, that I am bold to beg, with all due respect and reverence, that I may have
liberty to speak for my self without interruption. If you are pleased to grant
me this favor, I will use it as fully and briefly as I can, for your
satisfaction and my own vindication.

I have been represented (I hope without offense I may say, traduced, for so I
can make it appear) for a person of no Fortune, a Papist, a second Coleman, and
what is more rediculous, though not more false, a Jesuit and the Duke's Confessor.

In clearing my self from these Aspersions, I must be sorc'd, to say something,
which nothing but necessity, that either has none, or breaks all Laws, can
excuse from vanity. As that I was born a Gentleman, of one of the Antientest
Families, and related to many Considerable, in Ireland; in one County there is
a Castle, and a large Demean, and in another a greater tract of Land for
several Miles together, yet known by our Name. I need not say who was the head
or chief, it is too much that my Grandfather was the last that enjoyed the
Estate, and that my Father, left an Orphan in the beginning of King James'
Reign, soon found himself dispossessed, and exposed to the World, that whole
County, with five others in Vlster, being entirely escheated to the Crown. My
Parents Protestants, my Mother a Gentlewoman of England of good Fortune, a
Foster, who for my Fathers sake, quitted her Country and her Relations, both
famed for honesty, for their Loyalty and Sufferings in the late Rebellion, when
my Father escaped twice narrowly with his Life, and at last was forced to fly,
for relieving and protecting both the Fortunes and Persons of very many English.

To my Birth I had a suitable Education; I have some slender pretense to
Letters, am not altogether a Stranger to the Civil-law, nor the Laws of
England, the means intended for my Livelihood.

But, without my seeking or knowledge, some Friends procured for me the
Collectorship of the Customs of Cork, and the management of most of the Inland
Revenue of that County: This Employment, and the Accidents attending it,
together with that of the East India Prizes, and others in the last War with
Holland, put into Kinsale, enabled me to bring for my own proportion of
Advance-money, for the present Revenue-Farm of Ireland, 9532 l. as appears upon
Record in the Chancery of England; and being by a Brother of mine, then here,
without my privity or desire, engaged in this undertaking, and a stranger to
all the Partnership, excepting one, June last was three years I sold my
Interest for 4000 l. profit This Money I employed in Corporation and
Church-Leases, in Mortgages, and other Securities, at 10 l. per cent. the
Interest of that Kingdom. And after this account, if I have no visible real
Estate, I hope no man can doubt but that I may live independently, though
besides, I happen to be a younger Brother, so far from being ^ prejudice, that
it is possible to prove my advantage, being designed the Heir of two elder
Brothers, who neither have, nor are like to have any Children. The Bills of
Exchange, drawn, and remitted to and from Ireland, by Sir John Frederick and
Company, Mr. D. Arthur, and other known Merchants, will show my proper Fond,
and no Man's Bounty, supported my Expenses; and therefore, because I can with
great Truth, I do the more freely declare, That I neither have, nor ever had
any Relation to the Duke or Duchess of York, as a Servant or Dependant, a
Sallary-man or Pensioner, and was so far from succeeding Mr. Coleman, that his
Employment never entered into my Thoughts, taken up with Affairs of a far
different nature. My Journey to Flanders was no way criminal, and in a great
measure the effect of curiosity, having before seen very little of that
Country, Holland, or Germany; and as I went not with the Duke, so my return in
his Train was purely accident.

For my Religion, as I was born of Protestant Parents, so I was all along bred
a Member of the Church of England, and (by the Grace of God) will live and die
in this Profession; for it is not so much owing to the chance of Education, as
to my choice, being satisfied by Reason, by Scripture, and the Laws of my
Country, no inconsiderable Argument, that of all, it is the most purely
Christian.

Since I was seventeen years of Age I have gone duly to Church, and several
times in every Year received the Sacrament; I did so twice while in Fianders,
as Dr. Lake and Dr. Doughty (the Duke's Chaplains) and others can witness; and
I have done so six times since my return thence; there are in this Honorable
House that can testify some part of this Truth. I have taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy eleven times, am ready to submit to all further
injunctions of Law in matters of Religion, have in Disputes encountered, tho
unwillingly, with many of the several Orders abroad, remained unshaken in my
Principles; This at Ghent, putting a Jesuit (more zealous than the rest) into
great Passion, made him pronounce me obstinate, and declare, He could sooner
bring over ten of the most rigid Phanaticks of England, than hope to make me a
Proselyte. Now if all this be not sufficient to wipe off the imputation of
Popery, I consess I am to seek for a clefence.

Among other it is objected, That by my Interest in his R. H. I got my Brother
made a Bishop, in opposition to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and contrary to
Merit. To this I answer, That my Brother has been as much, and as injuriously,
though not so publicly, defamed as I; that he came off with Honor; that a
peek between two great Lords of that Kingdom, and one of the greatest of this,
did not only prevent his being sooner promoted, but was the occasion of his
being bespattered with many falsehoods and calumnies; that few in Ireland
deserve it better; that what he enjoys, he obtained not in opposition to,
though without the recommendation of, the chief Governor, nor by the mediation
of the Duke, but of a great Minister, in the presence of my Lord Bishop of
London, from the King's immediate Grace openly shown in Council, and with a
particular mark of His Royal Favor.

I hope it is no Crime to honor and revere the Duke as he is a Prince, or if a
private Man to love and value his innate Worth and Qualities; or to have said,
as it is reported, (I wish nothing else had been with less Truth) That I would
hazard my Life and Fortune to do him any lawful and just Service: If it be a
Crime, as I can no ways apprehend of the Brother of my King, while publicly
prayed for in all the Churches of the three Kingdoms, I confess my self guilty;
But I am not so wedded to his Interests, as to espouse or pursue them, if he
can have any such, contrary to the Duty I owe, and ever will pay, my Sovereign,
my Country, my Religion, and my God.

And I do here most solemnly protest, as I hope for Heaven, if I knew him in
any instance a Conspirator or a Traitor, I would not only detest, but endeavor
to bring him to public Justice; and if ever he can be proved a Criminal of
this nature, I will have no more respect nor regard, but less, for him, than I
would for any common Offender. And therefore, without the hopes of Reward, or
the fears of Punishment, I cleclare in the presence of the Almighty, if I knew
any part of the Papish-Plot, or the Persons concerned in it, I would long since
have revealed the whole Contrivance: But none in their senses can believe, that
a known Protestant could be made privy to such a Conspiracy; to which, if
necessary, might be added, that I was in a Country remote from that, where the
Design is said to be hatched.

I own my self of so extensive a Charity, as to love the persons of all honest
Men, notwithstanding their differing from me in opinion, about the Modes and
Circumstances of Religion, and to be for Liberty of Conscience, when consistent
with the safety of the state, to all quiet and peaceable Dissenters; But when
it is urged and made use of to other ends, or as a Cloak for Rebellion or
Treachery, I abominate all such Indulgence.

But I will no longer dwell on this Subject, than to mind you of Colonel
Mansel's mistake or forgetfulness, when he informs this Honorable House, That
in or about July 1678. I dined at his Treat for a German Lord, in or der to a
Design of his upon a Foreign Command, and that 2 or 3 days after, Ishou'd
advise him against it, telling him the Duke would very soon have occasion for
such Officers. First, I do say, to have said so was no Crime; But I easily see
through this Artifice, it is to serve as an argument, that I understood somewhat
of the Plot, of which I am as ignorant as any man living, beyond what I have
since learnt from the Prints and public Fame. In the next place, I do utterly
deny I ever said the words, because I do not know the Duke had any such Design,
and am certain I connot invent. Besides, by many circumstances, needless here
to mention, that Dinner was after the Courts return from Windsor, and
consequently after the breaking forth of the Plot. I desire the Gentleman would
recollect himself; at that time he was very great and intimate with a Roman
Catholic, H. N. from whom if he heard not the words, as I am not apt to
imagine, I am confident he dreamed them. He cannot be ignorant that I knew why
he was disbanded in Ireland, etc. and that I always declined, not only as
having no Interest, but as unwilling for other reasons, to introduce him to the
Duke, as he often pressed; and therefore he made his application to others, but
with as ill success.

And now give me leave, I beseech you, Mr. Speaker, to answer an Objection,
that I should have prescribed a way how the King should live without
Parliaments: I am so far from entertaining such a thought, that I ever esteemed
the Constitutions of England by King, Lords and Commons, the happiest kind of
Government in the world; and if the discourse called, The Rise and Tower of
Parliaments, etc. be mine, of which many will have me the Author, the reading
it, would be of this a sufficient Confutation: In that, Parliaments are
magnified, their power rather enlarged than lessened, and their frequent
meetings recommended as most convenient.

In a word, whatever Character my Adversaries have given of me, I am not a
Protestant in Masquerade, I can neither Lie nor Dissemble, I am really what I
profess, and as the word is commonly taken, no lover of Arbitrary Government,
in any single or complicated Body.

As to the Letter subscribed by Fitz James, I do sincerely protest I have no
Acquaintance with any of the Name, nor ever saw the Hand before, nor the
intended Messenger C. who not finding me, left it with the Maidservant: But in
this there is nothing Criminal,

As to the Computations, they are a Transcript from a Paper of Sir Peter Petts,
containing the number of Conformists, Non-conformists, and Papists, throughout
England, taken by the Bishops order, in or about the time of the General
Indalgence, and by him produced presently after the Plot, upon the talk that
there were fifty thousand Papists, able to bear Arms, within Temple Bar and
about Westminster; a number near double to what, at the taking this survey,
they were found, Men, Women and Children, in the whole Kingdom.

For the Copy of my Cousin Wilsons writing, I confess it the only thing I
endeavored to evade, having ingenuously, and without reserve answered all
other questions. That individual Paper I never saw before the preceding night,
when meeting it in the Drawer of my Bedchamber, (always open, whether I am at
home or abroad) I laid it uppermost with purpose of inquiring how he came by
it, and whether he knew the Author; but not seeing him till next day in
presence of the Members sent to search my Lodgings, I could not ask him, and
was surpised to have so Indiscreet and Reflective a Paper found in his hand,
and among mine. It Is true, that about three weeks before, I found another of
the same Contents, in an old crabbed hand, to me unknown; which after I had
read, and concluded it might possibly be left by some of my Acquaintance in
their Visits, and being unable to guess at the person, not knowing how long it
had layn there, being dated above a Month before, I immediately threw it into
the Fire. Yet in this Paper, which has made so great a noise, there is neither
Felony nor Treason; and being the Act of another, and never by me published,
having neither Sub, nor Super, Scription, nor Writ to, nor from me, nor Copied
by my order, cannot, I presume, be a Libel, nor I hope imputed to me, to whom
it came perfectly by Accident: If it were lawful to speak ones guesses from
the Contents, it should seem to have come from a Learned Gentleman, one of your
own Members, then in the Country, skilled in the Spanish Tongue, to which both
my Cousin and I are perfect strangers; nor was either of us out of London then,
or for some time before. If I could as well hit upon the Person, as his
Quality, I would give a more satisfactory account of this matter; and I hope
this Honorable Assembly will the sooner credit me, when they reflect, that
upon seeing another Paper of my Kinsmans writing, I would not by a Lie deny
this to be his hand.

As for my writing to Mr. Gadbury, I refer my self to the Letter in Sir William
Waller's hands: I have told you the accidental occasion; I desired from him,
(whose Acquaintance I knew large, even among the Members of that Parliament)
the most material of public News; I neither asked for Schemes or Figures, I
have ever laughed at the idle and ridiculous Art of Judicial Astrology,
invented, at least practiced, to impose upon, and pick the Pockets of the
Ignorant and the Credulous.

And now as to the Cause of my Commitment: The story Dr. D. told me as News, of
Peter Norris his knowing as much of the Plot as any man in England, his going,
or being gone into France to fetch a Priest to be a Witness, I can only say, as
near as I remember, I gave the same account to Mr. Secretary; not as an
Informer, but as News; for not being looked upon as such, I was not desired to
Swear, nor could I to a hearsay. In this I call Heaven to witness I had no
Sinister design, but an Honest intention of having the full Truth brought to
Light: Nor do I know, nor have I any reason to believe, that Mr. Secretary's
after proceedings were from any other principle. Upon my telling him the Name
of Norris, and his saying he had never before heard it, and commanding me to
send the Doctor to him, or the others Description; As soon as I met with the
Doctor, which was several days after this Discourse; and he as not knowing Mr.
Secretary, resusing to go, I desired from him the Description, which sometime
after he brought me, I gave or sent to Mr. Secretary, for I cannot tell
whether. But of this I am certain, that all I knew of the Affair, was from the
Doctor only; and that I never communicated it to any, but Mr. Secretary, and
that by what I writ under the Description, appears to be near a Month after
Norris his departure, and consequently could not be designed to stop his
Journey, or prevent the Priests coming over, or obstruct the fuller discovery
of the Plot, which no man living desires more than my self, believing it the
Interest of every honest Subject and Protestant, (out of which number I cannot
be excluded) to have all in it, from the highest to the lowest punished
according to merit; and that tranquillity it has so long disturbed, re-settl'd
in the Kingdom: And now I hope none of the Members of this Honorable House can
imagine I could be guilty of so Horrid a Crime, as having any knowledge of the
Priests being poisoned, as is suspected, or given out he might be. I am so
ignorant of this, or any part of the Conspiracy, that I do not so much despise,
as decline, because not needing it, the generous offer of Mr. Speaker, or other
Members Intercession for my Pardon: Lacknowledge, as I ought the Favor with
all fitting respect; but I thank God, I am so Innocent, that I dare, as now I
do, challenge the whole World, to make out one partisular, where in Word or
Action, in the whole course of my life, I have done or spoken falsely, or
unjustly; and yet no man ever suffered more Calumnies without any cause, or the
least shadow of Truth, beyond the witty malice of those, whose Eyes are
blinded, and Consciences seared by Envy and Intetest, who from pretended
Friends are become my real Adversaries, contrary to Reason and Justice. But
surther, none can believe I could keep any dangerous Correspondence, when its
well known that for these three years and a half all my Letters were no
otherwise Directed, than for me at the Reyal Coffeehouse.

Besides it appeared at the Committee by Norris his own Papers, that this
Priest Dowdall, (whose Name I never heard before,) died september laft was
twelve month, eight months before I heard there was such a man in the World as
Norris, and at a time when I was in another Country. And since you have thought
fit to acquit Dr. D. who was my Author and Principal, and who owned himself a
Roman Catholic, I hope you will not think it equal, that I a known sincere
Protestant, and but an Accessory, should stand Committed, and Committed after
such a manner, as neither Felon nor Traitor, not only Accused, but Convicted,
could suffer a closer Confinement.

And here, Mr. Speaker, I entreat your leave to ask Pardon, if at the Committee
my Behavior has offended any of the Members of this Honorable House, and to
say, whatever heat I expressed, was the effect of Passion, to which I was
moved, by hearing several of them in public, as at Locketts, and other Eating
and Coffe-Houses, had called me Papist, and a second Coleman, with other
Aspersions I could not bear without Resentment: To this was added my being
commanded a Messenger for Dr. D. (an Office beneath me,) and wherein I could
not expect to be sucoesful, not knowing whether he would appear without
Compulsion. I hope it will not be accounted an unexpiable Crime for a Gentleman
of more Years and Discretion, than I can pretend to, to show himself disturbed
at a conceived Indignity or Affront; and in hopes it may not be accounted so
heinous, I do once more with all due Submission beg Pardon. There is one thing
more I cannot without trouble touch upon, the Reflections the Written Votes,
very different from the Printed, bring upon my Reputation. In those it is said,
it appears that I have succeeded Mr. Coleman, than which there never was a more
groundless, false, or malicious invention: And also that I questioned your
Authority, and said your Proceedings looked like the late Rebellion. However
Sir William Roberts came to make the Report, my words were to Sir John Morton
in another Room, and to him I appeal, whether they were not thus. Upon his
advising that I should fare the better, if I freely showed my Papers, I told
him I would not hide one, nor dispute their Power, though I had heard others
did; and that the Seizing Closets and Writings, was not only Illegal, but
looked upon as one of the Causes of the last Rebellion; thereupon he wished I
had not said the Words: I replied, I meant no harm by those Objections, and
notwithstanding my mentioning them, they should find in me a readiness to obey,
and an entire submission; and added, if they were offensive, I unsaid them, and
asked his Pardon, as I now humbly do from the whole House, if I am thought
herein to have offended: And to do Sir John Justice, he was pleased to promise
he would take no notice of the Discourse, unless commanded; to whom with the
rest of the Committee I refer myself, whether of my own accord I was not going
along with them, when I met your Messenger.

If I had been guilty of any Crime, I had not only Warning, but Threats and
Advices to fly many days, some Weeks before, when I was told by Letters from
unknown hands, and by several persons of Honor and Quality, that I was
designed to be brought into trouble; I need not in this place say, for what
reason. And here I cannot by the way but take notice of a Report made by
Justice Warc^p at this Bar, and spread at Coffe-Houses; that he should have
Searched Mr. Sheridans Lodgings, and there found only a parcel of Popish Books,
whereas he never was in mine, but at Mr. Brunetly's House, an Italian Merchant,
whose Books chose must have been; and therefore I hope this was some Clarks,
rather than his mistake.

And now Once no Man can be placed beyond the reach of Malice, and the Devices
of the Wicked, and that I happen to be brought hither as a supposed Criminal, I
am extremely pleased I have the good fortune to meet with so wise and equil
Judges, as compose this August and Honorable Assembly; where I am so far from
sears, that I do not doubt, but upon an exact Scrutiny, and an Impartial
Examination, my having been so infinitely, and so wrongfully exposed to the
public, will be so far from gratifying my Adversaries unjust defires, that
they will not only be deseated, but my self greatly advantaged; and therefore I
leave my Cause at the Footstool of your Justice, and willingly submit to your
Pleasure and Determinations, praying no other favor, than what I am sure you
would grant without asking; your full Consideration of the whole Matter, your
speedy Condemnation or Acquittal, as I shall be found Guilty or Innocent.

The next Day after his Speech, Mr. Sheridan was freed from his Close
Restraint, and his Confinement made more Tolerable, by the Liberty of
Conversing with whom he pleased: A Committee was appointed to examine, whether
the Paper found loose in his Chamber, were of his Own, or Nephew's Writing;
though sor it, as a Breach of Privilege, the L^st had been Committed Five Days
before. Where, by the way, it may seem odd, That Copying a Letter without
Divulging it, because therein a Member of the House was reflected on, should be
a Crime deserving so severe a Treatment, as the Commitment of a Young Gentleman
of the Temple; who, Though he owned it his Hand, and declared he Transcribed it
for his own Use, as a thing Pleasing and Witty in the Style and Composition,
was yet notwithstanding, commanded (in their Presence) to Write Three or Four
Lines; which he did with that Speed, that they could not but be satisfied he
did not Counterfeit. Some Malicious Persons will have it, that his Crime was,
his Relation to Mr. Sheridan.

At this Committee, both the Uncle, and the Nephew were treated, first Civilly,
and after Roughly enough; the One threatened with the Pillory etc. the Other
with an intended Report to the House, of his being a very dangerous Person. To
which he replied, That he was sorry such an Opinion was taken up, without any
Ground; that he could not prevent their Pleasure; only desired, They would do.
as they would be done unto; and consider, that he was as true a Protestant, as
any in the Church of England; and as Honest a Man, as any in the Kingdom; that
he Defied the disproving of either of those Two Truths; and if such Men were
Dangerous, none were otherwise, but Fools and Knaves. But whatever was the
Cause, it is observable, that this Report was never made, though the Committee
Sat Thursday the Sixteenth of December.

After this, he was often told by several Persons, That they heard, his Name
would be inserted amongst the Papists, in the designed Bill of Banishment: An
Artifice too weak to srighten one of less Courage, who could not but be
assured, so unreasonable a Clause was unlikely to pass the whole House of
Commons; or, if it should, it would not the King and Lords; the Great
Conservers of Justice, and the Supreme Tribunal of England.

Having stood Committed Eifteen Days, at great and excessive Charges, and
after all Inquiries and Searches, nothing Criminal being found against him; he
was by some Friends, as well Members as others, together with his Cousin, that
they might not seem Stubborn, prevailed upon to Petition for their Releasement;
but to no purpose, some angry Members opposing the Reading of their Petitions.
I am consident, this could not be the Sense, because not agreeable to the
Justice, though perhaps to the Orders and Rules, of the whole House; yet
thereupon they were laid aside.

Mr. Sheridan, having now too much Cause to conclude, he was not like to be
Released during that Session, since it was not in his Power to answer the
Expectations or Desires of some Persons, resolved to seek his Remedy by a
Habeas Corpus, upon a Statute lately made, to prevent Illegal and Arbitrary
Imprisonments; from which, if he could not be freed, he hoped from the Twelve
Judges, and the Chancellor, if refused, to recover Six Thousand Five Hundred
Pounds Penalty, to Support and Ease his Expense. But the Dread of the House of
Commons would not suffer any of the many Counselors or Sollicitors he
consulted, to intermeddle in the Matter. Nevertheless, he was not discouraged,
but of himself pursued it, though without Precedent, and contrary to the Advice
of most of his Friends. I am loath to tell you, how very Nicely, some say
Fearfully; the Judges proceeded in this Affair; most desiring further time, and
after avoiding being spoken with, unwilling to Deny, and not daring to Grant.
But I were Unjust, if I did not let you know, that some wanted not courage; as
my Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Jones, Sir Job Charleton; and Sir Richard
Weston, who as obliged by Law and Conscience, his Oath, and a late Statute, to
his immortal Honor, at the first word granting the Writ, made further
Application to the others, unnecessary. Sir William Dolben, and Baron Gregory,
were out of Town, or unconsulted. Of the rest I will say no more at present;
only tell you, Mr. Sheridan is advised to bring his Action against several,
particularly against Sir Francis North, and Judge Raymond: The last of these
two thinking fit to ask the Commons advice, in this particular instance of
doing that justice to a Subject, which all Judges are sworn neither to Deny nor
Delay. An Act of an extraordinary Nature, and without Precedent, for a Judge to
expect Directions in the Execution of his Trust, from the House of Commons, who
are no Court of Judicature; and who, if the Case had been dubious, as here
himself confessed it was not, ought rather to apply himself to the rest of the
Judges, to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, or to the House of
Lords; the last Resort of Appeals in the Kingdom.

I will pass by this Judge's Servants denying his being within, and sending (as
I am informed) for Sir Thomas Stringar, a Justice of the Peace, to examine the
Gentleman that Solicited Mr. Sheridan's Business, and the Witnesses, whether
they were Protestants, and would take the Oaths of Allegiance, etc. which they,
being Members of the Church of England, offered to do, to his great
disappointment.

At length, after Twelve Days struggling with Difficulties, not only with the
Judges, but with inferior Officers; the Sergeant at Arms was served with the
Habeas Corpus, who therewith acquaints the House: They, after three days
Debate, and thrice reading over the Statute, finding all so plain, could not
but leave the Sergeant in Obedience to the Writ, to carry his Prisoner before
the Judge; who appearing with Mr. Sheridan, the Baron took the Names of three
substantial Persons, by him produced for Bail; declaring he would send to the
Speaker and Attorney General, and if on Monday following (the utmost time
allowed by the Act) nothing more appeared against the Prisoner, he should then
between three and four a Clock receive the benefit of his Habeas Corpus. But
the Prorogation in the Morning prevented the Execution of the Baron's
intentions, and set Mr. Sheridan and his Kinsman Wilson at liberty, after
almost five Weeks expensive Confinement; who, in all probability, had lain in
Custody during that Session, how long soever, if a Habeas Corpus had not been
then procured: Upon which, after Mr. Sheridan had been discharged, his Kinsman
expected likewise his Releasement; there being no hopes his Petition would be
read since so often opposed by Mr. C. tho Mr. Godolphin, upon whose account he
is said to have been committed sent word he was sorry he should on his score be
so great a Sufferer; and promised, upon any others Motion, to see and that for
his Liberty: Of which, many of that House thought he had done nothing worthy
the Forfeiture.

And because you have heard by the written Votes, that it did not appear to
Baron Weston, that Mr. Sheridan was committed by the House of Commons, when he
granted the Writ, you have here sub-joyn'd a true Copy of his Petition, and
Warrant thereunto annexed, and delivered to the Baron.

To Sir Richard Weston, Knight, One of the Barons of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer.
The Humble Petition or Request of Thomas Sheridan,
Shewrth,
THat Your Petitioner was on the Ninth of December last, Committed by one and
the same Warrant, and upon the same Account, with Dr. D. (who was Released
within Two Days after) into the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, attending the
House of Commons. That Your Petitioner humbly conceives he ought to be Bailed,
neither Felony, nor Treason, nor any other Crime, nor Breach of Privilege,
being laid to his Charge; as by the Copy of the Warrant of his Commitment
here-unto annexed, does appear.

He therefore Humbly prays, to have His Majesty's Writ of Habeas Corpus,
according to the Statute made Tricesfimo Primo of the now KING. And Your
Petitioner shall Pray, etc.

The Copy of the WARRANT.
By Virtue of an Order of the Commons of England, Assembled in Parliament, this
Day made, Thrse are to Will and Require you to keep in safe Custody the Bodies
of Mr. Sheridan, and Mr. D. separately and apart, DURING THE PLEASURE OF THE
HOUSE OF COMMONS. And you are not to suffer or admit any Person to them, other
than such as shall have Occasion to bring them Necessaries: And for your so
doing, this shall be your Warrant. Hereof fail you not, as you will answer the
Contrary at your Peril.

Given under my Hand the Ninth Day of December, 1680. William Williams, Speaker.

To John Topham, Esquire, Sergeant at Arms, etc.
It is very obvious, and natural to observe from recounting to you this Case,
that the Great Charter of England, or Magna Charta, was little thought of, or
that I am much mistaken in its meaning; since nothing is more expressly forbid,
than that any Man should be Imprisoned, or Diss^iz'd of any part of his
Free-held, Goods, or Chattels (among which, are to be reckoned all things a Man
is Law fully possessed of whether Letters, Papers, or other Matters) without due
process of Law. Py 25 Edw. 3. c. 4. it was Enacted, That none shall be taken by
Petition or Suggestion made to the King, or to his The Parliament is ^^ne^ the
King's Great Council.
Council, unless it be by Indictment, or Presentment of good and lawful People
of the same Neighborhood, where such Deeds be done in due manner, or by
Process made by Writ Original at the Common: Law; and that ^^ne be put out of
his Franchise, or Freehold, unless he be duly brought in to answer, and
fore-judged of the same, by the Course of the Law. And 28 Edw. 3. c. 3. it is
Ordained, That no Man, of what Estate, or Condition soever he be, shall be put
out of his Lands and Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor dis-inherited,
without being brought in to Answer by due Process of Law. 42. Edw. 3.6.3. it is
Decreed; That no Man be put to Answer without Presentment before Justices, or
Matter of Record or by due Process, and Writ Original, according to the Old Law
of the Land: And if any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law,
and holden for error. Likewise, in the Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. c. 1. it is
Complained of by the Commons, as a great Grievance of the Subject, That against
the Tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws, and Statutes of this
Realm to that end Provided, diverse of His Majesty's Subjects have been
Imprisoned Without any Cause showed; and when for their Deliverance, they were
brought before Justices, by His Majesty's Which by the by, were not then
Denied, though the Laws were not half so full and express, as the late Statute.
Writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive, as the Court should
Order; and their Keepers Commanded to Certify the Cause of their Detainer; no
Cause was Certified, but that they were Detained by His Majesty's Special
Command. And 37 Edw. 3. c. 18. it is Enacted, That though it be Ordained in the
Great Charter, that no Man ^e Taken, nor Imprisoned, nor put out of his Free
hold, without Process of the Law; nevertheless, diverse People make false
Suggestions to the King himself, as well for Malice, as otherwise, where the
King is often Grieved, and diverse of the Realm put in Damage, against the Term
of the same Charter: Wherefore it is Ordained, That all they who make such
Suggestions, shall be sent with the same Suggestions before the Chancellor,
Treasurer, and his Grand Council; and that they find there Surety, to pursue
their Suggestions, and incur the same Pain, that the others should have had, if
Attainted, in case that his Suggestion be found Evil. Or as it is altered in
the following Parliament, 38 Ed. 3. c. 9. It is Assented, that if he that
makes the Complaint, cannot prove his intent against the Defendant, he shall
be Commanded to Prison, there to abide till he has made gree to the Party of
his Damages, and of the Slander that he has Suffered by such Occasion; and
after shall make Fine, and Ransom to the King. In the Statute 16 Car. 1. c. 10.
it is Declared, That the Reasons for putting down the Star-Chamber-Court, was
not only founded on their Proceeding contrary to former Statutes; but that it
was also an intolerable Burden to the Subject, that the Remedies for all
Causes, might be had in the ordinary Courts of Justice; and that it was the
means for introducing Arbitrary Government.

I say then, if the same things are Exercised, and the Causes remain any where
else, they are equally to be Discountenanced, and Explode'd by King and
Parliament, and all Freeborn Subjects: And if the King's Officers or Ministers,
from the Highest to the Lowest, do any Illegal Act, though by the King's
express Command, they themselves become Criminal: it cannot be supposed, that
any Officer of any Court whatever, or Power inferior to His Majesty's, can have
a greater Latitude; but that whoever Executes any unlawful Command to the
Prejudice of his Fellow Subject, must be Answerable to the Party agriev'd, and
liable to make him Satisfaction; notwithstanding any Illegal Warrant whatsoever.

He that Considers the great Charge of One Pound, Six Shillings, and Eight
Pence per Diem, Fees to the Sergeant, and his Messenger, besides Diet, and
Lodging at Pleasure, will believe no Man ought to Suffer under that Punishment
but upon good Grounds, and in conformity to former Laws, without the Accusers
giving Security for Prosecution and answering Damages, if the Party prove
himself Injured. It Is known Maxim in our Laws, that Carcer it ad custodiendes,
non ad puniendes homines, before Trial or Conviction; which was so far from
being Mr. Sheridan's Case, that he was Committed, During Pleasure to a
Chargeable Confinement, without Cause Alleged, or any Information upon Oath;
which is very Remarkable, if we consider Noris's Case, which was Voted by the
same House, that restrained Mr. Sheridan in this manner, Illegal and Arbitrary,
because there was neither information upon Oath, nor Crime Specified; and sure,
no Man can conclude the Commons may do that against a Subject, which the King
cannot, without some Statute, giving the one that Power, which is Denied by all
to the other. But, as the King can do no Wrong, though his Officers may; so I
am content to admit, if they Challenge the same Privilege, that the House of
Commons may be always in the Right, provided they allow, that in the Execution
of their Injunctions, some of their Members, and Ministers, may ^^t; though the
whole Body may be exempt yet th^se do run the hazard of being called to an
Account.

I am certain, 'twas in order to Vindicate the Right of the Subject, as well as
to retrieve his own Liberty, and free himself from Charge, Mr. Sheridan
attempted the Habeas Corpus; a Motion, that no doubt offended some, though not
the disinteressed part of the Nation, nothing tending more to the advantage of
the People, and the opposition of Arbitrary Power, at least equally to be
contended against in the Commons, as in the King, by every free born Subject;
who if necessity makes him a Slave, and he have the Liberty to choose, ought and
must preser one Master to many. And tho it was three several days debated in
the House, and that some were of opinion, the Act was not designed in favor of
any by them Committed, the contrary was so plain from the Words, that it was
never brought to a Vote. And I am informed that one of the most Eminent and
Deservedly Leading men of the House, a Manager of my Lord Staffords Trial, Mr.
P. advised their proceeding according to Law, in a Case where the Right of the
Subject was so Nicely concerned; and which was indeed, or might be, every
English-man's, in which present and future Ages were equally interessed, and in
which a Vote, not having at all the force of a Law, nor the exposition of a
Statute, might not only Reflect, but make them Odious to all the World: An
advice, which all the People in the Kingdom ought to acknowledge with
Gratitude; nothing being more certainly the true Interest of the Nation than to
keep all things within their proper Bounds and Channels; the King to continue
to Both Houses of Parliament, what the Lords have by Fundamental Constitutions
always enjoyed, and the Commons by their constantly renewed Petitions have
received from the Kings Favor, their accustomed Right, and Privileges; and
neither Lords nor Commons to Entrench upon, or offer violation to any of their
Sovereigns Prerogatives, which (as the great Coke says) are as much the
Peoples Safety as the Kings Honor.

And indeed it were highly preposterous that the King, who is the Fountain,
Spring and Head of Law and Justice, should be concluded by this act, and the
Commons should not, who are the Lowest part in the Legislative Power and who
have no manner of pretense to Judicature, nor (by Original Right) even their
own Members as is consonant to Reason being all equal, and as such, having no
more Power over one another, than Hartford-shire has over Essex, or Oxford over
Cambridge, agreeable to that known Maxim in our own, and the Laws of all
Nations, Paribus in pares non datur potestas. It plainly appears, that the
Punishments of breach of Privilege against any of the Commons, was ordered
upon their applications, by the King or Lords, and never any by themselves
inflicted before the latter end of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, when the case
of Ferrers, because extraordinary, was referred to 'um by the Lords, as you
will see in Crompt^n's Jurisdiction of Courts. And at this day it is certain,
the Commons can force none into the custody of their Sergeant, but in the case
of Refractory Persons are under a necessity of begging the Kings assistance, as
is plain not only from Mr. Stowel's refulal to go along with their Messenger;
but likewise from their printed Votes of the 8th of this instant January,
concerning Sir John Lloyd, etc. However, since concession or continued usage
have given them Power over their own Members, or over others guilty of Breach
of Privilege, let them in Gods name enjoy it still; but let them not Vote any
thing they please a Breach of Privilege, since they are known, and no other
than what they ask at the beginning of every Parliament from the King's Grace,
and are recorded, as first begged in Henry the Eighth's days by Sir Thomus Moor,
then Speaker. To act otherwise, is to set up an Arbitrary Power, never to be
endured by any English Man, unless the most despicable of Cowards and Betrayers
of his Country-Liberties. For, as the Commons are the Representatives of the
Nation, so they are chosen to defend, not invade their own, when out of that
station as well as the Peoples, Privileges.

While this Process was on foot, Mr. Sheridan had many Addresses and Advices to
Petition a second time; which he not only refused before at the Sergeants
instance, but after also at that of others; and that you may be fully satisfied
of this Truth, read the following Letter on this occasion to one of the
Members, Sir R. C.

SIR,
HAving been informed, first by the Sergeant of Your House, and after by my old
Acquaintance Mr. Fermin, of your Favor toward me, I cannot without
Ingratitude but return you my hearty and humble Acknowledgment for so great an
Obligation: But having formerly petitioned with great deference and respect to
the Honorable House of Commons, otherwise against my own judgment and reason;
and that not being read, having no new matter to offer, I will not give you the
trouble of a second. I am apt to think, when any Cause is examined, it will be
found amongst the hardest. Dr. D. a confessed Papist, and Author of the Story,
being discharged without Fees or Petition in two days; and I a known Protestant
kept Prisoner twenty five, tho both committed for one and the same Cause, or
rather no Cause, none being mentioned in the Warrant; and for eight of those
days kept closer than a Felon, or a Traitor. Had my first been disliked for
matter of form, I might have preferred another, which now I think would not be
proper. Besides my own sufferings, my Cosen likewise taken into Custody for
Copying a Paper containing no Criminal, tho Reflective matter, as a Breach of
Privilege, because (...) Member mentioned; and yet four days after, a
Committee appointed to examine, whether or no it was his Writing. I hope Sir,
when these things, and the Reflections unjustly thrown upon me, are fully
considered, I shall have my liberty, for which I will own my self obliged to
you, and on all occasions study to approve any self, what I really am,

SIR, Your most humble, and very much obliged Servant, T. S.

I have industriously avoided in this Narrative, the overtures I have heard
were made Mr. S. because not to be mentioned without Reflection on one side, or
too much Honor on his. It Is enough, that he resisted all manner of Temptations,
that could betray or discover a Propension to dishonesty or cowardice; and that
as he had spoken and given it under his hand, so he would make his Actions
justify his words, that he would by all possible means promote the good and
service of his King and Country, without making Shipwreck of a good Conscience,
and that Reputation, which though clouded for the present, he neither could nor
would forfeit.

I will add no more, than to English what a wise French man, in such an
occasion has Recorded: Si vous jegez surles apparences, vous seriz souvent
trompet: Ce qui paeroist n'est presque jamais la verite. If you wi^ not be
deceived, judge not according to Appearance, but judge Righteous judgment. He
that has lived any time in the World, ought in passing his Censure upon others,
to consider whether he himself has never been traduced or heard groundless
stories, if he have not, he has had extraordinary good fortune; if he have, he
ought to be very slow in giving credit to Reports, which are sometimes raised
upon very little, and ofter without any, grounds.

This has been notoriously Mr. S's. Case; no man was ever more loudly clamoured
against, nor more without cause, as appears, in that after al scrutinies he is
found Innocent; insomuch that one may well say. Here has been not only a Great
Cry, and a Little, but no Wool; abundance o^ Smoke without any Fire. Though his
envious Adversaries will have it that his Cunning only protected him, I do not
doubt but you will believe the contrary knowing from many years intimate
Acquaintance, no man is more free and open has less of craft or sebtilty; and
considering his ten pennone has more cause to study to preserve from danger the
simplicity o^ the Dove by the Wisdom of the Serpent: A Caution, if ever
useful, a^ this time more particulary necessarly.

Through his Sides, it is well known, a very great Person was shot at who
perhaps will be found Invulnerable. Dog* Bark at the Moon in vain Some Spots
there may be in that Great and Glorious Body, but ^o^ such as can render it
useless or in significant to any man of Sense or Reason

Conclude then of all men by your own experience. and not upon the Relation of
either Friends or Enemles; the first are not more Partial. then the last
malicious. I should play the Fool extremely, if I give you Advice, who of all
the World has the least need of any; and therefore not having designed this to
you, without begging your Pardon, I will take the Liberty without further
Apology, abruptly to Subscribe my self what I truly am,

My Lord (...) Your Grace's with all imaginable Respect and Sincerity, L. C.
London, January the 20^^, 1680/1.
FINIS.

