A True and Perfect ACCOUNT OF THE Proceedings at the General Sessions of the
Peace, holden for London and Middlesex, Upon the 15. and 16. of January Instant.

OR THE Trials, Examination and Confession of the Woman that Burned her Child,
and the Bailiff that Killed another of his Fellow Bailiffs at Soehoe.

WITH The Trials of the Merchants Prentice, who Robbed his Master, and his
Masters Brother, of the Value of 3210.

Also a True Account of the Number of Persons that are Condemned to Suffer at
Tyburn, and how many Whipped at the Carts Arse.

LONDON, Printed in the 1674.

A True and Perfect Narrative of the Proceedings at the General Session of the
Peace holden for London and Middlesex, upon the 15th and 16th of January
instant.
IT would be neither easy to the Wrighter, nor very satisfactory to the readers
of these remarques, to have a precise account given of every particular
business at the Sessions, in every of which, are tried so many Petty felonies,
and other common offenses as would be little worth the observation of those
that should read them, the objects of men's curiosityes being things rare and
portentous, and not common and Vulgar; I shall therefore pretermit (in this
narative) those trials that were of less note, and consequence and only give
you an account of those that were most remarkable at this Sessions.

And they were in three notorious mischances, first of a Barbarous Murder
acted by an unnatural Mother upon her own Child. 2. for a Villainous Robery
(...) he was so much a friend to himself as to put himself upon his Trial by
Pleading not Guilty.

Upon his Trial upon this Second Indictment it was proved against him by the
Attestation of Several VVitnesses, that Mr. Rowland Lee the Younger Sojourning
in his Fathers house and heving a Little Room therein for the keeping of his
account, the Prisoner being then Servant to his Father took his opportunity
when the said Mr. Lee was one day out of Town, broke into the said Room, and
thence took a way the aforesaid 20 Pound.

The fact was Clearly proved against, him both by VVitnesses and his own
confession in a letter of his own wrighting, which was read in Court, and
wherein he owned the fact, and said moreover, that he stole the key wherewith
he opened the door out of the said Mr. Lees Pocket; but the witnesses tonement
varyed in their Evidence as to that, whether the said door was broken open or
opened by a key.

There was some dispute in the Court whither the Indictments was well laid for
the burglary, for that the fact although the same yet related to several
persons the house that was broken open being Mr. Rowland Lees the Elder, and
the Money that was taken away was Mr. Rowland Lees the younger, and therefore
it was advised whither another Bill should not be drawn up to indict him
severally of the burglary, but this Court not being agreed upon; the whole
matter was left to the Jury, who brought him in guilty upon the first
Indictment by his own Confessons, and upon the Second they at first brought him
in not guilty, but the Court not being satisfied with that Verdict they went
out again and brought in a Special Verdict, which is to be argued at another
time.

There was a woman at the same time tried for being accessory with the said
Rookewood, And receiving the monyes that he had Stolen; But although it
appeared to the Court that she was a person likely enough to be guilty of such
a crime, yet no direct Evidence coming in against her, she was acquitted.

The next was one Edward Coker who stood indicted for the ravishing of a Child
of 11 years old, the Child was there and gave her Evidence in Court that the
said Cober coming into her Aunts house where she lived, did get her into a Room
and did there force her; The Ant attested that she hearing the Child cry out,
came into the Room where he was in the dark with her, and found by evident
tokens that the Child had bin abused, but although the fact appreared very foul
against him yet the Circumstances thereto not being so direct as to prove a
Rape, according as the law directs on those case, he was brought in not guilty
upon that Indictment, but that he might not go Scot-free the Court directed
another Bill to be drawn up for an Assault upon the said Child, which Bill was
found, and upon his trial thereupon was found guilty, and was fined 25 Marks
by the Court for his offense.

There was also tried the Bailiff that killed his fellow Bailiff at Soehoe, he
was found guilty of Murder.

The Merchants Servant had the Allowance of his clergy and was burned in the
hand, together with 5 other.

There are Seven men are all condemned to Die whereof the aforesaid Bailey was
one.

And 8 to be Whipped at the Carts Tail.

FINIS.

