The True Copy of a PETITION Presented in July 1683. To the Most Christian King
BY DEPUTIES, from those of his SUBJECTS who are of the REFORMED RELIGION, whose
CHURCHES have been Taken from them, and Demolished.
And since That, Have Assembled in the Open Fields, but after PRAYER,
PREACHING, and Receiving of the HOLY SACRAMENT, Returned in all peaceable
manner to their respective Habitations.
Translated from the French Printed Copy by a sure Hand, and Reprinted at
London by G.C. Anno Dom. 1683.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
YOUR most humble Subjects of the Protestant Religion, not having power to
resist the Motions of their Consciences, are constrained to Assemble Together,
to call upon the Holy Name of God, and sing his Praises; and by this Religious
Acting, to expose themselves to all the Violences and Rigor which a too fierce
Zeal can infuse into the Breasts of your Officers. And because God has
established your Majesty for their Monarch, they are obliged to justify their
Proceedings and Behavior before your Majesty, with all the Humility they are
capable of.

These Assemblies, SIR, do no way hurt or wound that Fidelity which your
Petitioners owe your Majesty; They are all accorded to sacrifice their Fortunes
and their Lives for your Service. The very same Religion which constrains them
to Assemble together to celebrate the Glory of God, teaches them that they can
never dispense, under any Pretense whatever, with that Allegiance which is due
to your Majesty. Nor has your Majesty any need to publish your Declarations to
enforce them to embrace a Maxim so certain, and so well grounded upon
Christianity. It remains then, SIR, that your Petitioners insist upon nothing,
but what is only due to God; for as to what concerns your Majesty, their past
Behavior gives testimony of the reality and purity of their Intentions and may
serve as a security to your Majesty for the future; and, in a word, your
Petitioners are all ready with their Blood to sign the Oath of their
Allegiance. As to what concerns their Duty toward God, your Majesty has so
much Piety to take it amiss, that they render to that great God that Worship
and Adoration which they owe him, they also presume to hope, that your Majesty
will have the goodness to reflect upon their Behavior; that you will
compassionate the Desolations to which their Piety exposes them; and that
perhaps you will extend your Indignation against those who have by surprise
obtained so many severe Decrees and Declarations against them, and yet would
further provoke your Wrath against Subjects so faithful, and so innocent.

Your Suppliants, SIR, are persuaded that God has not sent them into this
World, but to glorify him; and they will rather choose to lose their Lives a
thousand times, than fail of their Duty so holy and indispensible.

It is in your Majesty's power to deprive them of all the Advantages of this
World, and also to doom to utter Destruction: They are ready for to sacrifice
all, to suffer all Miseries at your Majesty's Pleasure. But it May be, when
your Majesty shall consider, That your Petitioners do not give way to the Most
faithful of your Subjects [which all the World confesses] in their Duties to
God, your Majesty will not do that Injury to his Glory and to his Goodness, as
to destroy a People, for no other reason meriting your Indignation.

The Miseries of your Petitioners, SIR, only arise from the Reverence they have
for the Divinity, whose Word they look upon as the only Rule of their Religious
Worship.

Were the Dispute alone concerning our opposing Men for the service of your
Majesty, though all the World should rebel against your Majesty's Will, though
all your other Subjects should fail of their Fidelity and Obedience, your
Petitioners would inviolably stand by their August Monarch, and with pleasure
spend the last drop of Blood in his Service.

But their Unhappiness is so great, that the Declarations put forth against
them, to the prejudice of so many Edicts and Decrees made by your Majesty, and
the Kings your Predecessors, appear to them incompatible with the Commands of
the great Creator of Heaven and Earth:

For God has ordained them to instruct their Children and their Families, and
to declare unto them the Word of Life. He also pronounces his dreadful
Anathema's against them who shut the Gates of Heaven against those, to whom he
freely opens them. He commands them to offer to him Hymns and spiritual Songs.
Nevertheless, SIR, those Declarations that have been surreptitiously obtained
against us, forbid us to sing the Psalms of David, which do contain the Praises
of God.

In short, SIR, It is the pleasure of God that we should Assemble together in
his Name, to render him the solemn Adoration and Honor which is due to him.
Nevertheless, SIR, those Declarations which your Petitioners Enemies have
obtained against us by repeated Surprises, forbid them to assemble together, to
render to that great God the service which is due to him.

During this Inability of your Petitioners, to reconcile the Will of God to
what is exacted from them, they find themselves constrained by their
Consciences, to expose themselves to all sorts of Calamities, for the
continuance of giving Glory to the Majesty of God, who will be served according
to his Word.

If the Doctrine of your Petitioners were Abominable, if their Worship were
Scandalous, if they preferred the Creature in place of the Creator, there might
be some Reason to solicit your Majesty to refuse their Protection: But all
their Crime, and all the Difference between theirs, and the Catholic Religion,
consists in this:

That they prefer the Word of God, before the Traditions of Men: And the true
Worship of that great God, [who protests to be jealous of his honor, and that
he will not yield it to any other] before the Religious Worship of the Creature.

All Religion, SIR, to speak properly, consists only in Belief, in Prayers, and
in Works: And your Petitioners believe and hold the Creed of the Holy Apostles,
and the Lords Prayer, to be the Model of those which they present to God, and
the Commandments of that God are the Rule and Guidance of their Conduct and
Conversation. They know, and have no need, according to St. Paul, of knowing
any other but only Jesus Christ, and him crucified. They acknowledge God for
the only true God, and for him who sent Jesus Christ; for on this Belief it is,
that our Lord has founded Life Eternal.

Their Enemies make strange Interpretations of their Opinions, and their
Worship. However, SIR, your Petitioners implore the mercy of God. They trust in
the incomprehensible Charity, and infinite Merits of their adorable Savior,
whom they do embrace with a constant and lively Faith. They have recourse, with
all humility, to the healthful succor and grace of his holy Spirit; and to
this Trinity it is, that they render their Adoration and Homage, invoking it
after the same Form that the Scripture has prescribed in his Word. They
medita^e upon his Wonders. They sing his Praises: And they make it their
continual study to live Holily among themselves, Justly toward their Neighbor,
Obediently toward your Majesty, and Religiously toward God.

They therefore supplicate your Majesty to be the Judge, Whether your
Petitioners are unworthy of your Paternal Goodness, and the Honor of your
Protection. Whether they merit to be thrown into that extremity of Destruction
wherein they are at present overwhelmed, sufficient enough to move the Groans
of the most insensible, And lastly, SIR, Whether it be possible that they
should live without continuing to assemble together, to render to God the
service which they owe him.

After all this, your Petitioners cannot but pray to the great God, who
advances your Throne above all the Thrones of the Earth, to incline your
Majesty's heart toward your Subjects, whose Innocence and Allegiance is
apparent to the eyes of the whole world. And if these your poor People shall
yet not be able to move the Compassion of their August Monarch, for whom they
shall always retain a sincere Love, and aweful Reverence; a singular
Veneration, and inviolable Fidelity. They do protest before the Face of that
great God for whose sake they are exposed to so much Misery, That they will
render him Honor and Glory in the midst of their most terrible Calamities.

But, SIR, your Petitioners hope much better things, from the Natural Equity,
Goodness, and Piety of your Majesty; for which Reason, they prostrate
themselves at your Royal Feet, and most humbly implore your Majesty,

To Recall all the Declarations, Decrees, and other Judgments, which have
reduced them to that Deplorable Condition wherein they are, and deprive them
not of the Liberty of their Consciences, and Exercise of their Religion, by
virtue of so many solemn Edicts, confirmed by so many Declarations granted them
by your Majesty, without which it is impossible for them to live.

[And your Petitioner shall continue to pray for the Preservation of Your
Majesty's Sacred Person, your Royal Family, and the Honor and Prosperity of
your Kingdom.]

LONDON, Printed by George Croom in Thames Street over against Baynards-Castle.
1683.


