A True and Particular RELATION Of the FIRE which happened in the Castle of
DUBLIN in IRELAND.
THere is no place so secure, nor person so careful, that are not subject to
the contingencies that daily attend on humane Affairs, especially such as
happen by Fire, when that powerful Enemy gets the mastery. Troy, that resisted
the warlike Foe for 10 years, could not withstand the Fire so many hours, nor
all its (Titular) Deities defend it from the Flames. We have had many fatal
examples of late years in England, especially in London; nor has the Royal
Palace, nay hardly His Majesty's own Bedchamber, escaped, notwithstanding the
vigilance of the Guards, and the more peculiar hand of Providence over Him. His
Excellency the Earl of Arran, a Gent. of approved Trust and Loyalty, His
Majesty's Deputy in the Kingdom of Ireland, resided in the Castle of Dublin;
where on the 7th. instant there happened such a Fire as almost totally consumed
the Castle, etc. a true Relation whereof take as follows:
Dublin, April the 7 th. 1684. SIR,
THis morning, about half an hour after One of the clock, broke out a most
dreadful Fire in the Castle, which is thought to have begun in the Lord
Deputies Dressing Room, by the Beam of the Room going under the Room; which
taking fire, became immediately so outrageous, that my Lord himself was in
great danger of being destroyed: In fine, (though, God be thanked, not one
person is hurt, yet) it has consumed all the new Brick-buildings, ( viz.) the
Queens Drawing Room, my Lord's own Appartment, and the Ladies Appartments;
wherein my Lady Duchess has received very considerable loss, to the value of
several thousand pounds, in rich Furniture, etc. It has likewise destroyed the
Chapel, the King's Drawing Room, the Presence, and the great Dining Room; so
that that Row is quite burnt, from the great Door and Stairs of the Castle
Eastward, to the very corner of the Wall. As for the other Row, the long
Gallery, my Lords Closet, the Secretaries Office, and all the other Offices
below, with the Lodgings over them, ( viz. where the young Lady lay) are all
blown up. The Conflagration was so fierce and devouring, that there is nothing
of the Castle left (within its walls) but the Hall, Kitchen and Cellar; that is
as to the Palace: the out-Lodgings (such as they are) are still standing, tho'd
defaced.

You may, by this sad Relation, easily imagine the splender of our Court; but
the consternation of the people cannot well be thought; for the Tower of the
Magazine, (which has in it at least 2000 Barrels of Powder) was greatly
endangered, the Fire coming within 20 yards of it; which, as it would have
destroyed half the Town, so questionless many thousands of the Inhabitants must
inevitably have perished.

Amidst the horror and alarm of Drums beating, Trumpet sounding, and People
running about distracted they knew not whither, in the dead of the night, I
(your Friend and Servant) knowing my Service could be but small, and that I
should but add one to the Crowd, with what expedition I could, got me ready,
and away with my Coach to the Strand; where, from half an hour after Two, till
the Fire was quite out, (which was full three hours after) did I tower it all
alone, out of the reach or danger of the Fire.

My Lord Deputy is removed to White-Fryars, where he remains till Chappel-Isard
be in order, where he will then reside, he having sustained no small share in
this loss. All the Papers both of his Closet, and the Secretaries Office under
him, were saved before that Appartment was blown up. I am, SIR,

Yours, etc. B. R.

ANOTHER RELATION Of the aforesaid Dreadful FIRE.
Dublin, Apr. 7. SIR,
A Sad Accident happened here about Two of the clock this morning, by Fire that
took in the Castle, next Chamber to my Lord Deputies. It was first perceived
blazing through the windows by a Soldier, which ran and beat up his
Excellency, who had only time to get out of the Room in his shirt. This
happened in the Earl of Essex's Buildings, which consumed all to the great
Dining Room; the great Magazine of Powder (containing two or three thousand
Barrels) lying in the Tower next the back-gate, to which the Fire was making;
but the diligence of his Excellency gave order to blow up the long Gallery, and
the Buildings belonging to it; for had the Fire got thither, it would
unavoidably have burned the Tower of the Magazine, which ('it is supposed) would
have destroyed most of the City, and could not kill less than thousands of
people: but the blowing up of those Buildings put a stop to all the Fire, though
that Palace now lies in Rubbish and Ashes.

The particular losses cannot yet be known, though (praised be God) we do not yet
hear any one Soul has perished in this dismal Accident. I have seen several
Gentlemen of my acquantance, who (having Lodgings in the Castle,) have lost all
but their Lives. I do assure you this is a true account, and as particular as I
could then attain to: In the interim, I pray take it not amiss from him who his

Your loving Friend, and humble Servant, W. C.

Printed by Nath. Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old-SpringGarden near
Charing Cross, 1684.


