THE TRUE CAUSE Of all our MISERIES, Discovered in their Visible Effects: As I
find it (to my great Satisfaction) most manifest, in The Lay-man's Religion,
lately published. Licensed, October. 1. 1690.
Which vindicates the Doctrine of the Church of England, (above all others,) to
allow Liberty of Conscience, according to the Tenor of the Gospel.

Unveils the Undermining Jesuit, and Designing Sectary: And detects the
grossest Frauds and Cheats, imposed on the Honest, and Well-meaning, under the
most sacred Vizors and Pretenses.

Worthy to be received, and seriously considered of Ministers of State, Lords,
and Commons, as well as all other inferior Subjects, (of every Persuasion,) in
order to our lasting Safety and Settlement.

We find it impossible to prevent the sly and subtle Whispers of Designing
Hypocrites; who in secret do mis-represent the best of Their Majesty's
Subjects, to create a Misunderstanding of them, and their best Actions, only
to gain a good Opinion of themselves, and to carry on their own Designs. But
none (without a Forehead of Brass) dare openly question such experienced
Truths, as have been exemplified in Bloody Tragedies, within the Compass of our
own Memory.

Therefore it must be acknowledged, That

Whoever is the Author of that Book, he deals plainly and impartially with all;
beginning at Home, with censuring the Criminals of his own Party, both Clergy
and Layety; exposing Hypocrisy and Immorality (as the two Extremes) in All.

And therefore I have singled out this Sheet, as the best Service I can do
Their Majesty's, and the Government; heartily wishing it might be distributed
throughout the whole Kingdom, for Instruction to all, in order to secure and
transmit our Civil and Religious Rights to Posterity: Which therein thus
follows, Page 21.

AS God Almighty has various Ways and Methods to reform and discipline his
Children, according to their various Tempers and Dispositions; so the Devil, by
his Janissaries, Designing Hypocrites, and Time-servers, (who can readily take
any Impression in Religion, be of two or three persuasions at once, to promote
their own Interest,) puts himself into various shapes, and baits his Hook with
various Objects, suited to men's different Inclinations, that he may catch both
Pharisee and Publican; as well the spiritually proud, as the Debauchee, that no
Fish may escape his Net, and (if it were possible) the Elect too should be
cheated by him.

Thus he baits the Luxurious with Pleasure, the Avaritious with Riches, and the
Ambitious with Pride, Dominion, and worldly Design.

When he designs to subvert a Kingdom, or overthrow a Government, he does not
appear immediately in Arms and open Hostility; but first under a Disguise of
Zeal for Reformation, which he generally prosecutes, by removing all Foundation
laid in the first Principles of Religion; and then proceeds to create various
Opinions in the Minds of honest and well-meaning Persons, of easy and
credulous Dispositions; continually raising Niceties and Scruples, (before any
Foundation be laid in fundamental Knowledge of the first Principles of our
Religion, contained in the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commands, and the Creed,) and
those Niceties and Scruples are more and more irritated by subtle and designing
Teachers, under a Disguise of Liberty of Conscience.

God forbid Liberty of Conscience (if regulated by the Standard of the
Scriptures,) as it is the Birthright of every Christian, should be denied to
any that in sincerity desire it, to live peaceably under the Government in all
Godliness and Honesty; because many persons of honest and well-meaning
Principles, may, from their Education in Foreign Parts, or in Families of
different Persuasions, either misapprehend, or not rightly understand the Truth
of our Doctrine and Discipline established among us.

And many others, in the simplicity of their Hearts, when they see the vicious
Lives and Actions of some of our Members, or the Scandal of some of our Clergy,
in things that are open and manifest, may be imposed upon by Jesuitical
Whispers, on the one hand, and private insinuating Teachers, on the other hand;
as to imagine that our Religion established, must either countenance or allow
of such Evils in the Professors of it. Which is the Case of the Gospel it self

Now forasmuch as our Government is founded in the Law of God and Nature, and
our Religion established, is settled and framed from no other Model or Original
but God's revealed Will in the Scriptures, and so both may be a just Standard
for all other Governments; It must therefore be a Strain of great Arrogance and
Presumption in any State-Mountebank to propose any Foreign Precedent for
alteration of either.

And to silence all Complaints but theirs, whom nothing less than All will
satisfy, as our Religion and Government so established, do allow a peaceable
and innocent Liberty of Conscience, the Grand Charter of Christianity it self;
(which we have found by experience, no other differing Persuasion but ours
would ever allow any longer than they wanted power to restrain it;) so none can
deny it to be both prudent and just in the Government, (from the Law of
self-preservation,) to take care of, and secure it self against all abuse of so
great a Blessing, by such, who have pure Religion only in their Mouths, but the
rankest Poison of Ambition and Worldly Design in their Hearts making no Scruple
(as Opportunity serves,) to devour Widows Estates, as well as the Houses and
Patrimony of them and all others, to make way for their own Ambitious Designs;
For we find it most certainly true, by woeful experience, that it is impossible
to secure any Government in the World on a lasting Foundation, but by annexing
it to the Religion established, so as to make them inseparable, according to
the Policy of New England; (where Liberty of Conscience first planted their
Lawmakers.) They that do not first approve of, and embrace our Religion
established, ought to have no share in our Government.

But such as would come into the Government on other Terms, have Liberty of
Conscience only in their Mouths, but Ambition and Worldly Design in their
Hearts; which they carry on by multiplying Sects, under several Leaders, (each
ambitious to be Head of his own Party,) who, by their Influence on credulous
and well-meaning Persons, enclose them, as in so many Peculiars, each Pastor to
incline and lead his own Flock; the only Method to divide, and consequently to
weaken both the Government, and Religion established; that whenever their
Interest is in danger, they may easily, (as has been practiced in like Cases,)
by the same Art, dispose all, to unite (for the same End) against the
Government they live under.

And thus one and the same common (though invisible) Enemy of Mankind, putting
himself into various Shapes, and baiting his Hook with proper Objects, suited
to Men's various Inclinations and Dispositions, (which all center in
Self-Love,) can first divide and weaken, and again unite and destroy the best
Religion and Government in the World; though the designing Party are ever
lurch'd in what they aim at, which is Dominion and Rule.

For no sooner is any Party gotten uppermost, but the same Principle of
Ambition and worldly Design animates the rest (that are under) to supplant
that, in order to advance themselves into the Government; so that their whole
Babel of Designing and Contriving, ever ends in Anarchy and Confusion; which
has caused many of their chief Builders (convinced by their own woeful
Experience) at last to acknowledge their Error, and to declare, That to seek a
Kingdom in this World by carnal Means and Weapons is no true Badge of the
blessed Redeemer's Followers.

What clearer Demonstration can we have, that there is always such a designing
Party at the Bottom, under the most specious Vizor of Zeal for Reformation, and
Liberty of Conscience, than to see those who pretend to the greatest Purity and
Sanctity (though of several Persuasions,) all to unite, and diligently to apply
themselves to such Patrons and Leaders, whose Interest and Influence may best
promote their Design, though they all know them to be of no Religion at all;
nay, such as are guilty of the greatest Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta
movebo.
Immoralities; who can thunder out bloody Oaths without Reluctance, and make
use of their Power and Interest to oppress others, and ingross the Widow and
Orphans Estates. Such Men as these are proper Objects of all the Courtship and
Address of those consecrated Politicians; for they well know they are adapted
for their Turn, who readily prostituting their Conscience to their Interest,
can be most serviceable to their ambitious Designs. And as they are Favorites
in the highest station, so they are capable of the greatest Acts of Oppression
and Injustice therein; as they may (by alienating the Hearts of Subjects)
contribute more to dethrone a Monarch, or subvert a Government, than Ten
Thousand armed Men, especially as those designing Hypocrites manage it to their
own Advantage; who, though they always carry the Flattery of a Loyal All hail
in their Mouths; yet, by secret Trumpets in every Corner, they arraign the
Prince himself, as Author of all Acts of Injustice and Oppression, done by such
his Ministers, to render Monarchy uneasy to the People; and at the same time,
with no less Industry, both in public and private, expose the most faithful
and loyal Counselors and Magistrates, who are most true to the Church and
Government, and the very Pillars and Security of the Throne, as Betrayers of
their Country, their Laws, and Liberty; rendering them odious to the Prince and
People, that they may remove them, in order to get Champions and Agents of
their own Faction, into all Places, and Offices of Trust and Power, in the
Government.

This discovers plainly, that the Patrons and Clients are both governed by one
and the same Principle of Self-Love, which ebbs and flows with their own
Interest, the vital part of their Religion; and so disposes them to divide, or
unite, against that which opposes their Designs, and at length to quarrel
among themselves about (what they all aim at) Dominion and Rule.

The Result of all which may be this; To put us upon a Modest Enquiry,
WHat Endeavors have been made by all the separate Congregations in general,
toward an universal Reformation of Manners; and allaying our Heats, to heal
our Divisions, in order to Union among our selves; the only Means under Heaven,
to secure us, in these perilous Times, against our Foreign Enemy.

And wherein Christian Charity, and Purity of Life, (farther than in the cheap
and easy Fruit of the Lips,) has appeared in Dissenters, or those that
separate from our National Communion, and pretend to Extraordinary Call, and
Conversion, so as to distinguish them by any visible Change in their Lives and
Conversation, from those of our Communion, who live according to the Doctrine
and Discipline of our Church, or from what they themselves have ever before
been in their Lifetime.

And also, what visible Effects the late Indulgence, granted to Dissenters,
has wrought for the better, in procuring more meek, humble, and peaceable
Spirits; or abating Pride, Murmuring, or Discontent; railing against, and
censuring of others, (even among their own Party,) in order to heal our
Breaches, and compose our Differences.

It is manifest our Religion and Government is undermining: Therefore, O
England, England! Consider, in this thy Day, the Things of thy Peace, before it
be too late. At last, for shame, lay aside passionate Heat, and furious Zeal
for particular Interests, and (as becomes Christians) calmly consider the
public Weal. Be wary (in Choice of Magistrates) of the two Extremes that
poison all Religion and Morality; the Designing Hypocrite, and the Profane
Atheist. Choose Men fearing God, and hating Covetousness; such as have been
sincere and constant to our Kingly Government, and Religion established: And be
wise as Serpents, to countermine and evade the most glorious and specious
Pretenses of all others.
Nay, We may modestly enquire, whether the Scope and Tendency of all Endeavors
in the Leading Party among them, has not been more after Dominion and Rule
here below, than to advance the Kingdom of Christ in the Hearts of Men? And, in
order to that, Whether they have not, with the greatest Subtilty and
Partiality, improved their Factories and Agency by Humane Policy, to direct,
order, or influence the Choice of Magistrates and Officers in every Colony
among us, from whence the greatest Heats and Disturbances have arisen, let the
visible Effects speak for themselves?

And when we have so done, we may (from the History of the last Age) reflect
upon that happy Union, which continued among Protestants in this Kingdom, in
the open Practice of Piety, Sobriety, and Righteousness, from the first time of
the Reformation; but especially during the Forty four Years of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, when all (as one Soul) joyfully and constantly assembled
together, at the set Times appointed by the Church, to celebrate Divine
Service, and hear the Scriptures daily read; as the only Means to keep up a
venerable Awe and Sense of the holy Majesty of God in the World, and in the
Mind of every individual Person; and to maintain and increase Christian
Charity, and Brotherly Kindness, (the alone Medium of Union in a Kingdom;) as
being all fully persuaded in their Minds, it was a Service most acceptable to
God; without any other Discipline, or Way of Worship, than what had been so
settled among us by those pious and learned Martyrs, (the Founders of it,) who
carried their own Faggots, (not loving their Lives unto Death,) to bear their
Testimony for it.

By which Means that happy Queen so long reigned in Peace, (by Love,) in the
the Hearts of all her Subjects, and a Terror to all her Enemies; whereby our
National Church became the Envy of Rome, and the only Sanctuary for all
distressed Protestants abroad.

All this plainly demonstrates, That pure and undefiled Religion, founded in
Piety, Sobriety, and Righteousness, may be easily known of all, as it consists
in Humility, Self-denial, and sincere Practice of what we know, ( all
epitomized in Good Living,) and not in profound Knowledge, needless Disputes,
long Prayers, or fruitless Discourses.

If these things were laid to heart, so as to be well weighed, and considered,
by all sincere and well meaning Christians, who now separate from our public
Communion, into private Congregations; that from thence they might be awakened,
to examine, and (with me) seriously enquire into the Truth of Things, they
would soon find how miserably they have been imposed upon, and drawn into
Prejudice, and an ill Apprehension of the purest, and best established Religion
on the Earth, by such designing Leaders, as can be contented to sacrifice the
Peace and Safety of the whole Kingdom, to promote the Interest of a Party, in
order to gratify their own Ambition, and Worldly Design, though under a
Disguise of Liberty of Conscience; when in truth, by Separation from us, they
do but exchange one Shell of Religion for another; for so I reckon (and so our
Church does esteem) the most resined Discipline, or outward Way of Worship to
be; and lays no more stress in it, than Decency and Order requires. Therefore
it is no wonder that the most Ignorant, and Short-sighted, and such as look no
farther into Religion than the outward Appearance, but are never capable of
discerning the vital Substance, should, from the Scandal of some wicked
Members, (from which the Gospel it self was not wholly exempt,) be so apt to
despise our established Discipline, and yet at the same time idolize another
Form, or Way of Worship; as if God were more pleased with one Shadow, than
another.

Whereas we esteem our outward Discipline no otherwise than as outward Means,
composed and adapted by the most pious and learned Men, from the sacred
Fountain of the Scriptures, suited to every Capacity through a whole Kingdom:
the Least Knowing, as well as the Most Learned; that all may join together. In
which, the pious, and well-disposed Christian may worship God in the Beauty of
Holiness; and the Youth and Ignorant, as with a Leading-step, may be trained
up, from the first Principles of Religion, to the greatest Perfection; and
whereby also the Profane and Loose are, by a venerable Authority, influenced
and reclaimed, at least kept within some Bounds, from scoffing at Religion;
which is daily occasioned by the Separation of such who are still subject (with
their Neighbors) to the same Infirmities attending Humane Frailty, as well as
to Pride, Ambition, Self-Love, (in the inordinate Love of the World,) Railing
at, and Censuring of others, and yet, puffed up with a false Conceit of their
own Way, do herd and distinguish themselves, under their several Leaders, into
so many and various Ways, Opinions, and Persuasions; (I wish it were not so
near a Resemblance of the several Orders in the Church of Rome;) and all under
Conduct of their peculiar Guides.

From whence it comes to pass, that vain and loose Persons, beginning first
with light Thoughts of Religion, and by degrees declining the public Prayers
of the Church, and private Family Duties; and from thence giving scope to
boundless Lusts, at last cast off all Religion, and become downright
Debauchees, and practical Atheists.

This may satisfy any but such as are in love with a false Persuasion, and
beforehand resolved to know no better, that the Offense is taken, and not
justly given, by those that thus separate from our National Communion;
especially when they may be all so clearly convinced, that the original Cause
of Separation from our Communion did not arise from any thing either in our
Doctrine, or the Discipline of our Church; but from what was acted by Temporal
Rulers, (as they were steered by Jesuits, and Popish Interests,) in
Ecclesiastical Courts, procuring a Toleration of Sports on the Lord's Day; and
Indulgence to be granted in other Matters, which our holy and pure Religion
expressly condemns and abhors; which could not but be very offensive to many
honest and well-meaning Persons, especially when so industriously improved by
subtle Jesuits, and whispering Sectaries, (the secret Enemies of our Church,)
who insinuated into the Minds of the Easy and Credulous, that our Religion did
countenance such Evils, and thereby drew them into separate Congregations;
whereby they had opportunity to introduce so many strange Doctrines, and
variety of Persuasions, the Seed and Cause of all our Heats, Divisions, and
Animosities, on the one hand; and of Practical Atheism, Debauchery, and
Immorality on the other: Both which (as gross Hypocrisy, and barefaced
Impiety) do equally expose us to the Divine Vengeance, and lay us open to our
Foreign Enemies. For it is most Plain, the Enthusiastic, as well as the
Debauchee, when thwarted in their Designs, have an equal Tendency to Rebellion
and Treason.

I say, were sincere, (though mis-persuaded,) well-meaning Persons but once
fully sensible of these great Truths, and of the unavoidable Necessity of their
Returning into our Communion, as the only Means left to unite and save us, by
restoring True Piety, and Christian Charity, in Sobriety and Righteousness
among us, it is impossible they should sleep quietly one Night, before they
returned into this Bosom of Safety: For (God knows) I fear there is no other
Cure left for our universal Distemper; and it is high time to begin so happy a
Work,

Wherein their Leaders, if they have (as they all pretend to have) the Spirit
of Primitive Christianity, may (as faithful in God's Vineyard) outstrip all our
idle Laborers in painful and powerful Preaching; and especially, by their
exemplary and holy Living, so influence their Doctrine on the Mind, as to
reclaim many profane Persons, who now take occasion, from their Separation,
into so many Forms and Shadows of Religion, to inveigh, and rail against them
all.

And the Lay-Menbers, if they return into our Communion, and live up to what
our holy Religion (which is defective in nothing but good Living,) does most
plainly and powerfully teach, may boldly reprove, (by our Church Authority,)
and put to silence many open Transgressors, and Evildoers, who now take
occasion, from so many Fashions of Religion among us, to deride and scoff at
all Religion in general; and also (to their great comfort) may thereby shame a
scandalous Clergyman into a Reformation of his Life, by saying, (with the
Spirit of Meekness,) in the Language of the holy Prophet, I have more
Understanding than all my Teachers; for thy Testimonies are my Meditation,
Psalm. 119.

And this (I bear witness) is countenanced by all our reverend and pious
Fathers and Pastors, who would have all come to the Knowledge and Practice of
the Truth, and who (it is most manifest) are willing and ready to comply with
any thing that may tend to heal our Breaches, and to purchase Union with their
Dissenting Brethren, if desired in such a way, and to be done in such a manner,
as may preseve Peace and Unity in the Church.

Which we can never reasonably hope should be done, without some orderly
Application of such as must own themselves inferior to those whom the
Government (under which they live) have made their Superiors; which nothing
can hinder, or obstruct, but Pride, Obstinacy and Worldly Design, all which are
directly contrary to the meek, yielding, and self-denying Temper of Primitive
Christianity.

And here I may with an humble Confidence, enforce this Argument from the
greatest Example, and the most excellent Pattern; even that of His Sacred
Majesty, now in the Throne, the Head of our Government, and Chief of our
Communion; whose incomparable Perfections (whether we consider Him as a Man, or
as a Christian,) are sufficiently known to the whole World.

WHO, to give us the clearest Evidence of his Zeal and Sincrity, has exposed
himself to the greatest Dangers, for Defense of the Reformed Religion. And
though his Education was in a different Persuasion, (the Discipline established
in his native Country;) yet, to demonstrate both his Piety and Prudence, when
he had searched into, and was fully satisfied, that the vital Part of that
Religion wherein he was bred, and the Doctrine here taught in our National
Church, was one and the same, he was neither tenacious in his own Opinion, nor
bigoted to the outward Form, or Persuasion, (which is but the Crust and Shell.)

But, (as best became the Head of his People,) he, together with his Royal
Consort, (as one Soul,) do openly profess our established Religion; the
greatest Blessing Heaven could bestow, if we know our Happiness. And Oli that
all Their Majesty's Subjects would resent it accordingly!

And farther, I might urge another eminent Instance in His Royal Highness the
Prince of Denmark, whose Education was most strict in the Lutheran Church, (the
established Religion of that Kingdom,) where the Discipline is as different
from that of the Calvinists in Holland, as ours is from both; and yet, from the
same Christian Principle, founded in the vital Substance of Truth and Goodness,
and not wedded to the Shell and Shadow, finding the pure Doctrine still the
same, he joins himself with His Sacred Majesty, in the same Communion.

Who both, during their late Expedition abroad, in the defense of their
Religion and Country, have constantly, in a devout manner, offered up their
Morning and Evening-Sacrifice at the Public Prayers, according to the
Discipline established in our Church.

From whence we may appeal to all impartial Christians herein, whether such as
are Natives of our own Country, and Fellow Subjects with us in one Kingdom, and
do all pretend to hold Unity in Doctrine with the Reformed Churches abroad, and
with us too, in our National Church, and can so readily conform to the
Fashions, Garb, and Attire of the present Age, and are apt enough to insist
upon the least minute Particle of Precedence (with the rest of Mankind) in
Honor, according to Order and Decency in Temporal Government; yet are so
tenacious in their Opinion, and wedded to their own outward Form, or Shadow of
Divine Worship, as, by a continued Separation, to sacrifice our Religion, and
the Peace and Safety of our Government, our Laws, our Liberties, and our Lives,
as a Prey to our Foreign Enemies, rather than, with those most Illustrious
Persons, and many other eminent modern Instances, (who were all as strictly
bred in different Persuasions, under Foreign Governments,) to embrace that holy
and pure Religion, so here established and settled among us from the first
Reformation, by those pious and learned Martyrs, the Founders of it: I say,
whether this Stiffness and Obstinacy does not arise from Ignorance and
Prejudice in the honest and well-meaning, who are seduced, and imposed upon;
and from Self-Love, Ambition, and worldly Design in the Leaders and Seducers;
rather than from any pure Principle of Primitive Christianity, I leave to all
Persons concerned herein, to be themselves Judges of the Matter.

I shall only add (to complete this Discourse) these following Paragraphs, out
of the Second Part of the same Lay-man's Religion, published since the First.
Licensed Nov. 13. 1690. Page 13.
I Do not hereby charge all Nonconforming Clergy, as culpable herein; (God
forbid:) For I am fully satisfied there are many reverend, pious, and sincere
Christians of that number, who have great Veneration for our Established
Religion; yet have so far engaged themselves in their different Persuasions, as
they judge themselves incapable (Salva Conscientia,) entirely to communicate
with us, without some Accommodation in those things which have hitherto
obstructed so happy an Union; to which, it is well known, the most holy and
learned Fathers of our Church have been, and still are, readily, and most
willingly inclined, if such Application were made as, according to the decent
Rules of Civil and Religious Order in Government, is required.

And to stop the Mouths of such as endeavor to render such an Accommodation
either unpracticable, or impossible, whoever shall read, and will consider the
34th Article of our Established Religion, may be fully satisfied, that as the
pious Founders of it took care nothing therein should be repugnant to the Word
of God, so they never intended the Rites and Ceremonies, (which are the Shadow,
or Crust and Shell of Divine Worship,) established in our Church, should (like
the Laws of the Medes and Persians) be unalterable; thereby declaring plainly,
that as those Rites and Ceremonies might be changed, according to the diversity
of Countries, Times, and Manners of Men; so every particular, or National
Church, (not particular Parties, or private Judgments,) has Authority to
ordain, change, or abolish them; so as all be done to edifying.

But it cannot be reasonably supposed, such an established Discipline (the
alone Medium of Unity, and the Nerves and Sinews of all Government) should be
so from time to time changed, much less abolished, to gratify every Leader or
Founder of a Sect, or different Persuasion, that separates from our public
Communion, into gathered Churches, (though on never so specious Pretenses,) no
more than may be reasonably required of a Master of a Family to alter the
Economy of his Household, to gratify the Humor of every petulant Servant; or
of Magistrates in Corporations, to endanger the Peace and Safety of their Civil
Established Government, by a Change or Alteration therein, only to remove or
prevent the Murmurs or Complaints of every discontented Citizen, that through
Ignorance, Interest, or Design, shall scruple or refuse to comply with the
Rules and Orders made, long before they were there Inhabitants, for the Safety
and Well-being of the Place. Every reasonable and unbyassed Person, that shall
seriously consider these things, and well weigh the Consequence of it, must
necessarily conclude, that such a Condescension in Superiors herein, would
quickly unhinge all Government, and turn all settled Order, in the best
Constitution in the World, into Anarchy and Confusion.

How infinitely happy then would it be for this Kingdom, if all that are Men of
Learning and Parts, and every way fitly qualified for their high and holy
Calling, (to whose Judgment I humbly submit the Consideration of these great
and growing Evils,) would labor after such an Accommodation, in so sacred and
weighty Affairs; that they might all, as Fellow Laborers, join in the
promoting and endeavoring after so desirable a Blessing, as Harmony in Divine
Worship; the only Means to heal our Divisions, and effect an universal
Reformation of Manners among us.

For as it is most plain, Separation was the original Cause, and has increased
all our Miseries; so nothing but such an Union can heal and effect our Cure.

God grant all Their Majesty's Subjects may approve themselves herein, as
worthy Members of such a Communion, (in order thereto,) by following the Royal
Pattern and Example of our Sovereign, and chief Member, himself, now on the
Throne.

But after all, I would be so understood, (as I have plainly, in the First
Part, already declared,) that I do not aim at (in any thing I have said) the
least Abridgment of that honest and innocent Liberty of Conscience, (the
Christian's Birth (...) live peaceably under the Government, in all Godliness
and Honesty. But still I say, it is both equal and just, that till such Persons
shall be so rightly informed, and convinced in their Judgments, as to conform
to our Religion established, they ought to be content with such Liberty of
Conscience, and Indulgence, as the Law allows them, and not to make it a
Stalking-horse to serve their Worldly Interest, or Design; for it is from
Lucifer, and not from Heaven, if they aspire after, or attempt to share in the
Government, upon any other Terms.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Hea^ in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.


