A True and Perfect NARRATIVE OF THE Trial and Acquitment OF Mr. John
Satterthwayt. At the Assizes held at Kingston, March 13. Being Accused for
Firing the House of Mr. Peter Delanoy, Dyer in Southwark.
Written with his own Hand, in a Letter to his Friend in London. Kingston,
March 13. 1679. SIR,
I Presume it is no News to you that I was apprehended and committed to the
Marshalsea, for the wicked and felonious entering into, and setting on Fire, the
House and Dye-house of Peter Delanoy of Southwark, Dyer, it being made public
to the World, by our infallible, unerring, Protestant News-monger, and
therefore I forbore declaring to you my Case, or giving any Account of my self
about it, enduring my heavy Irons, my melancholy Imprisonment, and all other my
reproachful Sufferings quietly, till God was pleased to deal with me according
to my Innocence. And I should still with the same resolution have forborne
troubling you, were it not to vindicate my self from the Scandals, that
infamous Tongues asperse me withal, concerning the contriving of the said Fire,
together with the honorable Profession of a Soldier, the Employment I follow.
And therefore I hope you will please to peruse patiently these, and pardon me for
them.

In the first place I do declare, and I take God to be my Witness therein, that
I am a Protestant, of the Church of England, that I was born and educated so,
and never knew my self any other Religion, nor any of my Relations to be of the
Church of Rome, although my Accuser swore me a Roman Catholic.

I do in the second place profess before Almighty God, that knows the truth of
all things, I never saw, spoke to, or drank with the Maid that accused me, till
after I was apprehended nor did I ever see, or hear of Mr. Delanoy, or his
House, or what Trade he was, until such time I was brought before the Justice
no, nor was I in Southwark of a Month before I was taken, or thereabouts.

I am a Gentleman you know, and a Soldier, though ^t be an Employment
obnoxious to a sort of people in this Age, who are dis-satisfied that His
Majesty has any Guard for the Security of His Person* I wish my condition were
capable of disposing of 2000 l. I should put it to some better use than so
hellish and internal Design.

It may seem incredible, that a person of my Parts, and Profession too should
be employed in, or that (if it were true) I should treat with an unknown Woman,
about so weighty an Affair; or if it were so, what should induce me, next
morning and next door, (as I am informed it is) to come, where I had committed
such a Fact over ^ight?

Now, Sir, I am acquitted, and I do nevertheless solemnly protest; as I hope
for mercy at the last Day, I am as innocent of that Crime as the Child that is
yet unborn, else may I never see God in his Throne, which, with the following
particulars of my Case, I hope may satisfy you.

And if you, the moderate, and the doubtful, be but satisfied, I value not my
Misfortunes; let the envious and rude Rabble think what they please, for it is
not easy to persuade them to believe the truth, when they are once possessed
with the contrary; nevertheless, if any of them will be so critically curious,
as to enquire into any one of the particulars of my Case, they will find what I
have therein roughly set down, will plainly appear to be a great truth.

I shall say very little as to the Woman that swore against me; only give me
leave to tell you, that those who are acquainted with her, know well what she
is, and such as do not, may easily be satisfied, if they please, by several of
her late Masters, who have been to visit her in Prison; I pray God forgive her,
for I do from my Soul, yet while I live, I shall never forget her, nor the Bear
at the Bridge-foot, where I was so bit for nothing, I may live to see h^s Bear
run, except he keep him strongly chained, he is not so rich as I am innocent.

But now as to my Trial: I was this morning Indicted, Convicted, Arraigned, and
Tried, with Margaret Clark, my Accuser, both by one Indictment, to which I
pleaded Not Guilty, (as God knows I might without sinning, safely do) and so
did my Yoke-mate; there were 4 Witnesses sworn, two Men, and two Women, of
little credit, and less fashion; the Men wanted Matter to swear, and especially
a peevish Waterman; they proved the Fire; that was evident before, by the Maids
own confessing, (though she pleaded Not Guilty now) which was sufficient for
her turn; the two Women, the other Witnesses, one of them very briskly swore,
she had often seen me in Southwark, and particularly on Thursday before the Fire
broke out, but could not say, she had either seen me in Delanoy's House, or in
his Maids company; the other Witness swore, she saw a Man go on Sunday into
Delanoy's House in a red Coat, and come out again, but did not see his Face,
nor could she say I was the person; very angry the Witnesses were they could
swear no better; how my Persecutors were pleased, I leave that to themselves,
believing they had rather hanged me innocent, than the Maid guilty, judging so,
from what words a giddy Brain, passionate Coxcomb, an Apprentice to Delanoy,
spoke in Court, who thought he had more wit than my Judge, and more honesty
than my Jury, and would have me damned before I was condemned; I am so much a
Christian, as not to wish him harm, but the contrary, desiring his Soul may
find Favor from the great Judge of Assize in the other, for certain I am, his
Face will find but little from the lesser Judges of this World.

The Maid her self was examined; she denied impudently what she had before
confessed, as to her self, but stood firmly to her first principles; as to my
particular, I was the person, and like Cataline, resolved to add greater Evils
to those she had before committed; but she being Arraigned, her Evidence was of
no effect.

The stress lying chiefly on Thursday, Jan. 9. and Sunday, Feb. 1 some of my
Witnesses were examined, and then the Judge proceeded to give the Jury their
Charge. In fine, they brought her in Guilty, and me otherwise, a Favor I could
not have expected from many Southwark Juries, I thank this kindly for (...) I
am contented, but I hope to have no further experience of their Favors; and
now I only wait for my Discharge, not doubting in a day or two to be with you.

There were many Prisoners, and several Trials of sundry natures, which I shall
not trouble you with; only those of three Gentlemen, Seamour, alias Herring,
Smith, and Sherby; two of them are cast in five Indictments, and the third in
four Indictments, for Robbery and Felony on the Highway: With which I conclude
my tedious Epistle, and leave you to peruse my Case truly stated with a Copy of
my Commitment.

A Breviate of the Case of Mr. John Satterthwayt, one of His Royal Highness's
Troop of His Majesty's Guards, Committed to the Prison of the Marshalsea, for
the wicked and felonious entering into, and setting on Fire the House and
Dyehouse of Peter Delanoy, on Sunday night, the first of Feb. last, 1679.
1. Isabella Satterthwayt his Mother, and John Satterthwayt of Grays-Inne, his
Uncle. To prove his Education was in the Protestant, and not in the Romish
Religion. 2. His Certificate out of the Petty-Bag Office. To prove his
receiving the Sacrament, and taking the several Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy,
and Test. 3. His Officers and Fellow Soldiers. To give an account of his Life
and Conversation, and what sort of people he usually kept company and conversed
withal. 4. Mr. John Griffith, Mr. Dovenport, Mr. Fish, Mr. Huddleston, and Mr.
Whatton Gentlemen of His Majesty's Guard. To prove they with the said Mr.
Satterthwayt all met at the Pay-Table at Whitehall, on Thursday Jan. 29. and
that about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, they went to the One Tun Tavern
in St. Martins-lane. 5. The said five Gentlemen, the Master of the House, his
Drawer, the Constable, and part of his Watch. To prove him at the said One Tun
from about three of the Clock as aforesaid on Thursday Afternoon, till about
three of the Clock on Friday Morning, Jan. 30. 6. Four of the said Gentlemen,
etc. To prove he never was out of their Company from Friday morning at three of
the Clock, till about two in the Afternoon, during which time they were not out
of their Quarters in and about Pickadilly. 7. Mr. Bagley and his Wife, in
Vine-street in St. Giles. To prove he came to their House on Friday about two
of the Clock in the Afternoon, that he staid and slept there till about eight
at Night, and then went home to his Mothers House next door. 8. His said
Mother, and Mary Hills her Lodger. To prove he came home about eight of the
Clock as aforesaid, went to Bed, rose not till next morning about nine of the
Clock Jan. 31. when he was called by an Officer to go to the Guard. 9. The said
Officer, and most of the Guard. To prove his coming accordingly to the Guard,
staid there till three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the usual time of Relief,
and then came to the Cock and Bottle in New-street in Covent Garden. 10. Lieut
Griffith, Mr. Jahn Griffith, Mr. Fish, Mr. Davenport, Mr. Huddleston, Mr.
Cardiffe, the Master and Mistress of the House, etc. To prove he came thither
about four of the Clock on Saturday Afternoon aforesaid, staid there in their
Company in the said House till about nine of the Clock at Night, at which time
the said Company parted. 11. Tho. Spanton his Farrier, and Mr. John Griffith.
To prove he called on his said Farrier betwixt nine and ten of the Clock on
Saturday Night aforesaid, and ordered the said Farrier to come to the Swan-Inne
in Castle-street, and he should be paid his Bill. 12. Mr. Philips Master of the
said Swan, his Wife, Mr. John Griffith that lay with him, and the said Farrier.
To prove he came into the Swan-Inne on Saturday Night about ten of the Clock as
aforesaid, paid both the Landlady and Farrier, lay there all Night, rose not
out of Bed till Sunday Afternoon. That about four of the Clock he spoke to the
Landlord to get him a Fowl for Supper, which was accordingly fetched about the
time people came from Evening Prayer; That he Supped there, and in fine stirred
not abroad all day, till about ten of the Clock at Night, being Sunday Febr. 1.
1679. 13. His said Mother, and the said Mary Hills. To prove he came home about
half an hour past ten at Night on Sunday Febr. 1. as aforesaid, that he went to
Bed, and rose not till about nine on Monday Morning, Febr. 2. 79. 14. Mrs. H.
the person he was to meet, and Mrs. P. etc. To prove they had some time before,
viz. Jan. 30 in the Afternoon, resolved on a Meeting in Southwark; but till
that Morning the hour and place was not appointed; the said Mrs. H. then
sending a Maid to him, to let him know she was going into Southwark, received
back this Answer, That he would presently meet her at the Bear at the
Bridge-foot. 15. His said Mother, etc. To prove he stirred not out of doors on
Monday, till about ten of the Clock in the Morning. 16. Mr. Davenport. To prove
he called to speak with him about eleven on Monday aforesaid, when his Mother
told him he was gone out about an hour before.

Surry ss. To the Keepers of the Common Goal of the said County.

WHereas John Satterthwayt, whom we herewith send you, is charged upon Oath
before us, by one Margaret Clark, a late Servant to Peter Delanoy, of
Southwark, Dyer, for the wicked and felonious entering into, and setting on Fire
the House and Dye-house of the said Peter Delanoy, on Sunday last past: These
are therefore in His Majesty's Name to require you, to receive the said John
Satterthwayt into your Custody, and him to keep safe, until he shall be thence
delivered by due course of Law.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 2d. day of Feb. Ann. Dom. 1679. Ja.
Reading. Jo. Freeman.

Vera Copia.


