A TRUE and IMPARTIAL RELATION OF A Wonderful Apparition That Happened in the
ROYAL CAMP in FLANDERS, The Beginning of this Instant SEPTEMBER, 1692.

Concerning King WILLIAM.

In a LETTER to a Gentleman in London, from his Friend, a Captain in the KING's
Camp.

LICENSED, September 27. 1692. E. B.

IT is not (I presume) unknown to most, of the Dismal Earthquake that happened
at Brussels, and other places in Flanders, much about the same time there was
one universally felt here: And having received a Letter lately from thence,
from a very worthy Friend of mine, (whose Name, not having his permission to
reveal, I hope you will not think the worse of the Truth of the matter here
related, for my concealing it), who is a Captain in Colonel Stapleton's
Regiment, and himself at his return, will, I durst say, avouch the same: He not
only gives some Account of that Earthquake, but of things that seem as strange
as (I believe, you will find at His Majesty's Return, to be) true; which is
concerning his Sacred Majesty King William: And, Gentle Reader, I will no
longer detain your patience, but take it as it came to me in the true Copy
thereof, viz.

SIR,
ABout Ten days since, one Hussy, a Solder in my Company, standing Centry
about One of the Clock in the Morning, at my Colonel Stapleton's Tentdoor,
there appeared a Spirit to him, viz. A tall Gentleman-like Person, in a Camlet
Coat, and short Dark Peruke, mounted upon a fine Dapple-gray Horse; he rushed
by Hussy, who bid him stand; the Spirit replied several times in a shrill
Tone, The King, the King is to be made away, if care be not speedily taken; or
to that purpose: Hussy asked by whom? upon which another Spirit appeared to
him on Foot, having the appearance of a stern Black man, full grown, and pretty
tall, having on a Blew Campaign Coat, with a Cape, and Black Campaign Peruke,
and a Black Hat laced with Silver Lace, and a Silver-hilted Sword; the first
Spirit said, That is the Man, take good notice of him, which he did; and then
the last Spirit vanished: And Hussy asked the first Spirit, who still was on
Horseback, Whether that Person did belong to the Army? the Spirit replied, He
was daily busling about the Court, and then the first Spirit vanished. Hussy
writ a Relation of this under his hand (being seemingly very well in his
Senses), and offered to me, upon his revealing it to me, to swear to the truth
of it. After which he saw the real Person riding with the King, which appeared
to him on foot; and Hussy would have seized on him, but could not come near
enough to him at that time, Hussy being on foot; but waited an opportunity to
do it, some other time, and revealed it at the same time. But at One of the
Clock the very next Morning after, standing Centry near the same place again,
the first Spirit that appeared to him on Horseback before, appeared to him on
foot, and with an Angry Countenance said, Now the Business is prevented, no
thanks to you; why did not you do your Duty yesterday? and with that the Spirit
hit him a blow on the back, which has confined him to the Trench three or four
days; and the Spirit said, He is gone back to the French, but was last night
shot in the Guts by an Out-Centry of theirs: And it is asserted by a Deserter
that came over to us that Night, That such a Man so habited, and as related by
the Spirit, was so shot by them, and has asserted it: Believe it as you
please, Hussy is positive in the matter, and I think good to give you a
Character of him my self, who I have often sounded about this Business, and
neither Threats of Punishment, or Promises of Reward, can make him recant; but
he stands to the Truth of what I have here written from his own mouth; And I
think fit to add so much of my own knowledge of him, That ever since I have
known him under my Command, he has behaved himself with a great deal of
Faithfulness, Courage, and Loyalty, diligent in His Duties, observing the
Commands of his Officers, and cheerfully obeying them as a good Soldier ought
to do, and a Fellow given neither to Malencholly, nor to much mirth, but a
harmless good-natured Fellow as any I have in my Company.

So I leave you to judge of the matter, which to me is worth the taking notice
of; and to you I question not but it will be the same.

From the Camp of the 12th Instant, English Style. This happened at the Imperial
Camp, a League beyond Valkoway. I am Your Loving Friend.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir,
WE have had a great Earthquake here at Brussel, last week, and some Houses are
overthrown thereby: There was little harm occasioned by it in our Camp; but the
shake being great at his Majesty's Lodgings, they run so fast out of the Door,
that they run over the Centries; and one of them had three of his Teeth beat
out, and some more bruised.




London: Printed for RANDALL TAILOR, near Amen-Corner. 1692.


