THE SIX VOYAGES OF JOHN BAPTISTA TAVERNIER, BARON of AUBONNE; THROUGH Turkey,
INTO Persia AND THE EAST INDIES, For the space of Forty Years.

GIVING An Account of the present STATE of those Countries, Viz. Of the
RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, CUSTOMS, and COMMERCE of every Country; and the Figures,
Weight, and Value of the MONEY current all over ASIA.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A new Description of the SERAGLIO.

Made English by J. P.

ADDED LIKEWISE, A VOYAGE INTO THE INDIES, etc.

By an English Traveller, never before Printed: Published by Dr DANIEL COX.

LONDON: Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, for ROBERT LITTLEBURY at the King's Arms in
Little Britain, and MOSES PIT at the Angel in St Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

THE SIX VOYAGES OF JOHN BAPTISTA TAVERNIER, BARON of AUBONNE; THROUGH Turkey
INTO Persia, AND THE EAST INDIES, For the space of Forty Years.

GIVING AN Account of the Present STATE of those Countries, viz. Of the
RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, CUSTOMS, and COMMERCE of every Country; and the Figures,
Weight and Value of the MONEY current all over ASIA.

To which is added The Description of the SERAGLIO.

Made ENGLISH by J. P.

ADDED LIKEWISE A VOYAGE INTO THE INDIES, etc.

By an English Traveller, never before Printed.

LONDON: Printed, and sold by Robert Littlebury, at the King's-Arms in Little
Britain, and Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard 1678.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr Thomas Davies, Knight Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
IT cannot be thought that the Author of these Travels had he verily believed
that thereby he had eminently served his King and Country, would have
adventured a Dedication to so great a Monarch as the King of France: Wherein he
presumes to tell him, that he was the person that had brought him from the
Indies the fairest Jewels that at present adorn his Crown; for which and
several other services done the Kingdom, His Mty. honored him with the Title
of Noble. And indeed it is not probable that a Potentate so wise and so
discerning, had he not been convinced of the merit and good service of his
Subject, would have received him with that esteem, or have honored him with
that Title which he bestowed upon him. As for the Truth of what is here
comprised, there is his own Asseveration to his Prince of the Exactness which
he has observed in that particular; which there is the less reason to misdoubt,
in regard he has been public in the World for some time withnot the least
blemish of Contradiction. Be pleased then, My, Lord to consider the quality of
this Work, and as you are in high Dignity, governing that Famous City which has
so great a share in the Traffic of the Oriental world, vouchsafe it your
acceptance, as it is now made serviceable to this City and the whole Nation by

My Lord Your Lordships most obedient Servant J Phillips.

TO THE MOST ACCOMPLISHED AND EMINENTLY LEARNED DR. DANIEL COX Doctor of PHYSIC
Sir,
SInce it is the Mode of the Age, that no Book comes forth without a Dedication,
I hope I shall not be blamed for addressing these Travels to your Self, as
being the Person that has contributed so much to the Ornament and Perfection of
the whole Work. Hereby have I saved the labor of making Encomiums upon an
Author, of whom You have testified your Approbation, by the Encouragement You
gave the Publisher. Nor is it reasonable, that TAVERNIER coming into England,
should prefer others before a person that has showed him particular
kindnesses. For my part, after I had taken a Prospect of your personal Candor,
I knew not where to give so choice a Stranger better Accommodation: not without
some regard to my self; since I could not think that he who had been so kind to
the Original Author, would be an Enemy to his Interpreter. Upon which score, as
I presumed at first, I hope You will pardon the farther presumption of styling
my self,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, J. PHILLIPS.

THE DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR.
Where he gives a brief Relation of his first Travels through the best parts of
Europe as far as Constantinople.

IF the effect of Education may be liken'd to a second Birth, I may truly say,
that I came into the World with a desire to travel. The daily discourses which
several Learned men had with my Father upon Geographical subjects, which my
Father had the reputation of understanding very well, and to which, though very
young, I was with much delight attentive, inspired me betimes with a design to
see some part of those Countries, which were represented to me in the Maps,
from which I never could keep off my Eyes. By two and twenty years of Age,
therefore I had seen the fairest Regions of Europe, France, England, the Low
Countries, Germany, Switzerland, Poland, Hungary, and Italy; and I spoke
indifferently well the Languages most necessary and most generally spoken.

My first sally was into England, where at that time Reigned King James; from
thence I passed into Flanders to see Antwerp, my Father's Native Country, and
so into the Low Countries, where my inclination to travel became the stronger,
by reason of the great concourse of Strangers which I met at Amsterdam, that
crowded thither from all parts of the World.

Having seen what was most considerable in the united Provinces, I passed into
Germany, and when I came to Norimbergh, by the way of Frankfort and Auspurgh,
the noise of the Armies that were marching into Bohemia to retake Prague,
instilled into me a desire to go to the Wars, where I might learn something
that might be useful to me in the series of my travels. I was not above a days
journey from Norimbergh, when I met a Colonel of Horse, whose name was Hans
Brener, the Son of Philip Brener, Governor of Vienna, who engaged me to follow
him into Bohemia. Sometime after I bore the same Colonel company to Vienna, who
presented me to the Governor of Raab, his Uncle, then Viceroy of Hungary also;
who received me into his Family as one of his Pages. For it is a usual thing in
Germany for Gentlemen's Sons to serve in that quality 'till five and twenty
years of age, and seldom to quit that service, 'till they have a Commission for
a Cornet, or Ensigns place. Four years and a half I served the Viceroy, when
the Prince of Mantua came to Vienna, to engage the Emperor in certain designs
of his own without success. At that time the Count of Arc, whose Sister the
Viceroy had Married, was chief Minister to the Prince of Mantua; and coming to
visit the Viceroy at Javarin, I was appointed to attend him during his stay
there. Upon his departure, he told the Viceroy, that the Prince of Mantua had
no person about him that understood the Language, and that therefore he might
be sure that the Prince would take it for a great kindness, to permit me to
attend his person during his stay at the Emperors Court. This was a thing
easily granted to the Count of Arc; who thereupon carried one along with him to
Vienna, where having had the good fortune not to displease the Prince, he
testified to me at his departure, that he should be glad to see me at Mantua,
where he would not forget the services I had done him. This presently infused
into me a desire of seeing Italy, especially upon the opportunity that offered
it self not long after.

For Monsieur de Sabran, the King of France's Envoy to his Imperial Majesty,
being to go for Venice, and desirous of one that understood the German Language
to bear him Company, I laid hold of the occasion, so that in eight days we got
to Venice. While we stayed at Venice, I took a view to my great satisfaction,
of that most Celebrated City, and in regard it is in many things like to
Amsterdam, as in Situation, Greatness, Magnificence, Commerce, and Concourse of
Strangers, my being there did but still reinforce my inclination to Travel.

From Venice I went to Mantua with Monsieur de Sabran, where the Prince being
glad to see me again, gave me my choice of an Ensign, or of a place in the
Company of the Ordonnance of the Duke his Father. I accepted the latter, as
being glad to be under the Command of the Conde de Guiche, who was then
Captain. At the Siege of Mantua I had like to have been slain, but for the
goodness of a Cuirass which I had chosen out of the Princes Magazin, being hit
with two Bullets above and upon the left pap, which had entered, had not my
Arms been excellent proof: So that after I was recovered of my Bruises, a
longer stay at Mantua did not agree with my desire to travel.

Therefore some time after the Siege was raised, I took leave of the Prince,
who gave me an honorable Pass, by virtue whereof five or six Horsemen bore me
Company back to Venice. From Venice I went to Lauretta, from Lauretta to Rome,
from Rome to Naples, from whence returning to Rome again, I stayed there ten or
twelve days. After that I went to see Florence, Pisa, Ligorn, and Genoa, from
whence I Embarked for Marseilles.

From Marseilles I hasted to Paris, where I could not stay long; for being
desirous to see Poland, I passed once more into Germany through Switzerland,
after I had taken a survey of the principal Towns of the Cantons. I went by the
Rhine by Water, to visit Strasburgh and Brisack; thence by Land crossing
Suabia, I passed through Ulme and Auspurgh to go to Munich. There I saw the
Magnificent Palace of the Dukes of Bavaria, which William the fifth began, and
which Maximilian his Son finished, in the heat of the Wars that troubled the
Empire. From thence I went the second time to Norimbergh, and Prague, and
leaving Bohemia I entered into Silesia, and passed the Oder at B^eslaw. From
Breslaw I went to Cracovia, one of the greatest Cities of Europe, or rather a
Town composed of three Cities, the ancient Seat of the King of Poland. From
thence, keeping the Vistula upon the left hand, I went to Warsaw, and saw there
the Court of King Sigismund, which is a noble and splendid Habitation.

From Warsaw I returned to Breslaw, taking the Road toward the Lower Silesia,
designing to visit one of the principal Officers of the Emperors Household, who
was my particular acquaintance. But about two Leagues from Glogaw, meeting with
Colonel Butler, a Scotch Gentleman, Colonel of one of the Emperors Regiments
of Horse, who afterward killed Walesteyne in pursuance of the Orders he
received, I gave over my first intended journey. His Wife was a great lover of
the French, so that being earnestly obliged by both together, I could not
withstand the testimonies of their kindness. There I understood that the
Emperor was going to Ratisbone with his Son Ferdinand the Third, to Crown him
King of the Romans, so that I, who had seen the Coronations of the Kings of
Hungary and Bohemia, being desirous to see the third Solemnity also, took leave
of my Colonel, and hasted to Ratisbone.

At that time arrived to Ratisbone several Jewellers, one of which came to his
end by an accident so tragical, that all the whole Court pitied his untimely
fate. He was the only Son of one of the riohest Merchants of Europe, that lived
in Frankfort, whose Father had sent him with Jewels to sell at the Coronation.
For fear of being Robbed he had conveyed them before into the hands of a Jew
in Ratisbone, his Correspondent, to be delivered to his Son at his coming. This
young man arriving at Ratisbone, went to the Jew, who told him that he had
received a small Casket of Jewels from his Father, which he might take away,
when he pleased. At the same time the Jew invited the young man to drink, and
carried him to a public House upon the Key of the City, where they continued
'till about an hour after day was shut in. At this time, both going out
together, the Jew led the young man through a private Street where few people
passed by, and there having stabbed him five or six times in the Belly with a
Dagger, left him wallowing in his Blood. A while after, one of the Emperor's
Trumpets going that way in the dark, stumbl'd at the Legs of the unfortunate
youth, who still breathed, and fell upon his Body. At first feeling his hands
wet, he thought it had been some drunken fellow that had eased his stomach; but
upon second thoughts, imaging it might be some wounded person, he ran and
called the Officers, who coming with Lanthorns, beheld the tropic spectacle of
a young man weltring in his own gore. Thereupon the Officers carrying the Body
to the same public House, as being next at hand, his face was no sooner
washed, but the Woman and Maid of the House knew him to be the same young man
that had been there drinking with the Jew not long before. But as for the young
man he presently expired, without being able to make the least discovery.
However the Jew was seized that evening, and being seized, cofess'd the Crime.
The Imperial Laws ordain, that a Jew for killing a Christian should be hung
upon a Gibbet by the Heels, and that two fierce Dogs should be hung by him in
the same manner, to the end, that the Dogs in their madness should tear out his
Bowels. But the Jews made such presents to the Empress that the Sentence was
changed, though the punishment was not much less rigorous. For his flesh was
torn with red hot Pincers from several parts of his body, in several Streets of
the City, and boiling Lead poured into the raw wounds; after which he was
broken alive upon the wheel, at the public place of Execution.

Being upon my departure from Ratisbone, I met with Father Joseph, Resident
there for the King of France, who knowing me in Paris, proposed to me to go
along with the Monsieur, the Abbot of Chapes, Brother of the Marshal de Aumont,
and Monsieur St. Liebau, who were then intending for Constantinople, and so for
Palestine. I liked the proposition well, and immediately put my self into the
Society of those two Gentlemen, from whom I never separated 'till they departed
for Syria from Constantinople.

But before we left Germany, we resolved to see the Court of Savony, whither we
got in a few days. By the way we passed through Freybergh, a small City, but
well worth seeing, for the beauty of the Electors Tombs, and most splendid and
magnificent both for Materials and Workmanship in all Europe. From thence we
went and viewed the stately Castle of Augustburgh, seated upon a high Mountain,
wherein among other things there is a great Hall, adorned from top to bottom
with nothing but Horns fastened to the Wall; among the rest is the Head of a
Hare with two Horns, sent the Elector by the King of Denmark for a great
Rarity. In one of the Courts of the Palace stands a Tree so large in Body, and
spreading out the Branches at so wide a distance, that they will cover three
hundred sixty five Tables with their shade. And that which makes this Tree more
wonderful is, that it is only Birch, that rarely grows to that Immensity.

Dresde is the Residence of the Elector, a little City, but a very near one,
and well fortified; with a Stone Bridge over the Elbe, that parts the Old and
New Town. The Palace is one of the largest and fairest in Germany. But it wants
a Piazza before it, the principal Gate standing just at the bottom of a narrow
Lane.

From Dresde we went to Prague, which was a third time that I saw that great
and fair City, or rather three Cities together, only separated by the Molda,
that throws it self into the Elbe, some five or six Leagues below.

Having traversed Bohemia, and touched upon the corner of Moravia, we entered
Austria, and came to Vienna, resolving there to Embark with all speed, because
the Winter came on.

We stayed one day at Presburgh to see the great Church, and some Relics which
they showed us, and from thence fell down to Altenburgh.

Altenburgh is a City and Province belonging to the Count of Arach. It was the
Child's part of one of the Queens of Hungary, who upon her deathbed bequeathed
it to one of the Lords of her Court, upon condition that he and his Successors
should always keep such a number of Peacocks; for defect whereof, the Territory
should revert to the Crown.

Thence we came to Signet, from whence I took a little Boat and hasted to Raab,
where I did my Devoirs to the Viceroy, who was glad to see me, and gave noble
entertainment to the Messieurs de Chapes, and de St. Liebau. Here we stayed
eight or ten days for the Basha of Buda's Answer, whether he would give liberty
to two French Gentlemen, to pass with their Train through his Garrison or no;
which being returned such as we could desire, we Embarked at Comorra in a sort
of Brigantines well fitted for defense and convenience.

From Vienna to Javarin we laid three days upon the water, by reason of the
great turnings and windings of the Dunaw. Leaving Javarin we lay at Comorra;
and from Comorra we rowed to Buda in two days. For the Road by Land is seldom
traveled, in regard that the Frontiers of both Empires are full of Thieves and
Boothaylers. In fair weather you may go from Bada to Belgrade in less than
eight days, but we were forced to stay longer upon the Water, in regard of the
Cold weather.

It is the custom in Hungary, that in all Roads little frequented by Strangers,
not to take any Money of the Traveller; For the Burghers lodge and entertain
them civilly, for which the Burgo Master at the years end repays them out of
the public stock. But besides, that they are not troubled with many
passengers; Hungary, which is one of the best Countries in Europe, affords
provision at so cheap a rate, that to Belgrade it costs us not above two Crowns
a day for fourteen people.

Buda stands upon the right hand of the Danaw, about half an hours traveling
from the River. The Basha being advised of our arrival, sent his Squire with
led Horses, and several Slaves in very good Liveries to conduct us to the Town.
And though we stayed twelve days before we could speak with him, by reason of
his being sick at that time, yet he allowed us a fair provision of Mutton,
Pullets, Rice, Butter, and Bread, and two Sequins a day for small expenses. He
was a comely person, and of a handsome carriage; and at our departure, he sent
six Caleshes with two Spahi's to conduct us to Belgrade, with order to defray
our expenses, which would by no means be accepted.

Coming to Belgrade we found the Sangiai as rude, as we had found the Basha
civil before. For he made a ridiculous demand of two hundred Ducats a Head, and
for fifteen days prolonged the contest. But at length I so terrified him, by
threatening to send our Complaints to the Ottaman Port, of his ill usage of two
Gentlemen; kinsmen to the Ambassador of France, that he was contented with
fifty Ducats for all. Belgrade is situated upon a point of Land, where two
great Rivers, the Danaw and the Sava meet; and is furnished with Wine, Bread,
and all sorts of provisions at a cheap rate.

From Belgrade we took some Saddle Horses, some Coaches for Adrianople, as
every one liked best. We passed through Sophia, a large and well peopled City,
the Metropolis of the ancient Bulgarians, and the residence of the Basha of
Romeli. In it stands a fair Mosquee, which has been a Christian Church, built
with so much Art, that three men may go up to the top of the Steeple, and not
see one another.

From Sophia we came to Philippoli, between which Town and Adrianople we met
with two Troops of Tartars well mounted. When they saw us, they made a Lane for
us to pass through them, with a design most certainly to have fallen upon us;
since they could not hope to do any good upon us, but by surprise and number;
for they were ill provided of Weapons, and we rarely well Armed. Thereupon we
alighted and Barricado'd up our selves with our Chariots. In the mean time we
sent our Spahi's to the Commander of those Tartars, to tell them, we would not
stir 'till they were gone, and that being Soldiers as they were, they could
not hope for any booty from us. The Commander answered, that he had divided his
men in that manner only to do us Honor; but since we desired they should be
gone, they requested us but to send them a little Tobacco. A boon which we
readily granted them, and so we passed on.

We came to Adrianople the three and twentieth day after we parted from
Belgrade. Adrianople takes its name from the Emperor Adrian, being formerly
called Orestes. It is pleasantly situated at the mouth of three Rivers that
throw themselves into the Archipelago. The old Town is not very big, but the
Turks daily enlarge the Suburbs, being a place which the Grand Signors very
much delight in for the pleasures of Hunting and Hawking, especially at the
wild Duck and Heron.

The fifth day after we departed from Adrianople, and the forty second after we
departed from Vienna, we happily arrived at Constantinople, and crossing
through the City over to Galata, went to the Ambassador's House. While we
stayed there to winter, we made a small Voyage to the Dardanells, to the Ruins
of Troy, where we beheld nothing but Stones, not worth the while of going so
far to see. Another day we took three Barks and Sailed to Calcedon, that lies
upon the Sea. There is in it a very ancient Church; and they showed us the Room
where the Council was held, with the same Chairs which were then made use of.
Now it is only a Monastery, where two Bishops after they had showed us what
they could, handsomely entertained us.

Then we went to view Pompey's Pillar at the mouth of the Black Sea. Concerning
the Channel of which Sea, I must make one Observation; that though there be no
part of the Sea but has one Current, yet this has two quite contrary one to
another. That part next to Europe carries the Vessel to the Black Sea; and that
next Asia brings it back again to the Mediterranean. So that you have no more
to do but to cross over from one Shore to the other.

The Winter being over, the two French Gentlemen pursued their Voyage for
Alexandretta. But for my part, I having another design in my head, stayed at
Constantinople, in expectation of a Caravan, which the people told me from
Month to Month was coming. I was then ignorant, and did not understand that
every year there were five or six Caravans that went from Bursa. Besides, that
sometimes eight or ten Merchants traveling together, might go safe to Ispahan.
Which ignorance of mine made me stay longer than I intended. At length, after I
had continued eleven Months in Constantinople, I departed with a fair and
numerous Caravan for Ispahan, which was the first time I traveled into Asia.
After that I made five others, wherein I had time better to understand the
Qualities of the Countries, and the Genius of the People. The three last times
I went beyond Gauges, to the Island of Java; so that for the space of forty
years, I have traveled above sixty thousand Leagues by Land; never returning
but once into Europe by Sea. And thus in my six Voyages, and by traveling
different Roads, I had the leisure and opportunity to see all Turkey, all
Persia, and all India; particularly the famous Diamond Mines, where no European
had been before me. Of these three great Empires therefore have I resolved to
make an ample and exact Description: and I will begin with the several Roads
which may be taken from Paris into Persia.

These Computations are made, supposing a French Crown to be in value Sterling
54 pence, or 4 s. 6 d. the reputed Par, and that 12 Deniers make a Sous, 20
Sous a Liver; whereof 3 make an Escu. By which Computation 10 Sous is in value
9 d. and 10 Deniers 3 q.
Persian Money. French. English. l. s. d. q. ABassi 18 Sous, 6 Deniers 0 01 04
2 3 Abassi's and 1 Chayet 1 Ecu 0 04 06 2 Mamoudi's 1 Abassi 0 01 04 0 2
Chayets 1 Mamoudi 0 00 08 0 Casbeke Simple 5 Deniers, 1 Halfpenny 0 00 01 2
4^/100 Double Casbeke 11 Deniers 0 00 03 0 8^/100 Bisti 1 2 Double Casbekes 0
00 06 1 74/100 Chayets 1 5 Double Casbekes 0 00 04 0 1 Or 5 Abassi's 0 06 11 1
1 Toman 46 Livers, 1 Denier, Piaster 3 09 00 0 9/^5

Indian Money. French. English. l. s. d. q. LArins 5 1 Ecu French, within 8
Sous 0 03 10 3 Demi-Larins 10 Half as much 0 01 11 1 Roupy of Gold 21 Livers 1
11 06 Roupy of Gold 30 Sous 0 02 03 Pecha 6 Deniers 0 00 00 1 Half Roupy 16
Sous 0 01 02 1 Quarter of a Roupy 7 Sous, 6 Deniers 0 00 06 3 Pagods
Demi-Pistol (in Gold a Pistol is 11 Livers) 0 08 03 Fano's 6 1 Ecu 0 04 06
Cheda Money 1. 2. 2 Sous 0 00 01 3 ^/5 Cheda 3. 4. 4 Deniers 0 00 00 1 ^/5
Achen Gold 16 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 01 03 Macassar Gold 23 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 01 09
1 ^/5 Camboya Silver 4 Sous 0 00 03 2 ^/5 Siam Gold 7 Livers, 1 Sous 0 10 06 3
Siam Silver 32 Sous, 4 Deniers 0 02 05 0 Asem Silver 23 Sous 0 01 08 2 Tipoura
Silver 22 Sous 0 01 07 3 Arakan Money 21 Sous 0 01 06 3 ^/5 Pegu Silver 20
Sous, 6 Deniers 0 01 06 1 Gold Fanos 15. 1 Real 0 04 04 Asem Fanos 22. 1 Ecu 0
04 06 China Goltschut 1350 Livers 101 05 00 China Silver pieces 59 Sous, 8
Deniers 0 04 05 2 Japon Gold, No 1. 87 Livers, 10 Sous 6 11 03 No 2. 3. 29
Livers, 31 Sous, 4 Deniers 2 05 10 1 Japon Silver pieces 30 Sous 0 02 03 Silver
Ingots, No 1. 24 Livers, 10 Sous 1 16 09 2. 8 Livers, 10 Sous, 7 Deniers 0 12
09 2 1/10 3. 4 Livers, 5 Sous, 5 Deniers 0 06 04 3 4. 3 Livers, 10 Sous, 11
Deniers 0 05 03 3 ^/10 5. 3 Livers, 8 Sous, 8 Deniers 0 05 01 3 6. 1 Liver, 5
Sous, 1 Denier 0 01 10 2 5/10 7. 1 Liver, 9 Deniers 0 01 06 2 7/10 8. 16 Sous,
4 Deniers 0 01 02 2 A Tell 4 Livers, 5 Sous 0 06 04 2 Muscovy Gold 20 Sous, 1
Denier, 1 Halfpenny 0 01 06 0 3/10 Muscovy Silver 1 Sous 0 00 00 3

THE CONTENTS OF THE Persian Travels.
The First BOOK of Monsieur TAVERNIER's Persian Travels. Of the several Roads
from Paris to Ispahan the chief City of Persia, through the Northern Provinces
of Turkey.
Chap. I. OF the Roads from France to the hither parts of Asia, and the places
from whence they usually set out for Ispahan. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Road from
Constantinople to Ispahan, which the Author kept in his first Travels into
Persia. 3 Chap. III. A continuation of the Road from Constantinople to Ispahan,
from the Borders of Persia to Erivan. 10 Chap. IV. A continuation of the same
Road from Erivan to Tauris. 15 Chap. V. A continuation of the
Constantinopolitan Road from Tauris to Ispahan, through Ardeuil and Casbin. 24
Chap. VI. The ordinary Road from Tauris to Ispahan, through Zangan, Sultany,
and other places. 26 Chap. VII. Of the Road from Smyrna to Ispahan, through
Natolia. 32 Chap. VIII. How the Author was robbed near Tocat, and of a certain
sort of a rare and fine Wool, which he first brought into France. 40 Chap. IX.
Of the Road from Kerman to Ispahan, and the fortune of Nazar Mahomet-Ali-Beg.
42 Chap. X. Of the Caravansera's, and Government of the Caravans. 45 Chap. XI.
Of the breeding, nature, and several sorts of camels. 49 Chap. XII. Of the
Coyns and Money of Persia. 50
The Second BOOK of the Persian Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER; containing the
several Roads from Paris to Ispahan, the Capital City of Persia, through the
Southern Provinces of Turkey, and through the Deserts.
Chap. I. THe second Voyage of the Author from Paris to Ispahan, and first of
his Embarking at Marseilles for Alexandretta. 53 Chap. II. The Description of
Aleppo, now the Capital City of Syria. 57 Chap. III. Of the several Roads in
general from Aleppo to Ispahan, and particularly of the Road through the Great
Desert. Page 60 Chap. IV. Of the Road from Aleppo to Ispahan, through
Mesopotamia and Assyria, which I traveled in my third Voyage to the Indies. 66
Chap. V. A Continuation of the Road from Nineveh to Ispahan, together with the
Story of an Ambassador called Dominico de Santis. 72 Chap. VI. Of the Road
which the Author kept, when he traveled the fourth time into Asia, to go from
Paris to Ormus. And first of his Voyage from Marseilles to Alexandretta. 78
Chap. VII. A Continuation of the Road which the Author kept in the fourth
Voyage into Asia, and particularly of his passage upon the Tigris from Nineveh
to Babylon. 82 Chap. VIII. A Continuation of the Road from Bagdat to Balsara,
and of the Religion of the Christians of St. John. 87 Chap. IX. A Continuation
of the Road from Balsara to Ormus. 94 Chap. X. Of the Author's first Voyage,
and the Adventures of the four Frenchmen. 95
The Third BOOK of the Persian Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER, containing the
Author's Sixth and Last Voyages, and the Roads through Turkey into Persia,
through the Northern Provinces of Europe. With a Description of several
Countries, lying upon the Black and Caspian Seas.
Chap. I. OF the Author's sixth and last Voyage from his setting out of Paris,
to his Landing at Smyrna. 99 Chap. II. A Continuation of the Author's sixth
Voyage, as he traveled from Smyrna to Ispahan. 102 Chap. III. The Road from
Aleppo to Tauris, through Diarbequir and Van. 103 Chap. IV. Another Road from
Aleppo to Tauris, through Gezire and other places. 108 Chap. V. The Road from
Aleppo to Ispahan through the Small Desert, and through Kengavar. 109 Chap. VI.
Another Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, by the Euxine or Black Sea; with
some Remarks upon the principal Cities there abouts. 113 Chap. VII. The Road
from Warsow to Ispahan, over the Black Sea, and from Ispahan to Mosco; with the
names of the principal Cities and Islands of Turkey, according to the vulgar
pronunciation, as they are called in the Language of the Turks, 115 Chap. VIII.
Remarks upon the Trade of the Island of Candy, and the principal Isles of the
Archipelago; as also upon some of the Cities of Greece adjoining; with a
particular Relation of the present condition of the Grand Signor's Galleys,
belonging as well to the Isles as to the Continent. 118 Chap. IX. A Relation of
the present State of Georgia. 123 Chap. X. A Relation of the present State of
Mengrelia. 125 Chap. XI. Of Comania, Circassia, and of certain people which
they call Kalmouchs. 126 Chap. XII. Of the Ceremonies and Customs of the people
of Comania and Circassia. 129 Chap. XIII. Of the lesser Tartars, called
Nogaies, bord'ring upon Comania. 132
The Fourth BOOK of the Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER, being a Description of
Persia.
Chap. I. OF the Extent of Persia, and its Division into Provinces. 141 Chap.
II. Of the Flowers and Fruits of Persia, of Turquoises and Pearls. 144 Chap.
III. Of the Beasts of Service, of the Fish and Fowl of Persia. 145 Chap. IV. Of
the manner of Building in Persia. 147 Chap. V. A Description of Ispahan, the
chief City of the Kingdom and Dominion of the King of Persia. 148 Chap. VI. Of
Zulpha, a City separated from Ispahan by the River Senderou. 155 Chap. VII. Of
the Religion of the Persians; of the great Feast of Hocen and Hussein, and the
Camel-Feast. 160 Chap. VIII. Of the Religion of the Gaurs, the Relics of the
ancient Persians, Adorers of Fire. 163 Chap. IX. Of the Religion of the
Armenians, and of their principal Ceremonies; and how the Armenians Consecrate
and Administer the Sacrament. 169 Chap. X. Of the Ordination of their
Priesthood; and their Austerities. 170 Chap. XI. Of their Baptism. 171 Chap.
XII. Of the Marriage of the Armenians. 172 Chap. XIII. How the Armenians Bury
their Dead. 173 Chap. XIV. Examples of the Constancy of the Armenians, in
maintaining their Religion against the Persecutions of the Mahometans. 174
Chap. XV. Of the Author's Reception at the Court of Persia in his sixth and
last Voyage, and what he did there during his stay at Ispahan. 177 Chap. XVI.
Of the Honors and Presents which the Author received from the King of Persia.
179 Chap. XVII. How the King was pleased to divertise himself in the Author's
Company. 181
The Fifth BOOK of the Persian Travels of Monsieur TAVERNIER, being a Politic
and Historical Description of Persia, with the Roads from Ispahan to Ormus.
Chap. I. OF the Genealogy of the Kings of Persia, of the last Race. 195 Chap.
II. Of certain particular Actions which denote the Virtues and Vices of the
Kings of Persia, from Sha-Abas the first, to Sha-Soliman the present King. And
first of Sha-Abas the Great. 202 Chap. III. Of what fell out most memorable in
the Reign of Sha-Sefi the first; and particularly of the Death of
Iman-Kouli-Kan, and his three Sons. Page 198 Chap. IV. The Tragical and
memorable Story of Ralph Sadler, Native of Zurich, in the Reign of Sha-Sefi,
who had retained him in his Service. 207 Chap. V. Of some particulars under the
Reign of Sha-Abas the second. 199 Chap. VI. Of the misfortune of Mahomet-Beg,
in the Reign of Sha-Abas the second. 212 Chap. VII. Of the Rebellion of the
Prince of Jasque, a Vassal to the King of Persia, in the Reigns of Sha-Sefi the
first, and Sha-Abas the second. 217 Chap. VIII. Observations upon the Reign of
Sha-Solimon the present King. 218 Chap. IX. Of the Government of Persia. 219
Chap. X. Of the first of the three Orders or States of Persia, which
comprehends the King's Household, the Kans or Governors of Provinces, and the
Soldiery. 221 Chap. XI. Of the second Order, containing all those that belong
to the Ecclesiastical Law, and their Courts of Justice; and in general of all
the Gown-men, such as are chiefly the Officers of the Chamber of Accounts. 226
Chap. XII. Of the third Estate of the Kingdom, comprehending the Tradesmen and
Merchants; as also the Trades, Manufactures, and Commodities of Persia. 229
Chap. XIII. Of the Justice and Policy of the Persians. 232 Chap. XIV. Of the
Manners and Customs of the Persians. 234 Chap. XV. Of the Diseases of Persia,
and the manner of Curing them. 239 Chap. XVI. Of the Division of Time among the
Persians. 240 Chap. XVII. Of the Feasts and ordinary Diet of the Persians. 241
Chap. XVIII. Of the Marriages of the Persians. 243 Chap. XIX. Of the Death and
Burial of the Persians. 244 Chap. XX. The Author departs from Ispahan to Ormus,
and describes the Road to Schiras. 245 Chap. XXI. Of the City of Schiras. 247
Chap. XXII. A Continuation of the Road from Ispahan to Ormus, from Schiras to
Bander-Abassi. 251 Chap. XXIII. Of the Island of Ormus, and of Bander-Abassi.
225 Chap. XXIV. Of the Roads by Land from Casbin to Ispahan, to the Frontiers
of the Territories of the Great Mogul through Candahar. 257
THE CONTENTS OF THE Indian Travels.
The Figures of the Pieces of Gold, Silver, and Copper; and of the sorts of
Shells and Almonds that pass for Money over all Asia.
THe Money of Arabia. Page 1 The Money current under the Dominions of the Great
Mogul. 2 The Money of a King and two Raja's, all three Tributaries to the Great
Mogul. 3 Pieces of Gold called Pagods, which are current in the Territories of
the King of Golconda, the King of Visapour, the Great Raja of Carnatica, the
Raja of Velouche, and at the Diamond Mines. 4 The Money which the English and
Hollanders Coin in the Indies. 5 The Money of the King of Cheda and Pera. 6 The
Money of Gold and Tin of the King of Achen, with the Money in Gold, Coined by
the King of Macassar, and the Celebes. And the Silver and Copper Money of the
King of Camboya. 7 The Money in Gold, Silver, and Copper, of the King of Siam.
Ibid. The Gold and Silver Money of the King of Asem, Tipoura, Arakin, and Pegu.
8 Lumps or Pieces of Gold and Silver, which go for Money in the Kingdom of
China, and the Kingdom of Tunquin. Ibid. The Gold and Silver Money of Japon. 9
The Portraiture of the Silver Ingots of Japon, which go for Money. Ibid. Money
that represents the Figures of the twelve Signs; and which were Coined during
the twenty four hours, that Jehan-Guir, King of the Indies, permitted Queen
Nourmahall, his Wife, to Reign in his stead. 10 The Gold, Silver, and Copper
Money, which the Portugals Coin in the East Indies. 12 The Gold and Silver
Money of Muscovy. 13
The First BOOK of the INDIAN Travels. What Roads to take in Traveling from
Ispahan to Agra, from Agra to Dehly and Gehanabat, where the Great Mogul
resides at present: And how to Travel also to the Court of the King of
Golconda, to the King of Visapour, and to many other places in the Indies.
Chap. I. THe Road from Ispahan to Agra through Gomron, where is particularly
described the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Surat. Page 15 Chap. II. Of the
Customs, Money, Exchange, Weight, and Measures of the Indians. 17 Chap. III. Of
their Carriages, and the manner of traveling in India. 27 Chap. IV. The Road
from Surat to Agra, through Brampour and Seronge. 30 Chap. V. The Road from
Surat to Agra, through Amadabat. 36 Chap. VI. The Road from Ispahan to Agra,
through Candahar. 43 Chap. VII. The continuance of the same Road from Dehly to
Agra. 48 Chap. VIII. The Road from Agra to Patna and Daca, Cities in the
Province of Bengala, and of the quarrel which the Author had with Cha-Est-Kan,
the King's Uncle. 51 Chap. IX. The Road from Surat to Golconda. 60 Chap. X. Of
the Kingdom of Golconda, and the Wars which it has maintained for some few
years last past. 63 Chap. XI. The Road from Golconda to Maslipatan, or
Masalipatan. 69 Chap. XII. The Road from Surat to Goa, and from Goa to
Golconda, through Visapour. 71 Chap. XIII. Observations upon the present State
of the City of Goa. 74 Chap. XIV. What the Author did during his stay at Goa,
the last time he went thither, in the year 1648. 78 Chap. XV. The Story of
Father Ephraim, and how he was put into the Inquisition at Goa by a surprisal.
85 Chap. XVI. The Road from Goa to Maslipatan through Cochin, here described in
the Story of the taking of that City by the Hollanders. 88 Chap. XVII. The
passage by Sea from Ormus to Maslipatan. 90 Chap. XVIII. The Road from
Maslipatan to Gondicot, a City and Garrison in the Province of Carnatica; and
of the dealings which the Author had with Mirgimola, who commanded the King of
Golconda's Army. With a discourse at large concerning Elephants. 91 Chap. XIX.
The Road from Gondicot to Golconda. 100 Chap. XX. The Author's return from
Surat to Ormus. 105
The Second BOOK of the INDIAN Travels. Containing an Historical and Political
Description of the Empire of the Great Mogul.
Chap. I. A Relation of the last Wars of Indostan, which gives an insight into
the present Estate of the Empire and Court of the Moguls. 106 Chap. II. Of the
Sickness and supposed Death of Cha-Jehan King of India, and the Rebellion of
the Princes his Sons. Page 108 Chap. III. Of the Imprisonment of Cha-Jehan, and
how he was punished by Aurenge-Zebe his third Son, for the injustice he had
done Prince Boulaki his Nephew, the Grand child of Jehan-Guir, to whom as to
the Son of the Eldest Son, the Empire of the Mogul belonged. 111 Chap. IV. Of
the flight of Dara-Cha to the Kingdom of Scindi and Guzerat, of the second
battle which he fought against Aurenge-Zebe, his being taken Prisoner, and
Death. 114 Chap. V. How Aurenge-Zebe caused himself to be declared King, and of
the flight of Sultan-Sujah. 116 Chap. VI. Of the Imprisonment of
Sultan-Mahomed, Aurenge-Zebe's Eldest Son; and of Sultan Soliman-Chekour Eldest
Son of Dara-Cha. 117 Chap. VII. Of the beginning of Aurenge-Zebe's Reign, and
the Death of Cha-Jehan his Father. 120 Chap. VIII. Of the preparations against
the Feast of the Great Mogul, when he is weighed solemnly every year. Of the
Richness of his Thrones, and the magnificence of his Court. 122 Chap. IX. Some
other observations upon the Court of the Great Mogul. 124 Chap. X. Of the
Commodities which are brought, as well out of the Dominions of the Great Mogul,
as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other Neighboring
Territories. 126 Chap. XI. Of Diamonds, and the Mines and Rivers where they are
found; and first of the Author's Journey to the Mines of Raolconda. 134 Chap.
XII. The Author's Journey to the other Mines; and how they find the Diamonds
there. 137 Chap. XIII. A Continuation of the Author's Travels to the Diamond
Mines. 139 Chap. XIV. Of the diversity of Weights used at the Diamond Mines; of
the pieces of Gold and Silver there current; and the Rule which they observe to
know the price of Diamonds. 140 Chap. XV. The Rule to know the just price and
value of a Diamond of what weight soever, from three to a hundred, and upwards;
a Secret known to very few people in Europe. 142 Chap. XVI. Of Colored Stones,
and the places where they are found. 137 Chap. XVII. Of Pearls, and the places
where they fish for them. 145 Chap. XVIII. How the Pearls are bred in the
Oysters, and how they fish for them, and at what time. 146 Chap. XIX.
Observations upon the fairest and largest Diamonds and Rubies, which the Author
has seen in Europe and Asia, represented according to the Figures in the
Plates; as also upon those which the Author sold to the King, upon his last
return from the Indies; with the Figure of a large Topaz, and the fairest
Pearls in the World. 148 Chap. XX. The forms of twenty Rubies which the Author
sold to the King, upon his last return from the Indies. The first part of the
Plate shows the weight, extent, and thickness of every Stone. 149 Chap. XXI. Of
the Coral, and yellow Ember, and the places where it is found. 151 Chap. XXII.
Of Musk and Bezoar, and some other Medicinal Stones. 153 Chap. XXIII. Of the
places where they find their Gold, both in Asia and America. 156 Chap. XXIV.
The Relation of a notable piece of Treachery, whereby the Author was abused
when he Embarked at Gomrom for Surat. 157
The Third BOOK of the INDIAN Travels.
Chap. I. OF the particular Religion of the Mahometans in the East Indies. Page
159 Chap. II. Of the Faquirs, or poor Mohammedan Volunteers in the East Indies.
160 Chap. III. Of the Religion of the Gentiles, or Idolatrous Indians. 161
Chap. IV. Of the Kings and Idolatrous Princes of Asia. 163 Chap. V. What the
Idolaters believe touching a Divinity. 164 Chap. VI. Of the Faquirs, or poor
Volunteers among the Indians, and of their Penances. 165 Chap. VII. Of the
Idolaters Belief touching the State of the Soul after Death. 167 Chap. VIII. Of
the Custom among the Idolaters to Burn the Bodies of their Dead. 168 Chap. IX.
How the Wives are Burnt in India, with the Bodies of their deceased Husbands.
169 Chap. X. Remarkable Stories of Women that have been Burnt after their
Husbands decease. 171 Chap. XI. Of the most Celebrated Pagods of the Idolaters
in India. 173 Chap. XII. A Continuation of the Description of the principal
Pagods of the Indian Idolaters. 177 Chap. XIII. Of the Pilgrimages of the
Idolaters to their Pagods. 179 Chap. XIV. Of diverse Customs of the Indian
Idolaters. Ibid. Chap. XV. Of the Kingdom of Boutan, whence comes the Musk, the
Good Rhubarb, and some Furs. 182 Chap. XVI. Of the Kingdom of Eipra. 186 Chap.
XVII. Of the Kingdom of Asem. 187 Chap. XVIII. Of the Kingdom of Siam. 189
Chap. XIX. Of the Kingdom of Macassar, and the Ambassadors which the Hollanders
sent into China. 191 Chap. XX. The Author pursues his Travels into the East,
and Embarks at Mengrelia for Batavia. The danger he was in upon the Sea; and
his arrival in the Island of Ceylan. 194 Chap. XXI. The Authors departure from
Ceylan, and his arrival at Batavia. 195 Chap. XXII. The Author goes to visit
the King of Bantam, and relates several Adventures upon that Occasion. 196
Chap. XXIII. The Author's return to Batavia. His Revisiting the King of Bantam.
And a Relation of several extravigancies of certain Faquirs in their return
from Mecca. 199 Chap. XXIV. Of the War of the Hollanders, with the Emperor of
Java. 202 Chap. XXV. The Author Buries his Brother; and is again quarreled
withal by the General and his Council. 203 Chap. XXVI. The Author Embarks in a
Dutch Vessel, to return into Europe. 204 Chap. XXVII. The Holland Fleet arrives
at St. Helens. The Description of the Island. 207
THE FIRST BOOK OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER's Persian Travels, Containing the several
ROADS From PARIS to ISPAHAN the Chief City of PERSIA, Through the Northern
Provinces of TURKEY.
CHAP. I. Of the Roads from France to the hither parts of Asia, and the Places
from whence they usually set out for Ispahan.
A Man cannot travel in Asia, as they do in Europe; nor at the same Hours, nor
with the same ease. There are no weekly Coaches or Wagons from Town to Town;
besides, that the Soil of the Countries is of several natures. In Asia you
shall meet with several Regions untilled and unpeopl'd, either through the
badness of the Climate and Soil, or the sloth of the Inhabitants, who rather
choose to live miserably, than to work. There are vast Deserts to cross, and
very dangerous, both for want of Water, and the Robberies that the Arabs daily
commit therein. There are no certain Stages, or Inns to entertain Travelers.
The best Inns, especially in Turkey, are the Tents which you carry along with
you, and your Hosts are your Servants, that get ready those Victuals which you
have bought in good Towns. You set up your Tent in the open Field, or in any
Town where there is no Inn: and a good shift too in temperate weather, when the
Sun is not too hot, or that it does not rain. In the Carvansera's or Inns which
are more frequent in Persia than in Turkey, there are persons that furnish you
with Provisions, and the first come are best served. As for Turkey it is full
of Thieves, that keep in Troops together, and way-lay the Merchants upon the
Roads, and if they be not very well guarded will certainly rob them: nay many
times murder them. A mischief prevented in Persia, by the well ordered
convenience which is provided for Travelers. To avoid these dangers and
inconveniences, you are obliged to stay for the Caravans, that go for Persia or
the Indies, which never set out but at certain times, and from certain places.

These Caravans set out from Constantinople, Smyrna, and Aleppo. And it is from
one of these Cities that a Traveller must set out, that intends for Persia,
whether he keeps company with the Caravan, or will hazard himself alone with a
Guide, as once I did.

I will begin with Constantinople, from whence you may go either by Land or
Sea: and either by Land or Sea there are two ways to go. The first of these by
Land is that which I took with Monsieur Chapes and Monsieur St. Liebau. By the
way take notice; that Vienna is the halfway near upon between Paris and
Constantinople. The second Read is less frequented, but is less inconvenient
and less dangerous: for there are no need of the Emperor's Pasports, which he
does not grant very freely: besides that here is no fear of the Pirates of
Tunis or Argier, as when you embarque from Marseilles of Ligorn. If you intend
this way, you must go to Venice; from Venice to Ancona, from whence several
Barques are bound every Week for Ragusa. From Ragusa you sail along by the
Shore to Durazzo a Seaport of Albania; from whence you travel the rest of the
way by Land. From Durazzo to Albanopolis, distant three days journey, from
thence to Monestier, just as far; from Monestier you may either take the left
hand through Sophia, and Philippopolis, or the right through Inguischer, three
days journey from Monestier, and ten from Adrianople, from whence in five days
you reach Constantinople through Selivrea.

This last way is part by Sea and part by Land: but there are two other ways
altogether by Land, above and below Italy, according to the distinction which
Antiquity made of the two Seas that almost encompass it. You may embark at
Venice, and saying along the Gulf which is free from Pirates, you must double
the Cape of Matapan, the most Southern Point of all Europe, to enter into the
Archipelago. The other way is from Marseilles or Ligorn, from whence several
Vessels are bound for the East. The safest way is to go along with the English
or Holland Fleets, that usually arrive at Ligorn either in the Spring or in
Autumn, and part just against the Morea, to the several parts whither they are
bound. As the Wind serves, those Fleets sometimes make Sail between the Island
of Elba and Italy, and by the Tower of Messina: sometimes below Sicily and
Sardigna, within sight of Malta. Thus you must come within sight of Candy,
whether you are bound for Constantinople, Smyrna, or Alexandretta, from whence
it is but three days journey to Aleppo: from one of which three Cities, you
must necessarily begin your journey, if you intend for Persia.

Some take Egypt in their way, using through Alexandria, Cairo, and Damiata,
whence several Vessels are bound for Joppa; or St. John's of Acra, which is not
far off: from thence to Jerusalem or Damascus, and from thence to Bagdat or
Babylon.

If you will venture in a single Vessel not staying for the Fleets, you may
hire a Vessel from Ligorn to Naples, from Naples to Messina, keeping along by
the Shore, and lying ashore every night. I took this way, and went from
Messina to Syracuse, where are to be seen the most remarkable footsteps of
Antiquity. It Is like a City under ground, and near to it is a great Rock which
has been made hollow, at the bottom whereof if a man whisper, they that are at
the top may hear him. They call this Rock Dionysius the Tyrant's Ear: for being
at the top, he easily understood what the People said of him below; and
discovered the Counsels of the chief Men of Syracuse, whom lie kept prisoners
there. Syracuse has nothing of that splendor which renowned it when it was the
Mistress of all Sicily, and when Greece, jealous of her power, made War upon
her. But the Soil is very plentiful, and the Galleys of Malta very often take
in their Provisions there. Near the City is a fair Convent of Capuchin Friars,
going out of which you may walk for half an hour between two very high Rocks,
where there are several little Cells with every one a Garden, where the Friars
sometimes retire, and it is certainly one of the most pleasing Solitudes in the
World.

From Syracuse I went to Malta, where you must wait for some Ship that is bound
for the East.

CHAP. II. Of the Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, which the Author kept in
his first Travels into Persia.
IT is seldom that any Caravans go from Constantinople into Persia; but from
Bursa they go every two Months: Bursa is the Capital City of Bithynia, not
above three days journey from Constantinople, or a little more. These two Roads
meet at Chabangi, where you may be from Bursa in two Days: and so I will only
speak of the Roads from Constantinople to Ispahan. This Journey is to be
undertaken either with the Caravan of Camels, or else ten or twelve Men in a
Company, well mounted and well armed.

From Constantinople, you cross over to Scutari, upon the Coast of Asia.

Setting out from Scutari, the first days journey is very pleasant, over Fields
gayly painted with Flowers in their season. At first for some time together, on
both sides the way, you see nothing but fair Sepulchers with their Pyramids,
and you may easily discern the Women's Monuments from the Men's. For there is a
Turbant upon the Pyramid of the Men's Sepulcher, but the Pyramids of the Women's
Monuments are trimmed with the Head-Attire which is worn by the Women of the
Country. That Evening you must lie at Cartali, a Village of Bithynia, the next
Day at Gebisa, anciently Lybissa, famous for the Tomb of Hannibal. In that
place there are two good Inns, and two fair Fountains.

The third Day you come to Isnich, which is thought to be the ancient Niceae;
one part of the City is built upon the descent of a Hill, the other part upon a
Plain that reaches to the Sea, and makes the Golf of Isnich. The Haven consists
of two Moles made of Freestone, and three great Enclosures encompassed with
Walls, which serve instead of so many Arsenals, wherein there are Storehouses
full of large Timber, for building Houses and Galleys. The Country round about
being an excellent place for Hunting, and the Soil bearing rare Fruits, and
rich in Wine, caused Sultan Amuratt to build a Seraglio in the highest part of
the Town, from whence there is a prospect at the same time both over the Sea
and the Country. The Jews inhabit the greatest part of the Town, dealing
chiefly in Timber and Corn. When the Wind serves, you may go from
Constantinople to Isnich in seven or eight Hours, there being no danger in the
passage.

The fourth Day you stay at Chabangi, a small Town built upon the side of a
Lake, called Chaban-Gigul, where there are two Inns. From the beginning of the
Lake for two Leagues together you travel partly over Mountains, partly by the
Lakeside; where in some places the Horse will be up to the Belly. This Lake is
not above ten Leagues in compass; but it yields great store of large Fish,
infomuch that I have bought a Pike two Foot and a half long for three Sous.
Many Emperors have had a design to make a Cut out of this Lake into the Sea,
for the more easy transporting to Constantinople the Timber which grows upon
the Mountains near the Lake. And if the Grand Vizier, who by a Miracle died in
his Bed, and left his Son successor to his Employment, had lived some few Years
longer, he had no question added this to the rest of those famous Works that
eternized his Memory.

Departing from Chabandi, you come to lie at Night upon the Bank of a River
called Zacarat, which runs Northward and falls into the Black Sea. It is a
River plentiful in Fish, and you cross over it with a wooden Bridge. There is
neither Town, nor Inn in that place; but a League from the River is a great
Town called Ada, the chiefest part of the Inhabitants whereof are Armenians.
Thither we sent for excellent good Wine, and other necessary refreshments.

From that River to Cancoly, where you lie the next Night, and have your choice
of four Inns; you travel all the day in the Mershes, over wooden Bridges and
Causeys.

Tuskebasar is the next place, a small Village with two Inns. From thence to
Cargueslar, a great Town, with one Inn; built upon a River, where there is
great store of Fish taken, which the Inhabitants call Bourma-balouky, that is
to say, the Fish with the long Nose: It is speckl'd like a Trout; but of a
better taste, and more esteemed. Polia, or Polis, is a City seated at the foot
of several Mountains, the Inhabitants whereof are for the most part Greeks.
These Mountains are very high, and extend themselves along the Road for two
days journey. They are full of several sorts of Trees, which are straight and
tall like Firr-trees; and divided by so many Torrents, which it would be hard
to pass over, were it not for the Bridges that the Grand Vizier Kuprigli caused
to be built. In regard the soil of these Mountains is very fat, there would be
no drawing for the Horses after great Rains or the melting of the Snow, had not
the same Vizier caused all the Ways to be Paved and Pitched, even as far as
Constantinople. A Work of great Charge, in regard there is not a Flint in any
part of the Mountain, and for that the Stone is to be fetched a great way off.
There are abundance of Pigeons as big as Hens, and of an excellent taste, which
not only pleased our Appetites, but afforded us very good Pastime to shoot
them. Between the City and the Mountain, there is a Plain about two Leagues in
length; near to which, there glides a River that waters it, and very much
contributes to its fertility. It is an excellent Soil, and produces all things
necessary for Humane Life, Upon each side of the way I counted above twenty
Churchyards. For it is the custom of the Turks to bury near the Highway,
believing that the Travelers pray for the Souls of the deceased. Upon every
Tomb, there is to be seen a Marble Pillar, half fixed in the Earth: of which
Pillars there are so great a number, of various Colors, that it is from thence
conjectured, that there were a very great number of Christian Churches in
Polia, and the parts thereabouts. They assured me likewise, that there were a
vast quantity of these Pillars in the Villages up and down in the Mountains,
which the Turks every day pull down to set upon their Tombs.

Bendourlour is a Village in the Mountains, where there is one Inn.

Gerradar is beyond the Mountains, where there are two Inns.

Carg^slar has two Inns, and lies in a good Country.

Caragalan, is a Town where there are two Inns.

Cosizar is a Village with one Inn.

Tocia is a great City situated upon rising Hills, that join to very high
Mountains. Upon the Winter West, there appears a fair Champain Country, watered
by a Stream that falls into a River of a greater bigness, called Guselarmac.
Upon the highest of the smaller Hills toward the East, there is a Fortress,
where a Basha resides; and in the Town is one of the fairest Inns upon the
Road. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are Christian Greeks, who have the
advantage to drink excellent Wine, with which the Country furnishes them in
abundance.

Agisensalou stands upon a River, and there is an Inn and a fair Mosquee in it.

Ozeman is a little City, seated at the foot of a Hill upon which there stands
a strong Castle, and below two very commodious Inns. The River Guselarmac,
broad and deep, washes the South side of the City, which you cross, over one of
the fairest Bridges that ever was seen. It consists of fifteen Arches, all of
Freestone, and is a Work that shows the Grandeur of the Undertaker. Somewhat at
a distance from the Bridge stand six Corn-Mills all together, with little
wooden Bridges to go from one to another. This River falls into the Euxin Sea,
about eight days journey from Ozeman.

Azilar is a great Town, where there are two Inns.

Delekiras is a great Village, with one Inn.

These Four Days Journeys are very dangerous, by reason that the Ways are
narrow, and commodious for Robbers. They are very numerous in this Country; and
therefore understanding that we were waylaid, we sent and desired a Convoy of
the Basha, who lent us fifty Horsemen.

Amasia is a great City, built upon an ascent in the hollow of a Mountain. It
has no prospect, but only from the South over a fair Plain. The River that runs
by it comes from Tocat, and throws it self into the Black Sea, four days
journey from Amasia. You cross it over a wooden Bridge, so narrow that not
above three persons can go a-brest. To bring fresh Water to the City, they have
cut a League into Rocks as hard as Marble, which was a prodigious Labor. On
the West Side, upon a high Mountain, stands a Fortress, where they can come by
no other Water than what they preserve in Cisterns when it rains. In the middle
of the Mountain is a fair Spring, and round about it are several Chambers cut
out of the Rock, where the Dervichs make their abode. There are but two Inns,
and those very bad ones, in Amasia. But the Soil is good, and bears the best
Wine and Fruits in all Natolia.

Ainabachar, is the name of an Inn, distant a quarter of a League from a great
Town where they fetch their Provisions.

Turcall is a great Town near to a Mountain, upon which there stands a Castle.
The River that comes from Tocatt washes the Houses, and we caught excellent
Fish in it. In that place is another of the fairest Inns upon the Road.

From Turcall you may travel in one day to Tocatt, where the Road from Smyrna
to Ispahan meets.

Tocat is a good fair City built at the foot of a very high Mountain, spreading
it self round about a great Rock that stands almost in the midst of the Town,
upon the top whereof a high Castle commands the neighboring parts, with a good
Garrison in it. It is very ancient, and the remainder of three others that
stood there in former times. The City is very well inhabited with Turks, who
are the Lord Controllers, Armenians, Greeks, and Jews. The Streets are very
narrow, but the Houses are indifferent well built; and among several Mosquees,
there is one very magnificent, which seems to be newly reared. There was also a
very fair Inn going up, which when I last traveled that way, was not quite
finished. There is one thing more particular and more commodious at Tocat,
which is not to be found in any Inns upon the Road, That round about all the
Caravansera's in the Town, there are Lodgings which they let out to Merchants,
that desire to be by themselves out of the noise and hurry of the Caravans,
whiles they stay at Tocat. Besides that, in those private Lodgings you have
your liberty to drink Wine, and provide for the rest of your Journey; which is
not so easily done in the public Inns, where the Turks will have an eye upon
the Merchants, to draw Money out of their pockets. The Christians have twelve
Churches at Tocat, and there resides an Archbishop, that has under him seven
Suffragans. There are also two Monasteries for Men, and two for Women; and for
fourteen or fifteen Leagues round Tocat, the Country is all inhabited by
Armenian Christians, but very few Greeks being intermixed among them. The
greatest part of these Christians are Tradesmen, and for the most part Smiths.
A fair River runs about half a quarter of a League from the City, which rises
near to Erzerom, and is crossed at Tocat over a very beautiful stone Bridge.
Upon the North-side of the City, it waters a Plain three or four days Journey
in extent, and two or three Leagues broad. It is very fertile, and replenished
with fair Villages very well peopled. A man may live very cheap at Tocat: the
Wine is most excellent, and all sort of rare Fruit very plentiful. It is the
only place in all Asia where plenty of Saffron grows, which is the best
Commodity you can carry to the Indies, where a Pound, as the Years fall out, is
worth thirteen or fourteen Every Frank being 2 s. sterling.
Franks, though the Wax that preserves it, be as much in weight as the Saffron.
This City, with the Lands belonging to it, usually is the Dowager Sultanesses
Jointure. There is only an Aga and a Cady, that command there in the behalf of
the Grand Signor: for the Basha, from whom they receive their Orders, lives at
Sivas, which is the ancient Sebastia, and a very great City, some three days
journey from Tocat. In short, Tocat is one of the most remarkable Thoroughfares
in the East, where are continually lodged the Caravans from Persio, Diarbequer,
Bagdat, Constantinople, Smyrna, Synopus, and other places; and here the
Caravans turn off, as they are variously bound. They that are for
Constantinople, take to the Winter West upon the right hand; they that are for
Smyrna, incline to the Summer West, upon the left hand. When you set out either
way out of Tocat, there is a Toll gatherer, that counts all the Camels and
Horses that pass by, and exacts for every Camel a quarter of a Rixdollar, and
for every Horse half as much. As for the Horses or Camel that carry the
Passengers or their Provisions, they pay nothing. This continual concourse of
the Caravans trolls the Money about at Tocat, and makes it one of the most
considerable Cities of Turkey.

Setting out of Tocat to go to Erzerom, you discover a little Village so
situated under a Hill, as if the Mountain lay a top of it; and between that
Mountain and the River, the Road is very narrow where the Caravan is to pass.
In this Road it was, that we met the Grand Vizier returning from Hunting, with
a Train of four hundred men: so soon as he perceived us, he filled off all his
men to give us liberty to pass by. But among all the Company, there was not
above four Franks upon which he particularly cast his Eye; which made him send
for the Caravan Bachi to know who we were. The Caravan Bachi, to avoid the ill
Consequences of jealousy which the Vizier might have of the Franks, at a time
when the Grand Vizier made War in Persia, told him we were Jews; at which the
Vizier, shaking his Head, replied only that we did not look like such, and
happy it was for us that he took no farther notice. For it was twenty to one,
but that upon better consideration he might have sent after us to have stopped
us. But when he came home to his Lodging he found a Capigi staying for him,
with Orders from the Grand Signor to take off his Head, which were presently
executed. For Amurath being troubled for the loss of his Army, had no way but
to revenge himself upon the person that had the command of it.

Notwithstanding that the Caravans rest at Tocat, yet they stay likewise two or
three days at Charkliqueu, which is not above two Leagues distant from it; for
Charkliqueu is a great Town in a lovely Country, between two fertile Hills,
where there grows excellent Wine. It is for the most part inhabited by
Christians, who are generally Tanners. The fine blew Goat-leather Skins being
dressed in Tocat, and the Parts thereabout. It is thought the Water contributes
very much to their Art. For Tocat is as famous for the blew Goats-leather
Skins, as Diarbequir and Bagdat are for the red, Moussul or the ancient Niniveh
for the yellow, and Ourfa for the black. About two thousand Paces from this
Town, in the midst of a Plain rises a vast Rock, upon the North-side whereof
you ascend about nine or ten steps into a Chamber with a Bed, a Table, and a
Cupboard in it, all hewn out of the Rock. Upon the West Side you ascend other
five or six steps that lead to a little Gallery, about five or six Foot long,
and three broad, all hewn out of the Rock, though it be of an extraordinary
hardness. The Christians affirm that St. Chrysostom made this Rock his
retiring-place during his Exilement, and that he had no other Bed or Bolster
than the Rock it self, in a place where they show you the print of a Man's
Body. Hence it is, that the Caravans, consisting for the most part of Christian
Merchants, stay at Charkliqueu, to pay their Devotions to this Rock, where the
Bishop of the place, attended by some Priests, with every one a Taper in their
Hands, goes and says Mass. But the main Reason is, because there grows
excellent Wine in this place, which being cheaper by half here, than it is at
Tocat, obliges the Armenians to stop here, to provide themselves for the rest
of their Journey.

Two Leagues from Charkliqueu, you cross over very high Mountains, with
Precipices on both sides. It is the custom of the Armenians, when they hear of
the approach of a Caravan, to ride out two or three days journey to meet their
Countrymen and carry them fresh Provisions. Those of Charkliqueu coming to
meet our Caravan, three of the Armenians took a large Mornings-draught, which
made them so Pot-valiant, that they would needs ride before to the Town alone
by themselves; but by the way they were set upon by six Horsemen that came
from the North, where there are higher Mountains than those which we were to
cross. Immediately the Thieves darted their Half-Pikes at the Armenians, in so
much that two of them fell down mortally wounded, and the other saved himself
among the Rocks, but the Thieves got their Horses and Goods, which were valued
at ten thousand Crowns. The Caravan at the top of the Hill beheld the
misfortune of those poor men which their own folly had brought upon them, but
could not help them, by reason of the narrowness of the ways; besides, that the
Thieves knowing all the by-turnings, were presently out of sight. And therefore
it is a dangerous thing to leave the Body of the Caravan, either by staying too
far behind, or running too fast before: and some have suffered for distancing
themselves not above five hundred Paces from it.

The Caravans do not make their Journeys all alike; but come to their Stages
sometimes sooner, sometimes later, according as they meet with Water and Inns,
or places fit to pitch their Tents in, to which places the Natives bring
Provision and Provender from the Mountains. There are some places where there
is a necessity to provide Straw and Barley for two or three days. If you travel
in May, when the Grass is high, it costs nothing to seed the Horses and Camels.
For as soon as the Caravan is lodged, the Servants go and cut the Grass from
off the Hillocks, where it is much better then upon the Plains. But while the
Beasts feed only upon Grass they are much weaker, and cannot travel so far as
at other times.

From the Mountain where the Armenians were set upon, you come to Almous, a
little Village upon a River, which you cross, over a Bridge of Wood.

Going out of Almous, you cross a large Plain, at the end whereof you lodge
upon the Bank of a fair River, called Toufanlou-sou, which falls into the River
of Tocat.

Having passed this River, you ascend a high Mountain, which the People of the
Country call Kara-bchir-boguiendren, or, the Mountain that stops the Grand
Signors; for it is very rugged, and you must of necessity alight, to ascend it.
In that bad Way two Horses that carried each of them two Bales of English Cloth
burst under their Burden, which proved excellent Food for several Tartars that
were before us, and were pitched in the place where we intended to have lodged
our selves; so that we were forced to go a quarter of a League farther. These
Tartars when they heard of our two dead Horses, made immediately to the
Mountain fifteen or sixteen of them with all joy imaginable, to devour it. They
flayed the Horses, and when they came back (for I stayed to see them) they
brought every one a great piece of Flesh between the Saddle and their Horses
backs. For by that means the Flesh mortifies, and bakes as it were, through the
motion and heat of the Horse, and so they eat it without any more a-do. I saw
one of them that took a piece of those Horses Flesh, and after he had beaten it
soundly between two nasty Linen Clothes, with a piece of a Stick, set his
Teeth in it, and devoured it with a very greedy appetite.

Upon the top of the Mountain which I have mentioned, there is a Plain, and in
the midst of the Plain a Fountain called Chesme-beler, or, A Fountain of
Crystal; near to which, on the South Side, there stands a Village.

From the place where we lodged, we came to a little Town called Adras, the
Inhabitants whereof are all Armenians.

Aspidar is but two Leagues from Adras, and is but a Village.

Isbeder is another Village in the Mountains, where the Caravan generally stays
one or two days; as well to pay the Custom, which is the fourth part of a
Rixdollar upon every Camel, and half as much for every Horse; as for the
excellency and cheapness of the Wine, where every Man provides for himself.

Twice we passed by and paid nothing, in regard that the Caravan was too strong
for the Toll-gatherers; and were it not that they stay for the Wine, they might
go directly forward without paying any thing.

Leaving Isbeder, we came to another great Town in the Mountains; all the
Houses are hewn out of the Rock upon which it is seated, as are also all the
Stair-Cases. From this Village, having passed a River, over a wooden Bridge, at
the end whereof there stands an Inn, you come to Zacapa, another Village, from
whence through very narrow passages, where you are forced to unload the Camels,
and carry your Goods upon Men's shoulders for thirty Paces together, you come to
encamp in a little Plain. It lies at the foot of a high Mountain, which they
call Dikmebell, beyond which lies the Town Kourd-Aga, after which you cross
three Rivers; one fordable, the other over two Bridges, and then you come to a
Village called Garmeru.

From Garmeru you go to Seukmen, another Village; from Seukmen to Louri; from
Louri to Chaouqueu, which are two very handsome Towns.

I saw an Old Man at Chaouqueu who was above a Hundred and Thirty Years old,
who when Sultan Amurath besieged Bagdat, gave his whole Army as much Oats as
served them one whole day. In recompense whereof, the Sultan exempted him and
his Children from all Taxes and Tolls for their Lives.

Leaving Chaouqueu, you come to a high craggy Mountain which is called
Aaggidogii, or, The Bitter Mountain. The Ways being narrow, the Caravan is
forced to travel single; and then it is that they count all the Horses, and all
the Camels; every Horse and every Camel paying to the Caravan-Master a certain
Duty, which amounts to a good Sum if the Caravan be numerous. One part of that
Money is to pay seven or eight Armenians, that guard the Caravan all the way;
another part defrays the Expenses upon the Road; and the remainder is the
Captain of the Caravan's Profit.

Having passed this Mountain, you come to lodge in a Plain which they call
Gioganderesi, and from thence to Erzerom you meet only with three Villages by
the way, Achikala, Ginnis, and Higia, which are the Caravan's Stages. During
these three last days journeys, you keep all along the Banks of Euphrates for
the most part, which is yet but narrow, taking its source Northward of Erzerom.
It Is a wonderful thing to see the vast quantities of large Asparagus that grow
all along the River, with which you may load several Camels.

A League on this side Erzerom the Caravan is constrained to stop; for the
Officer of the Custom-House accompanied with the Basha's Lieutenant, comes here
and ties all the Bales and Chests with a cross Cord, upon which he puts a Seal,
to the end that when the Merchants come to the Town, they may not be able to
take out any Bags of Money, or any pieces of Stuff on purpose to hide them till
they go away. The particular Business of the Basha's Lieutenant in meeting the
Caravan, is to see whether the Merchants be well provided with Wines. And if he
desire any Bottles, whether it be then, or in the City, where they are not
ashamed to visit every Merchant, there is no refusing them. For there grows no
Wine at Erzerom, all that is drank there being a small Wine of Mingrelia, which
is always green: which forces the Merchants to furnish themselves with Wine at
Tocat, which they may do sufficiently to last them into Persia. The Officer of
the Custom-House generally allows the Caravan three days to rest; during which
time he sends to the principal Merchants some Fruit and other small
Refreshments, by which he is no loser. After the three days are over, he comes
and opens all the Bales and Chests, and takes a particular account of all the
Merchandises. This Search and the changing of Beasts, causes the Caravan to
stay generally twenty or five and twenty days at Erzerom.

Erzerom is a frontier Town of Turkey toward Persia. It is situated at the end
of a large Plain environed with Mountains, the Plain being beautified with many
fair Villages. If you take in the Castle and the Suburbs it may pass for a
City, but the Houses are ill built of Wood, without any neatness or proportion.
There are some Remains of Churches and of the ancient Buildings of the
Armenians, by which you may conjecture that it never was very beautiful. The
Fortress stands upon a high ground, with a double Wall, square Towers close one
to another, and a pitiful Moat. The Basha resides there but in a very ill
House, all the Buildings about the Fortress being in a bad condition. In the
same Enclosure there is a little rising Ground upon which they have raised a
small Fort, wherein the Janisary-Aga lives; and where the Basha has no Power.
When the Grand Signor has a mind to the Head of this Basha, or any other
considerable person in the Province, he sends a Capigi, with order to the
Janisary to send for the Person to the little Fort, where the Execution is
presently done. One Example hereof I saw in my last Travels into Persia: For
the Basha of Erzerom not having sent Twelve thousand Men so soon as the Grand
Signor required them for his Wars in Candy, the same Capigi that brought the
Sentence of his Death, had the same Order for the Execution of the Basha of
Kars; and meeting this Capigi upon the Road in a Village, upon his return for
Constantinople, he would needs show me whether I would or no, the Heads of the
two Basha's, which he was carrying to the Grand Signor in a Bag.

Between the first and second Gate of the Fortress are to be seen four and
twenty Pieces of Cannon, most excellent Guns, but lying one upon another
without Carriages. They lie at Erzerom to be ready upon all occasions when the
Grand Signor makes War against the Persians.

There are in Erzerom several great Inns; this City, like Tocat, being one of
the greatest Thoroughfares in Turkey. The Country about it bears Wine, but not
very good, and in regard the People are strictly forbid to drink Wine, the
Merchants are forced to buy it very privately, for fear it should come to the
knowledge of the Cadi. Though it be very cold at Erzerom, Barley grows there in
forty days, and Wheat in sixty, which is very remarkable. The Customs paid
there for the carrying out of the Gold and Silver, and upon all other
Commodities, is very severe. Silk, that comes out of Persia, pays four and
twenty Crowns for a Camel's Load, which is eight hundred Pounds. For in the
mountainous Countries a Camel's Load is no more; but in the plain and even
Countries they make'em carry above ten hundred weight. A Load of Indian
Calicutts pays a hundred Crowns; but the Loads of Linen are much heavier than
those of Silk. As for other Commodities, they pay Six per Cent. according to
their value.

From this Stage the Caravan sets forward to a Fortress called Hassan Kala,
where you must pay half a Piaster for every Camel's or Horses Load going from
Erzerom to Erivan, but returning you pay but half as much.

Leaving this Fortress, you must go and lodge at a Bridge near to a Village
which is called Choban-Cupri. Over this Bridge, which is the fairest in the
whole Journey, you cross two Rivers which there meet, one is the Kars, and the
other is a Stream that falls from a Mountain called Binguiel, both which
disburthen themselves into the Aras. The Caravan usually stays a day or two at
this Bridge; because the Caravan divides it self at this place, some continuing
on the High-road, others taking the Road of Kars, as well to avoid fording the
Aras several times, as the paying a great Duty upon the great Road, where they
exact four Piasters upon every Camel's Load, and two upon every Horse-Load,
whereas at Kars you are dismissed for half so much.

I went Kars Road twice; but it is longer, and more troublesome than the other.
As soon as you leave the Bridge, for the first four days you travel over woody
Mountains, and very desert Countries, where you meet but with one Village; but
coming near Kars the Country is more pleasant, and well manured; bearing all
sorts of Grain.

Kars is in 78 Degrees. 40 Min. of Longitude, and 42 Degrees. 40 Min. of Latitude; in a
very good Soil. The City is very large, but thinly peopled, though Provision be
very plentiful and very cheap. But the Grand Signor always choosing that place
to rendezvous his Army, whenever he intended to recruit it, and to lodge his
People there which he sent to build Villages; the King of Persia has ruined all
the Country, as he did at Sulfa, and in many other Frontier places, for nine or
ten days journey together.

From Kars to Erivan the Caravan makes it nine days journey, and lies where it
can find most convenience, there being no certain Stages. The first days
journey ends at a Monastery and a Village, the one no less deserted than the
other. The next day you come to the Ruins of a great City, called Anikagae, in
the Armenian Language the City of Any, which was the name of an Armenian King
that was the Founder of it. By the Wall, on the East Side, runs a rapid Stream
that falls from the Mountains of Mingrelia, and empties it self into the River
of Kars. This City was very strongly situated; being placed in a Mersh, where
are to be seen the Remains of two Causeys that only led to the Town. There are
the Ruins of several Monasteries; among the rest two that are entire, supposed
to be Royal Foundations. From thence to Erivan for two days journey, you meet
with only two Villages; near the last of which you ride by the side of a Hill,
whither when the Caravan passes by, the People bring Horses from several Parts
to be sold. The Great Road from the Bridge, where the Caravan parts, lies thus:

Two Leagues from the Bridge, on the right hand toward the South, lies a great
Mountain which the People of the Country call Mingol. In this Mountain there
are abundance of Springs, and from one side of it falls Euphrates, from the
other side the River of Kars, which empties it self into the Aras fourteen or
fifteen Leagues on this side Erivan. The Aras, which the Ancients called
Araxes, falls from other Mountains Eastward of Mingol, which after many
windings through the Upper Armenia, where it receives many other Rivers that
swell its Streams; it discharges it self into the Caspian Sea, two days journey
from Shamaki, upon the Frontiers of the ancient Medes.

The whole Country is inter-cut by the Rivers Aras and Kars, and several other
Streams that fall into them, inhabited by very few, but what are Christians;
those few Mahumetans that live among them being so superstitious, that they
will not drink the Water of any of those Rivers, nor wash in them; believing
them impure and defiled by the use which the Christians make of them. They have
their particular Wells and Cisterns by themselves, which they will not suffer a
Christian to come near.

Comasour is the first Village where you lodge after you leave the Bridge of
Choban-Kupri, going to Erivan.

Halicarcara is the next Stage to Comasour: this is a great Town also inhabited
by Christians, but the Houses are built all underground like Caves. Coming
thither the seventh of March 1655, the Snow was so deep that there was no
traveling, so that we were forced to stay there eight days. But the Customer
of Erzerom understanding in what a bad condition we were, came in person with
five hundred Horse to make way for us, and sent for the Country People round
about to clear away the Snow. But it was not so much out Kindness to us, as for
his own Interest. For a new Officer being to succeed him upon the 22d of March,
and our Caravan being very numerous, he would have lost above a hundred
thousand Crowns, had we not come to Erzerom before that day. Many of the
Passengers were almost blinded by continual looking upon the Snow, the color
whereof very much dims the Sight: for preservation whereof the Travelers are
wont to wear black Cypress Hoods, made on purpose, over their Faces. Others
wear furred Bonnets, fringed about with Goats-hair, which being long, falls
over their Eyes, and does altogether as well as the Hood.

The Caravan is usually twelve days upon the Road, from Erzerom to Erivan.
Leaving Halicarcara, you ford the Aras three times, and cross it the next day
again: for it winds exceedingly. A League and a half from the place where you
ford it the fourth time, upon the top of a high Mountain stands a Fortress
called Kaguisgan, which is the last place which the Turks possess on that side.
The Customers that live there come to the Caravan to take their Toll, which is
four Piasters for every Camel laden, and two for every Horse laden. In the
year 1655 the Caravan lodging about a League from the Fortress of Kaguisgan,
the Mountains adjoining being inhabited by Christian Armeniaus, there came to
us a poor Bishop attended by fifteen or sixteen persons, among which there were
certain Priests, who brought us Bread, Fowl, and Fruit, desiring the Charity of
the Merchants, who recompensed them to their satisfaction. About four or five
Months after, this Bishop had one of his Eyes struck out by a Janisary. That
wicked Fellow came to the Town where the Bishop lived, and lighting upon the
Bishop, asked him for Money, which because the Bishop had none to give him, in
a rage he stabbed him im the Eye with his Dagger. Complaint was made to the
Aga, who it is thought would have punished the Offender, but he fled, and left
the Bishop without remedy of satisfaction.

From the last place where we encamped near the Aras, we went and lodged the
next day upon the same River, in the sight of a Village not above a quarter of
a League. The next day we crossed the River that runs from Kars, and parts
Turkey from Persia. The next day we stopped upon the Banks of Aras, half a
League from a little Town; and this is the last time you see this River which
you are constrained to pass so often.

Leaving Aras, we came to lodge in a Plain, in sight of a Town which is not far
distant. The next day the Caravan lies in the Field, and the next day it comes
to a place where there are three Churches, whence it is but half a days journey
from Erivan.

CHAP. III. A Continuation of the Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, from the
Borders of Persia to Erivan.
THE first Place worthy Observation, entering into Persia thorough Armenia, is
that which they call the Three Churches, three Leagues from Erivan; which Three
Churches, are three Monasteries distant one from the other. The biggest and the
fairest is the Residence of the Patriarch of the Armenians. There is another to
the South of that, about a Musket Shot distant, and another a quarter of a
League from it toward the East, which is a Nunnery for Virgins. The Armenians
call this place Egmiasin, or the Only Daughter, which is the Name of the chief
Church. You may find in their Chronicles, That it began to be Built about three
hundred Years after Christ, and that the Walls being raised to a good height,
the Devil came in the Night and pulled down what they built up in the Day;
which he did for several Years: but that one Night Christ himself appeared, and
that from that time the Devil surceas'd to molest them any more; so that they
finished the Church. It is dedicated to St. Gregory, whom the Armenians have in
very great veneration. And there is a Table of Stone, whereupon, according to
their Chronicles, Christ rested when he appeared to St. Gregory. They that go
into the Church, kiss this Stone with a very solemn Devotion.

The Second is built in honor of a Princess that came with forty Virgins of
Quality to visit St. Gregory. This Lady an Armenian King caused to be thrown
into a Well full of Serpents; but she received no harm. For she lived therein
14 Years by a great Miracle, and from that time to this, the Serpents that
breed thereabouts never did any harm. That Idolatrous King had a design to have
enjoyed that Princess, who was very handsome, and all her Companions; but they
overcame him by their Virtue: who thereupon, seeing he could not have his Will,
put them all to Death.

The Custom of all the Armenians, as well those that come out of Persia, as
those that travel into Persia, is to perform their Devotions at these Three
Churches; and the Caravan stops usually five or six days, during which time
they Confess, and receive Absolution from the Patriarch.

The Patriarch has under him forty seven Archbishops, and every Archbishop has
under him four or five Suffragans, with whom he lives in a Convent, where there
are several Monks under their Jurisdiction. So soon as they have said their
Mass, which is generally done an Hour after Day, they all go to work, and to
dig and delve for their living. The Revenue of the Patriarch is 600000 Crowns
or thereabouts: for all the Armenian Christians that are above fifteen Years of
age, ought to pay him yearly five Sous. However there are many that do not pay
him, by reason of their poverty. Yet their defect is supplied by the rich, who
sometimes pay him two or three Crowns a Head. But this Money does not stay in
the Patriach's Pocket: nay he is sometimes behind-hand; for he is engaged to
relieve the poor Armenians, who have not wherewithal to pay the Carage, which
is an Annual Tribute that they owe to the Mohammedan Princes, to whom they are
subject: Otherwise necessity would force them to become Mahometans; and they,
their Wives and Children would be liable to be sold, which the Grand Patriarch
labors all he can to prevent. Every Archbishop sends him out of his Diocese
what is necessary to be raised for that intent. So that the Patriarch does but
only receive it with one Hand, and pay it with the other; making no Profit to
himself of a Revenue which he has out of 400000 Villages, which the Archbishop
of St. Stephen's affirmed to me to be under his Jurisdiction.

As I returned from Persia in the Year 1655, I came to the Three Churches about
the end of February; the Caravan stayed there eleven Days, as well by reason of
the great Snows that stopped up the Ways, as for that the Armenians resolved to
keep their Carnival there, and after that to perform their Devotions. The next
day I went to visit the Patriarch, who was sitting cross-leg'd upon a Mat.
There were four Archbishops, and nine Bishops sitting about him in the same
posture, among whom there was one that spoke very good Italian. I stayed with
him three Hours; and while we were discoursing together, in came one of the
Monks of the Convent, who had not spoken to any person whatsoever in Two and
twenty Years, by reason of a Penance that was imposed upon him. Never did Man
appear so meager and deformed; but the Patriarch sent for him, and by his
Authority commanded him to break Silence, which he did, by speaking at the same
Instant.

The Saturday before Shrove-Sunday the Patriarch invited all the Caravan, as
well Masters as Servants, to hear Mass the next day, and then to dine at the
Covent. Mass being concluded, the People were brought into a long Gallery,
about 15 or 20 Foot broad, there being a Table on both sides, made of several
Stones, and Benches next the Walls. At the upper end of the Gallery stands a
Table four Foot square, over which is a vaulted Roof sustained with four
Pillars, which serves for a Canopy: in the midst whereof is a Chair set for the
Patriarch, who from thence has a full view of both sides the Gallery; with two
other Chairs of each hand, for two Archbishops: the other Archbishops, Monks,
and Guests sat at the long Tables. The Meat which they brought us was several
sorts of Pilaw, and several Dishes of Fish, among the rest excellent Trouts.
The Pilaw was brought in forty wide Plates, so well filled and so large, that
they were every one as much as a Man could carry. They were all set down upon
the Ground before the Patriarch; who then Prayed and gave Thanks. Then six
Bishops with Ladles took out the Meat out of the great Platters, and putting it
into lesser, served both the Tables. Every one had also his earthen Pot of
Wine, which was very good, and was filled again when it was empty. The
Patriarch and the two Archbishops eat nothing but two Eggs, and a few raw
Herbs; no more did the other Archbishops that sat at the Table.

At the end of the Feast, a Bishop comes with a Paper and Pen and Ink in his
Hand, and asks of every one what he pleases to Subscribe for the Benefit of the
Church; then every one proposing, according to his Devotion, the Bishop writes
down the Names of the Persons, and the Sum which they mention; which he comes
and gathers the next day. There are some rich Merchants that will give two
Tomans, but the meanest Servant will give an Or. The Bishop having done
writing, the Table was cleared, and then they brought us Melons and other
Fruits. In a short while after the Bells rung to Evening Service, and the
People went to Church.

After Evening Service the Patriarch sent for me to behold a Combat of
Bufalo's, of which there are great store in that Country, some serving to Till
their Ground; while the Female ones yield store of Milk, of which they make
Butter and Cheese, and which they mingle with all sorts of other Milk: There
are some of these female Beasts that will give two and twenty Pints of Milk a
day.

They brought us into a wide Enclosure, to behold the Sport, wherein there were
eight Bufalo's. To provoke them one against another, they show them a Red
Cloth, which puts them into such a Rage, that there were two that died with the
stroke of their Horns upon the place, and there were none of the rest which
were not very much lamed. The Sport being at an end, they bring a great
quantity of Wood, which they pile together on purpose to set it on Fire. When
the Wood was heaped in as big a Pile as they intended, one of the Archbishops
presented a Taper of white Wax to all the Company, both Masters and Servants,
who every one agreed with him what they should give the next day for their
Tapers. The Tapers being lighted, the Patriarch with a Stick like a Bishop's
Crosier, marched before, singing an Hymn, attended by all the Persons both
Ecclesiastical and Secular, till they had in that manner walked three times
about the Pile. When the Pile came to be lighted, there was great striving who
should have the Honor. One of the Merchants offered a quantity of Oil, for
Lamps for the Church; another out did him, and a third proffered more than he;
and the Honor of Lighting the Pile was given to him that offered most.
Immediately upon that every one put out his Taper: For they esteem it a most
precious business; believing that the lighting of one of those Tapers in a
Sterm, and throwing it into the Sea, is a present Charm against Shipwreck. For
say they, The Virgin Mary, forty days after she was brought to Bed, went to
Jerusalem with Joseph and her Son; and going into the Temple met old Simeon,
who taking the Child in his Arms, began to sing the Song, Lord now let thy
Servant, etc. the Song being ended, all the People began to cry that Christ was
born, and to publish it about the City. Now in regard it was Night, every one
ran out with Torches in their Hands, and some made Fires before their Doors,
where Christ was to pass along. This Festival among the Armenians is like that
of Candlemas-day; and they call it in their Language, Ter en Areche? Where is
the Lord? The Armenians, Masters and Servants, drank all Night to make an end
of their Carnival, while the Patriarch was busy in dressing up the Church with
its gayest Ornaments.

I could not believe there had been so much Riches in the Christian Churches
under the Power of the Mahumetans. It is not a hundred Years since this
Patriarchal Church was in a much meaner Condition: But since the great Sha-Abas
put the Armenians upon Traffic, they have very much enriched themselves: For
as they got great Gains; so they made great Vows, and gave largely to the
Church: wherein there are now as rich Ornaments as in any Church of
Christendom. The Choir of the Church was hung round with a Venetian Tissue of
Gold. The Pavement also of the Choir and the Body of the Church, together with
the Steps to the Altar, were spread with rich Tapestry. For they all put off
their Shoes before they go into the Church; nor do the Armenians kneel as in
Europe, but stand all the while upright. When they hear Mass, they sit after
the Mode of the Country, but when the Lessons are reading they stand up. All
the Service-time their Heads are covered, unless at the Elevation of the Host,
for then they take off their Bonnets, and kiss the Earth three times. There was
upon the Altar a Cross, with six Candlesticks of Gold; and upon the Steps to
the Altar four Candlesticks of Silver five Foot high. After they had sung
several Hymns, the Patriarch seated himself in a Chair covered with Silk
Tapestry, four Archbishops sitting with their Backs to a Pillar at his right
hand. The Service was solemnly performed by an Archbishop, with two Bishops on
each side of him. After the Archbishop had made certain Prayers, he took the
Book wherein he had read the Gospel and gave it the Patriarch, the Archbishops,
Bishops, and all the People to Kiss. On the one side of the Cover of that Book
there are two Relics enchas'd, which are covered with Crystal, which was the
side of the Book that was given to be Kissed. The Ceremony being ended, many
went to Kiss the Patriarch's Hand, and so retired.

Ten Leagues from Erivan, toward the North, appears a great Lake, wherein there
is an Island, upon which is built a very fair Covent. The Monks that live there,
live so austere a Life, that they never eat Fish or Flesh above four times a
Year: neither do they speak one to another, but upon those four Days. The rest
of the Year they feed only upon Herbs, which they gather out of the Garden: for
say they, it is not Fasting, to eat either Butter or Oil. The Bread which they
eat is brought from the neighboring Villages: and the Island is replenished
with all sorts of excellent Fruits.

On the one side of the Lake nearer to Erivan is a large Plain, wherein there
are six Monasteries. One of which is entirely hewn out of the Rock, with the
Pillars that sustain it, being seated in a very hard Rock. The Armenians call
that Church Kickart in their Language, and the Turks in theirs Guieurghieche,
that is, See and away. In this Church, according to the Traditions of the
Armenians, is kept the Lance wherewith the Side of Christ was pierced; the
Figure whereof I caused to be drawn upon the Place. The Armenians have this
Lance in great Veneration, saying, that it was brought thither by St. Matthew.

Five Leagues from Erivan, toward the South-East begins the Mountain Ararat;
which will be always famous for being the resting place of Noah's Ark. Half a
League from that Mountain, where the Plain begins to grow level, stands a
Church upon a little Hillock, close by which are several Pits like Wells. They
report that it was into one of these Wells that Cerda, an Armenian King, caused
St. Gregory to be thrown, because he would not Worship his false Gods. Between
this Church and Erivan are to be seen the Ruins of the Ancient Artaxate, the
Seat of the Kings of Armenia, which demonstrate that it has been a great City:
besides, there appear the Ruins of a fair Palace.

Erivan lies in 64 Degrees, 20 Minutes of Longitude; 41 Degrees, 15 Minutes of
Latitude; in a most plentiful Country of all things necessary for Humane Life,
but especially abounding in good Wine. It is one of the best Provinces of all
Persia, and yields the King a very large Revenue, as well by reason of the
goodness of the Soil, as for being the great Thoroughfare of the Caravans. The
yearly Revenue of the Governor only, otherwise called the Kan of Erivan,
amounts to above 20000 Tomans, which make 840000 Livres. This City lying upon
the Frontiers of both Empires, has been taken and retaken by the Turks and
Persians, several times. By which means the old City being ruined, they have
built a new one, 800 Paces on this side, upon a Rock, at the foot whereof, upon
the West Side runs a rapid Stream: it is called by the Name of Sangui-Cija, and
in many places it is deep and full of Rocks. You cross it, over a fair Bridge
of three Arches, in which are built little Chambers, where the Kan retires in
the heat of the day. It is full of Fish, especially Trouts, which nevertheless
are dear enough. This River comes from a Lake called Gigaguni, about 25 Leagues
from Erivan, toward the North, and falls into the Aras, that runs not above
three Leagues off to the South. Though this City be fortified to the West by
the River, yet it is never the stronger, by reason of the Hills on the other
side which command it: and in regard it is built upon a Rock, the Moats of the
Fort are not above three or four Foot deep. In some places the City is secured
with a double Wall with several Towers; but the Walls being only of Earth, as
are most of the Houses, the Rain does more mischief, than the Cannon would do.
That part of Erivan to the North-West, is a kind of Suburb, but far better
inhabited than the City: for there live all the Merchants and Artificers,
together with the Christian Armenians, who have four Churches there, with a
Monastery. And of late years they have built also a very fair Inn in the same
Quarter. In the City there only lives the Kan, with the Military Officers and
Soldiers; the Kan's Lodgings lying upon the River. The Governor is a Person
of great Power, and has always sufficient Forces about him to guard the
Frontiers. The Summer being very hot at Erivan, he lies in Tents upon the
Mountains during the Heat. When a Caravan arrives, he is forced to give the
King advice thereof: and if any Ambassador come thither, he is bound to
maintain him at his own Expense, and to cause him to be conducted to the
Territories of the next Governor, who is obliged to do the same. So that
Ambassadors are not bound to be at any Expenses in the Territories of the King
of Persia. Four Leagues from the City are high Mountains, where the Natives
that inhabit the hot and Sunburned Countries toward Chaldea, come twenty
thousand together, to seek out good Pasturage for their Cattle, and about the
end of Autumn return again into their own Country. I cannot compare this
Mountainous Tract, whether for its Valleys and Rivers, or for the nature of the
Soil, to any Part that I have seen, better than to that portion of Switzerland,
which is called the Country of Vaux: and there is a Tradition among the
Natives, That certain People that inhabited between the Alps and Mount Jura,
and which composed a Squadron of Alexander's Army, having served him in his
Conquests, seated themselves in this part of Armenia, which they found so like
their own Country. From Tocat to Tauris the Inhabitants are for the most part
Christians. Which large Tract of Ground being that which the Ancients called
the Province of Armenia, it is no wonder to meet with fifty Armenians for one
Mohammedan. There are many ancient Armenian Families in Erivan, which is their
native Country; but they are ill used by the Governors, who being far distant
from the Court, do what they please. This City not being far remote from the
Province from whence the Silks come, is the place where all the Buyers and
Sellers resort. But neither in Erivan, nor in any other part of Persia are the
Merchants put to open their Bales at the Custom-Houses, as in Turkey. They only
pay certain Duties toward securing the Highways; which Duties they call
Raderies, and those that gather them Raders.

The Kans or Governors of Provinces in Persia are civil to Strangers,
especially to those that they like, or that show them any thing of Curiosity.
The first time that I went into Persia, I took a young Watch-maker with me, and
coming to Erivan, I carried him to the Kan who was then Governor. It was at a
time when Watches were very rare in Persia; and the Kan, understanding what
Trade the Young Man was of, told us he was the first Watch-maker that ever had
been in Persia: Thereupon he brought the Young Man a Watch to mend, and that he
might have the pleasure of seeing him work, he lodged us in a Chamber next his
own, and made us drink with him every day; for he was a true Toper, and
compelled us to drink with him from four in the Afternoon 'till near Midnight,
in a place which he had made on purpose, in his Garden, to take off his Glasses.

This was he, that having delivered Erivan to Sultan Amurat, went along with
him to Constantinople, and became his Favorite for teaching him to Drink.
Amurat left a Garrison of 22000 Men in the City; but Sha-Sefi the Persian King
begirt it presently with a strong Army; and planting himself securely under one
of the Hills that command the City, he battered it incessantly with eight
Pieces of Cannon: the fourth day he made a Breach, and though he had the repute
of a Coward, he was the first at the Assault, and took the City: and because
they would not yield at his Summons, he put all the Garrison to the Sword. For
which Amurat, was quit with Sha-Sefi afterward, though not in so noble a way;
for entering a Victor into Bagdat, he put all the Persians to the Sword, after
he had given them his Word to the contrary, and promised to spare their Lives.

The Platform of Erivan and the Suburbs.
A. The Town and Fort. B. The Subusbs, inhabited by the Armenian Christians. C.
The Church. D. The Convent. E. The River of Sangui-cija. F. The Stone Bridge.
G. The Highway for the Caravans. H. The Fort which Sha-Sefi built to batter the
City. I. The River that falls from the Mountain. K. The Highway to Tauris. L.
The Way to Teflis the chief City of Georgia; and the Way to the Mountain where
the Kan of Erivan goes twice a Summer to drink. M. The Marketplaces, for Sale
of Goods.


CHAP. IV. A Continuation of the same Road from Erivan to Tauris.
IT usually takes up ten days journey for the Caravan to go between Erivan and
Tauris; and Nacksivan is almost in the midway between both. The first days
journey you travel thorough large Plains sowed with Rice, and watered with
several Rivulets. The next day you continue to travel through Plains of the
same nature, in sight of the Mountain Ararat, which is full of Monasteries,
leaving it upon the South. The Armenians call this Mountain Mesesoufar, The
Mountain of the Ark; because the Ark of Noah rested upon it. It is as it were
unfasten'd from the other Mountains of Armenia, and from the halfway to the
top, it is continually covered with Snow. It is higher than any of the
neighboring Mountains; and in my first Travels I saw it for five days journey
together. So soon as the Armenians discover it, they kiss the Earth, and
lifting up their Eyes to Heaven, say their Prayers. Yet you are to take notice,
that the Mountain is hid in Clouds for two or three Months together. In the
Plains that you cross in this second days journey, to the Southward a League
and a half from the Highway, is to be seen a Work of great Art; being the
Ruins of a Magnificent Castle, where the Kings of Armenia were wont to reside
in the time of their Hunting Divertisements; more especially when they
continued their Sports at the Mallard and Heron. The next day we lodged near to
a Village where there was good Water, which constrained the Caravan to stay
there; there being none to be met with for ten Leagues farther. The next day
you must travel one by one through the Pass of a Mountain, and cross a large
River named Arpa-sou, which falls into Aras. It is fordable when it is low; but
when the Snow melts and swells the Stream, you must go a League out of your way
to the Southward to cross it, over a Bridge of Stone. From thence you go to
lodge near a Village called Kalifakiend, where you are forced to fetch your
Water a good way off. The first days journey is through a Plain, at the end
whereof you meet with an Inn, called Kara-bagler, standing upon a Rivulet;
which was finished in 1664. The Head of this Rivulet springs three or four
Leagues higher toward the North; and half a League below Kara-bagler, the Water
congeals and petrifies; and of those Stones is the Inn built. The Stone is very
slight; and when they have need of it, they make Trenches all along the Stream,
and fill them with the same Water, which in eight or ten Months turns into
Stone. The Water is very sweet, and has no bad taste; yet the Countrymen
thereabouts will neither drink it, nor water their Grounds with it. The
Armenians say, that Sem the Son of Noah caused the Rock to be hollowed, out of
which this River issues; which four or five Leagues from its Head, and two from
the Inn, falls into Aras. From this Inn to Naksivan is but a small Journey.
Naksivan, according to the Opinion of the Armenians, is the most ancient City
of the World; built about three Leagues from the Mountain upon which the Ark of
Noah rested: from whence it also takes its Name; for Nak in the Armenian Tongue
signifies a Ship, and Sivan, resting or reposing. 'Twas a great City, now
wholly ruined by the Army of Sultan Amurath. There are the Remains of several
rare Mosquees, which the Turks have destroyed; for the Turks and Persians
destroy one another Mosquees as fast as they fall into one another
possession. This City is very ancient, and the Armenians report that it was in
this place where Noah went to live, when he went out of the Ark. They say
further, that he was Buried here; and that his Wife has a Tomb at Marante upon
the Road to Tauris. There runs a little River by Naksivan, the Water whereof is
very good; the Spring whereof is not far distant from the Head of the River of
Karabagler. The Armenians drove a great Trade in Silk formerly in this Town,
which is now very much abated: however, there is a Kan which has the Command
there. All the Country between Erivan and Tauris was wholly destroyed by
Sha-Abas King of Persia, and the first of that Name; to the end that the Armies
of the Turks, not meeting with any subsistence, might perish of themselves. To
this purpose, he sent all the Inhabitants of Zulfa and the Parts adjoining into
Persia, Old and Young, Fathers, Mothers, and Children, with which he planted
new Colonies in several parts of his Kingdom. He sent above 27000 Families of
Armenians into Guilan, whence the Silks come; and where the harshness of the
Climate killed abundance of those poor People, that were accustomed to a milder
Air. The most considerable were sent to Ispahan, where the King put them upon
the Trade of Silk, and lent them Commodities, for which they paid upon the
return of their Markets, which suddenly set the Armenians upon their Feet
again. These are they that built the City of Zulfa, which is only separated
from Ispahan by the River of Senderou, calling it New Zulfa, to distinguish it
from the old City, which was the Habitation of their Ancestors. A third part of
the People were dispersed into other Villages between Ispahan and Sciras. But
the old People dying, the young ones generally turn Mahumetans: so that now you
can hardly meet with two Christian Armenians in all those fair Plains, which
their Fathers were sent to manure.

Among the Ruins of Naksivan appear the Ruins of a great Mosquee, which was
one of the most stately Buildings in the World: which some say was built in
memory of Noah's Burying-place. As you depart out of the City, near to the
River that runs by it, appears a Tower, which is an excellent piece of
Architecture: It is composed of four Duomo's joined together, which support a
kind of Pyramid, that seems to be framed of twelve little Towers; but toward
the middle it changes its figure, and lessening like a Spire, ends in a Point.
The Building is all of Brick, but as well the outside as the inside is
overspread with a kind of Varnish of Parget, wrought into Flowers, like
Embossed Work. It Is thought to have been an Edifice set up by Temur-leng, when
he had Conquered Persia.

Between Naksivan and Zulfa, on each side, as well to the North as to the
South, there are ten Covents of Christian Armenians, distant about two or three
Leagues one from the other. They acknowledge the Pope, and are governed by
certain Religious Dominicans of their own Nation. And to keep up their
Religion, they send from time to time, to Rome, certain Children born in the
Country, to learn the Latin and Italian Tongues, and other necessary Sciences.
It is thought there are in this Quarter above six thousand Souls that
absolutely follow the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; only that they sing the
Office and the Mass in the Armenian Tongue, that all the People may hear and
understand them. The Archbishop, being chosen, is sent to Rome to be confirmed.
He resides at a great Town, which is one of the most lovely places in all Asia;
the Wine and Fruits that grow there are very delicate, besides the abundance of
all other things necessary for Humane Life. Every Covent stands near a great
Village: the chiefest where I have been twice, is Abarener, the second
Abraghonnex, the third Kerna, the fourth Soletak, the fifth Kouchkachen, the
sixth Giaouk, the seventh Chiabonnez, the eighth Araghouche, the ninth Kauzuk,
the tenth Kisouk, which lies upon the Frontiers of Curdistan or Assyria. Here
it is, that the Armenians believe St. Rartholomew and St. Matthew to have been
Martyred, of which they pretend to show some Relics at this day. Many
Mahometans came thither out of Devotion, especially such as are troubled THE
PLATFORM OF BAGDAT
with Fevers. There are two or three of those Convents; where they civilly
entertain such Christians as come out of Europe; though the Monks, there, are
very poor. They also live very austere Lives, feeding upon nothing but Herbs.
That which makes them so poor, is the often change of Tyrannical Governors,
whom they are obliged to present with large Gifts. But in regard they cannot
give much, those Governors have no kidness for them; for which reason, being
instigated by those other Armenians who are able to oblige them, they use them
so severely that they are often forced to complain to the King; which I have
many times seen done at Ispahan.

A League and a half from the chief of these Covents there is a high Mountain,
separated from all the rest, which rises like a Sugar Loaf, as does the Pike of
Tenariff. At the foot of this Mountain are certain Springs, that have the
virtue to heal those that are bit by Serpents; in so much that Serpents carried
to that place will dye immediately.

When the Caravan is ready to set out from Naksivan for Zulfa, which is not
above a days journey from thence, the principal Armenians usually go out of the
way to the Covent of St. Stephen, which lies to the South.

Now the Road from Naksivan to St. Stephen's lies first to a great Village
called Ecclisia, where live the richest Armenians, that drive a great Trade in
Silk, and have built them a very fair Church.

Two Leagues from Ecclisia you must cross the River Aras in a Ferry-Boat, being
as it were squeezed between two Mountains in that place: Once I went over upon
the Ice. About two Musket-shots from thence, you must cross, over a Bridge,
another River that falls into the Aras. From the foot of the Bridge you begin
to ascend a little Hill, at the top whereof you meet with a great Village,
called Shambe, all the Inhabitants whereof, as well Men as Women, grow Mad at
18 years of age; but it is such a Madness that is not mischievous. Some believe
it to be the Punishment of Heaven, for that their Forefathers in these
Mountains persecuted St. Bartholomew and St. Matthew.

From hence to St. Stephen's it is not above a League, but the Way is very
troublefom. St. Stephen's is a Covent built not above 30 Years ago. It stands
upon the Mountains, in a barren place, and of difficult access. But the reason
why the Armenians chose that place before any other, is because that St.
Bartholomew and St. Matthew retired thither in the time of their Persecution.
They add, that St. Matthew did a Miracle in that place: for that there being no
Water there before, he only struck his Stick upon the Ground, and presently
there arose a Spring. This Spring is about half a quarter of a League from the
Covent, under a Vault with a good Door to it, to keep the Water from being
wasted. The Armenians go to visit this Spring in great Devotion, having laid
the Water into the Covent with Pipes. They also say, that in this place they
found several Relics which St. Bartholomew and St. Matthew left there, to
which they add a great many others; among the rest a Cross, made of the Basin
wherein Christ washed his Disciples Feet: In the middle of the Cross is a white
Stone, which, as they report, if you lay upon a Sick person, will turn black if
the person be likely to dye; and recover its former whiteness after the death
of the party.

A Jaw Bone of St. Stephen the Martyr.

The Scull of St. Matthew.

A Bone of the Neck, and a Bone of the Finger of St. John Baptist.

A Hand of St. Gregory, who was the Disciple of Dionysius the Areopagite.

A little Box, wherein they keep a great number of pieces of Bones, which they
believe to be the Relics of the Seventy Two Disciples.

The Church is built in the form of a Cross, as are all the Churches of the
Armenians; in the middle whereof rises a fair Duomo, round about which stand
the Twelve Apostles. Both the Church and Covent are of Freestone, and though
the whole Edifice be not very big, there has been abundance of Gold and Silver
wasted upon the Walls: many Armenian Families have been very much endamag'd
thereby; for the Women were so devout, that unknown to their Husbands they sold
their Jewels, and their very Clothes, to defray the Expenses of Building.

The first time that I was at St. Stephen's, in the company of some Armenians,
two Bishops, attended by several other Monks, came out to meet us, and led us
into a great Hall, where we were very well treated. For it is the custom of the
Armenians, a little before Meals to present their Guests a large Cup of
Aqua-vitae, with Sweet meats of all sorts, besides Citron and Orange-peels
candy'd, in seven or eight Porcelan-dishes, laid in a great China-Basin. This
is a little Prelude to exoite the Appetite; for the Armenians, both Men and
Women, will empty great Cups of Aqua-vitae. After Dinner they go to Church,
where they sing certain Hymns: when you return, there are a sufficient number
of Mattresses or Quilts to lie upon; for they use no other sort of Beds over
all Asia: only at Night you spread a Carpet upon a Quilt, and shut the Door. We
saw not the Archbishop all that Evening, only at Church.

About Midnight all the Bells rang, and every body rose to go to Church. I
believe it was more than usual, because it was Shrovetide; for both the Office
and the Missa were both concluded by break of day. Between eight and nine in
the Morning the Cloth was laid; before which time we saw abundance of the
neigbouring Country People, who brought Wine, Fruits, and other Provisions, and
presented all to the Archbishop.

While we were at Breakfast news came that a certain Bishop was dead, in his
return to the Three Churches; whither he was sent by the Patriarch to gather
certain Duties due from the Villages. Immediately the Archbishop rising from
the Table with all his Assistants, and having made a Prayer for the Dead, sent
a Bishop and six Monks to fetch the Corpse; who returning a little after
Midnight, the Body was presently laid in the Church upon a Carpet spread upon
the Ground, with the Face turned toward the Altar. In the mean time, a great
number of Wax-candles were lighted, and all the rest of the Night two Monks
watched by turns to Pray for the Dead. Early in the Morning the Archbishop, the
Bishops and all in Religious Orders, said the Office for the Dead, which lasted
half an Hour; and at the end of the Mass they brought the Corpse to the Altar,
so that they made the Feet of the Corpse to touch it. Having so done, they took
off the Linen Cloth that covered his Head, at which time the Archbishop
anointed him in six places with the Holy Oil, saying certain Prayers every
time. Then they covered him again, and said other Prayers which lasted half an
Hour. These Ceremonies performed, they carried the Corpse out of the Church with
Crosses and Banners, and every one a Taper in his Hand. As the Corpse passed by,
one of the Bishops put a Paper in his right Hand, containing these Words, I
came from the Father, and I return to the Father. Being brought to the Grave,
upon a little Mountain near the Covent, and set down, they said other Prayers
which lasted a quarter of an Hour. In the mean time a Bishop going down into
the Grave, took away all the Stones and made the place smooth, after which the
Corpse was let down wrapped in a large Linen Sheet. Then the Bishop, according to
their custom, raised his Head a little higher than his Body, turning his Face
to the East. Which being done, the Archbishop and Assistants took every one a
handful of Earth, which the Archbishop blessed, and giving it to the Bishop, he
strewn it over the Body. Then the Bishop coming out again, the Grave was
filled up.

From St. Stephen's there is a descent for a League together to Aras, by the
side whereof you are to keep along till you come to Zulfa, where you come into
the high Road again. There is another way quite over the Mountain, which is the
nearer way by a League, but it is very troublesome and toylsom, and therefore the
less frequented.

But to return to the High-Road from Naksivan; half a League from Naksivan you
meet with a River which falls into Anas, which is to be crossed over a
Stone Bridge of 12 Arches, though there be but little Water, unless it be when
the Snow melts, or the Rains fall. In a Meadow, next the Bridge, where we
lodged one time that I traveled that way, there is a Spring of lukewarm Water,
which will loosen the Bellies of them that drink it. At this Bridge it is that
the Toll-gatherer comes and takes his Duties, when the Caravan stays not at
Naksivan. You must pay ten Abassi's for every Camel's Loading, or nine Livres,
which is for the securing the Highways. These Duties are demanded in many
places of Persia without searching the Packs. The Governors also in their
Provinces are made to answer for every Robbery committed: which makes it so
safe traveling in Persia, that you need not keep with the Caravan, unless you
will your self.

From this Bridge to Zulfa is but one days journey; which Town being altogether
ruined, shows the reason wherefore the Caravan lodges upon the Bank of the
River five hundred Paces on this side.

Zulfa, the ancient Habitation of the Armenians which Sha-Abas carried into
Persia, is a Town squeezed between two Mountains, through which the Aras runs;
leaving but little Land on either side. It carries no Boats till about two
Leagues below, (for upward it will hardly bear a piece of Timber) and in regard
the Country grows low and extends it self into Plains, there is no fear of
Rocks, the course of the Stream being very quiet. There was a fair
Stone Bridge, which Sha-Abas caused to be broken down; when he wholly destroyed
the Town, that it might be no harbor for the Turks. Neither by the Ruins, nor
by its Situation, does it appear to have been a City of any ancient Beauty; the
Stones were clapped unskilfully together without Mortar, so that the Houses were
more like Caves than Houses. The North-West side was most inhabited, there
being nothing on the other side worth taking notice of. The Lands about Zulfa
being very fertile, there are certain Armenian Families returned, who live very
quietly. Cogia Nazar, one of the chief Armenians that went out of Zulfa,
growing rich by Trade, and being in great reputation with Sha-Abas, and
Sha-Sefi his Successor, who made him Kelomer, or Chief Judge of the Armenian
Nation, built two great Inns, for the Honor of his Country, in Zulfa, upon
each side of the River one. He spent above an hundred thousand Crowns, but
dying left two remarkable Pieces of Work unfinished.

Half a League on this side Zulfa, before you cross a Torrent that falls into
Aras, you may take your choice of two ways to go to Tauris. The one upon the
right hand, leading to the South-East, which is the ordinary Road; the other
upon the left hand, toward the North-East, which we took eight or ten in
company together on horseback, the last time I went to Ispahan. We left the
Caravan, that takes the great Road, and never goes the other way, because it is
full of Rocks and Stones that spoil the hooss of the Camels. However I was
willing to see a new Country, which I shall describe before I come to the great
Road.

From the Torrent where we left the Caravan, we went forward, and lay at a
Village not above a League and a half off.

The next day, after we had kept along by the Banks of the Aras for five or six
Hours, we came to Astabat, which lies a League from the River, where we staid
above two Days to divert our selves. This is but a little City, but a very neat
one; where there are four Inns, and every House has its Fountain. The great
plenty of Water makes the City very fruitful in all things; more especially in
good Wine. This is the only Country in the World that produces the Ronas, for
which there is a vast utterance all over Persia and India. The Ronas is a Root
that grows in the Earth like Liquorice, and is not much bigger. The use of it
is to dye Red, and this is that Red which gives that beautiful tincture to all
the Calicuts that come out of the Mogul's Country. Though the Roots which are
pulled out of the Earth are very long, yet they cut them into pieces not above
as long as a Man's Hand, for the better accommodation of Carriage. It is a
wonderful thing to behold at Ormus whole Caravans laden with this Ronas, whith
they Ship off from thence to the Indies.

The Root is full of Juice, and yields a very high Tincture; for I remember
that an Indian Vessel that was laden with it, being cast away in the Road of
Ormus, where the Bags of Ronas floated, the Sea looked of a red color for
several days.

Departing from Astabat, it behooved us to provide our selves with Straw and
Barley for our Horses, understanding that we should meet with none all that
days journey. From thence we traveled upon a descent for an hour together to
the River Aras, which we crossed in a Boat; and all the rest of the day we
traveled through Mountains; over Torrents and Stones. That Evening we lay upon
the Bank of a small Stream.

The day following, after we had traveled through a spacious Valley for two or
three hours, we ascended a high Mountain, at the top whereof we met with two or
three pitiful Houses, where we stopped that day.

The next, which was the fifth after, we left the Caravan, we traveled upon a
descent for two or three hours, till we came to a great Village neatly
situated, where there grows excellent Fruit. There we reposed for an hour or
two; and from thence we came to a great Stone Bridge on a River where there is
no Water but when the Rains fall. It falls into the Lake Roumi; but the Water
of the River is so sour and ill-tasted, especially when it is low, that it is
not to be drunk. About a quarter of a League from the Bridge are three long
Stones set in the Ground like Pillars: the Natives say that they were placed
there for a Monument, in the same place where Darius the Son of Hystaspes was
elected King by the cunning of the Gentleman of his Horse: from whence to
Tauris is but half a League. The Mountains of the Medes which we crossed in
this Road, and those which run along toward the ancient Parthians, are the most
fertile in all Persia. They bear Corn and Fruit in abundance; for upon the high
Mountains there are fair Plains sowed with Wheat, which are extraordinary
fertile. The Springs which rise there, and Rains which fall give a fresher
beauty and a higher taste to what grows there, more than in any other part of
Persia that wants Water; and the products of those Fields are of a higher price.

Now for the great Road. The Caravan having crossed the Stream where we left
it, lodges the next Night upon the Banks of Aras, over which it ferries the
next Morning. It does not go thorough Zulfa, though it be so near it; because
that on the other side of the City there are three Leagues of Way very bad and
unfrequented. For which reason you must leave Zulfa on the right hand, which is
not much out of the way. After two hours travel you go by a Bridge which is
called Sugiac; after which you come upon Heaths encompassed with high Rocks.
All this days journey you meet with no Water, but only one little Fountain, and
the Water is so bad that the Beasts will hardly drink it.

The day following you travel through an even Country, but very barren: where
you meet with nothing but a forlorn Inn; though it be a place where Cost has
been bestowed, and built all of Freestone, that was fetched a great way off.
The next Stage is Marante, famous for the Burying-place of Noah's Wife. The
Town is not very big; resembling rather a Thicket than a City: but the
situation is very pleasant, in the middle of a fertile Plain adorned with
several well peopled Villages. This Plain does not extend above a League round
about Marante, the Country beyond it being all barren. However it is not
altogether unprofitable: for being a continual Heath, it affords feeding for
the Camels, which are there bred for the Caravans. Which is the reason that
there are so many Camel-Masters at Sugiac and Marante, who furnish great part
of the Road. At Marante you must pay thirteen Abassi's, or four Crowns for
every Camel's Load, for the security of the Road.

Leaving Marante, you lodge the next night a League from Sophiana in a bushy
Plain, where the Water is worth nothing; after you have traveled a mixed
Country, barren enough, where you meet with but one Inn in a Valley: but it is
a very fair one. Sophiana is an indifferent large City, which you cannot see
till you come within it, by reason of the great number of Trees planted in the
Streets and round about it, which makes it look rather like a Forest than a
City.

The next day, which is usually the tenth days journey from Erivan; the
Caravan, having crossed fair, large and fertile Plains, arrives at Tauris. Those
Plains are watered with several Streams that fall from the Median Mountains;
but the Water is not all of the same goodness, for there is some which cannot
be drunk.

In the midway between Sophiana and Tauris, lies a Hill, from whence you have
a prospect over those Plains, upon which the Army of Sultan Amurath Encamped,
when he besieged Tauris. The news coming to Sha-Sefi King of Persia, that he
had burnt it, and was marching further into the Country with a hundred thousand
Men, Let him come, said he, without any disturbance, I know how to make the
Turks pay for their Invasion without any great trouble. They were then not
above fifteen days march from Ispahan, when Sha-Sefi turned the course of all
the Streams both before and behind, which only run from certain Springs, and
are brought in Cutts or Channels into the Inland-parts of Persia, where there
are no Rivers: By which means the whole Army of the Turks perished for want of
Water in those vast unwater'd Countries where they had engaged themselves too
far.

Tauris lies in 83 Degrees, 30 Minutes of Longitude; and 40 Degrees, 15 Minutes
of Latitude, in an open place where there is not a Tree to be seen; and
environed with Mountains on every side, but only upon the West. The furthest
Mountain is not above a League from the City; but there is one which almost
touches it, being only separated from it by the River. It Is a good Country, and
fruitful in Corn; there is good Pasturage, and great store of Pulse. Some think
that Tauris was the ancient Ecbatane, the Metropolis of the Empire of the
Medes. It is at this day a great City and well peopled, as being the Mart for
Turkey, Muscovy, the Indies, and Persia. There are an infinite number of
Merchants, and vast quantities of all sorts of Merchandise: particularly of
Silk, which is brought out of the Province of Guilan, and other places. There
is also a great Trade for Horses, which are handsome and cheap. Wine,
Aqua-vitae, and indeed all sorts of Provisions are cheap enough; and Money
trolls about in that place more than in any other part of Asia. Many Armenian
Families have got great Estates there by Trade, and understand it better than
the Persians. A little River, the Water whereof is very good, runs through the
middle of Tauris; it is called Scheinkaie, over which there are three Bridges to
cross from one part of the City to the other.

The most part of the Buildings in Tauris are of Bricks baked in the Sun; the
Houses not being above one or two Stories high at most. The tops of the Houses
are terrass'd; the Roofs within are vaulted, and plastered with Earth mixed
with chopped Straw, which they whiten afterward with Lime. In the year 1638 the
City was almost ruined by Sultan Amurath; but it is almost all rebuilt again.
There are in it Bazars, or Market-houses, which are well built, and many Inns
very commodious, two Stories high. The fairest is that of Mirza-Sade, Governor
of the Province, who caused it to be built with a Market-house adjoining, to
which he has added a Mosquee and a College, with good Revenues.

The great Trade of Tauris renders it renowned over all Asia: for it has a
continual Traffic with Turks, Arabians, Georgians, Mengrelians, Persians,
Indians, Muscovites, and Tartars. The Bazars or Market-houses, which are
covered, are always full of Goods: for there are some which are peculiar to the
Handicraft-Trades; the most part whereof are Smiths, such as make Saws, Axes,
Files, and Steels to strike Fire, with Tobacco-stoppers belonging to them. Some
there are that make Pad-locks: for the Eastern People fasten their Doors only
with wooden Bolts. There are also Turners, that furnish the neighboring Parts
with Spinning-Wheels and Cradles: and some Goldsmiths, that make trifles of
Silver. But there is abundance of Silk-weavers that are Artists, and work very
neatly; and indeed there are more of those than of any other Trade. Here it is
that they dress the greatest part of the Shagrin-Skins that are vended so
plentifully all over Persia; for there are none unless it be the
Country People, but wear Boots or Shoes of Shagrin-Leather. This Leather is
made either of the Hides of Horses, Asses, or Mules, and only of the hinder
part of the Hide: but the Asses Hide has the best grain.

There are to be seen at Tauris, Ruins of the stately Edifices round about the
great Piazza, and the neighboring Parts: they have also let run to ruin four
or five Mosquees of a prodigious height and bigness. The most magnificent and
the biggest stands as you go out of the Town, in the Road to Ispahan. The
Persians will not come near it, but look upon it as defiled, and a Mosquee of
Heretics, in regard it was built by the Sounnis, or the followers of Omar.
It Is a vast Structure fairly built, the Front whereof is fifty Paces broad,
with an ascent of eight Steps. It is lined without with Brick-work varnished
with different Colors; and adorned within with very fair Painting A Pantique,
and abundance of Cifers and Arabian Letters in Gold and Azure. Upon two sides
of the Forefront are reared two Minarets or Towers very high, but not very
wide, yet with Stairs to go up to the top. They are lined with varnished
Brick-work, which is the usual Ornament of the Persian Buildings: and at the
top stand two Cupola's, formed like the Turbants which the Persians wear. The
Gate of the Mosquee is not above four Foot wide, cut out of a great transparent
white Stone, four and twenty Foot high, and twelve broad. Entering at the Door
of the Mosquee, you come into a spacious Duomo, thirty six Paces in Diameter,
raised upon twelve Pillars within, and supported by sixteen without, which
Pillars are very high, and six Foot square. Below there is a Balustrade or
Rails that run round about the Building; with Doors to go from one side to the
other: and the Foot of every Pillar, which is of white Marble, is hollowed into
little Niches equal with the Floor, where the People put their Shoes, when
they go farther to their Devotions. The inside of the Walls is varnished in
Squares of several Colors, with Flowers, Cifers, and Arabian Letters
intermixed, and wrought in Emboss'd-work, so well painted, so well gilded, that
it seems to be but one piece of Work, cut out with a pair of Sciffars. From
this Duomo you pass to another lesser, but more beautiful in its kind. The
lower part is of transparent white Stone, of the same nature with that in the
Front, cut in great Panes like a Door that never opens. This Duomo has no
Pillars, but eight Foot high, it is all of white Marble, where are to be seen
Stones of a prodigious length and breadth: The inside of the Vault is a violet
Enamel, painted with all sorts of Flowers in Flat-work, but the outside of both
the Duomo's is covered with vernish'd Brick-work, and Flowers embossed A la
Moresque. Upon the first the Flowers are black upon green; upon the second,
white Stars upon black: which diversity of Colors is very pleasing to the Eye.

Near the Door out of which you enter into the lesser Duomo, on the left hand,
stands a Chair of Walnut-tree curiously carved, and fastened to the Wall; it
stands upon a Platform raised six steps high, without any Canopy. On the right
hand stands another Chair of the same Wood, and an exquisite piece of
Workmanship; with a kind of State over it of the same Wood, fastened to the
Wall. There is a little Rail about it; and the Platform is four steps high. On
the South Side of the Mosquee there are two white transparent Stones, which
when the Sun shines upon them look red: And sometimes after the Sun is set, you
may read at those Stones by the reflection of the Sunbeams.

Just against the Mosquee on the other side is another Front, which is the only
Remain of a ruined Building. It was the abode of the Sheck-Iman, or the Chief
Priest. There had been large Baths which belonging to it, but they are all
destroyed; some others there were of less note, which are not looked after.

In the great Piazza of Tauris and in the parts adjoining, stands a fair
Mosquee, a College, and a Castle, which fall to decay; these Buildings being
forsaken; by reason they were made use of by the Sounni's, which were followers
of Omar. Near the same Church is a ruined Church of the Armenians, whether they
say St. Helena sent the true Cross. There is another Mosquee, which was
formerly a Church dedicated to St. John Baptist, where they say one of his
Hands was preserved a long time.

The Capuchins have a very convenient House at Tauris; for Mirza-Ibrahim
Governor of the Province, whose credit is equal to the Kan of Tauris, which is
the chiefest Command in Persia, favors him very much with his protection. This
Governor has made himself very considerable at Court, and very much respected
by the King for his indefatigable pains, and his extraordinary agility in
augmenting the King's Revenue: having found out such ways for that purpose as
never entered into the thoughts of any that preceded him in the same Employment.
He is very curious to learn all the Noble Sciences, which is a quality very
rare among the Persians: He also takes great delight in the Mathematics and
Philosophy, discoursing often with Gabriel de Chinon, Governor of the
Capuchins Covent in Tauris. But the great desire which Mirza-Ibrahim had to
have his two Sons taught by the said Gabriel, was the chief motive that made
him so favorable to that Covent. He bought the Friars a place to build their
House, and liberally furnished them for the Expense of the Work.

When the Sun sets and rises, there are a certain Company of People who are
obliged to make a hideous noise with Drums and Trumpets in the Meidan, or great
Piazza of the City. They stand upon one side of the Piazza in a Gallery
somewhat raised, which is a Custom observed in all the Cities under the Persian
Government.

As you go out of Tauris upon the North-side, there is a Mountain close by,
there being only the River between it. The name of it is Einali-Zeinali, and
formerly there stood upon the top of it a fair Hermitage of the Armenians,
which the Mahometans have converted into a Mosquee. At the bottom of the
Mountain stands a Fortress and a Mosquee, which they let go to ruin, because
they were built by the Ottomans. A little farther upon the brink of the
Precipice stands a Monastery, near to which are two Caves, where are certain
Sepulchers and Marble Pillars lying along upon the Ground. There are also in
the Mosquee certain Tombs of the ancient Kings of the Medes, the Remains
whereof show that the Work was very Excellent.

Upon the Road from Tauris to Ispahan, about half a League from the utmost
Gardens, between several knaps of the Mountain which you leave upon the right
hand, upon the top of the highest of all, where there never was any Water, and
where it is impossible to bring any, appears a Bridge fifty Paces long, the
Arches whereof are very fair ones, but it falls to decay. It was a Mollah that
built it, out of what design no person knew: nor can you come to Tauris upon
that side, but you must see that Bridge, because there is no other way, there
being nothing but Water and Precipices on either hand. Afterward he confessed
that he built it out of mere Vanity, knowing that Sha-Abas, the first of that
Name was to come to Tauris. The King indeed came some time after, and seeing an
unprofitable Bridge upon the top of a Mountain, he demanded who built it, and
what was his design. To whom the Mollah returned this Answer, Sir, said he, I
built that Bridge, that when your Majesty came to Tauris, you might inform your
self from the mouth of him that built it. By which it appeared, that the Mollah
had no other ambition than to oblige the King to speak to him.

A League from Tauris to the West, in the middle of a Field stands a great
Brick Tower, called Kanhazun. It is about fifty Paces in Diameter, and though
it be half ruined, yet it is very high. It seems to have been the Dungeon of
some Castle, there being very high Walls round about it; which though they be
but of Earth, nevertheless appear to be very ancient. It is not certainly known
who built this Tower, but the Arabian Letters upon the Gate afford us some
reason to conclude that it was a Mohammedan Structure. In the year 1651 there
happened a terrible Earthquake in Tauris and the parts thereabout, by which
many Houses were overturned, and this Tower then cleaving from the top to the
bottom, a good part of it fell down, and filled up the hollow within-side.

Besides the little River that runs by Tauris, there is another bigger to be
crossed, about half a League from the City, over which there is a very fair
Stone Bridge. Near to it stands a Sepulcher, covered with a little Duomo, where
the Persians say that the Sister of Iman-Riza lies interred; and they have it
in great veneration. The River that runs under the Bridge comes from the
Mountains of the North, and falls into the Lake Roumi, thirteen or fourteen
Leagues from Tauris. They call it Aggisou, or Bitter-water; for the Water is
very bad, and without any Fish. The Lake which is fifteen Leagues in compass,
has the same quality, the Water being blackish: the Fish that happen into it
out of other Rivers that fall into it, presently become blind, and in a short
while are found dead by the Shore. This Lake takes its name from a Province and
a little City, which are both called Roumi, being not above eleven Leagues from
Tauris.

In the middle of the Lake, upon the way that leads to a little City called
Tokoriam, there is a little Hill that rises insensibly, the ascent whereof is
very smooth, and out of it there rise many little Springs. The farther they run
from the Head, the wider grow the Streams: and the Earth which they water is of
two distinct qualities: the first Earth that is dig'd serves to make Lime: the
next to that is a hollow spungy Stone, that is good for nothing: but under that
again is a white transparent Stone, which you may see through as through Glass,
which being smooth and polished serves to adorn the Houses. This Stone is only
a congelation of the Waters of these Streams; for sometimes you shall meet with
creeping Animals congealed within. The Governor of the Province sent one piece
to Sha-Abas, as a great Present, wherein there was a Lizard congealed of a Foot
long. He that presented it to the Governor had twenty Tomans, or three hundred
Crowns; afterward I offered a thousand for the same Piece. In some parts of
the Province of Mazandran, where the Euxin Sea stretches farthest into the
Persian Territories, these congealed Stones are to be found, but not so
frequently as near the Lake Roumi, and you shall many times find pieces of Wood
and Worms congealed in the Stones. I brought away a Camels-loading of these
Stones, and left them at Marseilles; till I could find what use to put them to.

CHAP. V. A Continuation of the Constantinopolitan Road from Tauris to Ispahan,
through Ardevil and Casbin.
FRom Tauris to Ispahan the Caravan makes it generally twenty-four days journey.

The first day you cross over dry Mountains, and four Leagues from Tauris you
meet with one of the fairest Inns in Persia. This Inn Sha-Sefi caused to be
built; it is very convenient, and large enough to lodge a hundred persons with
their Horses. Over all Persia, especially from Tauris to Ispahan, and from
thence to Ormus; you meet every day with Inns at an equal distance.

The next day you descend a Mountain, in very rugged and narrow way. At the
foot of this Mountain there are two ways for the Merchants to choose that will
go to Ispahan. They that will go the ordinary road and the direct way through
Kom and Kachan, leave a Lake upon the left hand that parts the two Roads; and
they that will go through Ardevil and Casbin, two other good Cities, leave the
Lake upon the right hand, and coast along by the side of the Mountain. From
Tauris to Ardevil it is not above a dozen Leagues; and having passed the Lake,
the Country is very good: Which is the Road I intend to describe first.

Ardevil being at so small a distance from Tauris, lies almost in the same
Degrees and Minutes of Longitude and Latitude. This City is famous, as well for
being the first Market of Silks that come from Guilan, from which it is not far
off; as also for the Sepulcher of Sha-Sefi, the first of that Name, King of
Persia. The avenues to it are very pleasant, being as it were Alleys of great
Trees, which are called Tchinar, planted in a straight line, at a due distance.
It is of a moderate bigness, and seated in a lovely opening of the Mountains.
The next to the City, which is called Sevalan, is the highest in all Media. The
Houses of Ardevil are built of Earth, as are most of the Houses in the Cities
of Persia: but the Streets are very uneven, dirty, and narrow. There is but one
which is handsome, at the end whereof is built the Armenian Church. A little
River runs through the middle of the City, which descending from the
neighboring Mountains runs from East to West. It is by Industry brought into
many Cutts to water the Gardens, and in many places there are very fair Trees
planted, which are very delightful to the Sight. The Meydan or Marketplace is
a very great one; more long than round; where stands a very fine Inn, upon one
side, which the Kan caused to be built. There are several others in several
parts of the City, which have the Prospect over several lovely Gardens,
especially that which belongs to the King; to which you go through a long and
stately Walk of four rows of Trees, at the end whereof stands a large Gate that
gives you entrance. Though the Country about Ardevil be proper to bear Vines,
yet there are none thereabouts; nor is there any Wine made till about four or
five Leagues from the City. The Armenians that dwell in the City are very well
stored with it; though there be no place in all Persia, where there is so much
Caution to be used, either as to the Importing it, or the Drinking it; both
which must be done very privately: Which proceeds from the Mohammedan
Superstition; the Persians having so peculiar a Veneration for that place, that
they believe it a Sin to suffer Wine to be publicly drank therein.

The People come in Pilgrimage from all parts of Persia to the Sepucher of
Sha-Sefi; which together with the vast Trade of Silk, makes Ardevil one of the
most considerable Cities of all Persia. There are several other Buildings added
to the Mosquee wherein he lies interred; the Entry whereof faces the Meydan, to
which it is joined upon the South Side with a large Portal. The Gate is chained
with Chains fastened across with great Rings; which if any Criminal Offender
can but touch, and enter into the first Court, he is safe; for no person can
apprehend him. This is a large Court, yet more in length than breadth, without
the Wall whereof that looks upon the Marketplace, several Shops are built for
Merchants and Tradesmen.

Out of this Court you pass into another which is less, and paved with broad
Stones, with a Rivulet running through the middle. The Entry into it is through
a Door, fortified with Iron Chains like the former, and is made at a corner of
the great Court upon the left hand. It brings you presently under a Portico,
where there are fair Balconies raised after the fashion of the Country. Those
Balconies are full of several People; either Pilgrims, or persons whose Crimes
constrain them thither for Sanctuary. In that place you must leave your Stick
and your Sword, before you go any farther; and give something besides to a
Moullah, who is always attending there with Books.

In that second Court through which the Rivulet glides, on the one side are
Baths, on the other Granaries for Rice and Corn; and upon the left hand, at the
end of the same Court, there is a little Door which brings you to a place where
the Royal Alms are distributed to the Poor, Morning and Evening; being just
against the King's Kitchen. This Gate is covered with Plates of Silver; and in
the Kitchen there are about thirty Ovens contrived in the Wall, with as many
great Caldrons to dress Pilaw and other Food, as well for the Poor as for the
Officers of the Mosquee. While these Alms are distributing, the Master-Cook,
who commands all the rest, sets upon a Chair covered with Plates of Silver, and
sees that every thing be done in order. He sees to the measuring out the Rice
every day for the Kettles, and causes the Victuals to be divided in his own
sight: For there is an excellent Economy in the King's House.

At the end of the Portico beyond the first Court there are two Gates, one
beyond another, both covered with Plates of Silver; between those two Gates on
the right hand appears a little Mosquee, where are the Tombs of several Persian
Princes of the Blood Royal. You must have a great care not to tread upon the
Thresholds of the Gates; for it is a Crime not to be expiated without a severe
Punishment. From hence through a little I Will, you come into the Body of the
Church, richly hung with Tapestry, and set about with high Desks, where lie a
great many Books, wherein the Moullahs, or Doctors of the Law read continually,
having Stipends to Officiate in the Mosquee. At the end of the Body of the
Mosquee, is a little Octagonal Monument, like the Choir of a Church, in the
midst whereof stands the Monument of Sha-Sefi. It is only of Wood, but
curiously carved and inlaid. It exceeds not the height of a Man of an ordinary
stature, and seems like a great Chest, having four Apples of Gold set up at
each corner. It is covered with a Crimson Satin purfl'd with Gold; and all the
other Tombs that are by it, are covered with Silks as rich. As well in the
Choir as in the Body of the Church, there are abundance of Lamps, some of Gold,
some of Silver; but the biggest of all is of Silver, gilded and vermilion'd,
and neatly engraved. There are also six great Branches of a curious sort of
Wood, covered with Silver, with great Wax Candles in them, which are never
lighted but at their great Festivals.

From the Duomo where stands the Tomb of Sha-Sefi, you go under a little Vault,
which encloses another Monument of another King of Persia, whose Name I could
not learn. It looks like another great Chest, curiously wrought, and covered
with Satin. The Roof of the Mosquee is adorned within with a Painting of Gold
and Azure, a la Moresque; on the outside, with a fair Varnish of several
Colors, like the stately Mosquee at Tauris.

In the adjacent Parts round about Ardeuil are several Monuments worth a Man's
sight, being very ancient; and some which are ruined, show by what remains the
care which they took to enrich them with curious Workmanship. A quarter of a
League from the City stands a Mosquee, in which are the Tombs of the Father and
Mother of Sha-Sefi. It is a fair Structure, with Gardens and Courts, in one of
which there is a very clear Fountain where they keep Fish.

Ardeuil is not only famous, as I have said already, for the Royal Sepulchers
which are in it, and for the Pilgrimages which have been made to it from all
parts of Persia; but the numerous Caravans of Silk, which sometimes consist of
eight or nine hundred Camels, add very much to its Grandeur. For being near to
Guilan and Shamaqui, from whence those vast quantities of Silk come; and for
that the Road from both those places, to Constantinople and Smyrna, lies
through this City, there is a continual confluence of Merchants, and all sorts
of Merchandises are here to be had as well as at Tauris.

From Ardeuil to Casbin you travel through a good Country; for every three or
four Leagues you meet with little Rivers that fall from the Northern Mountains,
and water the Earth. The Caravan is usually five days between Ardeuil and
Arion, between Arion and Taron two, between Taron and Casbin two more. Half a
League on this side Taron you must cross a great River over a stone Bridge, and
half a League beyond you come to Kalkal.

Arion is a little City, Taron and Kalkal are two great Towns; and there are
but these three places in all Persia where there grow any Olives, or that they
make any Oil. Leaving Kalkal, you travel over a Plain for three hours, at the
end whereof is a Way which you cannot get over in less than four hours. The way
is so bad that the Horses and Mules can hardly get up; but for the Camels, they
must take the lower Road, which is also very tedious, and full of Stones which
the Torrents tumble down, and it is three or four Leagues about. When you are
up, the Country is level, and you have not above three Leagues to Casbin.

Casbin lies in 87 Degrees and 30 Minutes of Longitude, and 36 Degrees and 15
Minutes of Latitude. It is a great City, the Houses whereof are low and ill
built; except seven or eight, which are next to the King's Gardens. It has no
Walls, and indeed the best half of the City is in Gardens. There are three
Inns, with Marketplaces round about; one of the three being large and
commodious. It is inhabited altogether by Mahometans; or if there be any
Christians, they are very few.

The Soil about Casbin produces Pistaches. The Tree that bears them is never
bigger than a Walnut-tree of ten or twelve years old. The great quantity of
Pistaches that are exported out of Persia come from Malavert, a little City
twelve Leagues from Ispahan, toward the East. These are the best Pistaches in
the World, and the Country being of a large extent, produces them in such
abundance, that it furnishes all Persia and the Indies.

Leaving Casbin, you come to a little Village where there is but one Inn; and
you travel that day six Leagues through Countries fertile enough, and well
watered.

The next day you travel through a good Country, and in nine or ten hours you
come to Denghe. This is a great Village at the foot of a Hill, through which
there runs a fair River. It abounds with excellent both White and Claret Wine,
where the Travelers take care to replenish their Bottles. But generally they
never lie here; being desirous to go a League farther, for a good Inn's sake,
which makes it a handsome Stage.

At this Town of Denghe it is where the two Roads from Tauris to Ispahan meet:
the first, through Ardeuil and Casbin, I have already described. Hither also
come the Caravans that go for the Indies through Meshehed and Candahar, and
where they leave Ispahan Road to take the left hand Way, which carries them
Eastward.

CHAP. VI. The ordinary Road from Tauris to Ispahan, through Zangan, Sultanie,
and other places.
WE must now return again to the Lake six Leagues beyond Tauris, where they
that will take the ordinary short way through Zangan and Sultanie, leave the
left hand way of Ardeuil and Casbin. This Lake is usually full of large red
Ducks, which are very good Meat.

From thence, after twelve or thirteen hours travel, in which time you meet
with three Inns, you come to Karashima, a large Town in a deep Valley, that
seems to be well manured. There is in it only a small Inn built of Earth, the
Doors whereof are so low, that the People are forced to creep upon their knees
to get in.

The next day you come to another large Village called Turcoma, where the Soil
is fertile, though it be very cold. There are several Caravansera's built like a
long Alley covered, which are only of Earth, the Men lying at one end; and the
Horses at another.

The next day you travel over an uneven and desert Country, and in eight hours
time you come to Miana, a little City situated in a Marsh, where you pay a Toll
for Guarding the Highways. In this City is one of the fairest Inns in all
Persia.

Two hours after you leave Miana, you must cross a River, over a fair Bridge
which runs to decay; the Arches whereof are hollow within; it is built of Brick
and Freestone, being near as long as Pont neuf in Paris. This Bridge stands
almost at the foot of a Mountain called Kaplenton. Sha-Abas caused all the way
to be Paved, because the Land is so fat and sloughy, that when it thaws, or
that the least Rain falls, it is impossible for the Caravan to pass. Besides,
there are a sort of Camels in Persia, that when it comes to rain in a deep
Soil, are not able to keep their Legs: nay through the weight of the Burdens
which they carry, their very Quarters will rive from their Shoulders, and their
Bellies will burst. So that before the way was paved, they were forced to
spread Carpets in the most slippery ways where those Camels were to pass: which
must be still done in some places, where the Pavement is worn away.

At the lower part of the descent toward Ispahan, upon the knap of a Hill which
stands by it self, appears an old forsak'n Fortress: it is near the Highway,
and a River, which falls into the Caspian Sea, after it has crossed the
Province of Guilan, where it is cut into several Channels. But generally the
Corn and Fruits which grow in Persia by the help of Water forced into Channels,
are of little esteem, and much cheaper than those that grow in the Provinces
whose Fertility is not Artificial. Moreover, that sort of forced Grain will not
keep above a Year; and if you keep it longer, it breeds a Vermin that eats it.
It Is the same thing if the Corn be grownd; and more than that, there breeds a
Worm in the Flowr, that makes it so bitter that it is impossible to eat it.

On this side the Mountain Kaplenton, appear at a distance two others very
high, one toward the North called Saveland, another toward the South called
Sehar^^^ there is a third, which cannot be seen in Ispahan-Road, being too far
out of the way, near the City of Hamadan. These three Mountains are full of
Springs, from whence most of the Streams do fall that water Persia: And the
Persians do say, that formerly there were many more of these Springs, but that
about a hundred Years ago several of them have been dried up, or otherwise no
body can tell what is become of them.

There are several Villages near the Mountain that pay nothing to the King, but
are obliged to send him a certain quantity of Rice and Butter, for the use of
the Mosquee at Ardeuil. They have also one great Privilege, That if a Man
commits a Murder, and flies to any of these Villages, he cannot be
apprehended, nor can the King himself punish him.

Leaving the River that runs at the foot of the Mountain Kaplenton, you come to
a fair Inn called Tshamalava, built some years ago: and for thirteen hours
after, traveling over a very barren Country, you meet with another Inn, which
is called Sartcham, standing in a very desert place: which makes the Raders,
that lie there to secure the Highways, very insolent, finding themselves so far
from any Towns or Villages.

From Sartcham you come to a River, by the Banks whereof you travel a good
while, till you come to an Inn which is called Digbe, near a large Village. The
Structure is very handsome, the lower part being of Freestone undulated with
red and white, and very hard.

The next day you travel a very uneven Country, till you fall into a deep
Valley, at the end whereof you meet with Zangan, a great Town and ill built.
However, it has a very fair Inn, which when I went last to Ispahan was so full,
that I had like to have lain abroad in the Rain, but for the Courtesy of two
Armenians. From Zangan you go, to an Inn, where you must pay the Duties due to
the Kan of Sultanie.

Sultanie is a very large City, which you leave half a Mile from the Road, near
to a Mountain. Formerly it had in it very beautiful Mosquees, as may be easily
conjectured by the Ruins that remain. Many Christian Churches also were
converted into Mosquees; and if you will believe the Armenians, they will tell
you, that there were in Sultanie near eight hundred Churches and Chapels.

Three Leagues from Sultanie stands an Inn, and a League farther a great Town
called Ija, where there is another very commodious Inn, and most excellent Wine.

From thence you go to Habar, an ancient City and of a large extent, but very
much ruined, inhabited by Armenians for the most part: Here, for the good Wines
sake the Travelers stay to recruit their Bottles.

From Habar, after seven hours travel you come to a Village called Partin. From
Zangan to Partin you reach in two days. It stands in a fertile Plain, where
there are several other Villages. It is not above three Leagues broad, being
enclosed on each side, to the East and West, with a row of high Mountains.

Having passed this Plain, you come to a barren Country and ill inhabited,
which lasts all the day, till you come to Sexava. You pass by the Ruins of a
Village, where there are but two Houses standing, with the Tower of a Mosquee,
which is very high and slender. Then you come to a Mud-wall'd-Inn, built some
few years since; and near to that a Castle called Khiara, upon the peek of a
Hill, but very ill built.

Sexava is a little City in a Soil that bears excellent Nuts. The Inns that are
there, being built of Earth, and being but little, are very handsome and
convenient, their number supplying the defect of their smalness.

From Sexava, after seven hours travel, you come to a great Inn, called
Idgioup, which was formerly a nobler place than now it is, standing alone in a
Field. Three Leagues from thence you meet with another spacious Inn, called
Cochkeria; and four hours farther you come to the Inn Denghe, where the two
Roads meet which I spoke of in the foregoing Chapter.

From Denghe to Kom, are three days journey, over a barren, dry, and desert
Country, where there is no Water but Cistem-water, except in some very few
places, where it is very good. Four Leagues from Denghe is a fair Inn; and
three Leagues farther stands another, about a Mile from a Village to the South,
where there grows excellent good Wine, white and red. From this last Inn to
Sava is not above three hours travel with the Caravan.

Sava is a good City in a fertile Plain, where there are several Villages. The
greatest Trade of the Town is in little gray Lamb-skins, the curl whereof is
very neat, of which they make Furrs. Two or three Leagues beyond Sava the
Country is very well manured, and after you have forded a River half a League
from the City, after two hours travel, you come to one of the fairest Inns in
all Persia, which was finished when I went last to Ispahan. From thence to Kom
it is about seven or eight hours journey, through a dry and sandy Road: but
half a League on this side Kom the Land is very good and fruitful.

Kom is one of the great Cities of Persia, in a fat Country abounding in Rice.
There grow also excellent Fruits, particularly large and excellent Granates.
The Walls are only of Earth, with little Towers close one to another; and the
Houses being only of Earth, are never the handsomer within-side. At the entry
into the Town you must cross a River, over a stone Bridge, and then turning to
the right hand over a fair Key, you come to an Inn very well built and very
convenient.

That which is most remarkable in Kom is a large Mosquee, no less in veneration
among the Persians, than the Mosquee of Ardeuil. There it is that you may see
the Sepulchers of Sha-Sefi and Sha-Abas the Second; as also the Tomb of
Sidi-Fatima, the Daughter of Iman-Hoven, who was the Son of Haly and
Fatima-Zuhra the Daughter of Mahomet. The great Gate of the Mosquee answers to
a Piazza more long than broad, where stands an Inn and certain Shops, which
without-side are somewhat beautiful. One of the sides of the Piazza is closed
up with a low Wall, over which appears the Shore, and a River which you cross
at the end of the Piazza. Over the great Portal of the Mosquee stands an
Inscription, in Letters of Gold, in the Praise of Sha-Abas the Second. The
first place that you enter into is a Court of more length than breadth, which
may be termed a Garden, in regard that on each side of the Alley in the middle,
which is paved, there are several square Beds of Flowers; yellow Jasmin, and
other Plants; which are railed in by a Rail that runs all the length of the
Alley on each side. It is not an easy thing for the Christians to get in to
this Court, especially such whose Habits and Aspect they do not like: But as I
clothed and carried my self, I never was denied entrance into any place either
in Persia or India.

In this first Court, on the left hand as you enter, are little Chambers, where
they that receive the Alms which by the Foundation of the Mosquee are to be
distributed every day, come and eat their proportion, and then go their ways.
Those Chambers serve as an Asylum to those that cannot pay their Debts, as at
the Mosquee of Ardeuil. Neither are these Priviledg'd places like ours, where
they that retire must live at their own Charge: For in Persia they are fed at
the Expense of the Mosquee; and being in that manner freed from Care, their
Friends more easily bring their Creditors to Composition.

Out of the first Court you pass into a second, which is larger, and all paved;
and from that into a third, which is square, and raised like a Terrass. You
enter into it through a large Gate, at the end of an open Passage, where stand
the Lodgings of the Moullah's.

Out of that Court by an ascent of Brickwork of ten or twelve Steps, you enter
into a fair Court, which is also raised like a Terrass; in the midst whereof is
a fair Fountain. It is continually filled by little Pipes of Water which run
into it, and is emptied by others that carry the Water into several parts of
the whole Enclosure. There are some Buildings in this Court, but one of the
sides of it is taken up with the Front of the Mosquee, which is no displeasing
Structure. There are three large Gates belong to it, very well expanded,
according to the mode of the Country; with a Brick-wall before, about the
height of a Man, with Holes in it for Light, made like a Lozange. The Threshold
of the middle Gate is covered with a plate of Silver; and between these three
Gates and that of the Duomo, are several Doctors, that hold Books in their
hands, and read perpetually.

This Mosquee is Octagonal, and at every angle is a small wooden Door of
Walnuttree, varnished with gray and yellow. The Tomb of Sidi-Fatima is at the
farther part of the Mosquee, there being only room for one Man to pass between
the Wall and the Tomb. It is encompassed with a large Silver Grate, sixteen
Foot square; the Bars whereof are round, and knob'd in those places where they
cross each other; it is lighted by several Lamps of Gold and Silver: which
altogether is very pleasing to the Eye. The inside of the Mosquee, to the
elevation of the Angles that support the Duomo, is composed of square Tiles
varnished over with diverse Colors; and the Cupola of the Duomo, as also the
Vault of the Portico of the Mosquee, is a Moresco piece of Painting in Or and
Azure. Upon each side of the Mosquee, and near the side where the Tomb of
Sidi-Fatima stands, appears a great Hall, where the Royal Alms are distributed
to the Poor, which consist of Pilaw and other diet, very well dressed. From this
Tomb you turn to the left hand toward an Ascent, distant five and twenty or
thirty Paces; and at the top of this Ascent is a Door, over which there an is
Inscription in Honor of Sha-Abas the Second. The Door being opened, shows you
the place where the Body of that King reposes: and through another Door with a
Grate in it, you may discover, under a small Duomo, the Tomb of Sha-Sefi his
Father; which is covered with a Carpet of Cloth of Gold. They were continually
at work upon the Tomb of Sha-Abas, which they said, they would make very famous.

I had not been two hours in Kom, but a multitude of People ran by the Inn
Gate, all in extraordinary have. Asking what the matter was, they answered me,
that it had been a day long designed for the two Prophets to fight. Thereupon I
went to the Piazza, which was so crowded, that I had much ado to get to see. In
the first place a sufficient number of Tumblers and Puppet-players, divided
into two Bands, kept the middle of the Piazza, and made a sufficient Ring for
the Combat. Each Band held a Bull by the Horns, one of which they called
Mahomet; and the other Haly: and whether it were by accident, or by the cunning
of the Bull-Masters, after an obstinate Combat, wherein the Beasts foamed again
with heat and rage; Mahomet at length quit the Field, and yielded Haly the
Victory. Then all the People shouted for joy, and all the Piazza was filled
with the noise of Flutes and Hautboys; and every one coming as if it were to
adore Haly, cried out, Behold the Works of God, that Haly has made! At length
they bring the Bull Haly under a Gate, with his Head turned toward the People;
where after they have rubbed him to refresh him, after a Combat so courageously
maintained, every one sends him Presents, which are all the Tumblers profit.
The Kan or Governor of Kom, who was present with a hundred Horses richly
trap'd to behold the Sight, sent the Bull a Present of 50 Tomans, or 750
Crowns. They who accompanied him, and the chief Inhabitants of Kom, gave him
some a Garment, others a Girdle. Neither did the meanest of the People spare to
send or carry him Fruits, or other things, according to their abilities.

The Kan was a Lord who was very civil, and there was no Stranger that did not
commend his behavior, in regard he was so obliging.

So soon as I came to the place, whether it was that he perceived me with a
Dutchman that I had brought along from Constantinople, or whether any one had
informed him that there were Strangers near him, he sent for us, and after he
had asked us some Questions concerning the occasion of our Traveling, he sent
for a Seat and caused us to sit down. Then he asked us whence we came, and what
we did at Ispahan; to which when we had answered him, that we went to wait upon
the King, he approved our Intention, complaining that we had not given him
advice of our Arrival. In the Evening he sent us several Delicacies, among the
rest, six fair Melons, and four Bottles of excellent Wine.

He appeared to me so brave and generous a Person, that I was very much
troubled afterward for his being in dis-favour with the King, and his death,
which ensued. For this Kan finding the Walls of the City, which were only of
Earth, and the Bridge over the River to be out of repair, without writing to
the King, of his own head, laid a slight Imposition upon every Basket of Fruit
that was brought into the City. Now there are in all the Cities of Persia,
persons who are hired to take an account every Week what the Commodities may be
worth, and to take care that no more than such a Toll be laid upon any thing;
which they tax among themselves, and when they have set the Rate, they cause it
to be cried at the beginning of every Week. Sha-Sefi then reigned, it being the
year 1632. The King being informed by these people of the Impost which the Kan
had set upon Fruit without his knowledge, was so enraged against him, that he
caused him to be brought in Chains to Ispahan, where he used him with a strange
severity. For at that time the Son of the Kan stood at the King's Elbow, it
being his Office to give him his Pipe and his Tobacco, which is a very
honorable Employment in Persia. When the Kan came, the King caused him to be
carried to the Gate of the Palace, in the presence of all the People, and then
commanded his Son to pull the Hair of his Father's Mustaches by the roots from
his Skin. After that he commanded him to cut off his Nose and his Ears; after
that to put out his Eyes, and lastly to cut off his Head. When he had done the
Execution according to the King's pleasure, he commanded him to go and take
possession of his Father's Government, and allowing him an experienced Old Man
for his Lieutenant, he sent him to Kom with these words; If thou govern'st no
better than this dead Dog has done, I will put thee to a more cruel death than
this.

Leaving Kom, for four hours you travel over a fair Champain Country, after
which you come to a fair Village with five or six Inns in it. Beyond that is
nothing but Sand, till you come to a place called Abschirim, or Fresh Water,
where there are three Inns at a distance from any Villages. From Abschirim to
Cachan is six hours journey through a Corn Country, and stored with great
Villages.

Cachan is a large City, well peopled, and furnished with all things necessary
for humane subsistence: There is an old Wall about it which is fallen down in
many places, so that there is no need of seeking for Gates to get into the
City. On that side which looks toward Ispahan the Soil is good, and produces
great store of Fruit and Wine, which the Jews take care to make. It is reckoned
that there are in Cachan a thousand Families of Jews; in Ispahan about six
hundred; but in Kom there are not above nine or ten. Not but that there are
many Jews in Persia, but those that live in Ispahan, Cachan and Kom, boast
themselves particularly of the Tribe of Judah.

There are an abundance of Silk-Weavers in Cachan that are very good Workmen,
which make all the best purfl'd Sattins mixed with Gold and Silver, that come
out of Persia. There they also coin Money, and make Copper-vessels, which they
vend in great quantities at a good distance off. The Market-houses are very
fair ones, and well vaulted, the Inns large and convenient: but there was one
among the rest which was very magnificent, near the King's Gardens, at the
entry of the City. As well the Inn as the Gardens were made by the order of
Sha-Abas, the first of that Name, who was at a vast charge. The Inn is above a
hundred Paces square, built of Brick two Stories high, containing twenty-six
vaulted Chambers of a reasonable bigness. It was a Structure too fair to be so
little regarded, as now it is, being much fallen to decay. In the middle of the
Court was a Fountain to receive Water, which is spoiled. The Persians and Turks
are of that bad humor, rather to build new Houses than to repair old Buildings.
For which reason they have since built at Cachan four or five Inns, as fair and
commodious as that of Sha-Abas. This Custom is grown to that height, that the
Children are so far from taking care to repair the old Houses where their
Parents lived, that they will not so much as live in them after their decease,
covetous of the honor of building Houses for themselves.

Before we leave Cachan you must take notice, that as you travel from that City
to Guilan you cannot avoid traveling thorough Plains for twelve hours
together, which are all pure Salt; and there is nothing to be met with by the
way, but one Cistern; nor can the Water which is in it be otherwise than very
bad.

Leaving Cachan, you cross a Plain of three Leagues, after which you enter in
among the Mountains, where you come to a very fair Inn of Brick. From thence
you descend a pleasant Vale, where you travel a long time by the side of a
River, over a very narrow way. At the end of the Valley you meet a great Wall,
which crosses it, and joins the two Mountains together. This Wall is above a
hundred Paces long, above thirty Foot thick, and fifty high. It was the Work of
the Great Sha-Abas, whose design it was to stop the Waters that fall from the
Mountain, and to make a Receptacle for Water in that place, to serve his
occasions. At the foot of the Wall there is a Sluice, which being let down keeps
in the Water; but is pulled up to let out the Water over all the neighboring
Lands to the Plain of Cachan. From this Receptacle to Corou, is about two hours
travel.

Corou is a very large Village, and well peopled, in a Soil environed with high
Mountains, and planted with great store of Walnut-trees. The Houses consist but
of one low Story, being built of Flint-stones; but the Inn therein is very fair
and commodious. This Village consists but of one Street, but it is almost half
a League long, and very troublesome in the Winter, by reason of a great River
that runs through it, and the great quantity of Stones that lie in the way. All
about this Village, as in several other places of Persia, there are a great
number of Shacales; which are a kind of Foxes, that in the night time make an
ugly noise; for if but one cry, all the rest will make answer, and set up a
howling.

From Corou you must travel three Leagues between Mountains, after which you
have but twelve Leagues to Ispahan. It is a continued Plain that extends it
self beyond the City, and in many places the Soil is very good. At every three
Leagues end you meet with Inns. The first is called Achaha-Agakamala; the
second, which is the halfway between Corou and Ispahan, is called Michiacour.
This place consists not only of one Inn, for there are many others, so that it
resembles a large Village. From Michiacour you come to Aganura, another Inn,
but ill built; and from Aganura, after you have traveled three Leagues through
a fat and fertile Country, you come to Ispahan.

CHAP. VII. Of the Road from Smyrna to Ispahan, through Natolia.
SMyrna is at this day for Trade, whether it be by Sea or Land, one of the most
celebrated Cities of all the Levant, and the greatest Market for all sorts of
Commodities which are transported out of Asia into Europe, or out of Europe
into Asia. Hither all the Western Fleets are most regularly bound, that came
formerly no farther than Ligorn, and from whence, at times most regularly
appointed, the fairest Caravans set out.

This City lies in 50 Degrees of Longitude; and 38 Degrees, 45 Minutes of
Latitude; at the bottom of a Gulf in the Archipelago, which is seven Leagues in
length, upon the right side of the Isthmus which begins to form the Peninsula
of Clazomene, right against the Island of Schio. It lies in that part of the
Lesser Asia, which the Greeks possessed, under the Name of Iconium; at a
distance almost equal, between Ephesus and Sardis; and was one of the seven
Churches mentioned in the Revelation of St. John. It is at this day a great
City, built like an Amphitheater, upon the descent of a Hill that looks toward
the Summer-West. But it is neither so great, nor so beautiful as formerly it
was, as may be easily conjectured by the Ruins of certain Edifices that remain
upon that Hill, which from the middle to the top, where the ancient City stood,
are altogether uninhabited. There are also to be seen the Walls of a fair
Castle, and above that the Ruins of an Amphitheater, where they say St.
Polycarp was exposed to fight with Lions. This Amphitheater was not in the form
of those other, which are usually round; for it contained but half a Circle,
being left open to the Seaside. The Turks have almost quite destroyed it:
making use of the Stones to build a Fort two Leagues from the City, upon the
Gulf, where the passage is very narrow; which the Ships are forced to salute as
they enter in, and to speak with when they sail out. Moreover, that they might
not be put to send for Stones a-far off, they consulted whether they might not
make use of the Stones of the Christians Monuments, as also of those of the
Jews, which are near the Shore: But they took very few, whether out of kindness
to the Tombs, or whether they did not think them so proper for use as the
Stones of the Amphitheater. This Castle had not been long built, but upon an
occasion very remarkable. In the last Wars of the Turks with the Venetians, the
Ottoman Fleet having been beaten in the Archipelago, the Grand Signor resolved
to re-fit another to Sea, and thereupon sent to all the parts of his Empire,
where he knew any English or Holland Vessels usually were wont to ride, to
solicit them to serve him for his Pay. More particularly he aimed at those
Vessels which were in Smyrna, where there were generally more than in any other
Port. But the Captains, who rejected his Proposition of fighting against the
Venetians, believing that he would put some force upon them, suddenly hois'd
Sail and got away; it being at a time when he could not keep them in, having no
Castle then built to command them. The Grand Vizier nettl'd at the refusal of
the Captains, as an affront done to his Master, and to see that the Ships could
come in and go out, without any let or molestation, bethought himself (to the
end he might keep them for the future under subjection) of building a Fort upon
the Gulf, in such a part where the Vessels must necessarily touch; where now
there lie great Cannons level with the Water, which no Vessel can escape. Ever
since the Convoys will not come to Smyrna, as they were wont to do, but lie out
at Sea, out of the reach of the Fort.

Near to the Sea are yet to be seen some Remains of a Church, two sides whereof
seem to have been distinguished into Chapels by little Walls, which are yet
standing: But the Natives doubt whether they be the Ruins of a Church
dedicated to St. Polycarp, or of an ancient Temple of Janus.

Smyrna has been oftentimes ruined either by the Wars, or by the Earthquakes
which often happen there. One time that I staid there, there happened one,
which did not last long, but was very terrible. About sixty Paces from the Sea
are to be discerned the Ruins of great Walls two Foot under Water; and at the
end of the City that looks toward the Winter-West, near to the Sea, appear the
Ruins of a Mole, and certain ancient Magazins.

The English Merchants have dig'd among the Ruins of Smyrna, and have found
great store of fair Statues, which they transported into their own Country.
There are still found some or other every day; but when the Turks find any,
they disfigure them presently. It may be conjectured, that there was one of a
prodigious bigness, by a great Toe broken off of some one, and for which I paid
sufficiently, out of the desire I had to buy it. I sent it to Paris to a Person
of Quality, who looked upon it as a great Curiosity. This Toe was of a hard
white Stone, and well shaped, and by the proportion whereof, the Figure could
not be judged to be less than the Colossus of Rhodes.

Upon that side of the City where the Mole was, stands an old Castle of no
defense, at the foot whereof the Sea makes a small Creek, where sometimes the
Galleys of the Grand Signor lie.

The City is well peopled, containing no less than fourscore and ten thousand
Souls. There are reckoned no less than 60000 Turks, 15000 Greeks, 8000
Armenians, and about six or seven thousand Jews. As for the European Christians
that Trade there, their number is very small. Every one of these Nations has
the exercise of their Religion free to themselves. The Turks have in Smyrna
fifteen Mosquees, the Jews seven Synagogues, the Armenians but one Church, the
Greeks two, and the Latins three. There are also French Jesuits, and Italian
Observantins, or a sort of Gray Franciscans. The Turks, the Greeks, the
Armenians, and Jews live upon the Hill; but all the lower part toward the Sea
is inhabited only by the European Christians, English, French, Hollanders, and
Italians. The Greeks have also in the same Quarter an old Church, and some few
small Houses, where Seamen make merry.

All these different People of Europe are generally known in Smyrna by the Name
of Franks. Every Nation has its Consul: and the French Consul has two
Vice-Consuls under him; the one at Scalanova, the other at Chio.

Scalanova, or the New Port, is two Leagues beyond Ephesus, and being a good
Haven, the Vessels were wont to unlade there; but the Turks would not permit it
any longer. For that Place being the Dowry of the Grand Signor's Mother, the
Vice-Consul agreed with the Governor of Scalanova, who permitted the
Transportation of Goods to Smyrna, which is not above three little days journey
with the Caravan: A thing that spoiled the Trade of the City, and injured the
Officers of the Custom-House. Whereupon they Petitioned the Grand Signor that
no more Goods might be unladed at Scalanova: so that now no more Vessels go
thither, unless it be to take in fresh Victuals.

Chio is one of the greatest Islands in the Archipelago, of which in another
place: but the Vice-Consul that lives there has no more business there than the
other at Scalanova; for the Vessels that touch there, neither unlade nor export
any Goods from thence.

The Quarter of the Franks is only a long Street, one side whereof lies upon
the Sea; and as well for the Prospect, as for the convenience of Unlading
Goods, the Houses upon the Sea are much dearer than those that lie upon the
Hill.

The Soil about Smyrna is fertile, and abounds in all things necessary for
humane support; but particularly in good Oil and good Wine. There are Salt Pits
also half a League from the City, toward the North. The Sea affords great store
of good Fish; Fowl is very cheap; and in a word, Smyrna is a place of great
plenty. There is a lovely Walk all along the Sea to the Salt Pits, where
generally abundance of People walk in the Summertime to take the fresh Air:
and there being more liberty at Smyrna than in any other part of Turkey, there
is no necessity of taking a Janisary along, when a man goes abroad. If a man
loves Fowling, it is but taking a Boat, which lands him two or three Leagues
from the City, toward the Mountains, where there is so much Game that he can
never return empty. For the value of three Sous you may buy a red Partridge at
Smyrna, and all other Fowl is proportionably cheap.

But if Smyrna have these great advantages, it has also its inconveniences: the
Heats are very excessive in Summer, and indeed they would be insupportable,
were it not for the Breezes that come off the Sea: these Breezes rise about ten
in the Morning, and continue till the Evening; but if they fail, it is very bad
for the Inhabitants. Besides, there hardly passes a Year but the City is
infested with the Plague, which however is not so violent as in Christendom.
The Turks neither fear it nor fly it, believing altogether in Predestination.
Yet I believe, if the Inhabitants of Smyrna would take care to drain away the
standing Puddles that gather in the Winter about the City, they would not be so
frequently molested with the Plague as they are. It is most rife in May, June,
and July; but the malignant Fevers that succeed it in September and October are
more to be feared, more People dying of them than of the Pestilence. In all my
Travels I never was in Smyrna at these unfortunate Seasons. There is no Basha
in that City; it being governed only by a Cady, who is not so severe to the
Christians as in other places: For should he abuse his Office, Constantinople
is at hand, where you may complain to the Mufti, and have relief; who for some
good Present may be easily persuaded to depose the Cady, as being glad of the
opportunity to displace him, and to put another in his room.

The Customs of Smyrna yield a great Revenue to the Grand Signor, being paid
there very exactly. But were there a certain Rate put upon Commodities, the
Merchants, who would otherwise be losers, would not study so many ways as they
do to deceive the Customers: For those Customers lay what Price they please
upon Commodities, valuing that at a thousand Crowns, which perhaps is not worth
three hundred, being absolute Masters of the Rate. In my last Voyage to Smyrna,
four Dutch Women that went thither in our Ship from their own Country, carried
a-shoar under their Coats whatever I had of rich Merchandise: for the Turks
have such a respect for that Sex, that they will not so much as offer to search
them. If a man be taken in stealing Customs, there is no other punishment than
to pay double.

The Trade of Smyrna is very great, and the principal Merchandises which the
Franks transport from thence, are raw Silk, which the Armenians bring out of
Persia; Chamlet-yarn, and Chamlet or Goats-hair, which come from a little City
called Angouri, fifteen or sixteen days journey from Smyrna; Cotton twisted;
Skins and Cordovans of several colors; Calicuts, white and blew; great
quantities of Wool for Mattresses, Tap'stries, quilted Coverlets, Soap,
Rhubarb, Galls, Valanede, Scammony, and Opium; which four last Commodities are
to be had in the Countries near to Smyrna, but not in great quantities. The
Caravans come generally to this Town in the Months of February, June, and
October; and depart again to the Countries from whence they came the same
Months.

Ephesus not being above a day and a halfs journey from Smyrna, on Horseback I
took an opportunity to go thither. There were twelve of us that joined
together, Franks and Hollanders, who took three Janisaries along with us, and
three Horses to carry our Provision.

We traveled this little Journey in the Summer, and setting out of Smyrna about
three of the Clock in the Afternoon, we rode through a Country part Plains, and
part Hills, till we came to a great Viliage, where we supped.

After we had staid there three hours, we took Horse and traveled till
Midnight, to avoid the Heats: By the way we met with nine or ten Arches, very
narrow; which we could not conjecture to be any thing else than the Ruins of
some Aqueduct. From thence to Ephesus the way is very pleasant, through little
Thickets watered with Rivulets.

A quarter of a League from Ephesus you meet with another Mosquee, which was
formerly a Christian Church, built out of the Ruins of the Temple of Ephesus.
This Mosquee stands enclosed with Walls, and you must ascend up to it by two
Ascents of twelve Steps a-piece, which bring you to a large Passage. From
thence you enter into a large Cloister, the Arches whereof are sustained with
Marble Pillars of several colors, delicately wrought; and the lower part of
the Gallery, which runs along three of the sides, that consists of great
Squares of Stone. The Mosquee takes up the fourth side upon the left hand, the
Gate being in the middle. The Mosquee it self is a wide Arch, supported by five
Columns, all of most exquisite Work. There are four of Marble, and every one of
a different Color; but the fifth is a most rare piece, being of Porphyry, and
the bigness of it makes it so much the more to be admired.

Ephesus does not look like a City, being so absolutely ruined, that there is
not a House standing. It was built upon the descent of a Hill, in a situation
not much unlike that of Smyrna, at the foot whereof runs a Rivulet, after it
has made a thousand Maeanders in the Meadows. The City seems to have been very
large, for you may discern upon the top of the Gates the compass of the Walls,
with several square Towers, some of which are still standing: and there is one
very remarkable, having two Chambers in it, one of which is a very fair one,
the Walls and Pavement whereof are Marble.

The famous Temple of Diana stood at the bottom of the Hill, near one of the
Gates of the City. There remains nothing of it at present but the great Portal,
which is entire. The Vaults of the Arches under ground stand to this day, and
are very large, but all full of nastiness. We went in with Lanthorns; and
though you must creep to get in, by reason that the Wind has almost stopped up
the Hole, by gathering the Dust about it, yet when you are in, you may go
upright; for the Arches are high and fair, and little the worse. Near the Gate
lie four or five Columns upon the Ground, and near to that a Fountain, ten Foot
in Diameter, and two deep. The People of the Country report, that it was the
Fountain wherein St. John Baptized the Christians. For my part, as I have seen
in the Indies several Pagods and Edifices much more beautiful than ever the
Temple of Ephesus could be; I believe it rather to have been a Basin wherein
the People put their Offerings, of which there are several such that belong to
the Indian Pagods. The Greeks and Armemenians, but above all the Franks, when
they go to Ephesus always endeavor to break off some piece of that Basin, to
carry it away with them as a Relick: but the Stone is so hard, that they can
break off but very little at a time.

Not far from the Temple appears another Gate of the City, over which there
lies a great Stone seven or eight Foot square, with an embossed Figure of Q.
Curtius that Famous Roman, who threw himself, Horse and Arms into the gaping
Earth, for the good of his Country. Many Merchants have offered Money for
liberty to carry it away, but cannot obtain leave. About five hundred Paces
from Ephesus is the Grotto which they call the Seven Sleepers, at the bottom of
the same Hill where the City was built.

From Ephesus we went to Scalanova, which is not above two Leagues off. By that
time you come half the way, the little River that runs by Ephesus falls into
the Sea; in the mouth whereof there are always a great number of Greek Barks
fishing for Sturgeon. Of the Spawn of this Fish they make Gaveare, and drive a
great Trade in it in those Parts: then they take the most delicate and smallest
Entrails of that Fish, which they fill with the same Spawn, of which they make
a kind of a flat Pudding, as long as a Biscuit, which they call Botargo. This
they dry in the Smoke, and cut it afterward in slices to eat. Upon this and
the Cuttle-fish the Greeks generally feed during their Lent, which is very
austere.

Scalanova is a Port of which I have already spoken, and thither we came by
seven a Clock in the Evening; where the Governor of the Place, more civil than
usually the Turks are accustomed to be, made us very welcome.

In the Evening one of our Janissaries had quarreled with one of our Servants,
who thereupon had beaten him; and therefore he complained to the Fellow's
Master, who not giving him that satisfaction which he desired, thereupon the
Turk studied to be revenged upon the whole Company. For this reason, upon some
pretense or other, he went before, the better to bring about his design. We
staid till the Morning, and then departed early from Scalanova, and by Noon we
came with good Stomachs to the Mosquee near Ephesus, where we had been the day
before: And some of the Company thought it a very convenient place to dine in,
in the shade; thereupon we sent for our Provisions, with a Boracho of Wine, and
another of Water, and fell to eating in the Passage into the Mosquee, not
dreaming any harm. We had not been long at it, when we perceived two or three
Turks about two hundred Paces off, who came from a Village very near to the
Mosquee. I knowing the custom of the Country better than they, told them, that
they were certainly coming to pick a quarrel with us, and therefore caused them
to hide the Bottle of Wine immediately; for it was then the Turks Ramezan, or
Lent; during which time Wine is strictly forbidden. These two ill-contriv'd and
ill-clad Fellows were the Janissaries of the place, whom the Cadi had sent, upon
the information of our Janizary (who knowing we had eaten in the same place
before, as indeed we had done, made no question but we would do so again)
thinking to surprise us as we were drinking Wine, in a place which they esteem
Sacred, and by consequence was among them accounted an act of Sacrilege.
Christian Dogs, cried they, when they came near us, to eat and drink in a
Mosquee, and profane a holy place as you do, at a time that renders the offense
more criminal! No, cried I, answering for the rest, we drink no Wine, we drink
nothing but Water, and you may taste it, said I to him that was the most busy;
with that I caused a Glass to be poured out and given him; and I gave one of
the Turks a private wink, who understanding it was a promise of gratuity,
turned about to his Comrades, and cried, It Is very true, they drink no Wine.
However in regard they had Orders to bring us before the Cady, there was no
contending. Thereupon I and three others undertook to and answer for all the
rest. The Cady reviled us as bad as the Janizary at first; but he was not only
surpised, but very much troubled, when they all unanimously affirmed that we
drank no Wine, believing they were confederates with us. But I had cunningly
slipped eight Ducats into the Hand of the Turk to whom I had made a sign with my
Eye, who overjoyed at so plentiful a gratuity, had over-perswaded his Comrades
not to say any thing against us. The Cady though he did not like their
Testimony, yet called for Coffee for us, according to the custom of the
Country, and sent us to his Lieutenant; who having been often greased in the
Fist by the Smyrna-Merchants, received us very kindly, and told us that the
Cady was but newly come to his Place, and was needy; however a small matter
would content him. Thereupon we gave the Lieutenant twenty-five Ducats, who
most certainly went snips with the Cady, and so returned us to our Company, who
were much afraid we would not have come off so.

We were resolved to return to Smyrna not the same way we came, and so we took
another Road, which was a very pleasant way, partly over firm Sands, and partly
thorough Meadows, where we met with several narrow Dikes very well Paved. Then
we cross a rugged high Mountain, and lay in a Mahumetan Barn.

The next day we returned to Smyrna, having finished our small Journey to
Ephesus in five days. When we told the Consuls how the Janizary had betrayed
us, they made their Complaint to the Janizary Aga and the Cady, who, for his
punishment put him out of the Consul's service, which is an advantageous
Employment. For besides that the Consul's Janissaries are exempt from the Duties
of War, they are well placed; for there is never a Merchant that is not
beneficial to them some way or other; especially at good times, as
New-years-day and other Festivals. Nor could the Janizary have been more
severely punished; for the Turks love Money above all things in the World.

But to return to our matter. The Rendezvous of all the Caravans is generally
two Leagues from the City, near a Town called Pongarbachi. The day of their
setting out being fixed, every one provides himself for his Journey, and meets
the Evening before at the place appointed, to be ready at the hour.

From Smyrna to Tocat, is thirty-five days journey with the Caravan, and the
last time I went we made it thirty-eight from Pongarbachi.

The first day we traveled eight hours through a Country whose prospect was not
unpleasing, leaving some Villages more than a League from the Road; and we
lodged in a Park, near the River Pactolus; which is a small River, the Sand
whereof shines, and is of several colors. Which caused Antiquity to call
Pactolus Golden-Sanded. It falls from the Mountain Tinolus, and after it has
watered the Territory of Sardis, mixes with the River Hermus, that throws
itself into the Archipelago through the Gulf of Smyrna. The Mouth of it is not
above two or three Leagues from the City, toward the North.

The next day in six hours we came to Durgout, a little City in a Plain. All
Christians that live not in the Territories of the Grand Signor, and pass that
way, once a Year pay Carrage, or a Tribute of four or five Crowns: but the
Franks are exempt, both at Durgout and over all Turkey. There resides a Basha
in this City; and we were constrained to stop there a whole day, because the
Caravan that comes from Persia arrived at that time, so that they were forced
to change their Camels.

The third day, after five hours travel in extremity of Heat, we came to lodge
near a paltry Village.

The fourth day we traveled six hours, and stopped near to a small River. In the
Morning we passed over the Ruins of the ancient Sardis, the Capital City of
Lydia, and Seat of King Croesus. There were still to be seen the Ruins of a
large Palace and two fair Churches, with a great number of Pillars and
Corniches of Marble. This City having held out six Years against the Army of
Temur-leng, who besieged it; so soon as he had taken it, in revenge he utterly
destroyed it. There is a Village near Sardis of the same Name, where stood the
City, which was one of the Seven Churches mentioned in the Revelation. The
fifth day we rode for seven hours through a Country but ill manured, and took
up our Stage in a Plain upon the side of a River.

The sixth day we passed by the Walls of the ancient Philadelphia, called at
present Allachars, which was also one of the Seven Churches of Asia. There is
something of Beauty still remaining in those Walls, and the City is very large,
but ill peopled. It is situated upon four little Hills, at the foot of a high
Mountain over-looking a fair Plain to the North, that produces excellent Fruit.
To witness its Antiquity, there is yet the Ruins of an Amphitheater, with
certain Sepulchers, from whence the Inhabitants report that the European
Christians took out the Bodies that were buried there, and transported them
into Europe, believing them to be the Bodies of Saints. It is now all
destroyed, but rebuilt of Earth by the Turks after their mode. It was formerly
one of the principal Cities of Mysia, and in regard it was always very subject
to Earthquakes, the most part of her Inhabitants lived in the Country. The last
time I traveled that way, in the year 1664, the seventeenth of June, the Turks
were feasting and rejoicing upon the News, as they said, which they had
received, of the defeat of the Christians in Candy. But the News was false, and
only contrived to encourage the People; for the Grand Signor was then making
Levies in those Parts. We lodged that day, after seven hours travel, upon the
Bank of a small River, a League and a half from Philadelphia.

The seventh day we traveled eleven hours over a Mountain, where those Trees
plentifully grow that bear Galls, and Valanede, which is the shell or rind of
an Acorn, that Curriers make use of to dress their Leather. We lodged in a
Meadow on the top of a Mountain which is called Ijagli-bogase, or, The Mountain
of Robbers.

The eighth day we continued our Journey over the same Mountain, which is a
very barren Country where there is no Provision to be had. We traveled but six
hours, and lodged near a River in a Plain called Sarrouc abaqui.

The ninth day the Caravan traveled thorough dry Lands, where there is not one
Village to be seen, and lodged near a Bridge built over a River called
Copli-sou, in the Plain of Inahi.

The tenth day, after we had traveled eight hours over an uneven and barren
Country, we stopped in a Valley near a River called Bana-sou, the Water whereof
is not good. In the Night there arose a Tempest that put us all in a disorder,
and the Rain that fell was as cold as is it had been in the depth of Winter. We
were wet to the Skins, and were forced to throw Coverlets over the Bales to
keep the Goods from being spoiled.

The eleventh day we traveled through a pleasant Country, between Vales adorned
with a most delightful Verdure; and we were in view as we passed along of
certain hot Baths, though very little regarded. We lodged upon the Banks of a
small River, by the side whereof we had traveled for some hours.

The twelfth day we continued our Road for six hours between the same Valleys,
and lodged by a River.

The thirteenth day we traveled eight hours, and stopped near to a Village in a
Country called Douagasse.

The fourteenth, after a Journey of seven hours we passed by the Walls of
Aphiom-Carassar, that is, The Black City of Aphiom or Opium; because it has a
Prospect over a fair and large Country well cultivated, where they sow great
store of Poppies, whence they draw their Opium or Aphiom, as the Turks call it.

Aphiom-Carassar is a great City, dirty and ill built, the ancient Name whereof
I could never learn, for the Greeks and Armenians are very ignorant. But
according to all probability and the situation of the place, it ought to be the
ancient Hierapolis situated upon the Maeander, a famous River of the Lesser
Asia, that winds and turns the most of any River in the World. And indeed we
are the more to seek, in regard the Turks change the ancient Names according to
their own custom and pleasure, and give no other Names to Rivers than that of
the principal City through which they pass; or else deriving their Names from
the Color of their Sands. There is to be seen in that City an ancient Castle
of Freestone upon the Point of a high Rock, separated from the Mountains that
are next it toward the South, which make a Semicircle. All the Armenian
Christians, Subjects to the King of Persia, passing thorough Aphiom-Carassar
must there pay Carage, from which they are not exempted, though they have paid
it before at Erzerom or elsewhere. The Caravan does not stop at
Aphiom-Carassar, as well for that there are no Inns but what are ruined, as for
that about a League farther there is a place where you have excellent Fish, and
very cheap, and they of the City bring Barley, Straw, and other things which
the Caravan wants. The Caravan therefore that day lodges upon the Banks of
Maeander, which is to be crossed over a Bridge not far distant from a small
Village. In this River are great store of Crawfish and Carps; and the Fishermen
will be sure to attend upon the Caravan. I have seen some Carps there above
three Foot long.

The fifteenth our Caravan began to part it self, some for Tocat, some for the
Road to Aleppo; the one part taking the right hand Road toward the Winter-East,
for Syria; the other the left hand Road North-East, for Armenia.

After we were parted, we traveled two or three hours in sight of one another.
They that go to Aleppo, fall into Tarsus, where St. Paul was born, and from
Tarsus to Alexandretta. But we continued our Road to Tocat, and after we had
crossed a great Plain, having traveled six hours, we lodged in a Mershy place
near a small Village. There is one thing remarkable in this Road as in many
others, which manifests the Charity of the Turks. For in most of the high
Roads, that are far from Rivers, they have set up Cisterns, whither when the
Rains fail, the neighboring Villages bring Water for the Travelers, who would
else be very much distressed.

The sixteenth we traveled eight hours through a very even Country, but ill
manured; where we saw a little City called Boulavandi. There are some Mosquees,
which the Turks have built out of the Ruins of the ancient Greek Churches,
from which they have taken Pillars of Marble, and other pieces of Architecture,
to adorn their Sepulchers without any order at all, which you meet with very
often upon the high Roads; the number is the greater, because they never lay
two Bodies in one Grave. There is also in this City an Inn, covered with Lead,
which is all the Beauty of it; nor do Travelers make any use of it but only in
foul weather. We lodged a League and a half from the City, and staid there all
the next day.

The seventeenth we traveled eleven hours through a mixed and uneven Country,
and came to lodge in a Village where there are not above three or four Houses,
though there be excellent Pasturage about it. There is no Water, but what is
drawn out of three deep Wells; for which reason the place is called
Euche-derin-giu.

The eighteenth we traveled not above five hours through desert Countries, and
took up our Stage in a kind of a Bog, near a pitiful Village.

The nineteenth, after we had traveled eight hours through spacious desert
Plains, we passed through a large Village, the Inhabitants whereof were gone
with their Cattle into the Mountains, for the cool Air, during the Summer time,
according to custom. There is an indifferent handsome Mosquee of Freestone; and
indeed the Village, the Name whereof the People told me was Tshaciclou, has
been much bigger than now it is, as may appear by the Ruins. In two hours
after we came to lodge beyond it in a Meadow, near a Rivulet.

The twentieth we crossed over desert Plains, but which seemed to have been
formerly well manured; and after ten hours travel, we stopped in a Bottom near a
bad Water.

The twenty-first, for ten hours the Country was all barren and desert, and we
came to lodge at the end of a long Plain, near two Wells, the Water whereof was
good for nothing.

The twenty-second we traveled through the forementioned Plain, and met with
little Valleys where there was very good Pasturage. The Caravan stopped near to
a pitiful Village, and a nasty Well.

The twenty-third we traveled not above five hours; because it was the time of
the Turks Beiram, or Easter, which our Caravan, consisting of Turks, would
needs solemnize. That day we traveled through an indifferent good Country, and
well tilled, where we discovered several fair Villages; and we lodged upon a
rising Ground, from whence we had a very fair and far distant Prospect.

The twenty-fourth we traveled six hours, and came to lodge in a Meadow where
the Water was bad. Near to that place, we discovered a Plain that extends it
self eight or ten Leagues in length, though it be not above one or two in
breadth: it seemed like a Lake; and indeed it is only a salt Water congealed,
and thickn'd into Salt, which you can hardly dissolve but in fair Water. This
Lake furnishes almost all Natolia with Salt; where you may buy a Wagon-load
drawn by two Bufalo's for 45 Sous. It is called Deuslag, or The Place for Salt;
and the Basha of Coushahar, about two days journey from it, gets by it 24000
Crowns a Year. Sultan Amurath caused a Dike to be cut quite thorough it when
his Army marched to the Siege of Bagdat, which he took from the Persian.

The twenty-fifth we traveled nine or ten hours, and met not with one Village,
the Country being all desert. We lodged upon a rising Ground, near a good
Fountain called Cara-dache-cesme, or, The Fountain of the Black Stone.

The twenty-sixth we passed through a great Village called Tshekenagar, in a
pleasant situation, but very ill built; and after we had traveled eight hours,
we came to lodge in a delightful Meadow, near another Village called Romcouche.

The twenty-seventh we traveled nine hours through Countries full of Licorice,
and having passed a great Town called Beserguenlou, we lodged in a Meadow.

The twenty-eighth we crossed a great River, called Jechil-irma, over a long
well built stone Bridge. At the end of the Bridge called Kessre-kupri stands a
great Village, wherein the greatest part of the Houses are built under Ground,
like Foxes Holes. We put on farther, and after seven hours travel, we lodged
below another great Village called Mouchiour, where there are abundance of
Greeks, which they constrain ever and anon to turn Turks. The Country being
inhabited by Christians, and fit for the Plantation of Vines, there is Wine
good store, and very good, but it has the scent of the Wines of Anjou. The
Village is well situated but ill built, most of the Houses being under Ground,
in so much that one of the Company riding carelessly, had like to have fallen into
a House.

The twenty-ninth we rode for seven hours through a pleasant Country, where we
saw several Villages; near to one of which the Caravan lodged in a Meadow,
close by a Fountain.

The thirtieth we rode through a flat Country, well manured, and stopped near a
River wherein there was but very little Water: it is called Cara-sou, or, The
Black River. For two or three days together, at every two Leagues distance we
observed little Hillocks of Earth artificially reared, which they told us were
raised during the the Wars of the Greeks to build Forts upon, for Watch-Towers.

The thirty-first we traveled a very uneven Country, but abounding in Wheat,
and after we had traveled nine hours, we lodged in a Meadow near a River, which
we crossed next Morning before day, over a stone Bridge.

The thirty-second, after we had traveled eight hours, we lodged by a River,
where we saw a great number of Turcomans: They are a People that live in Tents
like the Arabians, and they were then leaving that Country to go to another,
having their luggage in Wagons drawn by Bufalo's.

The thirty-second we met again with Mountains and Woods, which we had not seen
in 18 days before, which had constrained us to carry Wood upon our Camels to
dress our Provision: We were very sparing of it, and sometimes made use of
dried Cows dung or Camels dung, when we came near the Waters where they were
wont to drink. We traveled eight hours that day, and lodged in a Meadow where
the Grass was very high, yet where there had been Houses formerly standing.

The thirty-fourth we forded a deep and rapid River called Jangou, from the
Name of the Town next to it. A little above the place where we forded it, we
saw a ruined Bridge, which had been built over it.

The thirty-fifth we traveled eight hours through a fair Valley well manured,
and upon the left hand we left a Castle raised upon a Rock. The Caravan lay
that night upon a rising Ground near a Village.

The thirty-sixth we traveled through the same Valley for eight or nine hours
longer; in this Valley were several pleasant Villages, but we lay by a small
River.

The thirty-seventh we traveled six hours among the Mountains, where there are
some very narrow Passages, but store of Water; and we lay in a Vale abounding
in Pasturage.

The thirty-eighth we rode for four or five hours over a rugged Mountain in
craggy way, at the foot whereof we met with a Village called Taquibac; from
whence it is but five Leagues to Tocat. And these are all the Roads from Paris
to Ispahan, through the Northern Territories of Turkey.

CHAP. VIII. How the Author was robbed near Tocat, and of a certain sort of
rare and fine Wool which he first brought into France.
TAquibac is the place where the Persian Caravan uses to meet, when it departs
from Tocat to Smyrna; and this is the only place in all the Road where a
Traveller ought to stand upon his guard; by reason of Thieves who haunt these
Quarters, and are great Masters in their Trade. Once as I came out of Persia
they would needs give me a taste of their Art, notwithstanding all the care I
took. There were three or four of us that would needs ride before with our
Servants to Taquibac, in expectation of the Caravan which was to come the next
day; where we set up our Tents upon the Bank of a small River. I had then a
good many Bales of Wool, with which I made as it were a double Wall about my
Tent: so that there was but one passage between the Bales, for one Man. In four
of these Bales I had a quantity of Musk in lead'n Boxes, to the value of ten or
twelve thousand Crowns: which Bales I put within-side, so that they touched the
Tent and my Beds-head. Next Night, it being very dark, the Thieves came, and
finding the outward Bales smell so strong of Musk, they thought one of those
Bales would be a considerable Booty. The Bales were all tied together with a
Cord that kept them fast; nor was it easy to undo them, without a noise. They
waked me with their bustle at first, and I sent out my Servants to see if they
could catch them; but they will lie so close upon their Bellies, that in such a
dark Night as that was it is impossible to discover them. Thereupon my Servants
went to sleep again, and the Thieves to their work; and having with a great
deal of ingenuity cut the Cord, they carried away the two Bales. In the Morning
four or five of us with a Camel-driver for our Guide pursued them, and in half
an hour we met with the marks of the Robbery; for the Rogues being mad that
they found nothing but Wool, which they thought to be of no great value,
scattered it in the Highway for two or three Leagues together: so that I
caused it to be picked up again, and lost not above fifteen or twenty Pound, I
speak this to caution the Merchants that carry Bales of Silk or other rich
Commodities, to beware of these Thieves; for they will come creeping upon their
Bellies, and then cutting the Bales with great Razors, will presently empty a
Bale of one half of the Goods.

It Is true, the Wool was of no great value for their use; but it was a sort of
rare and very fine Wool, which I carried out of Persia to Paris, where such
fine Wool was never seen. As to the place where it is to be had, I met with one
of the Gaures, or Persians that adore the Fire, who when I was at Ispahan in
the year 1647 showed me a Sample of it, and informed me that the greatest part
of this Wool comes from the Province of Kerman, which is the ancient Caramania;
and that the best Wool is to be met with in the Mountains that are next to the
City that bears the name of the Province: That the Sheep in those Parts have
this particular property, that when they have fed upon new Grass from January
till May, the Fleece falls off, of it self, and leaves the Sheep naked, and
their Skins smooth, like a Pig's that is scalded off; so that there is no need
of shearing them, as with us: after they have gathered it, they beat it, and
the course Wool breaking, the fine only remains. That if you transport it,
before you make it into Bales, you must throw Salt Water upon it, which keeps
the Worms out of it, and preserves it from rotting. Now you must take notice
that they never dye this Wool, it being naturally of a clear Brown, or a dark
Ash Color; and that there is very little of it White, which is also much
dearer than the other, as well for that it is scarce, as because that the
Mufti's, the Moullah's and other persons belonging to the Law, never wear any
Girdles or Vails (wherewith they cover their Heads when they pray) but White:
for at other times they wear them about their Necks, as the Women do their
Scarfs.

Into this Province of Kerman almost all the Gaures are retired, and they are
they that only Trade in this Wool, and have the whole Manufacture of it. They
make those Girdles of it which they use in Persia; and some Pieces of Serge,
which are almost as fine and transparent, as if they were of Silk. I brought
over two Pieces into France, and presented one to the late Queen Mother, the
other to the Princess of Orleance.

I could not drive any Trade in this Wool till the year 1654, returning out of
the Indies by Sea from Surat to Ormus. To which purpose, I departed from Ormus,
and took Guides along with me to show me the way to Kerman, whither I could not
get on Horseback in less than twenty-seven days. I dare say that Alexander the
Great did not march this way into the Indies: for in the whole extent of the
the Country there is no Water to be met with but in some certain places, and in
the hollow of some Rocks, where there is not enough neither to water eight or
ten Horses. Besides, in some places a man is constrained, by reason of the
Mountains, to fetch a great compass about; for a Footman that makes his way
through those Rocks, shall go farther in half an hour than a Horseman can do
in four.

Kerman is a large City, which has been often ruined by being several times
taken and re-taken; nor is there any thing handsome in it, but only one House
and a Garden, upon which the last Kans have bestowed a vast expense to make the
place delightful. They make there a sort of Earthen-ware which comes very near
to Porcelan, and looks as neat and as fine. As soon as I arrived, I went to
visit the Kan, who made me very welcome, and gave order to the Gaures to furnish
me with Bread and Wine, Pullets and Pigeons, which in those parts are fat, and
as large as little Capons. The Gaures are they that make the Wine; and to make
it more sweet and pleasant, they take away the Stalks, and never press any
thing but the mere Grape.

The Kan was but newly entered into the possession of his Government, and being
desirous, according to the custom of the new Governors, to have a noble Sword
and Dagger, with a rich Furniture for his Horse, which required some Jewels, I
presented him with a Diamond worth eight hundred Crowns, which he caused to be
set in the end of the handle of his Dagger. He also desired to have of me as
many more Jewels as came to seven or eight hundred Livres: and by the Present
and the Bargain I facilitated my purchase of the Wool which I intended to buy.
Two days after he invited me to his Entry-Feast, which he made for the chief of
the City; and knowing I wanted a Mule, he sent me one well worth a hundred
Crowns. This is the Noblest Carriage in all Persia, which the great Personages
choose before Horses, especially when they are in years. But it was not the Kan
alone who was civil to me. A young Lord, who lived in Kerman, and was at the
Feast, whose Father had been formerly Kan himself, took great delight to
discourse with me concerning my Travels; and offered me his service in a very
obliging manner. Now the Persians are very curious, and great admirers of the
Rarities of Foreign Countries: which inclination led the young Lord to enquire
of me whether I had any Firearms, telling me he would content me for them to
my satisfaction. The next Morning I presented him with a Carbine, and a pair of
Pistols that pleased him exceedingly; and a little Watch, for which I would
take no Money, whereat he seemed to be not a little troubled. However he sent
me a stately Horse worth about two hundred Crowns, or twelve Tomans. This young
Lord was of a clear humor, civil, accomplished, generous, and did every thing
with a good grace. So that when he sent me the Horse, he sent to entreat me
withal, if I did not like that Horse, to come and choose which I liked best in
his Stable.

By the favor of this Lord and the Kan, I made good the Purchase that I
intended. For the People began to murmur (knowing what a Parcel I had got
together) and told the Kan that I would carry away all the Cloth out of the
Country, so that they should have none to set the Poor on work. Thereupon the
Kan sent for me, and for those reasons told me I must buy no more. To send off
the blow, I made answer, That it was the King of Persia's desire to try if we
could make as fine Cloth of his Wool in France, as they did in England and
Holland; and that if it succeeded, I should bring French Workmen into Persia,
and so by settling the Trade in his own Country, free him from the Charge of
foreign Manufactures. This silenced the Kan, so that I still bargained for more.
But when I was returned to Ispahan, the People of the Country would not keep
touch with me. However, I wrote so home to the Kan, threatening withal to
complain to the King, that he fearing the King's displeasure, forced the
Natives to send me my Bargain to Ispahan.

CHAP. IX. Of the Road from Kerman to Ispahan; and the Fortune of Nazar
Mahomet-Ali-Beg.
FRom Kerman to Ispahan is no less than five and twenty days on Horseback. In
those places where there is any Water, the Country is very good; but those
places are very rare; for the Road is generally Sandy, and offensive to the
Eyes. The chiefest comfort to a Traveller is, that every Evening he meets with
an Inn, where there are Cisterns, which is a great refreshment in those desert
Countries. The most part of those Inns were built some Years since by the
special care of Mahomet-Ali-Beg, Nazar, or Grand Master of the King's House and
Treasury; a Person the most Virtuous of any that Persia can boast of for many
Years. He was Generous, and favored the Franks in all things, for he loved
them exceedingly. He faithfully served his King, and defended the People
against the Oppression and Insolences of the Great ones; which drew upon him
the hatred of many: but still he preserved himself by his sincerity and
prudence; as by the following Story will remarkably appear.

The Great Sha-Abas the First, being one day a Hunting in the Mountains far out
of sight from his followers, met a young Lad playing upon a Pipe by an Herd of
Goats. The King asking him some Questions, he answered him to the purpose to
every one, not knowing who he was. The King surpised at his Reparti's, made a
sign to Iman-couli-Kan Governor of Schiras, who was just come up to him, not
to tell the Goat-herd who he was. After that he proceeded to ask him other
Questions; to which the young Man answered so smartly, that the King could not
choose but stand in an amaze. Thereupon the King asked the Kan what he thought
of the Goat-herds Wit? Who answered, that he believed if the Boy were taught to
Write and Read, he might do good service to his Majesty. Upon that the King
immediately caused him to be sent to School, where the young Lad being
naturally of a solid Wit, clear Judgment, and happy Memory, grew so
accomplished, and so well acquitted himself of several Employments which his
Majesty bestowed upon him, that the King advanced him to the Office of Nazar,
or Grand Master of the House, and did him the Honor to call him
Mahomet-Ali-Beg. The King observing his fidelity, and good management of all
things, sent him twice Ambassador to the Great Mogul, and both times was
extremely pleased with his Negotiation. Mahomet loved Justice, and would not
stoop to be corrupted by Presents: A thing which is very rare among the
Mahometans. This great Integrity of his made all the Lords of the Court his
Enemies, especially the Eunuchs and the Women, who have always the King's Ear.
But while Sha-Abas lived, there was no person that durst open his lips against
the Nazar, so much was he in favor, and that justly, with the King. Sha-Sefi
succeeding his Grandfather Sha-Abas, and being very young, the Nazar's
Adversaries thought they had now a fair Game to play. Thereupon the Eunuchs,
who are always at the King's Ear, suggested to him many things to the
disadvantage of the Grand Master; but whatever they said, the King gave little
heed to their Tales. At length, one day when the King was looking upon certain
Skains and Daggers set with precious Stones, one of the Eunuchs told him those
were trifles, and then desired his Majesty to send for a Scimitar that the
Grand Signor had sent Sha-Abas, all over set with Diamonds. True it is, that
the Grand Signor had sent a rich Scimitar to Sha-Abas; but Sha-Abas had defaced
it long before Mahomet's time, and had made a noble Jewel of the Stones that
adorned it. Thereupon this Scimitar was sought for in the Treasury, where
Mahomet was chief Officer; but not being to be found, the King was troubled,
finding it registered in the Book of Presents. Then certain Eunuchs and Grandees
of the Court took their opportunity to rip up Mahomet's Life; they represented
to the King how many Inns, Bridges, and Dikes Mahomet had built at his own
charge; what a House he had reared for himself, fitting for his Majesty to live
in: and aggravated withal, that he could not do such great things as those,
without purloining notably from the Public Stock; for which he should do well
to call him to an account. As they were thus discoursing, Mahomet came into the
Presence, to whom the King (not receiving him as he was wont to do) spoke some
hard words about the Scimitar that could not be found: telling him withal, that
he would see if all the rest of the things in the Treasury were agreeable to
the Register, and then gave him fifteen days time to give in his Account.
Mahomet not at all moved, replied to the King, that if his Majesty pleased he
might come to the Treasury to morrow: and withal besought him so to do, though
the King a second time gave him fifteen days. Thereupon the King did go to the
Treasury next morning, according to Mahomet's desire, and found all things in
good order; having heard before what became of the Scimitar. From thence he
went to Mahomet's House, who made the King a mean Present: For it is the
custom, that he whom the King honors with a Visit, must make a Present to his
Majesty. After the King had received it, he walked up and down, and viewed the
Chambers, Halls, Parlours and Rooms of State; and wondered to see them so ill
set out with plain Felts, and course Carpets; whereas in other Lords Houses a
man could not set his Foot upon any thing but Cloth of Gold and Silk. For the
King, as they had set the Nazar out, expected to have found other things; which
made him admire at so great a Moderation in so high a degree of Honor. Now at
the end of a Gallery there was a Door locked with three great Padlocks. Of this
the King took no notice: whereupon the Meter, who is the White Eunuch, and
chief of his Chamber, as he came back, showed the King the Door that was so
strongly Padlock'd; which made the King curious to have it opened: withal,
asking Mahomet what he had got there locked up with so much care? Oh Sir, said
he, it behooves me to keep that locked, for there is all the Estate I have in the
World. All that your Majesty has seen in this House is yours, but all that is
in that Chamber is mine, and I dare assure my self, your Majesty will be so
gracious as never to take it from me. Those words inflamed the King's curiosity
so, that he commanded the Door to be opened: But he was strangely surpised,
when he saw nothing more within than Mahomet's Sheep-hook, that lay upon two
Nails, his Scrip wherein he used to put his Victuals, his Bottle for his Water,
his Pipe, and his Shepherd's Weeds, all hanging against the Wall. The Nazar
beholding the King's astonishment at such a Sight, Sir, said he, when the King
Sha-Abas found me in the Mountain keeping Goats, then that was all I had, and
he took nothing from me: I beseech your Majesty that you would not deprive me
of these things neither; but rather, if you please, let me resume them again,
and fall to my old Calling. The King touched at so high a piece of Virtuo,
caused himself to be disapparel'd, and gave his Habit to the Nazar, which is
the greatest Honor that the King of Persia can bestow upon a Subject. Thus
Mahomet continued, and died honorably in his Employment. This brave Person was
the Protector of all the Franks in Persia: and if any one had done them wrong,
upon complaint he did them Justice immediately. One day as I was shooting
Ducks, upon the River of Ispahan near the Nazar's Gardens, with two Servants,
some of the Nazar's people that did not know me set upon me, and would have
taken away my Gun; which I would not let go till I had broke the Stock about
the Shoulders of the one, and flung the Barrel at the other's Head. Thereupon I
took some of the Franks along with me, and complained to the Nazar: He
testified his sorrow for what had happened, and gave us evident Proofs thereof,
by the blows which he caused to be laid upon those that had done me the injury.

Another time, Sha-Sefi being upon his return from Guilan, his Tents were set
up near Zulfa in Armenia, where the King staid to hunt two or three days. Now
among the rest of the Courtizans that followed the Court, to divertise the King
with Dancing and Mummery, there was one who was perfectly handsome, to whom the
King had already sent Presents; which could not be unknown to any Lord in the
Court. But the Nazar's Son, for all that, being in the heat of Youth, got this
Courtizan to his Tent, and there lay with her: which came to his Father's Ears
next day. The Nazar, whether out of his zeal to the Ring, or whether it were an
effect of his prudence to prevent the King's anger, which would have certainly
been the death of his Son, caused him to be drub'd, after the manner of the
Country, and bastinado'd all over, till the Nails of his Toes dropped off, and
that his Body was almost a perfect Gelly. Which when the King understood,
together with the Young Man's Crime, he said no more, but that the Nazar had
done wisely by punishing his Son himself, to prevent his Justice.

But to return to the Road from Kerman to Ispahan. The first day that I set out
from Kerman, at my Stage in the Evening I met with a rich Moullah, who seeing I
had Wine, civilly offered me some of his Ice to cool it. In retaliation, I gave
him some of my Bottle. He invited me to his House, which was well built, with a
handsome Garden with Water in it. He entertained me with Spoon-meat, according
to the mode of the Country; and when I took my leave, he filled my Boracho with
very good Wine.

The following days I saw nothing worthy observation; the Country being as I
have already described it.

Yezd lies in the Road, almost in the midway between Kerman and Ispahan, in 93
Degrees. 15 Min. of Longitude, and 13 Degrees. 45 Min. of Latitude. It is a great Town
in the middle of the Sands, that extend themselves for two Leagues round it: so
that when you leave Yezd you must take a Guide, for upon the least Wind the
Sand covers the Highway, whereby a man may be apt to fall into Holes, which
seem to have been either old Cisterns, or the Ruins of ancient Buildings.
Between the Town and the Sands there is a little good Soil, which produces
excellent Fruits, but above all, Melons of several sorts: the Pulp of some is
green, of others yellow and vermilion; and some there are, the meat whereof is
as hard as a Renneting. There are also very good Grapes, and good Wine; but the
Governor will not permit the Inhabitants to make Wine. Some therefore they
dry, and of the rest they make a kind of Confection to cat with Bread. There
are also abundance of Figs, which are large and well tasted. They distill vast
quantities of Rose Water, and another sort of Water with which they dye their
Hands and Nails red, which they squeeze out of a certain Root called Hina.
There are three Inns in the City, and several Bazars or Marketplaces covered
and vaulted, which are full of Merchants and Workmens Warehouses. They also
make at Yezd several Stuffs of Silk intermixed with Gold and Silver, which they
call Zerbaste; and another sort of Stuff of all pure Silk, called Darai, like
our smooth stripped Taffata's. Other Stuffs they make, half Silk half Cotton;
others all of Cotton, like our Fustians. They make also Serges of a particular
Wool, which is so fine and delicate, that it looks handsomer, and is much
better than Silk.

Though I had nothing to do, I staid in Yezd three days, because I met with
some Armenians of my acquaintance. In which time I found the general Opinion to
be true. For certainly the Women of Yezd are the handsomest Women in all
Persia. There is no Feast made, but five or six of them come to divertise the
Guests with Dancing, who are generally none of the meanest Beauties and
Conversations among them. However it comes to pass, the Persian Proverb is,
That to live happy, a Man must have a Wife of Yezd, cat the Bread of Yezdecas,
and drink the Wine of Schiras.

CHAP. X. Of the Caravansera's, and Government of the Caravans.
THE Caravansera's are the Eastern Inns, far different from ours; for they are
neither so convenient, nor so handsome. They are built square, much like
Cloisters, being usually but one Story high; for it is rare to see one of two
Stories. A wide Gate brings ye into the Court; and in the midst of the
Building, in the front, and upon the right and left hand, there is a Hall for
Persons of the best Quality to keep together. On each side of the Hall are
Lodgings for every man by himself. These Lodgings are raised all along the
Court two or three Steps high, just behind which are the Stables, where many
times it is as good lying as in the Chamber. Some will rather lie there in the
Winter, because they are warm, and are roof'd as well as the Chambers. Right
against the Head of every Horse there is a Nich with a Window into the
Lodging-Chamber, out of which every man may see how his Horse is looked after.
There Niches are usually so large, that three men may lie in them; and there it
is that the Servants usually dress their Victuals.

There are two forts of Inns. For some are endowed; where you may be received
for Charities sake; others, where you must pay for what you call for. There are
none of the first, but between Buda and Constantinople. Nor is it lawful for
any others to build such, but only the Mother and Sisters of the Grand Signor,
or such Viziers, and Basha's as have been three times in Battle against the
Christians, In these Inns, which are built out of Legacies, there is a very
good allowance of Diet to Travelers, and at your departure you have nothing to
do but to thank the Benefactor. But from Constantinople to Persia, there are
none of those endowed Inns; only such where you have nothing but bare Walls. It
is for you to provide Utensils for your Kitchen, and a Bed to lie on: as for
Provision, the people bring Lambs, Pullets, Butter, and Fruits in their
feasons: or else you may buy it, provided beforehand by the Master of the
House. There you also meet with Barley and Straw for the Horses, unless it be
in some few places that I have been at upon the Road. In the Country you pay
nothing for your Chambers; but in the Cities you pay something, though it be
but a small matter. Usually the Caravans never go into the Towns, which are not
able to contain so many People and Horses. When you come to your Quarters every
one looks after his own Chamber, for there is no regard to Poor or Rich:
sometimes out of Breeding, or out of Interest, an ordinary Tradesman will give
way to a great Merchant; but no man is permitted to leave the Chamber which he
has once made choice of. In the night the Innkeeper shuts up his Gates, being
answerable for all things that shall be lost; for which reason he keeps a Guard
about the Inn.

As for the Persian Caravansera's, they are more commodious, and better built
than those of Turkey, and at more reasonable distances, throughout almost all
the Country. By which description of Inns it is easy to observe, that though
these Caravansera's are not so commodious for the Rich as our European Inns,
yet they are more convenient for the Poor, to whom they never refuse to give
admittance: no person being obliged to eat or drink more than he pleases; but
every one being allowed to spend according to his Stock, without grumbling.

You may travel in Turkey or Persia, either with the Caravan, or else in
company, ten or twelve together, or else alone with a Guide. The safest way is
to go with the Caravan, though you are longer upon the Road, by reason of the
slowness of their march, especially when the Caravans consist of Camels.

The Caravans are as it were great Convoys, which consist of a good number of
Merchants, that meet at certain times and places, to put themselves into a
condition to defend themselves from Thieves, that are very rise in Troops in
several desert places upon the Road. These Merchants choose among themselves a
Caravan-Bashi, who orders them how they shall march, assigns the places of
lodging at night, and who with the chief of the Caravan, is a kind of Judge of
the differences that fall out by the way. There is no honest man that covets
the employment; for the Caravan-Bashi, being to discharge several small duties
upon the Road, however he behave himself, is still suspected for his fidelity.
When the Turks are most numerous, they make choice of a Turk; when the Armenian
Merchants are most, they choose an Armenian.

There are two sorts of Caravans. There are Caravans which consist of Camols,
which are the most usual; in regard that Camels are cheap, and for that some
Camels will carry as much as three Horses, others as much as four or five. But
among the Caravans of Camels, there are several Horses and Mules, which the
Merchants themselves ride upon; it being very tedious to ride upon a Camel when
he only goes a foot-pace, but very pleasant when he goes upon his large trot.
There are other Caravans that consist only of Horses; and among these, if the
Merchant have none of his own, he may hire one. The Servants ride upon those
Horses that are least laden; but at Smyrna you may meet with several good
Horses very cheap, from thirty to sixty Crowns. As for those persons that are
either unwilling or unable to be at any expense, they make use of Asses, of
which there are enough to be had. Above all things, you must take care to provide
Pack-Horses to carry your Wine; for the Camel-Masters being Mahometans, will
not permit you to lade their Camels with any such Liquor; that Beast being
particularly consecrated to Mahomet, who so strictly forbad the use of Wine.
You put your Wine in Bottles made of wild Goats Skins, with the hairy side
turned innermost, and well pitched within. There are some of these Bottles from
which they take off the Hair; but they are not so good, as being seldom without
holes.

These Camel-Masters are an insolent sort of people, which you shall never know
how to deal with, unless you can bring them to punishment. There was one that
played me some of his jades tricks in the Road from Smyrna to Tauris; but when
I came to Escrivan, I complained to the Kan, who presently caused a hundred
Bastnado's to be given him upon the spot. Nor is there any other way to bring
those Scoundrels to reason, especially at Smyrna and such other places, where
the Merchants have their Consuls, who upon the least complaint to the Cady have
Justice done them immediately. The examples of some of these Camel-drivers that
have been paid off, keep the rest in good decorum; and they will be very
tractable for a good while after.

The Journies of the Caravans are not equal; sometimes not above six hours
travel, sometimes ten, and sometimes twelve; it being the convenience of Water,
which is not every where to be met with, that is the Rule of Lodging the
Caravan. At all times the Caravan travels more by night than by day; in Summer
to avoid the heat, and at other times, that you may be sure to have day enough
to set up your Tents. For if the Caravan should come to pitch in the night, it
would be impossible for them to find where to set up their Tents, to dress and
look after their Beasts, make ready their Kitchins, and provide things
necessary for so large a Company. True it is, that in the depth of Winter and
in the great Snows, they seldom set out till two or three hours after midnight;
and that sometimes they stay till daybreak. But in Summer, according to the
Journey which they intend, they set out either at midnight, or an hour after
Sunset. The last time I went from Smyrna the Caravan consisted of six hundred
Camels, and almost the same number of Horse. Sometimes their number is greater,
so that the Camels going but by one and one after another, a Caravan seems to
be an Army; and whether it be in traveling or lodging, they take up a world of
Ground. Now by reason they travel all night in Asia, it happens that the Air is
indifferent wholesome; and that the Travelers, that lie for the most part upon a
Carpet spread upon the Ground, find themselves very little inconvenienc'd by it.

The Camels that go into Persia through the Northern Provinces of Turkey,
travel like Horses in a Cart, by seven and seven; they are tied together by a
Cord about the bigness of a Man's little Finger, and a Fathom long; fastened to
the Pack-faddle of the Camel that goes before, and to the Head-harness of the
Camel that follows. Those little Cords are made no stronger, to the end that if
the Camel before should chance to fall into any hole, the Camel behind should
either keep him up, or else not be pulled in after the other. And to the end
that the Camel-driver who leads the foremost, may know whether the other six
follow him or no, the last Camel has a Bell about his Neck, which if it cease
to ring, it is a sign that some one of the small Cords is broken, and that a
Camel has got a mischance. The seventh Camel generally carries the Provisions.
For if a Merchant have six Camels laden he is generally allowed one to carry
his Provision; if he have but three, he is allowed but half a Camel's load; but
if he have nine or twelve, he pays nothing for the carriage of his Provisions
of Food, or any thing else that he pleases. Every Merchant with his Servants
rides by the Camels that are laden with his Goods, especially in the dark
nights; for there are a subtle sort of Thieves, that have a trick to cut the
two Cords behind and before, and without any noise drive the Camel out of the
way; for having no Hoofs, his Feet cannot be shod, and consequently he makes no
noise. As well Merchants, as others, Camel-drivers and Servants, keep
themselves from sleeping sometimes by singing, and sometimes by taking Tobacco,
and sometimes by discourse.

The Caravan lies in such places as they think most convenient, chiefly near to
the Waterside. When the Sun is set, the Shaoux, who are a sort of poor people,
are diligent to guard the whole Field, and take care of the Goods. They walk up
and down, and either in the Arabian or Armenian Dialect they cry one to
another, God is one, and he is merciful; adding from time to time, Have a care
of your self. When they see that the time grows near to set out, they give
notice to the Caravan-Bashi, who gives order to bid them cry, Saddle your
Horses; and after that, to cry again, Load. And it is a strange thing to
consider, that upon the second Cry of the Shaoux every thing is ready upon an
instant, and the Caravan begins to set forward in great order and great
silence. Every one takes care to be ready, for it is dangerous to be left
behind, especially in those Countries which are haunted with Thieves. The Wages
of these Shaoux is the fourth part of a Piaster, for a Bale, from Smyrna to
Erivan.

When the Stages are long, and that they believe that they shall not get
thither by ten or twelve in the morning, every one carries two small Wallets on
each side his Horse, and when they come to the place where they intend to
Breakfast, they spread a Carpet upon the Ground and fall to.

When you go from Constantinople, Smyrna, or Aleppo with the Caravan, it be
hoves all people to carry themselves according to the mode of the Country; in
Turkey like a Turk, in Persia as a Persian; else would they be accounted
ridiculous, nay sometimes they would hardly be permitted to pass in some
places, where the least miscarriage makes the Governors jealous, who are
easily persuaded to take Strangers for Spies. Always, if you have upon the Road
but an Arabian Vest, with a mean Girdle, whatever Clothes you wear under, there
is no danger of passing any where. If you wear a Turbant, you must of necessity
shave off your Hair, else it will never stay upon the Head. As for Beards, they
never mind them in Turkey, the greatest being accounted the handsomest; but in
Persia they shave their Chins, and wear their Mustaches: and I remember I have
seen one of the King of Persia's Porters, whose Mustaches were so long, that he
could tie them behind his neck, for which reason he had a double Pension. More
than that, you must provide your self of Boots according to the custom of the
Country; they are made of red, yellow, or black Cordovan, lined with Linen
cloth; and in regard they never reach higher than the Knee, they are as
convenient to travel in as Shoes. As for Spurs, they never wear any; for the
Iron at the upper end of the stirrup, which is apiece, serves to spur the
Horse: so much the better, because it is the custom of all Asia to ride very
short.

Before you set out, you must provide your self of several Household Goods,
especially of those Bottles that are called Matares, which are made of
Bulgary-Leather; every man carries his own at the Pummel of his Saddle, or else
fastened to the Crupper of the Saddle behind. Besides these you must buy
Borracho's; the most serviceable things in the World; for they will never
break, and will hold above fifty Pints at a time. The smaller Bottles serve to
put Aqua-vitae in: and the Leather whereof they are made, has that peculiar to
it self, that it keeps the Water fresh. Then you must provide Food, and make a
provision of Rice and Biscuit as far as Tacat; For as for Pullets, Eggs, and
such like things, you meet with them almost every where; as also with Provision
for your Horses, and new Bread, unless in some few places. You must also carry
a Tent with all its appurtenances, with a Mattress; and Clothes to cover the
Horses at night, especially in the time of the deep Snows, wherein you shall
find them almost buried the next morning.

When the Caravan comes near the place where it intends to stop, every Merchant
rides before to take up a convenient place for himself and his Goods, for which
he covets a rising Ground, that if it should happen to rain, the Water may run
from the Bales. They also in that case lay Stones under the Bales, and a Cloth
over them; and the Servants make a Ditch about the Tent for the Water to run
into. But if it be fair weather, there is no care taken to set up the Tent: or
if it be, it is folded up after Supper; to the end the Owners may have the more
liberty to look about them, and may be in a better condition to look after the
Thieves. But if there be any likelihood of foul weather, the Tent is let stand
till the first Cry of the Shaoux. The Horses are tied before the Tent with
Cords fastened to a Nail, and their hinder Legs are tied with other Cords, to
the end they may not stir out of their places. If it be not seasonable for them
to eat Grass, you must buy Barley and Straw of the Countrymen that come to
serve the Caravan there being no Oats, neither in Turkey nor Persia.

In dressing your Victuals, you must follow the custom of the Country; which
is, to make a Hole in the Ground, and then kindling a Fire in it, to set the
Pot over it.

But the greatest inconvenience which Travelers suffer with the Caravans, is
this, that when they come to Waters, which are only Wells, or Cisterns, or
Springs, where only two or three can lade up Water at a time. For after the
Caravan is lodged, the Merchants shall be forced to stay for Water two or three
hours together; for they that belong to the Beasts of Carriage, will not suffer
any person to take any Water, till the Camels, Horses, Asses, and Mules are all
served. Nor is there any contending with these Camel-drivers and Muleters; for
as they are a rude sort of people, a Man runs the hazard of his Life by
contesting alone: of which one Example may suffice for all.

Setting out one day from Bander-Abassi, for Ispahan, with a Merchant of
Babylon, as we came to the Inn where we lay the first night, which was called
Guetchy, the Merchant commanded one of his Slaves who was a Cafer of
Mozambique, to fetch him some fresh Water, at the Cistern, to drink: The Cafer
went thither, and returned without any Water, telling his Master, that the
Camel-drivers and Muleters threatened to beat him, and would not let him come
near the Cistern. The Merchant either ill advised, or not knowing the custom,
bid him go back, and kick those that refused him. Whereupon the Cafer
returning, and finding the fame resistance as before, began to give ill
language to the Camel-drivers, so that one of them happened to strike him. Upon
that the Cafer drawing his Sword, ran him into the Belly, so that he fell down
dead: Thereupon the whole Rabble fell upon him, bound him, and carried him back
to Bander-Abassi for the Governor to put him to death. The Master of the
Cafer, accompanied by several Merchants, went to the Governor and represented
to him the insolence of those people, and how the business had happened. Upon
which the Governor took the poor fellow out of their hands, and caused him to
be kept safe; after that, he caused ten or a dozen of those Muleters to be
seized, and ordered them to be soundly bastinado'd, for hind'ring a Merchant's
Servant from fetching Water for his Master. He also put others in Prison; who
had not been released so soon, but at the request of those Merchants whose
Goods they carried, and who stood in need of their service. The Governor spun
out the business, on purpose that the rest might be gone: but as soon as they
were all departed except the two Brothers of the party slain, he told them, he
could not do them Justice, because their Brother belonged to Schiras; so that
all that he could do, was to send the Criminal thither. The Master of the Cafer
being rich, and loving the Slave, made have to Schiras, to tell his Story first
to the Kan. And I remember, two days journey on this side Schiras, we met in
the Highway abundance of poor people, the kindred of the party slain, who were
staying for the Cafer, to carry him before the Kan, and to demand Justice. Two
or three Leagues also from Schiras I met the Father and Mother, together with
the Wife and Children of the deceased, who seeing me pass along, fell at my
Feet and recounted to me their Grievances. I told them by my Kalmachi, that
their best and surest way was to take a piece of Money of the Cafer's Master,
and so to put up the business. This Proposal, that would have been accepted in
Christendom, was rejected by those poor Mahometans; in so much that the Father
tore his Beard, and the Women their Hair, crying out, That if it were the
custom of the Franks to sell the Blood of their Kindred, it was not their
custom so to do. When the rest of the kindred came with the Cafer to Schiras,
the Kan did all he could to persuade the Widow to take Money; but not being
able to overruled her, he was forced to give the Cafer into their hands: and
how they used him I cannot tell, being constrained at the same time, to pass
from Schiras for Ispahan.

CHAP. XI. Of the breeding, nature, and several sorts of Camels.
THE Female Camel bears her Burden eleven Months; and her Milk is a sovereign
Remedy against the Dropsy. You must drink a Pint of it every Day for three
Weeks together: and I have seen several Cures wrought thereby at Balsara,
Ormus; and in other places in the Persian Gulf, upon several English and
Holland Mariners.

So soon as a Camel comes into the World, they fold his Feet under his Belly,
and make him lie upon them; after that they cover his Back with a Carpet that
hangs to the Ground, laying Stones upon each side, so that he may not be able
to rise; and thus they leave him for fifteen or twenty days. In the mean time
they give him Milk to drink, but not very often; to the end he may be
accustomed to drink little. This they do also to use them to lie down, when
they go about to Lade them; at which time they will fold their Legs and lie
down so obediently, that it is an admirable thing to consider. So soon as the
Caravan comes to the place where it is to lie, all the Camels that belong to
one Master will range themselves in a Circle, and lie down upon their fore
Feet; so that it is but untying one Cord that holds the Bales, and they will
slide off gently from each side of the Camel. When it is time to lade again, the
same Camel comes and crouches down between the two Burdens, and when they are
fastened, gently rises up with the Burden again; which is done without any
trouble or noise. When the Camels are unladen, they let them go afield to feed
upon the Heath and Bushes, and half an hour before Sunset they return of
themselves, unless any one happen to wander, which they will call again with a
certain Cry which is natural to them. When they return, they range themselves
in a Circle, and the Muleters give to every one little Balls of Barley-meal
kneaded, as big as two Fists. The Camel though he be of a large bulk, eats very
little, contented with what he meets with upon the Heaths; where he more
especially looks for Thistles, of which he is a great lover. But it is more
admirable to consider with what patience they endure drowth: For one time that
I crossed over the Deserts, where we were 65 days upon the Road, our Camels
were nine days without Drink. But what is more wonderful is this, that when the
Camel is in the heat of Generation, he neither eats nor drinks for 40 days
together; and he is then so furious, that without great care you cannot avoid
being bitten by him: And wherever he bites, he carries away a piece of the
Flesh. At that time issues out of their Mouths a white Foam, besides that there
appears on each side of their Chops two Bladders large and swelled, like the
Bladder of a Boar.

In the Spring time all the Camel's Hair falls off in three days. The Skin
remains bare, and then the Flies are very troublesome. There is no way but to
Tar them all over: though it be a ventrous thing to come near them at that time.

A Camel must be dressed as well as a Horse; but the Camel-keeper never uses any
Curry-comb, but only beats him all over with a small Wand, as Carpets are wont
to be dusted. If a Camel be hurt or galled under the Pack-saddle, they never
apply any thing to it, but only wash it well with Urine, without using any
other Remedy.

There are two sorts of Camels; the one which is proper for hot Countries, the
other for cold Countries.

The Camels in hot Countries, such as go from Ormus to Ispahan, cannot travel
if the Ground be dirty and slippery; for their Bellies burst, while their
hinder Quarters rive from their Bodies. These are small Camels, that carry not
above five or six hundred Pound weight; but they are kept for little, and
endure Thirst a long time. They do not tie them Head to Tail, as they do the
great ones, but let them go as they please themselves, like a Herd of Cows. The
Camel-driver follows them singing, and sometimes playing upon his Pipe: the
louder he sings and pipes, the faster the Camels go; nay they will stand still
when he gives over his Music. When the Camel-drivers come to a Heathy Ground,
they will give them leave to feed for half an hour, taking their Tobacco the
while; and then singing them together again, they set forward. The Camels bred
in the Deserts are handsome, but very tender, so that they must be gently used,
and never be put upon long Journies. However, they eat and drink less than
others, and endure thirst more patiently.

The Camels of cold Countries, such as those that travel from Tauris to
Constanstantinople, are large Camels, that carry great Burdens, and will pull
themselves out of the dirt: But in fat Grounds and slippery Ways the Drivers
are fain to spread Carpets, sometimes an hundred one behind another; otherwise
their hinder Quarters are also apt to rive from their Buttocks: but if the Road
be slippery for too great a distance together, there is no way but to tarry
'till it be dried up and fair. These Camels usually carry a thousand Pound
weight: but if the Merchant has any hank upon the Camel-driver, he will lay
upon every Camel fifteen hundred weight, thereby making two of three Burdens.
This the Merchants do, when they come near the Custom-Houses, especially that
of Erzerom, which is the most severe. The Merchant does this for his own
Profit: So that when the Customer mistrusting, demands how so many Camels come
to travel empty, he makes answer, that they were Camels that carried Provision:
But the Customer most commonly winks at that good Husbandry of the Merchant,
for fear of losing his Custom, and obliging the Merchant to take another Road.

There is as much knavery among the Camel-drivers, as among our Horse-Coursers.
For I remember, that being once at Casbin, a Persian Merchant, thinking he had
bought eight good Camels, was deceived in four which he thought the best: He
verily believing they had been fat and in good case, but they were only blown
up. For those Cheats have a trick to cut a Hole near the Tail, of which the
Purchaser takes no notice, and which they know neatly how to sow up again: In
this Hole they will blow till they have puffed up a lean Camel, that he shall
appear as fat and plump as the soundest that ever fed: whereby they often
deceive the quickest sights, especially when the Hair is all off, and that the
bare Skin is all rubbed over with Tar.

CHAP. XII. Of the Coyns and Money of Persia.
IN the first place, you must take notice that there are no Pieces of Gold
coined in Persia, but only some few, to be thrown among the People when a new
King ascends the Throne: which Pieces are neither current among the Merchants,
nor of a certain Price. When the Solemnity is over, they who get the Pieces,
are not so curious to keep them, but carry them to the Changer, who gives them
the value in current Money. These Pieces of Gold may be worth five A Frank is
worth 2 s. Sterling.
Franks, about the fineness of Almain-Ducats. Once I received ten thousand of
them of one Merchant, at a prefixed rate; for their value is uncertain.

In the second place observe, That the Silver in Persia is good, whether it be
in Bars, or in Plate, or in Money, and it is taken for its goodness. For when
a The Money of the King of Persia.
Merchant enters into Persia, whether it be at Erivan or Tauris, where the
Money is coined, he is obliged to tell what Silver he carry's, to the end it
may be melted down and stamped with the King's Stamp; under a great Penalty, if
discovered to be a concealer. But if a Merchant's affairs will not permit him
to stay at Erivan, or at Tauris, and that he think it better to carry his Money
to the Mint of Ispahan; it is but taking a Note from the Master of the Mint
either at Tauris or Erivan, to attest that he has declared the truth of what he
carries, and it is excuse enough.

But they that can cunningly carry their Silver to Erivan, when the Season is
to go to the Indies, make a great profit of the Real; for the Merchants that go
to the Indies will give them thirteen and a half, or fourteen Shayez a piece,
for as many as they have. But there are few Merchants that carry their Silver
to Ispahan; in regard the Masters of the Mints upon the Frontiers will be sure
to present them with a good piece of Silver Plate, rather than let them carry
away their Bullion to Ispahan, to have the benefit of Coynage themselves.

They that traffic into Guilan for Silks carry their Silver to Teflis, where
the Master of the Mint gives them 2 per Cent. profit for their Silver. The
reason is, because that which he gives them for it is a little sophisticated;
but it passes current all over Guilan.

In the third place, you must observe, That upon the pieces of Silver, as well
for the King's Duty as the Coynage of the Money, there is required 7 per Cent.
But upon the Copper Money, not above one half, or 1 per Cent. at most. Whence
it comes to pass, that when a Workman has need of Copper, rather than lose time
in going to buy it, he will melt down his Casbeke's.

There are four several pieces of Silver Coin; Abassi's, Mamoudi's, Shaet's,
and Bisti's: but as for the Bisti's, there are very few at present.

The Copper pieces of Coin are called Casbeke, of which there are single and
double.

The single Casbeke is worth five Deniers and a Halfpenny of our Money.

The double Casbeke is valued at eleven Deniers.

Four single Casbeke's, or two double ones, make a Bisti.

Ten single Casbeke's, or five double ones, make one Shayet in value.

Two Shayet's make a Mamoudi.

Two Mamoudi's make an Abassi.

The Real or Crown of France is worth three Abassi's and one Shayet; and
counting a Real at sixty Sous, an Abassi is worth eighteen Sous, six Deniers.
Though to say truth, three Abassi's and one Shayet make three Halfpence more
than the Crown.

Number 1, and Number 2. Are two pieces, which upon one side bear the Names of
the twelve Prophets of the Law of Mahomet, and in the middle this Inscription,
La Illah allah Mahomet resoul Allah, Ali Vaeli Allah: on the backside, The
Conqueror of the World, Abas II. gives us permission to coin this Money in the
City of Cashan.

Number. 1. Makes five Abassi's; and counting our Crown at thirteen Shayet's, it
comes to four Livres, twelve Sous, six Deniers.

Number. 2. Makes two Abassi's and a half of our Money, or forty-six Sous and one
Farthing.

Number. 3. Is an Abassi, which comes to eighteen Sous, six Deniers.

Number. 4. Is a Mamoudi, worth nine Sous and a Farthing.

Number. 5. Is a Shayet, worth four Sous, seven Deniers, one Halfpenny.

Number. 6. A Bisti, worth one Sous, ten Deniers.

Number. 7. The Copper Coin, called Casbeke, worth five Deniers, one Halfpenny.

These Coyns, unless it be the Casbeke, bear no other Inscription, but only the
Name of the King reigning when they were coined; the Name of the City where
they were coined; with the Year of the Hegyra of Mahomet.

Though all Payments are made in Abassi's, as well at Ormus and other parts of
the Gulf belonging to the King of Persia, as in the Island of Bahren, where is
the great Fishery and Market for Pearls; yet there is no mention made but only
of Larins.

The Larin is described in the Money of Arabia. Eight Larins make an Or; four
and twenty make a Toman.

An Or is not the name of a Coin, but of a Sum in reckoning among Merchants.
One Or is five Abassi's.

A Toman is another Sum in payment: For in all Persian Payments they make use
of only Tomans and Ors; and though they usually say that a Toman makes fifteen
Crowns, in truth it comes to forty-six Livres, one Penny and.

As for pieces of Gold, the Merchant never carries any into Persia, but
Alman-Ducats, Ducats of the Seventeen Provinces, or of Venice; and he is bound
to carry them into the Mint so soon as he enters into the Kingdom; but if he
can cunningly hide them, and sell them to particular persons, he gets more by
it. When a Merchant goes out of the Kingdom, he is obliged to tell what pieces
of Gold he carries with him; and the King's people take a Shayet at the rate of
a Ducat, and sometimes they value the Ducat at more. But if he carry's his Gold
away privately and be discovered, all his Gold is confiscated.

The Ducat usually is worth two Crowns, which in Persia justly comes to
twentysix Shayets; but there is no price fixed in that Country for Ducats. For
when the season is to go for the Indies, or that the Caravan sets out for
Mecca, as well the Merchants as the Pilgrims buy up all the Ducats they can
find out, by reason of their lightness; and then they rise to twenty-seven, and
twenty-eight Shayets, and sometimes more, a piece.

The end of the Roads from Paris to Ispahan, through the Northern Provinces of
Turkey.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PERSIAN TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: Containing the
several ROADS From PARIS to ISPAHAN the Capital CITY of PERSIA; Through the
Southern Provinces of TURKI, and through the DESERTS.
CHAP. I. The second Voyage of the Author from Paris to Ispahan: and first; of
his Embarking at Marseilles for Alexandretta.
THE Road from Constantinople to Erivan, which with all those other Roads
through the Northern Provinces of Turkey, the first time I traveled into
Persia, I have amply described. It behooves me now to treat of the Southern
Provinces, and of those through the Deserts, where there are several Emirs, or
Arabian Princes, of which several are very potent: For there are some of them
that can bring 30000 Horse into the Field, five of which I have had the honor
to discourse, and to oblige them with small Presents; in recompense whereof
they sent me Rice, Mutton, Dates, and Sherbet, as long as I staid among them.

I embarked at Marseilles in a Holland Vessel that carried five and forty Guns,
from thence we set sail for Malta. At Malta we staid twelve days to carine the
Vessel, and to take in fresh Victuals. Among the rest we bought two thousand
Quails, for there are a prodigious quantity in the Island: but in two or three
days we found five or six hundred of them destroyed by the Vermin that pestered
the Ship.

From Malta we set sail for Larneca, a good Road in the Island of Cypras, to the
West of Famagosta, which is not above a days journey from it by Land. As we
were making into the Road, about two or three hours after midnight, we
perceived a Vessel close upon us, and both the Ships Company began to cry out,
for fear of falling foul one upon another, but the Vessel sheer'd clear without
any harm on either side.

In the morning we cast Anchor, and went a-shoar. It is a good half League from
the Road where the Consuls and Merchants, both English, Hollanders, and French,
live in a very pitiful Village. However there is a little Monastery of
Capuchins, who officiate in the Chapel of the French Consul; and another of
Religious Italians, that depend upon the Guardian of Jerusalem. We staid but
two days at Larneca; the Captain having nothing to do but to inform himself
what business they might have for him at his return; it being usual to then to
take in spun and unspun Cottons, together with course Wool for Mattresses.

From Larneca 'till we came in view of the Coast of Syria, we had the Wind very
favorable; but at length coming to prove a little contrary, instead of
carrying us to Alexandretta, it cast us to the Northward, two or three Leagues
higher, upon the Coast of Cilicia, toward a Town called Paiasses. Half a League
from that City lies a vast Rock, and between that Rock and the Land runs a very
high Sea: And here it was that the people of the Country believe that the Whale
cast up Jonas again; though the common Opinion reports it to have been done
near Joppa in Palestine. All along that Coast from Alexandretta to Paiasses,
and farther, the way is so narrow and straightened by the Mountain, that in some
parts the Camels and Horses must dip their Feet in the Sea: and yet you must
pass that way of necessity, traveling from Syria to Constantinople. Between
Alexandretta and Paiasses it was, that the Chevalier Paul, in a Vessel that
carried only three hundred Men, missed but little of surprising the Caravan
that every Year carries the Tribute of Egypt to Constantinople, which since
has never been sent by Sea for fear of the Maltesi. This Knight had landed his
Men, and laid them in Ambuscade; but unfortunately his Design was discovered,
so that the Caravan, that might have been easily surpised, stood upon their
Guard.

We were near the Coast, when we discovered a Skiff with fifteen or sixteen
Turks, that were sent by him that commanded four Galleys of Rhodes to demand
the Customary Present from our Captain. Those Galleys then anchored at
Paiasses, and had there discharged themselves of their Provisions of War for
Bagdat, which the Grand Signor was going to besiege. And it is the custom, that
when the Great Turk's Galleys are out at Sea, that whatever strange Vessel
passes by them must send them a Present, either willingly or by force. When the
Basha of the Sea, who is the Admiral of the Turks, is in Person at Sea, the
Vessel which he meets is not excused for 2000 Crowns: so that when he sets out
from Constantinople to cruise, the Vessels of the Franks do all they can to
avoid him. There are some that will seek to escape in sight of the Galleys, but
it has cost them dear. And it happened, that one day the Wind slackning, they
boarded a Vessel of Marseilles, the Captain and Notary whereof were both
seized, and drub'd 'till their Bodies were almost bruised to a Gelly, and they
had like to have died upon it, without being the better in their Purses; for
the rudeness of the Chastisement did not excuse them from paying the Money
which was demanded. Whether our Captain knew any thing of this Example, or
whether it were out of his natural heat of Valor, he laughed at the Skiff-men,
bidding them be gone, and telling them he had no Presents for them but
Cannon-Bullets. Thereupon the Men returned to their Galleys, who soon delivered
us from the true fear we were in, that the gallantry of the Captain had drawn
us into an inconvenience. For while we kept the Sea close by the Coast, to
observe the Countenances of the Turks, they weighed Anchor, and turned their
Prows toward Rhodes. However, before they left us they sent us a Broadside,
and our Captain, whatever we could say, sent them another, which rendered us
more guilty. For the Turks pretend that when their Navy is at Sea, or only one
Squadron, and that a strange Vessel is in fight, she is bound to come as near
as the Wind will permit her without being haled, for which they will otherwise
make the Commander pay very severely. The Consuls and Merchants of Aleppo
understanding what had passed, very much blamed the Captain, fearing a worse
consequence of the business: But by good fortune, the miscarriage was stifled
and never went farther.

The same day the Wind veering to the West-North-West, we sailed into the Road
of Alexandretta, where we came to an Anchor, about a quarter of a League from
the Land. Upon the advice which they have out of Christendom, so soon as they
of Alexandretta discover a Vessel, and know what Colors she carries, the
Vice-Consul of the Nation to which the Vessel belongs, fails not to advertise
the Consul of Aleppo, by a Note which is carr'yd in four or five hours; though
it be more than two or three days journey on Horseback. For they tie a Note
under the Wing of a Pigeon, who is taught what to do, and she flies directly to
the place whence she was brought. For more surety, they usually send two, that
if the one should miscarry in the dark, which has many times happened, the other
may supply the defect.

Alexandretta is nothing else but a confused heap of paltry Houses, inhabited
by the Greeks, who keep little Fudling-schools, for the Mariners and others,
the meaner sort of the people: for the Merchants lie at the Vice-Consuls of the
Nation. There were but two then, the English Vice-Consul and the French; who
had each of them a very convenient dwelling. However they must be Men who love
Money at a strange rate, that accept of those Employments. For the Air, like
that of Ormus, is generally so bad, especially in the Summer, in so much that
they who do not dye, cannot avoid very dangerous Distempers. If there be any so
strong that they can hold out for three or four Years, and can accustom
themselves to bad Air, they do well to stay there; for for them to betake
themselves to a good Air, is to hazard their Lives. Mr. Philips the English
Consul has been the only Person that ever lived two and twenty Years at
Alexandretta: but you must know he was a brisk merry Man, and of an excellent
temper of Body; and yet for all that he had been forced to be cauteriz'd. That
which renders the Air so bad, is the great quantity of standing Pools and
Plashes in the neighboring Plains, extending to the East and South; but when
the great Heats begin to approach, the most part of the Inhabitants retire to a
Village called Belan, upon the next Mountain to the City, where there are very
good Waters and excellent Fruits. They come also thither from Aleppo, when
there is any appearance of a Pestilence; and yet there are few people in this
Village who are not troubled with a sort of Fever, that makes their Eyes look
yellow and hollow; which they never can remedy as long as they live.

About half a League from Alexandretta, on the right band of the Highway, just
against the Mersh on the other side, is a Tower whereon are to be seen the Arms
of Godfrey of Bulloign. In all likelihood it was built for the defense of the
Highway, which is enclosed between these two Mershes, whose Exhalations are
very noxious.

It is but three little days journey from Alexandretta to Aleppo, and some well
mounted have rid it in two. The Franks are not permitted to go thither on Foot.
For before that Prohibition, in regard the way was short, every Seaman that
had a hundred Crowns, more or less, went on Foot to Aleppo, and got easily
thither in three days, with little expense. Now because they had but little
Money to spend, and were willing to dispatch their business, they would not
stand to give Four or Five in the Hundred extraordinary for what Goods they
bought, which was of dangerous consequence to the Merchants. For you must
observe, that when the Ships arrive, the first Man that either out of rashness
or ignorance, gives two Sous more for a Commodity that is not worth a Crown,
sets the Price, and causes all the whole Commodity to be sold at that rate. So
that the Merchants that lay out ten or twelve thousand Crowns together, are
very careful lest those Saylors should get before them, and enhance the Price
of the Market.

To remedy which inconvenience, the Merchants obtained an Order, That no
Strangers should be permitted to go a-foot from Alexandretta to Aleppo, but
that they should be bound to hire Horses, and to give for every Horse six
Plasters thither, and six back; which expense would soon eat out the Profit of
a poor Mariner's small Sum.

Usually you stay at Alexandretta three or four days, as well to rest your
self, as to make some little Provisions for your Journey to Aleppo. For though
you meet with good Stages at Evening, yet the Janissaries will be very glad to
eat by the way.

Setting out from Alexandretta, we traveled over a Plain to the foot of a
Mountain which is called Belan. There is a wide Gap in the midst of this
Mountain, which giving liberty to the North-East Wind, when it blows hard, does
so enrage the Road of Alexandretta, which is otherwise very calm, that no Ship
can ride there at that time. In so much that all Ships that happ'n to be there
when the Wind rises, presently weigh, and get out to Sea, for fear of being
cast away. Almost at the top of the Mountain you meet with an Inn; but though
it be a very fair one, with Fountains round about it, yet Merchants never stop
there, but go on a little farther to a Grecian that speaks good Italian, and
whose entertainment is indifferent good, considering the Country. When you go
away, you give him a Crown for your accommodation, which is the manner at other
Stages, by a custom, which the Franks themselves having established, will never
be left off.

Descending down the Mountain you discover the City of Antioch, built upon a
Hill. Formerly the Road lay through that City, but the Janissaries of the place
exacting a Piaster from every person that traveled that way, that Road is now
disused. Antioch once made more noise in the World, being fallen to ruin ever
since the Channel, that ran from the City to the Sea, where Galleys might ride,
has been stopped up by the Sands that have encroach'd upon the Mouth of the
Haven.

When you are at the bottom of the Hill toward the North, you discover a Castle
built upon a Hill standing by it self, from whence you have a prospect over a
good part of the Plain of Antioch. It is about fifteen Leagues long, and three
broad, in that part where the Road lies. Somewhat more than half the way, you
meet with a long Causey parted by several Bridges, by reason of certain
Rivulets that cross it, without which the Road were hardly passable. The
frequent Revolts of Bagdat and Balsara, which the Grand Signor has been forced
so often to besiege, caused the Grand Vizier in the Reign of Achmat to
undertake this Causey, which together with the Bridge was finished in six
Months, that was looked upon as a Miracle. This was done for the more easy
passage of the Artillery, and other Provisions of War, that were brought out of
Romania and Greece to the Siege of Bagdat, which could never have been done,
but for this Causey. At the end of this Causey stands a Bridge, very long and
strongly built, under which runs a River, which, with the other Rivulets that
wind about the Plain, forms a Lake toward the South, that is called the Lake of
Antioch. This Lake affords a great Revenue, by reason of the Eels that are
caught there, which are taken two Months before Lent, and transported to Malta,
Sicily, and other parts of Italy.

This Plain is very full of Olive Trees; which produces that great Trade of
Soap, that is made at Aleppo, and transported into Mesopotamia, Chaldea,
Persia, and the Desert; that Commodity being one of the most acceptable
Presents that can be made to the Arabians. Sallet-Oyl is also in great esteem
among them: so that when you make them a Present of it, they will take off
their Bonnets, and rub their Heads, their Faces, and their Beards with it,
lifting up their Eyes to Heaven, and cry in their Language, God be thanked.
Therein they have lost nothing of the ancient custom of the Eastern People, of
which there is often mention made in Holy Scripture.

About a League and a half beyond the Plain, you meet with a Rock, at the foot
whereof is a little deep Lake, wherein they catch a world of Fish that are like
our Barbels. I have killed them with my Pistol; and found them to be of an
excellent taste; though they are not regarded at Aleppo.

Two hours after, you ford a River which is called Afrora; though if it have
happened to rain, you must stay 'till the Waters are fallen. Having past the
River, upon the Banks whereof you stay to feed your self and your Horses, you
come to lie at a poor Village called Shaquemin, where there is an Inn. Here the
Countrypeople bring Provisions of Food to the Travelers; and whether you eat
or no, you must pay a Piaster, according to the custom which the Franks have
established. After you have passed the Plain of Antioch as far as Shaquemin,
the Horses in Summer are so terribly tormented with a sort of great Flies, that
it were impossible to travel three or four hours together, were it not for
going out of the Road, either to the right, or to the left, and riding through
the Fields, which are full of those Burrs that our Clothworkers make use of:
For in regard they grow as high as the Crupper of the Horse, they keep the
Flies off from stinging and tyring the Horses.

Leaving the Village of Shaquemin, the Road lies among Stones; and for half
this tedious way, for two or three Leagues round about, you see nothing but the
Ruins of ancient Monasteries. There are some of them which are built almost
all of Freestone; and about half a days journey toward the North, quite out of
the Road, stands the Monastery of St. Simeon the Stylite, with the remainder of
his so famous Pillar, which is still to be seen. The Franks that travel to
Aleppo, usually go out of their way to see that place. That which I find most
entire, and worthy observation among the Ruins of those Monasteries, is the
number of arched Cisterns of Freestone, which time has not defaced.

From Shaquemin you come to dine at a Village called Angare, where every
Traveller isentertain'd for his Piaster, as at the other Stages. Between the
other Villages it is ten hours journey; but between Angare and Aleppo, but
three. We alighted at the French Consul's House, at what time the Customers
came presently to search our Cloak-bags; after which we went to the Quaissery,
which is a place where all Strangers are at the expense of half a Crown a day
for themselves, and a quarter so much for every Servant, and are well
entertained.

CHAP. II. The Description of Aleppo, now the Capital City of Syria.
A Leppo is one of the most famous Cities in all Turkey, as well for the
bigness and beauty of it, as for the goodness of the Air, and plenty of all
things; together with the great Trade which is driven there by all the Nations
of the World. It lies in 71 Degrees. 41 Min. of Longitude, and 36 Degrees. 15 Min. of
Latitude, in an excellent Soil. With all the search that I could make, I could
never learn how it was anciently called. Some would have it to be Hierapolis,
others Beroea: and the Christians of the Country agree with the latter. The
Arabian Historians that record the taking of it, call it only Aleb, not
mentioning any other name. Whence this Observation is to be made, That if the
Arabians call it Aleb, others Alep; the reason is, because the Arabians never
use the Letter P in their Language. This City was taken by the Arabians in the
fifteenth Year of the Hegyra of Mahomet, which was about the Year of CHRIST
637, in the Reign of Heraclius Emperor of Constantinople.

The City is built upon four Hills, and the Castle upon the highest that stands
in the middle of Aleppo, being supported by Arches in some places, for fear the
Earth should tumble and moulder away from it. The Castle is large, and may be
about five or six hundred Paces in compass. The Walls and Towers, though built
of Freestone, are of little defense. There is but one Gate to enter into it
from the South, over a Drawbridge, laid over certain Arches cross a Moat about
six or seven Fathom deep. There is but one half of it full of Water, and that a
standing Puddle to boot; the rest is a mere dry Ditch: so that it cannot be
accounted a wholesome place. However there is Water brought into the Castle
through a large Pipe from the Fountains in the City: and there is a strong
Garrison kept in it.

The City is above three Miles in circuit, and the best half of it is unmoated;
that Moat there, is not above three Fathom deep. The Walls are very good, and
all of Freestone; with several square Towers, distant one from the other about
fourscore Paces; between which there are others also that are less. But these
Walls are not all of them of an equal height, for in some places they are not
above four Fathoms from the Ground. There are ten Gates to enter into the City,
without either Moat or Drawbridge; under one of which there is a place that
the Turks have in great veneration; where they keep Lamps continually burning,
and report that Elisha the Prophet lived for some time.

There is no River that runs through Aleppo; and but only a small one without
the City, which the Arabians call Coic. However, though indeed it be but
properly a Rivulet, yet it is very useful to water the Gardens, where grows an
abundance of Fruit, particularly Pistaches, much bigger, and better tasted than
those that comes from the parts near Casbin. But though there be no River, yet
there are store of Fountains and Receptacles of Water, which they bring from
two places distant from the City.

The Edifices, neither public nor private, are very handsome, but only
withinside; the Walls are of Marble of several colors, and the Cieling of
Foliage Fret-work, with Inscriptions in Gold'n Letters. Without and within the
City there are six and twenty Mosquees, six or seven whereof are very
magnificent, with stately Duomo's, three being covered with Lead. The chiefest
and largest of all, was a Christian Church which they called Alhha, or Listened
unto: which is thought to have been built by St. Helen. In one part of the
Suburbs also stands another Mosquee, which was formerly a Christian Church. In
that there is one thing worthy observation. In the Wall upon the right side of
the Gate, there is a Stone to be seen two or three Foot square, wherein there
is the figure of a handsome Chalice, and a Sacrifice over the hollow of it, with
a Crescent that covers the Sacrifice, the two Horns whereof descend just upon
the brims of the mouth of the Chalice. One would think at first that those
Figures were in Mosaic-Work: but it is all Natural, as I have found with
several other Franks, having scraped the Stone with an Iron Instrument, when
the Turks were out of the way. Several Consuls would have bought it, and there
has been offered for it 2000 Crowns; but the Basha's of Aleppo would never
suffer it to be sold. Half a League from the City lies a pleasant Hill, where
the Franks are wont to take the Air. On the side of that Hill is to be seen a
Cave or Grotto, where the Turks report that Haly lived for some few days; and
for that there is an ill-shap'd figure of a Hand imprinted in the Rock, they
farther believe it to be the Hand of Haly.

There are three Colleges in Aleppo, but very few Scholars, though there be
Men of Learning that belong to them, who have Salaries to teach Grammar, and
their odd kind of Philosophy, with the Grounds of their Religion, which are the
Principal Sciences to which the Turks apply themselves.

The Streets of the City are all paved, except the Bazar's, where the Merchants
and Handicraft-Tradesmen keep their Shops. The chiefest Artists, and the most
numerous, are Silk and Chamlet-Weavers.

In the City and Suburbs there are about forty Inns; and fifty public Baths,
as well for Women as for Men, keeping their turns. It Is the chiefest Pastime
the Women have to go to the Baths; and they will spare all the Week long to
carry a Collation, when they go at the Weeks end to make merry among
themselves, in those places of privacy.

The Suburbs of the City are large and well peopled, for almost all the
Christians have their Houses and Churches there. Of which Christians there are
four sorts in Aleppo, I mean of Eastern Christians, that is to say, Greeks,
Armenians, Jacobites or Syrians, and Maronites. The Greeks have an Archbishop
there, and are about fifteen or sixteen thousand in number; their Church is
dedicated to St. George: The Armenians have a Bishop, whom they call Vertabet;
and are about twelve thousand in number; their Church is dedicated to the
Virgin. The Jacobites being about ten thousand, have a Bishop also; and their
Church is likewise dedicated to the Virgin, as is that of the Armenians. The
Maronites depend upon the Pope, not being above twelve hundred; their Church
being consecrated to St. Elias. The Roman Catholics have three Churches,
served by the Capuchins, Carmelites, and Jesuits. They reckon that in the
Suburbs and City of Aleppo there are about 250000 Souls.

There is a vast Trade at Aleppo for Silks and Chamlets; but chiefly for
Gall-Nuts, and Valanede, which is a sort of Acorn-shell without which the
Curriers cannot dress their Leather. They have also a great Trade for Soap, and
for several other Commodities; the Merchants repairing thither from all parts
of the World. For not to speak of the Turks, Arabians, Persians, Indians, there
are several English, Italians, French, and Hollanders, every Nation having
their Consul to carry on their Interests, and maintain their Privileges.

Nor does this place happ'n to be so great a Mart, through the convenience of
the two Rivers of Tigris and Euphrates, as some have writt'n; by which they say
such vast quantities of Commodities are transported and imported out and into
the City. For had that been, I should never have crossed the Desert, coming
from Bagdat to Aleppo; nor at another time, going from Aleppo to Balsara. And
as for Euphrates, certain it is, that the great number of Mills built upon it,
to bring the Water to the neighboring Grounds, have not only rendered it
unnavigable, but made it very dangerous.

I must confess, that in the year 1638 I saw a great part of the Grand Signor's
Army, and several Boats full of Warlike Provisions fall down the Stream, when
he went to besiege it: but then they were forced to take away all the Mills
that are upon the River; which was not done without a vast trouble and expense.
As for Tigris, it is not navigable 'till beyond Babylon down to Balsara; where
you may take Water, and be at Balsara in nine days. But the Voyage is very
inconvenient, for at every Town which the Arabs have upon the River, you must
be haled, and be forced to leave some Money behind you. Sometimes indeed the
Merchants of Moussul and Bagdat, and others that come out of Chaldea to Trade
at Balsara, carry their Goods by Water from Bagdat; but in regard the Boats are
only to be towed by Men, it takes them up a Voyage of seventy days. By this you
may judge of the time and expense of carrying Goods by Water up the River
Euphrates to Bir, where they are to be unlad'n for Aleppo.

In short, if the convenience of Morat-sou (for so the Turks call Euphrates)
were to be had, and that Goods might be transported by that River, the
Merchants would never take that way: for the Arabian Princes, with their People
and their Cattle, lying all the Summer long upon the Banks of the River, for
the sake of the Water and the Grass, would make the Merchants pay what Toll
they pleased themselves.

I saw an Example of this, coming one time from Babylon to Aleppo. In all which
Road we met but with one of those Arabian Princes, who lay at Anna: yet he made
us pay for every Camel's Load forty Piasters. And which was worse, he detained
us above five Weeks, to the end his Subjects might get more of our Money by
selling us their Provisions. The last time I passed the Desert, I met another
of these Arabian Princes together with his Brother, both young Men: He would
not let us go a step farther, unless we would exchange two hundred Piasters in
specie for Larins, the Money of the Country; and he forced us to take them,
whatever we could urge to make it appear how much we should lose by them. And
indeed we said as much as we could, for the dispute lasted two and twenty days
to no purpose; might overcoming right. By this you may guess what the other
Arabians would do, who are not a jot more civil; and whether the Merchants
would get by taking the Road of Euphrates.

The City is governed by a Basha, who commands all the Country from
Alexandretta to Euphrates. His Guard usually consists of three hundred Men, and
some years ago he was made a Vizier. There is also an Aga or Captain of the
Cavalry, as well within the City as without, who commands four hundred Men.
There is another Aga who has under him seven hundred Janissaries, who has the
charge of the Gates of the City; to whom the Keys are carried every Evening,
neither has he any dependence upon the Basha. The Castle is also under another
Commander, sent immediately from Constantinople, who has under him two hundred
Musketeers, and likewise the charge of the Cannon; of which there are about
thirty Pieces; eight great Guns, the rest of a small size. There is also
another Aga or Captain of the City, who commands three hundred Harquebuzes;
beside a Sou-Bashi, who is a kind of Provost of the Merchants, or Captain of
the Watch, going the round every Night with his Officers through the City and
Suburbs. He also puts in Execution the Sentences of the Basha, upon Criminal
Offenders.

In Civils there is a Cadi, who sits sole Judge, without any Assistants, of all
Causes as well Civil as Criminal; and when he has condemned any Man to Death,
he sends him to the Basha, together with his Accusation, with whom the Basha
does as he pleases. This Cady makes and dissolves all Contracts of Marriage;
all Acts of Sale and Purchase pass in his presence. He also creates the sworn
Masters of every Trade, who make their inspection that there may be no deceit
in the Work. The Grand Signor's Duties are received by a Tefterdar, or
Treasurer-General, who has under him several Receivers in diverse places.

In matters of Religion, the Mufti is the Chief, and the Interpreter of the
Law, as well in relation to the Ceremonies, as in all Ecclesiastical
differences. Among these Interpreters of the Law there is a Chieke or Doctor,
appointed to instruct those that are newly converted to Mahumetanism, and to
teach them the Maxims and Customs of their Religion.

Three days after I arrived at Aleppo, Sultan Amurat made his Entry, going to
his Army, which was upon its march to the Siege of Babylon. Now you must take
notice, that not far from Aleppo, toward the East, there stands a House
inhabited by the Dervies, which are a Religious Order among the Turks; though
it formerly belonged to the Monks of St. Basil, and was a fair Covent. It is
still in good repair, the Walls of the Chambers, Halls, and Galleries being all
of Marble. All the Dervies of this House went half a League from the City, as
far as Mount Ozelet, to meet the Grand Signor; and the Superior, at the Head
of the rest, having made a Speech to his Highness, two Dervies came and made
their obeisance in particular. Which being performed, from that place to the
Castle of Aleppo, for half an hours march together; they went just before the
Grand Signor's Horse, turning round continually with all their might, 'till
they soam'd again at the Mouth, and dazzled the Eyes of those that beheld them.
There are some of these Dervies that will turn in that manner for two hours
together, and glory in that which we account folly.

While the Grand Signor staid at Aleppo, the Basha of Cayro came thither with a
thousand Janissaries: And indeed, there never was a sight of Men more active, or
better ordered. Every one of them had Scarlet Breeches that reached down to
their Ancles, with a Turkie-Robe of English Cloth, and, a Wast-coat of Calicut
painted with several Colors. The most part had Buttons of Gold and Silk; and
as well their Girdles as their Scimitars were adorned with Silver. The Basha
marched at the Head of this Magnificent Regiment in a modest Garb; but the
Harness of his Horse was as rich as his Habit seemed to be careless, having
spared for no Cost to appear before the Grand Signor in a stately Equipage.

There is a necessity for a Man to stay some time at Aleppo, as well to dispose
of his Affairs, and in expectation 'till the Caravan be ready, unless he will
venture himself alone without a Guide, which I have done more than once. And
thus much for Aleppo, next to Constantinople and Cayro, the most considerable
City in all the Turkish Empire.

CHAP. III. Of several Roads in general from Aleppo to Ispahan, and
particularly of the Road through the great Desert.
THere are five principal Roads from Aleppo to Ispahan, which being added to
those other Roads which I have described, through Natolia, make seven Roads
into Persia, parting from Constantinople, Smyrna, or Aleppo.

The first of the five Roads, setting out from Aleppo, is upon the left hand,
toward the Summer-East, through Diarbek and Tauris. The second directly East,
by Mesopotamia, through Moussul and Amadan. The third upon the right hand,
toward the Winter-East, through Bagdat and Kengavar. The fourth somewhat more
to the South, crossing a little Desert, through Anna, Bagdat, and Balsara. The
fifth through the great Desert, which is an extraordinary Road, never traveled
but once a year, when the Merchants of Turkey and Egypt go to buy Camels. Of
these Roads I intend to treat distinctly, and in several Chapters. And first of
the Road through the great Desert.

The Caravans that go to Balsara this way never set out 'till the Rains are
fallen, that they may not want Water in the Desert: and the Rain seldom holds up
'till December. This Caravan, with which I traveled, set out upon
Christmas Day, consisting of about six hundred Camels, and four hundred Men,
Masters and Servants together: the Caravan-Bashi being only on Horseback, and
riding before, to find Water, and convenient places to lodge in.

I must confess I had the convenience my self to ride my own Horse, which I
kept all the while I was at Aleppo. A liberty permitted the Franks only at
Constantinople, Smyrna, and Aleppo: for at Damas, Seyde, or Cayro, none but the
Consuls are suffered to keep Horses: others can only keep or hire Asses, which
stand ready in the public Streets at all times.

The next day we dislodged by daybreak, and by noon we came to a place where
there were five Wells, about five hundred Paces distant one from the other. The
Water was excellent, and eaus'd us to replenish our Borache's: and about four a
Clock in the Afternoon, we lay at a place where there was no Water.

The next day near noon we met with two Wells, but the Water was not good, and
only the Camels drank of it; there we also lodged that night.

Having now traveled two days in the Desert, I will describe it in a few words.
You begin to enter upon it two or three Leagues from Aleppo, where by degrees
you meet with nothing but Tents instead of Houses. It stretches out to the
Winter-East, all along the Euphrates to Balsara, and the Shore of the Gulf of
Persia; and upon the South to the Chain of Mountains that divides it from
Arabia Petraea and Arabia the Happy. These Deserts are almost quite thorough
nothing but Plains of Sand, which in some places lie looser than in others; and
are hardly passable 'till the Rains are but newly fallen, and have knit the
Sands together. It Is a rare thing to meet with a Hill or a Valley in these
Deserts; if you do, there is as surely Water, and as many Bushes as will serve
to boil a little Rice. For throughout the whole Desert there is no Wood to be
found; and all the Bavins and Charcoal that you can load upon Camels at Aleppo,
will not last above eight or ten days. Therefore you must take notice, that of
six hundred Camels that pass through the Desert, there are searce fifty laden
with Merehandize, which is generally course Cloth, some little Iron Ware, but
chiefly black and blew Calicuts, which the Arabians make use of without ever
whitening them. All the other Camels are only laden with Provision, and all
little enough; so many People being to travel for so many days through so long
a Tract of Ground where there is nothing in the World to sustain Life and Soul
together.

For the first fifteen days travel we met with Water but once in two days, and
sometimes not above once in three days. The twentieth day after we set out from
Aleppo, the Caravan lay at a place where there were two Wells, and the Water
very good. Every one was glad of the convenience of washing his Linen, and the
Caravan-Bashi made account to have staid there two or three days. But the News
that we received, caused us to alter our Resolutions. For we had no seener
given order to dress our Suppers, when we saw a Courier with three Arabs, all
mounted upon Dromedaries, who were sent to carry the news of the Taking of
Babylon to Aleppo and other Cities of the Empire. They stopped at the Wells to
let their Beasts drink; and immediately the Caravan-Bashi, and the principal
persons of the Caravan made them a small Present of dried Fruits and Granates.
Who thereupon were so kind as to tell us, that the Camels which carried the
Baggage belonging to the Grand Signor and his Train being tired, his Officers
would be sure to seize upon ours, if they should chance to meet with us: they
advised us moreover not to come near Anna, lest the Emir should stop us.

Upon this news, we departed three hours after midnight; and keeping directly
to the South, we put our selves into the midst of the Desert.

Eight days after we came to lie at a place where were three Wells, and three
or four Houses. We staid there two days to take fresh Water, and we were just
setting forward again, when thirty Horsemen well mounted came from one of the
Emirs, to tell the Caravan-Bashi that he must stop his Caravan. We staid
impatiently for him three days; and at length he came, and was presented by the
Caravan-Bashi with a piece of Satin, half a piece of Searlet Cloth; and two
large Copper Cauldrons. Now although those Cauldrons could not but be very
acceptable to an Arabian Prince, who most certainly had none such in his
Kitchen, yet he did not seem contented with his Present, and demanded above
four hundred Crowns. We contested seven or eight days to have kept our Money in
our Pockets, but in vain; so that we were forced to rate one another, and to
raise him his Sum; which being paid, he treated the chief of the Caravan with
Pilaw, Honey, and Dates, and when he went away, gave them five or six Sheep
ready boiled.

Three days after we had left this Arabian Prince, we met with two Wells near
certain old decayed Brick Buildings. The Water of those Wells was so hitter,
that the Camels would not drink it: however we filled our Borache's, thinking
it would have left its bitterness by being boiled: but we found the contrary.

From those two Wells that were good for nothing, we traveled six days before
we met with any Water, which with the three days before, made nine; and all
that time the Camels never drank, as I have hinted already. At the end of nine
days we crossed a Hilly Country for three Leagues together, at the feet of
three of which Hills there were three standing Pools. The Camels, that smelt
the Water half a League off, put themselves upon their great trot, which is
their manner of running, and no sooner came to the Pools but they crowded in
all together, which caused the Water to be thick and muddy. Thereupon the
Caravan-Bashi resolved to stay there two or three days together, 'till the
Water was settled. Here we had also the opportunity to boil us some Rice, there
being good store of Bushes that grew about the Lake. But above all, the People
were overjoyed that they had an opportunity to make Bread, which they do after
the following manner. First they dig a round Hole in the Ground, half a Foot
deep, and two or three in diameter, which they crowd full of Bushes, and then
set them on fire, covering them with Bricks or Stones 'till they are red-hot.
In the mean while they prepare their Dough upon a Sofra, or round piece of
Copper, which serves at other times for Table and Table-Cloth to eat upon. Then
they take away the Ashes and Bricks, and making the Hole very clean, put in
their Dough, and covering it again with the hot Bricks or Stones, leave it so
'till the morning. The Bread thus baked is very well tasted, not being above
two Fingers thick, and as big as an ordinary Cake.

While we stayed at the three Ponds, I spent my time in killing Hares and
Partridge, of which there was very great plenty in those parts. The night
before we departed we filled our Boracho's again, the Water being very good and
clear; though it be nothing but Rainwater preserved in those Cavities, which
in the Summer are dry again.

But now the Caravan-Bashi, seeing we had traveled already nine days without
finding any Water, resolved to leave the South, and to keep to the West; and if
he met not with Water in two or three days, to take to the North-East, or
Winter-East, in quest of the River Euphrates.

Two days after we had changed our Road, we passed between two little Hills,
where we met with a Pond, near to which were two Arabians, each with his Wife
and Children, tending a Herd of Goats and a Flock of Sheep. They told us they
were going toward Moussui, and put us in the best Road to find Water; and
indeed, from that place to Balsara, we never traveled three days together, but
we met with enough.

Five days after we had left those two Arabians, we discovered a large Palace
all of Brick; which showed some probability, that the Country had been formerly
sowed, and that the Bricks had been burnt with the Straw. To the Palace
belonged three large Courts; in every one of which were fair Buildings, with
two Stories of Arches, one-upon another. Though this large Pile was standing,
yet no body lived in it, nor could the Arabians, very ignorant in Antiquity,
tell us by whom it was built. Before the Gate of the Palace there is a Lake
with a Channel, the bottom whereof is brick'd, as also the Arch, which is even
with the Ground. This the Arabians believe to have been a conveyance of Water
from Euphrates: which surely could never be, in regard that Euphrates is above
twenty Leagues distant.

From that Palace we kept to the North-East, and after we had traveled five
days, we arrived at a pitiful Town, formerly called Cufa, now Meched-Ali, where
Ali, Mahomet's Son-in-law lies buried in a plain Mosquee. Generally there stand
four Tapers lighted about the Tomb, and certain Lamps burning over-head, which
are fastened to the Roof.

Though the Persians have Ali in so much veneration, yet they rarely go in
Pilgrimage to his Tomb. The reason is, because that there being no way to come
at it, but through Bagdat, which is under the Dominion of the Great Turk, there
is a demand of eight Piaesters from every Pilgrim; which is an Imposition that
no way pleases the King of Persia. Sha-Abas scorning that his Subjects should
be tributary to the Turks, endeavored to divert them from this Pilgrimage by
another sort of Devotion, which he set up at Mesheed, upon the Road from Tauris
to Candahar. Nor have the Kings his Successors been less unwilling to give
their Subjects leave to visit their Prophet Ali, taking it for an Affront to
pay Tribute to the Grand Signor. Which is the reason that this Mosquee is no
more enriched by the Persians. For besides the Lamps and Tapers that burn
continually, there are only two Moullah's that read the Alcoran according to
custom. In this Town there are only three or four bad Wells of brackish Water,
and a dry Channel, which they say Sha-Abas made to bring the Water of Euphrates
to the Town for the benefit of the Pilgrims. As for Food, we met with nothing
but Dates, Grapes, and Almonds, which the people sold at a dear rate. When any
Pilgrims come thither, which is very rare, and that they want Victuals, the
Sheck causes a distribution to be made among them of Rice boiled with Water and
Salt, and a little Butter poured a top. For there is no Pasturage for Cattle,
and by consequence there can be no store of Food.

Two days journey from Ali's Town, by nine of the Clock in the morning we met
two young Arabian Lords that took upon them the name of Sultans. They were two
Brothers, one of the age of seventeen years, the other of thirteen; and as we
pitched our Tents, they pitched theirs close by us; which were of a very fine
Scarlet Cloth; and among the rest there was one covered with Purple Velvet,
laced with a rich Galoon-lace. So soon as they were settled in their Tents, the
Caravan-Bashi and I went to wait upon them; who understanding that there were
Franks in the Caravan, asked me whether I had any Curiosities to sell them; but
when I made them answer that I had nothing worthy their purchase, they would
not believe me, and therefore commanded the Caravan-Bashi to fetch my Trunks,
that they might be opened in their presence. While they were opening, one of
the chief persons about those Princes would not suffer any of the rest of the
Arabs to come near, for though most of the Arabs are great Thieves, yet some of
them are persons of great integrity. Now I had in my company a young Painter,
who had in his Chest several engraved Cuts, part Landskips, part Figures,
together with the Pictures of certain Courtisans drawn to the Wast. The young
Lords made choice only of twenty of those Courtisans, which I would have
presented to them; but they gave me to understand, that they knew how to pay
for what they had, and especially the youngest, who seemed to be very generous;
him I pleased in an extraordinary manner; for his Teeth being very foul, I
ordered a Surgeon that I carried along with me at the same time to clean
them, which he did to the great satisfaction of the young Prince. Thereupon
they sent me and my Train, of their best Victuals they had. The Caravan-Bashi
presented them with half a piece of Scarlet, and two pieces of Tissue of Gold
and Silver. When we were ready to go, the young Sultan gave me twelve Ducats
for my Pictures, and sent the Caravan-Bashi and my self two Frails of the best
Dates that we had met with since we lest Aleppo.

About midnight the Princes dislodged, and took to the North, toward Euphrates.
We set forward after them, driving Northward toward the same River. After we
had traveled four days we met one of the most potent Emirs of Arabia, who
coming from the South, and going Northward, was to cross the Road that we kept.
He was about fifty years of age, well made, and of a comely presence. He had
not then above two thousand Horse, of thirty thousand which we heard had passed
by some days before. Behind the two thousand Horse were fifty Camels that
carried his Women; their Cajavas being covered with Scarlet-cloth fringed with
Silk. In the midst of these Camels there were six encompassed with Eunuchs, the
Fringes of the Cajavas being Silk, Silver, and Gold. The Arabians do not seem
to be jealous of their Wives, as in Turkey and other places; for they led their
Camels by our Caravan, never requiring us to retire, as is the custom in other
places. They lodged a quarter of a League off, where we thought to have
pitched, for the convenience of two or three Ponds, which they deprived us of.
This Arabian Prince had a great number of lovely Horses richly harnessed:
others he had that were neither sadl'd nor bridled, yet the Riders would turn
them with a Wand which way they pleased, and upon a full gallop would stop 'em,
by only holding them by the Hair. He had some Horses of an excessive price; and
this is to be observed, that they are never shod.

The Caravan-Bashi believing he should not escape scot-free from so powerful a
Prince, among the Merchants of the Caravan found out a rich Saddle, with Bridle
and Stirrups, which were all set out and garnished with massy Silver, with an
embroidered Quiver full of Arrows, together with a Buckler, the whole coming to
about eleven or twelve hundred Livers; and adding to these of his own a piece
of Scarlet, four pieces of Tissue of Gold and Silk, and six pieces of Tissue of
Silver and Silk, made a Present of all together to the Emir. But he refused
all, demanding only two hundred thousand Piasters for Larins: which exchange
being no way for the Merchants profit, raised a great dispute. But at length,
considering that it was in his power to stop and starve us there, we only
endeavored a Composition; which was obtained. Thereupon he took the Present,
which perhaps he would not else have done. For two days that we staid to weigh
the Money, he sent Provisions to the chief of the Caravan; and at our
departure, he sent us twelve Frails of Dates, and four young Camels that might
be worth about forty Crowns a-piece.

Two days after we met a Schek, who among the Arabians is one of the chief of
the Law. He was going to Mecca, cross some part of Arabia the Happy, with a
Train of ten or twelve Camels. He staid all night with us, and one of his
Servants having been dangerously wounded about two days before with a
Musket-bullet, my Surgeon dressed him, and gave him Salve and Tents, for which
he was extremely thankful. He sent me to Supper a great Dish of Pilaw, and the
next day a whole Sheep. The Caravan-Bashi likewise presented him with two Else
of Scarlet.

The next we met with nothing worth observation, but the day following we met
another Emir, of about Five and Twenty years of age, who came from Euphrates,
and was traveling into the Happy Arabia. He had with him about five hundred
Horse, and three hundred Camels that carried his women. He presently sent to
know what Caravan it was, and understanding that it consisted of many Franks,
among whom there was a Surgeon: He sent again to desire the Caravan Bashi to
follow with the Caravan, to the place where he intended to pitch his Tents,
which was not far out of the way. We did not think to have gone so far that
day, but he led us to the best water in all the Desert. The Princes Tent being
set up, he sent for my Surgeon, with whom I went along to know what his
pleasure was. He had upon his left Arm a Tetter, with a most filthy Scab as
broad as a Crown piece; and this went and came at certain times in the year. He
presently asked the Surgeon whether he could cure him? to whom the
Surgeon made answer, that the cure was not impossible, provided he knew
where to get such remedies as were convenient: For had he said, he could have
absolutely cured him, the Emir would have carried him away with him, without
any farther Ceremony. Thereupon he would have given the Surgeon five hundred
Crowns to have bought Medicines. But I made answer, that the cure would not
cost so much, and that if the Surgeon could meet with proper Drugs, I would
lay out the Money my self. The Emir content with that answer, sent one of his
chief People to Balsara, to come back with the Surgeon, when he had bought
his Medicines. He himself stayed three days in expectation of him; but after we
had pretended to seek for what we wanted, up and down the Town (for we enquired
for such things as we knew were not to be had) we sent him back word that we
could not find what we looked for, and desired his excuse, in regard the
attendance of the Surgeon would be of no use, where he had not proper
remedies; which was the only way we could think of, to get cleverly rid of him.

The next days Journey after we had left the Arabian Prince, was through a
Country altogether uninhabited; but the day following, which was the
sixty-fifth and last day of our being in the Desert, we met after some time,
with the ruins of some houses on both sides the way; which made us conjecture,
that some great City had stood formerly in that place.

At length we came to Balsara, which I shall describe in another place.

While I stayed at Balsara, which was about three weeks, an Ambassador from the
Great Mogul arrived there, who from Constantinople went to Bagdat to
congratulate the Grand Signor for the Conquest of that City which he had taken
in so short a time. The Emperor presented him with three stately Horses, and a
little Watch, the Case whereof was set with Diamonds and Rubies. But the
Ambassador not knowing what belonged to that little Engine, winding it up the
wrong way, broke the string. Coming to Balsara he sent to the Carmelites to
desire them to mend his Watch; for he feared the loss of his head, should he
return to his Master and not show him the Watch entire. It wat at their House
that I then lay; and therefore not knowing what to do with it, they desired me
to show my skill: Thereupon I put on a new string. But the Ambassador when he
understood to whom he was beholding, though it were but a trifle, profer'd me
all the service and kindness imaginable. Thereupon the Carmelites and Augustine
Friars desired me to request of the Ambassador in their behalf, that he would
obtain the Great Turks protection for them, in case he took Balsara, that their
Houses and Churches might be preserved; which I did, and obtained by his means
full protection from the Grand Vizier. But they had no need of it, for the
Turks did not make any attempt upon Balsara, hearing that the Persians were
advancing; besides that the rainy season was at hand, which will not permit an
Army to keep the Field: So that had Bagdat held out eight days longer; the
Grand Signor would have been constrained to have raised the Siege.

Having spoken of the Arabian Horses; I must needs say, that there are some
that are valued at a very high rate. The Mogul's Ambassador gave for some
three, four, and six thousand Crowns, and for another he offered eight thousand
Crowns, but the Horse would not be sold under ten, and so he left it. When he
was got home into the Indies, and had presented the Mogul those Horses which he
had carried along with him, being very lovely Creatures; he told his Master how
he had offered eight thousand Crowns for a Horse more beautiful than any of
them; but because the Owner would not let him go under ten, he left him. The
King incensed that his Ambassador had stood for so small a Sum, when it was for
one of the greatest Monarchs in the World, upbraided the poorness of his
Spirit, and banished him for ever from his presence, into a Province far
distant from the Court. Thereupon the King wrote to the English to buy him the
Horse, who accordingly did so, and brought him to Surat, where the Governor
re-paid them their Money. But the Horse died at Brampour.

Nor must I forget, that while I was at Balsara, twice there flew by such a
prodigious number of Locusts, that a-far-off they appeared like a Cloud, and
darkn'd the Air. They pass by Balsara four or five times in the year, the Wind
carrying them into the Desert, where they alight, and most certainly dye.
Should they not be thus wind-driv'n, there could nothing live upon the Earth in
some parts of Chaldea. They swarm all along the Persian Gulf, and when the
Vessels come to Ormus at the time of the year, there are little Shops where
people sell Locusts fried in Butter to those that love that sort of Diet. Once
I had the curiosity to open the Belly of a Locust six Inches long, and found
therein seventeen little ones that stirred; whence it is easy to guess how
those Insects come to be so numerous, especially in hot Countries.

There are several Barks that go from Ormus to furnish both sides of the
Persian Gulf, where the people eat neither Bread nor Rice. I agreed with the
Master of one of these Barks, and made my agreement that the Bark should not be
above half laden; for generally they lade them too deep, and in foul weather
they are forced to throw half the Freight overboard, to save the rest.

From Balsara to the mouth of the River Euphrates, it is reck'nd to be twenty
Leagues of Fresh Water. We staid seven whole days for a Wind, which proving
favorable, we came to Brander-ric, in forty-eight hours. This is the place
where you must land, if you intend for Persia, unless you are bound for Ormus.
Brander-ric consists only of five or six little Fishers Hutts; which Hutts are
only Hurdles set one against another, and covered over, where they and their
Families live. To the same place come Asses lad'n with Dates, which I was
forced to hire for want of Horses.

We were six days upon the Road from thence to Cazerom. This is a Mountainous
Country, where there is Wood enough; but you must lodge in the Fields, for
there are no Inns upon the Road. The way is pleasant in some places, along the
Banks of several Rivulets, and through verdant Groves stored with great
quantities of Turtles. We killed a good many; which we eat, part with Pilaw,
instead of Henns; some we roasted; making Sticks to serve for Spits.

Cazerom is a little City ill built, where there is but one Inn, and that none
of the most inviting to Strangers neither.

From Cazerom to Schiras it is five days journey. The Road lies over very
craggy Mountains, which had been impassable, but for the Liberality of
Ali-Couli-Kan, Governor of Schiras. He made Ways where there were none before,
and joined Mountains together by Bridges, in Countries which otherwise had been
inaccessible. In the midst of the Mountains is a wide gap or discontinuance,
from whence a Plain extends it self of about twenty Leagues in circuit. It is
inhabited by Jews only, who are Silk-Weavers. In these Mountains you meet with
Tents, where the Chaldeans sojourn, that come for cool Air and Pasturage in the
Summer.

Coming to Schiras, I took Horse there for Ispahan, where I arrived in nine
days. The Country over which you travel, between these two Cities, is part
Plains, part Mountains; part wild, and part manured. Three days journey from
Schiras you pass the Mountain of Mayen, a little City where there is nothing
worthy observation. Two days journey from thence you enter upon the Plains of
the Province of Cuscuzar, where the King of Persia keeps his Race-Horses. The
next day I arrived at Yesdecas, where the best Bread in Persia is made. This is
a little City upon a Rock, wherein there is a very fair Inn: at the foot
whereof runs a little River that glides into the Valley, wherein grows that
excellent Corn which is uttered in Bread from that City.

In three days I went from Yesdecas to Ispahan. This was the first Road from
Aleppo to Ispahan.

CHAP. IV. Of the Road from Aleppo to Ispahan, through Mesopotamia and Assyria,
which I traveled in my third Voyage to the Indies.
I Departed from Paris in my third Voyage to the Indies upon the sixth of
December 1643, and went to Ligorn, where I found the Dutch Fleet ready to set
Sail for the Levant. The Vessel wherein I embarked seeming rather a Man-of-War
than a Merchant-Man. We passed through the Channel of Messina, and lay there at
an Anchor four days before the City. From thence passing by the Morea, we
entered into the Archipelago, where the Fleet parted, according as every Ship
was bound. Our Ship sailed directly for the Port of Alexandretta, but though
the Wind were favorable, we were stopped for some time by a Pirate that met
with us off the Eastern Point of Candy. We endeavored to have got clear of
him; but the Pirate gaining upon us, we made ready. Thereupon the Pirate gave
us three Broad-sides, that went over the Ship without doing us any harm: which
we answered by as many from our Ship, the first whereof brought his Foremast
by the Board; and the third Shot went through the Fore-castle and killed him
some Men, as far as we could discern. At that very instant one of our Mariners
cried out from the Top-mast-head, A Sail from the South. Thereupon the Pirate
left us, and made Sail after her: and we, glad of such an escape, pursued our
Voyage to Alexandretta, where we happily arrived; from whence I took Horse for
Aleppo, as I have already described.

The sixth of March I departed from Aleppo in the company of two Capuchin
Friars, Father Raphael and Father Yves, and a Venetian whose name was Dominico
de Sanctis.

From Aleppo to Bir, where you cross the Euphrates, it is four days journey for
the Horse- Caravan. The Country is well wooded, and well manured.

The seventh of March the great Rains that fell hindered us from getting to the
usual Stage, so that we could not gain Telbechar, another Town, where there is
no Inn: which constrained us to stop a League on this side, and to go to a Cave
that was able to contain three hundred Horse. This is a Cave where the Bedouins
or Feeders of Cattle thereabouts often retire, who live after the manner of the
Arabs, either in Rocks or in poor Hutts. The Cave has been hollowed from time
to time, there being several Niches in it like little Chambers. Our
Caravan-Bashi fearing some Ambuscade, rode thither before to view the place,
but finding it empty and free, we rested there that night, and the next night
came to lie at Mezara, which is only a small Village without an Inn: Neither
was there any thing remarkable upon that Road. Only that near the Cave, in the
Mountain, there is very good Water: And formerly upon the Mountain stood a
Castle, of which some ruins are still remaining. From the top of the Mountain
there is a fair Prospect as far as you can see, over very fair Plains on every
side, and in several places very good Land, watered by diverse Channels which
are brought from the River Euphrates. All the Rivolets also that you cross from
Aleppo to Bir come from the same River.

The fourth day after we parted from Aleppo, being the ninth of March, we came
to the banks of Euphrates. Bir is on the other side of the River; and because
that sometimes the Goods cannot be unladen all in a day; there is a fair and
large Inn, to defend the Merchants from the Bedouins, which would else disturb
and rob them, were not they and their Goods in that manner secured.

You cross the Euphrates in large Ferry Boats, and as soon as you are got over
the other side of the River, the Customer and his Officers comes and tells the
Bales, and writes down the names of the Merchants to whom they belong. The
Caravan does not lie in the Town, which is built like an Amphitheatre upon the
brow of a very craggy Mountain, but passes forward over a scurvy Road to an Inn
upon the top of the Mountain. Near the Inn there are several Chambers cut out
of the Rock, where they that cannot get room in the Inn are forced to lie. That
Evening the Custom-Officer comes to receive his duties, being two Piasters upon
every load of Goods, whether upon Horse or Mule, though the Mules carry more
than the Horses; and half a Piaster for every Beast that carries Provisions.
But for Saddle Horses or Mules there is nothing demanded.

The Bir, or Berygeon, as the Natives call it, is a large City for an Eastern
City, situated upon the brow of a Hill. Below upon the River stands a Castle
that declares its Antiquity; it is half as long as the City, but narrow, and
without any other Fortification, saving only a Tower that scours the River, in
which there are eight or nine pitiful Culverins. In the highest part of the
Town stands another Castle where the Governor resides, who is an Aga, whom
some call a Basha, having under him two hundred Janissaries, and four hundred
Spahi's. The City is ill built, as are the most part of the Cities of Turkey:
But there are an extraordinary plenty of all things, excellent Bread, good
Wine, and great store of the best sort of Fish.

The tenth day after we had traveled elev'n hours in the first Lands of
Mesopotamia, that lies between the two Rivers Euphrates and Tigre, which at
present they call Diarbek, we came in the evening to Sharmely. This is a very
good Town, with a fair Inn, and Baths round about it. About twice Musket Shot
from thence, stands a Mountain alone by it self, like Montmartre near Paris:
Round about it are Plains, and at the top of it stands a Fortress, with a
Garrison of two hundred Spahi's, by reason that the Arabs sometimes cross
Euphrates, and make incursions upon that side. In the year 1631, the Grand
Vizier returning from Bagdat, where he had lost the greatest part of the Grand
Signor's Army, not being able to take the City; fearing the loss of his head if
he returned to Constantinople, and knowing himself to be in great esteem among
the Soldiers, resolved to quarter himself upon this Mountain, and to erect a
Fortress to secure himself from the tempest that threatened him. No doubt but'l
if he could have brought about his design, he might have made himself Master of
all Mesopotamia, and would have put the Grand Signor to a great deal of
trouble. For if you intend for Aleppo, whither it be from Tauris, Mossul, or
Bagdat, unless you travel thorough the Desert, you must pass through Sharmely,
under the command of this Fortress, for Provision and Waters sake. The work was
gone so far forward, that there was a good defense raised, and the Vizier had
already enclosed all the Mountain together with the Inn, with a Wall almost
twenty foot thick, and three fathom high, when he was strangled by those in
whom he most confided, the Grand Signor having gained them either by threats or
by rewards.

The eleventh, after a Journey of ten hours we came to Ourfa, where the Caravan
usually stays eight or ten days; for here it is that they live that hire the
Horses and the Mules, who have always some business in this place. We lay at an
Inn three or four hundred paces distant from the City toward the North. When
the Inn is full, the rest retire into the Grotto's which are near at hand, and
are very good quarters. Here the Toll-gatherer presently comes and counts the
Bales without opening them. They that carry any Sacks must pay for half a Load;
if not, he op'ns the Sack to see if there be any Merchandise therein, for then
the Merchant must pay the whole duty.

Ourfa is the Capital City of Mesopotamia, built as they say, in the same place
where Abraham lived, and where stood the ancient Edessa, where the people of
the Country report, that King Abagarus generally kept his Court. There are
still to be seen the ruins of a Castle; from whence they add, that the same
King sent to CHRIST for his Picture, and offered him his Kingdom and his people
to defend him against the Jews, whom he understood to be his Enemies. The
Chronicles of the Armenians report, that Abagarus was their Countryman, and
that in his Reign they began to be Christians, and to be Baptized by the hands
of an Apostle, whom CHRIST sent to that Prince after his Resurrection. *
Neither is this Castle yet so far ruined, but that there is still to be seen a
spacious Hall, and three or four handsome Rooms with some relics of Mosaic
work. I was curious to see what ever was remarkable in this City. And first
they led me to a large Fountain which resembles a Fish Pond, the Spring whereof
is under the Foundations of the principal Mosquee, which was built in the
honor of Abraham. The Christians of the Country say, that it was in that place
where he prayed, before he went about to Sacrifice his Son Isaac, and that two
Springs of Water arose from the two places where he rested his knees, which now
feed the large Fountain I have made mention of. It is paved with Freestone,
and so full of fish, that if you throw them in a little Bread, they will follow
you from place to place as you walk by the side of the Pond. There is no
meddling with them; for the Turks have a great veneration for those Fish which
they call Abraham's Fish. Besides that, the place about the Fountain where the
water wid'ns it self to water all the City, is covered with very fair Carpets,
for about twenty paces in breadth. This Fountain at length falls into a little
River that runs by the Walls. As for the Grotto where the two Springs rise,
there is no going into it before you have pulled off your Shoes, and it is a
great favor for a Christian to see it; such a favor as cost me six Piasters.
I also saw the Church, under the portal whereof, they say, St. Alexis lived
seventeen years a private life. It stands in the middle of a Churchyard, in
the highest part of the Town, in the possession of the Armenians. But their
principal Church is about a quarter of an hours walking from the City, built by
St. Ephren, who is there buried. The Monastery stands yet entire, enclosed with
fair Walls. In the Church I saw a large Bible in Armenian Characters. The
Sepulcher of St. Ephren is in a Cave at the foot of the Mountain, to which
there also belongs a Chapel, where they keep three or four Lamps continually
burning. There are other Grotto's up and down the Mountain, where are to be
seen very ancient Sepulchers of the Christians. The City of Ourfa is seated in
a good soil, very well manured, which extends it self out of sight toward the
East. There are several pleasant Gardens near the walls, watered by little
Channels brought thither by Art. The soil produces good Wine, so that a man may
live as well at Ourfa, as in any part of Turkey. While I stayed there, I killed
abundance of Feldfares in those Gardens; and indeed there is great store of
wild Fowl all the Country over. The Walls of the City are of Freestone, with
Battlements and Towers; but within, the houses are small, ill built, and
ruinous: And there are several void spaces in the City, which makes Ourfa to
look rather like a Desert than a Metropolis. The City is Governed by a Basha,
who has under him a hundred and fifty Janissaries, and six hundred Spahi's,
standing more in need of Cavalry than Infantry, by reason of the Incursions of
the Arabians, especially in Harvest time. In short, Ourfa is the place were
they dress such great quantities of Cordovan Skins, by reason of the waters
particular to the Country, which give them that peculiar beauty. The Yellow
Skins are dressed at Ourfa, the Blew at Tocat, and the red Rat Diarbequir.

The twentieth of March, we set out of Ourfa, and after a Journey of six hours,
we lay at a pitiful Village where the Inn was fallen all to decay. There is a
Fountain of excellent water by it, which is all the convenience of the place,
for there is no Provision to be had.

The twenty-first we traveled nine hours, and came to lie near several Caverns
which are very deep; at the entry whereof there are little Rooms, which are
supposed to be the places where the People of the Country lived that fed their
Cattle thereabouts. There is also Rainwater to be had in some of the
Concavities of the Rock. Half this days journey you must pass over Rocks, where
it is almost impossible, and very dangerous to keep your Horses back.

The twenty-second, having traveled eleven hours, we lodged near a Cavern,
having forded a River that runs at the foot of it. There are two great Grotto's
on each side, where Travelers take up their Quarters, and whither the Natives
of the Country bring Provisions both for Horse and Man. The Toll-gatherers,
coming from a Fort about three Leagues distant from these Caverns, here exact
two Piasters and a half for every Horse and Mules Load; and search your Sacks,
to see if there be no Merchantable Goods therein. About half the way of this
days journey you meet with a City quite deserted by the Inhabitants; and about
an hours march after that, with Tombs of Stone, in the middle whereof stands a
Cross, with Armenian Characters.

The twenty-third we traveled elev'n hours, and lay at Dadacardin. This appears
to have been a great Town, but is all ruined: nor is there any thing remaining
but a long Stone Bridge very well built, under which runs a River that is very
broad when it overflows. The People of the Country have no other Habitations
than the Hollows of Rocks; yet they bring to the Travelers Hens, Butter,
Cheese, and other Provisions which they sell very cheap.

The twenty-fourth we traveled nine hours, and lay at a place called Cara,
built upon a Hill. The Caravan lay at the Inn; but the two Capuchins and I lay
at a private Christian's House, who carried us to the Church, where was then
the Vertabet or Bishop of Merdin. It was a pitiful poor Church, where they had
nothing but two Planks supported with four Sticks instead of an Altar. They
dare not leave any Furniture in it; but as soon as the Priest has said Service,
he must have a care to take away every thing, as well the Planks as the
Covering of the Altar, which was only a Painted Cloth: For the Turks that
travel that way, if it be foul weather, will break open the Door, put their
Horses there, burn the Altar, and take away whatever they find.

In the Village where we lay, there was a Pond, the sides whereof were
surrounded with fair Free-stones, which were fetched from the Christian
Churches, and the Tombs of the Christians thereabouts. Among the rest, there
was one very large Stone, with an Epitaph upon it in large Latin Letters;
whereby we knew it to be the Tombstone of a Norman Gentleman, who had been a
Captain of Foot. The Bishop informed us, that it is recorded in the Armenian
Stories, that the French were a long time in this Country, at what time the
Christians were Masters of Syria. This Country is all a large Plain, about
twenty Leagues in length; which might be well manured, and make the Inhabitants
rich, did not the Tyranny of the Turks, and the Incursions of the Arabs reduce
them to the utmost degree of Poverty.

The twenty-fifth, after we had traveled eight hours, we lay at a Village
called Cousasar, where there was no Inn. There were formerly three great
Monasteries, a quarter of a League one from the other. The Turks have ruined
two, all but the Steeples of the Churches that belonged to them. The third,
which stands all entire, and is the fairest Pile of Building, serves for a
Mosquee. They have made Shops round about the Cloisters, in the middle of which
is a fair Spring of Water.

The twenty-seventh we lay still at Cousasar, being the place where you must
pay the Customs of Diarbequir, which is not above two days journey off,
amounting to two Piasters and a fourth part, for every Load of Merchants Goods.

Merdin is not above two Leagues from Cousasar. This is a little City seated
upon a Mountain, with good Walls, and a fair Fountain replenished from the
Castle; which stands upon the North side, in a place yet higher, that commands
the City; where there lives a Basha, who has under him two hundred Spahi's, and
four hundred Janissaries. Merdin is the place where was born the Lady Maani
Gioerida, the first Wife of Pietro de la Valle, so well known for his famous
Travels.

As for Cousasar, which is a large Village, it is inhabited for the most part
by Armenian Christians and Nestorians. The Armenians perform Divine Service in
their own Language; the Nestorians in the Chaldaic. The latter showed me two
Bibles in a large Volume, in the same Language, writt'n in Vellum, all the
Capital Letters being in Gold and Azure. They seemed to be very old; and one of
their Priests told me, that it is 937 years ago since one of them was writt'n;
the other not above 374 since. When Service is done, they put them in a Chest,
and hide them under Ground. I would have given 200 Piasters for the oldest, but
they durst not sell it, in regard it belonged to the Church, and was not at
their disposal.

The twenty-seventh, after we had traveled nine hours, we arrived at Karasara,
which had been formerly a great Town, and no doubt inhabited by Christians; as
appears by seven or eight Churches half ruined, though the Steeples are little
the worse. They stand at a good distance one from the other; and upon the
North-side of one of those Churches there is a Gallery, at the end whereof,
through a little Door you descend about a hundred Steps, every Step being ten
Inches thick. When you come under the Church, you meet with a larger and bigger
Vault, supported with Pillars. The Building is so contrived, that there is more
light below than in that above; but of late years the Earth has stopped up
several Windows. The great Altar is in the Rock; on the right side whereof is a
Room, which receives the light from several Windows contrived in the Rock. Over
the Gate of the Church was a great Freestone, wherein were certain Letters
that I could not read. On the North-side of the same Church under Ground are to
be seen two great Cisterns, each four hundred and fifty Paces long; with two
great Arches, sustained with several Pillars. Every year they fill them with
the Water that falls from the next Mountain, and makes a kind of a River. A
quarter of a League from the Church, you descend the Mountain for above a
hundred Paces together among the Rocks, on each side whereof are Rooms cut out
of the Rock. Upon every Door there is a Cross; and in every Room as it were a
Bench, and a Table, with a little place about the length of a Man, like a
Bedsted, all cut out of the Rock. At the bottom of the Rock is a Hall, round
about the Wall whereof is a Bench to sit on. The Roof is all plain, without any
Arch; in the middle whereof there is a Hole to the top of the Mountain: but in
regard it gives no light, it is very probable 'twas only made to let out the
Smoke when they dressed their Meat; or else to let in the fresh Air, as I have
seen in many Villages upon the Persian Gulf. Upon the highest of those
Mountains stands a paltry Village, where they buy their Victuals. But before
the Caravan arrives, certain Merchants ride before to inform themselves from
the Herdsmen, whether they know of any Thieves in the Grotto's, that often hide
themselves there in expectation of Prey.

In the year 1638, Sultan Amur at going to besiege Babylon, marched this very
way, as well to see these Ruins, as to give order for the demolishing a Fort
that stood not above two Leagues off of Karasera, which the Thieves of the
Country made their place of retreat. He also at the same time caused the Road
to be cleared for four days journey, by ord'ring the Stones to be picked up and
laid in heaps, all along the Road. He also built a Bridge over the River. And
indeed, that March of the Grand Signor was very advantageous to all Travelers
that pass this way.

The twenty-eighth we traveled eight hours, and came to Nesbin, anciently
Nisibis. Two or three hours travel on this side, near the Road, is a kind of
Hermitage, being a small Room enclosed with Walls, the Door whereof is so low,
that a Man must creep upon his Belly to get in. Three or four Jews went and
performed their Devotions at this Hermitage, believing it to be the place where
the Prophet Elisha was buried.

The Country from Cousasar to Nesbin is a large Plain, where for the first days
journey you shall see no other green Herb upon the Ground but only Pimpernel;
the Roots whereof are so large, that there are some a Foot and a half in
diameter. The next day, the Fields are covered with a large thick Leaf, the
Root whereof is bulbous, and as big as an Egg. There are also great store of
yellow, red, and violet Flowers, Tulips of several colors, Emonies, and single
Daffadillies. But in general Mesopotamia is a very barren Country, and there
are very few places that can be bettered by Art or Industry.

Nesbin is only the Shadow of the ancient Nisibis, being now only a large
Village; the Inhabitants whereof are Christians, both Armenians and Nestorians.
Our Caravan lodged a little beyond, in a Churchyard adjoining to one of the
Armenian Churches. The next day, hearing people sing, I went to the Church with
the two Capuchins, where I saw an Armenian Bishop, with his Miter, and a wooden
Crosier, accompanied with several Priests and a good Congregation. When Service
was done, after some few Compliments between us, he led us down under the
Church into a Chapel, where he showed us the Sepulcher of St. James Bishop of
Nisibis. In the Churchyard is a Stone about a Foot thick, and six high; upon
which were laid several Candles of Wax and Tallow, which the Poor Offer in
their Necessities, but especially in their Sicknesses. They believe that Stone
to have been the Pedestal for the Statue of some Saint, which the Turks have
defaced: so that they give the same Honor to the Pedestal, as they would have
given to the Statue. There are also some Roman Characters to be seen, but half
worn out, and spaces brok'n off in some parts: so that I could not learn, in
Honor of whom that Statue was erected. Half a League from Nisbin runs a River,
which you cross, over a Stone Bridge. In the way to the River are several
pieces of Wall, with an Arch, which made me conjecture, that formerly the City
extended as far as the River.

Twice Musket Shot from the River, you meet with a Stone, half buried, upon
which are written certain Latin Words; whereby it appears that it was the
Tombstone of the General of an Army that was a Frenchman: but I could not read
his Name, which time had desac'd. The same Bishop informed us, that formerly
the Moors having besieged the City, there came such a prodigious company of
strange Flies, and did so torment both Men and Horses, that they were forced to
raise the Siege. You must pay the same Toll at Nisbin as in other places, that
is, two Piasters and a half, for every Mule or Horses Load. We lay there three
days together, to furnish our selves with Provisions 'till we came to Moussul,
which is five days journey from Nisbin; the Country between being altogether
desert and uninhabited. There is no Water to be found but in two places, and
that not very good neither; near to which you shall see some few Herdsmen
grazing their Cattle.

The first of April we departed from Nisbin; and after we had traveled eleven
hours, we lay near to a River, whither certain Shepherds brought us Hens to
sell.

The second we traveled ten hours, and lay at a paltry Town, where we met with
nothing to eat.

The third we traveled thirteen hours, and lodged by a pitiful Fountain, the
Water whereof was hardly good enough for our Horses.

The fourth we traveled ten hours, and came to lodge by the Bank of a little
River, near to which appeared the Ruins of a Bridge and a Castle.

The fifth we traveled eleven hours, to reach Moussul, which is not far from
the ancient Niniveh.

Moussul is a City that makes a great show without, the Walls being of
Freestone; but within it is almost all ruined, having only two blind
Marketplaces, with a little Castle upon the Tigris, where the Basha lives. In
a word, there is nothing worth a Man's sight in Moussul, the place being only
considerable for the great concourse of Merchants; especially the Arabians and
Curds, which are the Inhabitants of the ancient Assyria, now called Curdistan,
where there grows great plenty of Galls, and for which there is a great Trade.
There are in it four sorts of Christians, Greeks, Armenians, Nestorians, and
Maronites. The Capuchins had a pretty Dwelling upon the Tigris; but the Basha
laying a Fine upon them, because they went about a little to enlarge it, they
were forced to quit it. The City is governed by a Basha, that has under him,
part Janissaries, part Spahi's, about three thousand Men.

There are only two scurvy Inns in Moussul, which being full when we came, I
caused my Tent to be set up at the Meydan, or great Marketplace.

Now to say something in general of the difference of the two Rivers, Tigris
and Euphrates, in reference to their Course and Waters: I observed that the
Water of Euphrates appeared somewhat red; and that the Stream was not so swift
as that of Tigris, which seemed to be whitish, like the Loire. As for its
Course, Euphrates runs a far longer way than Tigris. But now let us cross the
Tigris, over a Bridge of Boats, to view the sad Ruins of a City that has made
such a noise in the World; though there be now scarce any appearance of its
ancient splendor.

Niniveh was built upon the left Shore of the Tigris, upon Assyria-side, being
now only a heap of Rubbish extending almost a League along the River. There are
abundance of Vaults and Caverns uninhabited; nor could a man well conjecture
whether they were the ancient Habitations of the people, or whether any houses
had been built upon them in former times; for most of the houses in Turkey are
like Cellars, or else but one Story high. Half a League from Tigris stands a
little Hill encompas'd with Houses, on the top whereof is built a Mosquee. The
people of the Country say 'twas the place where Jonas was buried; and for that
place they have so great a veneration, that no Christians are suffered to enter
into it, but privately, and for Money. By that means I got in with two Capuchin
Friars; but we were forced to put off our Shoes first. In the middle of the
Mosquee stood a Sepulcher, covered with a Persian Carpet of Silk and Silver,
and at the four corners, great Copper Candlesticks with Wax Tapers, besides
several Lamps and Ostridge-Shells that hung down from the Roof. We saw a great
number of Moors without, and within sat two Dervi's reading the Alcoran.

About a Musket Shot from Moussul toward the North-East, stands a great Ruined
Monastery, enclosed with high Walls, the greatest part whereof is still to be
seen.

We stayed ten days at Moussul, and having provided all things ready for the
rest of our Journey, we set forward for Ispahan.

CHAP. V. A Continuation of the Road from Nineveh to Ispahan: Together with the
Story of an Ambassador, called Dominico de Santis.
HAving passed the Tigris, we stayed three quarters of an hours Journey from
Nineveh for some Merchants that were to go along with the Caravan. The way
which we took was not the usual Road to Persia; but it was a way wherein there
were less Duties to be paid; and besides, it was a short cut, the Caravan
making but fifty-eight days Journey between Aleppo and Ispahan. From the very
banks of the River to the place where we Lodged that Evening, we saw nothing
but continued Ruins, which makes me believe, it was the place where the
ancient Nineveh stood.

We stayed two days near the Mosquee, where according to the tradition of the
Turks, Jonas was buried, and made choice of a Curd, or Assyrian for our
Caravan-Basbi, though the people are generally Thieves, and must be carefully
looked after. But it was a piece of Policy, because we were to cross the
ancient Assyria, now called Curdistan; the Language of which Country is a
particular Speech.

In the two first days Journey we crossed two small Rivers that fall from the
Mountains, and empty themselves into Tigris. Our first Journey was through a
plain Country all along by the side of a little River; and the second Evening
we lodged by the side of a great River that falls from the Mountains toward the
North, and running to the South, discharges it self into Tigris. It is called
Bohrus, being a very rapid Stream, full of Fish, but more especially excellent
Trouts. The Caravan was two days passing that River, by reason there were no
Boats. For the people are forced to tie long Perches four or five together one
upon another, which the Natives call a Kilet. They make it apiece, and put
underneath it about a hundred Goat Skins full of wind, to the end the Kilet may
not touch the water. Besides the Merchant must be careful to spread good store
of thick Felts over the Kilet, of which he must be provided to keep off the
Water, least the Bales that sink the Kilet should take wet. At the four corners
are four Perches that serve for Oars, though they avail but little against the
force of the Tide; so that you must be forced to hale the Kilet four or five
hundred Paces a' this side up the River, and then row down the Stream to the
place where you intend to Land the Goods. When the Goods are Landed, the men
are forced again to draw the Kilet by main strength out of the water, to take
away the Goat Skins which are then to be lad'n upon the Mules appointed to
carry them. As for the Horses, Mules, and Asses, as well those that carried the
Goods, as those upon which the Men ride; so soon as the Herds-men thereabout
see a Caravan coming, they stock to the Riverside. Those people that wear
nothing but a course piece of Linen or a Goat-skin to cover their nakedness,
take off their Clothes and wind them about their Heads, like a Turbant. Then
every one ties a Goat-skin blowed up under his Stomach; and then two or three
of the most expert mounting the same number of the best Horses, which are
bridled, put themselves first into the Water, while others follow them
swimming, and drive the Horses before them; holding the Beast by the Tail with
one Hand, and switching him with the other. If they find any Horse or Ass that
is too weak, they tie a Goatskin under his Belly to help him. Considering which
difficulties, it cannot take up less time than I have mentioned to get over a
Caravan of five or six hundred Horses.

The Caravan being thus got over, for two or three days has but a very bad
Road. The first days journey, the Horses were continually in the Water up to
the mid-leg; and the second, and part of the third we traveled through a very
desert Country, where we met with very little food, for our Horses, and only a
few Brakes to boil our Rice. Having got over this bad way, we came to a River
called the great Zarbe, over which we passed upon a Stone Bridge of nine
Arches. They report that this Bridge was built by Alexander the Great, in his
March against Darius. A quarter of a League to the South-East, two Rivers meet,
which empty themselves into Tigris. Leaving the Bridge, we came to a Town
called Sherazoul, built upon a rising Ground, upon three Redoubts. There
resides a Basha, who must be bribed with a small Present to let the Caravan
pass; we lay by the Banks of a River, and staid there two days. From thence we
traveled one days journey over dry Mountains, not finding any Water. But the
next day we came into a pleasant Plain, stored with Fruit Trees. This was the
Plain of Arbele, where Alexander defeated Darius; containing about fifteen
Leagues in all. It is watered with several Rivulets, and in the middle of the
Mountain rises a little Hill about half a League in circuit. It is all over
covered with the fairest Oaks that ever were seen; and on the top are the
Ruins of a Castle, that seems to have been a sumptuous Structure. The
Country People say that Darius staid there while his Captains gave Battle to
Alexander. Three Leagues from thence, near a great Mountain toward the North,
are to be seen the Ruins of another Castle and several Houses, where they add,
that Darius secured some of his Wives when he lost the Battle. This Castle is
seated in a most lovely Prospect. At the foot of the Mountain rises a Spring,
which a quarter of a League off swells into a River that bears good big Boats.
It runs winding about the Mountains to the Southward; so that two days journey
from the Hill, you cross it near a Town called Sherazoul, over a fair
Stone Bridge of nine Arches, whereof the Great Sha-Abas caused three to be
brok'n down, after he had taken Bagdat.

This City of Sherazoul is built after another manner than any other of the
Cities in those parts, being all cut out of a steep Rock for a quarter of a
League together, so that you must go up to the Houses by Stairs of fifteen, or
twenty steps, sometimes more, sometimes less, according to the situation of the
place. The people have no other Doors to their Houses than only a thin round
Stone, like a Millstone, which they will roll away when they go in or out, the
sides of the Wall being so cut as to receive the Stone like a Case, being level
with the Rock.

The tops of their Houses are like Niches in the Mountain, where the
Inhabitants have contrived Caves to keep their Cattle in: So that we judged it
to be built for a place of safety to secure the Inhabitants from the Incursions
of the Arabians and Bedouins of Mesopotamia.

We came to Sherazoul upon Easter-Eve, and staid there three days to refresh
our selves, after a Lent which we had kept very sparingly. Here I found certain
Springs that rose up in large Bubbles, which after I had mixed with two Glasses
of Wine and drank up, I found to have a Purgative quality, having a kind of
Mineral taste. These Springs boil up near the side of a River called Altun-sou,
or, The River of Gold, that falls into the River Tigris, three days journey on
this side Bagdat.

The next day we lay at a pitiful Town, upon the Frontiers of Turkey and Persia.

The next day, being the fifth after we set out from Niniveh, we passed over
several Fenns and hot Waters, that part the two Empires. Entering thus into
Persia, we met with a high Mountain covered with fair Oaks, which bear the
Gall-Nuts, so high, that the Caravan was some hours ere it could get to the
top. As we ascended, but especially when we were up, we heard several Muskets
go off. At first we thought the people had been hunting the wild Boars or
Stags, of which the Mountains are full: but the report of the Guns being too
loud and too thick for Hunters, we stood upon our guard; and I believe we
should have mended our paces, had we known what was intended us. Besides, I
remembered that the Country People would not sell any thing but for Powder and
Bullet, which the Caravan-Bashi advised me not to let them have, for fear they
should make use of it against our selves. From the Mountain we descended into a
fertile Plain, watered with several Rivers; and night approaching, we set up our
Tents, not fearing any thing, because we were in the Dominions of the King of
Persia, where there is so much security in traveling. After that we sent our
Servants to the Tents of the Countrymen, but they brought us nothing but Bread
made of Acorns, than which the poor people thereabouts eat no other. This Acorn
is about the bigness of our Nuts; and once I met with a Branch that had thirty
Acorns, and twenty-three Gall-Nuts, all at one time growing upon it.

The Province which we traveled through then, composed the greatest part of the
ancient Assyria. But now to come to the Story of Dominico de Santis the
Venetian. He had Letters of Credence from the Pope, the Emperor, the King of
Poland, and the Republic of Venice, to the King of Persia; and he went in the
Caravan through the Grand Signor's Territories, never discovering himself who
he was; but coming into Persia, he took upon him without fear the Title of
Ambassador from the Commonwealth of Venice.

From the Plain where we lodged, it is two days journey to a good big Town, to
which belongs a Fortress, where the Governor of the Province has a Lieutenant,
with about two thousand Horse under his Command. The Fortress is upon the right
hand toward the South, after three hours riding upon the Highway. To this
Lieutenant, the Caravan-Bashi was according to duty bound to give notice of the
Arrival of the Caravan, and an account of the Persons and their Merchandise.
This Venetian was a person ill fitted for the quality of an Ambassador, being a
person of no Parts; which made me wonder that such great Princes, and so wise a
Commonwealth should send such a person upon a Concern of that importance. For
the Grand Signor then assailing Candy, he was sent to excite the King of Persia
to engage him in a War against the Turk, thereby to keep off the Storm that
threatened Christendom. Thereupon I told the Ambassador, that it was necessary
for him to give the Commander of the Fort first notice of his coming, to the
end he might give advice thereof to Solyman-Kan Governor of the Province,
whose duty it was to advertise the King. Thereupon he requested me to send my
Interpreter, which I did. Upon whose intelligence the Lieutenant of the Fort
came to Compliment the Ambassador on the behalf of the chief Commander, and to
conduct him to the Castle.

Thereupon the Ambassador, my self, and my Interpreter, together with some
Armenian Merchants went with him, traveling for three hours over the
Mountains. By that time we came half the way, as we passed through a Wood, we
heard as it were some person give a Whistle; at which when the Lieutenant
perceived us to be somewhat startled, he carried us to the place from whence
the Whistle came, where we saw a Serpent about as big as a Man's Thigh, and
about twelve Foot long, whose head was squeezed between two Trees, that put him
to pain. From that Mountain we descended into a pleasant Plain, where the
Commander of the Fortress staid for us under his Tent. He had set it up by the
side of a River, under the shade of several great Walnut-trees. So soon as he
saw us, he rose from his great Silk Tapestry Coverlet, and saluted us in a most
civil manner, telling us, that assuredly Sha-Abas, his Master, would be very
glad to hear that the Monarchs of Christendom had sent him an Ambassador, and
that he would write to Solyman-Kan, whose duty it was to advertise the
Emperor. Thereupon he wrote and dispatched away a Messenger, giving him order
to tell the Deroga, or Judge of the Town, through which we were to pass, that
he should make Provision for us and our Horses 'till we came to the Governor.
After he had asked us several Questions concerning the War between the Grand
Signor and the Venetians, how many thousand men he had as well by Sea as Land,
and what number of Galleys and Ships? wherein we satisfied him according to the
best of our knowledge. After he had civilly treated us, he sent his Lieutenant
back with us again to the Caravan. About ten a Clock the next night we
dislodged, and the Lieutenant and six Soldiers attended upon us; who told us
he had order not to leave us, 'till he had brought us to Solomon Kan.

The next night we lodged between two Hills, among several Tents of Herdsmen.
Here it was that the Commander had ordered that we should be treated by the
Deroga. A Deroga, as I have said, is the Judge of a Village: But this Deroga
was chief of many Families, some of which were of Mesopotamia, others of
Arabia. These are all Herdsmen that never live in Houses, but retire with their
Cattle to the holes in the Rocks, where partly Nature, partly Art, have
contributed to make them convenient Habitations.

So soon as we were alighted, four ancient men came and led the Ambassador and
my self to the Deroga's Tent. It seemed to consist of many Rooms, with a Hall
in the middle, spread with fair Persian Carpets. He caused us to sit down upon
Cushions, and then presented us with a Pipe of Tobacco, and Water to wash our
Feet. After he had nobly treated us, and that we were upon taking our leaves,
the Deroga was very much troubled that we had made a small Present to his Son;
telling us, that it was a crime for him to take any thing of the King's Guests,
especially from Strangers that had come so long a Journey.

The next day we lodged in a place where there was such a prodigious quantity
of Lillies that the Ground was almost covered with them. There were none that
were white, being for the most part of a fair Violet color, with a streak of
Red in the middle of every leaf; they are like our Lilly's, but much bigger.
And to drink the infusion of the Roots of these Lilly's, especially those whose
Leaves are blackest, for fifteen days together, is a most Sovereign remedy
against the Pox. Not long after came a Person of a goodly Aspect, who seemed to
be an Arabian, but he spoke the Persian Language, whom Solomon Kan had sent to
Compliment the Ambassador. He carried us to the Tent which the Governor had
caused to be set up in a Garden near the Town, where he also Lodged the
Capuchins. The Ambassador also sent to Compliment the Kan by my interpreter;
and when the hour was come that we were to set forward, he gave order to six of
the Captains of his Cavalry to accompany the Ambassador. The House where the
Governor lived in, was one of the most beautiful in Persia. And as for the
Governor himself, we found him in a Gallery that looked upon the Garden, the
Floor being all spread over with a Tapestry of Gold and Silk, with large
Cushions of Cloth of Gold all along the Wall. After some Questions and
discourse concerning the Affairs of Europe, they served in Supper, which
consisted of several Dishes; but no Wine was to be had; our drink being only
Sherbet and the juice of Granates, with Sugar for those that desired it. We
were a long time at Supper, for it is the custom of Persia that when one man
rises, another takes his place and falls too, in so much that the Master of the
Feast must have the Patience to stay 'till several have taken their turns; and
when every one has done, the Cloth is taken away without any more to do. Here
the Ambassador committed an absurdity; for there are no Silver or Gold Spoons
in Persia, but only long Wooden Ladles that reach a great way. Now the
Ambassador reaching his Ladle to a Purslane-Dish full of Pottage that was
scalding hot, clapped it presently into his mouth; but finding it so hot that he
could not endure it, after several scurvy faces, he threw it out of his mouth
again into his hand, in the presence of all the Company.

After we had stayed five days at Sneirne, the Caravan-Bashi signified his
desire to pursue his Journey. Thereupon the Ambassador took his leave of the
Governor, presenting him with a Watch and a pair of Pistols; who in
retaliation presented the Ambassador with a stately Horse, and a Colt of two
years old. The next day we dislodged, and pursued our Road to Amadan, which is
not above three days Journey from Sneirne.

Amadan is one of the largest and most considerable Cities of Persia, seated at
the foot of a Mountain, where do arise an infinite company of Springs that
water all the Country. The Land about it abounds in Corn and Rice, wherewith it
furnishes the greatest part of the neighboring Provinces. Which is the reason
that some of the Persian Statesmen hold it very inconvenient for the King of
Persia to keep Bagdat, as well by reason of the vastness of the Charge, as also
for that it draws from Amadan that which should supply other Provinces. On the
other side, it is easy for the Grand Signor to hold it, by reason of the
neighborhood of Mesopotamia, Assyria, and the Arabs, Enemies to the Persians:
by which means Provisions are very cheap, which the people would not know where
to put off, if the King of Persia were Lord of Bagdat.

We staid at Amadan about ten days, by reason of the Rains; during which time
the Caravans cannot travel. While we tarried there, we were visited by several
Babylonian Christians, who were glad to see that we had escaped the Clutches of
the Basha of Bagdat, who had given order to the Basha of Karkou, and the Bey of
Sharassou that commands the Frontiers of Turkey, to seize us, and carry us back
to Bagdat. For which we might have thanked the Ambassador, and a malicious
Rabbi, that came along with us in the Caravan from Aleppo; who finding the
Feast of the Tabernacles to be at hand, and that we had a great way to Ispahan,
left us at Niniveh, to keep the Festival with the Jews of Babylon. Where that
he might insinuate himself into the Basha's favor, he informed him that there
was a Fringuiz in the Caravan, whom he looked upon as a Spy, and that he was an
Envoy into Persia from the Commonwealth of Venice; for he carried no
Merchandise, but had three Chests full of rich Habits, and several other things
which he took for Presens to the Persian King. For out of vanity or folly, the
Venetian had several times opened his Chest and exposed his Gallantry to view.
And yet he was so clutch-fisted and niggardly in every thing, that when there
was any occasion to reward the Kan's Servant, or any of the Countrymen that
brought us the Dainties of the place, it came all out of my Pocket. So that I
left him to my Interpreter and the two Capuchins; and with three Servants and a
Guide, after I had staid at Amadan three days, I took Horse for Ispahan.

When I came there, the Nazar or Master of the King's Household hearing I had
left an Ambassador behind me with the Caravan, inquired of me what manner of
Person he was, but I pretended I had had little converse with him, unwilling to
discover his mean Spirit. The Evening before his Arrival the Nazar sent to give
the Fringuiz notice in the King's Name, that they should be ready to go meet
the Ambassador the next day; which we did, and brought him into the City and
through Ali's Gate, that joins to the King's Palace. Now it is the custom for
all Ambassadors to salute that Gate, by reason of a white Marble Stone made
like an Asses back, and which serves for a Step: being, as they report, brought
anciently out of Arabia, where Ali lived. So soon as you have strid over that
Stone without touching it, which were a great crime, you enter into a kind of a
Gallery, where there are Rooms on each side, which serves for a Sanctuary for
Criminals, which the King himself cannot fetch out of that place. That day that
the new King receives his Ensigns of Royalty, he goes to stride over that
Stone; and if by negligence he should chance to touch it, there are four Guards
at the Gate, that would make a show of thrusting him back again.

But now the Master of the Ceremonies being ready to conduct the Ambassador to
the Apartment allotted him, as an Ambassador that came from three great
Monarchs, and a potent Commonwealth, he desired to lodge at the House of one
Pietro Pentalet, descended from Venetian Parents; whereupon the Master of the
Ceremonies conducted him thither, and caused his Dinner to be brought him.
While we were eating, I counted thirteen Languages spoken at the Table; Latin,
French, High Dutch, English, Low Dutch, Italian, Portuguez, Persian, Turkish,
Arabic, Indian, Syriac, and Malaye, which is the Language of the Learned, that
is spoken from the River Indus to China and Japan, and in all the Islands of the
East, like Latin in Europe; not reckoning the little Moresco or Gibbrish of the
Country. So that it is a difficult thing to observe what is talked in one
Company, where the Discourse begins in one Language, is pursued in another, and
finished in a third: and for the Turks and Armenians, they never speak above
three or four Languages at most.

Now to show you the Civility of the Persians; the Master of the Ceremonies
came to the Ambassador and told him, that if he did not like the Cookery of the
Persians, he had Order from the Atemadoulet, who is as the Grand Vizier in
Turkey, to offer him Money instead of Diet, to the end he might dress his own
Meat as he pleased himself. Upon which the covetous Ambassador accepted his
offer, and two hours after there was a Bag brought him of 50 Tomans, which
amount to about 800 Crowns. The Franks being offended at his baseness, slighted
the Ambassador, and left him to keep House by himself, which was poor enough
God knows; an Onion or a Turnep serving his turn for a Meal. Some days after,
he had Audience of the King, to whom he presented his Letters Credential from
the Pope, the Emperor, the King of Poland, and the Commonwealth of Venice.
Those from the three last were well received, because the Seals were of Gold,
and for that the Paper was embelish'd with curious Flourishes: but the Pope's
Letters were rejected with scorn, because the Seals were only of Lead, as the
Bulls are usually sealed; and for that the Writing was very plain. For the
Kings of Persia, who are very nice, love things that are gay to the Eye;
otherwise they look upon themselves to be affronted. Dominico de Santis had
better have taken upon him the meaner quality of an Envoy, than the title of an
Ambassador, unless he had known better how to behave himself; especially being
so eclipsed as he was by a real Ambassador that arrived at Ispahan some time
after. All the Franks went forth to meet him, and the Master of the Ceremonies
made him the same proffers as he had done to the Venetian: but he nobly
answered, That whatever it were that the King of Persia sent him, he should
take it for a very great Honor: otherwise, if he would have eaten Gold, the
King his Master would have allowed him 30 Mules Load. Such persons as behave
themselves with decency and a good grace, are the persons that the Christian
Princes should send into Persia, who are the most refined Wits, and the best
Politicians of all Asia.

To conclude the Story of the Venetian, I will give you his Character. An
Indian naturally of a good Wit having embraced Christianity and an
Ecclesiastical Life, went to Rome to complete his Studies which he had begun at
Goa; whither, the Pope, taking an affection to him, sent him afterward as his
Vicar. Dominico de Santis being then at Rome, put himself into his service, and
followed him into the Indies, where I saw him the first time I went, in a mean
condition. Upon his return to Venice, where he was in no credit before, he made
people believe that he understood the Trade of Asia; whereupon some particular
Merchants trusted him with some Goods, which were cast away at Seide. Thus poor
and bare he returned to Goa, where he got 800 Crowns by a charitable
Contribution. From thence he traveled to Ispahan, where he fell into the
acquaintance of Father Rigordi a Jesoite, with whom he went into Poland: where
making his brags of the great knowledge he had of the Affairs of Persia, the
King gave him that Commission which I have already mentioned. The Emperor
followed his Example, and the Commonwealth of Venice did the same: and to give
the more luster and authority to his Embassy, they got the Pope to join with
them. But alas! both Dominico de Santis, and all such persons as he, that go
into Asia without Brains and good Behavior, do out prostitute the Reputation
of the Princes that send them. Such another was Father Rigordi, who after he
had been thrust out of Goa by the Portugals, went to Ispahan, where he
insinuated himself by a Proposition which he made of Marrying the King of
Persia, who was then a very young Prince, to the Duchess of Orleanoe. Under
which pretense he was well received and treated by the King; from whom he also
recerv'd some Presents by virtue of that Proposal, which was good sport to the
Duchess when she heard of it.

As for the Venetian, the Atemudoulet, who was very glad to be rid of him,
desired the Muscovite Ambassador, who was then upon his return home, to take
him along with him, which he did as far as the Caspian Sea, where they take
Shipping for Astracan; but there the Muscovite told him he could carry him no
further: thereupon he was forced to come back to Ispahan, and so to travel to
Goa, whence the Portugals shipped thim home for Charities sake. But when he came
to Venice, has was so far from being well received, that the Senate had like to
have punished him severely for giving so bad an account of his Negotiation.

CHAP. VI. Of the Road which the Author kept, when he Traveled the fourth time
into Asia, to go from Paris to Ormus. And first of his Voyage from Marseilles
to Alexandretta.
ISet out from Paris in the company of Monsieur d'Ardiliere the eighteenth of
June, 1651. and arrived at Marseilles the sixteenth of July. On the
twenty-sixth of August we set Sail, with a favorable North-West Wind that blew
very briskly the two next days; but at length it grew so very slack, that
coming about to the North. North-East, we made for Sardinia. Upon the second of
September by Sunrising, we discovered the Western Coast of Sardinia, six
Leagues from the Land. About Noon the Wind chopping about again to the
North-West, we held on our first Course; and upon the third of September, we
descried the Island Galita upon the Coast of Africa. On the fourth we
discovered the Island of Zambino before Tunis, and about Evening Cape Bon,
which is the most Southerly Point of all Africa. The fifth we had a sight of
the Island of Pantalaria, and the Coast of Sicily. The sixth we discovered the
Island of Goza, and the seventh the Castle that bears the same name.

We landed at Malta upon the day of the Nativity of the Virgin, which is a
great day among the Maltesi, upon which they give thanks to God, for that the
Turks raised their Siege upon that day.

The Grand-Master goes to the Church of St. John, accompanied with all the
chief Commanders in their Robes of Command, and the greatest part of the
Knights. All the Countrymen and Citizens are up in Arms upon that day, and
march to the Inn called the Auvernian-house, with the Knight that goes to fetch
the Standard. This Knight is clad in a Cassock of Crimson-Velvet, with a Cross
of the Order, before and behind. He wears a Helmet upon his head, and carries
the Standard upon his shoulders; and by him marches the Grand-Master's Page,
who carries a Sword in one hand, and a Dagger in the other, both very richly
Embellished, and given to the Order by CHARLES the fifth. The Page that carried
the Sword and Dagger was the youngest Nephew of Pope Innocent the tenth. The
Soldiers and Citizens marching before to the Church door, make a Lane for the
Knight and the Page to pass on to the Altar, where the Knight makes three bows,
and having done as much to the Grand-Master, places himself on the right hand
of the Grand-Masters Chair, and the Page on the left. Then the Mass and the
Music begins, and while the Gospel is reading, the Grand-Master takes the
Sword and the Dagger out of the Page's hand, and holds them with the points
upward all the remaining part of the Mass. During the Elevation of the Host,
the Knights repeats the same Ceremony as at the beginning; and then the Bells
ring, the great Guns go off, and the Soldiers give three Vollies. Mass being
ended, the Grand-Master retires, accompanied as before, only that he is then
attended by all the Ecclesiastical persons of the City, and coming out of the
Church, he proceeds with all the Infantry marching before him toward our Lady's
of Victory, where they all go in procession. While they make a stand in that
place, the Soldiers give another Volley, which is answered by all the Canons
in the Town, as also from the Ships and Galleys. After that they return to St.
John's; and the Infantry Guard the Standard back to the Inn, while the
Grand-Master goes to his Palace.

The ninth we viewed the Fortifications, which are stored with very fair pieces
of Canon.

The tenth we saw the Pages perform their Exercises before the Grand-master,
which are generally vaulting and handling their Arms, both Musket and Pike.

The elev'nth we viewed the Arsenal, where I was assured that there were Arms
for twenty thousand men, being in good order, and rarely well looked after.

The next day we visited the Infirmery, where the sick are served in Plate, as
well the poor as rich.

The twentieth we set Sail, having the Wind at West-South-West, and a fresh
gale; so that upon the twenty-third we discovered the Coast of the Morea, to
which we approached so near, as to descry Navarin. In the Evening we saw the
City of Coron, where there is a great Trade for Sallet-Oyl. From thence it was
that the Great Turk Embarked for Candy in the year 1645.

The twenty-fourth the Wind was at East-North-East. In the Morning we
discovered the Cape of Matapan, which is the most Southern Point of Land in
Europe, lying in the Morea, and at Noon the Island of Cherigo.

The twenty-fifth we drew near Cyprus, and descried a Mountain in that Island,
called Canteliere, with some other Promontories toward the South.

From the twenty-seventh day 'till we came to Alexandretta, we perceived the
Sea to be all over covered with Pumice-stones, which happ'nd from an Earthquake
that had for some time before swallowed up the Island of Santorini. Some think
that it proceeded from the abundance of Sulphur, of which that Country is full,
which took Fire, and was the death of above 750 of the Ilanders, that were
partly buried in the Ruins, and partly died out of fear. They that remained
alive, became black like Charcoal; and the Vapors that ascended out of the
Abyss fully'd all the Silver as far as Constantinople; the noise of the
Earthquake being heard as far as Smyrna.

The twenty-ninth, by break of day we discovered the Island of Cyprus.

The first of October by eight in the Morning we came to an Anchor before
Salines, which is one of the Ports of Cyprus, where our Consuls live. Here I
asked several of the Christians of the Country, how they did to live and pay
their Carage? Who told me that it was with a great deal of difficulty, in
regard the Island was very bare of Money; which was the reason that many
Christians turned Mahometans, to avoid paying their Carage, which is a Tribute
that the Grand Signor Iayes upon all Christians throughout his Dominions. He
exacts from the poorest six Piasters a Head; but there are some that pay a
hundred, or a hundred and fifty: and this Tribute is due so soon as ever they
come to be eighteen years of age.

The Island of Cyprus is one of the most considerable in the Mediterranean Sea,
more to the East than any of the rest; bearing the title of a Kingdom, as being
500 Miles in circuit. It is not all of the same breadth, being of a triangular
form, the sides whereof are very unequal. To it there belong several Capes or
Promontories, the principal whereof are, St. Epiphanio, toward the West; Cape
de Gate, toward the South; Cape Diegrega, toward the North-East; Cape
Cormachiti, toward the North; and Cape St. Andrew, upon the most Eastern Point
of the Island. The principal Roads are that of Salines or Larneca, that of
Paphos, and that of Cerines or Cerigni. The Haven of Famagosta signifies
nothing as to great Ships, there being none but small Vessels that can ride
there. The Venetians had formerly made a small Mole there to harbor their
Galleys, but it is now quite ruined. The Road of Cerines is that where the
Barks and Galliots lie that come from Caramania, and Payasses; and where the
Basha's land that are sent as Governors of the Island from Constantinople, who
reside generally at Nicosia. That City is almost in the middle of the Island,
and was formerly a very large one, as appears by the compass of the ancient
Walls. The new Walls are well terrass'd within-side, and in a good posture of
defense. There are three Gates belong to the City; that of Famagosta, that of
Paphos, and that of Cerines. The City it self is no uncomely place; the
Venetians having adorned it with many fair Palaces, which the Turks demolish
every day, out of hopes to find hidd'n Treasure therein, and sell the Stones to
build new Houses. The Cathedral that goes by the name of Santa Sophia is an
ample and fair Structure, of which the Turks have now made a Mosquee, together
with one more, which was formerly a Monastery belonging to the Austin-Fryars.
The Greeks have there four Churches, and the Franks two; that is to say, the
French Missionary Capuchins, and the Italian Missionary Soccolans. The first
have a Church dedicated to St. James, the others another, which is called Holy
Rood Church. The Armenians also have another belonging to them, which is a very
neat Building, which was formerly a Monastery of the Carthusians. There it is
that there is a Tomb, adorned with several Sculptures of Religious Nunns,
especially an Abbess with a Cross in her Hand, the Writing about the Stone
being in French Characters. The City is seated in a temperate Air and a fertile
Soil, abounding with Water. It extends more in length than breadth, having been
anciently nine Miles in compass; but the Venetians to make it stronger, reduced
it to the circuit of three. The Work of the Fortification was so neat, and such
a proportion observed in all things, that the most famous Engineers esteemed it
one of the most stately Fortresses in the World, when Sclim the Second sent an
Army against it, under the Command of Mustapha his Grand Vizier.

Famagosta is a Sea-Town upon the East Side of the Island, and the chief Bulwark
of it. It is kept in good repair, the Castle within being in form of a
Citadel. The Turks have converted into Mosquees the Churches of the
Christians, who are not suffered to dwell in the City. They have only the
liberty to come thither in the day, and to open Shops, which they shut up again
at night, and then go home to their Houses in the neighboring Villages. The
City is governed by a Bey, who has no dependence upon the Governor of the
Island, who is obliged to maintain a Galley for the guard of the Coast.

Cerines is another little City, but without any defense, the Walls thereof
being all tumbled to ruin. Only there is a Fortress toward the Sea, well
built, with a Garrison in it. There is also a handsome Monastery of Religious
Greeks, built somewhat after the French manner; wherein there are some of the
Cells which stand so upon the Sea, that they can fish out of the Windows. The
Fields about it bear Cotton, which is the chief Revenue of the Monastery. There
is only the Fort of Cerines upon the North, where the Island does not lie so
open, as toward the South and East; which besides by that of Famagosta, are
guarded by the Forts of Salines, Limisso, and Paphos. The Inhabitants of the
Island are for the most part Greeks, especially in the Villages. They are clad
after the Italian manner, both Men and Women; the Men wearing Hats like the
Franks, and retaining their ancient Customs as much as is possible for them to
do. The Trade of the Island lies in Cotton-wool, which is the best in all the
East; and some Silk, which is neither good, nor very plentiful. However the
Island is fertile enough, did it not want Inhabitants enough to till it. As for
Bread, Wine, Cheese, and Milk, they are all very cheap, and there is Oil enough
to serve the Island. But for the Wine, it is transported out of the Island to all
the places of Trade not far distant. The best grows at the foot of Olympus, and
is a delicious sort of Drink. The Country between Nicosia and Famagosta
produces Cotton, of which there grows also some between Paphos and Limisso. The
chief place where the Silk is made is called Cytherea, a large Town watered
with a fair River that runs from the Mountain of Venus. This River turns
several Mills, which are the chief Revenue of the Island. There is Silk also
made between Paphos and Limisso; upon the Road between which two places you
meet with a Town called Piscopi, where are to be seen several Aquaeducts, that
carried the Water into the Rooms and Magazines where the people formerly made
Sugar. But since the Island was taken from the Venetians, one of the Basha's
that was sent as Governor, burnt up all the Sugar Canes in the Country. Toward
the Sea-shoar near Limisso, is to be seen one of the fairest Gardens of Cyprus,
which they call Shiti; to which there belongs a magnificent House, and a Grove
of Orange Trees. It was built by a rich Venetian, who had a good Estate in
Lands thereabouts.

In Cyprus the people take a vast number of Birds as big as a Lark, especially
near the Mountain of the Holy Cross. In the Months of September and October,
the Country People of the adjacent Villages make themselves little Hutts in the
Fields, where usually those Birds are wont to light, and feed upon the Seed of
an Herb that grows there; which when it is dry, the people daub over with
Lime-twigs. But this they never do but when the North-West Wind blows, and that
the weather be very cold; for with a Southerly Wind they never take any. These
Birds are accounted great Dainties by the Venetians, who make no great Feasts
in Carnival-time wherein they do not set these Birds upon the Table, pil'd up
in Dishes like a Pyramid. They buy them up every year; being first prepared fit
for exportation by the people, who having pulled off their Feathers, parboyl
them, and pickle them up in Barrels with Vinegar and Salt. When they are to be
eat'n, they are set upon a Chafing Dish, between two Dishes. Sometimes there
are above a thousand Barrels exported out of the Island; and indeed, were it not
for this Trade, the poor people would see but very little Money.

Upon the Mountain of the Holy Cross stands a Church of the same name; upon
which the report of the Country goes, that St. Helena returning from Jerusalem
left a piece of our Savior's Cross with the Christians of Cyprus, who built a
Church there, by means of the Liberality of the same Princess. Afterward those
of the Town of Leucara took it from hence, and carried it to their Church,
where I saw it. The piece is as big as the Palm of a Man's Hand, set in a great
Cross of Latten, embossed with several Figures.

In the Kingdom of Cyprus there is an Archbishop and three Suffragans. The
Archbishop takes upon him the Title of Nicosia; to which Famagosta belongs
with all the Country between Nicosia and Famagosta, with the Territories of
Nicosia and all the Villages round. He has a House about a League from Nicosia,
where the chiefest of his Revenue lies. Some years since he caused the high
Altar of the Church to be painted and gilded, being a neat piece of
Workmanship. Thus the Archbishop has under his Jurisdiction all the middle
part of the Island, and some part toward the East. The Bishops are the Bishops
of Paphos, Larneca; and Cerines.

The Greeks are very much addicted to the observation of their ancient Customs
and Ceremonies; and generally their Masses are very long. Upon Sundays and
Holy Days they rise between one and two of the Clock in the Morning to Sing
Mattins. To which purpose there is a Clerk that goes from door to door and
knocks with a Hammer, to wake the people, and then cries out with a loud voice,
Christians go the Church. The men and old women fail not to go as being more
zealous; but the maids and young women never go out of doors in the night for
fear of the Turks. There are seven or eight Villages, the Inhabitants whereof
are Maronites, who came from Mount Libanus, and speak Arabic at home, but Greek
among the Islanders. They follow the Romish Religion, and have their Churches
peculiar to themselves.

The Island of Cyprus is no wholesome Air, being subject to the spoil of a sort
of Locusts, that some Summers destroy all their Fruit and Corn. During the
heats they hover in the Air, which they will dark'n with their number like a
thick Cloud; but when the North Wind blows, it carry's them into the Sea, where
they perish.

There are in Cyprus three sorts of colored Earth, a Grey-black, a Red, and a
Yellow; of which the Venetians fetch away great quantities for their courser
sort of Painting. There Is also a Mine of White Alome, which is the stone called
Damiantlius. It Is thought that the Ancients had a way to spin this Alome into a
kind of Cotton, and so to make out of it a certain sort of Cloth that would not
consume in the Fire, but only be the more perfectly whitened thereby. The
Indians formerly buried the dead bodies of their Kings deceased in Shrouds of
this kind of Linen, and then putting them into the Fire, found the bodies all
reduced to ashes, but the Cloth whole; out of which they took the ashes, and
carefully put them into an Vrne, which was prepared for their preservation.

When the Basha of Cyprus has a mind to view the Fortress of Famagosta, he
sends to give the Bey, who is Governor thereof, notice of it. For it is at the
Governors choice whether he will give him admission or no. The Basha
Hali-Giorgi, being a comely old man of above a hundred and two years of age,
setting out of Nicosia in his Litter with about two hundred Horse, when he was
come within half a League of Famagosta, the Governor of the place sent his
Lieutenant with a hundred Horse to Compliment him, and to conduct him to the
Town. Immediately they took upon them the Guard of the Basha's Litter, who was
not permitted to take along with him above eight or ten of his principal
Officers. The Cannons roared at his entry, and he was treated magnificently,
but he lay not in the Town, being conducted back by the same party to the place
where they met him in the Morning.

Upon the third day of October we set Sail about three a Clock in the Morning
with a West-North-West Wind, and about Noon we were within sight of Famagosta,
into which place we could by no means be admitted, by reason of the Wars
between the Turks and Venetians. But as far as I could discern a far off, there
is no easy access to the Port, and for the City I could descry no part of it.

The fourth, by break of day we got sight of the Coast of Syria, Cape Canger,
and the Golf of Antioch, and about Evening we arrived in the Road of
Alexandretta.

From thence we went to Aleppo, and stayed there from the seventh of October;
to the thirtieth of December.

On the thirtieth we set forward for Nineveh, and with little variation of the
Road which I have already described in my third Voyage from Paris. We arrived
the second day of February at Moussul or Nineveh, where we stayed 'till the
fifteenth, 'till the Kilets or Boats of the Country could be got ready. Our
Kilet carried thirty Passengers, and sixty hundred of Aleppo Weight, or thirty
three thousand pound of Paris Weight, upon which the Tigris bore us from
Moussul to Babylon.

CHAP. VII. A Continuation of the Road which the Author kept in the fourth
Voyage into Asia, and particularly of his passage upon the Tigris from Nineveh
to Babylon.
THE fifteenth of February we put off from Moussul, and after we had swam six
hours, we came to lie near a hot Bath, about a Musket Shot from the Tigris. It
was thronged with Sick people that came thither for their Recovery. We kept our
selves upon the Watch all night; but for all we could do, the Arabs stole two
Coverlets from a Merchant, and a Turk's Clothes that was gone into the Bath.

The sixteenth, after we had rowed about five hours, we came to a huge Dam; it
is 200 Foot wide, and makes a fall in the River of about 20 Fathoms steep. The
Arabians said that Alexander the Great made it to turn the course of the River;
others will have it, that Darius caused it to be made to hinder the passage of
the Macedonians by Water. However, we were forced to land our selves and our
Goods, and to lade them upon Horses which the Arabs brought us.

The passing this Dam is worthy observation. For it is a thing of wonder to see
the Kilet all of a sudden fall above sixscore Foot, and yet to be kept by the
Leather-Bottles still above Water. The Watermen that guide the Boat, tie
themselves and their Oars fast to a Perch bent like a Semicircle, to defend
themselves from the force of the Water. And indeed this is the Dam that renders
Tigris unnavigable.

The Kilet being come to the place where we expected it, we put our Goods
aboard, and lay in the same place upon the Bank of the River. For the Arabs, if
they perceive the Merchants asleep, cut the Cords of the Kilet, and setting it
a-drift, swim after it, and rifle away what they please.

The seventeenth, after three hours rowing we met with the River Zab, that
empties into the Tigris, upon Chaldea-side. Half a League above the River
stands a fair Castle of Brick upon a little Hill; but no body dwelling in it,
it runs to ruin. We were twelve hours that day upon the Water, and came to lie
at a place which was full of Wood, where we made great Fires, and shot off our
Muskets often in the night to scare the Lions.

The eighteenth we were upon the Water eighteen hours, and lay upon the Bank of
the River, upon Assyria-side. That Evening the Arabs brought us Milk-Meats, and
fresh Butter. They swim from the other side of the River with a Boracho under
their Stomachs, and another upon their Heads, wherein they bring their
Commodities; for which they will have no Money, but only Tobacco, or Biscuit, or
Pepper.

The nineteenth, in four hours time we met with a River called Altum-sou, or
The River of Gold. It flows from the Mountains of the Medes, and I traveled by
the side of it for three days together, returning from Tauris to Aleppo, and
passing the Tigris to Mesia. The Water of the River is of an excellent taste,
and it falls into Tigris upon Assyria-side. All along the Tigris, on the same
side, are great store of Bituminous Springs, and other Streams of hot Water
that smell of Sulphur. All that day we saw none but Arabs and Curds marching
along the Banks of the River, the Curds upon Mesopotamia side, and the Arabs
upon Assyria side. They were at War, and both sides marched in very good order.
The Young men went foremost with Bows and Arrows, and some Muskets, but several
Half-Pikes. Next to them their Wives, Virgins, and Children, with their Cattle,
Herds, and Camels; after which marched the Old men in the rear. As well the
Curds as the Arabians sent out Horsemen to scout upon the high Grounds; for as
soon as they find any advantage, they presently swim their Horses over the
River and fall on. Now because we would not trust those sort of People, we
rowed nineteen hours to avoid 'em.

The twentieth we were eleven hours upon the Tigris, and came to lie at a Town
called Tegrit, upon Mesopotamia side. There belongs to the Town a Castle half
ruined, and yet there are still some handsome Chambers to be seen. Upon the
North and East, the River serves for a Moat; but upon the West and South it has
a deep Artificial one paved with Freestone. The Arabians say that formerly it
was the strongest place in all Mesopotamia, though it be commanded by two Hills
not far from it. The Christians dwelt half a League from the City, where the
Ruins of a Church and part of a Steeple are still to be seen, whereby it
appears to have been a considerable Pile of Building.

The twenty-first, after we had rowed three hours, we met with a Town upon
Assyria side, which was called Amet-el-tour, from the name of a person that
lies interred in a Monastery, whom the people account to be a Saint. Therefore
is it a place of great Devotion among them, so that great numbers of Votaries
go thither in private. That day we were twelve hours upon the Water, and lay
upon the Banks of the River.

The twenty-second, having been upon the Water two hours, we met with a great
Channel cut out of Tigris to water the Lands, which runs up as far as just
overagainst Bagdat, and there falls into the Tigris again. Coming thither, we
landed upon Chaldea side, by reason that there were certain Turks with us, who
would of necessity perform their Devotions at a place called Samatra. In the
same there is a Mosquee not above half a League from the River; to which many
Mahometans pay their Devoirs, especially Indians and Tartars, who believe forty
of their Prophets to be buried there. When they knew us to be Christians, they
would not permit us, no not for Money, to set our Feet in it. About five
hundred Paces from the Mosquee stands a Tower very ingeniously built. There are
two Stair-cases without, that belong to it, made twirling like a
Periwinkle-shell: one of which Stair-cases was built deeper into the Tower than
the other. I would have taken better notice of it, could I have been permitted
to have come nearer it. Only I observed that it was made of Brick, and that it
seems to be very ancient. Half a League from thence appear three great Portals,
that look as if they had been the Gates of some great Palace. And indeed it is
not improbable but that there was some great City thereabouts; for, for three
Leagues all along the River there is nothing to be seen but Ruins. We were
twelve hours that day upon the Water, and lay upon the Banks of Tigris,
according to custom.

The twenty-third, we were twenty hours upon the Water, and all the day long we
saw nothing upon either side of the River but pitiful Hutts made of the
Branches of Palm Trees, where live certain poor people that turn the Wheels, by
means whereof they water the neighboring Grounds. We also met that day with a
River called Odoine, that falls into Tigris upon the side of the ancient
Chaldea.

The twenty-fourth, we were twenty-two hours upon the Water together, never
stirring off from the Kilet. The reason is, because the Merchants having taken
out of the Kilet all their Money and the best part of their Merchandises, give
them to the Country People, who carry them very faithfully to Bagdat, whither
they go to sell their own Commodities: which the Merchants do, to avoid the
payment of Five in the Hundred, in the City. I trusted them also with several
things of which they gave me a very good account, as they did to others, being
contented with a small matter for their pains.

The twenty-fifth, about four of the Clock in the Morning we arrived at Bagdat,
which is as usually called Babylon. They open the Gates by six, and then the
Customers come to take an account of the Merchandise, and to search the
Merchants themselves. If they find nothing about 'em, they let the Merchants
go: but if they have any thing about 'em which ought to pay, they carry the
persons to the Custom-House, where they write down the quantity of the Goods,
and let them go. All the Merchandise upon the Kilet is carried thither also,
which the Merchant fetches away again in two or three days, paying the Custom:
All which is done in very great order, without any noise or disturbance in the
least.

Though Bagdat usually bear the name of Babylon, yet it is at a great distance
from the ancient Babylon, whereof in due place. But now for Bagdat, as it
stands at this day.

Bagdat is a City seated upon the River of Tigris, on the Coast of Persia, and
separated from Mesopotamia by the same River. It lies in 33 Degrees. 15 Min. of
Elevation. The Chronicles of the Arabians report that it was built by one of
their Califfs named Almansour, in the year of the Hegyra of Mahomet 145, and of
Christianity 762, or thereabouts. They call it Dar-al-sani, that is, the House
of Peace. Some say it derived its name from a Hermitage that stood in a Meadow
where the City now stands, whence it was called Bagdat, or, a Garden
bequeathed. About forty years ago digging up the Foundations of an Inn, the
Workmen found a Body entire, habited like a Bishop, with a Censor and Incense
by him. And in the same place several Cells of Religious Houses showed
themselves: which makes it very probable, that where Bagdat is built there was
anciently a great Monastery, with several Houses where the Christians
inhabited. The City is about fifteen hundred Paces long, and sev'n or eight
hundred broad, and cannot possibly be above three Miles in circuit. The Walls
are of Brick, and terrass'd in some places, with large Towers like Bastions.
Upon all these Towers there are mounted about sixty pieces of Cannon, the
biggest whereof carries not above a five or six Pound Ball. The Moats are wide,
and about five or six Fathom deep. There are not above four Gates; three upon
the Land-side, and one upon the River, which you must cross, over a Bridge of
thirty-three Boats, distant one from the other about the breadth of one Boat.
The Castle is in the City, near to one of the Gates called El-Maazan, upon the
North side. It is partly built upon the River, encompassed only with a single
Wall, terrass'd in some places; and adorned with little Towers, upon which are
planted about a hundred and fifty Cannon, but without Carriages. The Moat is
narrow, and not above two or three Fathom deep, neither is there any
Drawbridge before the Gate. The Garrison consists of three hundred Janissaries,
commanded by an Aga. The City is governed by a Basha, who is generally a
Vizier. His House is upon the side of the River, making a fair show; and he has
always ready at command six or sev'n hundred Horse. There is also an Aga that
commands three or four hundred Spahi's. They have besides another sort of
Cavalry which is called Ginguliler, that is to say, Men of Courage, commanded
by two Aga's; and usually there are about three thousand in the City and the
Towns adjoining. The Keys of the Gates of the City and the Bridge-Gate are in
the custody of another Aga, who has under him two hundred Janissaries. There are
also six hundred Footmen, who have their particular Aga, and about sixty
Cannoneers, who were at that time commanded by an expert Artist that went by
the name of Signor Michael, who passed for a Turk, though he were born in
Candy. He put himself into the Grand Signor's service, when he went to besiege
Bagdat, in the year 1638. Though the Turk had the good fortune to carry the
City in a small time; not so much by virtue of the Breach which Signor Michael
had made in the Wall, as the Sedition and Revolt that happened at the same
instant, the Story whereof was thus in short.

The Kan that sustained the brunt of the Siege at first, was originally an
Armenian, and his name was Sefi-couli-Kan. He had commanded the City a long
time, and had defended it twice from the Army of the Turks, who were not able
to take it before. But the King of Persia having sent one of his Favorites to
command in his room, who had entered upon his Command before the Cannon had
made the Breach, the old Kan finding himself displaced by the Commission of the
new Governor, rather chose to dye, than survive the Affront which was put upon
him. To which purpose he sent for his Servants, the Officers of the Army, his
Wife and Son, and taking three Cups of Poison in his Hand, he commanded his
Wife, if ever she loved him, now to show the marks of her affection by
generously dying with him. He gave the same exhortation to his Son; and so all
three together drank up the Poison, which procured their speedy death. The
Soldiers, who had a great love for their Governor, having beheld so dismal a
Spectacle, and knowing the Grand Signor was preparing for a general Assault,
would not obey their new Kan, but began to act like Revolter's; and to that
purpose they agreed to deliver up the City, upon condition they might march
away with their Arms and Baggage: but the Turks did not keep their words. For
so soon as the Turks were got into the City; the Basha's told the Grand Signor,
that to weak'n the force of the Persian, it was necessary for him to put to the
Sword all the Soldiers that were in the City: and thereupon there were above
twenty thousand massacr'd in cold Blood. The Turks had seized upon the
Capuchins Mansion, but Signor Michael chief of the Canoneers, got it to be
restored them again.

As to the Civil Government of Bagdat, there is none but a Cady, who does all,
acting even the Mufti, with a Shiekelaslon or Tefterdar, who receives the
Revenues of the Grand Signor. There are in it five Mosquees, of which two are
indifferently well built, and adorned with Duomo's covered with varnished Tiles
of different colors. There are also ten Inns, all ill built, except two, which
are reasonably convenient. In general, the City is ill built; there being
nothing of beauty in it but the Bazars, which are all arched; else the
Merchants would not be able to endure the heats. They must also be watered
three or four times a day; for which office several poor people are hired upon
the public charge. The City is full of Trade, but not so full as it was, when
in the hands of the King of Persia: for when the Turk took it, he killed most
of the richest Merchants. However there is a great confluence thither from all
Parts; whither for Trade, or for Devotions sake, I cannot tell: because they
that follow the Sect of Haly, do believe that Haly lived at Bagdat. Besides,
all they that are desirous to go to Mecca by Land, must pass through Bagdat,
where every Pilgrim is forced to pay four Piasters to the Basha. You must take
notice that there are in Bagdat two sorts of Mahometans, the first are called
Rafedi's, or Heretics; the second, Observers of the Law, in all things like
those at Constantinople. The Rafedi's will by no means eat or drink with a
Christian, and very hardly with the rest of the Mahometans: or if they do
happ'n to drink out of the same Cup, or to touch them, they presently wash
themselves, as believing themselves unclean. The others are not so scrupulous,
but eat and drink and converse with all the World. In the year 1639, after the
Grand Signor had taken Bagdat, a Rafedi who was a Carrier of Water not only
refused to give a Jew to drink, who desired it of him in the Marketplace, but
abused him also in words. Thereupon the Jew complained to the Cady, who
immediately sent for him, and caused his Boracho and his Cup to be brought
along with him; when he came before him, he asked for his Cup, and gave the Jew
to drink, and then made the Porter drink also out of the same Cup: After that,
he ordered the Rafedi to be Bastinado'd, and this Lesson to be taught him while
he was chastising, That we are all God's Creatures, as well Mahometans, as
Christians and Jews. This has made them less zealous in their Superstition,
though they are the chiefest part of the Inhabitants of the City.

As to their Funerals, I have particularly observed, that when the Husband
dies, the Wife pulls off all her Head-gear, and lets her Hair fall about her
Ears; then she all besmears her Face with the Soot of a Kettle, and having so
done, frisks and leaps about after such a ridiculous manner, as from others
would rather produce laughter than tears. All the kindred, friends and
neighbors meet at the House of the deceased, and stay for the Celebration of
the Funeral. At what time the Women strive to outvie one another in a thousand
Apish tricks, clapping their Cheoks, yelling like mad people; and then of a
sudden setting themselves to dance to the sound of two Drums, like those which
the Tabor-and-Pipe-Men carry, upon which the Women beat for a quarter of an
hour. Among them there is one more accustomed to this fool'ry than the rest,
that fills your Ears with mournful Dinns: to which other Women make answer, by
redoubling their Cries, which may be heard at a great distance. It would then
be a vain thing to seek to comfort the Children of the deceased; for they seem
to be so much beside themselves, that they are not in a condition to hear any
thing. And they are obliged to carry themselves in that manner, unless they
intend to run the reproach of not having any kindness for their Parents. When
the Corpse is carried to the Grave, abundunce of poor people go before with
Banners, and Crescents at the ends of Sticks, singing most dismal Dirges all
the way. The Women are not to be at the Interrment, who are not to go abroad
but only upon Thursdays, when they go to the Sepulchers to Pray for the Dead.
And because that by their Law the Husband is obliged to lie with his lawful
Wife upon Thursday-night or Fryday-night, upon Wednesday-morning the Women go
to the ^^ths, where they perfume their Heads and Bodies with a sweet Water.
They may go abroad sometimes at other seasons, when their Husbands give them
leave to visit their Kindred; but then they are to be wrapped up from Head to
Foot, that it is impossible for their Husbands themselves to know them if they
meet 'em in the Streets. By the way take notice, that the Persian Women, unless
they be such as are very poor, would rather stay within all the days of their
Lives, than go abroad without a Horse. And it is a certain sign to know a
Curtisan from an honest Woman; for that the Curtisans put their Feet in the
Stirup, and the honest Women only in the Stirup-leathers. The Women of Bagdat
are very richly habited, after their fashions; but they are not contented to
wear their Jewels about their Necks and Wrists, for they hang them like
Bracelets about their Faces, and will bore holes in their Ears to put in a
Ring. The Arabian Women only bore the separation between the two Nostrils,
where they wear hollow Rings, as well to spare cost, as for lightness; for some
are so big, that you may almost thrust your Fist through them. Beyond all this,
the more to beautify themselves, they make a round Ring about their Eyes with
a certain sort of Blacking: And as well Men as Women, in the Desert, put the
same near their Eyes, to preserve them, as they say, from the heat of the Sun.

Of Christians there are three sorts: Nestorians, who have a Church; Armenians
and Jacobites, who have none, but go to the Capuchins, who administer the
Sacraments to them. The Christians go in Devotion to a Chapel, about a short
quarter of a League from the City, dedicated to a Saint whom they call
Keder-Elias, paying a small Fee, for admission, to the Turks, who keep the
Keys. Two days journey from the City stands another ruined Church in a pitiful
Village, where they say, that St. Simon and St. Jude were both Martyred and
Buried. If a Christian dies, all the rest come to his Burial, and returning
home, find a Supper prepared to welcome them; the next day they return to the
Grave, and pray for the deceased; and the third day there is a Dinner for all
comers and goers. Sometimes there will be a hundred and fifty persons at a
Burial. They repeat the same Ceremonies for the seventh, fifteenth, thirtieth
and fortieth days afterward; having a great veneration for the Dead, for whom
they pray too often. This custom of Feasting is very inconvenient for the Poor;
for they being desirous to imitate the Rich, run themselves sometimes so far in
Debt, that they are forced to sell their Children to the Turks to discharge
themselves.

There are several Jews also in Bagdat, but more that come every year in
Devotion to visit the Sepulcher of the Prophet Ezekiel, which is a day and a
halfs journey from the City. In short, since the taking of Bagdat by Sultan
Amurat, the number of Inhabitants cannot be less than fifteen thousand Souls;
which shows that the City is not peopled according to its bigness.

About a day and a halfs journey from the Point of Mesopotamia, at distance
almost equal between Tigris and Euphrates, there appears a vast Heap of Earth,
which the people call to this day Nemrod. It stands in the midst of a wide
Plain, and may be discovered a great way off. The vulgar sort believe it to be
the Remains of the Tower of Babel; but there is more probability of the
Arabians Opinion, who call it Agartouf, and believe it to have been built by an
Arabian Prince, who always kept a Beacon at the top to assemble his Subjects
together in time of War. This Heap of Earth was about three hundred Paces in
circuit; but it is not easy to guess at the ancient height, the rest being
fallen to ruin, but only eighteen or twenty Fathom. It is built of Brick dried
in the Sun, every Brick being ten Inches square, and three thick. The Building
is thus raised. Upon every row of Canes or Reeds bruised to pieces and mixed
with Wheat-straw, and spread an Inch and a half thick, lie seven orders of these
Bricks with a little Straw between each; then another Bed of Reeds, and six
rows of Bricks; then a third with five rows, decreasing in that manner 'till
you come to the top. The form of it seems to have been rather square than
round; and in the highest part of that which remains there appears a Hole like
a Window; if it were not rather an Outlet for Water, or a Hole for the
Scaffolding. In short, according to the Description of Moses there is no
likelihood that this should be the Remains of the ancient Tower of Babel.

The Plane of the City of Bagdat, which is to be compassed, as well by Land as
by Water, in two Hours.
A. The Ground-Plot. B. The Fortress. C. The Gate called Maazan-capl. D. The
New Bulwark. E. The Port where the Grand Signor erected his first Batt'ry, Anno
1638. F. The Old Bulwark. G. The Gate in the Wall. H. The Old Bulwark. I. The
Place where Amurat raised his second Batt'ry, when he made the Breach, and took
the City. K. The Gate in the Wall. L. The Old Bulwark. M. The Old Bulwark. N.
Cara capi, or the Black Gate. O. The Old Bulwark. P. Sou-capi, or the
Watergate.
CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the Road from Bagdat to Balsara; and of the
Religion of the Christians of St. John.
THE fifteenth of March we hired a Bark from Bagdat to Balsara. And we
observed, that a little beyond Bagdat the River Tigris divides it self into two
Arms; the one which runs through the ancient Chaldea, the other keeps its
course toward the Point of Mesopotamia; these two Arms making a large Island,
crossed by several small Channels.

When we came to the place where Tigris divides it self, we beheld as it were
the compass of a City that might have formerly been a large League in circuit.
There are some of the Walls yet standing, upon which six Coaches may go
a-brest. They are made of burnt Brick, every Brick being ten Foot square, and
three thick. The Chronicles of the Country say, that these were the Ruins of
the ancient Babylon.

We followed that Arm of Tigris that runs along the Coast of Chaldea; for fear
of falling into the hands of the Arabs, who were then at War with the Basha of
Babylon, denying to pay the ordinary Tribute to the Grand Signor. We were ten
days upon the Water in our passage from Bagdat to Balsara, and lay every night
upon the Water, dressing our Victuals in the Bark. For when we came to any
Villages, we sent our Servants a-shoar to buy Provisions, which we had very
cheap. Now the Towns we met with upon the Shore were these. Amurat, where there
stood a Fort of Brick baked in the Sun; Mansoury, a great Town; Magar, Gazer,
and Gorno. At this last place Euphrates and Tigris meet together: where are
also three Castles to be seen; one upon the Point where the two Rivers meet,
which is the strongest, and where the Son of the Prince of Balsara then
commanded; the second upon Chaldea side; and the third upon Arabia side. Though
the Customs be there exactly demanded, and paid, yet they never search any
person. The Tides come up to that place: so that having but fifteen Leagues to
Balsara, we got thither in sev'n hours, having both Wind and Tide.

All the Country between Bagdat and Balsara is inter-cut and parted by Dikes,
like the Low Countries; the two Cities lying a hundred and sixty Leagues one
from the other. It is one of the best countries in the possession of the Grand
Signor, being stored with large Meadows and excellent Pasturage, where are bred
infinite numbers of Beasts, especially Mares and Bufalo's. The Female Bufalo's
go twelve Months, and yield so much milk, that there are some which will give
two and twenty Pints. And there is so large a quantity of Butter made, that in
some Villages upon the Tigris, we saw sometimes five and twenty, sometimes
twenty Barks lad'n with Butter, which the people sell all along the Gulf of
Persia, as well upon Arabia, as Persia side.

Half the way between Bagdat and Balsara, we perceived several Pavilions set up
in the Meadows along by the side of the River. Upon enquiry we heard that the
Tefterdar was come from Constantinople to gather the Grand Signor's duty's. For
from Bagdat to Gorno, for all the Bufalo's as well Male as Female, there is to
be paid a Piaster and a quarter for every head once a year; which is worth
yearly to the Grand Signor a hundred and fourscore thousand Piasters. Every
Mare also pays two Piasters, every Sheep ten Sous; which if the Country people
were not very cunning, would be worth fifty thousand Piasters more than it is.

After this we came to Gorno, a Fortress upon the point where the two Rivers
meet, besides two other small Castles upon each side, so that there is no
passing without leave. Upon the Fort of Gorno which was well furnished with
Cannon, we saw the Prince of Balsara's Son, who was Governor of the Fort. And
here it is that the Account of the Customs is taken. But though they are very
exact in searching the Barks, they are very civil, for they search no body.
However lest any Goods should be hid between the Planks of the Ships, over
which they generally throw Fagots and Canes, the Customers bring a great
Piercer, with which they bore the sides of the Bark quite through for the
discovery of concealed Goods. The Goods are Registered at Gorno, but the
Customs are always paid at Balsara, according to the account given from the
Fort.

The same day entering into the Channel that is cut out of Euphrates to Balsara,
we met the chief of the Holland Factory taking his pleasure in a Boat covered
with Scarlet, who took me with him to Balsara.

Balsara stands upon the side of Arabia deserta, two Leagues from the Ruins of
a City, which was formerly called Teredon, and anciently stood in the Desert,
to which the Water was formerly conveyed out of Euphrates in a Brick Channel
still to be seen.

By the Ruins it appears to have been a great City, from whence the Arabians
fetch away the Bricks and sell them at Balsara. The City of Balsara is half a
League from Euphrates, which the Arabians in their Language call Shetel-areb,
or the River of Araebia. The Inhabitants of the City have made a Channel to it
about half a League long, which bears Vessels of 150 Tun; at the end whereof
stands a Fort, so that no Vessel can get into the Fort without leave. The Sea
is above fifteen Leagues off, but the Tide comes up to the Channel, and fills
the River other fifteen Leagues upward beyond Gorno. The Country is so low,
that were it not for a Dam that runs along the Sea-shoar, it would often be in
danger of being drowned. The Dam is above a League in length, and built all of
Freestone so strong, that the fury of the waves can do them no injury, though
it lie open to a Boystrous Sea.

It is not above a hundred years since Balsara belonged to the Arabians of the
Desert, and had no commerce with the Nations of Europe. For those people were
contented to eat their own Dates, having so great a quantity, that they only
live upon them. It Is the same thing all along the Gulf on each side; for from
Balsara to the River Indus for above six hundred Leagues together, and all
along the Coast of Arabia to Mascate, the poor sort of people know not what it
is to eat Rice, but live upon Dates and Salt-fish dried in the wind. The Cows
eat no Grass, and though they go abroad in the fields, they find little or
nothing among the bushes which is proper for them to eat. But every Morning
before they drive them to the Field, and when they return home, they give them
heads of fish and Date-nuts boiled together.

The Turks having had War with the Arabians took Balsara; and yet because the
Arabians always hovered about the Town, and made booty of all they could lay
their hands on, they were forced to come to an agreement with them, that the
Arabs should quietly enjoy all the Desert 'till within a League of the City;
and that the Turks should remain peaceable Masters of the City, where they have
a Basha for Governor. But this Treaty endured not long; for in the middle of
the City there is a Citadel, called Aushel Basha, or the Basha's Court, which
the Turks built; so that the Garrison being Turks and the Inhabitants Arabians,
who could not endure to be curbed, they oft-times quarreled with the Turks and
came to blows. Thereupon the Arabians of the Desert came to the relief of the
Citizens and besieged the Basha in the Fortress. At length because there could
be no such agreement made, but that one party or other took an occasion
presently to break it, there was one Basha whose name was Aiud, who after many
contests and revolts which had almost tired him, resolved to rid himself of the
trouble, and sold his Government for forty thousand Piasters to a rich Lord in
the Country, who presently raised a sufficient number of Soldiers to keep the
people in awe. This great man took upon him the name of Efrasias Basha, being
the Grandfather of Hussen Basha, who was Governor at the time when I passed
through before. This Efrasias threw off the Turkish voak, and took upon him the
title of Prince of Balsara. As for the Basha that sold his Government, he no
sooner arrived at Constantinople, but he was strangled. But after Amurath had
taken Bagdat, the Prince of Balsara was glad to feed him continually with
Presents that chiefly consisted in Horses, which are very beautiful in that
Country. The Great Sha-Abas having taken Ormus, sent a powerful Army under the
Command of Iman-Kouli-Kan Governor of Shiras, to take in Balsara. Whereupon
the Prince finding himself too weak to resist so great a Power, made an
agreement with the Desert Arabians to break down the Dam that stops the Sea.
Which being performed, in came the Sea tumbling fifteen Leagues to Balsara, and
four Leagues beyond it, which constrained the Persians, surrounded with water,
and hearing at the same time of the death of Sha-Abas, to raise their Siege.
Since that inundation, several Lands and Gardens have been utterly barren, or
have born very little, by reason of the Salt which the Sea has left behind.

The Prince of Balsara has entered into Leagues with several strange Nations,
so that whencesoever you come, you may be welcome. There is so much liberty and
so good order in the City, that you may walk all night long in the Streets
without molestation. The Hollanders bring Spices thither every year. The
English carry Pepper and some few Cloves; but the Portugals have no Trade at
all thither. The Indians bring Calicuts, Indigo, and all sorts of Merchandise.
In short, there are Merchants of all Country's, from Constantinople, Smyrna,
Aleppo, Damascus, Cairo, and other parts of Turkey, to buy such Merchandises as
come from the Indies, with which they lade the young Camels which they buy in
that place; for thither the Arabians bring them to put them to sale. They that
come from Diarbequir, Moussul, Bagdat, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, send their
Merchandises up the Tigris by Water, but with great trouble and expense. In
regard the Boats are to be towed by men, that cannot go above two Leagues and a
half in a day, and against the Wind they cannot stir, which makes them
oft-times between Balsara and Bagdat to be above sixty days, nay there have
been some that have been three months upon the Water.

The Customs of Balsara amount to five in the hundred, but generally you have
some favor showed you, either by the Customer or the Prince himself, that the
Merchant does not really pay above four in the hundred. The Prince of Balsara
is so good a Husband, that he lays up three millions of Livers in a year. His
chiefest Revenue is in four things, Money, Horses, Camels, and Date-trees; but
in the last consists his chiefest wealth. For all the Country from the meeting
of the two Rivers to the Sea, for the space of thirty Leagues together, is all
covered with these Trees; nor does any one dare to touch a Date, 'till he has
paid for every Tree three fourths of a Larin, or nine Sous French. The profit
which the Prince makes upon money, proceeds from this, that the Merchants that
come from abroad are obliged to carry their Reals to his Mint, where they are
Coined and converted into Larins, which is worth to him eight in the hundred.
As for his Horses, there is no place in the world, where there are more fit for
travel, or handsomer shaped; for there are some that will travel thirty hours
together and never draw bit, especially the Mares. But to return to the
Palm Trees it is worth observation, that there is more Art to bring up those
Trees than any other. The Natives dig a hole in the ground, wherein they heap a
great quantity of Date-nuts in a Pyramidical form, the top whereof ends in one
single Nut, which being covered with Earth produces the Palm Tree. Most of the
people of the Country do say, that in regard there is among the Palm Trees the
distinction of Male and Female, that therefore they must be planted one by
another, for that otherwise the Female Tree will bear no Fruit. But others
affirm that nicety to be unnecessary; and that it susfices, when the Male is in
Blossom to take a Flower from the Male, and put it into the Heart of the Female
a little above the Stem; for unless they should do so, all the Fruit would fall
off before it came to maturity.

There is at Balsara a Cady that administers Justice, and who is established by
the authority of the Prince that commands there. In the City are also three
sorts of Christians, Jacobites, Nestorians, and Christians of St. John. There
is also a House of Italian Carmelites; and there was a House of Portugal
Austin-Friars, but they have forsak'n the Town ever since their Countrymen
quitted the Trade.

The Christians of St. John are very numerous at Balsara, and the Villages
thereabouts; who anciently lived by the River of Jordan, where St. John
Baptized; and from whom they took their Name. But since the time that Mahomet
conquered Palestine, though Mahomet formerly gave them his Hand and his Letters
of Privilege that they should not be molested, nevertheless they that
succeeded the false Prophet resolved to extirpate them all; to which purpose
they ruined their Churches, burnt their Books, and exercised all manner of
cruelties upon their Persons: which obliged them to retire into Mesopotamia and
Chaldea, and for some time they were under the Patriarch of Babylon, from whom
they separated about a hundred and sixty years ago. Then they removed into
Persia and Arabia, and the Towns round about Balsara; as Souter, Despoul,
Rumez, Bitoum, Mono, Endecan, Calufabat, Aveza, Dega, Dorech, Masquel, Gumar,
Carianous, Balsara, Onezer, Zech, Loza. Nor do they inhabit City or Village by
which there does not run a River. And many of their Bishops have assured me,
that the Christians in all the foregoing places make above five and twenty
thousand Families. There are some among them who are Merchants; but the most
part of them are Tradesmen, especially Goldsmiths, Joyners, and Lock-smiths.

Their Creed is full of fables and foul errors. The Persians and Arabians call
them Sabbi, a People that have forsak'n their own Religion, to take up a new
one. In their own Language they call themselves Mendai Jahia, or Disciples of
St. John, from whom, as they ascertain us, they have received their Faith,
their Books, and their Traditions. Every year they celebrate a Feast for about
five days, during which time they go in Troops to their Bishops, who Baptize
them according to the Baptism of St. John.

They never Baptize but in Rivers, and only upon Sundays. But before they go to
the River they carry the Infant to Church, where there is a Bishop who reads
certain Prayers over the Head of the Child; from thence they carry the Child to
the River, with a Train of Men and Women, who together with the Bishop go up to
the knees in Water. Then the Bishop reads again certain Prayers out of a Book
which he holds in his Hand, which done he sprinkles the Infant three times,
saying, Beesmebrad er-Rabi, Kaddemin, Akreri, Menhal el gennet Alli Koulli
Kralek; or, In the Name of the Lord, first and last of the World and of
Paradise, the high Creator of all things. After that, the Bishop reads
something again in his Book, while the Godfather plunges the Child all over in
the Water; after which they go all to the Parents House to feast. If any tax
their Baptism for insufficient, in regard the Three Persons of the Divinity are
not named therein, they can make no rational defense for themselves. Nor have
they any knowledge of the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, only they say that
Christ is the Spirit and Word of the Eternal Father. They are so blind as to
believe the Angel Gabriel to be the Son of God, begotten upon Light; yet will
not believe the Eternal Generation of Christ, as God. Yet they confess he
became Man, to free us from the Punishment of Sin: and that he was conceived in
the womb of a Virgin without the knowledge of Man, by means of the Water of a
certain Fountain which she drank of. They believe he was crucified by the Jews;
that he rose the third day; and that his Soul ascending up to Heaven, his Body
remained on Earth. But like the Mahometans they corrupt their Faith, by saying,
that Christ vanished when the Jews came to take him, and that he deluded their
cruelty with his Shadow.

In the Eucharist they make use of Meal or Flower, kneaded up with Wine and
Oil: For, say they, the Body of Christ being composed of the two principal
parts; Flesh and Blood, the Flowr and the Wine do most perfectly represent
them; besides, that Christ at his Supper made use of Wine only, and not of
Water. They add Oil, to signify the benefit we receive by his favor of the
Sacrament, and to put us in mind of our Love and Charity toward God and our
Neighbor. To make this Wine, they take Grapes dried in the Sun, which they
call in their Language Zebibes, and casting Water upon them, let them steep for
so long a time. The same Wine they use for the Consecration of the Cup. They
make use of Raisins, in regard they are more easy to be had than Wine; the
Persians, especially the Arabians, under whose Government they live, not
permitting, nor indeed allowing them the use of it. Of all people that follow
the Law of Mahomet, there are none so opposite to other Religions, as these
Persians and Arabians about Balsara. The words of their Consecration, are no
other than certain long Prayers, which they make to praise and thank God, at
the same time blessing the Bread and Wine, never making mention of his Body and
Blood; which they say is not at all necessary, because God knows their
intentions. After all the Ceremonies are ended, the Priest takes the Bread, and
having eaten some of it, distributes the rest to the People.

As to their Bishops and Priests, when any one dies, who has a Son, they choose
him in his place; and if he have no Son, they take the next akin that is most
capable and best instructed in their Religion. They that make the Election, say
several Prayers over him that is elected. If he be a Bishop, after he is
received, and that he go about to Ordain others, he ought to fast six days,
during which time he continually repeats certain Prayers over him that is to be
ordained Priest, who also for his part fasts and prays all the said time. And
whereas I say the Father succeeds the Son, it is to be observed, that among the
Christians in those Parts, both Bishops and Priests marry, as do the rest of
the people; only if their first Wife dye, they cannot marry another unless she
be a Virgin. Moreover, they that are admitted to Ecclesiastical Functions, must
be of the race of Bishops or Priests; and their Mothers must have been always
Virgins when they were married. All their Bishops and Priests wear their Hair
long, and a little Cross wrought with a Needle.

When there is any Wedding to be, the kindred and persons invited go together
with the Bridegroom, to the House where the Bride lives. Thither comes the
Bishop also, and approaching the Bride, who is sitting under a Canopy; he asks
her if she be a Virgin. If she answer that she is so, he makes her confirm it
by an Oath. After which he returns to the Guests, and sends his Wife with some
other skilful Women to make an inspection. If they find her to be a Virgin, the
Bishop's Wife returns and makes Oath of it; and then they all go to the River,
where the Bishop re-baptizes the Couple to be married. Then they return toward
the House, and making a stop before they come quite near it, the Bridegroom
takes the Bride by the Hand, and leads her seven times from the Company to the
House, the Bishop following them every time, and reading certain Prayers. After
that they go into the House, and the Bride and Bridegroom place themselves
under the Canopy, where they set their Shoulders one against another, and the
Bishop reads again, causing them to lay their Heads together three times. Then
opening a Book of Divination, and looking for the most fortunate day to
consummate the Marriage, he tells them of it. But if the Bishop's Wife do not
find the Bride to be a Virgin, the Bishop can proceed no farther, so that if
the young Man have still a mind, he must go to some meaner Priest to perform
the Ceremony. Which is the reason that the people take it for a great dishonor
to be married by any other than the Bishops; for when a Priest marries, it is an
infallible sign that the Bride was no Virgin. The Priests also, in regard they
take it to be a great Sin for a Woman to marry not being a Virgin, they never
marry any such but by constraint, and to avoid ensuing inconveniences; for
sometimes in despite they will turn Mahometans. The reason of the Inspection
is, that the Husbands may not be deceived, and to keep the young Girls in awe.

As to what they believe touching the Creation of the World, they say, that the
Angel Gabriel undertrking to create the World according to the command which
God gave him, took along with him three hundred thirty-six thousand Demons, and
made the earth so fertile, that it was but to Sow in the Morning and Reap at
Night. That the same Angel taught Adam to Plant and Sow, and all other
necessary Sciences. Moreover that the same Angel made the seven lower Spheres,
the least whereof reaches to the Center of the World, in the same manner as the
Heavens do, all contrived one within another. That all these Spheres are of
different Metals, the first next the Center is of Iron, the second of Lead, the
third of Brass, the fourth of Laten, the fifth of Silver, the sixth of Gold,
and the seventh of Earth. The seventh is that which contains all the rest, and
is the chiefest of all, as being the most fruitful and profitable to Man, and
the most proper to preserve Mankind, whereas the rest seem rather to be framed
for its destruction. They believe that over every Heaven there is Water, whence
they conclude that the Sun swims in a Ship upon that Water, and that the Mast
of his Ship is a Cross, and that there are a great number of Boys and Servants
to guide the Ships of the Sun and Moon. Besides, they have the Picture of a
Barque, which they say belonged to the Angel Becan, whom God sends to visit the
Sun and Moon, to see whither they move right or no, and keep close to their
duty.

In reference to the other World and life to come, they believe there is no
other World, but where Angels and Devils, the Souls of good and bad reside.
That in that World there are Cities, Houses, and Churches, and that the Evil
Spirits have also Churches, where they pray, singing and rejoicing upon
Instruments, and Feasting as in this World. That when any one lies at the point
of death, three hundred and sixty Demons come and carry his Soul to a place
full of Serpents, Dogs, Lions, Tygres, and Devils; who, if it be the Soul of a
wicked man, tear it in pieces; but being the Soul of a just man, it creeps
under the bellies of those Creatures into the presence of God, who sits in his
seat of Majesty to judge the World. That there are Angels also that weigh the
Souls of Men in a Balance, who being thought worthy, are admitted immediately
into Glory. That the Angels and Devils are Male and Female, and beget Children.
That the Angel Gabriel is the Son of God engendered upon Light, and that he has
a Daughter called Souret who has two Sons. That the Angel Gabriel has several
Legions of Demons under him, who are instead of Soldiers, and others that are
his Officers of justice, whom he sends from Town to Town, and from City to
City, to punish the wicked.

In reference to Saints, they hold that Christ left twelve Apostles to Preach
to the Nations. That the Virgin Mary is not dead, but that she lives somewhere
in the World, though there be no person that can tell where she is. That next
to her St. John is the chiefest Saint in Heaven, and next to them Zacharias and
Elizabeth, of whom they recompt several miracles and Apocryphal tales. For they
believe that they two begat St. John only by embracing; that when he came to be
of age they Married him, and that he had four Sons which he begat upon the
waters of Jordan. That when St. John desired a Son, he prayed to God, who drew
him one out of the water; so that St. John had no more to do with his Wife but
only to give her the Child to bring up. That he died a natural death, but that
he commanded his Disciples to Crucify him after his death, that he might be
like Christ. Lastly, that he died in the City of Fuster, and that he was buried
in a Crystal Tomb, brought by miracle to the City, and that this Sepulcher was
in a certain House near the River Jordan.

They highly honor the Cross, and sign themselves with it; but they are very
careful of letting the Turks observe them; and during their Ceremonies, they
set a Watch at their Church doors for fear the Turks should enter, and lay some
unjust Fine upon them. When they have adored the Cross, they take it in two
pieces, which they never put together again, 'till their Service rebegins. The
reason why they so adore the Cross is drawn out of a Book which they have,
Entitled The Divan. Where it is written that every day early in the Morning,
the Angels take the Cross and put it in the middle of the Sun, which receives
his light from it, as the Moon also does hers. They add, that in the same Book
are Pictured two Ships, one of which is named the Sun, the other the Moon; and
tha^ in every one of these Ships there is a Cross full of Bells: And moreover,
that if there were not a Cross in those two Ships, the Sun and Moon would be
deprived of Light, and the Ships would suffer Shipwreck.

Their chief Festivals are three. The one in Winter, that lasts three days, in
memory of our first Parent and the Creation of the World. The other in the
Month of August, that also lasts three days, which is called the Feast of St.
John. The third which lasts five days in June, during which time they are all
re-baptiz'd. They observe Sunday, doing no work upon that day. They neither
Fast nor do any penance. They have no Canonical Books, but a great number of
others that treat of nothing but Witchcraft, in which they believe their
Priests to be very crafty, and that the Devils are at their beck. They hold all
Women to be unclean, and that it is not at all available for them to come to
the Church.

They have one Ceremony, which they call the Ceremony of the Hen, of which they
make great Account, which is not lawful for any to perform but a Priest Born of
a Virgin at the time of her Marriage. When a hen is to be killed, the Priest
puts off his ordinary habit, and puts on a Linen Cloth, girding his waste with
a second, and throwing a third about his shoulders like a Stole. Then he takes
the Fowl, and plunges it in the water to make it clean; after which he turns
toward the East and cuts off the head, holding the Body in his hand 'till it
has bled out all the blood. While the Hen bleeds, with his Eyes lifted up to
Heaven, as if he were in an ecstasy, he repeats in his own Language these words
following: In the name of God, may this flesh be profitable to all that eat of
it? They observe the same ceremony when they kill Sheep. For first, they
cleanse the place very carefully where the Sheep is to be killed, washing it
with water, and strewing it with boughs, nor is the number of people small that
assists at this Ceremony, as if it were at some solemn Sacrifice. If you ask
them why it is not lawful for the Laity to kill Fowls? They answer that it is
no more lawful for them to kill than to consecrate them; and that is all the
reason which they bring. They eat of nothing dressed by the Turks; and if a Turk
ask them for drink, so soon as he has drank, they break the Cup. And to make
the Turks more hateful, they Picture Mahomet like a great Giant, shut up in
Prison in Hell with four more of his Parents; and they say, that all the Turks
are carried into the same place full of wild Beasts to be there devoured.

They pretend all to Salvation. For say they, after the Angel Gabriel had
framed the World by the command of God, he thus discoursed him. Lord God, said
he, behold I have built the World as thou did command me. It has put me to a
great deal of trouble, and my Brethren also, to raise such high Mountains that
seem to sustain Heaven. And who indeed was able to make way for Rivers through
Mountains without vast labor, and to give every thing its proper place?
Moreover, great God, by the aid of thy powerful Arm, we have brought the World
to so much perfection, that men cannot think upon any thing needful for them,
which is not to be found therein. But instead of that satisfaction which I
ought to have for having accomplished so great a work, I find no reason but to
be altogether grieved. When God demanding the cause, the Angel Gabriel
answered: My God and Father, I will tell you what afflicts me; because that
after the making of the World as I have done, I foresee that there will come
into it a prodigious number of Jews, Turks, Idolaters, and other Infidels,
Enemies of your Name, who will be unworthy to eat and enjoy the Fruits of our
Labors. To whom God thus replied: Never grieve, my Son, there shall live in
this World which thou have built, certain Christians of St. John who shall be
my friends, and shall be all saved. Upon which the Angel admiring how that
should be! What, said he, will there not be several Sinners among those
Christians, and by consequence will not they be your Enemies? To whom God thus
concluded: That at the day of Judgment the Good should Pray for the Wicked, and
by that means they should be all forgiven, and obtain Salvation.

These Christians have a strange Antipathy against the Blew Color called
Indigo, which they will not so much as touch. For certain Jews dreaming that
their Law should be abolished by St. John, told it their Countrymen. Which
they understanding, and seeing that St. John prepared to Baptize Christ, in a
great rage, fetched a vast quantity of Indigo, which they call Nill in their
Language, and flung it into Jordan. They add also that those waters continued
unclean for some time, and had hindered the Baptism of Christ, had not God sent
his Angels with a large Vessel of water, which he caused them to fill out of
Jordan before the Jews had defiled it with Indigo; for which reason God
particularly Cursed that Color.

CHAP. IX. A Continuation of the Road from Balsara to Ormus.
THe tenth of April we set out from Balsara for Bander-Congo, for which passage
we hired a Terrade or a Barque for the purpose; for they which are laden with
Dates are generally so overcharged, that if a Storm rises, they are in danger
of being overset. The River of Balsara is very dangerous, by reason of the
Sands which also lie up and down the Persian Gulf, and are very prejudicial to
Navigation in that place. On both sides the Gulf that separates Persia from
Arabia the Happy, live a sort of poor people that follow no other Trade than
fishing; so poor, that when they bring fish to your Vessel, they require
nothing for it but Rice; and not the best neither, but such course stuff as we
feed our Hens and Pigs withal. I gave them a Sack of thirty or forty pounds,
and bid them make merry with it, but they told me, they must be careful how
they spent such Rice as that, unless it were for their Sick, or at their
Weddings; so that if the rest of Arabia the Happy be like that, assuredly it is
rather a most unfortunate Country.

There are several Isles in the Persian Gulf, but the chiefest of all is the
Isle of Baharen, where they fish for Pearls, of which I have spoken in its
proper place.

Near to the place where Euphrates falls from Balsarae into the Sea, there is a
little Island, where the Barques generally come to an Anchor, in expectation of
the wind. There we stayed four days, whence to Bandar-Congo it is fourteen days
Sail, and we got thither the twenty-third of April. This place would be a far
better habitation for the Merchants than Ormus, where it is very unwholesom and
dangerous to live. But that which hinders the Trade from Bandar-Congo, is
because the Road to Lar is so bad, by reason of the want of Water, and craggy
narrow ways, which only Camels can endure; but from Ormus to Lar the way is
tolerable. We stayed at Bandar-Congo two days, where there is a Portugais
Factor, who receives one half of the Customs by agreement with the King of
Persia. By the way take notice, that they who will go by Water from Ormus to
Balsara, must take the Natives for their Pilots, and be continually sounding
besides.

The thirtieth, we hired a Vessel for Bander-Abassi, and after three or four
hours Sailing, we put into a Village upon the Seaside, in the Island of
Keckmishe.

Keckmishe is an Island three Leagues about, and about five or six from Ormus.
It exceeds in Fertility all the Islands of the East, that produce neither Wheat
nor Barley; but at Keckmishe is a Magazine of both, without which Ormus would
hardly subsist, in regard it furnishes that City with most of their Provision
for their Horses. There is in the Island a Spring of good Water, for the
preservation of which, the Persians have built a Fort, least the Portugals when
they held Ormus, should get it into their Possession.

In 1641. and 1642. the Hollanders falling out with the King of Persia about
their Silk Trade, besieged this Island. For the Ambassadors of the Duke of
Holstein coming into Persia, the Dutch were jealous that they came to fetch
away all the Silk; and thereupon enhanc'd the Market from forty-two to fifty
Tomans. When the Ambassadors were gone, the Dutch would pay no more than
forty-four, which was two Tomans more than they were used to do. The King
netl'd that they would not stand to their words, forbid that they should make
sale of their Goods 'till they had paid their Customs, from which 'till that
time they were exempted. Thereupon the Hollanders besieged the Fortress of
Keckmishe, but the Heats were so intolerable, that they were forced to quit
their design with great loss of their Men; and at length by great Presents to
the chief Courtiers, they obtained to pay no more than forty-six Tomans.

Larec is an Island nearer to Ormus than Keckmishe, well inhabited, and so
stored with Stags and Hinds, that in one day we killed five and forty.

From Keckmishe we Sailed for Ormus, where we arrived the first of May. I had
put my choicest Goods in a Chest directed for the Hollaad Commander at Ormus,
by which means I got the Custom free.

The Persian Gulf is the most dangerous Gulf I know, by reason of the
shallowness and sharp Promontories that point out into the Sea; and therefore
the best way is to take a Pilot at Ormus or Bander-Congo, and the most proper
Pilots are the Fishermen, who are only skilled in that Sea and no farther. The
Soil about the Persian Gulf is dry Sand and without Water, so that it is
impossible to Travel by Land from Ormus to Balsara. The Merchants would be glad
to find a way through the Coast of Arabia to get to Mascate, whence there might
a cut be made to Sindi, Diu, or Surat, which are the three chief Ports of
India. During the difference between the King of Persia and the Hollanders, the
Emir of Vodana an Arabian Prince; offered to show them an easy Road from
Mascate to Balsara. But the Hollanders fearing to break with the King of
Persia, where they vended above fifteen or sixteen hundred thousand pounds of
their Pepper, and paid therewith for all their Silk, did not think it worth
their while to quit Ormus to settle themselves at Mascate.

Had it been yielded to, the way had been from Balsara to Elcatif a Sea-Town in
Arabia the Happy, where there is a Fishery for Pearls that belongs to the Emir
of Elcatif. From Elcatif to Mascalat, another City of Arabia, and the residence
of another Emir. From Mascalat to Vodana, a good handsome City seated upon the
meeting of two little Rivers that carry Barques to the Sea, and run together by
the single name of Moyesur. The Soil about Vodana produces no Corn, and very
little Rice; but it abounds in Fruits, especially Prunes and Quinces, which are
not so sour as ours, and are eaten by the Natives as Pears. There are
extraordinary good Melons and great Store of Grapes, of which the Jews, who
inhabit the best part of the City, are permitted to make Wine. From Vodana to
the Gulf, the County of each side is full of Palm Trees, the Dates being the
Food of the common people, who have not Money to buy either Corn or Rice. From
Vodana to Mascate it is but fifteen Leagues, though by the Maps, which are
Erroneous, the way is described to be much longer.

Being at Ormus, the Emir of Vodana showed me a Pearl transparent and perfectly
round, that weighed seventeen Abas, or fourteen Carats and seven Eights; for in
all the Pearl Fisheries of the East they use no other weights but Abas, which
make seven Eights of a Carat. I offered him 300000 Piasters, or 60000 Roupies
for the same Pearl, but the Emir refused to take it, telling me that he had
been offered more Money for it by several Princes of Asia, who had sent to him
to buy it, but that he was resolved never to part with it.

CHAP. X. Of the Authors first Voyage, and the adventures of four Frenchmen.
I Departed out of Paris in the year 1657, and Embarked at Marseilles for
Ligorn.

We set Sail from Ligorn seven Vessels together, two bound for Venice, one for
Constantinople, one for Aleppo, and three for Smyrna, in one of which being a
Dutch Vessel I Embarked. But before I leave Smyrna, to begin my Journey from
Tauris, give me leave to relate the story of four Frenchmen, the various
accidents whereof will much enlight'n the Reader into the Customs and Manners,
as well of the Turks as Persians.

While I stayed the departure of the Caravan, which could not be ready in five
or six Weeks, as also upon the advice of a rich Jew and a Merchant of Jewels at
Constantinople, who had several Pearls to sell, as well for their beauty as
their bigness, the best Commodity a man can carry to the Indies, I sent to
Constantinople a person that I carried along with me, one that was well versed
in that sort of Commodity. There was a Norman Gentleman named de Reville then
at Smyrna, who would needs accompany my Factor, so that they went both together
in a Vessel that carried the French Ambassador and his Lady to Constantinople.
This Gentleman had two or three thousand Ducats in his Purse, wanting neither
wit nor courage, besides a good presence; but perhaps he was more hasty in his
proceedings than the reserv'dness of that Country required. He had left the
Service of the Muscovites, thinking to find an employment in the Service of the
Venetians at Candy; but failing in his expectations, he resolved to travel into
Persia. While he was at Constantinople, the Jews, who lay hold upon all
opportunities of gain, soon found out my Factor; and besides the Pearls which
he desired to see, they showed him several other rich Stones to try whether
they could draw him in; for he had refused the Pearls because they held them at
too high a Rate. The Norman Gentleman fell into their acquaintance; and picking
out the richest, told him, that being resolved for the Indies, he had a mind to
lay out four thousand Ducats in Pearls. He added also, that he would pay him
half in Money, half in Goods, and at the same time showed the Jew two thousand
Ducats, which the Jew had already devoured with his eyes. Some four days after,
the Jew brought the Gentleman four fair Pearls with some Emraulds; and you may
be sure they easily agreed upon the price, in regard the Gentleman had a design
to put a trick upon the Jew. Thereupon he shows his Ducats a second time, which
the Jew, who thought he had a Cully, presently told out as his own. After that
the Jew desiring to see the Goods, which made up the other part of the payment,
the Gentleman without any more ado told him, that all the Merchandise which he
had to pay him, was a good strong Quartan Ague which had held him a long time,
and indeed such a one, that he could not possibly meet with a better, but that
he would not over-rate it, in regard he asked but two thousand Ducats for it.
The Jew who was rich and in great credit at Court, was so incensed at his
raillery, that he had like to have made a wicked stir about it. For as he had
heard him say, that the Gentleman was going into the Indies and Persia, he
might have easily caused him to have been apprehended for a Spy. But in regard
the Jews can do nothing in point of Trade without the assistance of the French
Merchants, he adviz'd with some of them, who persuaded him that it was an Act
of folly, which it better became him to excuse, and desired him to take his
Goods again, and put up the business; which with much ado they persuaded him to
condescend to. The Gentleman fearing least the Jews underhand should do him a
private mischief, stole away with what speed he could, and returned to Smyrna.

De Reville being thus returned to Smyrna, put himself into an Almadier, which
is a small Vessel of War, that generally touches at Chio and Rhodes, being
bound for Cyprus, from whence there is always some convenience or other to get
to Alexandretta. From thence he went to Aleppo; and while he stayed there he
met with two French men, the one whose name was Neret, the other Hautin, who
was an Accomptant. They had four wooden Chests full of false Stones ready set,
by which they flattered themselves to be great gainers in Persia. They went
from Marseilles to Seyde, from Seyde to Damas, hearing that there was an
opportunity to Travel to Bagdat with the Topigi-Bashi. This Topigi-Bashi or
chief of the Engineers, was he that assisted Amurath in the taking of Bagdat;
in recompense whereof the Grand Signor gave him a Timar, or Lordship in Damas
worth four thousand Crowns a year. Now it was his custom every year to visit
Bagdat, and to stay there during the Season, that there was any probability of
the King of Persia's besieging it; which Season not lasting above three or four
Months, when that was over, he returned to Damas. He usually had about thirty
Horse with him, with which he never made it above eighteen or twenty days,
taking the shortest cut directly through the Desert, where the Arabs are
commanded to bring him Victuals upon the Road. And he is willing at any time
when he has this opportunity, to conduct the Franks that desire it that way, in
regard they are never ungrateful to him for it. These two Franks therefore
having desired that they might be taken into his Company, the Topigi-Bashi
readily consented, provided they could stay 'till he went, which would not be
'till two or three Months; with which answer they were well satisfied. But the
two Franks had not stayed at Damas above seven or eight days but they fell
acquainted with a Spahi, a Renegado of Marseilles, who proffered to carry them
through the Road of Mesopotamia, so that they should be at Ispahan before the
Topigi-Bashi set out from Damas. Thereupon they privately departed out of Damas
without acquainting the Topigi-Bashi, who understanding they were gone after
the courtesy he had offered them, was so enraged at their uncivillity, that he
sent two of his Arabian Servants directly through the Wilderness to the Basha
of Bagdat, to give him advice of two Franks that were to pass that way; who
were most certainly Spies, describing them withal from head to foot.

In the mean while the two Franks being arrived at Ourfa, the Spahi, as he had
contrived his own design at Damas, goes to the Basha of Ourfa, and informs him
that he had conducted thither two Franks, who could be no other than Spies.
Thereupon the Basha seized upon them and all their Goods, among the rest he
laid his paws upon seven hundred Piasters, of which the Spahi no doubt had his
share. And this may serve for instruction to Travelers to have a care how and
with whom they Travel in Turkey.

While the two French men were in hold at Ourfa by one sort of Treachery, the
Norman Gentleman and his Companion arrived at Bagdat. But they had no sooner
set their feet upon the shore, when the Basha verily believing them to be the
persons, of whom the Topigi-Bashi had given him notice, caused them to be
brought before him, and seized upon their Goods and Letters, of which they had
several for the Consul of Aleppo, and other rich Merchants for Persia. The
Basha sent for the Capuchins to read those Letters, but not believing them, he
sent for a Sicilian Physician which he had in his Service, and his Treasurer
who had been a Slave taken in Candy. But neither Physician, Treasurer, nor
Capuchins would interpret any thing in prejudice of the French men; yet all
that could not preserve them from being shut up in a Stable full of dung, and
from being threatened to be Shot out of a Cannon's mouth if they would not
confess the truth. Thereupon the Capuchins and the Cadi begged him to suspend
his Sentence 'till the Arrival of the chief of the Cannoniers, to which he
readily consented.

When the Topigi-Bashi came, the Basha commanded the Prisoners to be brought
before him. But when the Topigi-Bashi denied them to be the persons, the Basha
grew into such a rage, that he no less reproached the Topigi-Bashi for
Treachery, than he had accused the others. Which so incensed the Topigi-Bashi
on the other side, that he never left 'till he had obtained the release of the
two French men; yet not so, but that the Basha would have his due; so that
Reville was forced to leave some of his Ducats behind which the Jew should have
had.

But now to return to Smyrna where I expected the Caravan for some time in
order to my Journey into Persia. Every thing being provided, we set forward in
the Road for Tauris, which I have at large described, nor was there any thing
worthy observation all the way. I will only take notice, that when we departed
from Tocat, in regard the heat was so extreme, we left the common Road toward
the North, and took the way through the Mountains, where there is always a
fresh Breeze and store of shady Lanes. In many of which high Mountains we met
with Snow, and abundance of excellent Sorrel; and upon the tops of some of
those Mountains, we met with several sorts of shells, as it had been upon the
Sea shore, which is very extraordinary. From Erzerom we went to Cars; from Cars
we came to Erivan, The Kan was not there then, being retired during the heat
into the Mountains, a days Journey from the City. His Lieutenant telling me
that I could not well pass farther without paying my duty to the Kan; I
followed his advice, and found him in his Tent in a fair Dale, where there was
a great quantity of Snow: and where when it began to melt, appeared several
beautiful Flowers, so that Summer and Winter seemed to lodge both in the same
place. The Kan entertained both me and all my Company most nobly for ten days.
I drove also a small Trade with him. For I durst not show him the rarities I
had, being designed for the King. For as in India, so in Persia, neither will
the King look upon any thing which his Subjects have seen before, nor will the
Subject buy any thing which the King has seen, it being an affront to present
any thing to the King which he had formerly viewed, and the Subject buys
nothing rare but what he intends to present.

Being past Erivan you may leave your Caravan when you please, by reason of the
security of the Roads in Persia. And indeed I intended to have visited the Kan
of Gengea, but finding the Road so full of Rocks and Precipices, where a man
was continually in danger of breaking his Neck, I turned my Horses head and met
the Caravan at Nacksivan in the Road to Tauris.

From Tauris to Ispahan I met with nothing worthy observation. When I came to
the Court I was well received by the King, and I sold him as many Jewels and
other Goods of great value, as came to sixty-two thousand Crowns. But of this
more in another place.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE PERSIAN TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: CONTAINING The
AUTHOR's Sixth and Last VOYAGE, And the ROADS Through TURKEY into PERSIA,
through the Northern PROVINCES of EUROPE.
With a Description of several Countries lying upon the Black, and Caspian SEAS.
CHAP. I. Of the Authors sixth and last Voyage from his setting out of Paris,
to his Landing at Smyrna.
I Set out of Paris in the year 1663. for Lions, with six several Servants of
several professions, which I thought most proper for my business. I carried
with me the value of about four hundred thousand Livers, part in Jewels, part
in Goldsmiths work and other curiosities, which I designed for the King of
Persia and the Great Mogul. Being at Lions I bought a Steel Mirror round and
hollow, about two foot and a half in Diameter, would immediately melt a
Half-Crown by the heat of the Sunbeams: and if you set a Candle by it in the
night, you might read, two hundred Paces off in your Bed by the reflection.

From Lions I rode to Marseilles, and set Sail for Ligorn the tenth of January,
1664. in a small Bark, but being scared by a great Vessel that we saw off at
Sea, we came to an Anchor in the Port of Agaie, two Leagues from Frejus, where
there stood a pitiful Fort with two or three Houses. There we also went ashore
and saw a Garden, the Alleys of which were distinguished with rows of Citron
and Orange Trees, which looked as Green in the depth of Winter as in the midst
of Summer, with several other curiosities after the mode of Italy. We were no
sooner got aboard again, but we perceived another Vessel making into the same
Port with sull Sail. It was a Vessel which the Masters of the Foreign Office at
Toulon, had set out to force all Ships that were bound into Italy to pay
certain Customs, which those of Marseilles would not pay when they came into
the Port of Toulon. Thereupon foreseeing that there would be mischief done, I
called for my little Chests that contained my Goods of greatest value, carrying
some part my self, and giving the rest to one of my most trusty Servants,
thinking to have skipt into a Genoa Bark that lay hard by us; but instead of
leaping a-board, I fell into the Sea: where by reason of the Tumult I had
perished without relief, had I not by good fortune laid hold of a Cable and
redeemed my self. At what time one of my Servants luckily coming to my aid,
with much ado drew me up safe again.

Having escaped this danger, I got a-shoar with such of my Servants as I had
about me, and meeting with a Bark of Frontignan that carried Languedock-Wine to
the Coast of Italy, I hired him for Ligorn; and setting Sail, we first touched
Villa-franca, and afterward at Monaco.

At Monaco I went a-shoar, and went to wait upon Madam the Princess, who showed
me the Rarities in the Castle; among the rest, several pieces of extraordinary
Painting, several pieces of Clock-work and Goldsmiths-work. But among all her
Curiosities she showed me two pieces of Crystal, about the bigness of two Fists
each, in one of which there was above a Glass full of Water, in the other a
good quantity of Moss; which were closed in by Nature when the Crystal first
congealed.

Monaco is a Castle situated upon a steep Rock, advancing out into the Sea;
which advantage, together with others which it receives from Art and Nature,
renders it one of the most considerable Forts in Italy.

The next day finding the Frontignan-Vessel to be deep-laden, and that it made
little way, I took a Faluke, and kept along by the Shore, which was most
pleasantly adorned with beautiful Villages and Houses, as far as Savona; where
I changed my Faluke, to complete the rest of the way which I had to Genoa. Half
the way we did very well, but the Wind rising, we were forced to put in to a
great Town, where we landed; and from thence, having but nine Miles, I got in
good time by Horse to Genoa. There can be no Prospect certainly more pleasing
than that nine Miles riding. For on the one side you see nothing but a
continued Row of magnificent Buildings and lovely Gardens; on the other a calm
Shore, upon which the Waves seem not to beat, but lovingly to kiss.

Arriving at Genoa, I met with the rest of my Servants; and at the end of two
days I embarked for Ligorn, where we arrived in four and twenty hours.

From Ligorn I went to the Court of Florence, to wait upon the Grand Duke. By
whom I had the honor to be admitted into his Chamber, where I found no body
attending but one Mute, who had a long time served his Highness: and I observed
that they understood one another by Signs, as perfectly as if the Mute had had
his Speech and Hearing. So that whenever the Duke sent him into his Closet for
any Papers or other thing whatsoever, he never failed to bring the right.

After I had taken my leave of the Duke, he sent me a noble Present of Wine and
Fruits; but that which I valued more than all the rest, was a Case of
Medicaments and Counter-poysons, in the composition whereof the Italians are
very exquisite. And yet they did me no service; for when I came into the hot
Countries their fermentation was so strong, that all the Oils and Treacles
broke their several Boxes, that I could save nothing of that precious Present.

The next day, being the twenty-sixth of March 1664, I embarked with all my
Servants in a Dutch Vessel called The Justice.

The twenty-seventh we staid in the Road, expecting the rest of the Fleet,
consisting of eleven Ships, two Men of War, and nine Merchant-mon; four of
which were bound for Smyrna, three for Ancona, and two for Venice. About seven
that evening we set Sail, and all that night the Wind was favorable, but blew
hard and veer'd often; which was the reason that two of our Fleet separated
from us, steering between the Isle of Elbe and Corsica, while we kept on
between the Isle of Elba and Italy.

The twenty-eighth by eight in the Morning we found our selves between Porto
Ferraro and Piombino, and it being fair Weather, we had a pleasant prospect of
those two places. From thence we steered between two Islands, the one called
Palmajela, the other being nameless. About six hours after we saw Portolongone,
afterward at a distance we descried Monte-Christo. An hour after Noon we
discovered Castiglon-sore, all the rest of the day we coasted by the Islands of
Gigio and Sanuti.

The twenty-ninth, with the same Wind at North-West, by Morning we discovered
the Islands of Pontia and Palmerola, and about Evening those of Ventitione and
Ischia. Night approaching, and there being no news of the Ships we had lost,
instead of making the Pharo of Messina, it was resolved that we should steer a
Course round about Messina, where we expected to overtake them. At eleven a
Clock in the Evening we had but little Wind at North-North-West, so that we
made not above fourteen Leagues of way.

The thirty-first the same Wind continued, with a high Sea; but about nine at
Night the Wind chopping about to the West, we kept our former Course.

The first of April, by eight of the Clock in the Morning we discovered the
three Islands that lie before Trepano, Levanzo, Maretima, and Favagna.

The second and third the Weather was ill, and the Wind unconstant, so that we
made but little way.

The fourth, by break of day we discovered the Island of Pantalarea.

The fifth by Morning we found our selves within a League and a half of the
Coast of Sicily, just against Cape Passaro, at what time, the Weather being
fair, we had a view of Mount Gibello, all covered with Snow. Doubling the Cape
in the Afternoon, we discovered the Coast of Saragossa. The sixth we had little
or no Wind. But the seventh in the Morning, the Weather being fair, we
discovered Cape Spartivento; and the same Wind continuing all that day, toward
Evening we sailed in view of other Islands of Calabria.

The eighth we found our selves near to Cape Borsano, and all the rest of the
day we sailed in view of Cape Stillo and Cape delle Colonne.

The ninth we made little way. But on the tenth in the Morning the Wind coming
about to the South, we found our selves at the Entry of the Gulf of Venice,
between Cape St. Mary and the Coast of Greece, where the Mountains were covered
with Snow. About ten of the Clock we tacked to our own Course, while the Ships
that were bound for Venice and Ancona entered the Gulf.

The tenth by Morning we saw two little Islands, the one called Fauno, the
other Merlera; and were in sight of Corfu. About Noon, the Wind being at East,
we kept out at Sea: and about Evening abundance of little Birds lighted upon
our Cordage, of which we caught enough to make a lusty Fricassie. We also caught
four Falcons, Owls, and good store of Turtles.

The eleventh and twelfth the Wind being at East, we lay hovering about the
Shore, without making any way.

The fourteenth and fifteenth having the Wind at North-West, we were two days
without seeing Land, yet we caught good store of Birds.

The sixteenth the same Wind continuing, we found our selves near the Island of
Zant. From eight in the Morning 'till three in the Afternoon we were becalmed;
but then a good brisk West Wind carried away all our little Birds.

The seventeenth and eighteenth we were becalmed.

The nineteenth in the Morning, the Wind being at North-West, we discovered
Cape Gullo, between Modon and Coron, in the Morea.

The twentieth, with the same Wind that blew fresh, we found our selves by
Morning within two Cannon-shot of Cape Matapan, which is the most Southern Cape
of all Europe. About Noon the Wind coming full West, in three hours we passed
by the Point of the Island Cerigo.

The twenty-first in the Morning, we discovered the Islands of Caravi and
Falconera on the one side, and Cape Schilli on the other hand. Two hours after,
having a fresh Gale at South-West, about Evening we were in view of the Island
of St. George.

The twenty-second though the Wind slackn'd, yet we made some way; for in the
Morning we found our selves between the Island of Zea and the Morea, near to
another Cape delle Colonne: afterward we discovered the Island of Negropont,
and doubled the Cape three hours after Noon, having left sight of the Island of
Andros by ten in the Forenoon.

The twenty-third the Wind blowing fresh all the night, by morning we found our
selves near the Island of Ipsera. At noon we made the Point of the Island of
Chio, near to the Land; and that night we came to an Anchor near the Castle,
being becalmed.

The twenty-fourth the Wind rose at North-West, which blew us into the Port of
Smyrna.

The twenty-fifth we went a-shoar, having had as quiet a passage as ever I had
in my Life for twenty days together.

CHAP. II. A Continuation of the Author's sixth Voyage, as he traveled from
Smyrna to Ispahan.
WE staid at Smyrna from the twenty-fifth of April to the ninth of June; during
which time there happ'nd so terrible an Earthquake, that I had like to have
tumbled out of my Bed.

The Caravan being ready to set out for Tauris, I took with me three Armenian
Servants, besides those that I carried out of France to serve me upon the Road.

We set out of Smyrna upon Monday the ninth of June at three a Clock in the
afternoon. The Caravan rendevouz'd at Pont-garbashi, three Leagues from the
City, consisting of six hundred Camels, and almost the same number of Horse. We
set out the next night, two hours after midnight. As for the Road I shall say
nothing, only relate some Passages that fell out by the way.

Being come to Erivan, the fourteenth of September we encamped in a pleasant
green place between the Castle and the old Town; for we would not lie in the
Inn, because we heard that several sick people lodged there. We staid there two
days; during which time I resolved to wait upon the Kan, I found him in a Room
made in one of the Arches of the Bridge which is built over the River, which I
have described already, with several Captains and Officers about him: when he
had asked me whence I came, and whither I was traveling, he caused a Glass of
Liquor to be filled me. After that I presented him with a Prospective-Glass,
six pair of ordinary Spectacles, twelve other pair of Spectacles that cast
several Reflections, two little Pistols, and a Steel to strike Fire, made like a
Pistol. All which pleased him extremely well, especially the Spectacles, for he
was sixty years of age. Thereupon he commanded a Lamb, Wine, Fruit, and Melons
to be carried to my Tent, and that I should want nothing. After that we sat
down to Dinner, but I observed the Kan himself drank no Wine, though he pressed
me to it. The reason was, because he was an Agis, that is, one that had made
his Pilgrimage to Mecca; for then it is not lawful to drink Wine, or any other
inebriating Drink. After Dinner, finding him in a pleasant humor, I resolved
to complain to him of one of the Custom-Officers about an injury he had done
me. For it is usual with the Customer in this place to open the Chests of all
the Merchants, both Turks and Armenians, to the end that if they have any thing
of Rarity the Kan of Erivan may see it: for many times, he buys what pleases
him best to send to the King. This Officer would not excuse me for his Custom,
and therefore at my very first arrival he would have me to open my Chests; and
because I did not do it according to his Orders, he asked me very rudely why I
had not obeyed his Commands: I answered him as surlily, that I would open my
Chest no where unless it were in the presence of the King, and that as for him,
I knew him not: Upon that he threatened me, that if he did not find my Chests
open the next day, he would open them by force; thereupon I said no more, but
bid-him have a care I did not make him repent of what he had done already. This
was the ground of the Quarrel, and I was about to have complained to the Kan;
but his Nephew entreated me for the love I bare him, not to say any thing of
it, and promised to send the Customer to me to beg my Pardon, which he did, and
the Customer was forced to crave it heartily. To avoid the same inconvenience
for the future, I desired the Kan to give me his Pasport, to the end I might
pass Custom-free through the Territories of his Government, which he freely and
courteously granted me: Come, said he, and dine with me to morrow, and you
shall have it.

The twenty-sixth of September we departed from Erivan, and the ninth of
November we came to Tauris, taking the ordinary Road.

At Erivan two of my Servants, the one a Watch-maker, the other a Goldsmiths,
died; I left them sick there, but caused them to be buried in the Churchyard
belonging to the Armenians. One of them died in fifteen days, of a Gangrene,
which eat out his Mouth and Throat; being the Disease of the Country. Though
had the Armenians known that one of them had been a Protestant, they would
never have allowed him to have been buried in their Churchyard.

Here observe the exact justice, wherewith the Persians preserve the Goods of
Strangers. For the Civil Judge hearing of the death of the Watch-maker, caused
his Chamber to be sealed up, to the end the Goods might be preserved for the
kindred of the deceased, if they came to demand them. I returned to Tauris a
twelvemonth after, and found the Chamber close sealed up.

We staid twelve days at Tauris: during which time I resolved to attend the Kan
of Shamaqui, a frontler Town of Persia toward the Caspian Sea; but I found him
not there, in regard it was Harvest season, at what time he goes to gather the
King's and his own Duties.

Two days journey on this side Shamaqui you pass the Aras, and for two days
journey you travel through a Country all planted with white Mulberry-Trees; the
Inhabitants being all Silk-Weavers. Before you come to the City, you must cross
over several Hills: But I think I should rather have called it a great Town,
where there was nothing remarkable but a fair Castle which the Kan built
himself; I speak of the time past: For as I returned from this present Voyage
of which I now write, when I came to Tauris I understood, that there had
happened such a terrible Earthquake in the Town as had laid all the Houses in a
heap; none escaping that dismal subversion, but only one Watch-maker of Geneva,
and one more who was a Camel-driver. I had several times designed to return
into France through Muscovy; but I durst never adventure, being certainly
informed that the Muscovite never permitted any person to go out of Muscovy
into Persia, nor to come out of Persia into Muscovy. So that it was by
particular connivence that that favor was granted to the Duke of Holstein's
Ambassadors. This last time I was resolved to have tried whether I could have
opened a Passage from Persia through Muscovy into France, but the Ruin of
Shamaqui deterred me.

We departed from Tauris the twenty-second of November, from whence to Cashan
we met with nothing considerable, but only one of the Muscovite Ambassadors
upon his return into his own Country, with a small Retinue of sixty, his
Companion dying at Ispahan.

Upon Sunday the fourteenth of December taking Horse by three of the Clock in
the morning, the Ice bearing very well, we came to Ispahan about noon: but in
regard it was slippery before day, and very plashy after the Sun was up, the
Journey was both tedious and troublesome.

CHAP. III. The Road from Aleppo to Tauris, through Diarbequir and Van.
THere are two Roads more remaining to be described; one through the North part
of Turkey, the other through the South. The first through Diarbequir and Van,
and so to Tauris; the second through Anna, and the small Desert leading to
Bagdat.

I will describe the first of these Roads, and make a skip at the first leap to
Bir, whither I have already led you in the Road from Aleppo.

From Bir or Beri, you travel all along the River Euphrates to Cacheme.

From Cacheme you come to Milesara, where you pay the Customs of Oursa, when
you do not pass through the City, which amounts to four Piasters for every
Horse-load.

From Milesara you come to the River Arzlan-chaye, or, the Lion River, by
reason of the rapidity of the Stream which falls into Euphrates.

From Arzlan-chaye you go to Seuerak. This is a City, watered by a River, that
also falls into Euphrates. It is environed with a great Plain to the North, the
West, and South. The way which the Horses, Mules, and Camels keep is cut
through the Rock like a Channel, two Foot deep, where you must also pay half a
Piaster for every Horse-load.

From Seuerak you come to Bogazi, where there are two Wells, but not a House
near; and where the Caravan usually lodges.

From Bogazi you come to Deguirman-Bogazi, and from Deguirman-Bogazi to
Mirzatapa, where there is only an Inn.

From Mirzatapa you come to Diarbequir, which the Turks call Car-emu.

Diarbequir is a City situated upon a rising ground, on the right side of
Tigris, which in that place forms a Half Moon; the descent from the Walls to
the River being very steep. It is encompassed with a double Wall; the outward
Wall being strengthened with sixty-two Towers, which they report were built in
Honor of the sixty two Disciples of JESUS CHRIST. The City has but three
Gates, over one of which there is an Inscription in Greek and Latin, that makes
mention of one Constantine. There are in it two or three fair Piazza's, and a
magnificent Mosquee, which was formerly a Christian Church. It is surrounded
with very decent Charnel-houses, near to which the Moullah's, Dervi's,
Booksellers and Stationers do live, together with all those other people that
concern the Law. About a League from the City there is a Channel cut out of
Tigris, that brings the Water to the City: And in this Water are all the red
Marroquins washed that are made at Diarbequir, surpassing in colour'all others
in the East: which Manufacture employs a fourth part of the Inhabitants of the
City. The Soil is very good, and yields according to expectation; there is
excellent Bread and very good Wine, nor is there any better Provision to be had
in any part of Persia: more especially, there is a sort of Pigeons which in
goodness excel all the several kinds that we have in Europe. The City is very
well peopled, and it is thought there are in it above twenty thousand
Christians. The two thirds are Armenians, the rest Nestorians, with some few
Jacobites. There are also some few Capuchins, that have no House of their own,
but are forced to lodg^ in an Inn.

The Basha of Diarbequir is one of the Viziers of the Empire. He has but an
inconsiderable Infantry, which is not much requisite in that Country; the Curds
and Arabs which infest that Country being all Horsemen. But he is strong in
Cavalry, being able to bring above twenty thousand Horse into the Field. A
quarter of an hours riding on this side Diarbequir there is a great Town with a
large Inn, where the Caravans that go and come from Persia rather choose to lie
than at Diarbequir; in regard that in the City-Inns, they pay three or four
Piasters for every Chamber, but in the Country-Inns there is nothing demanded.

At Diarbequir, you cross the Tigris, which is always fordable unless when the
Snow and Rains have swelled it; for then you must go a quarter of a League
higher, and cross it over a great Stone Bridge. Half a League on the other side
of Tigris stands a Village, with an Inn, which is the Rendevous of the whole
Caravan, and where they that first come have time enough to provide themselves
for a Journey of nine or ten days, as far as Betlis. For though you may find
Towns and Inns thick enough upon the Road, yet there is no good Bread to be met
with.

When the Caravan proceeds, the first days journey is fourteen hours on
Horseback, and you come to lie at Shaye-batman, where you must pay a Piaster
for every Horse-load.

From Chaye-batman you come to Chikaran.

From Chikaran to Azou, which you leave half a League from the great Road,
where the Toll-gatherers take their Toll, which is four Piasters upon every
Horse-load.

From Azou you come to Ziarat; from Ziarat to Zerque, where you pay a Duty of
two Piasters for every Horse-load.

From Zerche to Cochakan.

From Cochakan to Carakan, a bad Inn; where you enter among the Mountains, that
being full of Torrents reach as far as Betlis.

From Carakan to Betlis, a City belonging to a Bey or Prince of the Country,
the most potent and most considerable of all the rest; for he neither
acknowledges the Grand Signor nor the Persian: whereas all the other Beys are
Tributary either to the one or the other. And it is the Interest of those two
Potentates to correspond with him; for it is an easy thing for him to stop up
the passage from Aleppo to Tauris, or from Tauris to Aleppo; the Streights of
the Mountains being so narrow, that ten Men may defend them against a thousand.
Coming near Betlis you must travel a whole day among high steep Mountains, that
reach two Miles beyond, with Torrents on each side; the way being cut out of
the Rock on each side, where there is but just room for a Camel to pass. The
City stands between two high Mountains, equally distant one from the other, and
about the height of Montmartre. It is built like a Sugar Loaf, the ascent being
so steep on every side, that there is no getting to the top, but by wheeling
and winding about the Mountain. The top of all is a Platform, where stands a
Castle well built, at the Gate whereof is a Drawbridge. Then you pass through
two great Courts, and then into a third, opposite to the Bey's Apartment. It is
very troublesome to get up to the top of the Castle, and a Man must be very well
Horsed that does it. There is no other person but the Bey and his Esquire, who
is permitted to ride up on Horseback. There is one Inn within the City, and
another as it were without, in which the Merchants rather choose to lie than in
the other, by reason that it is ready to be overflown when the Torrents swell,
that run through every Street. The Bey, beside the strength of his Passes, is
able to bring above five and twenty thousand Horse into the Field; and a very
considerable Body of Foot, composed of the Shepherds of the Country, who are to
be ready at a Call. I went to wait upon the Bey himself, and made him a Present
of two pieces of Satin, the one streakt with Silver, and the other with Gold:
two white Bonnets, such as the Turks wear, very fine, and adorned with Silver
at the top; together with a suit of Handkerchiffs, streaked with Red and
Silver. While I staid with the Bey, who sent for Coffee for me according to the
custom, a Courier came to him from the Basha of Aleppo, to desire him that he
would deliver up into his hands a French Surgeon that was his Slave, having
been taken in Candia; complaining withal, that he had run away from him with
the value of three thousand Crowns. The Bey, who understood what belonged to a
Sanctuary, and was resolved to protect the Frenchman, schooled the Messenger
so severely, that he threatened to put him to death if he did not get him gone
presently; charging him to tell his Master withal, that he would complain to
the Grand Signor of his insolence; and that if he were strangled, he might
thank himself. And indeed it behooved the Great Turk to keep fair correspondence
with him; in regard that if the Persians should at any time besiege Van, the
Grand Signor must march through the Bey's Country to relieve it; who has Forces
enough to oppose him if he should be his Enemy.

But to travel through the Country of the Curds is very pleasant: for if on the
one side the ways are bad, and difficult to be traveled, in other places you
have a prospect of several sorts of Trees, as Oaks and Walnuts, and not a Tree
which is not embraced with a wild Vine. Below the Mountains, in the Level,
grows the best Wheat; and Barley in all the Country.

From Betlis, where you pay five Piasters for every Horse-load, to Taduan,
where you pay two.

Taduan is a great Town within a Cannon-shot of the Lake of Van, in such a
part, where Nature has made a Hav'n, sheltered from all the Winds; being closed
on all sides with high Mountains, the entry into which though it seem narrow,
is very free. It is able to contain twenty or thirty great Barks; and when it
is fair Weather, and that the Wind serves, the Merchants generally Ship off
their Goods from thence to Van: from whence it is but four and twenty hours
sail, and a very good passage; whereas by Land from Taduan to Van it is eight
days journey on Horseback. Returning back, you may also take Water at Van for
Taduan.

From Taduan to Karmoushe.

From Karmoushe to Kellat.

From Kellat to Algiaoux, a small City, where you pay one Piaster for every
Load.

From Agiaoux to Spanktiere.

From Spanktiere to Souer.

From Souer to Argiche.

From Argiche to Quiarakierpou.

From Quiarakierpou to Perkeri.

From Perkeri to Zuarzazin.

From Zuarzazin to Souserat.

From Souserat to Devan, where two Piasters are gathered for every Horse-load,
or else you must pay at Van.

From Devan to Van, where there is a Duty of two Tomans and four Abassis to be
paid for every Horse-load. For though Van be in the Territories of the Grand
Signor, yet the Persian Money is better liked than his own Coin.

Van is a great City upon the side of a wide Lake of the same name. There is a
good Fortress belongs to it, that is seated upon the top of a high Mountain
which stands by it self. There is but one sort of Fish in the Lake, a little
bigger than a Pilchard, of which they take great store in the Month of April.
For about a League from the Lake there is a great River that is called
Bendmahi, which descending from the Mountains of Armenia, empties it self into
the Lake. Now in March when the Snow melts and swells the River, vast numbers
of these Fish come down the River into the Lake; which the Fishermen
observing, so stop up the Mouth of the River that the Fish cannot go back; for
else they would not stay above forty days; at which time they catch 'em up in
wide-mouthed Baskets at the Mouth of the River, thinking to return; it being
lawful for any man to fish. The people drive a great Trade in these Fish,
transporting them into Persia and Armenia; for, the Persians and Armenians
both, drinking Wine at the end of their Feasts, they then bring this Dish to
the Table for a relishing-bit. The people of Van tell a Story, how that there
was a certain rich Merchant who farmed the whole Fishery, paying a good sum of
Money for it to the Basha; who thereupon strictly forbad any to fish but the
Merchant; whereas before it was free for any man. But when the Fishing-season
came, and that the Merchant thought to have caught his Fish, he met with
nothing but Serpents. So that after that time the Fishery was never more
farmed. And there seems to be something in it; for the Basha's, who are a sort
of people that will lose nothing they can get, would be certain to farm the
Fish again and again, were there not some strange reason to hinder it. There
are two principal Islands in the Lake of Van; the one called Adaketons, where
there stand two Covents of the Armenians, Sourphague and Sourp-kara: the other
Island is called Limadasi, and the name of the Covent is Limquiliasi, all which
Armenian Monks live very austerely.

From Van to Darcheck.

From Darcheck to Nuchar; it stands in the Territories of a Bey of Curdistan,
being a paltry Village consisting of two or three little Houses. These Bey's
are a kind of particular Lords, upon the Frontiers of both the Empires of
Turkey and Persia, who care for neither: for they lie so secure among the
Mountains, that there is no assaulting them by force. The Curds in general are
a brutish sort of people; who though they style themselves Mahometans, have
very few Moullah's to instruct or teach them. They have a particular veneration
for black Greyhounds; so that if any person should be seen to kill one of
them, he would be knocked of the Head immediately. Neither does any one dare to
cut an Onion with a Knife in their presence; but it must be squeezed between
two Stones by him that intends to make use of it; so ridiculously superstitious
they are.

The Bey to whom Nuchar belongs has his Toll-gatherers in that place, who exact
sixteen Abassi's for every Horse-load, besides a Present which the
Caravan-Bashi is obliged to present him, which comes sometimes to seven or
eight Tomans, sometimes more: for otherwise the Bey would be sure to watch the
Caravan at some scurvy place, and plunder it to some purpose. As once it
happened to a Caravan, with which my Nephew went along in the year 1672; though
he had the good luck to lose nothing more than one Camel laden with English
Cloth, and another with his Provision. The Basha of Van and the Kan of Tauris
took the Field with an intention to remedy these disorders: especially the
Basha of Van, who perceiving that the Merchants would forsake that Road by
reason of the Injuries they daily received, was resolved to make the Basha
restore some part of his Goods which he had taken from the Merchants; and for
the future to leave two of his Subjects in Tauris, and two in Van, that should
be responsible for what mischief should be done to the Caravan. For otherwise
the Merchants like this way best, as being the nearest from Aleppo to Tauris,
and where they pay less Duties.

From Nuchar to Kuticlar, is a long Journey through the Mountains, by the side
of several Torrents, which are to be crossed in several places. This bad way
brings Fifty in the Hundred profit to the Bey of Nuchar; for were the Caravan to
travel through Plains, or a level Country, one Horse or Camel would carry as
much as two or three, and the Merchant would pay Custom for no more. Here
therefore the Caravan-Bashi and the Merchants must understand one another, and
agree as cunningly as they can togethor.

From Kuticlar to Kalvat.

From Kalvat to Kogia.

From Kogia to Darkavin.

From Darkavin to Soliman-Sera: all which four places are very convenient Inns.

From Soliman-Sera to Kours: in that City resides a Bey, who is tributary to
the King of Persia. He lives in an ancient Castle about half a League off,
where the Caravan pays nine Abassi's for every Horse-load, besides a Present.
But that Present consists only in Sugar-loaves, Boxes of Treacle, or Marmaled;
for he stands so much upon his Honor, that he scorns to take Money. The Wine
of Kours is sweet and tart.

From Kours to Devogli.

From Devogli to Checheme. About half way between these two places you cross a
Plain, which upon the South extends it self a League to the Mountains, but upon
the North side enlarges it self out of sight. Upon the Highway, on the left
hand stands a Rock three hundred Paces in compass, and about fourscore Foot
high; round about it were to be seen several Dens, which most certainly had
been the Habitations of those that fed their Cattle thereabouts. Under the
Rock, which is hollow, appears a Fountain of clear cold Water, wherein there
was great store of Fish; thousands of which would come up to the top of the
Water, when a man threw any Bread into it. The Fish had a great Head, and a
large Mustache. I shot a Carbine into the River charged with Hail-shot, upon
which they all disappeared, but presently five or six returned wounded to the
top of the Water, which we easily took. The Armenians laughed at me for
shooting, believing it had been impossible to catch them in that manner; but
they admired when they beheld them again turning up their bellies at the top of
the Water. The Turks and some of the Armenians would not eat of them, believing
them to be defiled: but the Armenians that had been in Europe laughed at their
Superstition, and fell to, when they were dressed.

From Checheme to Davashiler.

From Davashiler to Marand; a City where you must pay sixteen Abassi's for a
Camel's-load, and eight for a Horses.

From Merand to Sefian.

From Sefian to Tauris. These are the two biggest days journies throughout the
Road.

Returning out of Persia this way, we could not get Bread for Money; so that we
were forced to give the Women some Trifles which they loved better. Though the
People are Mahometans, yet they will not spare to drink lustily.

CHAP. IV. Another Road from Aleppo to Tauris, through Gezire and other places.
FRom Aleppo to Bir or Beri, where you must cross Euphrates, days 4

From Bir to Ourfa, days 2

From Ourfa to Diarbequir, days 6

From Diarbequir to Gezire, days 4

Gezire is a little City of Mesopotamia, built upon an Island in the River
Tigris; which is there to be crossed over a fair Bridge of Boats. Here the
Merchants meet to buy Gall-nuts and Tobacco. The City is under the Jurisdiction
of a Bey.

Having past the Tigris, all the Country between that and Tauris is almost
equally divided between Hills and Plains; the Hills are covered with Oaks that
bear Galls, and some Acoms withal. The Plains are planted with Tobacco, which
is transported into Turkey, for which they have a very great Trade. One would
think the Country were poor, seeing nothing but Galls and Tobacco; but there is
no Country in the World where there is more Gold or Silver laid out; and where
they are more nice in taking Money that is in the least defective either in
weight or goodness of Metal. For Galls being a general Commodity for Dying, and
no where to be found so good as there, bring a vast Trade to the Country;
wherein there are no Villages, yet it is overspread with Houses a Musket Shot
one from another; and every Inhabitant has his quarter of his Vineyard by
himself, where they dry their Grapes: for they make no Wine.

From Gezire to Amadie, days 2

Amadie is a good City, to which the Natives of a great part of Assyria bring
their Tobacco, and Gall-nuts. It is seated upon a high Mountain, to the top
whereof you cannot get in less than an hour. Toward the middle of the Rock
three or four large Springs fall down from the Cliffs, where the Inhabitants
are forced to water their Cattle and fill their Borachio's every morning, there
being no Water in the City. It is of an indifferent bigness, and in the middle
is a large Piazza, where all sorts of Merchants keep their Shops. It is under
the Command of a Bey that is able to raise eight or ten thousand Horse, and
more Foot than any other of the Beys, by reason his Country is so populous.

From Amadie to Giousmark, days 4

From Giousmark to Alback, days 3

From Alback to Salmastre, days 3

Salmastre is a pleasant City upon the Frontiers of the Assyrians and Medes,
and the first on that side in the Territories of the Persian King. The Caravan
never lies there, because it would be above a League out of the way: but when
the Caravan is lodged, two or three of the principal Merchants with the
Caravan-Bashi according to custom go to wait upon the Kan. The Kan is so glad
that the Caravan takes that Road, that he presents the Caravan-Bashi and those
that go with him, with the Garment of Honor, or the Calaat, the Bonnet, and
Girdle; which is the greatest Honor that the King or his Governor can do to
Strangers.

From Salamastre to Tauris, days 4

In all thirty-two days journey this way from Aleppo to Tauris. But though this
be the shortest cut, and where they pay least Customs, yet the Merchants dare
hardly venture for fear of being ill used by the Beys.

Teren, whose Capital City the Persians call Cherijar, is a Province between
Mazandran and the ancient Region of the Persians known at this day by the name
of Hierac, to the South-East of Ispahan. It Is one of the most temperate
Countries, that has nothing in it of the contagious Air of Guilan, where the
King goes for the purity of the Air, and for his sport of Hunting; besides,
that it produces excellent Fruits in many places. The Capital City whereof,
which some call by the name of the Province, is of a moderate compass, but
there is nothing worthy observation in it: only a League from it are to be seen
the Ruins of a great City, which had been two Leagues in Circuit. There were
abundance of Towers all of burnt Brick, and Pieces of the Wall standing. There
were also several Letters in the Stones which were cemented into the Walls; but
neither Turks, Persians, nor Arabians could understand them. The City is round
seated upon a high Hill, at the top whereof stood the Ruins of a Castle, which
the Natives say was the Residence of the Kings of Persia.

CHAP. V. The Road from Aleppo to Ispahan through the small Desert, and through
Kengavar.
I Will describe this Road as if I were to return from Ispahan to Aleppo. This
Road lies through Kengavar, Bagdat, and Anna, where you enter into the Desert,
which I call The little Desert, because you get over it in far less time than
the great Desert that extends Southwards to Arabia the Happy, and where you may
often find Water, all the whole Journey being not far distant from the River
Euphrates. A man that is well mounted may ride this way from Ispahan to Aleppo
in three and thirty days, as I have done, and perhaps in less, if the Arabian,
whom you take for your guide at Bagdat, knows the shortest cut through the
Wilderness.

The Horse Caravans traveling from Ispahan to Kengavar are fourteen or fifteen
days upon the Road; but being well mounted ten or twelve in a Company, you may
Ride it in five or six days. The Country through which you travel, is very
fertile in Corn and Rice, it produces also excellent Fruits and good Wine,
especially about Kengavar, which is a large Town and well peopled.

From Kengavar to Bagdat I was ten days upon the Road. The Country is not so
fertile but very stony in some parts. And it consists in Plains and small
Hills, there being not a Mountain in all the Road.

Now for a man that travels quick, the Road lies thus:

From Ispahan to Consar.

From Consar to Comba.

From Comba to Oranguie.

From Oranguie to Nahouand.

From Nahouand to Kengavar.

Fron Kengavar to Sahana.

From Sahana to Polisha, or the Bridge-Royal, being a great Stone Bridge.

From Polisha to Maidacht.

From Maidacht to Erounabad.

From Erounabad to Conaguy.

From Conaguy to Caslisciren.

From Caslisciren to Iengui-Conaguy.

From Iengui-Conaguy to Casered.

From Casered to Charaban.

From Charaban to Bourous.

From Bourous to Bagdat.

There are some, who instead of passing through Kengavar, take Amadan, one of
the most considerable Cities of Persia in their way, and so from thence to
Touchere; but the way is longer; and according to the Road which I have set
down, you are to leave Amadan to the North upon the right hand.

Between Sahana and Polisha you leave the only high Mountain in all the Road to
the North. It is as steep and as straight as a Wall, and as high as you can
see; you may observe the Figures of men clad like Priests, with Surplices and
Censors in their hands, and yet neither can the Natives tell you, nor any
person imagine the meaning of those Sculptures. At the foot of the Rock runs a
River, over which there is a Bridge of Stone.

About a days journey beyond the Mountain you meet with a little City, whose
situation, the Streams that water it, the good Fruits that grow there, and
particularly the excellent Wine which it affords, render a most pleasant
Mansion. The Persians believe that Alexander when he returned from Babylon died
in this place, whatever others have writt'n that he died at Babylon. All the
rest of the Country from this City to Bagdat is a Country of Dates, where the
people live in little Hutts, made of the Branches of Palm Trees.

From Bagdat to Anna you ride in four days, through a desert Country, though it
lie between two Rivers.

Anna is a City of an indifferent bigness, that belongs to an Arabian Emir. For
about half a League round about the Town, the Lands are very well manured,
being full of Gardens and Country-houses. The City for its situation resembles
Paris; for it is built upon both sides of the River Euphrates; and in the midst
of the River is an Island, where stands a fair Mosquee.

From Anna to Mached-raba is five days riding, and from Mached-raba to Taiba,
five days more.

Mached-raba is a kind of a Fortress upon the point of a Hill, at the Foot
whereof springs a Fountain like a large Vase, which is very rare in the
Deserts. The place is encompassed with high Walls, defended by certain Towers,
and in which are little Hutts where the Inhabitants keep their Cattle, of which
there is great store, but more Mares and Horses than Cows.

Taiba is also a fortified place in a level Country, or a high Bank of Earth
and Brick baked in the Sun. Near to the Gate a Fountain springs out of the
Earth, and makes a kind of a Pond. This Road is most frequented by those that
travel through the Desert from Aleppo or Damas to Babylon, or from Damas to
Diarbequir, by reason of this Fountain.

From Taiba to Aleppo is but three days journey; but these three days are the
most dangerous of all the Road for Robbers, in regard that all the Country is
inhabited only by the Bedouins, or Arabian Shepherds, who make it their
business only to plunder and steal.

Now to take the same Road from Aleppo to Ispahan, it lies thus:

From Aleppo to Taiba, days 3

From Taiba to Mached-raba, days 5

From Mached-raba to Anna, days 5

From Anna to Bagdat, days 4

From Bagdat to Bourous, days 1

From Bourous to Charaban, days 1

From Charaban to Casered, days 1

From Casered to Conaguy, days 1

From Conaguy to Cassiscerin, days 1

From Cassiscerin to another Conaguy, days 1

From Conaguy to Erounabad, days 1

From Erounabad to Maidacht, days 1

From Maidacht to Sahana, days 1

From Sahana to Kengavar, days 1

From Kengavar to Nahouand, days 1

From Nahouand to Oranguie, days 1

From Oranguie to Comba, days 1

From Comba to Consar, days 1

From Consar to Ispahan, days 1

So that whether you travel from Aleppo to Ispahan, or from Ispahan to Aleppo,
you may easily ride it in thirty days.

From whence I make this Observation, That a man making it but two days more
from Alexandretta, and finding a Ship ready there to set Sail for Marseilles,
with a fair Wind he may travel from Ispahan to Paris in two months.

Another time, having an occasion to go from Aleppo to Kengavar, and so to
Bagdat; and from thence, so through the Desert; at Bagdat I met with a Spaniard
that was traveling the same way, with whom I luckily met to bear half the
Charges of the Guide; which as soon as we had hired for sixty Crowns, we set
forward from Bagdat; the Spaniard, and I, and our Arabian, who was afoot,
walked about Pistol Shot before our Horses. From thence to Anna we met with
nothing remarkable, but only that we saw a Lion and a Lyoness in the Act of
Generation: Whereupon our Guide believing we had been afraid, told us, that he
had met them oft'n, but that he never found them do any harm.

The Spaniard according to the humor of his Nation, was very reserved, and
contenting himself with an Onion, or some such small matter at meals, never
made much of his guide; whereas I was mightily in his favor, in regard there
was never a day passed wherein he did not receive of me some good business or
other. We were not above a Musket Shot from Anna when we met with a comely old
man, who came up to me, and taking my Horse by the Bridle; Friend, said he,
come and wash thy feet and eat Bread at my House. Thou art a Stranger, and
since I have met thee upon the Road, never refuse me the favor which I desire
of thee. The Invitation of the old man was so like the custom of the people in
ancient times, of which we read so many Examples in Scripture, that we could
not choose but go along with him to his House, where he Feasted us in the best
manner he could, giving us over and above Barley for our Horses; and for us he
killed a Lamb and some Hens. He was an Inhabitant of Anna, and lived by the
River, which we were obliged to cross to wait upon the Governor for our
Passports, for which we paid two Piasters apiece. We staid at a House near the
Gate of the City to buy Provisions for our selves and our Horses; where the
woman of the House having a lovely sprightly Child of nine years of age, I was
so taken with her humor, that I gave her two Handkerchiefs of Painted Calicut,
which the Child showing her Mother, all we could do could not make her take any
Money for the Provisions we had agreed for.

Five hundred paces from the Gate of the City, we met a young man of a good
Family, for he was attended by two Servants, and rode upon an Ass, the hinder
part of which was Painted red. He accosted me in particular, and after some
Compliments that passed, Is it possible, said he, that I should meet a
Stranger, and have nothing to present him withal? He would fain have carried
us to a House in the Country whether he was going; but seeing we were resolved
to keep our way, he would needs give me his Pipe, notwithstanding all the
excuses I could make, and though I told him that I never took any Tobacco; so
that I was constrained to accept of it.

About three Leagues from Anna, we were going to eat among the Ruins of
certain Houses, and had thought to have lain there 'till midnight, when we
perciv'd two Arabians sent by the Emir, to tell us that he had some Letters
which he would put into our own hands to the Basha of Aleppo, to which purpose
he had order to bring us back. There was no refusing, so that at our coming
into the City the next day we saw the Emir going to the Mosquee, mounted upon a
stately Horse, and attended by a great number of people afoot, with every one a
great Poniard stuck in their Girdles. As soon as we saw him we alighted, and
standing up by the Houses, we saluted him as he passed by. Seeing our Guide,
and threatening to rip up his Belly; Ye Dog, said he, I will give ye your
reward, and teach ye to carry Strangers away before I see them. Carry them,
said he, to the Governors House 'till I return from the Mosquee. Returning
from the Mosquee, and being seated in a spacious Hall, he sent for us and our
Guide, whom he threatened again for carrying us out of the Town without giving
him notice. But the Governor pleaded his excuse, and appeased the Emir. After
that he sent for Coffee for us, and then caused us to open the Budget that we
carried behind our Horses, to see whether there were any thing that pleased him
or no. In my Budget were two pieces of Calicut exquisitely painted, for two
Coverlets of a Bed; two pieces of Handkerchief of Calicut; two Persian
Standishes beautified with Japon Varnish; two Damascene Blades, one inlaid with
Gold, the other with Silver. All which he liked, and made me give him. In the
Spaniards Budget he found nothing but a few old Clothes: But afterward being
known to have had some Diamonds about him, the French Consul at Aleppo
sentenced him to pay me half the charges of what I gave the Emir.

The Prince satisfied with what he had taken, gave order that we should be
furnished with all necessary Provisions for our selves and our Horses: but
being provided before, we only took three or four handfuls of excellent Dates,
to show that we did not slight his kindness.

Between Anna and Mached-raba is the Guide to take special care so to order his
Stages, as to come every morning to the Wells by break of day, for fear of
meeting the Arabs, that come to fetch Water there by that time the Sun is up,
who are apt enough to be injurious to Travelers.

At Mached-raba I saw one of the most beautiful Virgins that ever I beheld in
my life. For I had given a Piaster to an Arab to get me some Bread, and going
to see whether it were baked, I found the Virgin putting it into the Oven, who
being alone, made me a sign to retire. There I also saw a Colt of that
wonderful shape, that the Basha of Damas had offered three thousand Crowns for
it.

Coming to Taiba, we did not go into the Town, but lay without under the Walls.
Only our Arab went in and brought us chopped Straw for our Camels. The Governor
of the Town came along with him, and demauded twenty Piasters of every one, for
certain Duties which he pretended payable to him. We knew there were but four
due, and refused to pay any more; but the Arab having a mind to put a trick
upon the Spaniard, gave me a wink, intimating to me that I should not trouble
my self: Thereupon the Governor incensed goes back to the Town, and by and by
returns with an Iron Chain; and had certainly carried the Spaniard fettered to
the Fort, had he not laid down the twenty Piasters. For my part, I was
discharged for my four Piasters, according to custom.

Drawing near to Aleppo, the first Houses that we came at bordering upon the
Desert, were the Houses of the Arabs and Bedouins; the second of which being
the Habitation of a Friend of our Guide's, I delivered my Horse to the Guide,
to whom I had sold it before at his own earnest request; for I was resolved to
go a-foot to Aleppo: and therefore that I might save the Custom of a parcel of
Turquoises that I had about me, I put them in the Pouches which I carried
behind my Horse, and threw the Pouches into a little Chest, as if they had been
things of no consequence; and desired the Man of the House to keep them a day
or two. The Arab told me, that were it all Gold it should be safe; and indeed
when I sent for them within a day or two after, I found nothing missing.

When I came to Aleppo, the English Consul asked me what news from Ispahan: I
made answer, that he must of necessity know better than I, in regard the
English President there had sent away an Express to him while I was there; and
that he went away with two Capuchins and an Arabian Guide. Thereupon the Consul
mistrusting some mischief was befal'n them, requested the Basha to lend him
some of his Sokliers; who readily granted him eight Men, part Arabians, part
Bedouins. These the Consul ordered to disperse themselves upon several Roads in
the Wilderness, to see if they could meet with any tidings upon the Way. In a
short time two of them returned with two little Pouches, in one of which was
the Packet of Letters. They reported also, that in a by-place between Taiba and
Mached-raba they saw the Bodies of four dead Men lying upon the Sand. One of
them which was in black Clothes, being hacked and mangled in a most miserable
manner; but the Bodies of the other three were entire, though run through in
several places. Some time after the persons themselves that did the fact told
both at Diarbequir and Damas, how it came to pass. For certain Merchants of
Damas going to Diarbequir, perceived four Men early in the morning at certain
Wells where they were to stop; whereupon they sent two of their Company before
to know who they were. But the Austin-Frier having a little parcel of Diamonds
about him, and believing them to be Thieves, inconsiderately let fly his Gun
and killed one of them immediately upon the place: the Merchants seeing one of
their companions dead, fell all at once upon the other three, cut the
Austin-Frier to pieces, and slew the rest; and so without rifling them pursued
their Journey.

From Aleppo I went to Alexandretta, and there embarked in a Vessel of
Marseilles, with a favorable Wind, 'till we came to make the Coast of Candy,
where we were becalmed for two days. One morning by break of day we discovered
a Pickaroon, whereupon seeing we could not avoid being fetched up by him, we
made ready. He made two or three shot at us, which did us no other harm but
only touched the Beak-head of the Ship. Our Gunner made a shot at him, which
brought down his Top-gallant; a second went through and through the great
Cabin, and caused a great disorder in his Ship, as far as we could discern with
our Prospective-Glasses. But when the Wind began to blow fresh, the Pirate, who
had enough of us, and had discovered another Vessel which perhaps he thought
better prize, made all the Sail he could from us toward the other Vessel.
Thereupon we pursued our Voyage with a fair Gale, and came to Malta.

From Malta we departed seven or eight in company, in two of the Pope's
Galleys, staying three days at Syracuse, and one at Messina; where our Company
increasing, we hired a Feluck for Naples. But as we were coasting by the Shore
to the Port of Naples, so terrible a Tempest surpised us near to Paolo, that
we were forced to put in there upon Palm Sunday. The next day we went to see
the Covent of St. Francis of Paolo; the way to it lying between a high Mountain
on the right, and a Precipice on the left hand. This Mountain leans so, that it
seems to be tumbling down; and there is a good height upon the Rock the seeming
print of a Hand, which as the report goes, was the print of St. Francis's Hand,
who sustained it a whole day, and kept it from falling. From Paolo we went to
Naples, were we arrived upon Easter-eve; and as we entered into the City, the
great Guns went off round the City, in honor of the Resurrection. At Rome we
all separated, according as our Business led us.

CHAP. VI. Another Road from Constantinople to Ispahan, by the Euxin or Black
Sea; with some Remarks upon the principal Cities thereabouts.
THere are three Roads yet remaining, leading out of Europe into Persia or the
Indies. That of Constantinople, all along the Coasts of the Black Sea; that of
Warsovia, crossing the same Sea at Trebisond; and that of Mosco, down the
Volga, which has been amply described by Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy of
the Duke of Holstein. In this and the next Chapter I shall describe the Way
from Constantinople, all along the Black Sea, and that from Warsovia; not
knowing any person that has hitherto mentioned any thing upon this subject. And
first of all I will give a short Description of the principal Places that lie
upon that Sea, as well upon the side of Europe as of Asia, with the just
distances of one Place from another.

The principal Cities upon the Black Sea, on the Coast of Europe.

From Constantinople to Varna they count it two hundred Miles, four of which
make an Alman League; miles 200

From Varna to Balshinke, miles 36

From Belshinke to Bengali, miles 70

From Bengali to Constance, miles 60

From Constance to Queli, miles 25

Near to this City of Queli the great Arm of Danow throws it self into the
Black Sea. Here is the grand Fishery for Sturgeon.

From Queli to Aquerman, miles 50

The City of Aquerman belongs to a Kan of the lesser Tartary; but it is not the
place of his residence, for he keeps his Court at Basha-Serrail, twenty-five
miles up in the Land.

From Aquerman to Kefet or Kaffa, miles 350

This is a great City, and a place of great Trade, wherein there are above a
thousand Families of the Armenians, and about five hundred Greeks. They have
every one their Bishop, and several Churches. St. Peter's is the biggest, very
large and very beautiful; but it falls to decay, because the Christians have
not Wealth enough to repair it. Every Christian above fifteen years of age,
pays a Piaster and a half tribute to the Grand Signor, who is Lord of the City;
and he sends a Bashae that lives in the ancient City called Frink-Hessar.
However the Kan of the Lesser Tartary extends his Jurisdiction as far as the
Gates of Kaffa.

From Kaffa to Assaque, miles 70

Assaque is the last City in Europe, belonging also to the Grand Signor. By it
runs a great River of the same name, the other side being in the Territories of
the Duke of Muscovy. Down this River come the Cossacks that do so much mischief
to the Turks. For sometimes they come with threescore or fourscore Gelia's
which are a kind of Brigantines, the bigger sort of which carry a hundred and
fifty men, the less a hundred. Sometimes they divide themselves into two parts,
one of which makes Havoc toward Constantinople, the other Ravages the Coast of
Asia, as far as Trebizond.

The Coast of Europe bord'ring upon the Black Sea is 861 miles in length.

The chief Cities upon the Black Sea on the Coast of Asia, which is 1170 miles
in length.

From Constantinople to Neapoli, miles 250

In this City are made the greatest part of the Galleys and Vessels that belong
to the Grand Signor.

From Neapoli to Sinabe, miles 250

From Sinabe to Ouma, miles 240

From Ouma to Kerason, miles 150

From Kerason to Trebisond, miles 80

From Trebisond to Rise, miles 100

From Rise to Guni, miles 100

The City of Guni belongs half to the Grand Signor, and half to the King of
Mengrelia, with whom he keeps a good Correspondence, because the greatest part
of the Steel and Iron that is spent in Turkey comes out of Mengrelia through
the Black Sea.

The only good Ports upon the Black Sea from Constantinople to Mengrelia, are,

Quitros, Sinabe, or Sinope, Onnye, Samsom, Trebisond, Gomme.

The Haven of Quitros is very deep, and the Vessels lie sheltered from the
winds, but the entrance into it is very bad, which only the Pilots of the
place, or they who have often accustomed themselves to that Trade can only find
out. It seems that anciently there had been most stately Buildings round about
the Port; and several noble Pillars are to be seen all along the shore, not to
speak of those which have been Transported to Constantinople. Near the City
toward the South stands a high Mountain, whence there flows good store of
excellent Water, which at the bottom gathers into one Fountain.

To go from Constantinople for Persia by Sea, you must embark at Constantinople
for Trebisond, and many times for Rise or Guni, which are more to the North.
They that Land at Trebisond go directly to Erzerom, which is not above five
days Journey off, and from Erzerom to Erivan or Tunis. But there are few that
will venture upon this Sea where there is no good Anchorage; besides that it is
subject to prodigious Tempests, from which there are very few good Ports to
defend them; which is the reason it is called Cara-denguis, or the Black Sea:
The Eastern people giving to all things, mischievous and dangerous, the Epithet
of Black.

They that are Bound for Rise or Guni, go to Testis the Capital City of
Giorgia, and thence to Erivan, for though the way be bad, yet it is far better
and smoother than the Road to Tauris.

The principal places from Teflis to Erivan are these, together with their
respective distances.

From Teflis to Soganlouk, leagues 3

From Soganlouk to Senouk-kupri, leagues 7

From Senouk-kupri to Guilkac, leagues 7

From Guilkac to Daksou, leagues 6

From Dakson to Achikent, leagues 6

From Achikent to Dillou, leagues 6

From Dillou to Yazegi, leagues 6

From Yazegi to Bicheni, leagues 4

From Bicheni to Erivan, leagues 2

From Erivan you keep the ordinary Road to Tauris.

CHAP. VII. The Road from Warsow to Ispahan, over the Black Sea, and from
Ispahan to Mosco; with the Names of the principal Cities and Islands of Turkey
according to the vulgar pronunciation, and as they are called in the Language
of the Turks.
FRom Warsow upon the left hand of the Vistula, the ordinary residence of the
Kings of Poland, to Lublin, days 6

From Lublin to Iluove, days 5

There all the Bales are opened, and the Customers take Five in the Hundred for
their Merchandise.

From Iluove to Jaslovieer, days 12

This is the last City of Poland toward Moldavia, where if you sell any
quantity of Goods, you must pay Five per Cent.

From Jaslovieer to Yashe, days 8

This is the Capital City of Moldavia, and is the Residence of the Vaywood
which the Grand Signor sends to govern in the Country. There they open all the
Bales, and there is a Roll of what every Merchant ought to pay, which may
amounts to Five per Cent.

From Yashe to Ourshaye, days 3

This is the last City of Moldavia, where there is no Custom to be paid.

From Ourshaye to Akerman, days 4

Here they never open the Bales, but they take Four in the Hundred.

From Akerman to Ozou, days 3

Here they never open the Bales, but the Custom amounts to Two per Cent.

From Ozou to Precop, days 5

Neither do they here open the Bales, but trust to the Merchant's word, and the
Customs amount to Two and a half per Cent.

From Precop to Kaffa, days 5

Nor are the Bales opened here, but the Custom comes to Three per Cent.

Thus from Warsow to Kaffa the Journey takes up one and fifty days, in the
Wagon, which is the manner of Carriage in those Countries. All the Customs
amount to Eighteen and a half per Cent. to which you must add the Carriage, and
Passage by Sea to Trebizond; where you pay three Piasters for every Mules-load,
and four for every Camels-load.

Observe by the way, that the Armenians do not usually take shipping at
Trebizond, but go to another Port more to the West, upon the same Coast, where
they never pay above a Piaster and a half for a Camels-load. This Port, called
Onnie, is a very good Haven; and there is another a little farther off, called
Samson, which is no bad one, but the Air is unwholsom and dangerous.

There is also another Road from Warsow to Trebizond, shorter by three days
journey.

From Warsow to Yashe, according to the Road already set down, days 31

From Yashe to Galas, days 8

All Merchandise is Taxed at this place, and the Duties are taken at Galas,
according to the Note which the Merchant brings from Galas. Galas is a City of
Moldavia.

From Galas to Megin, days 1

The Bales are not opened here, but the Merchant pays three and a half, or four
per Cent.

From Megin to Mangalia, days 8

This is one of the four Ports to the West upon the Black Sea, and the best of
all.

The three others toward the South upon the Coast are Kavarna, Balgik, and
Varna. At Mangalia they demand but half a Piaster for every Bale. Crossing from
thence to Trebisond you have five days Journey to Erzerom.

Now to the Road of Muscovy; which having been exactly described by Olearius,
going into Persia, I will describe it returning out of Persia.

Having led the Reader to Shamaqui, I will return home from thence.

From Shamaqui to Derbent, days 7

Derbent, which the Turks call Demir-Capi, is the last City within the
Jurisdiction of the Persians; by which there runs a River which is called
Shamourka.

From Derbent to Tetarck, days 8

By this Town runs a River which is called Bocan.

From Tetark to Astracan they hire small Barks with a dozen Oars. All along the
shore the Osiers grow so very thick, that they afford shelter for the Barks in
fowl weather. If the Wind serve they will put up a little Sail and be at
Astracan in four or five hours; but if they only Row, they cannot be there in
nine.

When you Embark upon the Caspian Sea, where you only creep along by the shore,
you must provide your self with Water for the three first days, in regard the
Water is bitter and ill tasted all along the Coast all that while; but for the
rest of the Voyage it is very good. If you carry heavy Goods, you may hire
large Boats to save charges.

When you come to Astracan you unlade your Goods; at what time the Officer
comes, and sealing up every Bale, causes them to be sent to the Merchants
lodging. Three days after the Customer comes to open the Bales, and takes five
per Cent. If the Merchant hap'n to want money, and takes it up at Astracan to
pay again at Moscow, he pays sometimes thirty per Cent, according to the rate
of Gold Ducats.

If a Merchant have any Diamonds or any other Jewels, and let it be known, he
pays five per Cent. But if a Merchant have any Jewels or any other rarities,
and tells the Governor that he intends to carry them to the Grand Duke; the
Governor sends a Convoy with him either by Land or Water, that costs him
nothing; and moreover sends a Courrier before to the Court to give notice of
his coming. There is very good Wine at Astracan, but better at Shamaqui, where
I advise the Traveller to provide himself.

From Astracan to Moscow you take Shipping in great Barques that make use both
of Oars and Sails rowing against the Tide, and weigh what ever you put aboard,
to a very Coverlet. Generally you pay for every pound fourteen Caya, or three
Abassi's and a half, and an Abassi makes eighteen Sous and three Deniers.

In Muscovy they reck'n the way neither by leagues nor miles, but by Shagerons,
five of which make an Italian mile.

From Astracan to Courmija, Shagerons 300

From Courmija to Sariza, sha. 200

From Sariza to Sarataf, sha. 350

From Sarataf to Samarat, sha. 200

From Samarat to Semiriskat, sha. 300

From Semiriskat to Coulombe, sha. 150

From Coulombe to Casan, sha. 200

This is a great City with a stout Fortress.

From Casan to Sabouk-sha, sha. 200

From Sabouk-sha to Godamijan, sha. 120

From Godamijan to Niguina, sha. 280

Niguina is a large and well Fortified Castle.

From Niguina to Mouron, sha. 300

From Mouron to Casin, sha. 100

From Casin to Moscow, sha. 250

So that from Astracan to Moscow they count it sha. which makes 590 Italian
miles. 2950

At Sarataf you may go ashore, and so by Land to Moscow. When the Snow is gone
you travel in Wagons, but when the Snow lies, in Sledges. If a man be alone,
and that his Goods weigh not above two hundred pounds Paris weight, they put
them into two Bales; and laying them upon the Horses back set the man in the
middle, paying for Carriage as much as from Astracan to Moscow.

From Sarataf by Land to Inserat, days 10

From Inserat to Tymnek, days 6

From Tymnek to Canquerma, days 8

From Canquerma to Volodimer, days 6

Volodimer is a City bigger than Constantinople, where stands a fair Church
upon a Mountain in the City, having been formerly the residence of the
Emperors themselves.

From Volodimer to Moscow, days 5

In all, days 35

Observe by the way that they never go ashore at Serataf but in case of
necessity, when the River begins to be Frozen. For from Serataf to Inserat is a
Journey of ten days, in all which time there is nothing to be had, either for
Horse or Man. The Custom is the same at Moscow as at Astracan, that is Five per
Cent. All the Asiaticks, Turks, Persians, Armenians, and others, lodge in a
sort of Inns: but the Europeans lie in a place by themselves altogether.

The Names of some Cities and places belonging to the Empire of the Grand
Signor, as they are vulgarly called, and in Turkish.

COnstantinople after it was taken by Mahomet the second, the twenty-seventh of
May, 1453. was called by the Turks Istam-Bol; Istam signifying Security, and
Bol, Spacious, large, or great, as much as to say, Great Security.

Vulgar. Turkish. Adrianople, Edrene. Burse, Brousa. Belgrade, Beligrade. Buda,
Boudim. Grand Caire, Mesr. Alexandretta in Egypt, Iskendrie. Mecca, Meqquie.
Balsara, Basra. Babylon, Bagdat. Nineveh, Moussoul. Nisibis, Nisbin. Edessa,
Ourfa. Tiqueranger, Diarbequir. Eva-togea, Tokat. Teve Toupolis, Erzerom.
Shamiramager, Van. Jerusalem, Koutsheriff. Damas, Came. Tripoli in Syria, Came
Taraboulous. Aleppo, Haleb. Tripoli in Barbary, Taraboulous. Tunis, Tunis.
Algier, Gezaiir. Candy, Guirir. Rhodes, Rodes. Cyprus, Kebres. Chio, Sakes.
Methelin, Medilli. Smyrna, Izmir. Troy, Eski Istamboul. Lemnos, Limio. Tenedos,
Bogge-adasi. Negropont, Eghirbos. The Dardanels, Bogaz-ki. Athens, Atina.
Barut, Biroult. Seyde, Saida. Tire, Sour. St. John of Dacres, Acra. Antioch,
Antexia. Trebizond, Tarabozan. Sinopus, Sinap.

In the Fortress of Sinopus, at the lower part of the Wall there is a Stone to
be seen, where there is an Inscription in Latin abbreviated, with the word Rome
in it; whence some conjecture may be made that the Romans built it.

The Mediterranean Sea, Akdeniis. The Ocean, Derijay Mouhiit. The Black Sea,
Kara-Deniis.

CHAP. VIII. Remarks upon the Trade of the Island of Candy and the principal
Isles of the Archipelago, as also upon some of the Cities of Greece adjoining;
with a particular Relation of the present Condition of the Grand Signor's
Galleys, belonging as well to the Isles as to the Continent.
Of the ISLAND of CANDY.
OUT of the Island of Candy Strangers export great store of Wheat and
Sallet-Oyl, all sorts of Pulse, Cheese, yellow Wax, Cottons, Silks, but more
especially Malmsey, wherein consists its chiefest Trade. When Vintage draws
near, the Country People that are to gather the Grapes wrap their Feet in a
piece of a Boar's Skin, which they tie together upon the upper part of the Foot
with a piece of Pack-thred, to preserve their Feet from the violent heat of the
Rocks upon which they are to tread. Those Skins are brought out of Russia by
the Russes, that bring Botargo and Caviare to Constantinople, where they have a
vast vent for it all over Turkey, Persia, and Ethiopia; where they that follow
the Greek and Armenian Church, eat little or nothing else all the Lent. By the
way take notice, that the Turks make a certain Glue out of Sturgeon, which is
the best in the World, so that whatever is fastened with it, will rather break
in another place than where it is glew'd. They make it thus: When they have
caught a Sturgeon, they pull out his Guts, and then there remains a Skin that
covers the Flesh; this Skin they take off from the head to the belly. It is
very clammy, and about the thickness of two Sheets of Paper, which they roll as
thick as a Man's Arm, and let it dry in the Sun. When they use it, they beat it
with a Mallet, and when it is well beat'n they break it into pieces, and steep
it in Water for half an hour in a little Pot.

When the Venetians were Masters of Candy, they that had committed any Crime
which deserved Death, if they could get out of the Island before they were
apprehended, went directly to Constantinopole, to beg their pardon. For you
must know, that no person but the Ambassador of the Commonwealth of Venice had
the Privilege to pardon Crimes committed in Candy. For example, when Signor
Dervisano was Ambassador for the Commonwealth of Venice at Constantinople, a
Candiot having a desire to lie with a Woman by force, she told him she would
sooner eat her Child's Liver than yield to his Lust. Whereupon, the Villain
enraged he could not compass his design, took his opportunity, killed the
Child, cut out the Liver, and made the Mother eat it, and then slew the Mother
also. Upon this he fled to Constantinople, to beg pardon of the Ambassador, and
obtained it there: But the Ambassador at the same time wrote word to the
Governor of Candy to put him to death at his return; having only granted him
his Pardon, to preserve his Privilege. And indeed, to speak truth, the
Candiots are the most wretched people under Heaven.

Of the ISLAND of CHIO.
THE City of Chio, which gives the Island its Name, contains about thirty
thousand Inhabitants; where there are little less than fifteen thousand Greeks,
eight thousand Latins, and six thousand Turks.

Among the several Greek and Latin Churches, the last of which has continued
ever since the time that the Genoeses possessed the Island, there are some
indifferent handsome Structures. The five principal Latin Churches are the
Cathedral, and the Churches belonging to the Escolantines, the Dominicans, the
Jesuits, and the Capuchins. The Turks have also their Mosquees, and the Jews
their Synagogue.

Four Miles from the City, near to the Seaside is to be seen a vast Stone,
which was cut out of some Rock; it is almost all round, only the upper part,
which is flat, and somewhat hollow; round about the upper part, and in the
middle, are places like Seats, cut into the same Stone; of which there is one
higher than the rest, like a School-master's Chair; and Tradition reports that
this was Homer's School, where he taught his Scholars.

In this Island there is such an infinite number of Partridges, that the like
is not to be found in any part of the World. But that which is a greater Rarity
is this, that the Natives breed them up, as we do our Poultry, but after a more
pleasant manners, for they let them go in the fields all the day long, and at
night every Countryman calls his own severally home to Roost by a particular
Note, whither they return like a Flock of so many Geese.

There are great quantities of Damasks and Fustians wrought in the Island of
Chio, which are transported to Grand- Cairo, and to all the Cities upon the
Coast of Barbary, Natolia, and particularly to Constantinople.

Three Leagues from the Island of Chio, upon a Mountain to the South there
grows a peculiar sort of Trees; the Leaves are somewhat like a Myrtle, their
Branches so long that they creep upon the ground; but which is more wonderful,
that when they are down, they rise again of themselves. From the beginning of
May to the end of June, the Inhabitants take great care to keep the Earth under
the Tree very clean; for during those two Months there issues out a certain Gum
from the joints of the Branches, which drops upon the ground; this is that
which we call Mastick, and the Turks, Sakes, according to the Name which they
give the Island. The Island produces great store of this Mastick, which is
spent in the Seraglio of Constantinople, where the Women continually chew it,
to cleanse and keep their Teeth white. When the Mastick Season draws near, the
Grand Signor every year sends a certain number of Bestangi's to take care that
it be not exported, but be preserved for the use of the Seraglio. If it be a
plentiful year for Mastick the Bestangi's that cull out the lesser sort to
sell, put it into little Bags and seal it up; which Bags being so sealed, are
never questioned by the Custom-house Officers. The Island also yields very good
Turpentine.

Of the ISLAND of NAXIS.
THere is not one Port belongs to this Island; the Vessels that are Bound
thither for Trade, being forced to stay in the Haven of the Isle of Paros,
called Derion six miles from Naxis, which is one of the best Havens in the
Archipelago, able to contain a thousand Ships. There are the ruins of a Wall
still to be seen that made a Mole, where four or five Galleys might ride. There
are also the ruins of several Houses of the ancient Dukes, the Stables
standing almost whole, all Arched, and built of Marble. These Dukes were also
Lords of twelve other Islands. As for the Island it self, it is well stored
with Villages, and has three good Cities, Barequa, Qusa, and Falet.

Near this Island within a stones throw, there is a curious piece of Antiquity
still to be seen. It is a flat Rock, as big about in compass as the ancient
Court of the Louvre. In the middle of this Rock it was that the Temple of
Bacchus was built all of Marble, of which there is nothing but the Foundations
that remain. The Gate is still standing made of three Stones, whereof two make
the sides, and the third lies across. From the Isle to this Rock there is a
fair Stone Bridge of Freestone, upon each side whereof are to be seen the Pipes
that conveyed the Wine into the Temple, that was drank at the Feast of Bacchus.
Naxis also is the Island that produces the best Emeril.

As to the Inhabitants themselves, if the Husband or Wife happens to dye, the
Survivor never stirs out of the House in six Months after, upon any business
how urgent soever, no not to hear Mass. There are both Latins and Greeks in the
Island, but the latter are the most numerous. There is a Latin Archbishop, and
Canons belonging to the Metropolitan Church, with two Religious Houses, one of
Capuchins, and the other of Jesuits: The Greeks also have their Archbishop.

The Island of Naxis is sixscore miles in compass, being one of the fairest and
pleasantest Islands in the Archipelago. The ancient Dukes made it their
residence, whence they command the greatest part of the Cyclades. There is
great plenty of White Salt made in Naxis, and it produces excellent Wine both
White and Claret, which caused the Inhabitants to build a Temple to Bacchus,
who according to their ancient Tradition chose that Island for his Habitation.
The Island produces excellent Fruits, feeds great store of Cattle, and abounds
in several other things necessary for human support. There are also in it large
Woods full of small Deer, and frequented by a great number of Eagles and
Vultures.

Here follow the names of the Cyclades, as the people of the Country pronounce
them.

1. Deloa or Sdilis. 2. Giaroa. 3. Andros. 4. Paros. 5. Nicaria. 6. Samoa. 7.
Pathmoa. 8. Olearoa. 9. Sitino. 10. Rhena. 11. Miconoa. 12. Tenoa or Tino. 13.
Sciroa or Sira. 14. Subiuma. 15. Syphnus or Sifante. 16. Nixcia. 17. Chios or
Scio. 18. Astypalea. 19. Amorgus or Amorgo.
Of the Islands of Zea, of Milo, of Paros, and other Islands of the Archipelago.
ZEA is an Island wherein there is nothing remarkable, and from whence there is
nothing to be Exported but Valanede, to dye Leather withal. Neither are there
any Goods Imported into it but what the Pirates bring in, which are very few,
in regard the Islanders are careful to provide themselves otherwhere.

Milo affords nothing but Millstones to grind Wheat, which are carried to
Constantinople.

Paros where there is no Trade neither, has nothing remarkable in it but one
Greek Church, very well built all of Marble, called Our Lady's Church.

As for the Islands of Sifante and Miconoa, in regard there is nothing of Trade
in either but only with the Pirates, who sometimes touch there, if there be any
Consuls that live there, it is only to buy their stolen Goods.

Of the City of Athens, Corinth, Patras, Coron, and Modon.
THE City of Athens is about four miles distant from the Sea, and contains two
and twenty thousand Inhabitants, twenty five thousand Greeks, five or six
thousand Latins, and a thousand Turks. Among all the Antiquities that yet
remain, those in the Castle are the best preserved. The Castle stands upon a
Hill, upon the North descent whereof some part of the City stands. It encloses
a very fair and spacious Temple, built all of white Marble from the top to the
bottom, supported by stately Pillars of black Marble and Porphiry. In the front
are great Figures of Armed Knights ready to encounter one another. Round about
the Temple, except upon the Roof, which is all of flat Marble Stones well
ordered, are to be seen all the famous Acts of the Greeks in small carving,
every Figure being about two foot and a half high. Round about the Temple runs
a fair Gallery, where four persons may walk a-brest. It is supported by sixteen
Pillars of white Marble upon each of the sides, and by six at each end, being
also paved and covered with the same Stone. Close to the Temple stands a fair
Palace of white Marble, which now falls to decay. Below the Castle, and at the
point of the City toward the East, stand seventeen Pillars, the remainder of
three hundred, where anciently, they say, stood the Palace of Theseus first
King of the Athenians. These Pillars are of a prodigious bigness, every one
eighteen foot about. They are proportionable in height, but not all of a piece,
being thwarted most of them by Stones of white Marble, one end whereof rests
upon one Pillar, and the other upon that which follows it; which was the
support of the whole building. Upon the Gate, which is yet entire, are to be
seen these words upon the front without. (...).

The City of Athens was assuredly the City of Theseus.



Within-side of the same City these other words are Engraved. (...).

The City of Athens is the City of Adrian, and not of Theseus.



There are in Athens several other pieces of Antiquity which are well worthy to
be seen.

Corinth, which formerly made such a noise in the world, is now a Village of
some five or six and twenty houses, but all of them the Habitations of rich
Greeks. The Town lies at the foot of the Castle, which is seated upon an
inaccessible Rock guarded by the Greeks, commanded by an Aga. Corinth Exports
great quantities of Currants.

Patras does the same, which is all the Trade of those two places.

Coron and Modon drive a Trade in Sallet-Oyl, which is so good and so
plentiful, that several English, Dutch, and other Ships are load'n away with it
from thence every year.

There are Consuls in Athens, Patras, Coron, Modon, and Napoli of Romania.

The Athenian Merchants buy up Tissues, Velvets, Satins, and Cloth, with which
they serve other Countries adjoining. The Commodities which Foreigners export
from thence, are, Silks, Wool, Sponges, Wax, Cordivan-Leather, and Cheese.
Which is all that can be said in few words, of the Trade of all these Places.

A Particular Relation of the Galleys belonging to the Grand Signor, as well at
Constantinople, as in the Isles and other Parts of the Empire.
FOrmerly there lay in the Road of Constantinople above a hundred and fifty
Galleys: But the Grand Vizier perceiving that so great a number did but cause
confusion, and that the Captain- Basha could not conveniently take so great a
burden as to look after such a number, he gave order that no more than
twenty-four should lie in the Port of Constantinople; sending the rest to other
Ports, as well of the Continent, as the Islands.

At present the Number of the Grand Signor's Galleys is fourscore, thus
distributed under the Command of their several Beys or Captains.

At Constantinople, twenty-four under the Command of the Captain- Basha, or
Admiral of the Sea; who when he goes out upon any Expedition, sends to the rest
to meet him according to Orders. When he goes in person to Sea, he gives to
every one of his Slaves, besides their ordinary Habit a kind of Cassock of Red
Cloth, and a Bonnet of the same color. But this is only in the Admiral's
Gally, and at his own Cost. His Gally carries usually 366 Slaves, and to every
Seat of the Rowers, a Bonne Vole. These Bonne Voles are certain Volunteers that
freely offer themselves to the Service of the Admiral, and there is great care
taken for their being well paid. Their Pay is 3500 Aspers for their Voyage,
which generally continues seven or eight Months. They feed as the other Slaves;
but if they Row negligently or lazily, they are beaten worse than the Slaves;
for the Volunteers have nothing to do except it be to Row: But the Slaves are
put to several other Duties. Take notice also that the Volunteers that serve in
the General's Gally, have 500 Aspers more than those in the other Galleys, that
is to say, 4000 Aspers for their Voyage, which comes to 40 Crowns.

The Reer-Admiral carries Two hundred and fifty men, as well Slaves as
Volunteers. That Galley and the great Tefterdar's or Treasurers, are the best
provided of any in the whole Fleet: For the Reer-Admiral Basha has his choice
to take four of the best men out of every Galley for his own, or else to
receive 3500 Aspers for every man, which is paid by the Captain of the Galley;
which makes him the richest of all the Beys.

The great Tefterdar's Galley is one of the Twenty four Galleys of
Constantinople, and he sends a particular Treasurer, in the quality of a
Lientenant, to command her. That Command is very much contested for, in regard
that Galley is very well provided with all things; and for that all the
Captains Court the Tefterdar, who, when the Galleys return to Port, rewards
them according to their Merit.

The Janizary-Aga's Galley is of the same number; but he never goes to Sea,
always sending one in his room.

The Bey of Rhodes, that takes upon him the Title of Basha, has eight Galleys.

The Bey of Stancho, an Island about an hundred Miles from Rhodes, Lieutenant
to the Bey of Rhodes, has one Galley.

The Bey of Sussam, a small Island near Scio, has one Galley, and his
Lieutenant another. These Galleys are generally appointed to watch the Maltesi,
and Ligorn.

The Bey of Scio formerly had but three; but since the War with Candy, he has
had six.

The Lieutenant of the Bey of Soio has two Galleys. There be also three other
Beys in the Island of Scio, who have no dependence upon the Basha of Scio, but
buy their Provisions where they can find it best cheap.

The Bey of Smyrna and his Lieutenant have two Galleys; but they can do nothing
without the Orders of the Bey of Scio.

The Bey of Metelin has two Galleys.

The Bey Cavale, a small Bay, twelve Miles on this side the Dardanells, upon
the Coast of Europe, has one.

The Bey of Nestrepont, seven.

The Bey of Napoli in Romania, five.

The Bey of Coron, one.

The Bey of Modon, one.

The Bey of Famagosta, six.

The Bey of Alexandria in Egypt, five.

The Bey of Canee, two Galleys.

The Bey of Candia, one.

The Bey of Castel-Tourneze or Navarin, two Galleys.

All these Galleys make up the number of Fourscore.

The light Galleys carry not above 196 men; the four men that are wanting of
two hundred, being the Bey's profit.

Every Captain is allowed thirteen thousand Piasters for his Provision; and
every Christmas he gives to every Slave a pair of Breeches, and a Cassock of
course Cloth, with a scantie kind of a Cloak.

Every Slave has every day a pound and a half of good Bread, and nothing else.
But upon Friday, which is the Mahumetans Snnday, they have hot Pease, or Beans,
or Lentils boiled in Butter. They receive also sometimes the Alms of the
Greeks, when they lie in any Port. But at Constantinople they fare somewhat
better; for twice a week, as well the Turks, as the Greeks and others, come to
the Bains, and be stow their Charity of Rice and other good Victuals. The Bains
is the name of the place where the Seamen are kept when they are not at Sea.

Sometimes when they are to go to Sea, they will counterfeit themselves sick or
lame; but they are so narrowly observed, that it serves them to no other
purpose than to procure to themselves the more Blows.

CHAP. IX. a Relation of the present State of Georgia.
GEORGIA, which others call Gurgie, or Gurgistan, extends Eastward to the
Caspian Sea; and upon the West is bounded by Mountains that part it from
Mengrelia. Formerly it was a Kingdom, all the Inhabitants whereof were
Christians, of the Armenian, and of the Greek Church; but of late the
Mahometans have got footing among them. And the King of Persia having filled
them full of Divisions, has made two Kingdoms of it, which he calls Provinces;
over which he has placed two Governors. They are generally Princes of the
Country, who must turn Mahometans before they can be admitted to that Dignity.
When they are advanced, they take upon them the title of Kings; and while they
have any Issue, the King of Persia cannot dispossess their Children.

The most Potent of these two Kings, is he that resides at Testis, who in the
Language of the Country is called the King of Cartele. The present King is the
last that has continued a Christian, with his four Sons; the Eldest of which,
the King of Persia having enticed to Court, partly by Promises, and partly by
Presents, has won to Mahumetism. Immediately thereupon, he caused him to be
declared King of the other Province.

These two Kings have each of them a Guard of Mahumetan-Horsemen under their
own pay; and at present I believe there are in both Kingdoms near upon 12000
Mahumetan Families.

The King of Testis coyns Money in the King of Persia's Name; and the Silver
which he coyns, is in Spanish Reals, French Crowns, and such other Money, which
the Armenians bring out of Europe for their Goods. As to the Justice of the
Country, neither the King himself, nor the Mahometans have any thing to do
with it. A thief is acquitted, paying sevenfold what he has stole; two parts
whereof go to the Party robbed, one part to the Judges, and four parts to the
King. If the Thief has not wherewithal to make restitution, he is sold: If the
Product do not yet equal the Sum, if he have a Wife and Children, they first
sell the Wife, and if that will not do, then they sell the Children: But if the
Party robbed be so merciful, as to forgive the Thief his share, then neither
the King nor the Judges can demand any thing for their share. If a man commit a
Murder, they condemn him to die, and deliver him up into the hands of the
Kindred of the Party slain, to do Execution as they please themselves. However,
it is in their power to pardon him, if he be able to give sixty Cows or more to
the next akin to the Party killed. In matter of Debt, a Creditor has power to
seize upon all the Estate of the Debtor; and if that will not satisfy, he may
sell his Wife and Children.

The Christians of Georgia are very ignorant, especially in Matters of
Religion. They learn that little they know, in the Monasteries, as also to
write and read; and generally the Women and Maids are more knowing than the
Men; not only because there are more Religious Houses for Women than for Men,
but also because the Boys are bred up to labor, or sent to the Wars. For if a
Virgin grows up, and happens to be handsome, some one or other presently
endeavors to steal her, on purpose to sell her into Turkey, Persia, or the
Territories of the great Mogul. So that to prevent their being stolen, their
Fathers and Mothers put them very young into Nunneries, where they apply
themselves to study; wherein, if they attain to any proficiency, they usually
stay as long as they live: After that, they profess, and when they come to a
certain Age, they are permitted to Baptize, and to apply the holy Oils, as
well as any Bishop or Archbishop can do.

The Georgians are very great Drinkers; and Nature has fitted them a Country
that produces good store of Wine. They love the strongest Drinks best; for
which reason, at their Feasts both men and women drink more Aquavitae than
Wine. The women never eat in public with their Husbands; but when the man has
invited his Friends, the next day the Woman invites her She-companions. And it
is observable that at the Women's Festivals there is more Wine and Aquavitae
drank than at the men's. The Guest is no sooner entered into the Dining Room,
but he is presented with 2 or 3 Dishes of Sweetmeats, and a Glass of half a
pint of Aquavitae to excite his Appetite. They are great Feeders upon Onions
and Herbs, which they eat raw out of the Garden. The Georgians are also great
Travelers, and very much addicted to Trade; they are very dext'rous in
shooting with Bow and Arrows, and are accounted the best Soldiers in all Asia.
They compose a great part of the King of Persia's Cavalry, who keeps them in
his Court at peculiar pay, and relies very much upon their fidelity and
courage. There are several also in the Service of the Great Mogul. The Men are
very well complexion'd. and very well shaped; and for the Women, they are
accounted the fairest and most beautiful of all Asia; and therefore out of this
Country it is that the King of Persia chooses all his Wives, being not
permitted to marry a Stranger. Teflis, where the Women have more liberty than
in any part of Asia, is the Capital City of Georgia, well situated, large and
well built, where there likewise is a great Trade in Silk.

CHAP. X. A RELATION of the present State of Mengrelia.
MEngrelia extends from a Chain of Mountains, that separates it from Georgia to
the Black-Sea, and is now divided into three Provinces (every one of which has
their King. The first is called the Province of Imarete, or Bassa-Shiouk, the
king whereof pretends to a superiority over both the other, which is the reason
they are often at War, and that with so much cruelty, that when they have taken
any Prisoners of either side, they fell them into Turkey. They are so
accustomed to sell one another in this Country, that if a man or his wife have
any occasion for money, they will go and sell one of their Children, and many
times they will exchange a Child for Ribands or other Toys at the Mercers
Shops.

The second Province is that of Mengrelia, and the King of this Province is
called the King of Dadian.

The third is the Province of Guriel, the King of which Province is called the
King of Guriel.

The Province of Mengrelia was formerly subject to the King of Bassa-Shiouk,
who sent thither a Governor, which is called in their language Dadian.

One of those Governors being a person of wit and courage, gained so far upon
the affection of the People, that they chose him for their King.

The chief of the Province of Guriel, seeing how the Dadian had obtained the
Kingdom, following the Example of Mengrelia, shook off the Yoke of the King of
Bassa-Shiouk, and chose another King among themselves, who keeps his
Sovereignty to this day, by the support of the Grand Signor. For when the
Dadian rebelled he entered into an Alliance with the Grand Signor, and obliged
himself to furnish him every year with such a certain quantity of Iron, upon
condition that if the King of Bassa-Shiouk should war upon him, he should
furnish him with twenty thousand Horse. Of which the Turk was very glad,
finding thereby the Country of Mengrelia divided, which being united, was able
at any time to have disturbed him with an Army of fifty thousand Men.

The King of Bassa-Shiouk coins money of the same bigness and weight with that
of the King of Persia. But in regard it is not so fine metal as that of the
King of Persia, he would have much a do to make it pass in the trade between
his Subjects and the Persians, which is very great, had he not found an
expedient by putting the King of Persia's name upon the Coin as well as his
own, which makes it pass without any difficulty. He would also put the Grand
Signor's Name upon his Coin, but that the Turk coins none but small money, or
Aspers, excepting only some Ducatts which he coins at Cairo. The King of
Bassa-Shiouk, as well as the King of Teflis coins all sort of foreign money.

These three Kings of Bassa-Shiouk, Mengrelia and Guriel, are Christians also.
And when they go to war, all the Ecclesiastical Persons attend them;
Archbishops and Bishops, Priests and Monks: not so much to fight as to
encourage the Soldiers.

Being at Constantinople the first time I traveled into Persia I saw there an
Ambassador from the King of Mengrelia, whose behavior gave all the Franks
occasion of laughter. The Present which he made the Grand-Signor was in Iron
and Steel, and a great number of Slaves. The first time of his Audience, he had
a train of above 200 Persons. But every day he sold two or three to defray his
expenses; So that at his departure, he had none but his Secretary and two
Vassals more left. He was a man of presence but no wit: and every time he went
to visit the Grand-Visier, he presumed to wear the white Bonnet which all the
Franks wondered at; when they saw that the Grand Vizier winked at it. For
should any other Christian have done so, he had been most certainly put to
death, or constrained to turn Mahumetan. By which it was apparent how much the
Grand Signor valued the Friendship of the King of Mengrelia, and how careful he
is of offending those that are sent from his Court. He knew those People suffer
no affronts, but upon the least word presently draw; besides that there is
nothing to be got by provoking them.

This Ambassador going once upon a visit into the Country, returning home was
surpised with a Storm, whereupon he pulled off his Boots and carried them
under his Coat, choosing rather to go bare - foot to his lodging, then to spoil
his Boots.

Another time, it being the custom of all Catholic Ambassadors to go to Mass
to the Covent of Gray Friars in Pera, upon St. Francis's day, the Mengrelian
Ambassador after Mass was done, coming out of the Church, and seeing several
baubles which the Pedlers expose in the Cloister upon that day, bought a Tin
Ring, two or three small Looking-Glasses, and a Pipe, which he put in his
mouth, and went piping all the way in the Street, as Children do coming from
Fairs.

But to return to the matter, you must take notice that there are not only Iron
Mines, but also Mines of Gold and Silver in two places five or six days Journey
from Teflis, the one called Soiianet, the other Obetet. But the mischief is,
the people can hardly be got to work there, for fear the Earth should tumble
down, and bury them in the Mine, as it has many times happened.

There is also a Mine of Gold near to a place which is called Hardanoushe, and
a Mine of Silver at Gunishe-Kone, five days Journey from Erzerom, and as many
from Trebisond.

As for the people themselves both Georgians and Mengrelians, they never
trouble themselves about the jgnorance and viciousnes of their Priests, or
whether they be able to instruct them or no. The richest among them are they
which are in most credit, and absolutely give Laws to the poor. There are also
some heads of the Church, that assume such a jurisdiction over the people, as
to sell them both to the Turks and Persians, and they choose out the handsom'st
Children, both Boys and Girls, to get the more money, by which authority also
the great men of the Country enjoy Married Women and Maids at their pleasure.
They will choose out their Children for the Bishops while they are yet in their
Cradles; and if the Prince be dissatisfied at it, all the Clergy joins with him
that makes the choice, and then together by the Ears they go. In which
Skirmishes they will carry away whole Villages, and sell all the poor people to
the Turks and Persians. And indeed the custom of selling men and women is so
common in that Country, that a man may almost affirm it to be one of their
chiefest Trades.

The Bishops dissolve Marriages when they please, and then Marry again after
they have sold the first. If any of the Natives be not Married to his fancy, he
takes another for such a time as he thinks fit, for which he pays her all the
while as the Turks do. Very few of these people know what Baptism means. Only
two or three days after the woman is brought to bed, the Priest comes and
brings a little Oil, mumbles over a few Prayers, and then anoints the Mother
and the Infant, which they believe to be the best Baptism in the World. In
short they are a people of no Devotion at all, neither in their Ceremonies nor
in their Prayers. But there are great store of Nunneries, where the young Maids
apply themselves to their Studies, and after such an age, whether they stay in
the Nunneries or betake themselves to the Service of any of the great Lords,
they Confess, Baptize, Marry, and perform all other Ecclesiastical Functions,
which I never knew practiced in any other part of the World beside.

CHAP. XI. Of Comania, Circassia, and of certain people which they call
Kalmouchs.
COmania is bounded toward the East by the Caspian Sea; Westward by the
Mountains that divide it from Circassia; Northward it lies upon Muscovia; and
Southward it is bounded by Georgia. From the Mountains that bound upon the
North-East to Tercki, which is the River that parts Moscovia from Comania, it
is all a level Country excellent for Tillage, and abounding in fair Meadows and
Pasturage. However it is not over-peopl'd, which is the reason they never Sow
twice together in one place. The Climate is much the same as between Paris and
Lion, where it Rains very much; and yet the Country people have cut several
Channels from the Rivers to water the Grounds after they have Sowed them, which
they learnt from the Persians. Those Rivers fall from the Southern Mountains,
being not at all taken notice of in the Map. There is one among the rest a very
large River, which can be forded at no time. They call it Coyasou, or The thick
water, in regard it is continually muddy, the stream being so slow, that they
can hardly discern which way it runs. It falls gently into the Caspian Sea to
the South of the mouth of Volga. Not far from this River, in the months of
October and November, all along the Shore of the same Sea, you may see vast
shoals of fish about two foot long. Before, they have two legs, like a Dog's
legs, behind instead of legs they have only claws. Flesh they have none, but
only fat with a bone in the middle. Now in regard they are but flow paced when
they come upon Land, the Country people easily knock them on the head, and make
Oil of them; which is the greatest Trade they have.

The people of Comania, commonly called Comouchs, dwell for the most part at
foot of the Mountains, because of the Springs so plentiful in those places,
that in some Villages you shall have above twenty or thirty. Three of these
Spings meeting together, make a stream strong enough to drive a Mill. But this
is not the sole reason, for there is Water enough in the plain. But in regard
they are a people that only live upon the spoil and plunder of their Enemies,
and of one another, as they are in continual fear of being set upon, they love
to dwell near the refuge of the Mountains, whither they fly with their Cattle
upon any occasion of danger. For all the people round about, as Georgians,
Mengrelians, Cirkassians, Tartars, and Muscovites, live altogether by rapine,
and continual In-roads into one another Countries.

There are another sort of people which are called Kalmouchs, that inhabit upon
the Coast of the Caspian Sea between the Muscovites and the Tartars. The men
are strong, but the most deformed under Heaven. Their faces are so flat and
broad, that there is the breadth of five fingers between each Eye. Their Eyes
are very small, and that little Nose they have is so flat, that there is
nothing to be seen but two little holes instead of Nostrils. Their Knees also
and their Feet turn inward. When they go to the Wars, they carry their Wives
and their Daughters, if they be twelve years of age, along with them, who fight
as courageously as the men themselves. Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, and Skains,
with a great wooden Mace at the Pummel of their Saddles; their Horses being the
best in all Asia. Their Captain is of some ancient Family, but they more
particularly choose him for his valor. The Duke of Muscovia sends them
presents every year, to preserve their friendship, which presents consist in
Cloth. And he grants them free passage through his Territories, when ever they
have a mind to invade the Mengrelians, Georgians, or Cirkassians, at which
sport they are much more dexterous than the lesser Tartars. Sometimes they
advance into Persia, as far as the Province of the Usbekes, which is a part of
Great Tartary, ranging up as far as Caboul and Candahar. Their Religion is
particular to themselves, but they are great Enemies to the Mahumetans.

As for the Comouchs or people of Comania, they are Mahumetans, and very
precise ones too. They are under the protection of the King of Persia, who
makes great account of them, in regard they defend the Passes into his Country
on that side against the Kalmouchs. They are habited both men and women like
the Lesser Tartars, fetching all the Silk and Calicut which they use out of
Persia; for as for Cloth, they are contented with what they make in their own
Country, which is very course.

Circassia is a pleasant good Country, and full of variety. There are Plains,
Forests, Hills, and Mountains abounding in Springs, some of which are so
large, that some of them will serve seven or eight of the neighboring
Villages. But on the other side, in all the Rivers that proceed from these
Springs, there is not a fish to be seen. Flowers they have in abundance,
especially fair Tulips. There is a sort of Strawberry also with a short stalk,
of which five or six grow in a bunch; the least are as big as a small Nut, of a
pale yellow Color. The Soil is so fertile, that it brings forth without any
great trouble a vast plenty of all sorts of Fruits. Nor do the people need any
other Gardens than their Fields which are covered with Cherry-trees,
Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Walnut-trees, and all other useful Trees of the same
nature: but their chiefest Wealth consists in Cattle, but especially in
well-shap'd Horses, not much unlike the Spanish Gennets. They have also an
abundance of Goats and Sheep, whose Wool is as good as that of Spain; which the
Muscovites fetch away to make Felts. They neither sow Wheat nor Oats, but only
Barley for their Horses, and Millet to make Bread; nor do they ever sow twice
in the same place: not but that the Land is good enough to bear Wheat, but
because they love Bread made of Millet better. They have very good Fowl, and
Venison, and Wild-Fowl more than they know what to do withal; which they never
hunt with Dogs, nor fly their Hawks at; for their Horses are so swist and so
good, that they will tire the Beast, and force him to lie down and yield. Every
Horseman has a Rope with a sliding-knot ready at the Pummel of his Saddle,
which they are so dextrous to throw about the neck of the Beast that begins to
be weary, that it is twenty to one if they miss him. When they have killed a
Dear, they cut off the legs, and breaking the Bones, eat the Marrow, which they
say is the best thing in the World to strengthen the Body. When they go to
steal Cattle, they carry along with them great Cows-horns stuffed with boiled
Tripes cut in small pieces; then watching their times when the Herdsmen are
asleep, when the Dogs begin to bark, they throw to every one a Horn, with which
the Dog presently runs away: and so while the Shepherds are asleep, and the Dog
is busy to get the Meat out of the Horn, which is there ramm'd in on purpose,
the Thieves drive away what they please.

The Drink of the Sherkes is Water and Bosa. Bosa is a Drink made of Millet, as
intoxicating as Wine, which they want in the Country.

The Men and the Women, Boys and Girls go habited all alike, and their Habit is
a colored Robe of Fustian, with a kind of large Petticoat underneath; with
this they wear a little pink'd Wastcoat that reaches down to their Thighs; and
over that a Cassock of course Cloth that reaches down to their Knees, girt
about their Wastes with a Cord. The Sleeves of the Cassock are open below and
above, and sometimes they pin them behind their Backs. They wear no Beards
'till they are sixty years of age. And as for their Hair, neither Men nor
Women, Boys nor Girls, ever wear it longer than the tips of their Ears. The
Men, both young and old, shave the middle of their Heads about the breadth of
two Fingers from the Forehead down to the Nape of the Neck: and then instead of
Hats or Head-clothes, both Men and Women wear only a little Bonnet of the same
Cloth as the Cassock, made like a Nightcap. It Is true, when the Maids come to
be married there is some distinction upon their Heads; for then they fast'n to
the hinder part of their Heads a round piece of Felt, which they cover with a
white Veil very artificially pleated. Their Breeches are tied below their
Knees, and reach to their Ancles; their Shoes, which are of Cordovan, both
upper and under Leather, have but one seam upon the upper part of the Foot,
being light, and cut like a pair of Pumps.

As for their Beds, they take several Sheepskins and sow them together, and
then stuffing them full of Millet-leaves, make a kind of Quilt. Now when they
beat the Millet, the Leaf comes to be as small as the Chaff of Oats; so that
when the person rises off from the Quilt, the Quilt rises and swells again of
it self. Their Cushions are of the same Make, only sometimes they are stuffed
with Wool.

The People are neither Christians nor Mahometans, all their Religion
consisting in some Ceremonies which they perform with the greatest Solemnities
which they can imagine: for at that time old and young of all Ages and Sexes,
and all the whole Town must be there at the place appointed, unless impotency
or sickness excuses them. I call them Villages, for in all these Countries
their is neither Fortress nor City: and as for their Villages, they are all
built after the same Model, round, with a Piazza in the middle, according to
the Figure.

THE PLATFORM OF ONE OF THE VILLAGES OF THE COMOU^


CHAP. XII. Of the Ceremonies and Customs of the People of Comania and
Circassia.
THe Principal of all the Feasts which the Comouchs and Sherkes or Cirkassians
make, is that which they make at the end of Autumn, after this manner. Three of
the ancientest of the Village are appointed to manage it, and to discharge
themselves of a Duty imposed upon them in the company of all the people. These
three old men take a Sheep or a Goat, and having muttered certain Prayers over
the Beast, they cut the throat of it: after they have dressed it very clean, they
boil it whole, all but the Gathers, and them they roast. The Sheep being
boiled, they set it upon a Table, and carry it into a large Barn, where the
People are appointed to meet: There the three old men stand upright before a
Table, and all the People, Men, Women and Children behind them. When the Table
upon which the Meat stands, is brought in, two of the three old men cut off the
Legs and the roasted Gathers, and hold them up above their heads, and the third
holds up a great Cup of Bosa in the same manner, to the end the people behind
may see them. When the people see the Meat and Bosa so lifted up, they
prostrate themselves upon the ground, and so continue till all the rest of the
Meat be set upon the lesser Table, and that the old men have said some few
word. Then the two old men that held up the Meat, cut off two little pieces,
and give each of them a piece to him that holds the Cup, which being done, they
take each of them a piece for themselves. When they have all three eaten of the
meat, the old man that holds the Cup, drinks first, then gives the two old men
to drink, first to him upon the right hand, next to him upon the left, never
letting go the Cup all the while. This first Ceremony being thus accomplished,
the two old men turn toward the Assembly, and go and present both of the Meat
and the Drink, first to their Chief or Lord, then to all the people, who
equally eat their share, both men and women. That which remains of the four
feet, is carried back to the Table, and the three old men eat it. This done,
they go and place themselves at the Table, where the Mutton is set, where the
oldest of the three taking the Head, eats a little Morsel; after him, the
second, and next to him, the third does the same. Then the first old man
commands the rest to be carried to the Lord, who receives it with a great deal
of respect, and after he has given it to his next akin, or the Friend whom he
loves best, the Head is given from one to another, till it be eat'n up. This
being done, the three old men begin to eat of the Mutton a bit or two, and the
Lord of the Village is called, who comes with his Bonnet in his hand, in a
trembling posture; to whom, one of the old men presenting a Knife, he cuts off
a piece of Mutton, and eats; and having drank a Cup of Bosa, he returns to his
Seat. After him, all the people, according to their turns in quality, do as
much; and then, for the Bones the Children go together by the ears among
themselves.

They have another Feast before they begin to Mow their Meadows; at which time
all the people of the Village, that have wherewithal, take every one a Goat,
(for in their Ceremonies they esteem Goats better than Sheep) and for the poor,
they join eight or ten together for a Goat. Let them be Goats, Sheep or Lambs,
when they are all brought together, they cut their Throats, and then flea off
the skin, leaving the four feet and the Head in it. Then they stretch the Skin
with sticks that cross from one foot to the other, and set it up on a Pole
fixed in the Earth, the top whereof enters into the head of the Beast, as is to
be seen in the Figure of the Village; and as many Beasts as there are killed,
so many Poles are planted in the midst of the Village, with every one a
particular Skin upon it; to which, every one that passes by, maks a profound
obeisance.

Every one having boiled his Goat, brings it into the void place in the middle
of the Village, and sets it upon a great Table with the rest. There is the Lord
of the Village with his Servants, and sometimes the Lord of some other Village
is invited. Now all this Victuals being upon the Table, three of the oldest men
of the Village sit down and eat a Bit or two: Then they call the Lord of the
Town, and if there be any other Lord, they come both together, with some other
of the Seniors of the Parish; who being set down, eat up one of the Beasts,
which the old men had set apart for them; the rest is divided among the people,
sitting upon the ground.

There are some Villages where you shall have fifty Goats and Sheep, or Lambs
and Kids, killed together at one time. As for their Bosa, there are some that
bring above 200 Pints; others more or less, according to their quality. All the
day long they eat and drink, and sing and dance to their Flutes a dozen
together, which are in some measure harmonious, as consisting of several parts,
and decreasing proportionably from the Treble to the Base. When the old men
have solac'd themselves with eating and drinking, they go home, and leave the
young people, Men and Women, Boys and Girls to be merry by themselves: They
stay as long as there is any Drink; and the next day they go early to Mowing.

They have other Ceremonies particular only to their Families. Once a year in
every House they make a Cross after the Form of a Mallet, about five Foot high,
the two Sticks that compose the Cross, being as big as a man's Arm. This the
Master of the House sets in the Evening near the Door in his Chamber, and
calling all his Family together, gives them every one a lighted Wax-Candle.
Then first he fixes his own to the Cross, next his Wife sticks hers, and so all
the Children and Servants: If the Children be so young, that they cannot do it
themselves, the Father and Mother do it for them. If one of the Candles burn
out before it be put out, 'tisa Prognostic that he or she that fixed it there,
shall not live out their year. If the Candle falls, then he whose Candle it
was, shall be robbed, or be forced to fly for his Life.

If it thunders, all the people run out of the Village, and the young people of
both Sexes set themselves to singing and dancing in the presence of their
Elders: And if any one be Thunderstruck, they bury that person honorably,
believing him to be a Saint. Besides that, they send over all the Country for
a white Goat, which they breed up and keep in the Village where it happened to
thunder, having it in great veneration, till thundering in another place, the
people send for it thither also. If the Thunder fall upon any of their Houses,
though it kill neither Man, Woman, Child, nor Beast, all that Family shall be
kept upon the public stock all that year, without being tied to any Labor but
of Singing and Dancing. These people, during that time, go from Village to
Village Dancing and Singing at peoples Doors, but never going into their
Houses; for which the Inhabitants are bound to bring them out something to eat.

There is a day in the Spring, when all that have been struck'n with Thunder,
meet together in the Village where the white Goat is kept; who has always a
Cheese hanging about his Neck as big as a Parma-Cheese. This Goat they take and
carry to the Village of the chief Lord of the Country. They never go in, but
the Lord with all the rest of the Village coming out, they all together
prostrate themselves before the Goat. Having said some Prayers, they take away
his Cheese, and immediately put another in its place. The Cheese which was
taken away, is at the same time cut into little pieces, and distributed among
the people. After that, they give the Strangers to eat, and bestow their Alms
upon them; so that by this wandering from Village to Village, they get good
store of Money.

They have among them but only one Book; and it is as big as one of our largest
Folio's, and it lies in the hands of an old man, who has only the privilege to
touch it. When that old man is dead, they choose another old man to keep the
Book; whose Duty it is to go from Village to Village, where he hears of any
sick people. He carries the Book with him, and after he has lighted up a
Wax-Candle, and put the people out of the Room, he lays the Book upon the
Stomach of the sick person, opens it, and reads in it, then blows over it
several times, so that the Breath passes toward the mouth of the Party: Then he
causes the party diseased to kiss the Book several times, and as often lays it
upon his head, which is a Ceremony of half an hour. When the old man goes away,
one gives him a Beef or a Heifer; another gives him a Goat; every one according
to their Quality and Estate.

They have also Old Women that take upon them to cure the Sick. These Women
feel the body of the sick party, all over, but more particularly they handle
and grope that part where the distemper lies: during which time they let go
several belches out of their mouths, and the more sick the party is, the
louder and thicker, they fetch their belches. The standers by hearing them
belch in that manner and fetch such vilanous sighs from their stomachs, believe
their friend to be dangerously ill, and that the louder the Women belch, the
more ease and comfort they receive; but whether they do or no, the women are
well paid for their pains. When any one feels a pain in the Head, they send for
the Barber, who gives two cutts upon the Head across with the rasor, and then
poures Oil into the wound. For they believe the Headache proceeds only from a
wind beeween the flesh and the bone, for which the Incision opens a paslage to
let it out.

At their Funerals they that are the near Relations or Friends of the dead,
some cut their faces, and other parts of their Bodies with sharp flints, others
prostrate themselves upon the ground, and tear their hair; so that when they
return from the Burial, they are all of a gore blood: However, notwithstanding
all this affliction, they never pray for the Dead.

As to their Marriages: When a young man has seen a Virgin which he has a
liking to, he sends one of his friends to agree with her Parents or her Tutor,
what he will give for her. Commonly the guist consists in Horses, Cows or some
other sort of Cattle. When the agreement is made, the Parents and Kindred of
the party thereby contracted, together with the Lord of the place, go to the
House where the Virgin lives and bring her to the Bridegrooms House, where
there is a Feast ready prepared; and after they have made merry, and sung, and
danced for a while, the Bridegroom and Bride go and lie together, without any
other Ceremony. If the Man and Maid are of two Parishes, the Lord of the
Village where the Man lives, accompany him and his Kindred to the next Village
altogether, to fetch the Bride from thence.

If a Man and the Wife have no Children, he is permitted to take several Wives
one after another till he have Issue. If a married Woman have a Gallant, and
that the Husband should come and find his Wise a bed with him, he goes away
again without saying a word, and never takes any further notice of it. The
Woman also in the same case, does the like by the man. Nay, the more Gallants a
Woman has, the more she is respected: And it is a common custom when they fall
out, to taunt one another, that if they were not ugly, or ill natured, or
diseased, they would have more Admirers than they have. The People are of an
excellent Complexion, especially the Women, who are extremely fair, and finely
shaped, and keep their beauty till five and forty or fifty years. They are very
laborious, and work themselves in the Iron Mines, which they melt afterward
and forge into several Tools and Implements. They make abundance of Embroidery
of Gold and Silver for their Saddles, their Quivers, and their Pumps, as also
upon the Calicut of which they make their Handkerchiefs.

If the man and the woman happen to quarrel often together, so that they cannot
be reconciled: the Husband complaining first to the Lord of the Place, He sends
for the Woman, and having given order to sell her, gives the Man another. But
if the Woman complain first, the Man is served the same sauce. If a Man or
Woman be a disturber of their Neighbors, if the Neighbors complain to the
Lord, he presently causes the party to be apprehended and sold to the Merchants
that buy Slaves, for they are resolved they will live in quiet.

They that take upon them the quality of Gentlemen, sit still, do nothing, and
speak very little. In an evening they ride out, and meet some twenty or thirty
together to go a stealing. Nor do they rob only their Enemies, but their
Neighbors, from whom the chief prey which they take are Cattle and Slaves. All
the Country People are Slaves to the Lord of the Village where they live, whom
he imploys to till his Land, and cut Wood for him upon occasion, of which they
spend vast quantities. For not being very warm clad, they keep fire all night
in the places where they sleep.

CHAP. XIII. Of the lesser Tartars, called Nogaies, bord'ring upon Comania.
THE lesser Tartars have a very ancient race of Horses, which they breed up
even to Superstition; so that it would be among them an act of Sacrilege to
sell them to strangers, as being not a little curious how they sell them to one
another. These are the Horses which they ride, fifty or sixty in a Troop
together when they go a thieving; and sometimes a hundred together, when they
design any Incursion upon their Enemies. When the old Men come to be infirm and
impotent, if they know any stout young Man that is a Soldier, they will lend
him one of their Horses (if he have none of his own) to make an Incursion, upon
condition to have half of the Booty. Many times they run up as far as Hungary,
near to Comora and Javarin. These Horses, partly by nature, partly by early
custom, will travel four or five days together with a handful of Grass given
them once in eight or ten hours, and a little Water every four and twenty
hours. But they never go a robbing with them 'till they come to be seven or
eight years old: besides that, they must undergo a very severe education ere
they make use of them in those hardships. Their Bit is only a piece of Iron
with a Buckle on each side, to which they fast'n the Bridle and Head-stall. For
eight days together they put under the Saddle a bag of Gravel or Earth. The
first day the Sack is a Horse-man's weight; and so they add to it every day,
'till it come to be double the weight at the end of the eight days. As they
increase every day the weight upon the Horses back, they abate every day the
Horse's Provender and Drink. During these eight days, they get up and walk the
Horse two or three Leagues. The next eight days, they abate every day of the
weight, 'till the Sack be quite empty. Proportionably also they abate him of
his Meat and Drink as in the first eight days, and every day take up the Girt a
hole shorter. The three or four last days they afford the Horse neither
Provender nor Drink, according as they find him able to endure hunger and
thirst, and the labor which he is to undergo. The last day, they work him
'till he be all over of a Sweat; then they unbridle and unsaddle him, and pour
upon him the coldest Water they can meet with. That done, they lead him into a
field, and tie him by the leg with a Cord, at such a length as they intend he
shall feed; yet still from day to day allowing him more Rope, 'till at last
they let him loose, and feed with the rest of the Horses. This terrible fasting
and labor, during which time, that little which they do eat and drink, they
eat and drink with the Bit in their mouth, brings them to be so lean and out of
flesh, that their very bones are ready to start out of their skins: So that if
any one should see them in that miserable condition, that does not know the
nature of the Horses, would think they would never be fit for good service. The
hoofs of these Horses are so hard that they never shoe them, and yet they will
leave the prints of their feet in the Earth, or upon the Ice, as if they had
been shod. These Tartars are so curious in having Horses that will endure
labor, that so soon as they see any handsome Colt in their Breed, they
presently take him up, to school him as I have related: but hardly ten in fifty
endure the tutoring.

As for their Diet, it is a great advantage for these Tartars to ride a Mare, in
regard they drink the Milk. They that ride Horses, carry along with them a
little Bag full of pieces of Cheese dried in the Sun; they have also a small
Boracho of Goat-skin, which they fill with Water where they meet with it, into
which they put two or three bits of their hard Cheese, which softens with the
motion of the Horse, the Boracho being tied under his Belly: and thus the Water
becomes a kind of sour Milk, which is their ordinary Drink.

As for their Instruments of Cookery, every Horseman has a large wooden Ladle
hanging at the Pommel of his Saddle, out of which the rider drinks himself, and
gives his Horse likewise to drink. They that encounter them, can hope for no
better Booty than their Horses; but they are very hard to be taken; for when
one of these Horses perceives that his Rider is slain, he follows those that
fly with all the swiftness imaginable. Beside that, those Horses being carried
into other Countries, are presently spoiled, and come to nothing.

Their Clothing is only a Sheep-skin, which in Winter they wear with the wool
next their Bodies; in the Summer turning the other side. They that are the
Nobility of the Country, wear Wolves-skins, with a kind of Shirt, and Breeches
of course Fustian of diverse Colors, which the Tailor gets little credit by
shaping.

Their Women are very white and well proportioned, but their Faces are broad,
and their Eyes little, so that by thirty years of Age they become very
deformed. There is not a man but has two or three Wives, which they never
choose but out of their own Tribe. Every Tribe has a Chief; who is one of the
Nobility of the Country, and carries for his Banner a Horse-tail fastened to a
half-Pike, and died into the Color belonging to the Tribe. When they march,
every one knows where to place himself, and how much ground they ought to take
up for their Tribe and their Cattle; one Tribe never encroaching upon another.

The Women and Maids are generally clad in a large Shirt that reaches down to
their feet. Upon their Heads they wear a large white Vail, their Foreheads
being bound about with a large black Handkerchief tied in five or six Rolls.
The Noble sort of Women and Maids wear over this Vail a Bonnet open behind,
which comes down upon their Foreheads like a three-corner'd Cap: One of these
Points stands up in the midst of the Forehead, lined with Velvet, Satin, or
Cloth of Gold, and set with small pieces of Gold and Silver, and false Pearls,
of which they also make themselves Bracelets: Their Breeches are of
single-colour'd Cloth, and for Shoes and Stockings, they only wear a Cordovan
Boot of what Color they please, neatly sewed.

When a young man intends to marry, it behooves him to give the Father and the
Mother of the Maid a certain quantity of Horses, Bullocks or Cows, or other
Cattle, which is done in the presence of the greatest part of the ancientest of
the Tribe, and a Moullah beside. When the Agreement is made, the young man has
the liberty to see his Mistress, but not till then: For before, he has only the
information of her Mother, his Sisters, or such Women as were his own Friends.
Besides the three Wives which the man is allowed to take, he may keep several
female Slaves; but the Children are still slaves, and can never inherit. These
Tartars are of a very hot constitution, though not so hot as the women. Both
the one and the other are very fair-haird; but the men have little or no
Beards: So that if there be any one that has more Beard than ordinary, and can
but write and read, they make him a Moullah.

These people have no Houses, but live in Tents, or in Wagons which are drawn
after them wherever they go. The Tents are for the old people and little
Children, with their Slaves that attend them. The young women ride in Wagons
closed up with Boards, and to let in the Air, upon one side they open a Window
that is made like a Lattice. In the Evening they are permitted to spend a
little time in the Tents. When the Girls have attained to the age of ten or
twelve Years, they never stir any more out of their Wagons till they are
married, not so much as for the necessities of Nature; but in the middle of the
Wagon there is a Plank to be taken up; and if it be in a place where they
stay, a Slave presently comes and cleanses all underneath. The Maidens Wagon
is easy to be known, as being painted with Flowers; and generally there is a
Camel tied to the Tail of it, besmeared with several colors, and several
Nosegays or Posies of Flowers stuck about the Head of the Beast.

The young men have also every one their Chariot, wherein they only carry a
Boracho of Horse-skin, containing about 38 Quarts, which they usually fill with
Mares-Milk, which is very sour. They have also every one another Wagon next to
that wherein they ride themselves; wherein they carry several Boracho's full of
Cows-Milk, which is very sour. At Meals they drink this Milk: But before they
power it out, they stir it in the Boracho with a great Stick, that the Curd may
mix with the thin Milk. But the Mares-Milk is only for the Master and Mistress,
though before they drink of either, they mix it with water. When a Friend comes
to see them, they fetch out their dried Cheese, which they call Kourout, and
breaking it into little Bits, eat it with fresh Butter. At their Feasts they
sometimes kill old Sheep, sometimes old Goats. But for their Horses they never
kill them but at the Funerals of their Kindred, at the Birth of a Child, or at
their Marriage-Feasts, or lastly, when their Friends return laden with Spoil
from any incursion, and are stored with Slaves. They never drink any thing but
Mares-Milk or Cows-Milk, and when they can get neither, they will endure thirst
for three or four days together before they will drink Water, being always
gripped with a terrible Colic when they drink it. They never eat any Salt,
being of an opinion that it is naught for the Eyes. They live long, and are
very strong, and seldom sick; nor do they refuse any Diet but Swines-flesh.

Their Country is very level; only for some few Hills in some places. They
have great store of Pasture-grounds, and every Tribe has their peculiar Wells
to water their Cattle. In the Winter they lodge upon the banks of great Rivers,
near to Woods and Marshes, suffering their Herds to feed at liberty. When the
Snow is very deep, the Cattle scrape it away with their seet to come at the
Grass, though they meet with very little else but Reeds and Bushes. In the mean
while the men cut down the Woods, make great Fires, and employ themselves in
Fishing. There are some parts of these Rivers where the least Fish they take is
about four or five foot long; and some there are above ten or twelve foot in
length. Some they dry in the wind, and preserve against Summer; some they smoke
in holes which they make in the Earth: As for the smaller sort, they boil them,
and eat them without Salt or any other seasoning. When they have eat'n their
Fish, they scoop up a large wooden Ladle full of the Fish-water and gulp it
down. As for Bread, there is no talk of it in their Country.

When they are not at Wars, or are but newly returned from any Incursion, they
spend their time in Hunting; but cannot endure any other Hounds except
Greyhounds: So that he must be a very poor Tartar indeed that does not keep a
Greyhound. Take notice however by the by, that these petty Tartars, concerning
whom I have last discoursed, are certain people adjoining to Comania, which the
Turks, Persians and Mengrelians call Nogaies; who may be well reckoned among
the number of the petty Tartars, in regard they are all under one Prince, whom
the Grand Signor appoints King over all Petty Tartary, and who receives his
investiture at Constantinople.

These Tartars are all Mahumetans. Nor have they any Physician among them;
making use only of certain Simples of which they have a traditional knowledge.
When the sick person lies in any extremity, they send for a Moullah, who comes
with the Alcoran, which he opens and shuts three times, saying certain Prayers,
and laying it upon the sick person's face. If by chance the sick person
recover, they attribute his recovery to the Sanctity of the Alcoran, and
present the Moullah with a Sheep or a Goat: If he die, all his Kindred meet and
carry him to the Grave with great Testimonies of Sadness, crying continually
Alla, Alla. When he is interred, the Moullah mutters certain Prayers over the
Grave, and is paid for his pains according to the wealth of the Heirs. For the
poor he generally spends three days and three nights in that exercise; for the
rich he as usually spends a Month, never stirring all the while from the Grave;
and sometimes sev'n or eight.

When any one of them is wounded, they use no other Salve but only boiled
Flesh, which they apply hot to the wound. If the wound be deep, they thrust in
a piece of Fat as hot as the wound can endure it; and if the person be able to
kill a Horse, the wound is cured so much the sooner; for the Flesh and Fat of a
Horse are much more medicinable than the Flesh of any other Creature.

Were it not the Custom of the Tartars to buy their Wives when they marry,
there would be fewer Whores. But in regard there are an abundance of poor young
men that have not wherewithal to buy Wives, they never marry at all. This is
that which makes so many Soldiers among them, and emboldens 'em to invade
their Neighbors, and to get something whereby they may be enabled to buy them a
Wife. For the Virgins they are never to be defiled, being always shut up in
their Wagons: But for the Women they are oft'n debauched, appointing their
private Meetings, when they go to fetch water for their Cattle, when their
Husbands are a-hunting, or looking after their Herds. Nor is it a hard thing to
conceal it from their Husbands, in regard the Tartars are not in the least
prone to Jealousy.

By the way take notice, that the Nogaies, though they live almost after the
same manner as the Tartars, and are under the same Prince, yet they perfectly
hate them; reproaching them for effeminate, because they live in Houses and
Villages, whereas the true Soldier should live in Tents as they do, to be
ready upon all occasions.

They that run a-foot, as well in these Countries, as in Persia, when they are
weary, take Walnuts and bruise them, and then rub the Soles of their feet with
them before the fire as hot as they can endure it, which presently makes them
fresh again.

Having thus done with all the several Roads; here follows an Alphabetical
Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes of all the Principal Cities of the whole
Empire of Persia.

THE LONGITUDES and LATITUDES OF THE Principal Cities of PERSIA, according as
the Geographers of those Countries place them.
A.
A Amoul is in 72 Degrees, 20 Min. of Longitude, 36 degrees. of Latitude. The Lands
about this City abound in Prunes. Abeher, in 74 degrees. 20 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15
min. Lat. 12 Leagues from Casbin, a small City; but the Land is good about it.
Absecun, in 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 10 min. Lat. A small City in an
excellent Soil. Abdehil, in 60 degrees. 20 min. Long. 36 degrees. 24 min. Lat. The
Inhabitants are most Christians, and there are many ancient Churches in it. It
depends upon Sultany. Ahwaz, 70 degrees. 15 min. Long. 31 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A small
City half ruined, in the Province of Belad-Cowreston, in a Soil that yields
excellent Fruits. Arbella, 69 degrees. 50 min. Long. 36 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A small
Champaign City, where Provisions are Cheap. Ardevil, 62 degrees. 30 min. Long. 38
degrees. 15 min. Lat. Ardeston, 77 degrees. 10 min. Long. 33 degrees. 7 min. Lat. Famous
for the Copper Vessels that are there made. Arion, 74 degrees. 32 min. Long. 32
degrees. 25 min. Lat. One of the three places where Olives grow in all Persia.
Assed-Abad, 63 degrees. 40 min. Long. 34 degrees. 50 min. Lat. A small City toward
Amadan. Ava, 75 degrees. 10 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat. This is a very small
place. Azadkar, or Yevin, 82 degrees. 15 min. Long. 36 degrees. 32 min. Lat. A City in
a great Plain, where there are above four hundred Channels underground.
B.
Bab El Abab, or, the Gate of Gates; called also Demir-capi; or, the Gate of
Iron. The Tartars call it Monjou: 75 degrees. 15. min. Long. 45 degrees. 15 min. Lat.
It has been formerly a strong place. Badkeist, 85 degrees. 32 min. Long. 35 degrees. 20
min. Lat. A small, but most pleasant City, and well built. Baste, 80 degrees. 15
min. Long. 29 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A City in the Province of Kerman, where in
Summer the Mornings are very cold, the Afternoons hot; yet the Air very good.
Bafrouche, see Mahmeter. Beylagon, 63 degrees. 52 min. Long. 41 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A
City toward the Caspian Sea, in a Country abounding in Corn and Fruit. Balk, 91
degrees. 36 min. Long. 38 degrees. 10 min. Lat. Three days journey from Moultan. Bem,
or Bembe; 74 degrees. 15 min. Long. 28 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Thought to have been built
by Caliph Mouktadar, near the great Desert of Bersham. Berdoe, 63 degrees. 15 min.
Long. 35 degrees. 30 min. Lat. It lies surrounded with Pasture-grounds, which breed
great store of Cattle. Berzende, 63 degrees. 14 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat.
Here are made a sort of course Druggets for ordinary people. Beston, 79 degrees. 15
min. Long. 37 degrees. 20 min. Lat. It lies in a Country abounding in Corn and
Fruits. Bimonoheer, 74 degrees. 10 min. Long. 37 degrees. 30 min. Lat. Here is great
Trade for Silk. Bost, 91 degrees. 28 min. Long. 32 degrees. 16 min. Lat. A great City,
to which belongs the fairest and strongest Castle in all Persia. Bourou-Jerde,
74 degrees. 30 min. Long. 34 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Famous for Saffron, and for being
the native City of many Learned Men.
C.
Chemkon, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 41 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Chiras, 78 degrees. 15 min.
Long. 29 degrees. 36 min. Lat. Chirvan, or Erivan; 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 38 degrees. 32
min. Lat. Here all the Silk- Caravans rendevous; and it is one of the richest
Kanats or Governments in Persia.
D.
Dankon, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 30 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A bad Town, in a bad Soil.
Darabguired, 80 degrees. 15 min. Long. 30 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In several parts round
about this City they meet with Salt of several colors, as red and green, black
and white. Here they also make long-neck'd Glass-Bottles, which are very
curious work; nor are they without Sider to fill those Bottles, in regard of
the great plenty of Apples thereabouts. Near to the City there is a
Sulphur-Mine, and great store of Mummy, very much esteemed in Persia. Debeston,
80 degrees. 15 min. Long. 38 degrees. 15 min. Lat. This is not properly a City, but a
great many Villages joined together. Deras, 79 degrees. 30 min. Long. 31 degrees. 32
min. Lat. Devinmaat, 62 degrees. 5 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Din Ver, 63 degrees.
15 min. Long. 35 degrees. Lat. A City in a fruitful Soil, stored with Mosquees.
Doulad, 74 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 50 min. Lat. The Country about is full of
black Mulbery trees. Dourak, 74 degrees. 32 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Here
they make the loose Cassocks without Sleeves which the Arabians wear. Near to
this City the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, meeting at a place called Hella,
make a Marsh, where grow the Reeds of which the Eastern people make their Pens.
E.
Elalbetem, 87 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15. min. Lat. Eltiib, 70 degrees. 15.
min. Lon. 32 degrees. 15. min. Lat. Enderab, 93 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min.
Lat. Erivan, see Chirvan. Espharaien, 81 degrees. 40 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15 min.
Lat. The Country about it abounds in Pears and Apples. Estakre, 78 degrees. 30 min.
Long. 30 degrees. 15 min. Lat. The ancient City in the Province of Fars, properly
Persia; in a Soil abounding in Vines and Date-trees. Esterabat, 75 degrees. 35 min.
Long. 36 degrees. 50 min. Lat.
F.
Ferah, 18 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Built by Abdalla the Son of
Taher, in the time of Maimon Reshid, Caliph of Berni-Abbas. Ferouzabad, 82 degrees.
32 min. Long. 30 degrees. 10 min. Lat. Anciently called Hourbecthion.
G.
Girefte, 73 degrees. 40 min. Long. 31 degrees. 10 min. Lat. One of the biggest Cities
in the Province of Kerman. The Trade of the City consists in Hones and Wheat.
Girrcadegon, vulgarly Paygon, 75 degrees. 35 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat.
Goutem, 74 degrees. 46 min. Long. 37 degrees. 20 min. Lat. A little City, full of
Silk-Twisters.
H.
Hamadan, 75 degrees. 20 min. Long. 34 degrees. Lat. The Country about it breeds great
store of Cattle. Hasn-Eltaf, or, The Center of Beauty; 72 degrees. 32 min. Long. 34
degrees. 40 min. Lat. At this day almost ruined. Hawas, 75 degrees. 40 min. Long. 33
degrees. 15 min. Lat. Heaye, 74 degrees. 35 min. Long. 31 degrees. 50 min. Lat. Helaverde,
91 degrees. 30 min. Long. 35 degrees. 15. min. Lat. Built by Abdalla before mentioned.
Herat, 85 degrees. 30 min. Long. 36 degrees. 56 min. Lat. A City in the Province of
Carassan, where Sultan Heussein-Mirza founded several Colleges for Youth.
Hesn-Medi, 78 degrees. 45 min. Long. 32 degrees. 5 min. Lat. Hessne Ebneamade, 70 degrees.
45 min. Long. 26 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Hurman, 85 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 30
min. Lat. A small City, in a bad Air.
I.
Jemnon, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 36 degrees. 40 min. Lat. The Trade of it is in
Copper Manufactures. Jend-Babour, 75 degrees. 5 min. Long. 31 degrees. 15 min. Lat. A
very strong place, famous for the Tomb of Melek-Yakoub-Sha, King of Schiras.
Irson, 80 degrees. 35 min. Long. 36 degrees. 50 min. Lat. Ispahan, or Hispahan; 86 degrees.
40 min. Long. 32 degrees. 40 min. Lat.
K.
Kaar, 78 degrees. 40 min. Long. 42 degrees. 32 min. Lat. Kashan, 76 degrees. 15 min. Long.
34 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Kafre-Chirin, 71 degrees. 50 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat.
Built by Noushirevon-Aadel, surnamed the Just; and upon the acts and deeds of
this King is all the Morality of the Persians founded. Kaien, 83 degrees. 20 min.
Long. 36 degrees. 32 min. Lat. Said to breed the choicest Wits of all Persia.
Kalaar, 76 degrees. 25 min. Long. 37 degrees. 25 min. Lat. One of the chiefest Cities
in Guilan. Kalin, 87 degrees. 5 min. Long. 35 degrees. 35 min. Lat. In an excellent
Soil for Cattle and Fruit. Karkoub, 74 degrees. 45 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat.
Kasbin, 75 degrees. 40 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Kasre-le-lehous, or
Kengavat, 76 degrees. 20 min. Long. 33 degrees. 35 min. Lat. Kazeron, 88 degrees. 30 min.
Long. 28 degrees. 30 min. Lat. The Country about produces Oranges, Limons, and
Cypress-trees. Kerah, 86 degrees. 40 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Kerman or
Kirman, 81 degrees. 15 min. Long. 29 degrees. 50 min. Lat. Kervak, 87 degrees. 32 min.
Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Kirmonsha, 63 degrees. 45 min. Long. 34 degrees. 37 min.
Lat. Kom, 75 degrees. 40 min. Long. 35 degrees. 35 min. Lat. Kouh de Mavend, 74 degrees. 15
min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. the smallest now, which was once the largest
City in Persia. Koucht, 83 degrees. 40 min. Long. 33 degrees. 20 min. Lat. In a soil
excellent for Corn and good Fruits. Koy, 60 degrees. 40 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min.
Lat. Kevachir, or Verdechir, 80 degrees. 30 min. Long. 28 degrees. 15 min. Lat.
L.
Lahijon, 74 degrees. 25 min. Long. 37 degrees. 15 min. Lat. The Trade of the Town
consists in Stuffs, half Silk, half Cotton, called Teftile. Loussek, see
Toussea.
M.
Maameter, or Barfrouche, 77 degrees. 35. min. Long. 36 degrees. 50 min. Lat.
Mehrouyon, or Behbehon, 75 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 35 min. Lat. Meraque, 71
degrees. 20 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat. It stands in one of the Gardens of
Persia. Merend, 63 degrees. 15. min. Long. 37 degrees. 37 min. Lat. Mervasae, 87 degrees.
32 min. Long. 34 degrees. 15 min. Lat. in a fertile Country for Corn and Fruit.
Merverond, 88 degrees. 40 min. Long. 34 degrees. 30 min. Lat. in a fertile Country.
Mesched, look Touss. Moukon, or Derbent, 20 Leagues from the Caspian Sea, 63
degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Mourjan, 84 degrees. 15 min. Long. 37 degrees.
15 min. Lat. A City well peopled, wherein there are several Mosquees, and fair
Piazza's.
N.
Nacksivan, or Nachevan, 61 degrees. 32 min. Long. 39 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Natel, 77
degrees. 40 min. Long. 36 degrees. 7 min. Lat. in a fertile Country for Pasturage.
Nehavend, or Nahouand, 73 degrees. 45 min. Long. 34 degrees. 20 min. Lat. The Country
people aver this City built before the Loufon, or the Flood. Neher-Terij, 75
degrees. 00 min. Long. 32 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Nessah, 84 degrees. 45 min. Long. 38 degrees.
40 min. Lat. Nichabar, 80 degrees. 55 min. Long. 36 degrees. 20 min. Lat.
O.
Oujon, 61 degrees. 35 min. Long. 32 degrees. 24 min. Lat. To this City finely seated,
belongs a fair Castle.
R.
Rachmikdon, 87 degrees. 34 min. Long. 35 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Rem-hormous, 74 degrees. 45
min. Long. 31 degrees. 45 min. Lat. In this City Selmon, Haly's Foster Father was
born. Rey, 76 degrees. 20 min. Long. 35 degrees. 35 min Lat. In the best Soil of all
Persia, for Wheat, Fruit, and Pasturage. Roudbar, 75 degrees. 37 min. Long. 37 degrees.
21 min. Lat. in the Province of Guilan. Royon, 71 degrees. 36 min. Long. 36 degrees. 15
min. Lat. in the Province of Mazandran.
S.
Saassour, 86 degrees. 20 min. Long. 35 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Saron, 76 degrees. 20 min.
Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In the Province of Guilan. Sary, 78 degrees. 15 min.
Long. 36 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Seated among the Copper-Mines. Sebzevoar, 81 degrees. 5
min. Long. 36 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Near this City the people gather great
quantities of Manna. Semiron, 71 degrees. 30 min. Long. 34 degrees. 40 min. Lat. A
pleasant City stored with good Water and Fruits. Serijr-el-lan, 63 degrees. 15 min.
Long. 45 degrees. 50 min. Lat. Serkess, or Serakas, 85 degrees. 35 min. Long. 36 degrees.
15 min. Lat. A pleasant City for Situation, and plenty of Waters. Sermeghon,
87 degrees. 37 min. Long. 37 degrees. 32 min. Lat. In a fertile Soil, yet not very
plentiful. Serveston, 78 degrees. 15 min. Long. 29 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In a Soil
abounding with Gardens. Servon, 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat. In a
Soil abounding with Wine and Dates. Surjon, 74 degrees. 40 min. Long. 30 degrees. 20
min. Lat. Where the best Persian Carpets are made, and Shaads, or Girdles of
Goats Hair curiously wrought. Sohreverede, 73 degrees. 36 min. Long. 36 degrees. 5 min.
Lat. Ssouss, 73 degrees. 45 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Sultanie, 76 degrees. 15
min. Long. 39 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Where the Mornings and Evenings are very cold;
all the rest of the day very hot.
T.
Taberon, 80 degrees. 34 min. Long. 35 degrees. 20 min. Lat. Talikon, 88 degrees. 15 min.
Long. 36 degrees. 32 min. Lat. In a Country plentiful in Corn, Fruit, and good
Water. Tauris, otherwise called Ssernerdehi, 63 degrees. 15 min. Long. 39 degrees. 10
min. Lat. Tebess, 80 degrees. 40 min. Long. 38 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Teflis, 60 degrees. 15
min. Long. 43 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Toukon, 82 degrees. 45 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min.
Lat. Touss, or Meshed, 82 degrees. 30 min. Long. 38 degrees. 40 min. Lat. Toussea,
otherwise called Loussek, 85 degrees. 40 min. Long. 37 degrees 50 min. Lat.
Y.
Yesd, 79 degrees. 15 min. Long. 32 degrees. 15 min. Lat. Yevin, see Azadkar.
Z.
Zemma, 89 degrees. 14 min. Long. 38 degrees. 35 min. Lat. In a Country abounding in
all forts of Cattle. Zenjon, 73 degrees. 36 min. Long. 36 degrees. 5 min. Lat. Famous
for its antiquity, and formerly the Persian University. Zertah, 79 degrees. 30 min.
Long. 32 degrees. 30 min. Lat. The biggest City in the Province of Belad-Ciston,
abounding in Wine and Shell-fruit. Zour, 70 degrees. 20 min. Long. 35 degrees. 32 min.
Lat. A City in the same Province. Zouzen, 85 degrees. 15 min. Long. 35 degrees. 39 min.
Lat. In the Province of Mazandran. Zourend, 73 degrees. 40 min. Long. 31 degrees. 15
min. Lat. In the Province of Kerman, where there is great store of curious
Potters ware; where also grows the Root Hanna, with the juice whereof the
Persians dye their Nails, and the Breasts and Tails of their Horses.
The End of the Third BOOK.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: BEING, A DESCRIPTION OF
PERSIA.
CHAP. I. Of the Extent of PERSIA, and its division into Provinces.
PERSIA, according to the present State of the Empire, to the North is bounded
by the Caspian Sea; Southward, by the Ocean; Eastward it joins to the
Territories of the Great Mogul; Westward, to the Dominions of the Grand Signor;
the two Empires being parted by the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates.

But that you may the better understand the full extent of the Dominions of the
Persian King, you are to know, That this great Monarch, besides that Tract of
Ground which is properly called Persia, possesses a vast part of the ancient
Assyria and the great Armenia, the ancient Kingdoms of the Parthians and Medes,
the Kingdom of Lar, the Kingdom of Ormus, and all Eastward of Persia beyond
Candahar, almost as far as the Kingdom of Scindi.

But because those Europeans that have Traveled before me, either were not so
curious, or had not perhaps the opportunity to learn the true number of the
Provinces that compose the whole Continent of Persia, I have undertak'n, though
the Persians themselves are ignorant enough, to give the best account I can,
finding it necessary for the better satisfaction of the Reader, to take some
notice of the Names of Places according to the ancient Geography.

The first is the Great Armenia, which our Maps without any ground or reason at
all call Turcomannia; in regard they might have more properly called it
Ermonick in general, since the Inhabitants are the greatest part Armenians.
That part whereof which is situated between the two Rivers of Araxes and Cyrus,
at this day called Aras and Kur, by the Natives is called Iran, or Cara-bag,
being one of the most beautiful, and richest pieces of Land in all Persia; the
principal Cities of which are Erivan, Nacksivan, Zulpha, and Van.

The second is Diarbeck, formerly Mesopotamia, between Euphrates and Tigris;
the chief Cities whereof are Bir, Car-Emir or Diarbequir, Ourfa, Moussul,
Gezire, Merdin, etc.

The third is Curdistan, formerly Assyria, extending all along the East Side of
the River Tigris, from the Lake Van to the Frontiers of Bagdat; the principal
Cities are Niniveh, Sherisoul, Amadie, Sneirne, Betlis, and Salmastre.

The fourth is Hierak-Arabi, otherwise the Country of Babylon or Chaldea; the
principal Cities whereof are Felougia upon Euphrates, Bagdat upon Tigris,
Mershed-Ali, Gourno, and Balsara; and in the Country of Bourous, Sharaban,
Eronnabat, etc.

The fifth is Hierak-Agemi, or the ancient Parthia; the principal Cities
whereof are Hispahan, Toushercan, Hamadan, Cashan, Kan, and Casbin; and perhaps
Yesd, if it be not rather in Kerman or Sigistan.

The sixth contains Shirvan, all along the Caspian Sea, where stand the Cities
of Derbent in the Persian Tongue signifies ae Strait Gate, and Demir-Capi in
the Turkish, ae Gate of Iron; near to which place were the ancient Caspian
Gates, or Caspiae Pylae of the Ancients.
Derbent or Demir-Capi, Baku, and Shamaki; and the Province of Edzerbaijan;
wherein stand the Cities of Tauris, Ardevil, and Sultany. Which two Provinces
comprehend the ancient Media within a very little, extending to the very Shore
of the Caspan Sea.

The seventh contains Kylan and Mazandran, lying likewise upon the Caspan Sea,
formerly Hyrcania; wherein are the Cities and Towns of Firuzcuh, Sukar-abad,
and Mibnikielle at the entry of the Mountains; Giru, Talara-pesct, and Saru, in
the Plain; Ferh-abad, Ciarman, and Gscref, toward the Sea.

The eighth is Estarabad, formerly Margiana, which extends to the River
Ruthkhane-kurkan, which the Ancients called Oxus; the principal Cities whereof
are Estarabad, Amul, Damkam.

The ninth contains the Province of the Usbeck-Tartars, comprehending all the
ancient Sogdiana and Bactriana; the chief Cities whereof are Balk, Samarcand,
and Boccara, etc.

The tenth is Corassan, formerly Aria, with some part of Bactriana; the chief
Cities whereof are Eri, Meshed, Nisabur, Thun, etc.

The eleventh Sablestan, formerly Peloponnesus; the principal Cities whereof
are Beksabat, Asbe, Bust, Sarents; the Territory and City of Candahar being
also comprehended within the extent of this Province, together with Duki and
Alunkan, upon the Frontiers of the Great Mogul's Dominions.

The twelfth is Sigistan, formerly Drangiana; the principal Cities whereof are
Sistan, Shalack, and Kets.

The thirteenth comprehends all the Territories of the ancient Arachosia,
bord'ring upon the Kingdom of Scindi, not having any Cities that we know of.

The fourteenth is the Province of Makran, lying all along upon the Sea of
Mogostan, formerly Gedrosia; the chief Cities whereof are Makran, Firhk,
Chalak, and the Port of Guadel toward Guzerat.

The fifteenth Kerman, formerly Caramania, extending as far as the Gulf of
Ormus; the chief Cities whereof are Kerman, Bermazir, the Port of Kuhestek, and
the Cape of Jasques.

The sixteenth is Farsistan, or that part of Persia so properly called; the
chief Cities whereof are Schiras, Caseron, Benarou, Firus-abat, Darab-guier,
etc. To which you may add the little Province of Laraston, with the City of
Lar, just against Ormus. But this Province formerly extended no farther than
Benarou, two days journey from Lar, before Sha-Abas conquered the Kingdom of
Lar, and then the Kingdom of Ormus. Now they are both united; though they have
both several Governors, as they had distinct Princes before. The Ports in this
Province upon the Persian Gulf are Bander-Abassi and Bander-Congo.

There are two other little Ports in the Persian Gulf, about thirty hours sail
from the Mouth of Euphrates, but not capable of receiving any other than small
Barks; which are very much to be admired; for in regard the Inhabitants are
ignorant of the use of Iron, it is strange to see their Boats made so handsome
and strong withal; the Planks being only tied together with a Cord, which is
made of a kind of Hemp taken from the outside of the Coco-nut.

The last is the Province of Cursistan, formerly Susiana, which Euphrates and
Tigris joining together separate from Chaldea; the principal Cities whereof are
Suster, anciently Susa, the Capital City of the Empire of King Ahasuerus,
Ahawas, Scabar, Ramhormus, etc.

The temper of the Air in Persia varies according to the variety of situation.
The Country of Edzerbaijan is very cold, but very healthy. The Air of Mazandran
is very unwholsom; for being a low fenny Country, and full of Insects, when the
Waters dry up in the Summer, the Insects also dye and infect the Air. Sometimes
those bad Waters overflow the Country; in so much that the Inhabitants receive
a tincture in their Complexions from the color of the Earth. The Province of
Guilan is included in the Province of Mazandran; and the Air is so unwholsom,
that the People cry of him that is sent to command there; Has he robbed,
stolen, or murdered, that the King sends him to Guilan?

At Ispahan, which is almost in the middle of Persia, there are six months of
hot, and six months of cold weather. The Snow falls three or four times in a
season, and sometimes so very thick, that there is hardly any traveling upon
the Road. About a League from the City, toward the Mountain, there stands a
Stone about two or three Foot high, which when the Snow hap'ns to cover,
prognosticates a plentiful Year; and the first Countryman that carries the
news thereof to the King, receives a hundred Tomans. As for Rain, there is very
little falls there, unless it be in April, and then it sometimes rains very
hard.

In the Southern Provinces, the heats are very excessive, and kill abundance of
our Europeans, especially those that are given to drink.

All Persia is watered with little Rivers; but there is not one navigable River
through the whole extent of it, unless it be Aras, or the Araxes of the
Indians, which carries some few flat-bottom'd Boats. The other Rivers, instead
of growing bigger, the farther they keep their course from the Springs, grow
shallower for want of Water, by reason of the infinite number of Kreises or
Channels, which they cut out of the Rivers to water the Lands, which would not
bring forth so much as only Grass without the help of those Cuts; unless it be
in the Province of Mazandran, which from September to March seems a kind of
Terrestrial Paradise, through the pleasing variety of Herbs and Fruits.
However, Persia in general being thus watered, is a most fruitful Country:
though it be true, that many of their Springs and Channels are lost and brok'n.
And Mirza-Ibrahim Governor of the Province of Edzerbaijan told me one day,
that in the very Territory of Tauris, there were above two hundred Springs
utterly lost, either by accident or negligence.

As for their Gardens, they water them with Well-water, by the help of a Wheel
and an Ox; but the running Water is much better, as not being so cold, and more
fatning to the Earth. And therefore the Fruits that grow in the Mountains which
are only watered by the Rain or by the Dews, are much better tasted, and keep
longer.

Persia is a mountainous Country, but for the most part the Mountains are very
dry and barren. As for Woods, there are none in all the Country. Travelers are
also forced to go a great way out of their Road to find a Spring; and sometimes
they shall ride ten or twelve Leagues, before they meet with any Water but what
they carry in their Bottels. There are some Mountains out of which they dig
Salt, as Stones out of a Quarrey. There are also Plains where the Sand is
nothing but Salt, though it be not so savoury as our Northern Salt.

Of late several Copper-Mines have been found out, of which the Natives make
all sorts of Kitchen-Housholdstuff. Their Lead comes from Kerman; their Iron
and Steel from Corasan and Kasbin, though not so good as that of Spain. Their
Steel is very fine, with a smooth grain, and grows very hard in the Water, but
it is as brittle as Glass. Neither will this sort of Steel agree with the Fire:
so that if the Fire have not more than a double heat when the Steel is forged,
it will look just like a piece of burnt Charcoal. The Steel which we call
Damas-Steel comes from the Indies, and the Persians call it Gauherdar.

There are also some Mines of Gold and Silver in Persia, wherein it appears
that they have anciently wrought. Sha-Abas also tried again, but found his
expense to be more than his profit: whence it is become a Proverb in Persia,
Nokre Kerven dehkrarge nohhassel; The Silver-Mine of Kerven, where they spend
ten to get nine. which is the reason that all the Gold and Silver of Persia
comes out of Foreign Countries.

CHAP. II. Of the Flowers and Fruits of Persia, of Turquoises and Pearls.
THE Flowers of Persia are nothing comparable to our European Flowers, neither
for variety nor beauty. For having passed the Tigris in the Road to Persia, you
meet with nothing but Roses and Lillies, and some other Fruits peculiar to the
Country.

As for Roses, they have great store, which they distill, as they do
Orange-flowers, and transport the Waters into all the Eastern parts of Asia.

I never left the Court of Persia, but some of the Lords, especially four of
the white Eunuchs, begged of me to bring them some Flowers out of France; for
they have every one a Garden before their Chamber door: and happy is he that
can present the King with a Posie of Flowers in a Crystal Flower-Pot.

There are in Persia Apples, Pears, Oranges, Granates, Prunes, Cherries,
Apricots, Quinces, Chestnuts, Medlers, and other sorts of Fruit, which is not
generally so welltasted as ours.

Their Apricots indeed, especially the lesser sort, are better than ours. When
you open this Apricot, the Stone cleaves in two, and then the Kernel, which is
only a small Skin, as white as Snow, is more pleasing to the taste than if it
had been preserved.

As for their Melons, they are most excellent, and very plentiful, neither is
it so dangerous to eat them to excess, as ours. There have been some that have
eat'n six and thirty pound in a day, and have never been the worse. There is a
prodigious quantity of them sold in Ispahan; where they are brought to Market,
from midnight 'till four a Clock in the afternoon. Those Melons which are first
in season, and are called Guermez, are insipid, and taste of nothing but Water.
However the Physicians advise you to eat them, saying that they plump up the
Flesh, and renew the habit of the Body. The next to the Guermez, are better
than they, and they increase in goodness 'till they come to be quite out of
season; the last of which they keep all the Winter long.

Though they have such vast plenty, yet they never leave but one Melon upon a
stalk, and when it is as big as a Nut, the Gardener, or his Wife, or his
Children, lie down upon the ground and lick off the Down, which they say keeps
the Melon from being sweet, and ripening kindly.

The Persians have also a particular sort of Quince-Pepin, but not so good as
ours, which they fry unpar'd, casting great store of Salt in the Pan to excite
thirst, and then present them to their Friends at their Collations. They have
also Almonds and Figs, but few Small-nuts or Wall-nuts.

Oil they have none, but in the Provinces of Mazandran and Guilan, which
furnish all the rest of Persia; but the Olives are rotten, black, gravelly, and
not worth any thing, compared with Provence-Olives.

Armenia, Mengrelia, Georgia, and Media abound in Vineyards. They bury their
Vines all the Winter, and take them up again in the Spring by reason of the
cold. In the hotter Countries they dress their Vines as we do, without any
under-propping them. There are three sorts of Wines in Persia. That of Yesd is
very delicate; that of Ispahan but ordinary: that of Yesd is transported to
Lar, where there lives a great number of Jews, who care not to live but where
they may have good Wine, and that at a cheap rate. It is also carried to Ormus,
where it is sold half in half cheaper than the Wine of Schiras. As for the Wine
of Schiras, it is made of one only Grape, sweet in taste, but which heats the
Mouth extremely. This sort of Grape is called Kichmishe; it is a white Grape,
without any stone, as vulgarly believed; but however it has a stone, though it
be hardly to be perceived; which nevertheless will appear in new Wine, when it
frets like a little Ligament. They say that the Wine of Ispahan is cold upon
the Stomach, but that it fumes into the Head. For its coldness upon the Stomach
I can say little, but I know it will warm the Head, if a man takes too much of
it. In Persia they never keep their Wine in Tuns, but in great earthen Vessels
baked in an Oven, either glazed, or else smeared over with the fat of a Sheeps
rump, stopped up with wood'n Covers, covered over again with a great piece of
red Calicut, that lies over all the lids of the Pots.

The King and his Lords have other sorts of Cellars for magnificence, where
they treat such as they invite. These are four square Rooms not above three or
four steps deep, with a Well in the middle, the floor being spread with Turkey
Carpets. Now at the four corners of the Well stand four great Bottles
containing twenty Pints a piece, the one of White, the other of Claret. Between
the great Bottles stands a row of lesser Bottles filled, a Bottle of White, and
a Bottle of Red. In the Cellar-Wall are several niches one above another, and
in every nich a Bottle, still varied Gules and Argent; a very pleasant sight to
good Companions in a Room, which is as light as day.

As for Herbs and Roots they have very good in Persia, but above all, most
excellent Roman Lettuce. But there is no sort of Pulse, nor can they find a way
to make Pease grow among them. The Carmelites carried Asparagus, Artichoaks,
and Succory, which were never seen there before, but now begin to thrive very
well.

As for Turquoises and Pearls I shall speak thereof in my discourse of Jewels,
toward the end of my Indian Travels.

CHAP. III. Of the Beasts of Service; of the Fish and Fowl of Persia.
THe Beasts for service in Persia, are Horses, Mules, Asses, and Camels. The
Horses of Persia are but of an ordinary stature, less than ours, very narrow
before, but very swift and light. They carry their heads very ill in running,
by reason of the custom to which the Persians use them. For they have got a
trick of managing their Horses, yet never getting upon their backs; they teach
them to Amble by tying their feet with two Cords of an equal length, to the
middle whereof are fastened two other Cords that are fastened to the Saddle,
which two Cords keep their feet so, that they cannot stir but at such a
distance; and so they deal with their Mules upon which the old men generally
covet to ride. The Horses of Persia are very docible, and easily brought up.
They give them nothing else from one Evening to another but a Sack full of
chopped Straw, with a measure of Barley which they mingle together with the
Straw, to the end they may eat both together. When the Barley is newly eared,
they give it them for fourteen or twenty days together to purge their bodies,
as we for the same end put our Horses to Grass in the Spring. The Persian
Horses hold out very well 'till eighteen or twenty years of age; but they never
cut their Stone-Horses in that Country. In the Winter, they never take off
their Shoes, but only Frost-nail them. Their Furniture is very light and
handsomely made. And this is further observed, that whereas we keep Goats in our
Stables and Inns, the Persians keep Hogs.

There are two sort of Asses in Persia. Those that are bred in the Country only
serve to carry burdens; but there are a sort of Arabian Asses that are swift
and very handsome, excelling in price the common sort of Horses. The Merchants
of Ispahan keep these Asses in their Country Houses, taking it for a great
piece of Grandeur to Ride every Morning to their Shops.

Some parts of Persia are perplexed also with wild Beasts, as Lions, Bears, and
Leopards, but there are but very few; nor have we heard that ever they did any
great mischief. Porcupines they have also; and I my self saw brought before the
King two men, the one of which was Shot through the Thigh, and through the Leg
with a Porcupine's Quill. The second was killed, the Porcupine having darted
his Quill a little above his right Pap through his Breast. As for their Fish,
there are an abundance of Carps, Trouts, and Pikes in the River Aras; but in
all the other Rivers of Persia there is but one sort of Fish, which is a kind
of Barbel. In the subterranean Channel which they bring to water their fields
there is another sort of Fish very plentiful of bones, and as little as can
well be eaten.

Where the white Mulberies grow by the River side, so soon as they begin to
bear fruit, it is very good pastime to see the Crabs, as big as the Palm of a
man's hand, come out of the River after Sunset, and climb the trees to eat the
fruit, and then by break of day return into the River again. They are delicate
food, far beyond Creyfish, but a hot provocative Diet, as the Physicians well
observe.

During the Frost they bring from the Caspian Sea great store of Salmon or
Salmon-Trouts, four or five Foot long. The Province of Media is well stored
with Sturgeon from the mouth of the River Araxes. In the same Sea there is a
certain Fish like a Carp, which they salt and dry like our Herrings. From the
Persian Gulf comes nothing but Salt-fish, which is transported over all the
Kingdom.

Their Fowls are much the same that we have in Europe, only I do not remember
that I ever saw any Quails in the Country. As for their Pigeons, they fly wild
about the Country; but only some which they keep tame in the City, wherewithal
to decoy the rest: which is a sport the Persians use in hot weather as well as
in cold. Now in regard the Christians are not permitted to keep these Pigeons,
some of the vulgar sort will turn Mahometans to have that liberty. There are
above three thousand Pigeon-houses in Ispahan. For every man may build a
Pigeon-house upon his own Farm, which yet is very rarely done; all the other
Pigeon-houses belong to the King, who draws a greater Revenue from the Dung
than from the Pigeons: which Dung, as they prepare it, serves to smoke their
Melons.

Poultrey is very plentiful in Persia; and the Armenians brought out of Europe
the way how to fat Capons; the first so fatted they presented to the King, who
liked them so well, that he ordered that the richest of the Armenians should be
commanded to provide him such a number every year. There are no Turkeys in all
Asia; but the Armenians trafficking to Venice carried some from thence, which
when the King had tasted, he liked so well, that he ordered the Armenians to
breed him up such a number, and to stock the Kingdom with them. But the
Armenians, seeing the King would impose a new Tribute of Turkeys as well as
Capons, grew negligent, and suffered the Chickens to dye as soon as they were
hatched. Thereupon the Persians suspecting the fraud, commanded the Armenians
to keep the dead Turkeys, that they might be Judges how they came by their
deaths: And it was my wonder to see so many young Turkeys hanging against the
Walls of some Houses in Zulpha, that occasioned this Story to be told me.

All sorts of Waterfowl are as plentiful in Persia, as with us.

Upon the Frontiers of Media and Armenia, at a certain season of the year are
to be seen a great number of Birds, much like to our Owzils. Much about the
same time the Corn begins to appear, but then is the ground covered with such
infinite swarms of Locusts, that the Armenians are forced to betake themselves
to their Processions, and to water the ground with a Water which they fetch a
great way off, whereinto the Bodies of several martyred Christians were thrown.
Three days these Processions and waterings of the ground continue, and after
that, whether it be that the forementioned Birds do eat the Locusts, or only
drive them away, in two or three days the Country is clear of them.

As for Birds of prey, the Country wants none, Falcons, Sparrow-haws, Lanerets,
etc. of which the King of Persia is very well provided, having above eight
hundred belonging to his Game. Some of these Birds are taught to fly at the
wild Boar, or wild Ass, or wild Goat; others at Cranes, Herons, wild Geese, and
Partridge. The chiefest of which Birds are brought from the Southern Mountains,
extending from Schiras to the Persian Gulf.

The King takes great delight to hunt the Boar and Heart; and if it come to pass
that the Game outrun the Dogs, then they let fly one of their Hawks, who
presently seizes the head, and while she is continually pecking and disturbing
the Beast, the Dogs are presently at his heels. The Hawks are taught to stop
like a Horse at full speed: else they would never quit their prey, which they
presently do, as soon as ever the Falconer shows them their reward. Now their
way of ord'ring or making the Hawk is this. They take the skin of a Heart, head,
body, and legs, and stuff it with Straw, to the end it may be like the Beast
which they intend to represent in the nature of a Quarry. When they have set it
in the place where they usually train up the Hawk, they lay meat upon the head,
or in the holes of the eyes, to the end the Bird may be sure to seize those
parts at his downcome. Being accustomed to feed in this manner for some days
together, they fix the Beast upon a Plank with four Wheels, and cause it to be
drawn with long Cords by certain men, that mend their pace every day, 'till at
length it is drawn by a Horse at full speed, whereby the Bird is accustomed by
degrees not to forsake her prey. After the same manner they counterfeit all
other sorts of Quarrys to enter their Hawks, as well wild Boars, wild Asses, as
Hares and Foxes. Some there are that will order a Crow with the same industry
as you would make a Hawk. They have have also a certain Beast which they call
Once, which has a spotted skin like a Tiger, but which is nevertheless very
gentle and tame; this a Horseman will carry behind him, and when he sees a
wild Goat, he sets down the Once, which is so nimble, that in three leaps he
will be upon the back of the wild Goat; though the wild Goat be a very swift
Creature. The Once immediately strangles him with his sharp teeth. But if by
accident the wild Goat get from him, the Once will stand still in the same
place abashed and troubled, so that an Infant may take him and kill him,
without the least resistance made in his own defense.

The Kings of Persia take great delight in Hunting, and in that sport it is
that they love to show themselves magnificent: Insomuch that Sha-Sefi desirous
to treat all the Ambassadors then at his Court, which at that time were the
Tartarian, Muscovite, and Indian, carried them along with him into the field,
and having taken a great number of Hearts, Fallow-dear, Hinds, and wild Boars,
he caused them all to be made ready to be eat'n the same day: And while he was
feasting, an Architect had order to raise a Pyramid of the heads of those
Beasts in the middle of Ispahan, of which there are some remains to this day.
When the Architect had raised it to a considerable height, he came very
pleasantly to the King, and told him he wanted nothing but one head of some
great Beast to finish the Work. The King, whether in his Wine, or to show the
Ambassadors how absolute he was over his Subjects, turning briskly toward the
Architect; Thou say well, said he, nor do I know where to meet with a Head
more proper than thy own. Thereupon the miserable Architect was forced to
submit his own Head, the King's Command being presently put in execution.

CHAP. IV. Of the manner of Building in Persia.
IN regard there is little Wood or Stone in Persia, all the Cities, except some
Houses, are generally built of Earth; but of an earthen, or rather a kind of
Potter's Clay, so well wrought, that you may cut it like Turf, being wrought to
a just consistency. The Walls are made with lays of Earth, according to the
proportion intended, and between every lay of Earth, three Foot high, two or
three rows of Bricks baked in the Sun. These Bricks are made in a square Mold
three singers thick, and seven or eight inches broad: and for fear they should
cleave with drying in the Sun, they lay over them pounded Straw to keep them
from chopping in the heat. They never lay the second Lay 'till the first be
dry, nor is the second Lay to be so broad as the lowermost. Those Buildings
which are made of Brick baked in the Sun are very handsome; and after the Wall
is raised, the Mason plasters it over with a Mortar made of Potter's Clay
mingled with Straw; so that the defects of the Building being covered, the Wall
appears very firm and close. Then the Workman plasters the Mortar over again
with a Lime mixed with Muscovy-Green, which he pounds with a certain Gum, to
render the Lime more glutinous: and then rubbing the Wall over with a course
Brush, it becomes as it were damask'd and silvered, and looks like Marble. The
poor are contented with only bare Walls, or some course daubing that costs
little. The middle of the House consists of a large Portico, twenty or thirty
Foot square; and in the middle of the Portico a Fountain full of Water. It is
all open upon one side; and from the Portico to the Pond or Fountain all
covered with Carpets. At every corner of the Portico is a Room to sit and take
the fresh Air; and behind another large Room, the floor whereof is spread with
Carpets, Mattresses, and Cushions, according to the quality of the Master of
the House. Upon the two sides of the Portico are two other Chambers, and doors
to go from one Chamber to another: and thus are the Houses of the great Lords
built, but only they are more spacious. For their Houses consist of four great
Parlours, that look toward the our corners of the World, and every Parlour has
two Chambers upon each side, which make eight Chambers, that surround a great
Hall in the middle. The King's Palace is also built after the same fashion: and
generally the Persian Houses are very low, it being a rare thing to see one
three Stories high. Yet all their Chambers and Rooms are arched, wherein the
Persian exceeds us. For without all that trouble and time that we spend, they
will presently raise an Arch so broad and high as easily demonstrates the skill
of the Workman. The tops of their Houses are flat and terrass'd; being
plaster'd with Earth mixed with Straw chopped very small, and well tempered; which
they bind together with a layer of Lime beat'n for seven days together, which
makes it as hard as Marble, and if they want Lime, they pave the Terrass with
square Tiles baked in an Oven, so that the Rain can do no harm. But they are
very careful to shovel off the Snow, for fear it crack the Terrass with lying.
Without the Houses show nothing, but within they are curiously painted with
Birds and Flowers, wherein the Persians are no bad Artists. They take great
delight to have several little Chambers, with several Doors, and
Lattice-windows, the quarrels whereof are of Glass of various colors. This
sort of glazing serves generally, and indeed more properly, for the Apartments
where the Women may come. For they might have Crystal-windows if they pleased,
but they glaze the void spaces in this manner, that their Women may not be
seen; after they have framed the open place that gives light, like a Flower-Pot
with several Flowers in it, which the Glass of several colors imitates to the
life; whereby it is impossible that the Windows should be peer'd through;
besides, that it is pleasant to the Eye. The Doors of their Houses are of
Tchinar-Wood, which is very noble, and their Wainscoting is as neat. The
Persians that love ostentation, always display their rich Carpets, Mattresses,
Cushions, Coverlets, and all the most costly Furniture they have, in the fore
part of their dwellings: For the Haram, or the Women's Quarter is but meanly
adorned, in regard they are never visited by any men but their Husbands. In
some of their Rooms they have very narrow Chimnies; for the Persians set all
their Wood upright which they burn, because of the Smoke; besides, they make
but small Fires, in regard they have so great a scarcity of Wood. When they
would go to sleep, they lie down upon a Plank covered with a Carpet, and wrap
themselves in a quilted Blanket. In the Summer they sleep in the open Air, upon
their Terrasses; and in regard the Women lie there too, there is an order
obtained, that the Moullahs that sing upon the Mosquees shall not presume to go
up in the morning, because it might be their hap to see the Women as they lay;
it being one of the highest pieces of infamy imaginable for a Woman to be
discovered with her Face open.

There are some Houses that belong to great Lords, that have a square place
before their Doors, where they that come to visit them may put their Horses, to
the end the Street should not be pestered. If you look upon the Front of their
Houses, there is little ornament to be seen, unless it be upon some which have
been lately built.

CHAP. V. A Description of Ispahan, the chief City of the Kingdom and Dominions
of the King of Persia.
ISpahan, Sphahan, or Sphaon, as the Persians pronounce it, which some
Travelers have too unwarily affirmed to be a fine City, lies in the Province
of Hierac, which composes some part of the ancient Kingdom of the Parthians. It
is the Capital City of all Persia, and a very large place, where the King
usually keeps his Court. The Records of the Persians declare that formerly it
was two contiguous Towns, one part whereof belonged to Haider, and the other to
Neamed-Olahi, two parts of Ispahan still retaining those two names, which has
occasioned great quarrels and debates among the people, while they have both
been eager to prefer their own quarter. Nor indeed could Ispahan be accounted
other than a Village, before Sha-Abas had conquered the Kingdoms of Lar and
Ormus. But then observing so fair a Situation, where he might as well be near
the Provinces which he had newly conquered, as for the design which he had to
extend his Dominions to the East and West, as he had enlarged them to the
South, he quitted Casbin and Sultany to reside at Ispahan, as in the center of
his Empire.

This City is seated in a vast plain, which extends it self three ways fifteen
or twenty Leagues. Upon the South about two Leagues from Ispahan rises a very
high Mountain, on the top whereof toward the West are to be seen the remains of
a very strong Fortress, where Darius kept himself, when Alexander gave Battle
to him in that Plain. In the side of the Rock is a Grotto, either natural or
artificial, or both, out of which issues a natural Spring of excellent Water,
where a Dervis usually inhabits.

The Circuit of Ispahan, taking the Suburbs all in, is not much less than that
of Paris; but the number of Inhabitants is ten times greater at Paris than at
Ispahan. Nor is it a wonder that a City should be so large and yet so ill
peopled, where every Family has its particular House, and every House its
particular Garden. What ever way you come to it you may discover first the
Towers of the Mosquees, and then the Trees that environ the Houses, so that
Ispahan seems rather a Forest than a City. The Plain being fertile is well
inhabited, but there are no Villages in it, only three or four Houses in a
place together.

The Walls of Ispahan are of Earth, to which do belong some pitiful Towers
without Battlements or Platforms, Bastions or Redoubts, or any other
Fortification. The Moats also are as bad, neither broad nor deep, but always
dry. In some places also the people have beaten down great gaps in the Wall, to
get the nearest way into the City; yet they reckon ten Gates, which are but of
Earth however, and of no defense; the chief of which are Der-Vasalsehab, not
far from the King's Palace, Der-Tokshi, Der-Mark, Der-Vasal-Lembon,
Der-Nasan-Abad, Der-Sha, and Der-Dekt. The Gates are made of Planks rudely
joined together, and covered with plates of Iron four fingers broad, and as
thick as a Crown, fastened with flat-headed Nails. The Keys are never carried
to the Governor, but left with a silly Porter that op'ns and shuts the Gates
as he pleases himself; for indeed there is no necessity of shutting the Gates
when there are so many other ways into the City.

The City of Ispahan is ill laid out; for the Streets are narrow and unequal,
and for the most part dark, because of the Arches that go from one House to
another, so that a man is forced sometimes to feel his way for two hundred
paces. Moreover the Streets are many times annoyed with Loads of Ordure and the
Carcasses of dead Beasts, which cause a most filthy stench, and would be very
infectious certainly, but for the wholesomness of the Air. In the most part of
the Streets are Wells, which are stopped up in Summer, and opened in the Winter
to carry away the Rain and the Snow into the Arched Channels which run under
Ground through the middle of the Street. There are also before every Door
certain Troughs to receive the filth and ordure of every Family, which the
Countrymen come and carry away to Dung their Grounds. Every morning the
Countryman comes with his Ass to lade Dung; and it is observable that he is
more diligent to carry away the Dung of the Armenians, Franks, and Jews that
drink Wine, than of the Persians that drink none. And this is the profit of the
Servants of the House that sell an Asses Load of Dung for five, and sometimes
for ten or twelve Kasbeshe.

The Streets of Ispahan, as of all the rest of the Cities of Persia are not
paved, which makes them very incommodious both Summer and Winter. For in the
Summer the dust puts out your Eyes, unless it be in the Streets where the great
Merchants live, and about the Meydan, where there are people hired to water the
Streets Morning, Noon, and Night. Those people go about the Streets also with a
Boracho full of Water, and a Glass, with Ice in a Bag, to give them drink that
desire it: Nor do they take any money, being paid out of the Legacies left by
persons deceased for that purpose. In the Winter this dust turns to mire half
the leg deep; though it be very true that there are very few people to be seen
then in the Street; for in regard of the vaulted Channels that run through
every Street, should the soaked Earth chance to fail under the Horse, it might
endanger a Limb. Besides, the Persians are so superstitious, that they will
hardly receive a man within their doors with a spot of Dirt upon his Clothes,
for fear of being defiled by him.

You shall also meet with little Holes against the Walls of the Houses in the
open Street, where the Persians are not ashamed to squat and Piss in the face
of all the World. If there be any running Water in the Street, they take a
little in their Hands and wash their Member with it; or if there be no Water,
they rub it against a Stone or the Wall, which they take for a great piece of
gentility and modesty.

That which farther contributes to the nastiness of the Streets of Ispahan, is,
that the Butchers throw the Blood and Excrements of the Beasts which they kill
into the Streets. If a Horse or a Mule, a Camel or an Ass dye, they presently
throw him into the Street. True it is, that there are people who come presently
to buy it of the Owner; who make Harisse, which they sell to the poor Workmen.
This Harisse is thus prepared; they boil the flesh of the dead Beast with Corn,
and after it is well boiled they mash it together, 'till it becomes like a
Pottage. They also make Harisse of good Mutton; both which sorts they sell in
the Marketplace, or great Meydan of the City.

Though the City of Ispahan be dirty, yet there is a way for persons of ability
to avoid it; for they never stir but on Horseback, with two or three Lackeys,
called Chatres, that run before to make room. For the Men are all upon the
false Gallop in the Streets, without any fear of hurting the Children: by
reason that the Children are not suffered to play in the Streets like ours, but
as soon as ever they come from School, they sit down by their Parents, to be
instructed by them in their Profession.

These Valets or Footmen make a Trade of Running; of which the King and the
Lords have several in their service; it being a piece of grandeur to keep a
great many. They serve from Father to Son, undergoing an Apprentiship in
Running. From six to seven years of age, they only set themselves to walk
slowly. The next year they run a League at a time upon a handsome trot, the next
year after they run two or three Leagues, and so proportionably for the rest.
At eighteen years of age they are allowed a Scrip of Flowr, with a flat piece
of Copper to bake their Bread upon, and a Bottle of Water; all which they carry
about them when they run. For these people when they are sent Post never take
the Caravan-Road, but the shortest cuts through the Deserts, and must therefore
accustom themselves to carry their Provision. The King and the Lords have no
Chatres, but what are Masters; which degree they are not to arrive at without
some Ceremony and performing a Race, like our Jemmy and the Butcher of Croyden.

If he be a Lord that owns the Chater who desires to be a Master, he sends for
all his Friends, sets up a Scaffold in the Meydan, provides a Collation, and
sends for the Curtisans to divert the Company. Now there is not one of these
Guests that does not bring something to give this Chater after the Race is run,
either a Bonnet or a Girdle, or some other thing, part of which the Chater
gives to his fellows. Then the Chater appears with his Legs greased, his Thighs
bare, only a slight short pair of loose Breeches, and a Girdle with three
little Bells hanging upon his Belly. Thus accouter'd he starts from Ali-Capi,
and between Sunrising and Sunsetting he runs backward and forward to a Stone
a League and a half from the City toward the Mountains; running in that time
six and thirty of our common Leagues, or a hundred and eight Miles. While he
runs, there is Kourouk in the Meydan, and upon all the Road where he runs, and
three or four Horsemen that continually ride to and fro, to see that there be
no deceit in the Chater's Race; who when he approaches near the City, ride
before to give notice of his coming. Every time he starts and returns, the
Drums and Trumpets sound; at the end of the Race there stand several persons
with Arrows in their Hands, and every time he comes to the Stone they give him
an Arrow, which he carries back every course to Ali-Capri. Every time he
returns, the Curtisans rub him and make much of him. All the time he runs, he
eats nothing, but drinks Sherbet now and then. If he acquit himself well, which
appears by the number of Arrows brought back, he is admitted a Master by the
approbation of the King's Footmen, who are superior to all the rest. The Kans
or Governors of Provinces run their own Chaters with the same Ceremonies, and
in the same manner.

The Fortress of Ispahan is nothing at all considerable. It joins to the Wall
upon the South side of the City, and is twice as long as broad, but without any
defense in the world, unless it be of some pitiful Towers made of Earth. Here
it is that the King keeps all the Rarities which he has purchased, or that has
been presented to him. For as to his main Treasure, I believe it consists
chiefly in Gold-Plate. Within the Fortress there is a large Field, sowed every
year with Rice and Corn; hard by which stands the House of the Capuchin-Friars.

Ispahan in general, unless it be the Meydan and some few arched Streets where
the Merchants live, is more like a great Village than a City; the Houses
standing at a distance one from the other, with every one a Garden, but ill
looked after, not having any thing in it perchance but only one pitiful Tree:
true it is that they begin to build better of late days, but it is without the
City. As for the Women, it is not a pin matter whether they live out of the City
or within, in regard they never stir out of doors, and as seldom go a-foot.

The Meydan or great Piazza of Ispahan was the contrivance of the great
Sha-Abas, who had never done it, if a great Prince of the ancient Race of the
Kings of Persia had not refused him the old Meydan, with several Privileges,
and the House that stood by it. Thereupon he designed this new Piazza, to draw
off the Merchants, and to spoil the old Marketplace, by their departure from
that quarter of the City which is less inhabited at this day. It is not far
from this old Meydan, that the Austin-Friars on the one side, and the
Carmelites on the other have their Habitations. There are also two sides of
that Meydan entire, under the Portico's, where sit only such people as sell
Herbs, Fruit, and Victuals; the other two sides are almost fallen to decay; but
when it was all standing, it was as handsome as the new one: and it is to be
wondered, that the Prince, who built it, did not choose the place where
Sha-Abas has built his, as being near the Water, and consequently far more
convenient.

The great Meydan then is a place about seven hundred Paces long, and between
two and three hundred broad. It has Buildings upon all the four sides; it lies
in length directly North and South; the Fronts are every one Portico'd, and
Terrass'd at the top; and on the City-side are little Chambers nine or ten Foot
high, which fall very much to decay, being only built of Brick baked in the
Sun. They are inhabited, the greatest part of them, by the most infamous
Curtisans of the City. At some Paces distance from the Portico's, is a Channel
which is paved with stone, and runs round about the Piazza; Sha-Abas caused
several Trees to be planted by the side of it, but both the Channel and the
Trees being altogether neglected, are fallen to decay; besides, that the smell of
the Water in the Summer time is very noysom.

In the midst of the Piazza stands a kind of a May Pole, or Mast of a Ship,
where the people exercise shooting at Birds. When the King comes to shoot, they
set a Cup of Gold upon the top of the Mast, which he is to strike down with an
Arrow. To which purpose he must ride full speed, nor is he permitted to shoot
'till after he has past the May Pole, turning himself upon the crupper of his
Horse: a remain of the ancient custom of the Parthians, that killed their
Enemies flying.

The Cup belongs to him that strikes it down; and I have seen Sha-Sefi,
Grandfather of the present King, in five Courses strike down three Cups.

From this Mast or May Pole down to the great Mosquee, they sell nothing but
Wood and Charcoal: from the same Pole to the Sun-Dial upon the North-side, are
none but such as sell old Iron-Tools, old Harness for Horses, old Coverlets,
and other old Brokery-ware, as in our Long-Lane.

From the Pole to another Mosquee, to the South, just against the Sun-Dial, is
the place for all the Poulterers. The rest of the Piazza toward the Palace, is
always kept clean, without any Shops, because the King comes often abroad in
the Evening to see Lions, Bears, Bulls, Rams, Cocks, and all other sort of
Creatures fight which are brought thither.

The people of Ispahan, as in many other Cities, are divided into two parts,
the one called Hedari, the other Nametlai; and upon all the Combats of Beasts
beforementioned, there are always very considerable Wagers laid between these
two Tribes. The King, who is a neuter, gives to the Master of the Beast that
gets the upper hand sometimes five, sometimes ten, sometimes twenty Tomans,
according to the value of the Wager laid; and he that wins the Wager, presents
the Master of the the Beast likewise. They have also a Sport at breaking of
Eggs, by knocking the ends one against another, some of which Eggs come to
three or four Crowns. The Hens that lay them are bred in a Country which they
call Sausevare, about a hundred leagues from Ispahan, toward the Province of
Karason; the Cocks of which Country are bigger and stronger than other Cocks,
and cost some of them a hundred Crowns. There are a sort of Tumblers also, that
after Dinner set up their Stages in the Meydan, and toward the Evening, they
that play the Maid-Marians come and encompass a square place with a course
piece of Calicut; and then through another very fine Cloth, the Wenches show a
thousand tumbling Tricks and antic Postures. When they have done, they come
and ask the Spectators for Money, who give them every one what they think fit.
Every Friday, which is as it were Market Day, the Country-folks bring to Town
what they have made in the Villages, as Doors and Windows fitted to be hung up,
Window-frames, Locks, and other things of that nature. Upon that day also they
sell Mules, Horses, Camels, and Asses, which brings a great confluence of
people from all parts.

Upon the West side, where stands the Gate of the Palace, and Ali's Gate,
between the Canal and the Portico's are ranged some seventy Pieces of Cannon
upon, their Carriages. These Guns, together with the Sun-Dial, were brought
from Ormus by the Great Sha-Abas, of which the English ought to have had their
share; for without their assistance he never could have taken the Town.

From the corner of that Front, which touches upon the Eastern Front of the
Mosquee, in the middle, are all Sadlers Shops; and from that Mosquee to another
corner that touches upon the Western Front, live the Booksellers,
Book-binders, and Trunk-makers. In the middle of the Southern Front stands a
Portal, with a Tower upon each side, which leads to a Mosquee, the Gate whereof
is covered all over with Plates of Silver, and is certainly the neatest Portal
and fairest Entrance into any Mosquee of Persia.

At the other end of the same Front, where it joins to that upon the West,
there is a great Portal that leads to a false Gate of the King's Palace; near
to which, as soon as you are entered, you meet with the Apartment of the Great
Treasurer, who is a white Eunuch, and having the Keys of the Chamber where the
Money lies, takes care to pay whatever the King orders him. Through that false
Gate all the King's Provisions are carried into the Palace. This way also enter
they that are entertained for the Manufactury of the King's Tissues, Silks,
Sattins, Coverlets, and the like. In the same Enclosure also the Franks, who
are under the King's Wages, and live at Zulpha, come every day to work; as also
all the most particular and eminent Artists that the King hires.

The Western Front, which makes one of the two lengths of the Meydan, is thus
appointed; from the Southern angle that touches the Trunk-maker's quarter, live
all your Pedlers that sell all the small Commodities of Norimberg and Venice.

As for the King's Palace, I cannot make any handsome description of it, in
regard there is nothing of Beauty either in the Building or in the Gardens. I
think I have been as far in the House as a man could go, every time I was sent
for by His Majesty; but excepting only four Rooms which they call Divans, I saw
nothing but pitiful low Galleries, and so narrow that hardly two men could pass
a-brest in 'em. In one of those Galleries I had audience of the King, in the
Garment of Honor which he had bestowed upon me. But in regard I have spok'n of
two of them in another place, and that the other two are much alike both
Building and Furniture, I shall say no more of them here.

From the King's Palace Gate to Haly's Gate live the Goldsmiths, Lapidaries,
and Gravers of Stones for Seals: Haly's Gate is a plain Gate, naked of Work; of
which I have already spok'n.

Between Haly's Gate, and the other angle of the same Western Front, stands a
great Gate which leads into a Bazar, where all the Armenians that live at Zulfa
keep their Shops, and sell all sorts of Cloth that comes out of Europe, and
other the choicest Wares of Persia. At the end of that Bazar stands a fair Inn
two Stories high, which the Mother of Sha-Abas the second caused to be built.
In the middle stands a great Fountain with four great Gates, which lead into
four other Inns. Here by the way let me give a Traveller and a Trader in Persia
this advice; that if his Goods be not very heavy, he never hire a low Chamber,
as being three times dearer than those above: For the Chambers which the Sun
lies upon most in the Summer, are the Chambers which cost least. Not but all
the Chambers in the Inn are Taxed at the same rate by the King; but the Host
for his profit will find some pretense or other to raise his price, pretending
those Chambers be hired already which you desire, especially if they be corner
Chambers, which are the largest and most commodious. And indeed without this
collusion Chambers would be very cheap. The best convenience of those Inns is,
that a man is more secure in one of them then in a private House: For there if
it happ'n that a piece of Goods be stolen; or that your Chapman prove insolvent
for Goods bought, the Innkeeper is to make all good; being by the Law to
receive so many blows a day 'till he pays the sum demanded. The Merchant also
gives two in the hundred for every thing that he sells, and when the Market is
done they presently go to the Host, who sets down in his Book the quality of
his Goods, and the names both of buyer and seller. If he knows not the buyer,
he is bound to go and enquire after him, and if he be not solvent, the Merchant
takes his Goods again. Sometimes the Merchant to save the two in the hundred,
combines with the Purchaser to carry away some of his Goods without the
knowledge of the Host, which is done by greasing his Deputies fist, who will
presently shut his Eyes. But then if the Purchaser proves insolvent, the
Merchant dares not complain, because his Goods are not Registered in the King's
Book, whom he has defrauded of his Custom.

No less secure are the Bazars or Marketplaces, where the Merchants shut up
their Shops very slightly, the Bazars being strongly guarded both within and
without all night long. As for the petty Stalls in the Meydan, every one puts
up his Ware in a Box Padlock'd up, and then lay them down at one end of the
place one by another. As for the course sort of Ware, as Tents, Cords, Ropes,
and such other things they only heap them under a large Coverlet fastened at
the four corners by four sticks, for the Meydan also is as strongly guarded as
the Bazar.

Between Haly's Gate and that which leads to the Bazar where the Armenians keep
their Shops, live all those that deal in Russia Leather, making Borachio's to
tie under the Horses Bellies, little Buckets, and Furniture for Horsemen, as
also Bowyers, Fletchers, and Forbishers. From the last Gate to the end of the
Gallery, live all the Druggists and Apotheearies.

At the Angle upon the two fronts upon the East and North, there is a Gate that
leads to the Great Bazar; next to that live only your Sails-men that sell whole
Habits for men, as Shirts, Sheets, Hose, and the like. There be also those that
sell Leather Shoes for men and women; which Shoes are always worn by persons
of quality.

Out of this Bazar you go into another full of men that work in Copper, such as
make Pots, Plates, and other Utensils for the Kitchen. Here also live those
that make Files, and the blades of Sythes. The rest of the Bazar is possessed
by Dyers of Calicut; and at the end of the Bazar is a fair Inn, where all the
Merchants live that sell Musk, Russia Leather, and Furrs.

I have in another place observed that the King has a great Revenue out of the
Bazars and Inns which he has caused to be built, which is particularly laid out
in provision for his Table. For the Law of Mahomet forbidding Princes to impose
Taxes or Customs upon the people, they do not believe that the money which
arises from thence is fit to be employed or laid out for the necessaries of
life, believing that their food so purchased would do them no good. By virtue
of this prohibition of Mahomet it is, that the Merchants take all the liberty
they can to deceive the King of his Customs, believing that they cannot offend
the Prince, while they transgress not the Law. Besides, that if they should pay
all the King's Duties, the price of Goods would rise so high, so as to spoil
the whole Course of Trade and Commerce. Neither would the Revenue of the
Caravansera's, Bazars, and Gardens suffice for the Kings Kitchen, were not the
several Kans or Governors of Provinces obliged to supply that expense every
Week in their turns, whereby those expenses cost the King little or nothing.

Upon the North-Front of the Meydan, are made under the Portico's separations
for Chambers, that look upon the Piazza, where people go to smoke Tobacco and
drink Coffee. The Seats of those Rooms are placed as in so many Amphitheaters,
and in the midst of every one stands a large Vessel full of running Water,
wherewith their Pipes be cleans'd when they are over-fowl. All the Persians
that haveany spare time, fail not every day to resort to those places between
seven and eight in the Morning, where the Owner of the Room presently brings
them every one their Pipe and their Dish of Coffee. But the Great Sha-Abas, who
was a man of a great understanding, finding those places were only so many
Meeting Houses, where men assembled to talk and prattle of State Affairs, a
thing which no way pleased him; to break the neck of those petty Cabals, he
ordered that a Moullah should be sure to be betimes at every place before the
rest of the people came thither, and that he should entertain those
Tobacco-whiffers, and Coffee-quaffers, sometimes with a Point of the Law,
sometimes with History, sometimes with Poetry. This custom is still observed:
so that after this entertainment has lasted two or three hours, the Moullah
rising up, cries to every one in the Coffee-Room, Come my Masters, in good time,
let us all now retire every man to his business. Straight every one retires upon
the Moullah's words, who is liberally entertained all the while by the Society.

In the midst of the North-Front stands a great Portal, with a large Dial over
it, which Sha-Abas brought from Ormus when he took it from the Portugals. But
the Dial is of no use, nor is ever like to be. Round the Tower of that Portal
runs an open Gallery, with a kind of a Cieling over head supported with
Pillars; from whence every Evening about Sunset, and at Midnight, a noise of
Drums and Trumpets is to be heard through the whole City. Though the truth is,
the Music would never charm a curious Ear. Out of some parts of the Gallery
are contrived little Dormitories, where the chiefest of the Court lie. In all
the Cities where the Kans reside is the custom of making this rattling noise of
Drums and Trumpets observed, and not elsewhere.

On each side of the Portal, under the Horologe, are five or six Banks of
Jewellers, who there put to sale certain parcels of Pearls, Emralds, Granats,
and Turquoises, which are not of any great value: every parcel being set by it
self in a Dish, and the whole Stall covered with a silk Net, to preserve the
Stones from being stolen.

Just against the same Portal, going toward the South-Front, you meet with two
little Goals five or six Foot high, and sev'n or eight distant one from the
other. Here the men play at Pall Mall on horseback, the Horseman being to
strike the Ball running at full speed, between the two Goals.

Through that Portal you enter into an Enclosure much like the place where the
Fair of St. Germans is kept, and there it is that the Merchants of Gold and
Silver-Tissues and other rich Stuffs, with all your finest sorts of Calicuts
and Linnens, keep their Shops.

The Court side of the Meydan, which is upon the East, and which answers to the
grand Front where the King's House stands, is thus appointed. In the middle
stands a Duomo covered with a kind of baked Earth, and as well the Duomo as the
Portal, which is very high, are all varnished over. You ascend nine or ten
steps, the Port of Haly facing it on the other side of the Piazza. From the end
of the Portico's that touch the North side of the Mosquee, live the
Shopkeepers that sell sowing-Silk, and small Manufactures of Silk, as Ribands,
Laces, Garters, and other things of the same nature. From the Mosquee to the
other end, are all Turners, that make Cradles for Children, and
Spinning-Wheels. There are also some Cotton-beaters, that make quilted
Coverlets. Without the Portico's are none but Smiths, that make Scyths,
Hammers, Pincers, Nails, and such like things; with some few Cutlers.

This is all that can be said of Ispahan, and that great Piazza, which some
perhaps have set out in better colors. But I have represented all things as
they are, as being one that have seen them oftener, and beheld them a longer
time than ever any Frank that Traveled into Asia.

CHAP. VI. Of Zulpha, a little City, separated from Ispahan by the River
Senderou.
ZUlpha, which others call Julpha and Giolpha, is distant from Ispahan toward
the South half an hours walk, the River Scnderou running almost at an equal
distance between the two Cities. The way that leads from one City to another is
a Walk some fifteen hundred Paces long, and seventy broad, almost equally
divided by the River. It begins from a Pavilion or Tabernacle forty Foot
square, which joins to the hinder part of the King's House, with a double
Story, to which several Windows give light, closed with wooden Lattices very
artificially wrought. None but the King and his Household pass that way into the
Walk. For they that go from Ispahan to Zulpha, find the way into the Walk
through a Gate which is close adjoining to the Tabernacle. This Walk is called
the Street of Tcharbag, or the Street of Four Gardens.

A Channel runs all along the Walk from the Tabernacle, where a little Rivulet
falls into it, and fills it as far as the great Bridge. The two sides of the
Channel which are paved with Stone, and are two or three Foot broad, make one
way, which Passengers may, and many times do take; for the usual way both for
Horse and Foot, lies upon each side of the Walk, behind the Trees, which are
planted in a straight line to the very Walls of the King's Gardens, which close
the Alley on each side. It is a kind of a Causey of Freestone, somewhat
raised, and four or five Foot broad. There is but one row of Trees on each
side, straight and high, called Tchinards, with one tuft at the top. The space
between the Channel and the Trees is not paved, but lies common, and is
sometimes sowed. About two hundred Paces from the Tabernacle or
Banqueting House, the River falls into a great Pool, about thirty or
thirty-five Foot in diameter; and in that place, as also in others somewhat
beyond it, where there are also other Pools, the Walk is crossed by a Causey
paved and raised, ten or twelve Foot broad, as the rest are. Upon the left hand
of the first Pool stands another Tabernacle or Banqueting House, much alike in
structure and bigness to the former; in which place, in a low arched Room with
a Fountain of Water in the middle, you may go and drink Coffee. From that House
to the Bridge the Walk descends, and the Water makes some falls.

All the Gardens on each side of the Walk, both on this side and beyond the
Bridge, belong to the King. But you must not imagine that these Gardens, or that
of Hezardgerib, which is the fairest of all Persia, are so curiously set out,
nor so well kept as ours in Europe. For they have no such lovely Borders, nor
such close Walks of Honeysuckles and Jasmin as are to be seen in the Gardens of
Europe. They suffer the Grass to grow in many places; contented only with a
good many great Fruit Trees, tufted a-top, and planted in a line, which is all
the grace of the Gardens of Persia.

In each side of the Walls between which the Walk runs, at a true distance of
space, are gates neatly contrived, and over each a little Room. Almost in the
middle of the Walk between the great Banqueting House and the Bridge, upon the
left hand, stands a House of the Dervi's, to whom the King has given one of his
Gardens to build upon. There they keep the Rellcks of Haly, or some other
Prophet; for you shall see them standing under a certain Arch, before which the
Persians make a most profound Reverence. These Dervi's come every Afternoon
about three or four a Clock into the Bazars of Ispahan; every two, an old one
and a young one, choosing his quarter. They go from Shop to Shop, instructing
the People upon some Point or other of the Law: the young Dervi's answering the
old ones at certain times. Their Habit is only two Sheepskins or Goat Skins,
the one hanging before, the other behind, with a great leathern Girdle, four or
five fingers broad, garnished with several great Plates of Latten. They throw
another Sheep-skin cross their Shoulders, which they tie before, under their
Chins. Upon their Heads they only wear a little Lamb-skin in form of a Bonnet,
letting the feet hang down to their Necks, over their Cheeks. They carry a
great Club in their hands, as the Painters represent John the Baptist in the
Wilderness. Between their girdles and their wastes they stuff a company of
pitiful Flowers, or else a sort of Herbs, which after Exhortation, both the
young and the old Dervi's bestow upon the Merchants and Tradesmen, from whom at
the same time they receive Alms. Toward the Evening they go home again; and I
forgot to tell you, that before the door of the House stands always a large
Vessel of Water with several little Cups, and Ice in the Summer, where all
passengers may drink upon free-cost.

The River of Senderou, which as well as the rest of the Rivers of Persia,
except the Aras, is not able to carry a Boat, is a very great relief to
Ispahan. Behind the Mountains of the South beyond Zulfa is another River,
called Abkuren, which about five or six Leagues above Ispahan runs within a
League and a half of Senderou. Sha-Abas the first attempted to have joined the
two Rivers together, to which purpose he went about to have removed certain
Rocks that stood in his way, but not being able to compass his design, his
Successors laid aside all the thoughts of attempting any more. Could it have
been done, the Champaign of Ispahan would have been one of most fertile and
delicious places in the World; whereas now the River is of no use, running
through Desert Countries and Plains of Salt. As for the River of Senderou, in
Winter it over-flows, but in Summer it has very little Water, being oftener
foarded than crossed over upon Bridges. About four Leagues above Ispahan they
are constrained to force it into their Lands to water their Fields and Grounds,
which else would produce nothing at all. Wells they have a great many in
several places; but besides, that they are not able to furnish that great
quantity of Water which is necessary; the River Water is much better to fatten
the Land. Now you must observe that their Channels never return to the River,
being wasted upon the Ground; so that the River of Ispahan being very much
wasted before it comes to the City, by reason that it is still lessened by so
many Channels, about ten or twelve Leagues from thence, it ends as it were
quite spent in a few Mershes. This scarcity of Water, which is so general over
all Persia, is the reason that they are extraordinary Husbands of it, and buy
it very dear. Therefore is the superintendant of the Water, which brings the
King in a very considerable Revenue, one of the most contended for employments
in the whole Court. For every Garden is Taxed more or less according to its
bigness, for the Water it requires once a Week; which Water is let go into the
quarters which have need of it, every Garden having a particular Channel whence
they have their Water by turns. But you must have a care of attempting to bring
this Water in before your turn, for should it come to be known, an easy Fine
would not excuse the matter. I knew two Franks, who because they presumed to
take in Water in the night time before it was their turn, had like to have lost
all their Land by Confiscation, had it not been for the particular favor of
the King to the Franks; and yet all that favor did not excuse them from being
soundly amerc'd.

There are four Bridges a quarter of a Leagues distance one from another that
cross the River of Senderou to Ispahan. That which crosses the walk bears the
name of Alywerdi-Kan, who caused it to be built, being also called the Bridge
of Zulfa. It is built of good Brick joined together with Freestone, and very
level, not being higher in the middle than at either end. It is not above three
hundred and fifty paces long, and twenty broad, being supported by several
small Arches of Stone which are very low. Of each side there is a Gallery eight
or nine foot broad which runs from one end to the other, several Arches
twenty-five or thirty foot high supporting the Platform, where when the heat is
not extreme, they that please may walk for the sake of the fresh Air. But the
most usual passage is under the Galleries, where there are several out-lets
upon the River to let in the fresh Air. For the Galleries are very high from
the level of the Bridge, to which you ascend by easy steps, the middle of the
Bridge not being above twenty-five foot broad, serving for Wagons and
Pack-horses. There is also another way all along by the Water side, where there
are several Stones laid to step upon, to keep you from being watchet. It
crosses through all the Arches of the Bridge, through little doors made in
every Arch from one end to the other, descending from the Bridge by a little
pair of stairs, taken out of the thickness of the Arches supporters. There is
another Staircase to ascend up to the Galleries of about two fathoms broad,
with stays or Rails on both sides. This Bridge is truly a very neat piece of
Architecture, if I may not say the neatest in all Persia.

THE PERSIAN GOLPHE


There are also three other Bridges upon the River, one above the Bridge of
Zulfa, and two below. The first but meanly built, but very commodious for the
Armenians, when they travel Westward, who would else be forced to go a great
way about, through the whole City of Ispahan.

The first of the other two Bridges below the Bridge of Zulfa, was built by
Sha-Abas the second, Father of the present King. It is almost equal to it in
Structure; but it has one particular beauty, which is a hexagonal place in the
middle of the Bridge, which causes the Water to fall in that part with a
pleasing noise. For that being the deepest part of the River, Sha-Abas resolved
to build a Bridge there; partly for the Gaurs sake, to the end, they might not
come through the walk of Tcharbag, and that going from Ispahan they might have
a shorter cut home. The Habitation of the Gaurs is only a large Village, the
first Houses whereof are but a little way from the River; though the walk that
goes from Ispahan to the King's Bridge is both longer and broader than that of
Tcharbag, planted on both sides with a row of Trees, but no Channel in the
middle.

Before each of the Avenues to the Bridge stands a House that belongs to the
King for his divertisoment. That upon the left side of the River toward
Ispahan, was by the great Sha-Abas given to the Capuchins. For as soon as they
came to Ispahan, upon their Examination, the King was extremely taken with
their behavior. He asked them how they lived, and whether they took any money?
To which the Capuchins making answer, that they never handled any money but
contented themselves with Alms; the King believing his Subjects, would give
them very little, bestowed that House and Garden upon them. But they stayed not
long there, because it was too big for them to repair, and too far from the
City, so that the Roman Catholics in the Winter could not get to their
Chapel. Now they have built themselves a very handsome House not far from the
King's Palace, at the Cost of Father Joseph, one of their own order.

There is another old Bridge a quarter of a League below the Gaurs Bridge,
which is upon the Road from Ispahan to Schiras.

But to return to the long-walk of Tcharbag, which continues above eight
hundred paces beyond the Bridge of Zulfa to the Garden of Hezardgerib. The
Rivulet that passes that other part of the walk, comes from the same River
which they have cut three or four Leagues above Ispahan. When you have walked
about four hundred paces, you meet with a fall of Waters that tumbles into a
Pool, from whence there are twelve steps to ascend to the end of the Alley. The
walk is fronted by the great House which stands before the Garden of
Hezardgerib, or the thousand Acres. The House consists but only of one great
Hall over the Gate, and four small Chambers at the four corners of it.

Hezardgerib is the fairest Garden in Asia, though it would be accounted
nothing in Europe. However as it lies upon the descent of a Hill, it consists
of sixteen Terasses, sustained by a Wall sixteen or seventeen foot high. There
is but little Water in any of the Wells; but that which has most is in the
fourth Terrass. That is a great Octagonal Pool about a hundred and twenty foot
in Diameter, round about which are several Pipes that throw up the Water about
three foot high, and there are three steps down to the Water. A Channel paved
with Stone runs through the principal Alley, which goes no farther than the
building. This Channel is as wide as that of the Channel of Tcharbag, whence it
is supplied as being right opposite to it. In the tenth Terrass you meet with
another Fountain of the same bigness and form with that in the fourth; and in
the last which terminates the Grand Alley and the length of the Garden, there
is another Channel which crosses all the Alleys, which, like the great one
compose the length of the Alley. Besides this, there are open Rooms to take the
fresh Air, some falls and murmurs of Water, but for borders and close Alleys,
and Arbours, you must expect no such thing, either in Hezardgerib, nor in any
other part of Persia.

Having walked in the great walk of Tcharbag, you meet upon the right hand with
a Street between two Walls of the Gardens that belong to the King, which Street
leads you to Zulfa, not above two or three Musket Shots distance off.

Zulfa a Colony of Armenians which Sha-Abas brought from Zulfa a City of
Armenia, is so much increased for some years since, that it may now pass for a
large City, being almost a League and a half long, and near upon half as much
broad. There are two principal Streets which contain near upon the whole
length, one whereof has on each side a row of Tchinars, the roots whereof are
refreshed by a small Channel of Water, which by a particular order the
Armenians bring to the City, to water their Gardens. The most part of the other
Streets have also a row of Trees, and a Channel. And for their Houses, they are
generally better built, and more cheerful than those of Ispahan.

How they came to be fetled here, I have already described: And now the number
See the Description of Zulpha.
of Inhabitants is strangely increased by the accession of several other
Christians of diverse Sects, as Jacobites, Cophtes, and Nestorians, who formerly
lived in the Suburbs of Ispahan. Neither was Sha-Abas so cruel in transplanting
the Armenians away out of their own Country; for they were all at that season
poor laboring men, who knew not at all what belonged to Trade. Since that time
they are grown very rich: so that the Armenians have no cause to be covetous of
the Habitations of their Ancestors. And now I will tell you how they came to be
such great Proficients in Trade.

Sha-Abas, who was a man of a great Genius, and a person of great undertaking,
considering that Persia was a barren Country, where there was little Trade, and
by consequence little Money, resolved to send his Subjects into Europe with raw
Silks, so to understand whence the best profit would arise, to bring Money into
his Country. To which purpose, he resolved to make himself Master of all the
Silk in his own Country, by purchasing it himself at a reasonable rate, taxed
by himself, and to reap the gains by his Factors: and withal, thought it
necessary to seek an Alliance with the great Kings of Europe, to engage them on
his side against the Turk. He first sent to the King of France, Henry the
Fourth. But he dying before the Ambassador arrived, answer was made the
Ambassador, That if the King of Persia had any thing to say to the King of
France, Lewis the Thirteenth, he must send a new Ambassador, which was never
done.

Three or four years after he sent an Ambassador to the King of Spain,
accompanied with a Persian Merchant of Ispahan, putting into their hands a
considerable quantity of Bales of Silk. He also sent along with them a
Portuguez Austin-Friar, to be their Guide and Interpreter. The Persian Merchant
would have sold the Silks, as was the King's order, and have bought a Present
more becoming. But the Ambassador overruled by the Friar, resolved to present
the King of Spain with the Bales of Silk. The Merchant not able to oppose the
Ambassador, returns home forthwith to give an account to the King, who approved
his management. The Ambassador proceeds, and coming to the Spanish Court,
presents his Bales of Silk to the King, who asked the Ambassador whether his
Master took him for a Woman, that he had sent him so many Bales of Silk to
spin; and immediately sent away the Present to his Queen, presenting the
Ambassador but very meanly: who thereupon seeing the Error he had committed,
made have home; but upon his return, the Persian King having notice of the ill
success of his Negotiation, caused his Belly to be ripped open in the public
Marketplace.

About fifteen years after, he trusted a considerable quantity of Silk with a
Merchant's Son of Ispahan, and sent him to Venice: who when he came there, took
a stately Lodging, and spent his Money at a strange rate, especially among the
Courtisans; to maintain which expense, he continually sold great quantities of
Silk. The Venetians seeing a private man live so splendidly among them, and not
believing so great a quantity of Goods could belong to one single Merchant, but
rather imagining him to be a Factor for some Company who suffered for his
folly, wrote to all the Ports of the Levant, and having intelligence who he
was, the Senate thought fit to seize his Person and his Goods, before he had
consumed all; at the same time giving a civil account to the King of Persia,
what they had done. To which the Persian King returned a most obliging Answer
of Thanks, sending withal an intelligent Persian Merchant to take an account of
what was left, to whom the Venetians were very punctual. As for the Prodigal
Persian, who thought it not his wisest way to return into Persia, what became
of him is not material to this Story.

Sha-Abas by these Experiments observing the little inclination of his Subjects
to Trade, who were naturally addicted to Pride and Expense, which is no part of
a Merchant's business, cast his Eyes upon the Armenians, men able to endure the
The Platform of the famous Fortress of Candahar which is the Best Place in all
Asia
labor of long Journeys, sober persons, and great Husbands, and such who being
Christians, might more freely Trade among the Christians; and made choice of
them, as being most proper and fit for Trade. Whereupon, picking out the most
Judicious among them, he delivered to every one so many Bales of Silk,
according to their Capacity; for which they were to pay at their return, a
reasonable Rate taxed by the King, who allowed them what more they got for
their Expenses and Gains. Those people in a short time became so expert, that
there is not any sort of Trade which they will not now undertake; for now they
run as far as Tunquin, Java, and the Philippines, and indeed over all the East,
except China and Japan. But if they do not thrive, they never return; as being
a place where they must either give an exact Account, or else suffer the quick
and severe Justice of Drubbing, which never fails those Factors that are ill
Husbands for their Masters.

And indeed the Armenians are so much the more fit for Trading, because they
are a people very sparing, and very sober; though whether it be their virtue of
their avarice, I know not. For when they are going a long Journey, they only
make provision of Biscuit, smoked Bufalo's flesh, Onions, baked Butter, Flowr,
Wine, and dried Fruits. They never buy fresh Victuals, but when they meet with
Lambs or Kids very cheap in the Mountainous Countries; nor is there one of them
that does not carry his Angle to fish withal, when they come to any Ponds or
Rivers. All these Provisions cost them little the Carriage. And when they come
to any Town where they are to stay, they club five or six together, and lie in
an empty Chamber which they furnish themselves; every one carrying his
Mattress, his Coverlet, and his Kitchin-Instruments, which is a great piece of
Thrift. When they travel into Christendom, they carry along with them Saffron,
Pepper, Nutinegs, and other Spices; which they exchange in the Country-Towns
for Bread, Wine, Butter, Cheese, Milk-Meats, and other Provisions which they
buy of the poor Women. When they return out of Christendom, they bring along
with them all sorts of Mercery-ware, and Pedlery-ware of Noremberg and Venice;
as little Looking-glasses, trifles of Tin enameled, false Pearls, and other
things of that nature; which pays for the Victuals they call for among the
Country People.

In the beginning of their Trade, there returned very few Caravans into Persia
without two hundred thousand Crowns in Silver, beside English and Dutch
Clothes, fine Tissues, Looking-glasses, Venice-Pearls, Cochenel, and Watches;
which they thought most proper for the Sale of Persia and India.

At length those Armenians became so exquisite in Trade, that several of them
have left Estates of two, some twenty thousand Tomans. But the richest among
them was Cotgia, or Monsieur Petrus, who left forty thousand Tomans in coined
Money, besides his Horses, Furniture, and Lands in the Country, his Jewels and
Plate; all which are never reckoned a Merchant's Estate, but only the ready
Cash with which he trades. Cotgia Petrus was very much esteemed for his
Charity, and the great Church which he built, which is a kind of Covent, with a
Bishop and Monks. Nor is the fair Marketplace, all environed with Shops, a
little beholding to his Generosity.

The Armenians of Zulpha have this advantage over all the Christians of the
East, that they enjoy Lands and Privileges, the King not permitting the least
injustice to be done them, nor that any Mohammedan should live at Zulpha. They
have also the privilege to be as well clad as the Persians, and to make use as
they do of Bridles of Gold and Silver. Their Wives also are very richly
habited, in stripped Sattins purfl'd with Gold, and other rich Europaean Silks.

The King names whom he pleases among the Armenians to be their Chief; whom
they call Kelonter, who judges all their differences, and taxes them to make up
the Sum which they are to pay to the King every year.

The Language of the Armenians is either vulgar or learned: the learned is only
used by the Ecclesiastics, in reference to their Religion. They write like us,
from the left to the right, having found out peculiar Characters about four
years since. They have three Languages very natural to them, which however are
very differente the Armenian, which is their ancient Country-speech, which they
have preserved from Father to Son; the Persian, which is the Language of the
Country where they live; and the Turkish, of which they make very much use in
course of Trade. As for their Women, they speak nothing but the Armenian, as
having no converse with strangers, and never stirring out of their houses.
There are some Armenians speak Italian and French, as having learnt it in
Europe.

There are in Zulpha fifteen or sixteen Churches and Chapels of the Armenians,
among which you are to count two Nunneries for Women. There are in Ispahan
Austin-Friars, Carmelites, and Capuchins, and in Zulpha Jesuits. The Jesuits
that came last have but a little House, but to make them amends they have a
large Garden. Though the number of the Religious Teachers is far greater then
the number of Hearers: for in all Ispahan and Zulpha, take the Franks that come
out of Europe, or born in Persia, as well Men as Women, there are not six
hundred persons that profess the Catholic Religion. As for the Armenians, they
are so obstinately fixed to their own Religion, that they will hear of no
other; and nothing but Money has sometimes caused them to seign the embracing
of another. Friar Ambrose a Capuchin staid a while at Zulpha, to whom several
of the principal Armenians came to School to learn French, in hopes of
establishing a Trade with France. But the Armenian Archbishop and Bishops
fearing lest the Children should be infected with some other Religion,
excommunicated all Fathers that sent their Children to School. And finding that
they little regarded the Excommunication, they shut up the Church doors, and
stirred up the People against the Religious Franks; so that Father Ambrose was
forced to leave Persia, and retire to Surat.

Moreover there are in Ispahan both Jews and Indian Idolaters. Nor are the Jews
so miserable and beggarly, as they seem to be: they intrude, according to
custom, into all Business; so that if any has a mind to buy or sell any rich
Jewel, he need do no more but speak to them. In the Reign of Sha-Abas, the
Athemadoulet persecuted them so grievously, that either by force or by cunning
he caused them to turn Mahometans; but the King understanding that only power
and fear had constrained them to turn, suffered them to resume their own
Religion, and to live in quiet.

There are about ten or twelve thousand Banians in Ispahan, who are known by
their yellow Complexions, or rather by a yellow Mark made with Saffron upon the
top of their Foreheads. Their Turbants are less than usual, and their Shoes
are almost like ours, embroidered with Flowers a-top. They are all Bankers, and
very knowing in Money. The greatest part of the Money of the principal Moneyed
men of Ispahan is in their hands for improvement sake. So that if you want a
considerable Sum, you may have it the next day upon good Security, and paying
severe a Interest, which those Banians will squeez up sometimes to 18 per Cent.
But if it be not very privately exacted and paid, the Law of Mahomet, which
forbids the taking of Interest, lays hold upon the whole Sum, and confiscates
it every Penny.

CHAP. VII. Of the Religion of the Persians; of the great Feast of Hocen and
Hussein, and the Camel-Feast.
THE difference among the Mahometans, does not consist in the different
Explanations which they put upon the Alcoran; but in the several Opinions which
they hold concerning the first Successors of Mahomet, from which have aris'n
two particular Sects entirely opposite; the Sect of the Sunnis, and the Sect of
the Schiais.

The first, who are of the Turkish belief, maintain that Abou-baker succeeded
immediately to Mahomet, as his Vicar or Vicegerent; to him Omar; to Omar Osman;
to Osman Mortuz-Ali, Nephew and Son-in-law to Mahomet by Marriage of his
Daughter. That Osman was Secretary to Mahomet, a porson of Courage, as well as
the other three: and that they were all valiant Soldiers, and great Captains,
who extended their Conquests more by force of Arms than by Reason. And thence
it comes that the Sunnis will not allow of Disputes, but propagate and maintain
their Religion altogether by force.

The Schiais, who are of the Persian belief, detest Abou-baker, Omar, and
Osman, as Usurpers to the Succession of Mahomet, which only belonged to Haly,
his Nephew and Son in Law. They hold that this succession consists in elev'n
High Priests descendants from Haly, who makes the twelfth in this order. 1.
Haly, Son of Aboutaleb. 2. Hocen, eldest Son of Hali. 3. Hussein, his second
Son, who suffered death in defense of his Father's Succession. The place where
the Sunnis gave him battle and slew him, is called Kerbela near to Babylon, and
is a holy place in high veneration among the Persians. 4. Iman-zin-el-Abedin.
5. Mahomet-el-Baker. 6. Iafer-el-Scadek, who introduced the Law into Persia,
that if any Christian, Jew, or Idolater turned Mahumetan, he should be declared
general Heir to his Family to the exclusion of Brothers and Sisters, and that
he might allow what he pleased to his Father and Mother. Whence arose two
mischiefs, that some Armenians, Christians, and Jews turned Mahumetans, to get
the Estate of the Family, and others turned Mahumetans to keep their
possessions. 7. Moussa-Katzem. 8. Hali-el-Rezza, whose Tomb at Meshed is as
highly venerated among the Persians, as Mahomet's among the Turks. 9.
Mahammet-el-Iouad. 10. Hali-el-Hadi. 11. Hocen-el-Askeri. 12.
Mouhemmet-el-Mouhadi Shaheb-zaman. The Persians hold the same belief as to the
last Iman, as we do of Enoch and Elias; which is the reason that several people
leave them in their Wills Houses ready furnished, Stables full of stately
Horses, and other necessaries for them to make use of when they return to Earth
again. They attribute to this Iman the Surname of Zaheb-zaman, or Lord of Time.

These two Sects of Sunnis and Schias overrun the three principal Kingdoms of
India, viz. the Great Mogul's, the King of Golconda's, and the King of
Visapour's. The first and last being Sunnis, that is to say, both the Kings and
Lords of the Court; for their Subjects are most of them Idolaters. Some Schiais
there are in the Courts of both Kings, in regard the Officers of the Army are
for the most part Persians, though in outward show they may follow the Religion
of the Prince. But the King of Golconda Koutoub-Sha is a zealous Schiais.

I come now to the Grand Festival of the Persians, which is the famous Feast of
Hocen and Hussein.

Eight days before the Festival begins, some of the more zealous sort black all
their Bodies and their Faces, and go naked in the Streets with only a covering
about their secret parts. They carry two Flints, one in each hand, which they
knock one against another, wrything their Bodies, and making a thousand antic
Faces; and all the while crying out, Hussein, Hocen; Hocen, Hussein; which they
act and speak with so much Labor, 'till they foam again at the mouth. In the
Evening, the devout people admit them into their Houses, and feed them very
well. During those days, as soon as the Sun is set, you shall see at the
corners where several Streets meet, Pulpits set up for certain Preachers, who
prepare the people that flock to hear them to the devotion of the Feast. Now in
regard all Ages and Sexes go, there is no time in all the year so favorable
for the Women to meet their Gallants.

In the year 1667. the third of July, I saw the Festival by the favor of the
Nagar, who appointed me a place just against the Dela where the King sat. This
Dela is a Room built with a jetting upon that side of the Meidan next the
Palace Gate, one story high. Several Pillars sustain the flat bottom or floor
of the Dela, enriched with a Grotesco work of Gold and Azure, in the midst
whereof there was a Fountain that was filled with Water by the contrivance of a
Pipe. The Stage or Dela was open upon three sides, the longest side jetting out
upon the Piazza. Upon the Wall of the opposite side, which was close, were to
be seen several English and Hollanders, both men and women pictured with
Bottles and Glasses in their hands, as if they were drinking to one another.
Sha-Abas the second caused this Painting to be drawn by a Hollander.

About sev'n a Clock in the Morning Sha-Sephi the second, who since has changed
his name to Sha-Soliman the second, came and seated himself upon his Throne set
up in the midst of the Dela, all his Nobility standing about him. So soon as
he was sat down, the Great Provost appeared at the end of the Piazza mounted
upon a fair Horse, attended by certain young Lords, who caused the people,
consisting of the Companies of the two quarters of the City, which are twelve
in all, to advance to the places which were designed them. For formerly the
Companies would strive for the way; and therefore the King to prevent disorder,
ordered there should be a Provost, or Master of the Ceremonies to place them
without disturbance. As he was about his duty, a Horseman entered the Piazza,
armed with a Bow, a Quiver, and a Scimitar, followed by seven Men that carried
every one a Pike upright in their hands, with every one a Man's Head at the
top. Those were the Heads of certain Usbeck-Tartars, the neighboring and
mortal Enemies of the Persians, which those men had cut off from the shoulders
of their conquered Foes. The King caused five Tomans a piece to be given to
them that carried the Heads, and ten Tomans to their Leader. After them entered
three hundred Turks, which were fled from the Borders of Turkey, from whence
the Country People were taken by force, and sent to the Wars of Candy. They
complained, that whereas they were wont to be sent to their Winter Quarters
about the middle of October, the Turk kept them to the same hard service in
Winter as in Summer. All these were ordered to advance into the middle of the
Piazza, where they made their obeisance to him three times, and then humbly
besought him that they might dwell in his Kingdom, with their Wives, their
Children, and their Cattle. The King ordered Money to be distributed among
them, and that they should have Lands assigned them to manure. Then the Provost
caused the Companies to advance, every Company having the Thill of a Wagon
carried before him; upon every of which Thills was a Bier three or four Foot
high, the Wood of the Thill being painted with a Grotesco of Gold and Silver,
and the Bier covered with Satin. When the first Company had order to march,
three Horses were led before, richly harnessed; when they were come about a
hundred Paces forward into the Piazza, in view of the King, they that led the
Horses caused them to gallop, and then all the Company fell a running and
dancing about with the Bier. Besides that, every one flung up his short
Cassock, his Girdle, and Bonnet, put their fingers in their mouths, to whistle
as loud as they could. While the naked people, with their Flint-stones in their
hands, ran knocking their Stones together, crying out, Hussein Hocen, Hocen
Hussein, 'till they foam at the mouth again; not omitting to wryth their
Bodies, and to make all the scurvy Faces as before described. The three
Companies succeeding one another in the same Formalities, by and by came two
Companies more with a little Bier upon their Thills, and in each Bier a little
Child that lay as if dead. They that accompanied these two Biers wept and
sighed most sadly. These two Infants represented the Children of Hussein, who
when the Prophet was slain, were taken by Yerid, Caliph of Bagdat, and put to
death.

Upon this occasion you shall see a great number of Curtisans that come to the
Ceremony fall a weeping, who thereby believe their Sins are forgiven

When all the people were come into the Piazza, notwithstanding all the care
and good order that was taken, there were several that went to Sharps,
accounting it a great honor to fight smartly in the King's presence; and
farther believing, that if any one be killed upon that occasion, he shall be
Sainted; as indeed every one gives something toward his Interrment. The Grand
Provost seeing the Quarrel grow hot, and fearing more mischief, sent for five
Elephants, which ceased the Combat, by drawing the Eyes of the Spectators upon
them. The Elephants marched one before another, according to their Pay that was
allowed them, and their skill in War. Not that the King of Persia makes any use
of them in the Field, but only for State, keeps such as the Indian Princes
present him withal. Those five Elephants were covered with Houses of Cloth of
Gold, with a Fringe of the same round about. And upon the first, which was the
highest and the biggest, sat two Men, the one upon the neck, who guides the
Elephant; the other upon the crupper, carrying the King's Arm's in a Standard
fixed to a Half-Pike. Upon the other four sat only one Man a-piece, who were
the Governors. When they came before the place where the King sat, they were
all ranked five a-brest, at what time the biggest, which was in the middle,
stretched out his two forelegs forward, and his two hinder-legs backward,
'till his belly almost touched the ground; after which manner the Elephant
makes his obeisance. The other four did the same. Then laying their Trunks upon
the ground, and raising them again over their heads three times more, they were
made to stand with their heads where their tayls stood; and their Houses were
turned up; to the end the King might see in what condition they were, and
whether well looked after or no: which being done, they were led away again.

Upon one side of the Room where the King stood, a little Scaffold was set up,
covered with Tap'stry, some five Foot lower than the Kings. In the middle of
the Scaffold stood a great Elbow-Chair covered with black Velvet, where sat a
Moullah with six other Moullah's round about him. The Moullah made a Discourse
upon the Death of Hussein and Hocen of about half an hour long, which being
ended, the King caused a Calaat or Habit of Honor to be given him, as also to
the others, though not so rich. When they had all put on the Habit, the same
Moullah returned to his Chair, and made a Prayer for the health of the King,
and the prosperity of his Kingdom.

All these Ceremonies lasted from seven in the Morning 'till Noon, at what time
the King retired into his Haram. As for the People, they carry their Biers up
and down the City, and wherever two Companies meet, whether it be for the
upper hand, or to get foremost, they presently fall together by the Ears, and
knock one another down: for they are not permitted to carry any other Arms than
good big Clubs, almost as big as Levers.

Some time after the Feast of Hussein and Hocen, the Persians celebrate another
Festival, which they call the Feast of the Camel, in remembrance of Abraham's
Sacrifice. They have a great reverence for this Festival, saying that it was a
Camel and not a Ram which God sent to reprieve Ishmael (affirming that Ishmael
was to have been sacrificed, and not Isaac.) They choose out for this Ceremony
one of the fairest Camels they can meet withal, and adorn and dress him up with
several Plates of counterfeit Gold and Silver, and then lead him without the
City to a place which is before a Mosquee on the other side of the River of
Ispahan, upon Zulpha side; the Deroga or Provost accompanying the people. The
King was formerly wont to be at this Feast, accompanied with his Nobility, and
I have seen him there; but of late years he never goes, the Deroga supplying
his place.

When the King went thither, several Moullahs prayed for half an hour, after
which the King took a kind of a Javelin and darted it against the Camel: but
now in the absence of the King, the Deroga gives the first stroke. At the same
time they fling the Camel to the ground, with Ropes tied to his legs, and
cutting off his head and neck together, they divide the rest of the Body into
eleven parts more, to the end all the twelve Companies may have every one their
share. Every Company carries their share to the Master of the Companies House,
who is generally the ancientest among them. Which part is kept and salted up
'till the next Feast, and the piece the year before, so 'till then preserved,
is then boiled with Rice, and is the foundation of the Feast for the chief of
the Company, who take it for an honor to eat of it: For the rest, they boil
Rice with Mutton and Hens, and besides that, distribute large Alms to the Poor.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Religion of the Gaurs, the Relics of the ancient Persians,
adorers of Fire.
THere are no men in the world so scrupulous of discovering the Mysteries of
their Religion, as the Gaurs; so that I was forced to frequent their company
very much in most of my Travels, to pick out what I have here to deliver.

Of the present Condition of the Gaurs.
AFter the Persians began to persecute the Gaurs, great numbers of them retired
to Surat, and others into the Province of Guzerat. Now the King of Persia lets
them live in quiet; and there are now above 10000 in Kerman, where I staid
three Months in the year 1654. All that live in India are Tradesmen, and for
the most part Turners in Ivory; those in Kerman deal in Wool. Four days journey
from whence stands their principal Temple, where their Chief Priest resides;
whither they are once in their lives obliged to go in Pilgrimage. There are
some of these Gaurs live near Ispahan.

Of their Original, and their Prophets.
THey say that the Father of their Prophet was a Frank by Nation, whose Name
was Azer, and a Carver by Trade. That he left his own Country to live in
theirs, which at that time was the City of Babylon; where he took a Wife who
called her self Doghdon. That one night his Wife dreamt that God had sent an
Angel from Paradise to visit her, who brought her very rich Clothes, which she
put on. That a Celestial Light presently overspread her Face, and rendered her
as beautiful as the Sun; and that when she waked she found her self with Child,
which Child proved to be the Prophet Ebrahim-zer-Ateucht. That the Astrologers
of that time, by their skill in the Stars knew of the Birth of that Infant sent
by God, who was to govern Men, and reign in their Hearts. That those
Astrologers went and declared the same thing to the King, telling him that
there was a Child suddenly to be born, that would one day deprive him of his
Crown. Whereupon the said King, called Neubrout, and a great Tyrant, caused all
the Women with Child to be put to death, through the whole extent of his
Dominions.

But by a Miracle the big Belly of the Mother of their Prophet not appearing,
she remained undiscovered, and brought forth a Son. Her Husband, who knew
nothing of this Mystery, fearing he should lose his head if he did not discover
the business to the King, before he found it out another way, went and
confessed that he had a Child born, but that he knew nothing of her being with
Child.

Now you must know, that contrary to the custom of other Children, that cry so
soon as they come out of the Mothers womb, this Child laughed so soon as he was
born. For being to triumph over the Hearts of the people, he was to show signs
of joy; so that the people began already to rejoice in their future felicities.
This being signified to the King, he called his Astrologers together, to tell
him the meaning of so extraordinary a thing, and what would become of the
Infant. But the Astrologers not being able to satisfy him, he sent for the
Infant, and would have slain him with a Sword with his own hand; but God dried
up his Arm immediately, so that he could not. However, not terrified with so
great a punishment, transported with Choler, he caused a great Fire to be
kindled, and commanded the Infant to be thrown into it. But by the power of
God, the Fire which he had prepared to consume the Infant turned into a Bed of
Roses, where the Child most sweetly reposed.

They who from that hour began to honor the little Prophet, took away some of
that Fire, which has been preserved to this time. They keep it, say they, in
honor of so great a Miracle; and they have it in great veneration, because it
discovered the merit of their Prophet.

Nevertheless the King stopped not there, but still obstinate in his impiety,
notwithstanding all these Miracles, he prepared new torments for the little
Infant; but God chastis'd his incredulity and that of his people very severely,
by sending such an infinite number of Flies, and that of such a pestiferous
nature, that who-ever were stung with them died without remedy, unless they
immediately came and worshipped the Prophet, and kissed his Feet, in testimony
of their repentance. As for the King, who still continued in his impenitency,
an exemplary fate befell him. For one of those Flies stinging him in one of his
Ears, he died a most tormenting death.

His Successor was Sha-Glochtes. He also at the beginning of his Reign began to
persecute the little Infant, who now began to increase in years and virtue. The
King imprisoned him: but he was astonished when he heard that one of his
Horses, which he always confided in when he went to Battle, as being assured of
Victory when he rode him, had lost his four legs. Thereupon, wiser than his
Predecessor, and acknowledging from whence so dire a Correction proceeded, he
sent for the Prophet out of Prison, asked pardon for his incredulity, and
prayed him by his intercession to restore his Horse his legs again. The Prophet
willing to do him that favor, prayed to God four times, and every time he
prayed one leg returned to the Horse again. The King beholding such a Miracle,
was half converted; but being desirous to be farther convinced, he desired the
Prophet to throw himself into a Bath of melted Silver, which he would provide
for him; promising, if he came out safe, that he and all his People would
receive him as one sent from God, and be obedient to his Precepts in all
things. The Prophet resolutely undertook his offer, and the Bath being ready,
cast himself fearlesly into it; and as he went in, so he came out without the
least harm. Then the King and all the people that were present adored him for a
real Prophet, and gave him the name of Zer-Ateucht, or Washed in Silver.

The Prophet perceiving that all the people had him in so much veneration,
withdrew himself, and would not be seen any more. Nor do they justly know
what-became of him; which makes the greatest part of the Gaurs believe, that he
was taken up into Paradise both Soul and Body together. Others say, that having
found an Iron Coffin upon the Road near Bagdat, he put himself into it, and was
carried into Heaven by the Angels. They allow their Prophet three Children, who
are not yet come into the world, though their names be already given them. They
say that this Prophet Ebrahim walking one time upon the River without a Boat,
three drops of his nature fell from him upon the water, which are still
preserved there. That their God will send a Virgin, very much beloved by him,
upon the same River, who by the reception of the first drop shall become big of
the first Child, whom they call beforehand Ouchider. He shall come into the
world with authority, and shall cause his Fathers Law to be received, and
confirm it, not only by his eloquent Preaching, but by many miracles. The
second, whose name is Ouchiderma, shall be conceived after the same fashion; he
shall assist his Brother, and by causing the Sun to stand still ten years,
shall convince all the world of the Truth of his Doctrine. The third shall be
conceived by the same Mother, and shall be called Senoiet-hotius: He shall come
with more authority than his two Brothers, and shall perfectly reduce all
people to the Religion of their Prophet. After which shall be the universal
Resurrection, at what time all the Souls, either in Paradise or Hell, shall
return to take possession of their Bodies. Then say they, shall all the
Mountains, and all the Minerals in the world be melted, and shall fill up the
great Chaos of Hell, whereby the Mansion of the Devils shall be utterly
destroyed? After this the world shall be levelled, and be made fit to inhabit,
and men shall have every one their apartment answerable to the degree and
quantity of the good which they did in their life time: but that their chief
delight shall be to behold and praise God and Ebrahim their Prophet. They add
that before the Resurrection, those that are in Paradise do not behold the face
of God, no not the Angels themselves, except only one, who is always attendant
on him to receive and execute his commands. They also say that God will have
pity upon the Damned, and that they shall go into Paradise, as having suffered
enough already for their sins. By which it appears, that the Paradise of the
Gaurs is less remote from sense than that of Mahomet's invention; and that they
have a confused knowledge of the mysteries of Christian Religion.

Of the Books of the Gaurs.
EBrahim-zer-Ateucht being taken up into Paradise, they received by his means
seven Books of Laws, which God of his goodness sent them to instruct them in
the way of their Salvation. They also received seven others, containing an
interpretation of all the Dreams that could be Dreamed. Lastly seven others,
wherein were written all the secrets of Physic, and all the possible means for
the long preservation of health. They say that fourteen of these Books, which
contained the explication of Dreams and secrets of Physic are lost; for that
Allexander the Great carried them away, as esteeming them a vast treasure; and
for the Books of their Religion, because they were written in a language that
none but the Angels understood, Alexander for madness caused them to be burnt:
for which rashness of his, God punished him, and afflicted him with that
terrible sickness whereof he Died. Some Doctors and Priests that had did
themselves in the Mountains to save their lives from his Butchery, after
Alexander was Dead, met again together, and composed one Book by the strength
of their memories. I saw that Book which is a good large one, and written in a
different Character, either from the Arabian, Persian, or Indian. Their Priests
themselves that read in that Book hardly understand what they read, but they
have other Books that explain what is contained therein. When they read in that
Book, as also when they pray, they tie a Handkerchief about their mouths, as if
they were afraid their words should mix with the Air and receive any impurity.

Of the manner of their Baptism.
THe Gaurs never use Circumcision; but at the Birth of their Children practice
something like our Baptism. For some days after the Child is born, they wash it
with Water wherein certain Flowers are first boiled; and during that dipping,
the Priest, who is present, makes certain Prayers. If the Child dye without
that Washing, they do not believe but that it goes to Paradise; but they hold
that the Parents shall give an account for their neglect of the Infant, because
that Washing increases his favor and his merit in the sight of God.

Of their Marriages.
THe Religion of the Gaurs permits them to have five Wives, if they can
maintain them; nor is it laudable to repudiate any one but in case of an
evident Adultery, or that she turn Mohammedan; besides, it behooves her Husband
to stay a whole year, to see whether she will repent or no. If she come and
acknowledge her fault to the Priest, he enjoins her Penance for three years;
after which he remarries them, and they become man and wife again.

As to the Ceremony of Marriage, the Priest, when the Couple come to him, asks
the Man and the Woman in the presence of Witnesses whether they both consent;
then taking a little Water he says a few Prayers over it, and then washing both
their Foreheads he pronounces certain words, and there is all. But they are not
to marry within the third degree; nor do they know what it means to desire a
Dispensation.

But you must observe by the way, that though they are allowed five Wives,
there is but one which can be truly said to be married, with whom they are
obliged to lie at least two nights in a week, Friday and Saturday, and she
always goes before the rest. But if she have no Children in seven years, the
man is allowed to marry another, but not to repudiate the other, whom he is
bound still to maintain according to his quality.

So soon as Women or Maids perceive the custom of Nature upon them, they
presently leave their Houses, and stay alone in the Fields in little Hutts made
of Hurdles or Watlings, with a Cloth at the entering in, which serves for a
Door. While they are in that condition, they have Meat and Drink brought them
every day; and when they are free, they send according to their quality, a Rid,
or a Hen, or a Pigeon for an Offering; after which they go to the Bath, and
then invite some few of their Kindred to some small Collation.

Of their Fasts, Feasts, and principal Ceremonies.
THe Gaurs drink Wine both men and women, and eat Swines-flesh, provided it be
of their own breeding and feeding. They are very careful lest their Hogs eat
any ordure; for should they perceive that they had devoured any thing of
nastiness, they are strictly forbid'n to eat them. They never pare their Nails;
so that if by way of disgrace, or by any misfortune they are constrained to cut
their Nails or their Hair, they carry that which they cut off to some place
appointed without the City for that purpose. Five days in a year they abstain
from Meat, Fish, Butter, and Eggs; and three other days they fast altogether
'till Evening. They have also thirty Holy Days in honor of thirty of their
Saints, which they keep very strictly, no man daring to work. But the day of
the Birth of their Prophet is celebrated with an extraordinary Pomp; besides,
that then they bestow large Alms.

There is one day in the year when all the Women of every City and Village meet
together to kill all the Frogs they can find in the fields; and this is done by
the Command of their Prophet, who was one day very much annoyed by them.

Their Priests have several Books full of small Pictures in Watercolors, ill
done, representing how the several Sins of Men shall be punished in Hell,
especially Sodomy, which they abominate.

Of their Funerals.
WHen the Gaurs are sick they send for their Priests, to whom they make a kind
of Confession; whereupon the Priests enjoin them to give Alms, and other good
Works, to gain pardon of their Sins.

They neither burn nor bury their dead, but carry the Corpse without the City,
into a walled place, where are abundance of Stakes seven or eight Foot high,
fixed in the ground, and tie the dead Corpse to one of the Stakes, with his Face
toward the East. They that accompany the Corpse fall to their Prayers at a
distance, 'till the Crows come; for those Cemitaries draw the Crows to them. If
the Crow chances to fasten upon the right Eye of the deceased, then they
believe the person to be happy, and for joy they give large Alms, and make a
Feast in the field. But if the Crow fixes upon the left Eye, then they take it
for an ill Omen, return home sad, without speaking to one another; give no
Alms, nor eat nor drink.

Of their Adoration of Fire.
THe Gaurs would not be thought to give Honor to Fire under the title of
Adoration. For they do not account themselves Idolaters, saying that they
acknowledge but only one God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, whom they only
adore. As for the Fire, they preserve it and reverence it, in remembrance of
the great Miracle, by which their Prophet was delivered from the Flames. One
day being at Kerman, I desired to see that Fire, but they answered me, they
could not permit me. For say they, one day the Kan of Kerman being desirous to
see the Fire, not daring to do otherwise, they showed it him. He it seems
expected to see some extraordinary Brightness; but when he saw no more then
what he might have seen in a Kitchen or a Chamber-fire, fell a swearing and
spitting upon it as if he had been mad. Whereupon the Sacred Fire being thus
profaned, flew away in the form of a white Pigeon. The Priests considering then
their misfortune, which had happened through their own indiscretion, fell to
their Prayers with the People, and gave Alms; upon which, at the same time, and
in the same form the Sacred Fire returned to its place: which makes them so shy
to show it again. When they put any persons to their Oaths, they Swear them
before this Fire; for they think no person so impious, as to swear false before
that Sacred Fire, which they take for the Witness of their Oath. Their Priests
put them in dread of very great punishments, and threat'n them that the
heavenly Fire will forsake them, if they prove so wicked as to swear falsely
before it.

Of their Manners and Customs.
THe Language of the Gaurs is different from the Persians, as is their
Character and manner of Writing. They love to feast, and to eat and drink well,
being very profuse of their Wine and Strong-water. They never eat Hares,
because they have their monthly Purgations, like Women: for the same reason
they never eat Mulberries, believing that they partake of the nature of Women
and Hares.

If, when they comb their Hair or their Beards, any one hair happ'ns to fall
upon their clothes, those clothes must be washed in the stale of a Cow or an Ox
to purify them again. If by chance they happ'n to touch any ordure or
nastiness, when they come home they must wash themselves in the same Urin. If
one of their Priests meet a dead Corpse in the Highway, and chances to see it,
he is obliged to wash himself in Cows-Piss, which they hold to be a good
Purification: an Opinion held in some parts of India also. I asked one of their
Priests how they came to understand the virtue of this Urin; who answered me,
that a certain person who was contemporary with the first Man, having his Arm
bruised and very black, by reason of some accident that befell him through the
malice of the Devil, fell asleep in the fields, and as he lay, an Ox staling, a
drop of the Urin flew upon his Arm, and presently healed that part which it
wet, and restored it to its former whiteness: which the man perceiving when he
waked, presently followed the Ox, and staid by him 'till he stal'd again, and
then receiving the Piss upon the whole wound, was perfectly cured. They also
preserve it, and compound it with a Water, which they cause them to drink who
have committed any Sin, after they have been at Confession for it. They call
that Water the Cazi's Water; which Urin ought to be preserved forty days, with
an infusion of Willow-Bark, and certain Herbs. When any person is confessed of
his Sin, if it be a crying Sin, the party is bound to stay ten days in the
Cazi's House, and not to eat or drink but what the Priest gives them. And in
order to Absolution, the Priest strips him naked, and ties a little Dog to his
right great Toe, which he leads with him about the Cazi's House wherever he
goes, sometimes a whole day, sometimes longer, according to the hainousness of
the crime. In that posture he desires the Cazi to purify him, telling him that
for his part he believes himself to be purified. The Priest makes answer that
it is the Dog that must purify him, and not he. After that he powrs the
compounded water seven times upon his head, then gives him a draught to drink,
and so he is absolved. This penitence costs the criminal Sauce, who is
afterward bound to feast all his friends at the Cazi's House. Being surpised
at this superstition, I asked whether the women were shrifted thus by the Cazi;
but I found that the Cazi's Wives confess and absolve the women and maids.

One more strange custom they have, that when a man is upon the point of death,
they take a little Dog and set it upon the expiring parties breast. When he is
just breathing his last, they put the mouth of the Dog to the mouth of the
person dying, and cause him to bark twice in that posture, that the Soul of the
deceased may enter into the Dog, who they say will deliver it into the hands of
the Angel appointed to receive it. Moreover when any Dog happ'ns to dye, they
carry him out of the City, and pray to God for the Carrion, as if the Beast
received any kindness after death by their Prayers.

Of the Beasts, which they love or hate.
THere are some Beasts which the Gaurs do mightily respect, and to which they
give a great deal of Honor. There are others which they as much abhor, and
which they endeavored to destroy as much as in them lies, believing that they
were not created by God, but that they came out of the body of the Devil, whose
ill nature they retain.

The Beasts which they principally admire are the Cow, the Ox, and the Dog.
They are expressly forbid to eat of the flesh of a Cow or an Ox, or to kill
them. The reason why they so esteem these Creatures is, because the Ox labors
for man, and Ploughs the Ground that produces his food. As for the Cow they
more dearly affect her for the Milk she gives, but especially for the purifying
quality of her Urine.

The Creatures which they abhor are Adders, Serpents, Lizards, Toads, Frogs,
Creyfish, Rats, Mice, but above all the rest Cats; which they say are the
resemblance of the Devil, who gave them so much strength that a man can hardly
kill them; so that they rather suffer the inconveniency of Rats and Mice, than
ever to keep a Cat in their Houses.

As for the other Animals beforementioned, if any of the Gaurs fall sick, they
hire poor people to go and find those Creatures out and kill them; which they
reck'n in the number of those good works that comfort the Souls of the
deceased. The reason why they hate them so, is, because they believe the Devils
make use of them to torment the Damned; and therefore they do a work of charity
that destroy them, whereby they mitigate the pains and torments of Souls in
Hell.

The last King of these Gaurs was Sha-Iesherd, who was driven out of his
Country by Omar the second, successor to Mahomet.

Of the RELIGION of the ARMENIANS, and of their Principal CEREMONIES.
CHAP. IX. How the Armenians Consecrate and Administer the Sacrament.
SInce the Armenians Traded into Europe and began to be Travelers, their
Churches are better set out then they were heretofore. They spare no cost to
adorn the Choir and the Altar; you tread upon rich Carpets, and for the
structure and embellishments of it, they employ the best Workmen and the
choicest Materials they can meet with. From the body of the Church to the Choir
there is usually an ascent of five or six Steps. Nor is there above one Altar
in any Church, upon which they set the Consecrated Bread, before they set the
Chalice where the Wine is. When the Mass for the Ceremony is said by an
Archbishop, at the reading of the Gospel they light an abundance of Wax
Tapers, which Tapers are like Torches. After the Gospel is read, several of the
Noviciates take sticks in their Hands about five foot long, at the end whereof
are Latten Plates with little Bells hanging about them, which when they are
shak'd, imitate the sound of Cymbals. Other Noviciates there are which hold a
Copper Plate in their Hands hung about with Bells, which they strike one
against another: and at the same time the Ecclesiastics and Laity sing
together indifferent Harmoniously. All this while the Archbishop has two
Bishops of each side of him, who are in the room of a Dean and a Sub-dean; and
when it is time, he goes and unlocks a Window in the Wall on the Gospel side,
and takes out the Chalice where the Wine is. Then with all his Music he takes
a turn about the Altar, upon which he at length sets down the Chalice, saying
certain Prayers. After that, with the Chalice in his hand, and the Bread upon
the Chalice, he turns toward the people, who presently prostrate themselves
upon the Ground, beat their Breasts, and kiss the Earth, while the Archbishop
pronounces these words; This is the Lord who gave his Body and Blood for you.
Then he turns toward the Altar, and eats the Bread dipped in the Wine; for they
never drink the Wine, but only dip the Bread in it. That done, the Archbishop
turns once more toward the people with the Bread and Chalice in his hand, and
they that will receive, come one after another to the bottom of the Choir,
whither it is not lawful for any Lay-person whatsoever to ascend; to whom the
Archbishop gives the Bread dipped in Wine that is in the Chalice, which Bread
is without leven, flat, and round, about as thick as a Crown, and as big as the
Host of the Mass, being Consecrated the day before by the Priest, whose Office
it is. They never put Water in their Communion-Wine; affirming that Water is
for Baptism, and that Christ when he instituted the Holy Supper drank it pure,
without any mixture of Water.

When the Armenians come to the Communion, the Archbishop or the Priest says
these words: I confess and believe that this is the Rody and Blood of the Son
of God, who takes away the sins of the World, who is not only ours, but the
Salvation of all Mankind. The Priest repeats these words three times to the
people, to instruct them and to teach them to what end they receive the
Sacrament. Every time the Priest says the words, the people say after him word
for word; and when the Priest serves the people, he breaks the Host into little
bits which he dips in the Wine, and gives to every one of the Communicants.
That which I most wonder at is, that they give the Communion to Children of two
or three months old, which their Mothers bring in their arms; though many
times, the Children put it out of their mouths again. They never administer the
Sacrament all the time of their Lent, for then they never say Mass but upon
Sunday noon, which they call Low-Mass, at which time they never see the Priest,
who has a Curtain drawn before the Altar, and only reads the Gospel and Creed
aloud. Sometimes upon Thursday in the Passion week they say Low-Mass about
noon, and then they Confess and administer the Sacrament: But generally they
stay 'till Saturday, and then the Communicants, after they have received, are
permitted to eat Fish, Eggs, Butter, Oil, or any thing else except Flesh. Upon
Easter Day, by break of day, the Priest says Low-Mass, Confesses, and
Administers, after which it is lawful to eat Flesh. But the Beasts must be
killed upon Easterday, and not so much as upon Easter-eve. They have four other
Feasts in the year, wherein they observe the same Ceremony, eating neither
Flesh, Fish, Eggs, Butter, nor Oil for eight days: which four Feasts are
Christmas, the Ascension, the Annunciation, and St. George's. Before this last
Feast they stretch their devotion to the utmost, for some will fast three days,
some five, one after another.

CHAP. X. Of the ordination of their Priesthood; and their Austerities.
WHen a Father designs his Son to the Priesthood, he carries him to the Priest,
who puts the Cope, open on both sides, about his Shoulders; after which the
Father and Mother take him home again. This Ceremony is repeated seven times in
several years, according to the years of the young Child, 'till he come to be
of age to say Mass. If he be not designed for a Monk, but for the Priesthood,
after the fourth time of putting on the Chasuble or open Cope, they marry him:
for their Priests marry once, but if that Wife dye, if they intend to marry
again, they must give over saying Mass. The six first Ceremonies being over,
when the Youth comes to the age of 18 years, at what time they are capable of
saying Mass, as well those who are designed for Monks, as those who are married
Priests, they proceed to the seventh and last Ceremony, which must be performed
by an Archbishop or a Bishop; who invests the young Priest with all the Habits
which the Priests wear that say Mass. That being done, he goes into the Church,
out of which he is not to depart for a whole year; during all which time he is
altogether employed in the service of the Church. The Priest who is married,
must be five days after he has said Mass before he returns home to eat or
drink, or lie with his Wife. And as well the Monks as Priests, when they intend
to say Mass again, must remain five days in the Church, without either going to
bed or touching any thing with their hands, unless it be the Spoon wherewith
they eat their meat: not daring all the while to spit or blow their noses. The
next five days after they have said Mass, though such days upon which they
might otherwise eat Flesh and Fish, they are obliged to seed upon nothing else
but Eggs without Butter, and Rice boiled with Water and Salt. The morning
before they celebrate Mass, if the Priest have by chance swallowed a drop of
Water, he must not say Mass.

Their Austerities are such, that many of their Bishops never eat Flesh or Fish
above four times a year; but more then that, when they come to be Archbishops,
they only live upon Pulse. They have six months and three days in a year
wherein they keep Lent, or particular Fasts, which you please to call them; and
during all that time, as well the Ecclesiastical persons as the Laity, feed
only upon Bread, and some few Herbs which grow in their Gardens. There was an
Armenian of Zulpha whose superstition was so great, that he made his Horse to
fast with him, allowing him but very little either to eat or drink for a whole
week together. As for the poor laboring people, they only feed upon Pulse,
boiled in Water and Salt: for during their chief Lent, they are permitted no
more then others, to eat either Butter or Oil; nay though they lay a dying, it
is not lawful for them to eat Flesh upon those days wherein that diet is
forbidd'n. They may only eat Wall-nuts or Small-nuts, Almonds or Pistaches, or
some such other Fruit that affords no Oil; and they have this farther liberty,
to pound them, and put them among their Pulse or their Herbs, and boil them
with Rice.

CHAP. XI. Of their Baptism.
IT IS the custom of the Armenians to Baptize their Infants upon Sunday; or if
they Baptize any upon the weekdays, it is only in case of necessity, when they
think they will not live. The Midwise carries the Infant to Church, and holds
it in her arms, 'till either the Archbishop, the Bishop, or the Priest has said
some part of the Form of Baptism. Then he that baptizes takes the Infant which
is naked, and plunges it in the Water, and then taking it out again, puts it
into the hands of the Godfather, and goes on with the Prayers. While he reads
them, with the Cotton which he has in his hand he twists a string about half an
Ell long. He makes another also of red Silk, which is flat; then twisting those
two strings together, he puts them about the Child's neck. They say, that these
two strings, one of white Cotton, and the other of red Silk, signifies the
Blood and Water which flowed from the Body of CHRIST, when he was wounded with
the Lance upon the Cross. Having tied the cord about the neck of the Child, he
takes the holy Oil and anoints the Child in several parts of the body, making
the sign of the Cross in every place where he drops the Oil; every time
pronouncing these words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. He first anoints the Forehead, then the Chin, then the Stomach,
the Arm-holes, the Hands and Feet.

As to the making this Oil, you must know, that every seven years, upon the Eve
of our Lady in September, against which day they observe a small Lent of eight
days, the Patriarch makes this holy Oil; there being no person but he who has
power to make it. He uses all sorts of fragrant Flowers, and Aromatical Drugs;
but the principal Flower is that which the Armenians call in their Language
Balassan-Jague, we in ours, the Flower of Paradise. When the Oil is made, the
Patriarch sends two Bottles to all the Covents of Asia, Europe, and Africa,
without which they cannot baptize.

The Ceremony of Baptism being over, the Godfather goes out of the Church with
the Infant in his arms, and a Taper of white Wax in each hand. According to the
quality of the person, when the Child is carried out of the Church, the
Trumpets, Drums, Hautboys, and other Instruments of the Country make a hideous
noise, and go before the Infant to the Parents House, where being arrived, the
Godfather delivers the Child to the Mother. She prostrates her self at the
same time before the Godfather, kissing his feet; and while she continues in
that posture, the Godfather kisses her head. Neither the Father nor Godfather
names the Child, but he that baptizes gives him the Name of the Saint whose
Festival falls upon the Sunday on which the Child is baptized. If there be no
Saint's day that Sunday in the Almanac, they take the next Name whose Festival
succeeds the Sunday of Baptism; so that they have no affected Names among them.
Upon the return of the Godfather with the Child home, there is a Feast
prepared for all the Kindred and Friends, and him that baptized the Infant,
with whom all the Priests and Monks of the Covent, at least of the Parish, go
along. The poor people were wont to be so prodigal at these Feasts, as also
upon their Marriages and Burials, that the next day they had not wherewithal to
to buy Victuals, much less to pay what they have borrowed for so needless an
expense. But now the poor Armenians are grown so cunning to avoid the
Bastinado's which are given to Debtors upon the soles of the Feet, when they
cannot pay, according to the custom of Persia; that they carry the Child to
Church upon the weekdays, without any Ceremony, with tears in their eyes,
pretending it to be sickly and like to dye, and so make no Feasts at all.

If the Women lie in fifteen or twenty days, or two months before Christmas,
they defer the baptizing the Infant 'till the Festival, provided the Infant be
healthy. Then in all the Cities and Villages where the Armenians live, if there
be any River or Pond, they make ready two or three flat-bottom'd Boats, spread
with Carpets to walk upon; in one of which upon Christmas Day they set up a
kind of an Altar. In the morning by Sunrising all the Armenian Clergy, as well
of that place as of the parts adjoining, get into the Boats in their Habits,
with the Cross and Banner. Then they dip the Cross in the Water three times,
and every time they drop the Holy Oil upon it. After that they use the ordinary
form of Baptism, which being done, the Archbishop or the Minister plunges the
Infant in the River or Pond three times, saying the usual words, I Baptize,
etc. and the same anointings as before: though it seems a wonder to me that the
extremity of the weather does not kill the Child. The King of Persia is many
times present at this ceremony when it is performed at Ispahan, riding on
Horseback to the side of the River with all his Nobility. The Ceremony being
over he goes to Zulpha to the Kelonter's House, where there is an entertainment
prepared for him. Neither is there any place in the World where a King may be
entertained with less charge than in Persia. For if any private person invite
the King, and that His Majesty pleases to do him that Honor, it is but for the
inviter to go to the chief of the Officers, and to carry him twenty Tomans, or
three hundred Crowns, and to tell him withal, that the King has promised to
accept of a small Collation with his Slave. For then the Governor is obliged
to send to the House of him that treats the King all things necessary for the
entertainment. Else it were impossible to be done, in regard the King eats in
nothing but in Gold Plate. At the end of the Feast the King is always presented
with some European Rarity, not less worth than four or five thousand Crowns. Or
if the person have no Rarity to present, it suffices to offer in a Basin the
value in Venetian Ducats of Gold, with all the submission imaginable. Besides
all this, some Presents must be given to some of the Lords and principal
Eunuchs of his train; and others sent to the Queen Mother, if living, and to
the Sultaness, his Wives and Sisters. Thus though the entertainment may be made
with little trouble, yet otherwise it proves somewhat expensive; though the
Armenians of Zulpha are well enough able to bear the charge. I was twice at
this Ceremony upon Christmas day in Ispahan. The first time I saw Sha-Sefi, and
the second time Sha-Abas the second, who drank both so hard, that in their
Drink they committed those crimes that very much stained their memories: For
Sha-Sefi returning home stabbed his Wife, the Mother of Sha-Abas. Sha-Abas
another time returning home in drink, would needs drink on, and force three
women to drink with him; who finding he would not give over, stole out of his
Company. The King perceiving them gone without taking leave, in a mad humor
sent his Eunuchs for them, and caused them to be thrown into the Fire, where
the poor wom^^ were burnt; for there is no resisting nor examining the Kings
command.

CHAP. XII. Of the Marriages of the Armenians.
THE Armenians Marry their Children before either party have seen each other,
nay before the Fathers or Brothers know any thing of it- And they whom they
intend to Marry must agree to what their Fathers or Parents command them. When
the Mothers have agreed among themselves, they tell their Husbands, who approve
what they have done. Upon this Approbation, the Mother of the Boy, with two old
Women and a Priest come to the House where the Mother of the Daughter lives,
and present her a Ring from him whom they intend to betroth. The Boy appears
afterward, and the Priest reads something out of the Gospel as a blessing upon
both parties; after which they give him a sum of Money according to the quality
of the Father of the Girl. That done, they present the company with drink, and
this is called a betrothing or affiancing. Sometimes they agree a Marriage when
the Children are not above two or three years old; sometimes two women that are
friends being both with Child at one time together, will make a match between
the two Children before they are born, if the one be a Boy and the other a
Girl. So soon as they are born the Contract is made; and when once the Boy has
given the Ring, thought it be twenty years after before they are Married, he is
bound every year upon Easter Day to send his Mistress a new Habit with all the
trimming belonging to it according to her quality. Three days before the
Celebration of Marriage, the Father and Mother of the Boy prepare a Feast,
which is carried to the house of the Father and Mother of the Girl, where the
kindred of both parties meet. The Men are in one place by themselves, and the
Women in another; for they never eat together at public Feasts. The Evening
before the Nuptials the Bridegroom sends a Habit to the Bride; and some time
after he comes to receive what the Mother of the Bride has provided for him, on
her part. If the Bride has no Mother, some ancient Woman next akin dresses the
Bride. At length the Bride gets upon one Horse, and the Bridegroom upon
another, each Horse being sumptuously harnessed, with Bridles and Saddles of
Gold and Silver, if the persons be rich: those that are poor, and have not
Horses of their own, repair to the Great men, who willingly lend theirs upon
such an occasion. As they set out from the Virgins habitation, the Bridegroom
goes before with a Veil of Carnation-Tiffany upon his Head, or else of Gold and
Silver Network, the Meshes whereof are very close, that reaches below the
Stomach. He holds in his Hand one end of a Girdle some three or four Else long,
and the Bride that rides behind holds the other. She is also covered with a
large white Veil from head to foot, that spreads also a good way over the
Horse. Under which Veil, that rather seems a large white Sheet, the Bride is
hid in such a manner, that there is nothing to be seen of her but her Eyes. Two
Men walk on either side of each Horse; and if they be Children of three or four
years old (for so young they marry) there are three or four Men to hold them in
the Saddle, according to the quality of their Parents. A great Train of young
Men, the kindred and acquaintance of both parties, follow after, some
a-horseback, some a-foot, with Tapers in their hands, as if they were going in
Procession: and besides all these, the Drums, Trumpets, Hautboys and other
Instruments of the Country, all attending to the Church-door. When they are
alighted, every one makes way for the Bridegroom and Bride, who advance up to
the foot of the Altar, still holding the Girdle in their hands. Then the
Bridegroom and the Bride meet, and lean forehead to forehead. Then comes the
Priest, and turning his back to the Altar, lays his Bible upon their Heads,
instead of a Desk, a weight sufficiently heavy, as being a thick ponderous
Folio. There he lets it lie while he reads the Form of Matrimony, which Office
is most usually performed by a Bishop or an Archbishop. The Form is very much
like ours. The Bishop demands the Bridegroom, Will thou have such a one to thy
Wife? then to the Bride he says, Will thou have such a one for thy Husband? to
which they both answer with a nod of the Head. The Matrimonial Benediction
being given, they hear Mass; which being ended, they return both together to
the Daughters habitation, in the same order as they set out. These Nuptials
last three days: where the Women drink more than the Men. The Man goes to Bed
first, the Woman pulling off the man's Breeches, though she does not lay aside
her Veil 'till the Candle be put out. Let it be what time in the year it will,
the Woman rises before day. So that there be some Armenians that in ten years
after they are married never saw their Wives faces, nor ever heard them speak.
For though her Husband may speak to her, and all the rest of her kindred, yet
she never answers but with a Nod. The Women never eat with their Husbands; but
if the Men feast their Frinds to day, the Women feast theirs the next day.

CHAP. XIII. How the Armenians Bury their Dead.
SO soon as any person dies, one appointed for the Services of the Dead runs
immediately to the Church to fetch a Pot of Holy Water, which he presently
pours into a great Vessel full of Water, into which they put the dead Corpse.
This man is called Mordichou, or the person that washes the Dead; which
Mordichou's are so much detested among the people, that it is an ignominy to
eat or drink with those sort of people. Whatever the party deceased has about
him at the time of his death belongs to them, though it be any excellent Jewel;
for it is the custom of the East to lie in their Breeches, Shirt, and Wastcoat,
in regard they never make use of Bed-cloaths. So soon as the Corpse is washed,
they dress it with a clean white Shirt, a pair of Breeches, a Wastcoat, and a
Bonnet, all new, never having been worn before. Then they put the Body in a
linen Sack, and sow up the mouth of it. That being done, the Priests come and
take up the Body to carry it to Church, which is attended by all the kindred
and friends of the deceased, with every one a Taper in his hand. Being come to
Church, they set down the Corpse before the Altar, where the Priest says certain
Prayers; and then setting up lighted Tapers round about the Corpse, they leave
it so all night. The next day in the morning a Bishop or an ordinary Priest
says Mass, at the end whereof they carry the Body before the door of the
Bishop's house, attended as before; at what time the Bishop comes forth and
says a Prayer for the Soul of the deceased. Then eight or ten of the poorer
sort that are next at hand, carry the Body to the Churchyard. All the way they
sing certain Dirges, which the Priests continue, while the Body is let down
into the Grave. Then the Bishop takes three handfuls of Earth, and throws them
one after another into the Grave, pronouncing these words; From Earth thou
came, to Earth thou shall return, and stay there 'till our Lord comes. These
words being said, they fill up the Grave. Those of the kindred and friends that
will go back find a Collation ready; and if any other persons will go along,
they are not refused. For seven days also they allow Dinners and Suppers to
certain Priests and poor people, if they are persons of ability: believing no
Soul departed can be saved, unless the survivors are at that expense. Whence it
comes to pass, that so many of the poor people are so miserable, and Slaves to
the Mahometans, by borrowing Money to desray those expenses, which they are not
able to pay again.

When an Archbishop or a Bishop dies, they add this farther Ceremony, that an
Archbishop or a Bishop writes a little Note, and cutting open the Sack puts the
Note into the Hand of the deceased, wherein are these words; Remember thy self,
that from Earth thou came, and to Earth thou shall return.

If a Slave dye before enfranchiz'd, when the Body is brought into the Church,
the Master writes a Note, wherein are these words; Let him not grieve, I make
him free, and give him his liberty. For they believe that he would be
reproached in the other World for being a Slave, for which his Soul might
suffer tribulation. If the Master be dead, the Mistress does the same. If an
Armenian makes away himself, they never carry the Body out of the door of the
house, but make a hole in the wall, where they can most conveniently, and carry
him to his Grave without any Ceremony.

The night preceding the Feast of the Holy Cross, Men, Women, and Children go
to the Churchyard, whither they carry good store of Food, not forgetting their
Wine. Immediately they fall a weeping over the Graves of the dead, and after
they have spent some time in that doleful Exercise, they all fall to eating and
drinking; thus passing the whole night by turns, in blub'ring, eating, and
bubbing.

As for the poor people, they would think themselves undone, and the most
unfortunate in the world, should they want Provision and Wine to go to the
Churchyards, the night before the Feast of St. George, where they go to frolic
it, rather then to pray for the Dead.

There may be some few Armenians that embrace Mahometanism for worldly
Interest, but they are generally the most obstinate persons in the world, and
most firm to their superstitious Principles.

CHAP. XIV. Examples of the Constancy of the Armenians, in maintaining their
Religion against the Persecutions of the Mahometans.
IT is the custom of the Armenians, that when any one of them apostatizes, and
desires to return again to the Church, he cannot have Absolution but at the
same City or Village where he first abjured his Religion.

Now it happened that a young Armenian being sent to Smyrna with a very
considerable quantity of Goods, and falling to debauchery, turned Mohammedan, to
the end he might defraud his Father and his Brethren of their Estate, according
to Haly's Law, already mentioned. But after he had spent good part of the Goods
in Debauchery, he returned to the Three Churches, where the Grand Patriarch
lived, to be absolved from his Fault; but the Patriarch telling him he must go
to the Bishop of Smyrna, he went accordingly; and in some few days after he had
undergone the Penance enjoined him, he went to the Cadi, and with a great
Resolution, Sir, said he, you know that some years since I turned Mohammedan;
now I come to declare before ye that I have repented, and do repent of the foul
Crime I committed, when I denied the Savior of the World, and embraced your
wicked Law. The Cadi, who thought it had been at first only some evaporation of
Extravagance, endeavored to reclaim him by fair words and promises; but when
he heard him persist in his resolution, when he heard him curse and blaspheme
Mahomet, he caused him to be carried to the Piazza, where he was cut to pieces
immediately. For no persons go with more courage and joy to suffer for their
Faith, then the Armenians.

In the year 1651 there happened to be a Wedding between a young Turk and a
Virgin of the same Nation. To this Wedding was invited an Armenian Lady, who
was a great friend of the Bridegroom's Mother. The Armenian had an only Son of
about twelve years of age, that earnestly desired to go along with her; at
first she refused him, knowing that after the age of five or six years, no
Youth is permitted to be in company with the Turkish Women or Maids. But the
Boy still pressing his Mother, and being seconded by an Aunt, who to please her
Nephew, told her she might let him go in Girls Apparel; at last the indulgent
Mother, overruled by the importunity of the Child, took him along with her in
a female dress. Three days the solemnity of the Turkish Weddings last: but the
very first day, an old Gipsy-Turk casting her Eye upon the young Armenian, and
finding him too sparkish and too nimble for a Girl, suspected his Sex; and
calling his Mother aside, told her, that by all the gestures and actions of the
Child, she could be no Girl, but a Boy in disguise. The Mother not only denied
the matter, but also seemed highly offended at the old Woman's suspicion; who as
much incensed to have her judgment questioned, decoyed the Child among the
Eunuchs of the Family, and caused him to be searched; and finding her self in
the right, spread it presently about the house. Immediately the people cried
that the Chambers were defiled, that the Armenian Lady had done it in derision
of their Law; and seizing Mother, Aunt, and Youth, carried them all before the
Basha, demanding Justice. The Basha dismissed the Mother and the Aunt, but kept
the Youth six or sev'n days, hoping the rage of the people would be over. But
in vain he strove to plead for the Child, though the Father offered them half
the weight of him in Gold, for the Basha was forced to deliver him up into the
hands of the married Woman's kindred; who carried the Child to the Marketplace
of the City, where they stripped him stark naked; and first they flayed him from
his Neck behind down to the Wast, and so left him with a Guard upon him all
night. The Cadi and Moullah's exhorted the Child to turn Mohammedan, and they
would preserve him from further mischief. His Mother begged him to have pity
upon her and himself, and to turn Mohammedan to save his life. But neither
tears, nor all the tender words that grief and affection could inspire, could
shake the constancy of the Infant, who with a resolute utterance answered, that
he had hitherto suffered, and still would suffer patiently; and that nothing
grieved him, but that his Mother should exhort him to deny his Savior. Next
day the pitiless Turks came and flayed all his Breast and his Stomach, and so
left him all night under a Guard, intending to have flayed him part by part
every day. But the Basha abhorring their Cruelty, came the next day with his
Guards, and caused his Head to be cut off.

Van is a City peopled as well with Armenians as Turks; so that it is a usual
thing for the Armenian and Turkish Boys to play together. One day it
unfortunately fell out, that the Boys playing one among another, and flinging
Stones at each other, an Armenian Boy hit a young Turk full upon the Temples,
and struck him dead. Presently the other Turkish Boys and the Rabble seized
him, and carried him to the Basha; the Father and Mother of the Child slain
followed with hideous out-crys, bawling for justice, or that the Boy should
turn Mohammedan to expiate his fault. The Armenian Parents offered a large sum
of Money to redeem their Child; but the adverse party obstinate against all
accommodation, the Basha was constrained to deliver the Child, giving sentence
that the young Armenian should endure the same death the Turk had suffered, and
no other. Immediately the Turks hurried the poor Child to the place where he
had unfortunately slain his play-fellow; and after the Parents of the young
Turk had had the two first hits, he was presently brained by a shower of Stones
from the Rabble. Yet as near death as he knew himself to be, without any
disturbance at all, he exhorted his weeping play-fellows to stand firm to the
Faith of Jesus Christ, for which he was going to dye.

Another time an Armenian Merchant coming from the Indies to Grand Cairo, went
to the Coffee-house according to custom, being a rendesvous of all the
Merchants in the Town. There falling into discourse, by reason of the heat of
the weather, he took off his Bonnet made after the Armenian fashion of diverse
Colors, and laid it behind him, keeping his black Cap only upon his head. When
the Moullah came about to hasten the people to go away according to the custom,
which I have already declared, the Armenian hastily rising up, a Turk,
concealing the Merchant's Bonnet, clapped his own Bonnet upon his head. Upon
that all the Turkish Merchants that were there came and congratulated the
Armenian Merchant, telling him, how glad they were to see that he had embraced
the good Law. At which words the Armenian surpised, takes off the Turbant,
throws it to the Ground before all the Company, and stamped it under foot. This
action of contempt so enraged the Turks, that they carried him before the
Basha, before whom it was in vain to justify himself, or to affirm that the
Turbant was maliciously put upon his head; for the Turks swore the contrary,
and that he took it of his own accord, and therefore he must either turn Turk
or dye for it. Upon his refusal they put him in Prison, and in a few days the
sentence was brought him from the Mufti and Cadi, that he must either turn or
be burnt alive. The severity of the sentence overpowered him at first to
embrace the Mahumetan Law. But four or five years after returning from the
Indies to Cairo, he came where the Basha was sitting in Council with the
Grandees of the Country, and getting as near the Mufti as he could, and
throwing his Turbant in his face; There Dog, said he, Thou were the cause that
I have worn it so long, of which I have repented, and do repent from the bottom
of my heart; for I know that neither thou nor thy Law are worth a Straw. At the
same time the crowd laid hold of him, and dragged him to the Piazza, where he
died in the midst of the flames with an admirable constancy.

A rich Merchant of Zulpha, called Cotgia Soultenon, was so well beloved by
Sha-Sefi, that he often went to Dine at his house, But one day it fell out that
the King having eat and drank to excess, upon his return home fell crop-sick,
upon which the report ran that the Armenian had poisoned him. Which report
coming to his ears, fearing least the King should dye, and himself be put to
cruel Torments, he took a dose of Poison and died. Which when the King, who was
well again the next day, understood, he was very much troubled for his death.

The same Cotgia Soultenon had a Cafer sent him from Melinda for a Slave; who
being young and very apprehensive soon learnt the Persian and Turkish
Languages, and was instructed in the Christian Religion, and Christened by the
name of Huzod or Joseph. After his Master's death he turned Mahumetan, and so
continued twenty years. At the end whereof returning to Zulpha, he begged pardon
of the Church; and all the rest of his days so crucified himself with Fasting,
that every one pitty'd him; and when the Armenian Bishops told him he had done
well, he made no other answer, but that he was not worthy to live upon the
Earth who had denied his Savior, only he hoped that he would have mercy upon
him; and so continued his austere penance 'till he died.

CHAP. XV. Of the Author's reception at the Court of Persia in his sixth and
last Voyage, and what he did there during his stay at Ispahan.
IArriv'd at Ispahan the 20 th of December, 1664. So soon as the Nazar was
informed of my arrival, he sent the Kelonter or chief of the Armenians with
seven or eight more to congratulate my arrival, and to assure me of all the
kind Offices he could do me. The next day he sent the same Armenians with four
Horses; and to tell me that the King had a desire to see what I had brought;
for which purpose the Kelonter had order to furnish me with men. Thereupon I
took Horse, accompanied by all the Franks that were at Zulpha. When I came to
Court, I was brought into the place where all the great Ambassadors had
audience, where I found attending the Nazar, and Father Raphael superior of the
order of the Capuchins, ready to deliver me my Box of Jewels which I had left
with him in the Covent for more security. After I had exposed my Goods upon a
fair Table covered with a Carpet of Gold and Silver, and that the Nazar had
disposed every thing in order with his own hand, the King entered, attended
only by three Eunuchs for his Guard, and two old men, whose office it was to
pull off his Shoes when he goes into any Room spread with Gold and Silk
Carpets, and to put them on again when he goes forth. The King had nothing on
but a single pair of Drawers of Taffata, checkered red and white, which came
half way the Leg, his feet being bare; a short Cassock that came but half way
his body, with a large Cloak of Cloth of Gold with hanging-sleeves down to the
Ground, furred with Sable Martin. The first thing I showed was a large
Candlestick of Crystal of the Rock, the richest piece of that nature that ever
was seen. The next was a suit of Tapestry hangings held up by several men, as I
had appointed. The Nazar then caused me to advance and do my obeisance to the
King, who presently knowing my Face again; Oh, said he to the Nazar, This is
the Fringui Aga who sold me so many Rarities about six years ago, when Mahomet
Beg was Athemadoulet. After that the Nazar showed him all my Rarities as they
lay in order. Among the rest I besought His Majesty by Friar Raphael, to accept
of a great Steel Mirror, which when he looked in, he wondered to see his Face
so big. But when Friar Raphael had told him the nature of it, he caused it to
be held to one of his Eunuchs, which had a monstrous Hawk Nose, the sight
whereof held him in laughter and divertisement for above a quarter of an hour.
After that the King retired, leaving me alone with the Nazar and Friar Raphel.
As for my Jewels I put them up my self, and had a place assigned me to Lock
them up and keep the Key, but for my large pieces of Goldsmiths work, the Nazar
committed them to the trust of one of the principal Officers of the House.

The next day early in the morning the Nazar sent for me and Father Raphael,
and made his Secretary write down the price of every thing, according to his
demands. He had also his own Artists to prize them; but that I did not value,
in regard I knew the price much better then they. After he had showed the
Jewels, price and all to the King, we were several times before we could agree;
but at length he told me, that the King would give me Twenty-five in the
Hundred profit for all the Stones; leaving me the Pearls, which he thought I
might put off at a better price in the Indies; which was an offer I could not
refuse, and therefore I signed the Agreement according to the Nazar's desire:
Which when his Majesty had seen, he bid the Nazar tell me I should be his
Jeweller in Ordinary, and that for my sake all the Franks should be the better
used within his Territories, and that I should have any favor of him that I
desired. I besought his Majesty to give me his Patent with his Seal affixed,
whereby I might be priviledg'd to Trade in his Dominions, without paying Custom
for such and such Merchandise, and in in such manner as I should think fitting.
I also besought him graciously to grant his Protection to a Nephew of mine,
whom I had left at Tauris to learn the Language, that he might be serviceable
to his Majesty when I was dead and gone. Thereupon he caused my Nephew to be
enrol'd presently as one of his Domestic Servants, and ordered the Nazar to
take particular care of him.

The next day after my agreement with the Nazar, the King gave audience in the
great Hall of the Palace to the Ambassador of the Vsbeck-Tartars. All the Lords
and Officers of the Crown stood in the Court where the Ambassador was to pass:
there were also nine stately Horses, whose Furniture was very rich, and all
different. Two Harnesses were covered with Diamonds, two with Rubies, two with
Emralds, two with Turquoises, and one embroidered with fair Pearls. Had he been
an Ambassador from a Monarch for whom the King of Persia had had a greater
esteem than he had for the Cham of Tartary, there had been thirty Horses: for
according to the value which the King puts upon the Prince that sends to him,
he either augments or abates of the number of his Horses of State. Every Horse
is tied by the Reins to a Nail of Gold fastened in the Ground, with a Hammer of
Gold lying by. There was another Nail of Gold behind, with a Cord tied to it,
that held their hinder legs. They set also before every Horse a Caldron of
Gold, out of which they draw up Water into a great Manger; though all this be
only for State, for they never water their Horses in that place.

Out of the first Court the Ambassador entered into a large Gallery, between a
long File of Musketeers on each side. Thence he entered into a Garden through
an Alley about eight Fathom broad, all paved with great Marble Stones, in the
middle of which runs a Channel of Water four Foot wide, with several
Waterworks that spurted out of the Channel at equal distances. On each side of
the Walk to the Hall where the King sat, there is a Pond almost as long as the
Walk, and in the middle of the Pond another sort of Waterworks. Several
Officers of the Army were ranged all along the Alley; and at the end of one of
the Ponds were four Lions tied; and at the end of the other, three Tigers
couchant upon Carpets of Silk, having Men to guard them with Half-pikes in
their hands. The Hall took up more ground in length then in breadth, being open
every way; the Cieling was sustained by sixteen wooden Pillars, of eight
pannels every one, and of a prodigious thickness and height. As well the
Cieling as the Pillars were all painted with Foliage-work in Gold and Azure,
with certain other Colors mixed therewith. In the middle of the Hall was a
Vase of excellent Marble, with a Fountain throwing out Water after several
manners. The Floor was spread with Gold and Silk Carpets, made on purpose for
the place: and near to the Vase was a low Scaffold one Foot high, twelve Foot
long, and eight wide, covered with a magnificent Carpet. Upon this Scaffold
sat the King upon a apiece Cushion of Cloth of Gold, with another Cushion
behind him covered with the same, set up against a great Tap'stry-Hanging,
wrought with Persian Characters, containing the Mysteries of the Law. On each
side of the King stood several Eunuchs with Muskets in their hands. The King
commanded the Athemadoulet and four others to sit down by him, and the
Athemadoulet made me a sign to sit down; but the King knowing how little the
Franks care for sitting cross-leg'd, ordered me to be told that I might stand
upright, if I thought good. The King was clad in a Silk streaked with Gold: His
Cloak was a Gold-ground with Flowers of Silk and Silver, Furred with a Martin
Sable, the blackest and most glist'ring that ever was seen. His Girdle was very
rich, and upon his Bonnet he wore a plume of Herons Feathers fastened with a
transparent Jewel; in the middle of the Jewel was a Pear-fashion'd Pearl, set
with great Topaze's and Rubies.

About half an hour after the King was sat, the Nazar and the Master of the
Ceremonies brought the Ambassador, who neither himself nor any of his Train
were very well clad, and caused him to stay at the foot of the steps into the
Hall from the Garden. When the Ambassador had ascended the steps, he prostrated
himself before the King, then advancing nine or ten paces he did the same
again; after which the Master of the Ceremonies caused him to sit down, leaving
between him and the King space enough for eight men. After that I observed that
the Nazar went often between the King and the Ambassador, and between the
Ambassador and the King; but I could not tell what they said. So that I being
by that time quite tired, made my obeisance to the King, and went home to my
Lodging.

The next day the Nazar signified to me that it was the King's pleasure to
favor me with a complete Calaat, or Habit of Honor, and to pay me my money.

This is ye God worthy to be praisd.
The Kingdom belongs to God
The God of Mercy to ye Compassionate
O Mahomet OHaly:
ye God most high.
the Prophets.
These great Caracters with those yt are upon the side of the names of the 12
Prophets signify.


This Contain ye Names of ye 12 Prophets without their surnames.
Aly Hassen Hossein Alizein Maham Iafar Moussa Alj Mahomet Haly Hassen Mahomet
That which is under the Names of the 12 Prophets signifies as follows. He who
at this time enjoyes ye Kingdom The Victorious Abas the second.

this is yt. which is on ye. Kings seal
Mahomet Methi son of Habi Bala of the race of Sophi.


The next day in the Morning being sent for to the Court, I found the Nazar,
the Grand Treasurer, and several other great Officers expecting me in the
Treasury, where the Money lay ready in sealed Bags. My Sum amounted to three
thousand four hundred and sixty Tomans, of which the Treasurer would have
abated me a hundred and sixty for Fees. After a long contest, I gave him half,
and carried away my Money; having first weighed two Bags, Toman by Toman, and
then weighed the rest of the Bags, Bag by Bag.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Honors and Presents which the Author received from the King
of Persia.
THE day following one of the Nazar's principal Officers brought me the
complete Calaat, consisting of Vest, Tunick or Super-Vest, Girdle, and Bonnet.
He also delivered me three Patents, sealed by his Majesty and the Athemadoulet,
which exempted me from paying any Customs within his Kingdom. Another to the
Kan of Schiras, with a little Seal or Signet, commanding him to let me have
three Loads of good Wine when I traveled that way. A third with his Signet, in
favor of my Nephew at Tauris; wherein the King declared that he owned him as
his Domestic Servant, and that he was under his Protection.

The First PATENT ran thus: THE Command of him whom all the Universe obeys has
been made, That the Beglerbegs of High Nature, the victorious and great Lords,
Ornaments of the Kingdom, Possessors of Honor, the Judges in high place,
practisers of Justice, the Visiers who preserve Reason, and have in their
thoughts the removal of Vice, and the Commissioners who act in affairs and
difficulties of the Palace, the Overseers of the Roads, and the Conservators of
the good Customs of the well-ordered Kingdoms of Kragon (which God preserve
from all misfortune) MAY KNOW, That whereas the choicest of his Resemblers and
Companions, * Aga TAVERNIER, French Merthant has brought so many Rarities of
all sorts to the presence and view of the Lieutenant of the Eagles, who has all
things according to his wish, has found the degree of favor and good will. And
whereas We have commanded him to perfect some Business for Us, which so soon as
he has finished, he is to bring to the holy and pure view. Therefore through,
whatsoever Road or Coast of Our Thrice-spacious Kingdom the above-named shall
have a desire or occasion to pass, Let not the Receivers of the Palace, out of
any seeming expectancy from the above-named, give him any trouble or
molestation. But let them know, that it is necessary for them to give him all
honor, and to make much of him, that he may go where he pleases. And whereas
the Seal of High Nature, the Light of the Universe of Kragon, of thrice-noble
extraction, the Master of the Age, has illuminated and adorned this Writing,
Let them rest there, and give Credence to it. By the thrice-high Command, etc.



Kragon: A King of China, so renowned for his Justice, Victory, and
Magnanimity, that sometimes the Kings of Persia assume that Title in their
Patents, and sometimes in honor of him, style themselves his Lieutenants.

Receivers of the Palace, are Farmers of the Customs and other Subsidies.

The Second PATENT. To the Governor of Schiras,
THE Command of Him whom all the world ought to obey, is such, That the
Illustrious and High Lord, whose Office ought to be honored, the Governor and
Prototype of Visiers and Grandees, Mirza-Mahomet-Sadee, the Vizier of Fars may
be assured of Royal Favors when he understands the Contents of this Command.
He shall give three Loads of Wine, of that which he has in his custody, to the
Cream of his Equals, Aga TAVERNIER, French Merchant, and you shall take an
Acquittance. All the Grand Visiers, and Officers of Customs, and Guarders of
Passes also let them not molest him at all, let them take nothing from him, let
them permit him to go and come as he pleases, and let them obey him. Given the
Month of Jamady-Elaker, in the Hegyra of Mahomet 1075.

January, 1665.



The Cream, is the Character of an honest man among the Eastern people.

But to return to the Calaat. You must take notice, that the Persians call a
Calaat, any Present which one person makes to another inferior to him in
dignity; sometimes a Vest alone, sometimes a Tunick with the Girdle only,
sometimes a Turbant, or a Horse, with Bridle and Saddle; to those in the Army
the King sends a Sword or a Dagger, and all these go by the name of Calaat's.
Secondly, you must take notice, that when the King sends a Calaat to a
Governor of a Province, he names himself the person, that is to carry it. For
both in Turkey and Persia, the Receiver of the King's Present is obliged to pay
the Messenger, in so much that sometimes they hardly escape for a thousand
Tomans. But when the Calaat is sent to any private person, the Nazar chooses
out of his Domestic Servants one to carry it. I gave twenty-five Tomans into
Father Raphael's hand, who ordered his business with so good a grace, and so
advantageously for my Purse, that he complemented away the Messenger very well
satisfied with half.

The next day the Nazar sent to me to put on my Calaat, and to come and do my
obeisance to the King, who was that day to go abroad. Thereupon I summoned
together all the Franks, and ordered the Trumpets and Drums to be made ready as
I rode from the Palace home. For then the people come out to see who the King
has honored that day, who is always known by his Habit, which is still the
newest and gayest of all the rest.

It happened, that the King being indisposed did not go away that day; however
I applied my self to the Nazar, and told him how much I was obliged to the King
for the honor he had done me, and that I was resolved to show my self before
the greatest Monarchs in Europe in the Habit he had bestowed upon me; that they
might behold the beauty and richness of my Calaat. The Nazar failed not to
repeat my Compliment to his Majesty; who thereupon ordered me the Persian
Cloak, with hanging-sleeves, and faced with sable Martins.

Two or three days after the Nazar sent for me again to Court, whither I went,
accompanied by the Zulphian Franks, as before. I was no sooner come to the
Palace, but the Nazar met me in the great Hall, attended by two Officers, who
carried the Cloak which the King had appointed for me, and presently taking the
Cloak out of their hands, he put it about my shoulders, saying these words, It
is the King's pleasure to honor thee entirely. It was a most magnificent piece
of Silk, and very richly furred, having been valued at eight hundred Crowns. In
this I was particularly beholding to the Nazar, who might have sent me my Cloak
home to my Lodging as well as the Calaat; but he was pleased to put it upon my
back in the Palace with his own hands, to spare me the charges of a new
Present. After this the Nazar took me by the hand, and led me to the Hall,
where the King was sitting upon a large Cushion, having no more than twelve
Eunuchs for his Guard; some with Bows and Arrows, and some with Muskets. By
that time I had advanced two or three paces in the Hall, the Nazar ordered me
to fall upon my knees, and touch the Ground with my forehead; then taking me by
the hand, he led me within two or three paces of the place where the King was
sitting, where I was ordered to make the same obeisance as before; after that
he caused me to retire seven or eight paces, and there to stand. And then it
was that His Majesty was pleased to tell me, that he had contrived the Models
of several pieces, which he would have made in France; and asked me whether I
would carry them along with me, or whether I would presently send them into
France to be made up while I dispatched my business in the Indies? I told His
Majesty, that so soon as he would be pleased to deliver them to me, I would
send them for France. After this and some other discourse I made my obeisance,
and retired toward the door of the Hall. Having thus done my duty to the King,
I went and kissed the Nazar's hand; and then taking Horse at the Palace-Gate,
with the rest of the Franks that accompanied me, we rode home with the Trumpets
and Drums of the Country before us. When we came to Zulpha with our Torches
before us, for it was three hours after Sunset, the Men and old Women came out
of their Houses to see us pass along, and several presented us with Fruits,
Sweetmeats, and Wine, obliging us to drink almost at every House 'till we got
home.

CHAP. XVII. How the King was pleased to divertise himself in the Author's
Company.
ABout two days after betimes in the Morning I was sent for to the Court in
that have, that I had scarce time to make me ready. When I came to Court, I
found the Nazar, Father Raphel, and two Hollanders, upon whom the Nazar had
began to cast a particular eye of favor all together. After we had stayed a
while, the Nazar brought us to the Room where the Ring was, sitting upon a low
Pallet, with two Mattresses covered with a rich Carpet. He leaned his back
against a large Cushion four foot long, having before him eight or ten Plates
of Fruits and Sweetmeats. Before him also stood two Bottles, with long round
necks of Venice Crystal stopped with Pitch, full of Schiras Wine, with a Cup of
pure Gold; upon one side a kind of a very small Fat and with a handle, within
three or four Fingers full of the same Wine, with a Gold Ladle that held a good
Chopine of Paris. The Bottles were for the King's drinking; that in the Fat for
those that the King did the Honor to drink with him. After we came in and had
made our several obeysances; said the King to Father Raphael, Raphael, bia,
bia, that is, come hither, come hither, who thereupon rising, and falling upon
his knees when he came near the King; Raphael, continued the King, if thou will
drink Wine, stay here, if not, be gone. The Friar unaccustomed to drink Wine,
replied that since His Majesty did him so great an Honor, he was willing to
drink a little. It Is very well, answered the King smiling, go then and take thy
seat. Thereupon the King commanded one of the Dutchmen to fill some Wine,
which he did, but with a trembling hand Heaven knows, as never having been at
such a Festival before. And I observed that having laid his Hat upon the
Carpet; the King commanded him to put it on, it being a very ignominious thing
in Persia to be bare-headed. Thus the great Ladle went about very smartly,
considering it was but early in the Forenoon: But at length the King bethinking
himself that the Franks were not used to drink without eating, gave such order,
that immediately they spread before us a Sofra of Cloth of Gold instead of a
Table-Cloth; and over that a Leather Covering of the same length and breadth,
and over that a sort of Bread as long as the Sofra; for had the Sofra been ten
Else long, the Bread must have been as long. This Bread is no thicker then a
piece of Paper, and folds like a Napkin. It is made with a Rolling-pin, and
baked upon Plates of Tinned Copper. This Bread is never eat'n, but only serves
for a Table-Cloth to preserve what falls from the Dishes, and what every man
leaves particularly upon his own Plate, which is all wrapped up in the Leather
and given to the poor. Next to that they set upon one end of the Sofra a sort
of most excellent Bread two foot long, and one broad, then which never was
better eat'n in the World. By and by followed Boiled and Roast flesh and fish,
with two Chests of Limons of Mazandran, and Granates from Schiras.

After we had made a large Breakfast, the King was pleased to put me upon a
discourse of my Travels into the Indies, and asked me what Princes I had had
access to, and how many I knew by their faces? Then causing a Satchel to be
brought him, he opened it himself, and showed me several portraitures in
Miniature. Presently I knew Sha-Gehan, Aurenge-Zebe, and three of his Sons; the
King of Golconda and Visapour; Sha-Est-Kan, and two Raja's. Among the rest he
showed me a Persian Lady's Picture and gave it me; to the end, said he, that
your French Ladies may see how our Persian Ladies are clad. After that he
showed me the Pictures of two Venetian Curtisans, the one a Widow, and the
other a Virgin, with a Parrot upon her hand clad after the French mode. Upon
which the King putting the question to me which I liked best? I replied that
she pleased me best who had the Parrot upon her fist. And why not the other
said the King? Because, answered I, she looks like one that had renounced the
world. Thereupon the King falling into a laughter, and turning toward Father
Raphael; Patri, Patri, said he, is it possible that such a Lady as this should
have renounced the World? This led us into a discourse of beauty, wherein when
the King demanded my opinion, I told him that Women's beauty depended very much
upon the Custom of the Country; for that in Japan Women with broad faces were
most in request; in China small feet were admired; in the Isles of Borneo and
Achen, Women the blacker their Teeth were, the more they were beloved; that in
the Island of Macasser, to make their Women lovely, they pull out four of their
Teeth when they are young, to put in four of Gold in their room; as I have seen
a Captain of Java, who pulled out four of his fore Teeth, and set four Diamonds
in their place. In short, I told His Majesty that in his own Dominions full
Eyebrows which meet together were highly esteemed; whereas the Women of France
pull them up by the Roots. But which, said the King, do thou like best, the
black or the fair? Sir, continued I, were I to buy Women as I purchase
Diamonds, Pearls, and Bread, I would always choose the whitest. With that the
King fell a laughing, and orderd me a brimmer in his own Cup, which was a great
Honor indeed. From hence we fell into a more serious discourse concerning the
present State of Europe, speaking very low, and the rest of the Company
retiring all the while out of hearing. Only I observed that there was one Lord
middle aged, and clad after the Georgian mode, who stood within five or six
paces behind the King, and that many times as the King drank, he only wet his
Lips, and gave the rest to that Lord to drink, which when he had done, he
retired again to his place. Upon inquiry I found he was the Kings Uncle by the
Mother's side.

While we were talking of serious things the Curtisans were bid to retire out
of the Hall, which they did, into a Gallery that looked upon a Garden, where
they sat, where immediately a Sofra was laid before them covered with Fruits
and Sweetmeats, and one of their Society continually powered out the Wine which
they drank round without intermission: One would have thought they should have
been fuddl'd; yet when they came in again, no man could perceive they had been
drinking. After they had Danced a while, they were ordered to retire again, and
the King sent for his Music, which was both Vocal and Instrumental; his
Instrumental Music consisted of a kind of a Lute, a Guittar, a Spinet, and two
or three Base Flutes. He had also in the Gallery where the Curtisans were, a
large Ebony Cabinet eight foot high, adorned with several Silver figures, which
proved to be an Organ that went alone. It was part of the present which the
Muscovite Ambassadors made the King, which he ordered to be set a going, that
we might hear it as we sat. No sooner had the Organ stopped, but the Curtesans
were called in again, and the King caused the Gold Ladle to go round,
commanding that no man should leave a drop. When every man had done, the King
was pleased to ask me which of the Curtisan's I thought to be handsomest?
Thereupon I rose up, and taking a Wax-Candle in my hand, I went and viewed them
all. The King laughed, and being very glad to see my face among theirs, Bring
hither, said he, her to whom thou have most a fancy. In obedience to which, I
picked out the eldest, as I thought, and led her to his Majesty, who caused us
to sit down by him. Then the King pointing to another, And why, said he, did
you not chose yonder Girl, which is younger and handsomer; commanding them both
to kiss me one after another, that I might understand the difference between
the Caresses of one and the other. But I replied, that were I to choose again,
I would make the same choice, believing prudence to accompany age. However I
besought his Majesty to consider, that it was not for me to look upon elder or
younger, and that though he had given me the liberty to send the elder home to
my Lodging, yet it was not in my power to accept of his favor, in regard I had
a Wife, to whom I never had been unfaithful.

We had thus droll'd together 'till eleven a Clock at night, when the King
started another Question, Whether any one present knew how to Sing? It happened
that there was one Monsieur Daulier there, that Played upon the Virginals, and
pretended to Sing, who immediately began a Court-Air. But his Voice being a
high-pitch'd Voice, and for that the Persians are altogether for Bases, the
King did not like him. When I perceived that, being in a merry vein, though I
knew not a Note, yet having a good deep voice, and clear, I sung an old Air
that came into my head, which begins,

Fill all the Bowls then, fill'em high,
Fill all the Glasses there, for why
Should every Creature drink but I?
The King was so pleased, that he cried out, Baricala, Baricala, as much as to
say, Oh the works of God! an expression of admiration usual among the Persians.

By this time it was very late, and the King growing sleepy, gave us leave to
depart; which we did very willingly, having had hard labor for seventeen hours
together.

The next night the King fell a drinking again, and there was in his presence
an Agi or Pilgrim newly returned from Mecca, and consequently obliged never to
drink Wine after that. While this Agi staid, there was one of the Persian Lords
got so impertinently suddl'd, that he twice struck the Agi's Turbant from his
head, refused to drink when the King commanded him, played the fool with the
Curtisans when they were dancing, and committed so many other acts of folly,
that the King incensed at such a continuation of Buffonry, in a great fury,
This Rascal, said he, has lost all his respect, and thinks he is no more my
Slave; drag him out by the feet, and throw him to the Dogs to eat. Immediately
four or five of the King's Officers came and dragged him out of the Hall by the
feet, and every body wondered he was not thrown to the Dogs, according to the
King's Command; but it is thought that some of the King's Women begged for him,
so that his punishment was changed.

There was one of the Curtisans that gave one of her Companions a box on the
ear, not in the King's presence, but in the Gallery where they were drinking
together. However she did not strike so softly, but that the King heard the
noise of the blow. Whereupon he commanded her that had given the blow to be had
before the Deroga or Judge of the Town, whom he ordered to expunge her out of
the number of Curtisans, and to put another in her place; that she should have
a hundred Tomans given her, and that the Deroga should cause her to be married.

The next day I waited on the King, and received those Models which he had
bespoke me to send into France. They were the Patterns of certain Drinking-Cups
and Trenchers, with the Model of a Dagger drawn with his own hand: for he had
learnt to draw of a couple of Dutchmen that were in his Service. The Dagger
was to be Goldsmith work enameled. When I had received his Instructions, I took
my leave of his Majesty: and then going to wait upon the Nazar at his
Country House, I took leave of him also, who assured me of his affection upon
all occasions, and did me several kindnesses at my departure.

The End of the Fourth BOOK.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE PERSIAN TRAVELS OF MONSIEUR TAVERNIER: BEING A Politic
and Historical Description of PERSIA: With the ROADS FROM ISPAHAN to ORMUS.
CHAP. I. The Genealogy of the Kings of Persia, of the last Race.
AFter that Tamerlane had extended his Conquests into Asia, and defeated the
Army of Bajazet, whom he took Prisoner, together with his Wife, he returned
into Persia, where at that time lived a Cheik, whose name was Aidar, a person
in high reputation for his Holiness. He was a person of great wit, and the
first in the dignities of the Law, which gained him great authority and belief
among the people. He gave great honor to Tamerlane, and showed Eminent
kindnesses to all the Officers of his Army; in recompense whereof, Tamerlane,
who was a generous Prince, and full of gratitude, made a Present to the Cheik
of a great number of Captives, which he brought along with him out of Turkey.
The Cheik planted one part of these Slaves about Ardevile, and seated the other
near his own residence. Now in regard he assumed to himself to be descended in
a direct line from Mahomet, he covered his head after another manner then all
the rest of the Persians, wearing a kind of flat Bonnet, growing broader and
broader to the top, and so pleighted, as to make twelve Pleights of a Ruff, in
honor of the twelve Prophets. In the middle, a kind of a Pyramid about a
fingers length seemed to rise out of the Bonnet, but was indeed sowed to it.
Such a Bonnet as this the Cheik appointed all the Slaves to wear that Tamerlane
had given him, and this is that which at this day distinguishes their
Successors from the other Persians. And it is the custom, where Kans or
Governors of Provinces reside, that all the Sophies both in the City and the
neighboring parts, meet in the Piazza every Friday in the afternoon, where
they pray to God for the health of the King and the Kan, and for the prosperity
of the Kingdom; after which the Kan sends them Victuals to eat, not without
some other effects of his Liberality.

The Cheiks Sons considering of what a number of Slaves they were Masters, and
that the greatest part of the people, prepossessed in favor of their Father,
out of the opinion they had of his Sanctity, took their part; the more
powerfully to engage them, showed themselves liberal to all, and when they
found themselves strong enough, revolted against Alamout King of Persia, their
lawful Sovereign. After many Skirmishes, at length they gave him Battle near to
Tauris, wherein Azimout was defeated, and slain by the hand of Ismael Sophi,
the Cheiks third Son, who is properly to be accounted the first King of that
Race: I mean of the Race of them that did not embrace the Alcoran, but
according to the Interpretation of Haly, Mahomets Son-in-Law.

To Ismael Sophi succeeded Sha-Tammas his Son, and to Sha-Tammas Sha-Ismael the
second, who reigned but a short while; for his cruelties constrained the
Nobility of the Country to set up in his room Mahomet-Coda bend his Brother;
though little skilled in the affairs of Government or War. Many thought he was
blind, but he was only dim-sighted, through the application of a hot Iron to
his eyes, by the Command of his unnatural Brother in the beginning of his
reign. He was the Father of Sha Abbas, that succeeded him, who settled the
affairs of Persia in a very good condition.

Sha Abbas the first, by his Valor and good Conduct gained the name of Great.
When he came to his Throne, upon the North and West side he found nothing in
his power but the City of Casbin; but afterward, as he was a personage of
great wit as well as courage, partly by policy, and partly by force, he
recovered several Provinces to the West, and conquered the Kingdoms of Lar,
Ormus, and Candahar.

Of many Sons that Sha-Abbas had, not one survived but only Sophi-Mirza, a
Prince of great wit, and dextrous at his Arms. All the people loved him, which
made his Father jealous of him, that he waited for his death to ascend the
Throne. And that which augmented his jealousy was, for that one day being a
hunting, Sophi-Mirza drew the first arrow at a Boar; it being a capital crime
in Persia to shoot before the King. However Sha Abbas for the time concealed
his displeasure, unwilling to fly out in fury against the Prince, in regard he
had no more Sons. But Sophi-Mirza having had a Son by a Slave, which pleased
him, Sha Abbas's joy increasing as the Child grew, his jealousy also daily
increased against the Father of the young Prince; so that being no longer able
to dissemble his fear, he caused his eyes to be put out. Nay his jealousy went
a great way farther; for he now feared the blind Prince, and having therefore
resolved his death, he commanded a Lord of the Court to bring him his head. The
Lord in an astonishment refused to obey the King, and besought him rather to
take away his life, than to constrain him to embrue his hands in the blood of
his Prince. The King offended at him for his refusal banished him his Court;
and the next day gave the same command to another Lord, who without any scruple
put it in execution, and brought him the head of his Son in a Basin of Gold.
That object of pity brought him to himself; so that not being able to look upon
so sad a spectacle without tears in his eyes, upbraiding the villainy of the
Lord, he expelled him from his sight, forbad him his presence for ever, and
sequesterd all his estate, only allowing him a Mamoudi, or nine French Sous a
day. The other Lord, who had so generously refused to aid him in so bloody an
act, the King recalled from Exile, and bestowed upon him one of the best
Governments of the Empire.

Ever since that time all the Male Children of the Blood Royal are shut up in
the Women's Haram, where they are bred up in ignorance, having only two or three
Eunuchs to teach them to write and read, and to keep them company in their
recreations, whether it be in shooting with a Bow, or riding about the Gardens
upon an Ass; for they never allow'em a Horse: besides that all that time they
are never permitted to see the people. In this manner it was that Sha Abbas
bred up his little Grandson, many days causing him to take Opium to render him
more stupid. So that when he came to the Throne, after his Grandfathers death,
the Physiicians thought it convenient that he should drink Wine, to restore his
natural heat, and renew his vigor. Sha Abbas reigned forty years, and died at
the end of the year 1628. Before he died, he gave command, that he should be
buried in some place unknown to all the world; and that they should set his
Grandchild upon his Throne, and give him the name of Sha-Sefi.

So soon as Sha Abbas's eyes were closed, the General of the Horse, and the
chief Captain of the Harquebusses, with whom the Commands were left, rode in
all haste to Ispahan, and coming to the Palace, desired to speak with the
Mother of the Child. The Mother was in a sad affright, believing that they came
to put the young Prince to death. But when they had dissipated her fears, and
that she understood that they came to set him upon the Throne by the command of
his Grandfather, she embraced the young Prince, and returned him into the hands
of the Eunuchs. When he was come out of the Haram, the two Lords, attended by
several others, saluted him King, and acknowledged him for their Sovereign. At
the same time they took off his Clothes and tore them, which in Persia is a
mark of mourning; and according to custom, put him on another plain Garment,
which he wore till midnight. Then they disrobed him again, and put him on his
Royal Robes, and set him upon the Throne, where all the Lords came and did him
homage, and the next day he was acknowledged by all the Acclamations of the
people. For when the Royal Habit is put upon the new King, the Drums, Trumpets,
Timbrels, Hautboys, and other Instruments, make a din in a peculiar place of
the Meydan appointed for that purpose. Which is the Signal to give notice to
the people to meet the next morning, to acknowledge the new King. Sha-Sefi for
many years was a Novice in the art of Government. But time opening his eyes,
the first remarkable thing which he did, being at Casbin, was to cut off the
head of Ali-Kouli-Kan, that great Captain who had conquered the Kingdoms of Lar
and Ormus for Sha Abbas; and the heads of three of his Sons. After that,
returning to Ispahan, he cut off the heads of seven of the principal Lords of
his Court; and by little and little took the Government into his own hands. Of
those Lords whom Jani-Kan was the chief.

For it is thought that Sha Abbas had left a private order with Mirza Take, and
the Dowager Sultaness, to rid themselves of those Lords so soon as Sha-Sefi
should be settled in his Throne, and that they had placed Governors in all
places where in the King might confide. These Lords having smoked the private
order of Sha-Abbas, and believing that the time of execution drew near,
prevented the Athemadoulet Mirza Take; for meeting one morning before the
Palace-door, they killed the Porter, and entering his Bedchamber, stabbed him
before he could rise. After this execution, they went to the King, whom
Jani-Kan boldly told, that they had slain Mirza Take. The King at that time
dissembling his anger at so bold an enterprise, and an attempt upon the Royal
Authority, answered him, that he had done very well, and that he had prevented
those orders which he intended to have given him. The Sultaness his Mother then
governed the Kingdom, together with the Athemadoulet, from whom she received
four hundred Ducats in Gold every day for her little pleasures; and held a
private Council with him in her Haram, where he had free admission, as being
cut close. In this Council it was, that these two persons overthrew in the
night whatever the Lords concluded in the day; changed the Kings mind, and
overruled his thoughts as they pleased themselves, by virtue of that power
which they had over him. Eight or nine days after, as these Lords were sitting
in Council with the King, an Eunuch entered, which was the signal for the King
to get out of the way; and as soon as the King was gone, the Chamber was filled
with Eunuchs, that rushing in immediately fell upon Jani-Kan and his
Accomplices, and cut off their heads. Their heads and bodies were immediately
exposed to the view of the people in the Meydan; and for that it is not the
custom in Persia to take any cognizance of what the King does, the most part of
the people, spurning the heads with their feet, cried one to another, See the
heads of those Dogs that have disobeyed the will of the King.

I told ye, that Mirza Take was clean cut; which occasions a particular story:
He was Governor of Guilan in the Reign of Sha Abbas, and having abused one of
his Pages, the young Ladd stole secretly to Ispahan, and made his complaint to
the King; who having heard it, immediately sent him to be Governor of Guilan,
in the place of Mirza Take, and ordered him to send him his head by one of the
Officers, which he dispatched along with him. The King also, in regard the Page
was very young, appointed him a person able to advise him in his affairs. In
the mean while Mirza Take missing his Page, and making no question but he was
gone to make his complaint to the King, which would of necessity prove his
ruin, if not prevented; he resolved to divert the storm by punishing himself,
and caused that part to be cut clean off that committed the crime. At the same
time, and in that bad condition wherein he then was, he caused himself to be
put into a Litter, and taking his Surgeon along with him, he gets to Ispahan
by another way which was not usually traveled, for fear of meeting the Page,
and causing himself to be carried into the Palace in that pitiful and
languishing estate, desired to speak with the King, who was surpised at his
arrival. But the Kan having presented him in a Plate of Gold with the undoubted
marks of his repentance, besought his Majesty's pardon. Whereupon the King
considering the rigor and extraordinary punishment which he had inflicted upon
himself, sent him back to his Government, and recalled the Page, whom he
otherways gratified. And this was the man whom Sha Abbas upon his Deathbed
ordered that Sha-Sefi should make Athemadoulet, as being the fittest for the
employment of any person in his Kingdom.

Sha-Sefi not content to have rid himself of the Lords that had presumed to
invade his Authority, was resolved to have the head of Ali-merdan-Kan,
Governor of Candahar; of whom he was jealous, by reason of his vast riches,
his Plate being all Gold, and his House as magnificently furnished as the
Kings. But the King could not bring about his design; for the Kan being press't
to come to Court, and believing it was only to take away his head, to free
himself from the danger, delivered Candahar to the Great Mogul, by whom he was
kindly entertained, and highly caressed. Neither was Ali-merdan-Kan's wealth of
his own getting, but left him by inheritance, as being descended from the
ancient Kings of Candahar, who were originally Tartars. Now whatever favors or
advancement the Great Mogul bestowed upon Ali-merdan-Kan, the same did the
Persian King bestow upon his two Sons; whereas all the world believed, that
after such a piece of Treason committed by their Father, the King would have
ripped up their bellies. This piece of policy of Sha-Sefi was very advantageous
to Sha-Abbas the second, when he besieged Candahar with fifty thousand men. For
the greatest part of the Moguls Army being composed of Persians, they
remembering how kindly Sha-Sefi had used the two Sons of Ali-merdan-Kan, made
little resistance against the King of Persia, who entered Candahar in a small
time. The Great Mogul troubled at the loss, asked Ali-merdan-Kan, by what means
he might retake Candahar; who presently made answer, that it would be very
easy, if he could find such another Traitor as he had been.

But to return to Sha-Sefi; his Reign was very violent, of which I will give
you this Example:

One day the King returning from the Kelonters House in Zulpha, having drank to
excess, commanded that the Sultaness should come to him; who understanding that
he was in drink, made no great haste, so that the King in the mean time fell
asleep. But waking again soon after, and not seeing the Queen, he called for
her a second time; of which when she had notice, she came immediately. When she
came into the Chamber, she perceived the King asleep, and in expectation of his
waking, hid her self in a Nich behind the Hangings; where generally the
Mattresses and Coverlets are laid by. The King waking, and not yet perceiving
the Sultaness, in a great chafe demanded why she was not yet come. The
Queen Mother, who was a Georgian Slave, and mortally hated the young Sultaness,
who was the Daughter of the King of Georgia, and therefore disdained by her,
took an occasion to put her out of the Kings favor; and having first spok'n
ill of her, made a sign to the King to let him understand that the young Queen
was hid in such a Nich. Upon that the King rising in a great fury, stabbed the
poor Princess with his Dagger four or five times in the belly, and hardly
knowing what he had done, went to bed again. The next day, forgetful of the
fact, he called for the Queen; but when they told him what had happened, he
began to be deeply sensible of his error, and sorrow'd excessively; and at the
same time sent an express order through his Territories, that no man should
drink Wine, and that the Governors should break all the Wine-Vessels wherever
they found any, and spill the Wine. But this order did not last above a year.

During the Reign of Sha-Sefi, the Kan of Erivan sent him a Colt, which I saw,
which was begot by a Mule. Not long after the King died of a Surfeit, with
excess of drink ing, after he had reigned fourteen years.

Sha Abbas the second was set upon the Throne at Casbin, with the usual
Ceremonies, at the end of the year 1642, and made his entry into Ispahan in the
beginning of the year following. Upon the day of the Solemnity all the Citizens
were ordered to be in Arms, and to march out of the City, where they were filled
off upon each side of the Road. In the same manner were all the standing
Infantry and Cavalry ranged for five Leagues together. All the Road for two
Leagues together without the City was covered with Tissues of Gold and Silver,
with Carpets of Silk, and other rich Stuffs; all which costs the King nothing.
For the Sha-Bander, who is like our Mayor, takes care to tax every one what he
is to furnish toward that Solemnity. The English and Hollanders went also forth
to meet the King; among whom I was one. When we came near the King, Jani-Kan,
General of the Cavalry, gave the King notice who we were. Whereupon we all
alighted, and the King holding his Leg stretched out of his Stirrup, we all
kissed his Boot. When he came where the way began to be spread with rich
Carpets, he found the Grand Mufti and the Grand Cadi, attended by a great
number of Moullahs, who made a Prayer after their manner. Prayers being ended,
the King rode on, the Athemadoulet being on the left hand, which is the most
honorable, and the General of the Cavalry on the right, yet not even with him,
but so as that their Horses heads reached to the Crupper of his. There was no
person but the King that rode over the Tissue, that Honor belonging to him
alone; nor is the way spread above the breadth of the Stuff; and as soon as the
King is passed over it, the people fall to scrambling, and carry away every one
what they can get for themselves.

About a quarter of a League from Ispahan is a Garden, with a Great Room over
the Gate, where the King made a halt, thinking to have made his Entry into the
City. But an Astrologer came to him, and told him, that the hour was past, and
that he must tarry three days before the hour would prove propitious again. So
that he was constrained to betake himself to the Garden of Hezardgerib till the
time came; whither the Nobility also were all forced to come betimes in the
morning, and to stay till the evening. The day that the King made his Entry,
the way from the Garden to the City was also spread with Carpets. For three
days together the Fireworks played in the Meydan; and round the Piazza from
top to bottom were lights hung out; and in the principal Inns, the richest
Merchants had adorned the Doors and Windows of their Chambers, according to the
Mode of the Country; and I believe it cost the Chief of the Holland Company,
above nine hundred Tomans.

In the year 1643, came the Prince of the Usbecks in person to desire aid of
Sha Abbas against his Children, who had caused his own Subjects to rebel and
make war against him. His eldest Son first took Arms, and getting the advantage
of a Battle, the other Brother treacherously took part with him; which nothing
dismayed the Father, to whom the chief of the Nobility still adhered. Toward
the end of the year 1642, the Prince lost another Battle and his left eye,
which was shot thorough with an Arrow; which constrained him, so soon as he was
cured of his wound, to come and crave succor from the King of Persia; which he
easily obtained. Sha Abbas designing to receive him honorably sent above ten
thousand Horse as far as Cashan, which is four days journey from Ispahan, and
five or six thousand Foot two days journey from thence to meet him. Every day
he was attended by different Officers. Every day they set him up a new Tent,
and spread new Carpets; and every day changed the twelve Horses that were led
before him, whose furniture was all over covered with Jewels. For a League and
a half from the City the way was spread with all sorts of Silk Stuffs to the
very Palace; and the King of Persia went himself to meet him, as far as where
the Stuffs were begun to be laid. Though Sha Abbas was very young, yet he was
resolved to show, that he looked upon himself as a potent King in the peaceable
possession of his own Dominions, and that he went to meet a dethroned Prince,
that came to desire his Aid. For so soon as he perceived the King of the
Tartars, he made a show of spurring on his Horse; and being come up to his
Horses head, he put his foot out of the Stirrup, as if he intended to have
alighted, but did not. The Tartarian Prince, as old as he was, presently leap't
to the ground from his Saddle to salute the Persian King, who returned him some
slight Compliments about his having alighted; at which time the Athemadoulet
and other Lords remounting him, the two Kings rode together upon the Silks, the
King of Persia giving the left hand to the Tartar. The King of Persia very
generously lent him a considerable assistance of 15000 Horse, and 8000 Foot,
and sixty thousand Tomans in Money. The Tartar in Exchange gave him one of his
Provinces bordering upon Persia, which yielded him a very good Revenue, in
regard the Inhabitants were all Shepherds, or Turcomans, that breed an infinite
number of Cattle, wherein the wealth of that Province consists.

While he reigned, he had a present made him from the Governor of Schiras, of
a wild Ass, whose Skin was as red as Scarlet, having a Horn growing out of his
forehead about a foot long.

Sha Abbas reigned about twenty-four years, and died at Tehzon, of an
inflammation in his throat, which came by excessive drinking. His body by his
own order was buried at Kour. So soon as he was dead, the Lords that were about
him, sent advice of his death to the Prince that now reigns, by the
Topigi-Basha, who is General of the Musketeers, and Mirza Bayad the Chief of
the Astrologers. So soon as they came to the door of the Haram, they desired to
speak with the Mother and the Son; who believed them come upon some dismal
design. But they presently confirmed them to the contrary. For as soon as the
Prince came forth of the Haram, they fell at his feet, and saluted him King,
declaring the death of his Father. Whereupon the Prince immediately tore his
Garment according to the custom. And indeed they have another custom, that as
soon as the new Prince comes after much entreaty out of the Haram, he throws
himself to the ground, at the door of the Haram, and then rising and sitting
upon his heels, one of the Lords that are sent, girds the Scimiter about his
waste, saying these words, May it please your Majesty to remember your Slave,
that had the Honor to grid you with this Scimiter. Which done, he goes and
sets the Trumpets a sounding, and the Drums beating, whereupon all the people
in the morning come running to the Gate of the Palace, crying out, Patsha
Salamalek, I salute thee Emperor. Which is all the Ceremony used when any King
of Persia ascends the Throne. For I never saw any Crown set upon the head
either of Sha Abbas or Sha Sefi. Only in Persia they gird on the Scimiter, as
in Turkey they put on the Bonnet of the Sophi's, which is very richly set with
Jewels, but has not the least resemblance of a Crown. The same Ceremony of
girding on the Scimiter, is used to the Mogul, the Kings of Visapour and
Golconda; and they also put the Bonnet upon their heads, which is set with the
richest Jewels in the possession of those great Monarchs.

Sha-Sefi the second, some time after his coming to the Throne, fell
dangerously sick, not having ever enjoyed a perfect health before. Now it is
the custom in those Countries, that upon such an occasion all the Lords of the
Court, and Governors of Provinces, give a sum of money, according to their
willingness and liberality. This sum is usually in Gold, which they put into a
Basin very richly set with precious Stones, and bear it three times over the
Kings head, pronouncing these words, Patsha Bashena Olson, This money is
sacrificed for the health of the Kings head. If the King recover all that money
is given to the poor, to which the King and his Haram add very liberally. But
if the King dies, the money is put into the Treasury, and the poor have
nothing. The twentieth of August 1667, was the critical day of his distemper,
and every one thought he would have died. Upon which all the Grandees of the
Court seeing him in that condition, went to the Mosquee called Babaron, which
is without the City, to pray for his health, and altogether gave near a
thousand Tomans to the poor. The next day they commanded the Christian
Armenians to pray for the recovery of the King. Whereupon as well the
Ecclesiastics as the Laity went to their prayers upon the side of the River
which is between Ispahan and Zulpha. They also sent their Kelonter, with fifty
Tomans in Gold, to bear over the Kings head; though the Armenians pronounce not
the same words as the Persians, saying only, Berai te Sadduk, destined for Alms.

Thus the danger being over in a few days, they made it their business to
recover him to a perfect habit of health; but in regard the King continued in a
languishing condition, and for that the Physicians could not discover the cause
of the distemper, the King began to believe that it proceeded from the
ignorance of the Physicians; for which reason some of them had received none of
the best entertainment already. At length it came into the thoughts of some
others of the Physicians, who were afraid for themselves, that in regard Persia
was thus doubly afllicted, with Famine and the Sickness of the King, both at
one time, it must of necessity be the Astrologers fault, that missed the
favorable hour when the King should have ascended the Throne. Thus being
troubled at their disgrace, pretending to have no less skill in future knowledge
than the Astrologers, who had not chos'n a true time for the King to ascend the
Throne, they concluded that for the perfect recovery of his health, and the
restoring of plenty to the Nation, it was necessary to renew the Ceremony at a
lucky hour, and to change his name. This proposition pleased the King and his
Council. The Physicians and Astrologers joining together, observed the first
unlucky day, which would certainly be followed by another that would prove
fortunate. Now there being among the Gaures, some that pretend themselves
descended from the Rustans, who were ancient Kings of Persia and Parthia, that
very morning one of those Gaures setting himself upon the Throne, with his back
against a wooden Figure which represented him to the life, all the Grandees of
the Court came and did him homage as their King, as he had ordered them to do.
This action lasted till the favorable hour was come, which happened a little
before Sunset. Then it was that an Officer of the Court came behind and cut
off the head of the wooden Figure, while the Gaure immediately took his heels
and fled. Presently upon that the King appeared in the Hall, upon whose head
when they had put the Bonnet of Sophi, and re-girt him with the Scimitar, he
ascended the Throne, and took the name of Soliman. He was forced to act this
Comedy to satisfy the Law, which contrived that he should change his Name, and
take a new possession of his Throne, by ejecting a Usurper that had wrongfully
claimed it. For which reason the Gaure was set up as Pretender, as laying claim
to the ancient Lineage of the Persian Kings, and being of a different Religion.
From that time the King recovering, and the Famine decreasing, the Physicians
were in great repute, and the Astrologers were cast out of favor, except two
or three of the most skilful.

Sha-Soliman before his coming to the Crown, had conversed with none but Women
and black Eunuchs; from whom he could not learn the art of Ruling. At present
he only divertizes himself with his Wives in going a hunting, very rarely
troubling himself with business, but relying wholly upon his Ministers of
State. He will not be seen for ten or twelve days together; all which time
there are no Petitions to be preferred, nor Complaints to be made.

CHAP. II. Of certain particular Actions which denote the Virtues and Vices of
the Kings of Persia, from Sha Abbas the first to Sha-Soliman the present King.
And first of Sha-Abbas the Great.
SHa-Abbas, who was a passionate Lover of Honor, sought all ways imaginable to
furnish his Empire with the supports of wealth and good Government. He would
not suffer any Indian or Banian to live as a Trader in his Dominions; they
having crept in since under the Reigns of Sha-Sefi the first, and Sha-Abbas the
second, who came very young to the Throne. Neither had Sha-Abbas any reason to
permit them to trade in his Kingdom; for they are worse Usurers than the Jews,
and seldom it happens, but that they have all the Money in the Nation, which
they take up at nine or ten in the hundred, and let out again upon pawns at two
and a half per Cent. a month. From such devouring Pests and Vipers as these,
Sha-Abbas thought it but reasonable to preserve his people; so that before
these Vermin crept into Persia, the Money was all in the hands of the Armenians
of Zulpha. And indeed those Banians have been the ruin of many poor people, of
which I will only bring one example among many.

I was at Ispahan in the year 1662, when one of those Banians lent six or seven
Tomans per Cent. a month to a poor Persian, who had uttered several pieces of
Linen upon the place. Those Banians will have their interest paid every month;
but the Persian had slipped three or four, having no Money to pay, in regard his
Debtor could not pay him. Thereupon the Banian dunn'd him perpetually, and
threatened to have him drub'd till he paid it, according to the Persian
custom. The Mother of the Persian troubled to see her Son haunted in that
manner, one morning as he was going to the Meydan, bid him, if he met the
Banian, that he should be sure to bring him home, and she would pay him his
interest, and some of the principal, with some Money that she had saved of her
own. Toward evening the Banian met his Debtor, whom he readily followed home
upon promise of payment. The Mother desired him to set upon the Coursi, which
is the place where they make their fires, it being cold snowy weather, and set
fruits before him to eat. While he thus eat and warmed himself, night came on
apace, and the woman putting him in hopes of payment, spun out the time so
long, that the Banian not being unaccustomed to cold weather and late hours,
was easily persuaded to stay all night at the Persians House. When 'twas time
to go to bed, the Banian threw himself upon one Quilt, and the Persian upon
another. About two hours after midnight, the Mother comes sostly into the
Chamber, with a sharp Razor in her hand, intending to have cut off the Banians
head; but unfortunately mistaking, killed her own Son instead of the Banian.
The Banian having had such an escape, stole cunningly out of the House, and
declaring the murder to the Divan-beque, or the Chief Justice, He caused the
woman to be apprehended, and brought before him; who confessing the fact, he
commanded her to be tied to the tail of a young Mule, and to be dragged about
the City till the Mule had kicked her to death.

In the year 1667, eight or ten days before I departed from Ispahan, there was
a Banian found buried in a Street near the Capuchins house; they had cut off
his arms and legs, and so put him into the hole; but buried him so shallow that
the Dogs scraped away the Earth, and discovered him; but who committed the
fact, was not then known.

Sha Abbas was not only willing that all the trade should be in the hands of
his Subjects, to make profit thereby, and to draw the Money into his Kingdom,
but he would not suffer it to be transported when it was brought in. He saw
that the Pilgrimages of his Subjects to Mecca, their Expenses and Presents
carried out abundance of his Ducats of Gold; therefore more politic than
religious, he strove to hinder those Pilgrimages as much as in him lay; and
going himself in person to Meshed in Pilgrimage to the Tomb of Iman-rez already
spoken of, over which one of the Legs of Mahomets Camel hangs as a a great
Relict; and upon his return relating and giving out strange Miracles of
Iman-rez, on purpose to divert his Subjects from going to Mecca.

Among the rest of the cunning knacks that Sha-Abbas made use of, to know how
squares went in his Kingdom, without trusting too much to his Ministers, he
oft'n disguised himself, and went about the City like an ordinary inhabitant,
under pretense of buying and selling, making it his business to discover
whether Merchants used false weights or measures or no. To this intent one
evening going out of his Palacein the habit of a Countryman, he went to a
Bakers to buy a Man of Bread, and thence to a Cook to buy a Man of Rost-meat,
(a Man is six Pound, sixteen Ounces to the Pound). The King having bought his
Bargains returned to Court, where he caused the Athemadoulet to weigh both the
Bread and the Meat exactly. He found the Bread to want fifty-seven Drams, and
the Meat forty-three. The King seeing that, fell into a great chase against
three or four of them that were about him, whose business it was to look after
those things; but especially against the Governor of the City, whose Belly he
had caused to have been ripped up, but for the intercession of certain Lords.
Besides the reproaches that he threw upon them for being so negligent in their
Employments; and for their little affection to the public good, he laid before
them the injustice of false weights; and how sadly the cheat fell upon poor
men, who having great Families, and thinking to give them eight hundred Drams
of Bread, by that fraud deprived them of a hundred and forty three. Then
turning to the Lords that were present, he demanded of them, what sort of
justice ought to be done those people? When none of them daring to open their
mouths, while he was in that passion, he commanded a great Oven to be made in
the Piazza, together with a Spit long enough to roast a man; and that the Oven
should be heated all night, and that they should make another fire to be
kindled hard by the Oven. The next morning the King caused the Baker and the
Cook to be apprehended, and to be led quite thorough the City, with two men
going before them, who cried to the people, We are going to put the Baker into
a red hot Oven made in the Piazza, where he is to be baked alive, for having
uttered Bread by false weights; and the Cook is to be roasted alive, for having
sold meat by false weights. Thus those two men served for an example not only
to Ispahan, but to all the Kingdom, where every one dreaded the severe justice
of Sha-Abbas.

CHAP. III. Of what fell out most memorable in the Reign of Sha-Sefi the first;
and particularly of the death of Iman-Kouli-Kan, and his three Sons.
I Man-Kouli-Kan was the last Kan of Schiras, whose Government extended over
the Province of Lar, to the Golf of Persia, under the Reign of Sha-Abbas; these
Kans being the most potent in all Persia. Iman-Kouli-Kan was he who in the
Reign of Sha-Abbas conquered the greatest part of the Kingdom of Lar, and the
Kingdom of Ormus, with all the Coast of the Persian Golf, from Cape Jasques to
Balsara.

This Iman-Kouli-Kan was prodigiously rich, beloved and respected by all the
world; besides he was wonderfully magnificent, his expenses almost equalling
the Kings; which occasioned Sha-Abbas, who discoursed with him one day
particularly upon that Subject, to tell him, that he desired him to spend every
day one Mamoudy less than he, that there might be some difference between the
expenses of a King and a Kan.

The noble qualities of this Iman-Kouli-Kan had gained the affections of the
people; for he was magnificent and liberal; highly recompensed brave Soldiers
and Students; he loved Strangers, and had a particular care to cherish Arts and
Sciences. To which purpose he built a fair College at Schiras, for the
instruction of Youth; and several Inns, as well in the City as upon the Road,
for the benefit of Travelers. He caused Mountains to be cut thorough to
shorten the way; and joined others by Bridges, of such an adventurous
Structure, that it is hard to conjecture how such prodigious Arches could be
made over such vast Precipices and Torrents.

Now in regard Iman-Kouli-Kan was strick'n in years, he seldom went to Court,
choosing rather to continue in his Government, where he was beloved and
respected by all men. But the King being young, and the Government of the
Kingdom in the hands of the Queen Mother and the Athemadoulet, who were
extremely jealous of the Kan, those two persons linked together in interest for
the maintenance of the Kings Authority and their own, fretted to see the Kan's
Court almost as splendid as the Kings; and that nothing of the Revenue of
Schiras, Lar, Ormus, or any part of the Persian Golf came to the Kings Coffers,
as being solely at the disposal of the Kan; but that on the contrary, the King
was obliged to send him Money to pay the Army. But that which troubled the
Queen Mother most of all, was the pretention of the Kan's eldest Son to the
Crown, whowas also a person of a daring and ambitious courage. For the Kings of
Persia esteem it a great Honor to bestow upon any Kan or great Lord, one of
their Wives out of their Royal Haram; and Sha-Abbas had given to Iman-Kouli-Kan
one of his own proper Wives, whom he loved extremely. It Is thought that when
she left the Haram she was three months gone with Child by Sha-Abbas, for
somewhat above six months after she was bedded by the Kan, she lay-in of a Son,
of which the King was the reputed Father, and who being born before Sha-Sefi,
pretended a right before him to the Throne. By virtue of this claim, contrary
to the will of Sha-Abbas in favor of Sha-Sefi, this ambitious Lord, who only
passed for the Kan's eldest Son, vehemently solicited his Father to seize upon
Sha-Sefi, and to make himself King, or at least to open a way for him to the
Throne. Now it happened, that one day being a hunting with the young King near
Schiras, the impatient young Lord coming to his Father; Sir, said he, see now
the opportunity that offers you the Throne; for I will go presently and bring
you Sha-Sefi's head. But the Kan holding his Son by the Arm, told him, that he
would never consent to the death of his King; protesting to him, rather to dye
a thousand deaths; adding withal, that it was the Kings will to appoint
Sha-Sefi to succeed him, as being the Son of his Son, and consequently his
lawful Heir; that the young Prince was recommended to his care, and in regard
he had promised and sworn, he was so far from falsifying his trust, that he
would maintain his possession to the last gasp.

This generous resolution of the Kan broke the young Lords design upon the
Kings person. However the Sultaness being not ignorant of the train that was
laid for the young King, and against the repose of the Kingdom, thought it her
wisest way to prevent the blow, and to rid her self of such persons as had
conspired the death of the King. The Kan's two other Sons took part with him
they called their elder Brother. And as for the Kan himself, though he were
upright in his Loyalty, yet his power, his wealth, his reputation among the
Soldiery, and the affection that the people bare him, concurred together not
only to render him suspected, but guilty. The Sultaness and the Athemadoulet
took counsel together, which way to divert the storm that threatened the Kings
head, to whom they represented, that he was not safe in his own person so long
as Iman-Kouli-Kan and his three eldest Sons lived. The King easily believed
them, and resolved to be rid both of Father and Sons together; but the
difficulty was to get 'em to Court, wherein opportunity it self assisted them.
For at that time Amurath the Great Turk at the head of a vast Army, was already
advanced within the Confines of Persia, had taken Erivan, and had ruined
Tauris. Upon the first news of this march the King sends for all the Kans and
Governors to attend his person, with all the Forces under their command. Among
the rest, the Kan of Schiras received the same orders; who thereupon assembled
all his Troops, both Horse and Foot, who were not only the most numerous, but
the best disciplined and stoutest Soldiers of all Persia. As he was upon his
march to Casbin with his three Sons, the eldest having well considered of
affairs; Sir, said he, We are making have to the King, to the end our heads may
the sooner fall at our feet. Perhaps my Son, replied the Kan, thou may speak
the truth; but to this day I never was a Rebel against the King, I have done
whatever he commanded, and whatever may happ'n I will obey him till death. The
Kan arriving at Casbin, was by the King welcomed with great demonstrations of
joy. Some days after, he took a general Muster, and then made a great Feast
which lasted three days, to which all the great Lords and Kans that were at
Casbin were called. The three Sons of Iman-Kouli-Kan were of the number; but
the Father excused himself, as well by reason of his age, as also representing
to his Majesty, that it better befitted him to employ his time in taking care
of his affairs, and in praying for his Majesty; however if it were his
Majesty's express command, he would not fail to obey; to which the King
returned for answer, that the Kan of Schiras was at his liberty to do as he
thought fit. The third day of the Feast the King rose from his Seat, and going
out of the Hall, without speaking a word to any person, went into a Room hard
by. Half an hour after, three sturdy resolute Fellows with some other
Ragamuffin attendants, entering the Hall with their Scimeters drawn, seized upon
the Kans three Sons, and cut off their heads. They were put into a Gold Basin,
and presented to the King; who commanded the Fellows to carry them to their
Father, and as soon as he had seen them, to take off his head to make the
fourth. The Assassinates found him at his prayers; but being interrupted to see
the heads of his three Sons, he desired leave only to conclude, which having
done, with a countenance undisturbed, and without any other words or
expressions in his mouth than what is usually said among the Persians, Let the
Kings will be done, he submitted to a death which he might have easily avoided.
The four heads were brought back to the King, to be sent into the Haram to his
Mother. So soon as he had taken off the heads of the Father and the three Sons,
the King dispatched away certain Chappars or Courriers, with order to the
Lieutenant of the Kan, to put to death all the rest of the Children. The
command was obeyed, and they were all put to death, but only two that were at
Nurse, whom their Nurses so well concealed, that never any tidings could be
heard either of the Nurses or of the Children.

After the death of Iman-Kouli-Kan, the Province of Schiras, with its
dependances, has been governed by a Vizir, who agrees with the King what Rent
to pay him yearly. In the years 1665 and 1666, the Vizir gave him fifty
thousand Tomans a year. But in the year 1667, the King abated him eight
thousand Tomans, in regard he had taken from him a small part of his Government
to pleasure a Favorite.

Besides what the Governor of Schiras pays to the King in ready Money, he is
obliged every year to send him a present of all the rarities that grow on are
bred in the Province. These Presents consist in Horses, of which there is the
best breed of any Province of Persia. In Granates, Oranges, and Lemons, sweet
Oils and Waters of several sorts, especially Oil of Roses, with which the women
rub their bodies and heads; and the water of a certain Flower that grows upon a
tree not much unlike our Willows, which water is called Arak-Bilmitshe, which
is a great refreshment to those that use it; besides other Oils and Essences
which the Governor is obliged to present. Yet were he only obliged to present
the King, the expense might be born well enough; but for fear of being
displaced by any other Favorite, he is constrained to make Friends of all the
other great Lords and Favorites at Court; which there is no way to do, but by
continual presents. Whereas the ancient Kans, who were a kind of petty
Sovereigns in their Governments, were only wont to send a few Baskets of new
Fruits in their season for the service of the Kings Table. To defray this
expense, the Governors are forced to tyrannize over the people; who when they
come, as many times they do, two or three Villages together, to complain to the
King, are forced after long waiting, to return with empty Purses home again, by
reason that they who should give them admission, are the only persons that
debar them from it; and patiently to submit to the Extortions of the Vizir;
which is a piece of policy practiced likewise by all the other Kans and
Governors of the Persian Provinces. As for Sha-Sefi himself, he was very
severe, and one whose punishments oft'n amounted to acts of cruelty. One day
being a hunting, a poor Countryman appeared from behind a Rock, with a paper in
his hand, being deputed by the Village to make some complaint to the King. But
while the poor man cried for justice, the King without making any answer, shot
two arrows into his body and slew him. That which moved Sha-Sefi to this act of
cruelty, was because he had some of his Wives with him in company. For then
there is no mercy to those poor people that happ'n to be in the way where the
King chances to pass by; no not for them that are in the Country round about,
where the Eunuchs have order to kill all men they meet. When the King gives
notice of his intention to carry his Wives into the Country, this is called
Courouk; and there is nothing more troublesome nor more inconvenient in the
world to the poor people that live in the Villages through which these women
are to pass; for upon notice given them, they must leave their Houses for a
League or two of either side. When there is a Courouk at Ispahan, let the
weather be never so bad, the people must leave their Houses, and if they have
no Friends in some distant quarter to retire to, they have no way but to repair
to the Mountains. Such is the excess of the jealousy of the Kings of Persia;
which indeed derives it self to all his Subjects, who will not permit their
women to be seen by any but their own Husbands.

The Persians both men and women are so addicted to take Tobacco, that to take
their Tobacco from them, is to take away their lives. So that if the King
should prohibit Tobacco for any time, he would lose a good part of his revenue.
However Sha-Sefi in a humor having once forbidd'n Tobacco to be taken in any
part of his Dominion, his Spies (that are in every City) found in the Indian
Inn two rich Merchants of that Nation smoking their noses. Immediately they
were seized, bound, and carried to the King, who commanded forthwith that
Justice should be done upon them in the Meidan, which was that they should pour
melted lead down their throats till they were dead.

The people thought the King had only intended to have scared them, and would
have reprieved them upon the place. Insomuch that four Banians went to the
Athemadoulet, and offered to pay two thousand Tomans into the Kings Treasury,
so that he would be pleased to spare the two Merchants lives. The chief
Minister made the proposal, but the King falling into a passion, and asking the
Atbemadoulet, whether those Indian Dogs thought that a King of Persia would
sell justice, sent a second order for the execution of the Merchants without
delay.

The same Sha-Sefi having given command that the Eyes of a young Lord of the
Court should be put out, one of the principal Officers of the House being
present, and seeing the Executioner prick the eyes of the unfortunate young man
with the point of a small knife, shut his own eyes and turned away his head, as
abhorring such a spectacle. The King perceiving it, and vexed to see those
signs of pity, and a dislike of an act that he approved; What, said he in a
fury, art thou afraid to punish the wicked? And at the same time commanded his
eyes to be pulled out of his head.

It is a custom, that if any man points at the King as he passes along in the
Street, or upon the Road, he must lose his hand. One day Sha-Sefi being in the
Country, two Merchants of Constantinople were upon the Road, where the King and
his Train were to pass. They stopped to see the King, and when he came near,
one of the Merchants prayed his Friend that oft'n had seen him, to show him
which was he. The other knowing that only the King wears the Heron tops in his
Bonnet, innocently lifted up his hand to distinguish him, by pointing, from the
rest of the Lords that followed him. For which act two Horsement came presently
to him, and cut off his hand with a Scimiter.

CHAP. IV. The tragical and memorable Story of Ralph Sadler, Native of Zurich,
in the Reigu of Sha-Sefi, who had retained him in his Service.
RAlph Sadler, born in Zurich, was a Watchmaker by Profession, who put himself
into the service of the Emperors Resident at the Ottoman Court, with whom he
went to Constantinople. This man I desired to take along with me into Persia;
and coming to Ispahan, he set himself to work, and made a small Watch about the
bigness of half a Crown; which being a neat piece of work, the English would
needs buy, to present it to Iman-Couli-Kan paying the price demanded, which was
two hundred Crowns. Iman-Couli-Kan presented it to the King; who was mightily
pleased with it, in regard it was the least striking Watch that ever had been
seen by the King, who therefore carried it hanging about his Neck under his
Clothes, in a Gold Chain. One day the King happening to wind up his Watch, and
turning the Key the wrong way, broke the Fusil, for which he was so much
troubled, that he sent for the Watch-maker from Ispahan to Casbin; whither when
Ralph came, he presently made the Watch as good as ever. The King thus
satisfied in his work and in his person, ordered him a Pension of thirty
Tomans, and Diet for him and a man, and provision for two Horses; commanding
him withal to make some new pieces of work. Now a skilful workman in the
service of the Persian King, has this advantage, that if he pleases the King,
besides his Wages that are duly paid, the King out of his liberality bestows on
him a present, which usually amounts to a third part or half his Wages; or else
his Wages are raised, which is more advantageous than a present.

Ralph was obliged every morning to wait upon the King at his rising, to wind
up his Watch; and was so much in the Kings favor, that every morning when he
came out of the Kings Chamber, he had a Glass of Wine presented him, as a mark
of esteem. And indeed the King had such an affection for him, that to retain
him in his service he often solicited him to turn Mohammedan.

The Ambassador of Holstein coming to Ispahan, and seeing Ralph so much in
favor with the King, endeavored to gain his Friendship.

Thus Ralph oft'n keeping company with the Ambassadors, and having one time
tarried till late at night upon the debauch with them, returning home to his
Lodging, where he kept a young Nestorian girl, in the Court of the House met a
young Persian, Brother to one of the Kings Porters. The Persian knowing himself
guilty, and surpised to see Ralph so soon returned, skip't over the Wall into
the Garden and fled. The next day Ralph (who knew who he was) told his Brother
of it, and desired him to speak to the young Persian not to come any more to
his House; for if he did, he must expect what followed.

Some days after, the Ambassadors treated all the Franks; when Ralph beginning
to be warm, called the young Persian to mind, and slipping home without taking
his leave, opened the door softly, and found the young Persian again with his
Mistress. Thereupon Ralph calling his Slaves to help him, bound his arms, and
tied him to a Tree in the Court; and so leaving him there, went to bed. By and
by one of Ralph's Servants, who knew the Persian, fell a jeering him; which so
incensed the Persian, that he having his feet at liberty, and the fellow within
his reach, gave him sach a kick upon the bottom of his belly, that he first
swooned away, and then died. The other Slaves seeing him fall, wakened Ralph
with their cries, who thereupon snatching up a Pistol that was charged with a
brace of Bullets, shot the Persian into the head. The Persian being thus slain,
Ralph went in the morning to wind up the Kings Watch; and being asked by the
King, as he was wont to do, what news in Ispahan, told him plainly what he had
done, and the reason why. The King upon his report told him, he had done well
according to the strictness of the Country.

The Athemadoulet at that time was Mirza-Take, who hated Ralph. For the
Armenian Merchants having presented the Athemadoulet with several Watches at a
time, it happened that once he sent to Ralph above thirty Watches together to
be mended. For which the Athemadoulet, to gratify him, and knowing that he
kept four or five Servants, and seven or eight Horses, sent him fifteen or
twenty Camels load of Straw and Barley for his Horses. But Ralph slighting such
a present as that, Go (said he to the Athemadoulets Servant) tell thy Master,
that I am neither a Horse nor an Ass, and therefore let him eat his Present
himself. Which message so provoked the Athemadoulet, that he studied nothing
but revenge.

Thereupon the Athemadoulet, whose business it is to attend the King when he
rises, and to report to him the news of the Town, told him, among the rest,
what Ralph had done. The King replied, that Ralph had consess'd it to him
already: and that he had pardoned him, in regard he had reason to do as he did.
But the Athemadoulet made answer, that Ralph had minced the matter; and
represented the story to the King far otherwise than it was, making the worst
of it he could upon Ralph's side; and the more to incite the King, he put him
in mind of the fair occasion he had to force him to turn Mussulman, there being
no way to expiate his crime, but by turning Mohammedan, or suffering the Law.
The King thus overruled, sent for Ralph, told him, he was now better informed
of the crime he had committed, and that he must either turn Mohammedan or dye.
Thereupon the King sent him to Prison. Eight days after, the King (who had a
great love for him, and therefore troubled that he must be constrained to put
him to death, unless he would turn Mahumetan,) sent for him again, and offered
him two thousand Tomans, after a powerful persuasion by words, but all
signified nothing. Upon that he sent him back again to Prison. But yet
remembering that he had once approved the fact, he sent for Ralph a second time,
and offered him ten thousand Tomans, and a Wise out of his Haram, with all her
Jewels; all which Ralph refused, with the same resolution as before. The King
incensed at the fierceness of his resolution, delivered him to the Brother of
the party slain, to execute the Law upon him. The Holstein Ambassadors were
resolved to have begged his life; but the Athemadoulet, smelling their design,
would not permit them Audience. However, the King commanded all the Franks, and
all the Armenian Clergy to be present at the Execution, to save all his blood,
and put him in a Coffin; he commanded also, that he should be buried at Zulpha
in the Armenian Churchyard, and have a Tomb made over him.

Thereupon Ralph was lead to the Meidan, with that triangular Instrument of
Wood which the Persians call a Palenk, about his neck. This Palenk was the
cause that the Brother of the deceased, who was to be the Executioner, not only
missed his first blow, but wounded himself in the Leg, while his Skain being
born off by one of the sides of the triangular Instrument, by the force of the
blow lighted upon himself. Whereupon the people making a great shout hindered
farther execution for that time. The King being advertised thereof, remanded
him to Prison, and after a few days sent for him a third time into his
presence; but though the King offered him a thousand Tomans, and that the Lords
urged him to turn, though it were but for a while, and in outward appearance;
yet neither threats nor promises could move the Zurickian, who was thereupon
executed at the end of October, 1637.

All the Franks willingly contributed to raise him a Tomb; which was covered
with a small Duomo, supported with four Pillars, ten or twelve foot high. The
Armenians have made him a Saint; so that when they are sick of a Fever, they
come and make their devotions at this Tomb; and every time they come, they
carry away a piece of a Stone; so that the Tomb wants repairing every year.

The Athemadoulet, to the end the King might be the less sensible of the want
of him, had told the King, that his Majesty would find no great miss of him, in
regard he had a Servant who was almost as good as himself. But some few days
after, the Kings Watch that he always carried about him, being out of order,
and Ralphs Apprentice not being able to remedy the fault; the King for madness
that he had been the Watchmakers death, threw the Watch at the Athemadoulets
head. There, cried he, Dog as thou art, by thy advice I put Ralph to death, the
most skilful man of his Profession that ever will come into my Kingdom. Thou
deservest for thy counsel, to have thy belly ripped up. But I swear by my Throne,
that from this time forward I will never put a a Christian to death for his
Religion. And I question whether any of you would have had the same courage to
have died for the Law of Haly. And indeed they have been very cautious ever
since; nor has any of the Franks been put to death, though they have flown out
before the King in words and actions rash enough.

CHAP. V. Of some particulars under the Reign of Sha-Abbas the second.
SHa-Abbas the second, Son of Sha Sefi, was no less cruel then his Father; and
would be no less punctually obeyed.

He had two Sisters, which he married to two of the richest Lords of his
Kingdom, though of a very mean extraction. Some time after, the King
understanding that they were both with-Child, ordered Physic to be given them
to destroy the fruit of their Wombs. About three months after, he was told that
they were big again; then he suffered 'em to be brought to bed; but commanded
that they should not give the Children any nourishment, but let them starve to
death.

The same Sha Abbas caused the tongue of one that filled him Tobacco to be cut
out for a word spok'n idly. For the King calling for Tobacco, one of the Pages
ran hastily for it to him that had it in charge, and bid him dispatch; who
answered him briskly, Gehenneme sabreijle, that is, to Hell, have a little
patience. The King being informed of it, commanded his tongue to be cut out.
The poor man desired him that was the Executioner, to cut it as deep as he
could in his throat, and to leave it very short; by which means he spoke some
words muffling.

The people cried out against the Nazar, who being a person of low extraction,
and advanced to that high dignity in a short time, grew so proud that he
contemned all the Lords of the Court. There was no dealing with him about any
business, unless he were first presented; and he paid no body without making
some advantage of it. Every body had reason to complain; yet no person knew how
to come at the King to make their complaints. At length they bethought
themselves of making their application to two black Eunuchs, who had the Kings
ear in the night. One was called Aga-Saron, who was the Meter or Master of the
Wardrobe; and the other Aga-Kafour, or high Treasurer. These two Eunuchs seeing
the King in a good humor one night, let fall certain words concerning the
Nazar, and his management of affairs, and thence slid into a discourse of His
injustice, that caused the people to cryout against him, and speak evil of his
Government. Now it happened one morning that the King intending to go a
hunting, the Grand Master, who had always a large train attending him, coming
to the Kings Tent, the Meter denied him entrance. About the same time the King
came forth, and seeing the Nazar, commanded his Officers to take off the Bonnet
from the head of that Dog that took Gifts from his people; and that he should
sit three days bareheaded in the heat of the Sun, and as many nights in the
Air. Afterward he caused him to be chained about the neck and arms, and
condemned him to perpetual imprisonment, with a Mamoudy a day for his
maintenance; but he died for grief within eight days after he was put in prison.

Jafer-Kan, being a generous Lord, and one that kept a magnificent train, was
Governor of Asterabat. At first he was very mild, but at last he began to
exact such sums from the people, that his oppressions were very heavy; nor were
these violences of his concealed from the Kings ear; who being one day drinking
with some of his Lords, and seeing the Master of his Music in the Room, who
was a merry droll, and had always some pleasant news or other to tell the King;
his Majesty was pleased to ask him, what the people said of Jafer-Kan; adding
withal, that he had made him Governor of several Provinces, and had never
heard any complaint of him before, but that now he was accused of strangely
tyrannizing over the people. The Music Master being a mere flatterer, and
knowing that Jafer-Kan was extremely beloved by the King, confidently averred,
that the Governor was falsely accused, and that he had always known him apter
to give than to receive. There was at the same time in the Room, an Agis called
Manouchar-Kan, lately returned from a Pilgrimage to Mecca; him the King also
asked, what was his opinion of Jafer-Kan, and his Government, being a person
that had been long acquainted with him; to whom the Agis, thinking to please
the King, returned the same answer, that the Music Master had given. Whereupon
the King, who had been well informed of the Kans behavior, turning toward the
Lords that were present, What think you, said he, of these two Flatterers, that
absolutely know the contrary to what they speak? And at the same time commanded
two of the Music Masters teeth to be pulled out of his mouth, and to be driven
into the head of the Agis; which had like to have cost him his life, being a
very old man. As for Jafer-Kan, he was disgraced for a time, but being a person
endowed with noble qualities, valiant, generous, and pleasing in conversation,
he was recalled to Court, and knew so well how to make his tale good, that his
Majesty gave him the Government of Shemeloubostan, of which Semeran is the
Capital City. Shemeloubostan signifies a Country manured to bear fruit. Nor is
there any Province in Persia that so abounds in Pastures and Castles, that
daily fall to ruin.

Jafer-Kan being restored to favor, the King sent for several Lords of the
Court to come and drink with them. He also commanded five French Artificers
which he had in his service to wait upon him, a Goldsmith named Sain, two
Watchmakers Lagis and Varin, and two Musket-makers Marais and Bernard. After
they had heated themselves a little with Wine, the King drew a Ruby out from
off his finger, which I sold for him a hundred Tomans, and a Diamond Jewel
worth thirteen or fourteen hundred Tomans, which he gave to Jafer-Kan, with
whom he was whispering at the same time. Now though the Nazar were at a
distance, yet without doubt somewhat of the discourse was heard; insomuch that
the Wine emboldning him, he told the King aloud, that if he would let him have
but four thousand Horse, he would cut all that Rabble to pieces. The King bid
him hold his tongue and go to sleep; testifying his displeasure at his
discourse. For the Nazar conjectured that the King was talking to Jafer-Kan
about the incursions which the Usbeck Tartars often made from Meshed side. As
for the Franks three of the five were gone home to sleep, Sain, Lagis, and
Bernard: Maras and Varin stayed behind in the Room. But Marais being of a humor
that when he was drunk he could not hold his tongue, and having heard what the
Nazar said, he likewise took upon him to tell the King, that if the King wanted
a General, there was none fitter to make a General than Jafer-Kan, and
presently began a long repetition of his praises. The King commanded him to
hold his tongue, which he did for awhile, but then falling again into his
former impertinencies, the King commanded him to be dragged out of the Room by
the feet, and that they should rip up his belly. Thereupon Marais was seized
upon by the Meter, who having a great kindness for the Franks, and knowing that
the King had a singular love for Marais, delayed the execution of the Kings
command, pulling his Clothes off very slowly; and finding that the King did
not rise to go into his Haram, which is the sign of no pardon to be given, he
caused him to be dragged as near the person of the King as he could, thereby to
try whether the King would have compassion on him or no; while certain Lords
took the boldness to implore the Kings mercy in his behalf. At last when the
King saw him dragged along, he commanded the Officers to let him go, and
withal ordered him to put on his Clothes again, and resume his place.

The King of Persia's eldest Son comes very raw to the Throne; and his first
divertisement is to make short journeys into the Provinces, thereby by little
and little to gain the knowledge of such things as concern him. Above all
things he never fails to visit the principal Church of the Armenians at Zulpha.
That which makes him so curious, is his desire to see the Armenian women, who
are very handsome; being also further incited thereto by the Sultanesses, who
are glad of any recreation. And then he has a Courouk through all Zulpha, at
what time all the men must retire to Ispahan, or to their Friends at a
distance. Sha-Abbas the second went several times in that manner to Zulpha; and
one day among the rest, upon the report of the beauty of the Wife of the
Kelonter Gorgia Sasras, Son of Kelonter Gorgia Nazar, the King having seen her,
liked her very well, and desired her to go along with the Sultanesses, who
carried her into the Haram, where she continued fifteen days, and then returned
home with a fair Neck-Lace of Pearls, which the King gave her when she went
away.

To say the truth of Sha-Abbas the second, he was a man too much given to
drink, and too much governed by his passion; otherwise he was a lover of
justice, and very magnificent and generous to Strangers.

CHAP. VI. Of the misfortune of Mahomet Beg in the reign of Sha-Abbas the
second,
MAhomet Beg was born at Tauris, the Son of a Tailor, who bred him a Scholar.
He had a quick apprehension, and was naturally inclined to virtue; and being
desirous to advance himself in the world, he had the good luck to obtain the
employment of Major-Bashi, or chief of the Essayers and Refiners of Money, who
has a power to visit all places where money is coined. After that, he became
acquainted with the Aila Verdi Beg, or Mr. Godsgift, the Kings chief Huntsman,
by the title of Mert-Shekar-Bashi, who gladly presented him to the King, to
whom the King was very thankful, so soon as he had found the noble Qualities of
the person he had presented. Thereupon so soon as Mahomet Ali-Beg, grand Master
of the Kings House died, the King bestowed that Employment upon Mahomet Beg,
who not only gained the favor of his Majesty, but the good will of all the
Lords of the Court. He had a great respect for them all, without meddling with
any of their employments, and suppressed his revengeful spirit, not finding it
seasonable as yet to disclose his passions.

Kalise Sultan at that time Athemadoulet happening to dye, the King conferred
that place upon Mahomet Beg, who at first behaved himself in that employment to
the satisfaction of all men. He applied himself particularly to the searching
out of Mines; for there had a report ran among the people for many years, that
if certain mountains nine or ten miles from Ispahan toward the West were well
dug into, their might be found store of Gold, Silver and Copper. To which
purpose he made use of a Norman, whose name was La Chapelle de Han, who vanted
at that time to have great skill in Chemistry, Mines and Minerals, for which
reason he was recommended by the Governor of Ispahan to the Athemadoulet then
at Casbin with the King, who presently sent him back again to the Governor to
furnish him with all things necessary for his Expenses, and for the work which
he undertook in the Mountains. Thither went La Chapelle, and after fifteen days
toil returned to Ispahan with two or three hundred weight of earth, and set up
furnaces to draw out the metal. The Athemadoulet was so wise as to give order
to the Governor of Ispahan, and three or four more persons of Quality to
overview the Norman, to see that he played no foul play. But though there was
not so much as a half penny worth of silver in all the earth from the bottom to
the top, though the Persians watched him so narrowly as they did, he made a
shift to shuffle in an Abassi among the earth, as it was in the furnace without
being perceived. Nevertheless the Athemadoulet, to whom it was carried,
presently found out the cheat, though he took no notice of it, hoping to make
better use of the Norman in other things; only he forbad him to dig any more in
that place, in regard the expense would exceed the profit.

La Chapelle, who was very skilful at putting off his merchandise, and one who
knew to make the best use of the least smackering that he might perhaps have in
Mechanics, and the power of Motion, had the cunning to amuse the Athemadoulet
for ten years together, being a passionate Lover of new Inventions; and the
better to insinuate himself into the Kings favor assumed to himself the
Invention of several Rarities which he showed the King, who thereupon allowed
him a very handsome pension. Thus encouraged, he undertook to cast Canons,
bring the water to the top of the Kings house, and several other things, yet
when all his designs failed for want of Art, and that he found he could do no
more good in Persia, resolving for India, he died at Ormus.

The Athemadoulet missing of Gold and Silver Mines, applied himself to the
discovery of Copper Mines, wherein he was more fortunate; for in those Mines he
also found veins of Azure, of which there is a great quantity consumed in
painting the Grotesco Flourishes upon the Ceilings and Arches of their Houses.
He also found out a Mine of Lead near Yerde: and being still upon new
discoveries, he found out a Mine of Talk, Stone, Alum, and Coals, but of
neither so good as in other Countries. He was so obstinate in the searth of
Metals, that if any person had an occasion to speak with him, let him be never
so busy upon never so important affairs, it was enough to bring him some
stones of a supposed Mine, or something rare either for Color, Figure or
Weight. He also gave full power to them that brought him any tidings of a Mine
to go to the place, and to press the Countrymen from their labor to dig in the
Mountains and break up rocks: and if they found nothing he cast the fault upon
the ignorance of the Laborers.

He also applied himself to the study of Mechanic Motions. He would have found
an Invention, whereby the half Vail that hangs in the Kings Megeler, or Council
Chamber, and is drawn to and fro by certain Officers in the Summer, to gather
the cool Air, should have bin made by Engine-work. Then he took a fancy for
water Engines, the most necessary thing in the world for Persia to relieve the
drowth of the Country, but wanting necessaries, as Beams, Rafters, Wheel-work,
Cordage and Iron, he could not begin those Engines, the figures whereof La
Chapelle had left him in a Book.

But as Mahomet Beg was studious in these things, so was he Ambitious and
Revengeful to that height that he could not observe a moderation in his
resentment against those that had given him any distaste. In his height of
Passion he caused several Kans to be deprived of their Provinces, and by
confiscating their Estates reduced them to utmost necessity.

The Kan of Erivan had a Son who was a lovely and a well proportioned
Gentleman, and always attended at the Kings Elbow. One day that the King was
drinking with some Lords, he commanded the Kan of Erivans Son to carry a Gold
Cup full of Wine to the Athemadoulet, who perceiving that he had enough
already, made a sign with his eye to the young Lord to return it back. The
young Lord passing by the King told him ingeniously that the Athemadoulet had
no desire to drink, whereupon the King commanded him to go and power the Wine
into his bosom. As the one was obliged to obey, the Athemadoulet was forced
to suffer, and to permit the young man to open his bosom and power down the
Wine; for not daring to show his Anger, he was forced to dissemble the best
he could for that time. But having resolved to revenge the affront upon the Kan
of Erivan Father of the young Lord, who had only done what the King commanded
him, he resolved to lay hold upon the opportunity that presented it self,
knovving that there were several complains come against him from the Armenians
of Erivan. Thereupon the Athemadoulet sends for the Kelonter, encourages him in
his suit, and gives him instructions how to proceed. To this end Mahomet Beg
appoints him to meet him such an hour at the Kings Stables, whither the King
presently coming, the Kelonter threw himself at the Kings feet, and besought
him for Justice against the Kan of Erivans oppressions: while Mahomet Beg
failed not to heap up aggravations against the Governor, and the King, though
he had heard but one side, as easily condemned him upon the Accusation of the
Kelonter and his Prime Minister. Thereupon an Officer of the Kings, called
Negef-Couli-Beg, a man of a quick and active spirit was commanded to go in all
haste, and seize upon the Person of the Kan. Who being come to Erivan found him
upon his seat of Justice, confiscating and condemning to fine and Corporal
punishment a near Kinsman of the Kelonters. The Messenger boldly entered into
the Megeler or Council Chamber, goes directly to the Kan, told him he was the
Kings prisner, and gave him a blow with his fist upon the neck, about which he
was to wear the Triangle of great thick pieces of wood already described, into
which the neck is enclosed, while the Arms and Hands of the Prisner are put
through another piece of wood that crosses the Triangle, which is a great pain
to the Prisner. Thus was the Kan carried night and day to Ispahan, but when he
came there the King showed him more mercy, and allowed him his house for a
prison, yet not suffering him to go to the Bath, nor to shave his hair, nor to
stir out of the Apartment where his women were. These are penalties imposed
upon those that fall into disgrace at Court, whom the King shuts up in their
houses, intending no severer punishment. For the Kan being beloved by the King
was restored to his favor, and to his former charge of superintendant of the
Kings Mosquee.

Neither did this sright'n others from bearing up against the Power of Mahomet
Beg, though every one had not the same success. For ill it fared with the
Governor of Schiras, who was called Mirza Haddi. He was a person of great
wealth and knowledge, and one day in Council took upon him to tell Mahomed Beg,
that he was not of his opinion, and withal to lay before him his defects, and
ill conduct. But the Primce Minister so deeply laid to heart the boldness of
Mirza Haddi, that he resolved to revenge himself by all means imaginable. He
suborned false witnesses, and other persons to make complaints before him of
the Governor of Schlras. There was a necessity for the party accused to appear
before Mahomet Beg as his Judge, but the Governor trusting to his Innocence,
nere minded the rage of his adversary, not believing he could receive any
injury from him. In the mean time Mahomet Beg informed the King what he pleased
himself, and overpow'ring him by his authority, confiscated all Mirza Haddi's
Estate, and sent him to prison to the House of the Nazar, who was called Ismael
Beg. When he came there they hung him upon Tenter-hooks by the feet against the
wall, and drub'd him so long, that he was forced to be carried into another
Room upon a Slaves back. His Lieutenant and an Eunuch, that had bin his
Treasurer, were served in the same sauce, and all three put into a high Chamber
that served instead of a prison. His Vizier or Lieutenant was released in a
short while, but Mirza Haddi and his Eunuch were still kept close.

Nor is the manner of his revenging himself upon Mir-Kassem-Beg, the Deroga, or
Provost of Ispahan less remarkable. While Mahomet Beg was only Majer-Bashi,
there was some gold Plate stoll'n out of the Kings Kitchen. Thereupon the
Deroga sent his Officers to seize upon all the Goldsmiths in Ispahan, that knew
nothing of the matter, as being utterly innocent of the Robbery. In the mean
time he put them all in prison, and locked them close up, intimating to them
that he was resolved not to release them without a good sum of money. The poor
Goldsmiths thus ill used, applied themselves to the Majer Bashi, who sent his
Officers to entreat the Deroga to consider that the Goldsmiths were innocent
of the Robbery, and that being in some manner under the Jurisdiction of the
Mayer-Bashi, as being Artificers in Gold and Silver, he ought not to refuse to
discharge them at his request. But the Deroga not seeing the money come, bid
the Officers of Mahomet Beg tell their Master that he knew what belonged to his
Employment, and further, said he, Let the Tailors Son meddle with his own
business; tell him withal, added he, that if he pleases I will show him his
Sister's drawers. For a little before the Deroga had by his Spies surpised her
toying in a Garden with two young Lords, from whom he squeezed a considerable
sum of money. Mahomet Beg not powerful enough then to prosecute his revenge,
let it sleep, but when he came to the height of preserment, he remembered the
Deroga, and bethought himself which way to ruin him. Nor was it long ere an
opportunity offered it self. For there being a report that the Enemy appeared
about Candahar, a Frontier Town of Persia upon the Mogulls Territories, the
Athemadoulet adviz'd the King to raise a good number of Soldiers about
Ispahan, as being lusty nimble fellows and used to labor, and to send them to
Candaliar, to be ready against all accidents. The King having an entire
confidence in the Athemadoulet, ordered him to lose no time, but to commit the
management of the Levies to such persons as had perfect knowledge of the plain
Country. Then Mahomet Beg, studying his revenge, told the King that there was
no person fitter for the employment than the Deroga. Mir Kassembeg, who
according to his cruel and covetous humor, soon abused his Commission, the
thing which he, who had procured it, chiefly desired. For whereas the King
intended that none should be enrolled but those that were willing, the Deroga
forced every body, especially the Sons of the richest Farmers, who rather than
part with their Sons gave the Deroga his own demands to spare them. When
Mahomet Beg had got matter enough against the Deroga, he underhand stirred up
the Country people to make their complaint, giving them to understand that it
was contrary to the Kings intention to have them tormented in that manner, that
his Commission was only to list those that would go of their own accord. The
Villages, easily encouraged, sent their Deputies to Ispahan, whom he kindly
received and presented the same hour to the King. His Majesty having heard
them, and Mahomet Beg having seconded their complaint, the King ordered that
they should make an exact list of what the Commissioners of the Deroga had
robbed them of. Mahomet Beg lost no time, but by virtue of his Authority and
the Kings command, sent his Officers into all the Villages to take the Oath of
every Countryman to the end they should declare the truth, under the penalty of
a Fine and Corporal punishment, of what had been exacted from them to the
utmost Shayet. This Oath was to be put in Paper, signed by every one that made
it, in these words, Let my head be confiscated to the King, and my goods to his
Divan, if I obey not punctually the Order of his Majesty. The account being
made of all the money for which they had compounded with the Deroga, it was
presented by Mahomet Beg, who aggravated the Tyranny of the Deroga, and
represented to his Majesty that for thirty years he had thus devoured the
Territories of Ispahan. Thereupon by the command of the King, who was then at
Ispahan, the Deroga was to be carried into the Meydan, and being tied up by the
heels to receive a certain number of Bastinado's upon the feet for so many
Fridays one after another; and moreover the nerves of his heels were to be cut,
and his ankles to be boar'd thorough. The Kings command being thus sealed,
Mahomet Beg committed the execution thereof to his trusty Instrument
Negef-Couli-Beg, who coming to Ispahan assembled the chief of the City,
together with the Vizir or Governor, and the Deroga or Provost, who thought of
nothing; being met, before they broak open the Kings Seal they made a public
Prayer for the prosperity of the King; which being ended, the Vizir opened the
Letter and read it with a loud voice. When the Vizir came to read the Sentence
against the Deroga, he was seized with astonishment; at what time
Negef-Couli-Beg coming to the Deroga, and striking him upon the Neck with his
fist, threw him down under his Horses feet, and caused him to be bound
according to custom. Immediately he was hurried to the Piazza, where he
received so many Bastinado's upon the soles of his feet that his nayls fell
off. The next Friday they brought him to the same place, where they repeated
the same Execution, and boar'd his ankles. The Deroga being very ancient, his
pains put him into such a condition as moved Negef-Couli-Beg himself to
compassion, who wrote presently to Court, that the continuance of so much
torment, would infallibly be the death of the old man. Upon that the King
ordered that there should no more be done to him; only that he should be shut
up in the inner part of his House with his Wives, depriving him of his
employment, but leaving him his Estate.

But Mahomet Beg, not having yet completed the revenge he sought, was resolved
after he had thus tormented him, to deprive him also of his Estate. To which
purpose he advanced to the Office of Deroga, a Georgian Renegado who was called
Padada-Beg, whom he taught all the tricks imaginable to pick the peoples
pockets. The design of Mahomet Beg in this, was to let the King understand,
that if the new Deroga could heap up such a sum of money in five or six months,
what a prodigious sum must Mir-Kassembeg have heaped up in so many years. In
short, the new Deroga instructed and encouraged by Mahomet Beg, levied unjustly
such a vast number of fines, committed so many extortions and rapines upon the
people, that at the end of six months the people began to tumulc at the Palace
gate. The Divan Bequi, who is the first Minister of Justice, took the peoples
part; whereupon Mahomet Beg perceiving he had been too hasty in his design to
be revenged upon the Divan Bequi, who had crossed his designs, one morning
caused several files of Musketeers to be drawn up at the Kings Haram. The King
surpised at the sight, Mahomet Beg told him that his Majesty was not safe so
long as the Divan Bequi stirred up the people to Rebellion: which so incensed
the King, that he caused the Groom Porter to go immediately and pull out the
Divan Bequi's eyes, which was immediately done; nor did the old man say any
more, but with his face all besmeared with his own goar, desired the servant
upon whose arms he leaned, to turn him toward Mecca that he might pray for the
prosperity of the King. All his goods were confiscated and brought into the
Treasury; but Mir Kassem-beg still enjoyed his, though he was forced to spend
the remainder of his days in his own house.

Thus Mahomet Beg preserved himself still in the Kings favor, and had removed
all those persons from the Court that had no kindness for him, and was
indifferently safe, till Mir-Tchekar-Bashi another favorite, whom the King
highly loved, began to make head against him. These two haughty spirits would
not give an inch one to another: and both equally strove to possess the Kings
favor, to have the disposal of Affairs. Mir-Tchekar-Bashi, who had brought
Mahomet Beg into Favor, being the elder pretended a respect due to his years,
and Mahomet Beg pretended more due from him by reason of his place. During this
contest ran a report of a rebellion upon Georgia side. Whereupon the
Athemadoulet persuaded the King to send Mir-Tchekar-Bashi, lately made Koular
Agasi or General of the Slaves toward Georgia, that so he might remove his
Rival from Court. The Favorite sets forward with a flying Camp, but not
finding any Enemy that opposed him, wrote back to the King that he saw no
appearance of an Enemy, and that therefore it was a needless thing to tire the
Soldiers in a Country where there was no face of War, and begged his Majesty's
leave to return. The Athemadoulet on the other side labored to hinder his
return by preaching to the King the advantages of the stay of those forces in
those parts.

In this interim the Usbek Tartars had made inroads upon the Frontiers of
Carassan, and had slain several of Manoutcheks people, who was governor of the
Province. Mahomet Beg who was his Kinsman, gave the King to understand that the
Kan of Corassan had behaved himself valiantly, but concealed the defeat of the
Kan. On the other side the Koular Agasi sent Letter upon Letter to the King,
but perceiving that none of them came to the Kings hands, he sent to Ispahan
one of his discreetest and most trusty servants, who coming to Court intermixed
himself among the rest of the Lackeys. The Athemadoulet spying an unknown face,
and being always mistrustful, demanded who he was? To whom the Messenger
answered that he was a poor Soldier upon the frontiers of the Kingdom, who
because he could not get his pay there was come to Court to see if he could
there get any recompense for his service: upon which reply the Athemadoulet
took no farther notice of him. Presently after, the young man meeting the Meter
told him he had Letters of importance to deliver into the Kings own hand, of
which the Meter giving notice to the King, the messenger was immediately called
in. The King having read the Letters which discovered to him what the
Athemadoulet had concealed from him touching the no necessity of keeping forces
upon the Frontiers of Georgia, and the loss which the Kan of Korassan had
received, transported with choler against his prime Minister, sent for him, and
after he had most bloodily reviled and reproached him, he was within a little
of killing him with his own hands. But the Nazar and some other Lords there
present took the boldness to represent to the King the long services which
Mahomet Beg had done the Kingdom, and that since his Majesty had raised him
from the dust to the highest honors of the Kingdom, it would not be for his
honor to destroy at one blow a person that he had loved, and might still be
useful to him. This discourse somewhat appeased the King, so that he only gave
him in custody to the Nazar. Three days after the King exiled him to Kom, with
all his Family, not permitting him to shave himself, go to the Bath, or to come
abroad. This Exilement lasted for several years. But my Letters from Persia in
the year 1674. enform'd me that Sha Solomon, the present King, has restored him
to his Primier Dignity, and that he still governs as Athemadoulet, the King
finding no man more capable than himself.

CHAP. VII. Of the Rebellion of the Prince of Jasque, a Vassal to the King of
Persia, in the raigns of Sha-Sefi I. and Sha-Abbas II.
BEtween Cape Jasque, and Cape Guadel which are the two most Southern points of
Persia, there lies a mountainous and mershie Country, which extends it self
from the Ocean toward the Province of Kerman, and in several places is
inaccessible. It is possessed by three petty Princes, the one a Mahumetan, the
other two toward the East both Idolaters. The first is the most potent of the
three, and nearest to the Province of Ormus. He also assumes the title of
Prince of Jasque, as his Ancestors did before him. Now after Sha-Abbas the
first had conquered Ormus, he went about to have made himself master of all the
coast that extends it self beyond Cape Jasque; but meeting with resistance, he
only obtained that the Prince of the Country should acknowledge the King of
Persia for his Lord, and that as his Vassal he should pay him an annual
tribute. And indeed during the reign of Sha-Abbas, who knew how to make himself
feared, the Prince of Jasque paid his tribute very orderly. But Sha-Sefi
succeeding his Grandfather very young, this tributary Prince shook off his
yoke, and refused to pay. Which not being regarded in the reign of Sha Sefi,
the Prince of Jasque thought to do the same in the reign of Sha Abbas the
second. But at length after he had refused to pay for some years, the Kan of
Ormus pretending the Country to be under his Jurisdiction, and that the Kings
honor was concerned in the Princes refusal, incited Sha Abbas to send forces
against him to reduce him to obedience. The King granted the Commission to him
that had undertaken the business: who presently gathering together an Army of
20000 men, the most part Horse, thought to have surpised his Enemy. To which
purpose that he might take the nearest way, he marched directly toward Cape
Jasque. But as it was the shortest cut, it was the most dangerous; insomuch
that the Kan, who hunted all the way he marched, according to the custom of
Persia, had the misfortune to fall into a bogg, where he was stifled, together
with 20 or 30 horsemen more. The death of the Kan being divulged, the Army
retreated back again: but as soon as the King received the news, he sent the
Brother of the deceased Kan to succeed him. In the mean while the Rebel Prince
believing within himself, that he was not to be thus at quiet, and expecting to
be attacked by the new Kan, stood upon his guard. And indeed the new Kan
marched with all the speed he could, and entered the territories of the
rebellious Prince, but being beat'n was forced to make more haste back again to
Ormus, with the loss of an abundance of men.

The Prince of Jasque puffed up with this success, did not believe that the
Persians would be so hasty to come again: and thereupon he resolved upon a
Voyage for Mecca to give the Prophet thanks for his Victory. To which end he
embarked at the nearest place he could to Cape Jasque, thence to make fail
toward Arabia. But the Governor of Kan understanding his design by his spies,
waylaid him by Sea, took him and brought him to Ormus. At that time the heats
being excessive, the Governor was retired, according to custom, to the
Mountains some ten or twelve Leagues from the City, whither the Prince was
carried and brought to the Kans tent. But while the Kan was expecting the
return of the Messenger which he had sent to the King for orders what to do
with the Prisner, the Princes wife hearing of her husbands misfortune, and
being a woman of a manlike courage, taking along with her about five or six
hundred horse, with little noise and by long marches she at length fell
unawares upon the Kan about midnight, killed him with her own hand, cut in
pieces the greatest part of his men, whom she found asleep, carried away ten or
twelve of his wives, and set her husband at liberty in spite of the Persians,
who had not time to rally themselves.

The news of this defeat coming to Court, the King being highly incensed, sent
away the third Brother to be governor of Ormus, with special command to the
Governors of Schiras, Lar and Kerman forthwith to raise 30000 horse to revenge
affront and reduce the Rebel. The Kan of Ormus marched at the head of that
Army, and gave Battle, but the Prince being succored by the other two
Idolatrous Princes his neighbors, the Persians were again beaten. Only the
Prince of Jasque lost his Lieutenant General, a valiant Captain, and a very
good Soldier.

The King understanding that the Lieutenant General was the Kans Prisner, gave
him leave to do with him what he would, in revenge of his Brothers death: who
thereupon devised the most cruel torments that ever were heard of. For he first
caused the body of the Lieutenant General to be larded with lighted Candles,
and then setting him upon a Camel ordered him to be led softly about the
streets every day in the very heat of noon. A torment almost insufferable,
which the heroic Indian nevertheless endured with an invincible courage. After
the Kan had tormented him in this manner three days together, the chief of the
Holland Company and other strange Merchants abhorring so much cruelty, begged
of the Kan to surcease his rigor, who readily granted them their request.

CHAP. VIII. Observations upon the reign of Sha Soliman the present King.
ALi-Couli-Kan had bin three or four times exiled from the Court, for speaking
with two much liberty. For he was bold and could not keep his tongue between
his teeth. For which reason he was called the Kings Lion, who was wont to chain
him up when he had no occasion for him, and to let him loose when he had any
business for him to do. The last time he was exiled, he was kept five or six
years in a Fortress out of which he had never stirred: but one day, having a
smooth tongue, he overperswaded the Commander to give him leave to go a hunting
with him. When he returned, with the help of some of his servants, he fell upon
the Commander, and gave him so many Bastinadoe's upon the feet, that he had
like to have killed him: telling him withal, that it was to teach him his duty
not to let a man go that the King had committed to his charge. Sha Sephi,
though very young, hearing of this, and desirous to see Ali-Couli-Kan,
notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Grandees to hinder his return,
commanded him to be set at liberty, and that he should have a better allowance
to live upon. Two or three days after, the King sitting in Council, the whole
Assembly was amazed to see Ali-Couli-Kan enter, who approaching his Majesty
with a profound reverence, told him that the Lion being now let loose was
humbly come to kiss his hands. Thereupon the King fell a laughing, and casting
a favorable glance upon him, told him he had done well. Nor was it long ere
the King finding him no less pleasant in conversation, then a valiant and
expert Captain, made him Generalissimo of his Armies, as he had bin in the
reign of Sha Abbas.

When the Court saw Ali-Couli-Kan so well received, every one then labored to
testify their joy for his return. They sent him Horses, Mules, Camels, rich
Carpets, and every thing fit to furnish a Lords house. But all this while he
wanted money, which because he could not meet with among the Persians, he was
forced to have recourse to the Armenians, of whom he desired to borrow five or
six hundred Tomans. As for the Kalenter he would have had the sum lent, but
the rest would not. Thereupon the King taking a walk to Zulpha, Ali-Couli-Kan
put it into his head to go and see the great Cathedral belonging to the
Armenians, where several Bishops with several Monks reside. The King entering
into the Church, where the Bishop stood ready at the head of the Clergy to
receive him, and seeing all things new and strange, as coming but lately out of
the women's Haram, asked his favorite what sort of people those were clad in
such an extraordinary manner. Ali-Couli-Kan told him they were Devils, Devils!
said the King, What! added he, do bring me into a house of Devils? The King
thus incensed against the Armenians, resolved to force 'em to turn Mahumetans.
But Ali-Couli-Kan, being a Georgian, repenting that he had raised the Kings
indignation to so high a pitch, and not believing it would be any advantage to
him for the Armenians to turn Mahumetans, contented himself only with frighting
them, which was enough to bring the Armenians upon their knees, and to make
them come and beg the Intercession of his authority. Which favor, as he
ordered it, cost the Armenians ten thousand Tomans to the King, and four or
five thousand Tomans to his Favorite.

The 23. of September 1677. the King made a Cavalcade, then which there could
be nothing imagined more magnificent. All the richest Furniture was brought out
of the Exchequer into the Meydan. The golden buckets to water the Horses. The
golden Fat out of which they take the water, together with the buckles, harness
and nails of gold, to which the Horses are tied. After the King had played at
Mall, as I have already described, and had also shot at the Goblet upon the top
of the Mast in the middle of the Meydan, he went and fate in the Divan, which
is over the Gate called Ali Capi, where he had the pastime to see Lions, Bulls,
Bears, Tygres and Rams fight. But that which was most admirable, was to see a
man stand upright upon the Saddle while the horse ran full speed, which he did
three times the whole length of the Meydan. The first time, it is true, he fell,
but the two last times he stood firm.

On day the same Ali-Couli-Kan presented two handsome Youths to the King, which
had both delicate voices. The King hearing them sing, was very much troubled
that he could not make use of them in his Haram, which Ali-Couli-Kan observing,
sent for a French Surgeon, and promised him a great reward if he could cut
the youths and save their lives. The Surgeon for lucre of a large
recompense, cut them both and cured 'em very well. Which done, Ali-Couli-Kan,
presented the two youths to the King, who was surpised to see them, but was
well pleased that he had got two such new attendants in his Haram. But see the
reward of such a wicked action. Ali-Couli-Kan died soon after. The Surgeon
never was paid: and being advised to present a Petition to the King by the
Meter, the Meter asked him whither he would turn Mohammedan: which when the
Surgeon denied to do, the Meter bid him be gone like a Rascal, telling him
withal that he did not think the Religion of the Christians had permitted such
acts of villainy. The two youths were born at Cashan, and had both Fathers and
Mothers, and were promised in Marriage. When their Parents heard of it, they
came to Ispahan, to weep over their Children. Which the King observing, to
appease their sorrow, gave them a Pension during life.

CHAP. IX. Of the Government of Persia.
THE Government of Persia is purely Despotick or Tyrannical. For the King has
the sole power of life and death over all his Subjects, independent from his
Council, and without any Trials or Law-proceedings. He can put to what death he
pleases the chief Lords of the Kingdom, no man daring to dispute the reason:
nor is there any Sovereign in the world more absolute then the King of Persia.

The King deceasing and leaving Male Issue behind him, the Eldest ascends the
Throne, while his Brothers are kept in the Haram, and their eyes are put out:
and if there be the least suspicion of any contrivance against the King, they
are forthwith put to death without any farther examination. And not only they,
but the Children also of the Kings Brothers and Sisters. I remember when I
first traveled into Persia, they were not so rigorous, but were contented to
move a red hot iron to and fro before their eyes. But Sha-Sefi perceiving his
command had bin negligently executed, and that the poor unhappy Princes had
some sight left them, he ordered their eyes to be dug out of their heads.
Sha-Sefi's cruelty went yet farther, for he spared not his Eldest Son Sha
Abbas, the lawful Heir to his Throne, ordering one of his Eunuchs to move an
Iron before his eyes, no man being able to tell the reason. But the Eunuch
compassionating the young Prince, did indeed move an Iron, but not a red hot
Iron before his Eyes, and teaching him to counterfeit himself blind, preserved
his sight till his Father lay upon his deathbed: at which time his Father was
very penitent, for having put out the eyes of his Eldest Son, to whom the
Throne of right belonged. The Eunuch seeing the King so sadly afflicted and
ready to give up the ghost, assured him that he would restore the Prince to his
sight, and to comfort him at his death, brought the Prince with perfect eyes to
the bed side. The sight of which prolonged the Kings life till next day; and
gave him time to command all the Grandees of the Court to obey Sha Abbas his
Eldest Son, as his lawful Successor and their King.

But to return to these blind Princes; There were several at Ispahan when I was
there: and I knew one particularly, who is still alive, and is a person of
excellent natural parts. As blind as he is, he is a great lover of Curiosities,
and has built him a House in Ispahan, which is worthy a man's sight. He is
overjoyed when any person brings him any rarities out of Europe, feeling them
in his hands, and causing his Eunuchs, which are very apprehensive, to tell him
the meaning of every thing. He is a great admirer of Clock-work and Watches,
and can tell by his finger when a Watch is right in the Case. To know what a
Clock it is, he has little points set up in the Dial-plate, and a half hand, to
the end he may not be deceived which part of the hand points to the hour. By
means of certain figures which he makes of soft wax, and sets in order upon a
Table, he will cast up an account very exactly. Several other good qualities I
admired in him; and it grieved me to see a man reduced to that miserable
Condition, only because he was of the blood Royal of Persia.

Though the Employments of the Kingdom generally fall from Father to Son, yet
the King if he pleases may bequeath the Governments of Provinces or any other
dignities to any of his Goulams which are his Slaves, if he find them capable,
and thinks they may be fit for his service. The Father to leave the Employment
to his Family, labors by degrees to introduce his Son, and to obtain the
Survivorship for him. But if the Father dye, and leaves the Survivorship to an
Infant, there is generally a person of Age and Experience sent along with him.
Some there are also that obtain employments by presenting the Favorites at
Court.

The State of Persia is distinguished like most of the European States, into
three Bodies. The first is that of the Sword, which answers to the Nobility,
and comprehends the Kings household, the Kans, and all the Soldiery. The second
is that of the Quill, comprehending all those that belong to the Law and the
Courts of Justice. The third is composed of Merchants, Handicrafts-men and
Laborers.

CHAP. X. Of the first of the three Orders or States of Persia, which
comprehends the Kings Household, the Kans or Governors of Provinces, and the
Soldiery.
THE Primier Minister of the Kingdom is called Athemadoulet, or the support of
Riches. His office is the same with the Grand Vizir's in Turkey, and may be
compared to the ancient Mayors of the Palace in France. In regard all the
affairs of the Kingdom pass through his hands, he ought to be rather a Gowoman
then a Soldier: and herein he only differs from the Grand Vizier, who is
always to be at the head of the Army, and for every slight fault or distaste is
subject to be strangled by the Grand Signior. Whereas in Persia where the
Government is milder, the Prime Ministrers generally dye in their beds, or if
they are Deposed, they are only exiled to some frontier City, where they live
as private men.

When the King is young, the Prime Minister has a hard game to play, for then
the Favorite Eunuchs and the Sultanesles disannul and cancel in the night
whatever orders he makes in the day time.

The Nazar or Seer has the charge of all the Kings goods, of his breeds of
horses, of his movables, of his Clothes and Plate: much like the grand Master
of the Kings House in France.

The Mehter, who is always a white Eunuch, is the first Gentleman of the Kings
Chamber, and follows the King with a kind of bag hanging by his side full of
handkerchiefs. And as he is always at the Kings elbow, if he have the Kings
ear, it is easy for him to befriend or do unkindnesses, as his inclination
leads him. During the minority of the King, some of these Mehters have been
known to govern the Kingdom.

The Mir-Akhor-Bashi, or Grand Esquire, has the Charge of the Kings Stables,
which as well as the Gate of Ali-Capri, are a place of Refuge, and whoever
saves himself therein, let it be for Murder or Debt is safe. All the Horses in
the Kings Stable are marked with a hot iron upon the left hip, and those that
belong to private persons upon the right. Those that the King gives to them
that serve in his Armies, have the Kings mark, and are not to be sold, but they
may be chaffer'd away. If any of those Horses happens to dye in a Horse-mans
hands, he must flea off the Kings mark, and carry it to the under Officers of
the General of the Cavalry, to have another, otherwise he would be forced to
buy another at his own expenses. Those people by laying the skin in the water,
know, though by what art I cannot tell, whither the Horse died of age or
sickness, or whither he were maliciously killed. For in times of Peace there
are some Horsemen that will kill their Horses, to save the Charges of keeping
any more than themselves: then at the next Muster they bring the skin of their
Horse, with the mark on, to the Officers, and get another, unless they be found
out. Nor are their Horses only marked, but their Scimitars, Muskets, Bows and
Quivers, all which they must show to the Commissioners every Muster.

Sha-Abbas the second being at Casbin in the year 1654, took a general view of
his Cavalry, which lasted for ten or twelve days. For the King sitting in the
Portal of one of his Gardens, with his Officers standing about him, every day
caused so many troopers to ride by him: which were all stout active men and
well mounted. Every Soldier galloped singly by him; and coming just under the
King, he shot an Arrow against a Butt of Turf that was thrown up upon his left
hand, and when the Muster was over, the King advanced the Pay of every
Horseman, who according to the sentence of the Judges had shot nearest the
mark.

I was then at Casbin, and I remember one Soldier, who quite contrary to what
the other Horsemen did, walked his Horse along by the King, and never shot,
but only laid his hand upon his breast, and then upon his forehead, which is
the Ceremony of Salutation used by the King. He was a very homely fellow, with
a flat tawny countenance: so that his behavior and his presence offending the
King, in a chafe he commanded that black rascal to be cashiered out of his
service. Immediately they took away his Horse and his Arms, and were going
about to have drubb'd him, but that the General of the Cavalry made them a sign
to let him alone. Immediately the General gave the King to understand that he
was one of the best Soldiers in the Army: as he had signally made it appear at
the Sieges of Erivan and Candahar. Upon that the King caused his Horse and Arms
to be restored him again, and commanded him to ride by him as the rest of the
Soldiers had done. When he came against the Butt, instead of obeying the Kings
command, he turned his Horse to the right and left, without saying a word. The
General fearing he would offend the King again, bid him shoot. What shall I
shoot at? Sir said he. Against the place where all the rest have shot, answered
the General. Then the Soldier shaking his head and smiling, It Is not my way,
said he, to spend my Arrows against a wall; for I know how to make use of 'em
better against the body or head of the Enemies of my King. I would then shoot
thrice before another could shoot once. At the same time he draws out two
Arrows out of his Quiver, one of which he held in his mouth, and put the other
to his bow: and then setting spurs to his Horse he out-rid the Butt for the
nonce, to shoot backward, which he did, and hit the very middle of the white,
then turning his horses head and passing the Butt as before, he shot the second
Arrow into the same hole, whence they had pulled the first Arrow. Then the
General approaching near the King, told him that by what he had heard and seen,
he might well believe that Horseman to be as brave a Soldier as any in the
Army: which his Majesty confessed, and from three Tomans advanced his pay to 15
Tomans.

The Mir-Shikar-Bashi, or the Grand Master of the Hunt, who is also employed as
Grand Falconer. He has under him a thousand Officers, and a great number of
Birds of prey, and managed Hawks.

The Seguan Bashi receives the orders of the Grand Master of the Hunt. He has
charge of the Dogs, Lions, Leopards, and other Beasts for Chase.

The Kindar Bashi, who has charge of the Kings Saddles.

The Zinkan-Courlshisi is the chief of the Querries, that hold the Kings
stirrup, when he gets a Horseback.

The Kelege-Courlshisi carrys the Kings sword.

The Oriaje-Courlshisi carrys his Bow and Arrows.

The Vakanviez is as it were the chief Secretary of State: an employment never
conferred but upon a Favorite. He also reads all Petitions and Papers that are
represented to the King.

The Kasnadar-Bashi is he that keeps all the Money which is in the Kings
Coffers, whom we call the High Treasurer.

The Ishik-Agasi-Bashi is the Grand Master of the Household, who has several
Officers under him.

The Mehmender Bashi is the Master of the Ceremonies.

The Hakim-Bashi is the Kings chief Physician, by whose allowance all the
Physicians of the Kingdom are licensed.

The Munedgin Bashi is the chief of the Astrologers.

The Divan-Bequi is the chief Justiciar, as well in Civil as in Criminal
causes, and he keeps his Court either in Ali Capi, or in the Kings House, where
his Majesty sometimes presides himself when he pleases. Before him as being an
Officer of great Authority all the Criminals in the Kingdom make their appeal,
and he makes out process against the Kans, and other Grandees of Persia.

The Deroga is much like the Lieutenant Criminal in France, from whom it is
lawful to appeal before the Divan Bequi. He has an eye upon Robberies,
Batteries and Murders, and he has power to suppress Houses of Debauchery. If
he catch any debauched persons, he has power to give them the Bastinado, or to
fine them: and most commonly he spares corporal chastisement to punish their
purses.

The Sofragi-Bashi is he that spreads the Sofra before the King.

The Chirakgi-Bashi is he that has charge of the Wine: chiefly the Schiras
wine, which is particularly kept for the King, who seldom drinks any other. Nor
can any particular person in Schiras make Wine till the Court be first served,
and that with the leave of the Chirategi-Bashi; there being none but the Franks
and Jews that make it.

The Mesheal-Bashi is the chief of the Torch-bearers; who furnishes the Court
with Candles, which are all of Wax. To this Mesheal-Bashi belong all the fines
of those that play at Cards or Dice, the Law of Mahomet forbidding all Games of
hazard. This Officer has several inferior Officers under him, who go from place
to place to spy where they can find any persons at play: and he has power to
break open any house, unless the Master be of great Quality.

The Kahuergi-Bashi is he that has ear of the Kahue, the Rose Water, and other
distillations which the Persians drink; as Bilmishe, made of the buds of brown
Sallows.

The Kara-Setashe is the King's Surgeon, or Barber, who lets him Blood, and
shaves his Head, and cannot part with his place to another.

The Capigi-Bashi is the great Porter, who has under him several other Officers.

The Melikultugagear is he that has charge of the Stuffs for the King's
Household, and puts them out to the Tailors. He takes an account of the shreds
and old habits, which serve to make Clothes for the Soldiers, deducting for
them out of their pay.

The Gelander-Bashi is the chief of the Footmen.

The Mir-ahe, or the Prince of the Seals, is the Superintendent of the Seals;
and for profit, is one of the best employments in the Kingdom. He has the sale
of the Canal-water to the Contrymen; for which he makes the Farmers pay a
severe rate.

The Karkrone is the House for the Royal Manufactures, where the Gold and
Silver-Carpets are made, as also those of Silks and Worsted, together with
Tissues, Velvets, and Taffeta's. There are other Workmen that make Coats of
Mail, Bows, Arrows, Scimitars, and other Arms. In other Apartments are Limners
that paint in Watercolors; Lapidaries, and Goldsmiths, that only make
Silver-Rings. For in regard the Persians cannot say their Prayers when they
have any Gold about 'em, they never wear Jewel or Ring of Gold, because it
would be troublesome to pull 'em off, and lay 'em up so many times a day. And
therefore the King of Persia causes all his Jewels to be set in Silver, as we
set all our Stones in Gold. As for working Goldsmiths, they have none in
Persia; all their Gold and Silver-Plate being wrought by the Copper-smiths in
round figure, for they have not the art to frame an Oval.

The Nakkashe-Bashi is the Serjeant-Painter, who only works in miniature; they
cover their Pictures with a Varnish made of Mastich steeped in a certain Oil
that distills from a Rock that points upon the Caspian-Sea not far from
Shamatri. It distills out of the Rock at first like water: but afterward it
thickens till it become as thick as Sallet-Oil, preserving still its whiteness.
There are also three other Rocks not far from the former, from whence this Oil
distills; but it is thicker, and of darker color.

The Negeach-Bashi is the chief of the Joyners.

The Embardar-Bashi has the charge of the King's Granaries, and other
Provisions, having several Officers under him.

The Odondar-Bashi is the Master of the Woodyard.

The most part of these Officers have their diet in the King's House, or else
an allowance of Diet from thence.

The Tushemal-Bashi is the Clerk of the Kitchen. He orders what shall be served
up to the King, and when the Table is cleared, he sticks his Knife in the best
dish, and orders it to be carried home to his own House.

Now for the Officers of War, the principal are; First, the Sepeh-Salar,
Generalissimo of the King of Persia's Armies, who is never constituted but in
time of War; which being ended, his employment ceases. His place in Council is
immediately next to the Athemadoulet.

Now in regard the Militia is divided into three sorts, there are also three
Generals. The three Bodies of the Militia are the Corschis, the Goulams, and
the Tusenlegis.

The Corschis are descended from a foreign race, which have still a great
repute for their Valor. These people live in Tents, like the Turcomans; and
they send their Youth betimes to the King. They furnish their Youth also with
all necessaries, and maintain them till they come to be taken notice of by the
King. They are all Horsemen, well paid, and well looked to, and are many times
advanced to the Supreme Dignities of the Kingdom. They are generally called
Kesel-Bashi, or Red-heads, because that formerly they wore red Bonnets. It is
said that the King has about 22000 of these Corchis in pay, all good Soldiers,
that do wonders in Battle. Sha-Abbas the first did what he could to abolish
this Militia, and to set up the Goulams in their stead. His hatred against them
was only because he thought them too powerful; for he was wont to say to his
Favorites, that nothing but the Puissance of the Corchis, could oppose the
Royal Power. Thereupon he took away some of their Privileges, and gave them to
the Doulams; but he could not bring about his design any farther.

The General of the Corchis is called Corschi-Bashi, and ought to be one of
their Body; nor can the King impose another upon them. The Mim-Bashi commands a
thousand Men, the Yux-Bashi commands a hundred, and the Om-Bashi commands ten.
The Corschi-Bashi has 150 Tomans a year; the Mim-Bashi sixty-two; the Yuz-Bashi
thirty, and the Om-Bashi fifteen. The pay of every Horseman is from nine to
fifteen Tomans a year. Besides, every year the King makes a general Muster, and
then he gives to the Corschis a third part more than their usual pay; however,
to some more, to others less, either according to favor or merit. When the
King has resolved to put a great Man to death, he commits the execution of his
command to a Corschi.

The Gouler-Agasi is General of the Goulams, or Slaves. For indeed they are
either Slaves, or the Sons of Slaves of all sorts of Nations, who do the King
very good Service They are for the most part runnegade Georgians; and there are
about 18000 of these Goulams, being all Horsemen; whose pay is from five to
eight Tomans a year. The Corschis are very good Husbands; but the Goulams, as
soon as they have received their pay, fall a drinking and swaggering; whereas
the other, if he has a Piaster to spare, will buy a Sheep with it: For in
regard they live in Tents, their Riches consists in Flocks. The greatest part
of the Court of Persia is made up of these two Bodies. The Goulams have this
peculiar to themselves, that they are very rarely known to revolt. For being
all Slaves, and of different Nations, there are no ties of Affection or Kindred
between them: And if the King has an occasion to punish any of them, the chief
of their Body is to execute his orders. The Goulams carry no other Arms besides
a Bow and Arrows, with a Skain. Though some wear Coats of Mail, and
Head-pieces: others Vambraces and Battel-Axes. These Horsemen never entrench
in the Field like ours in Europe, nor have they any Field-Marshals to assign
them quarters. For after the chief have taken up the best places, the rest set
up their Tents as near as they can to the Pavillion of the General.

The Tufenkgiler-Agasi is the General of the Tufenkgis, who compose the third
Body of the Militia. This part of the Soldiery was but lately instituted,
being composed of men taken from the Plough, as being most fit for labor. They
are Footmen with only a Scimiter and a Musket. But when they march, they have
a Horse or a Mule between three or four, to carry their Baggage and Provisions.
Their pay is not above four or five Tomans a year. And for their Officers,
their pay is more or less according to their Quality and Command. They are in
no great reputation, being laughed at by the old Soldiers, as being a company
of poor Contrymen, that dare not look an enemy in the face. Not but that the
Infantry of Persia is able to do good service; though, as numerous as they are,
the King never makes use of them, but in case of necessity. When he marches in
person, he sends for eight or ten thousand, which he sends for out of what
Province best pleases him, and they prove very useful to the Army, as Sutlers.
This Infantry is composed of the Contrymen that live in Tents, abiding in
the Mountains all the Summer, and betaking themselves in the Winter to the hot
Countrreys. Every Tribe or Family knows how many men it ought to set out. And
there is not a Footman that has not his new-Suit in his Chest, and his Musket
and Scimiter in very good order. They are well trained, and well disciplined;
for every three months the Governor of the Province takes a review of all the
Soldiers in his Province, and causes them to be exercised in his own presence.
They are ordered to shoot at a mark, and they that hit it, are sure to have
some reward from the Governor. When the King sends for any part of his
Infantry, they presently know who is to lead 'em; and they are all lusty, and
well clad, never putting on their best Clothes but when they muster, or march
into the Field. They pay to the King little or nothing: for of all their Cattle
great and small, they pay but one in the hundred to him, and one Abassi, or 18
Sous of our Money.

The Eshek-Agasi, or chief of the Keshekshi's, who are the King's Guards, and
carry a Musket with a very wide bore. They were but lately instituted by the
Athemat-doulet, when he intended to destroy the Divan-begui. This Officer has
about 2000 men under him, of which he disposes every night a certain number,
round about the Palace. When the King sits in Council, he stands there with a
Battoon in his hand, and throws himself to the ground when the King beckons to
him to come and receive any command from his mouth. The Topigi-Bashi is the
Master of the Ordnance, and ehief of the Sea-affairs, but he has little to do
in either employment. For, as for the Cannon, there are only some two or three
pitiful Guns in some of the Frontier-towns: And for Ships, there are none in
Persia but what come from Europe or the Indies to Ormns or Balsara. The
Persians themselves have no other Ships than some few large Barks in the
Persian-Gulph, and in some parts of the Caspian-Sea, where they keep a Fleet
against the Usbeck Tartars, the Kalmoukes, and other people.

As for the Kaus or Governors of Provinces, they are generally chosen out of
the body of Corschi's and Goulams; who are handsome persons, and generally much
more Valiant than the natural Persians. For the natural complexion of the
Persians is not good, as may be seen by the Gaures, the original Inhabitants of
the Country, who are for the most part tanned, and ill-shap'd. So that there
is hardly a Persian, from the King to the meanest of his Subjects, who is not a
Georgian, or sprung from the loins of Georgidns. For they fetch a great number
of Slaves out of Georgia; by the frequent Marriages of whichwomen, the Georgian
Valor and Beauty are become Natives of Persia.

The Kans or Governors of Provinces are as so many petty Kings, feared and
respected by all the people. And when they are settled, they are never deposed,
but upon repeated complaints of their excessive Tyranny. There are some of
these Governments that yield the Kan seven or eight thousand Tomans. But they
are bound to present the King every year at Nourons, or New-years-tide.

Under the Kans there are also Governors of lesser quality, who are also
immediately preferred by the King, and cannot be deposed by any person but
himself. If they abuse their Authority, the complaints brought against him are
first carried to the Kan,; which, if they concern the Government of the
Kingdom, the Kan is bound to inform the King thereof. But if the complaints are
not considerable, then the Kan may do Justice himself, and make the Sultans
know their duty.

There is yet a third sort of Governors, called Asephs, who are the King's
Lieutenants in places where he had Kans in former times; or where he ought to
have them still, but only to save charges. For in the Provinces where Kans
Govern, they and their Officers, almost equalling in name and number the
Officers of the King's Household, devour all the profits of the Province, but
what the Kan is obliged annually to pay.

By what I have wrote as well concerning the King's Household, the Governors of
his Provinces, and the Officers of his Army, it may be easily concluded that
the King of Persia's Court is the most magnificent and glorious of all the
Courts of Asia; and besides, that it is the most Polite and Civil of all the
Orient.

CHAP. XI. Of the second Order, containing all those that belong to the
Ecclesiastical Law, and their Courts of Justice; and, in general, of all the
Gown-men; such as are chiefly the Officers of the Chamber of Accounts.
THE second of the three Estates of Persia comprehends the Gown-men, such as
are the Doctors of the Law, the Officers of Justice, and those of the Chamber
of Accounts.

As the Athemat-doulet is the Prime Minister in Temporals, the Sedre is the
Prime Minister in Spirituals, and the High Priest of the Law. However, he does
not pretend to take place before the Athemat-doulet either in Council, or in
the public Ceremonies. There is this difference between the Sedre and the
Mufti in Turkey, that in Persia Ecclesiastical Dignities are no bar from Civil
Employments; so that the Sedre is many times made Athemat-doulet.

The Dignity of Sedre is not limited to one single person, but may be divided
between two, in regard there are two sorts of Legacies, the one from the King's
of Persia, the other from particular persons. Therefore for the more careful
Superintendency over these two sorts of Legacies, there are sometimes two
Sedres appointed. The one is called Sedre-Kras, particular or peculiar Sedre,
who manages all the Revenues of the Royal Foundations, and distributes them to
the Mullaks and Students according to their merit. The other is called
Sedre-el-mankoufat, who has the management of private Foundations. In the year
1667 the King created two Sedres, and married them to two of his Sisters.

The Sedre has two men under him, whose Authority is almost equal to theirs.
The one is called Speik-el-selom, and the other Cadi: and these are they that
decide all controversies in Religion, judge of Divorces, make Contracts and
public Acts. These two Dignities are in the King's nomination: and in all the
principal Cities of the Kingdom there are two of these Ecclesiastical Judges
for all matters that concern the Law.

To every Mosquee there belongs a Pichnamaz, who is always first there before
Prayers begin; and he teaches the people to Pray by learning of him, having
their eyes always fixed upon him to that end. This Picknamaz is the same with
him whom the Turks call Iman. The Moullah's are the Doctors of the Law, as are
the Hodgia's in Turkey, and they are well paid out of the Legacies given to the
Mosquees, for reading every Friday, and interpreting the Alcoran to the people.
He that reads, sits in one Chair; and he that interprets, in another, somewhat
lower upon the left hand of the Reader. They are also bound to teach the
Sciences to all those that require it: and, as a mark of Sanctity, they wear a
great white Turbant, with a single Chamlet-habit of the same color. Their gate
is grave, and their discourse very serious; yet all this is but pure hypocrisy.
When they light into any considerable company of people, they presently rise,
and exhort 'em to go to Prayers. At the same time they wash their heads, their
hands, and their feet, and spread a felt upon the ground, or if they are poor,
a single mat. Upon this, at one end, the Maulla kneels, at the other lies a
flat Stone about the bigness of the paulm of a man's hand, which was brought
from Mecca. Which Stones the Moullah's always carry about 'em; for being
commanded while they are at their devotions often to kiss the ground, they
rather choose to kiss a Stone brought from so holy a place, than the profane
Earth. They have a kind of a Mariners compass, which directs them punctually
where Mecca stands, to the end they may know which way to turn when they say
their Prayers. The Prayer which the Moulla's make, seems to be accompanied with
a great deal of zeal, and they take great notice all the while whether the
company be attentive or no. Some Persians are so superstitious, that a Vizir of
Schiras suffered his leg to rot off, because he would not let a Christian
Surgeon touch him, for fear of being defiled.

There belongs also to every Mosquee a Monteveli, who looks after the repairs
of the Building, and the Provision of what belongs to the Mosquee; together
with a Mouazen, who cries morning and evening from the top of a Tower, That
there is but one God, and that Mahomet is his Prophet.

Colleges, the Persians call Medrese; where there are a great number of
Scholars bred up at little charge, out of the Legacies left to the Foundations.
They allow them a Chamber without any Furniture, they being to provide a
Coverlet and a Mattress for themselves. They have no certain Masters, but
sometimes they go for their instructions to one, sometimes to another, seldom
to the Principal of the College, who is called Monderes, and is generally the
greatest Blockhead of them all. But there are several other persons in every
good City that are forward to teach the Sciences to purchase honor to
themselves. For which reason they are very liberal, to get a great company of
Followers together, who are as so many Trumpets to publish the wisdom of their
Akroom or Doctor. But when their Liberality ceases, the Trumpets want breath at
the same time.

Now, as to their manner of studying, the Student first reads two or three
lines, and then the Doctor Expounds. Then another reads two or three lines
more, and so one after another; every one rising up out of respect after he has
done reading, and standing upright till the Doctor bids him sit down again. One
of these Doctors shall teach all manner of Sciences in one day; for he is not
learned that cannot talk of all. And certainly had the Persians those
advantages of Books, and that method of study which we have in Europe, they
would prove to be men of great understanding: for with those little helps they
have, they will give a good account of their own Theology, of Logic, Physic,
and the Mathematics, wherein they strive to reach the bottom of things as deep
as they can. Their Books are for the most part the works of an ancient Persian
Author, whose name was Kodgia Nesir in the City of Thouss, in the Province of
Korassan. It Is very probable he was well skilled in the Greek and Arabic,
having translated into Persian several Books out of those two Languages. They
have some pieces of Aristotle which are accounted the best in the West: The
Almagistes of Ptolemy, which they call Magesti; some tractates of Euclide, some
fragments of Archimedes: the Optics of Ebne, Heister, and other excellent
Books. Some have affirmed that they have been skilled in the doctrine of Sines
and Tangents for above this 800 years: and indeed they are very curious at this
day in Mathematical Instruments. They have also a great inclination to Poetry,
the chiefest grace whereof they believe to consist in design of accidents, and
high comparisons, observing Rhyme as we do. As for Physic, they have Galen,
whom they call Galenous; Averroes, whom they call Aboualt, or great Father; and
Hermes Trismegistus, whom they call Ormous. The most considerable of their
Historians is Ronze el Sapha, who wrote a Chronology from the Creation of the
World to his time; wherein there are abundance of fables, but little truth. He
says that the World was inhabited by Devils for an infinite number of years
before the Creation of Adam, and that God for their enormities deprived them of
their power upon earth, and gave it to man to manage. Their Books, though deer,
are very common, and every Tradesman buys 'em, being very ambitious to learn
the Sciences themselves, and to encourage their children to do so too. They
send them betimes to the School, which they call Meklebe, of which there are
several in every Quarter. They make a hideous noise in their Schools, repeating
their Lessons altogether aloud, while the Master corrects every Boy that does
not keep along with the Cry. As for the children of persons of Quality, they
have Tutors at home, never stirring out of doors till they are 18 years of age,
unless it be to go a hunting or a shooting now and them. Hence it comes to
pass, that the Children are discreet, civil and modest; so that you shall never
hear an ill word come out of their mouths.

In the Chamber of Accounts are many Officers, whom I look upon as Gownmen. All
the Books and Registers pass through their hands, particularly such Papers as
concerned the King's Revenue. All which are registered in the Chamber of
Accounts at Ispahan, which is called Defter-Krone. As to the Fee-Lands called
Moulkerbar, which belong to particular persons, they owe to the King a certain
annual Rent, which the Governors of Provinces exact with a severe extortion.

The Mestempti and the Memalek are they that value the Rent of all Lands in
Demesh, which is one of the principal charges of the Defter-Kroon. They also
take cognizance of all the King's Farms, Quit-Rents, Provisions and Expenses of
Receivers and Collectors. There is also a Mestempti to value Legacies.

The Nazer controuls the Mestempti and the Memalek, and his hand is required to
all Papers of dispatch.

The Deroga or Provost of the Dester-Kroon is to prosecute and punish all that
are guilty of false Receipts, or of Exaction.

Into this Office are delivered all the Grants and Assignations of the wages of
the King's Officers. Every man comes and receives his own, or sends for it to
those places upon which this Money is assigned.

In every Village or Borough there is a Reis, or chief of the place, to whom
the Officers apply themselves for their Money: for should they terrify the
Countryman, he would run quite away, and pay nothing. The greatest cheat in
this Chamber of Accounts, is, that in regard the Officers keep the Roll of the
Officers wages, they will give them diverse Bills to receive little parcels at
several places distant from one another, till the Sum be made up; to which
trouble rather than the Kings servant will be put, he will give a good gratuity
to the Officer to pay him all together. But because the Officers are not able
to satisfy all that come, there are certain Thahsilders or hoarders up of Rent,
who buy for ready Money as cheap as they can, such Bills as private men come to
receive at the Chamber; and when they have got a good number together, they go
and receive them altogether at the Chamber, and make great advantage. By this
misgovernment of the Dester-Kroon, several persons are very much oppressed. For
he that has but 30 Tomans a year, shall be forced to give a good share out of
it to have the rest in ready Money; which has been often the ruin of the
Persian Army, through the abuses and defalcations put upon the poor Soldiers.
During the Reign of Sha-Abbas the 1; and toward the beginning of the Reign of
Sha-Sefi his Son, the Exchequer was better regulated; but when the Persians
came to be at Peace with their Neighbors, the King and his Lords have minded
nothing less than the payment of the Soldiery.

The greatest part of the Lands in Persia belong to the King, and are only
farmed by private persons. The rest of the Lands are measured, and every Land
pays so much a measure. The King also has a vast income by the Merchandises
that pay Custom and Toll. The Port of Bander-Abassi alone brings him one year
with another, when least, besides accidents, near upon 20000 Tomans.

CHAP. XII. Of the third Estate of the Kingdom, comprehending the Tradesmen and
Merchants: as also of the Trades, Manufactures, and Commodities of Persia.
THe Commerce of Persia, as in all other Kingdoms, consists in the Trade of the
Country and Foreign Traffic. Only with difference, that the Country Trade is
in the hands of the Persians and Jews, the foreign Traffic in the hands of the
Armenians only, who are as it were the Kings and the Noble men's Factors to sell
their silk.

As for the Handicraft trades, there are some Corporations that pay a certain
yearly duty to the King, as Shoemakers, Cutlers, Smiths, and others. Some are
free, as the Joyners and Masons: though he get by their labor as much as
others pay him in money. For when the King requires twenty Masons for a work
which is in have, the Marmar Bashi who is their Chief, summons them together,
and they that give most are excused. For when the King requires but twenty, he
summons forty: and thus every man lives by his calling. The practice is the
same with the Chief of the Joyners, and all other Trades, who are Officers
paid by the King, and never work unless they please themselves, commanding all
that are under their Jurisdiction. As for Carpenters and Joyners work, the
Persians know little what belongs to it, which proceeds from the scarcity of
Wood, that does not allow them materials to work upon. So that for Chairs,
Tables and Bedsteads, there are no such things to be seen in Persia: the
Joyners business being only to make Doors and Frames for Windows, which they
make very neatly of several pieces of wood joined together, so that a man can
hardly put a Tennis Ball through the holes where they put the glass. Nor can it
be expected that the Persians should work like other Europeans, having no other
Tools then a Hatchet, a Saw, and a Chizzel, and one sort of Plainer, which a
Frenchman brought among them.

Their nobler Arts are Writing, for Printers they know none. All their Books
are writt'n, which is the reason they so much esteem that Art. There was an
Armenian who had set up a Printing-Press at Ispahan, and had Printed the
Epistles of St. Paul, the seven Penitential Psalms, and was going about to
Print the whole Bible, but not having the way of making good Ink, and to avoid
the ill consequences of the Invention, he was forced to break his Press. For on
the one side the Children refused to learn to write, pretending they wrote the
Bible themselves, only to get it the sooner by heart: on the other side many
persons were undone by it, that got their living by writing.

The Persians use three sorts of hands, the first is called Nestalick, or the
Set-hand: the second Shakeste or Divanni, which is their Court-hand: the third
Neskre, or the Running-hand, very like the Arabic. They write with small Indian
Reeds; and say, that to write well, a man ought to lean so slightly upon his
Pen, that should a fly stand upon the other end it would fall out of his hand.
When they write they hold their Paper in one hand to turn it according to the
motion of the Pen, otherwise they could not make their dashes large and free,
as the Character requires. They make their Paper of Cotton Fustian, very
course, brown, and of no strength, for the least folding tears it. They sleek
it with a sleek stone, and then rub it over to make it more sleek. Their Ink is
made of Galls and Charcoal pounded together with Soot.

The Persians reck'n four Languages among 'em. The Persian called Belick, that
is, sweet and pleasing. The Turkish, called Sciascet, or the Rodomontado
Language. The Arabian, to which they give the Epithet of Feschish or Eloquent:
and the fourth, called Cobahet, or the Speech of the Country people. The
Persian in use among the Gentry is composed almost of all Arabic words: by
reason that the Persian is very barren. But the Gibbrish of the Country people
is so corrupt that they in the City can hardly understand 'em. The Arabian is
the Language of the Learned, in which tongue their Books are written. The
Language of the Court is Turkish, but much more soft and elegant then at
Constantinople. As for the Persian Language, it is spoken in the Courts of the
Great Mogul, and the Kings of Golconda and Visapour, in all which Courts a
Noble man would take it for an affront to be spok'n to in the Indian Language.

As for their Painters they only paint in miniature, and for Birds and Flowers
they will draw them indifferently well: But for figures and stories they know
not what belongs to any such thing.

The Persians are most excellent Artists for manufactures of Gold, Silk and
Silver, of which their rich Carpets and Tissues are made: nor do their Gold and
Silver Manufactures ever grow black or loose their luster by long wearing or
lying by. There are abundance that work in Silk stuffs of all sorts, and others
that make Bonnets and Girdles of Gold and Silk. Others there are whose business
it is to fast'n flowers of Gold and Silver to their Taffata's, with gum water,
of which the women make Shifts and Drawers. And now they begin to make such
large quantities of Taffata's, that they care not for the stuffs which are
brought out of India, though they be much finer.

They also make great quantities of Linen Cloth of all sorts of colors, upon
which they fast'n several flowers with gum water, and some figures, though the
Law forbid it. Which they learnt to do upon the Armenians carrying out of
Europe some ill-favored cuts and pieces in distemper which they bought here
without judgment: these pieces they hang before their doors, and those hollow
places in the walls where they put their Quilts and Carpets when they rise.

The Persians are excellent Artists at Damasquing with Vitriol, or engraving
Damask-wise upon Swords, Knives, and the like. But the nature of the Steel
which they make use of, very much contributes to their Art, in regard they
cannot perform the same work neither upon their own nor ours. This steel is
brought from Golconda, and is the only sort of steel which can be damasqu'd.
For when the workman puts it in the fire, he needs no more then to give it the
redness of a Cherry, and instead of quenching it in the water as we do, to wrap
it in a moist Linen cloth: for should he give it the same heat as to ours, it
would grow so hard that when it came to be wrought it would break like glass. I
speak this to undeceive those people who think our Scimitars and Cut-lasses are
made of steel of Damascus, which is a vulgar error; there being no steel but
that of Golconda that can be Damask'd.

The Persians are also excellent Artists at making Bows and Arrows, and such
other weapons as are used in that Country. As for Bridles and Saddles their
Artists far exceed ours, especially in their sowing, which they do so neatly
and with so much art with a kind of back-stitch, that it looks almost like an
embroidery. There are an infinite number that live by dressing Seal-skins and
Goat Skins, the first to make boots for the Gentry and better sort of
Merchants, the latter for the poor people.

There is also a sort of earthen ware made at Kerman which is very fine, and
being brok'n looks as white within as without. It does not endure hear so well
as Porcellane, which has this quality, that if you power never so hot liquor
into a Porcellane cup, neither the foot nor the brims a-top will be any thing
the warmer.

There are abundance of poor people that get their living by mending glass
Tobacco-pipes, for when they are brok'n they join them together again with a
certain mastic made of lime, and the white of an egg, then with a
Diamond-pointed piercer they make holes in the glass, and bind the pieces
together with a thin Latten-wire.

The most considerable commodities of Persia are the Silks which come out of
the Province of Guilan. But there is not so much transported out of- Persia as
men imagine. For formerly great quantities of Velvets, Tissues and Taffata's
were transported out of Persia into these parts: but now we make them better
and cheaper in Europe.

There is also a vast quantity of flat silk transported out of Persia into
Turkey, Muscovy and Poland, which the women use in embroidery: for the Colors
being lively, they embroider their shifts, hankerchers, vails, and other linen
with it.

The Seal-skins and Goat Skins which are dress't in Persia are transported by
the Hollander into India and Japan. Great quantities also of both are
transported into Muscovy and Poland.

The Ronas, that famous Root, of which I have already spoken, is transported
over all India, where there is also a great vent of Persian fruits pickled in
Vinegar, as also of their sweet waters.

Their Pistaches grow in great abundance about Casbin; Almonds from the
Territories of Yesd and Kerman, Raisins from several parts of the Kingdom,
especially from Schiras: And their purgative Prunes, which they call
Alonbacara, from the Frontiers that border upon Tartary.

Great store of Quinces candied, and boxes of Marmaled made at Balsara, are
thence transported into India, where they are bought up by the Mahometans and
Portugueses. For the Banians will eat none, for fear they should by accident
bury a fly in their stomachs.

Great store of dried Fruits are brought out of the Country of the Medes, and
transported to Tocat, to Diarbequir, Nineveh and Dagdat. Among the rest a sort
of small Abricots, very pleasing to the taste, which being boiled in water make
a pleasant syrrup, and are the only diet for the sick in those parts.

There are also great store of painted Calicuts made in Persia, which being
course, are only worn and made use of by the poor, so that there is very little
transported out of the Country, but what is carried into Turkey.

The Persians also make a great deal of money of their Cattle; and to begin
with their Camels, they sell vast numbers of them into Armenia and Natolia. But
the Governors of the Provinces are very unwilling to part with them; which
very much abates the trade. For the Turks very highly esteem the Persian
Camels, as being stronger than their own. They also sell great store of Horses
and Mules; but that trade is not so considerable, the chiefest part being only
sent into India.

As for their Sheep, it is a wonderful thing to see what prodigious numbers come
out of the Province of the Medes and the Higher Armenia, and the Foreign
Merchants come as far as Tauris and Hamadan to fetch them away. They drive them
as far as Constantinople and Adrianople, and the greatest part of the Mutton
which is spent in Natolia and Romania comes out of Persia, which very much
enriches Persia with ready money. But when Lamb is in season, as we travel with
the Caravans, we meet at every turn with flocks after flocks, the least of
which consists of a thousand Lambs: and in regard there are some of those Lambs
that are weary, and lag behind, we buy them at a very cheap rate, the
Shepherds that are not able to carry them, being glad to be rid of 'em.

Formerly the Merchant Fewellers brought some Turquoises of the old rock out of
Persia; but for these 15 years last past there have bin none found. The last
time I was there I could only meet with three, which were but reasonable. As
for those of the new rock, they are of no value, because they do not keep their
color, but turn green in a little time.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Justice and Policy of the Persians.
THe Justice of the Persians is very exact and very speedy. Suits are
determined upon the place without any need of Advocates or Proctors. Not but
that the Officers of Justice are easy to be corrupted, but in their unjust
exactions, which they carry as secretly as possibly they can, they are sooner
satisfied then the Turks: and if their injustice be discovered, upon complaint
to the King they are punished without mercy.

The Kans do Justice in their Provinces, as representing the Kings person.
Besides that, the King has a Divan Begui in every City, and the Kan places
under him a Deroga, who is like the Lieutenant Criminal in France. He has under
him an Aatas, who is a kind of Captain of the watch; who goes about the streets
in the night to hinder disorders, and carries all people to Prison that he
finds abroad at unseasonable hours, if they cannot give a good account of
themselves. There is also a Kelonter, that is, the chiefest or greatest, who
seems to resemble the Tribune of the People among the Romans, or the Provost of
Merchants in France. The Kelonter is only responsible to the King, who places
one in every City, and it is his business to defend the People from the
injustice and oppressions of the Governors.

Murder is severely punished, nor will money save the Criminal. When the
Murderer is taken, they carry him before the Divan Begui, who makes quick
work. For he delivers him to the Parents or kindred of the person slain, who
carry him to the place of execution, and without any compassion torture him to
death.

I remember the Kan of Schiras had a Favorite, who falling in love with a
young Persian Gentleman, would needs endeavor to have the use of his body. One
day meeting upon the Road together, and lying at night under the same Tent, the
Favorite about midnight came to his bed side, and after many solicitations
would have forced him. But being violently resisted, the Favorite for madness
to see himself disappointed, and liable to be discovered, stabbed the young
Gentleman to the heart, and fled to the Mountains. The Murder being divulged,
the Mother, Widow and Sister of the young man repaired to the Kan for Justice,
who willing to save his Minion, offered them money: but they scorning his
proffer, threatened to complain to the King. The Kan being thereupon
constrained to pursue his Favorite, at length took him and sent him to
Ispahan, telling them that he would not judge of the Affair, but refer it to
the King. The Mother, Widow and Sister immediately followed the Murderer to
Ispahan; and demanded Justice of the King with that eagerness, that though the
King had an inclination to have spared the Kan's Favorite for his Masters
sake, he was forced to abandon him, and to bid them pay themselves with his
blood. Immediately he was carried to the Meydan, where the Widow first stabbed
him to the heart with a Dagger, then the Mother took her turn, and after the
Sister; and then holding a Cup to receive his blood, drank every one a cup full
to quench the thirst of their revenge.

Nor are they so exact in the punishment of Murder only; for they punish
disorders in houses of Debauchery with a proportionable strictness, of which I
will give the Reader two examples. A young Hollander, coming to Ispahan,
presently put himself into a Persian habit; and going in the evening to a house
of good fellowship, met with certain Persians, with whom he happened to
quarrel, and being well beaten for his pains, thought it not convenient to stay
any longer where he had bin so ill entertained. Thereupon the Dutch Interpreter
went and complained to the Athemadoulet, who informed the King. The King
immediately sent for the people that had beaten the Hollander, and asked them
why they abused a stranger? To which the others made answer that they saw no
stranger, but only a man clad after the Persian garb. Whereupon the King told
the Interpreter, that if the Dutchman had worn his own Country habit, his
Subjects durst not have abused him, but as the case stood, he had no reason to
punish 'em.

One day it happened that there was a great hubbub in one of those houses of
debauchery, where the woman had prostituted her own Daughter. The King informed
of it, commanded the Mother to be thrown headlong from a Tower: and that the
Daughter should be torn a pieces by his dogs, which he keeps a purpose for
such chastisements.

Above all things there is an extraordinary care taken for the security of the
Highways. For which purpose guards are set at convenient distances, who are
ready to pursue upon the least noise of a Robbery, and who examine people whence
they come and whither they go. If they answer not as they should, or trip in
their Answers, they carry them before the next Governor. Those Radars are so
posted over all Persia, that you need no more then send to the places where
they keep station, to know what is become of any person that has committed a
crime. For it is impossible to escape, all the Passes are so well guarded. If
any one endeavors to travel through the Mountains or unfrequented roads, then
the Radars who are in all places, seize such persons upon suspicion, for not
taking the direct road.

As the Caravan was one day setting out from Tauris for Ispahan, a poor fellow
took an occasion to rob a Cloak-bag during the hurly-burly of packing up, and
fled cross the fields not knowing his way: the Merchant missing his goods,
complained to the Governor who having sought for him in vain, sent order to
the Guards of the Highways, to make a strict examination, and to send the
person to him so soon as they had seized him. In a short time the Thief was
constrained to forsake his Cloak-bag and to come a thwart the fields for water.
Who being examined by the Radars why he came alone by such a by way, and not
knowing what to answer, was carried to the Governor. He was soon convicted and
condemned to death, for Thieves find no mercy in Persia. Only they are
variously put to death. For sometimes they are tied to a Camels tail by the
feet, and their bellies rip't open. Sometimes they are buried alive all but
their heads, and starved to death: in which torment they will sometimes desire
a Passenger to cut off their heads; though it be a kindness forbidden by the
Law. But the most cruel punishment of all, is when they set the Thief a
Horseback, with his extended Arms fastened to a long stick behind: then
larding him with lighted Candles, they suffer the Candles to burn into his very
bowels. Another and I met two in this misery, who desired us to hasten their
deaths, which we durst not do, only we gave them a Pipe of Tobacco according to
their desire.

As for those that steal in Cities, they tie them by the heels to the tail of a
Camel, and rip up their bellies: and then as the Camel drags the poor creature
along the streets while one goes before him crying, The King has punished him
for such a crime. If yet he be not dead, they hang him upon the next tree.

The Radars have little wages, which makes them use their Rhetoric to get what
honestly they can out of the Travelers, to whom they tell long stories of
their care for the security of the highways.

If it happen that a Merchant be robbed, the Governor of the Province is to
make good to the Merchant whatever he has lost, according as he shall make out
by his Oath or his Book. Nor dare the Governors deny satisfaction, fearing a
complaint at Ispahan. I my self was robbed of two Bales of goods, between Lar
and Schiras, to the value of 1400 Piasters, but upon complaint to the Governor
upon my own oath and showing him my Book, he paid me all my loss in gold, and
gave me a present in wine besides.

The Posts or Shappars are those that carry the Kings dispatches to the
Governors of Provinces. When they are sent any whither, the Kings Esquire
finds them a Horse, and a man that runs to the end of the Stage, to bring him
back again. If these Curriers meet a Horseman upon the road, they have power to
dismount him, if their own be not so good, or be tired: and the Horseman must
either run after his Horse, or send some body to the end of the Stage.
Sometimes these Curriers abusing their power, within a quarter of an hour after
they have changed their Horse, if they meet another better mounted, they will
take away his Horse too. Nor dares the Horseman resist, though he be never so
much too strong; for there is no pardon for them that lay so much as a finger
upon one of these Shappars; at other times they will pretend to take away a
man's Horse only to get money. But they are forbid to deal so by the Franks; and
I have passed by them, when they have said nothing to me.

Their Government in relation to Belly-timber is the best in the world. For
there is a Mohteseb, who is the chief of the Government, whose business it is
to set a rate upon all sorts of Provision, being assisted by three or four more
Assessors. Every first day of the week there is a public Proclamation of tax
upon the weight of every thing. Which Assessors in the evening advize together
against the next day whether to raise or abate the price before set. This order
was established by the great Sha Abbas, and was in his reign more punctually
observed then it has been since. By the by observe, that all provisions of
belly-timber are sold by weight and not by measure: so that you may send a
Child to Market; for if the Commodity be not weight,'it is well if the buyer be
satisfied with having his money again. For if the seller be discovered to sell
by false weights, they are led about the streets with a Taktekolas, or a Bonnet
like a Bee-hive upon their heads, and a Bell about their necks to expose'em
first to the laughter of the people: after that they are fined, and receive so
many drubs upon the soles of their feet.

If this good order were not observed in Persia, the poor would suffer very
much. For the handicraft tradesmen that work all day in shops remote from their
houses, where their wives are continually shut up, eat nothing at noon but a
little fruit in season: and then in the evening when they leave work, they go
to the Market and buy for their Families boyld or roast meat, of which there is
great plenty. Therefore are they so exact, least so many poor laboring men
should be deceived.

One day a Baker of the City came to the Kan, complaining that the Judge of the
Government had set too low a price upon bread, so that he should be a great
loser. To whom the Kan made answer, that'twas not his business to alter the
price: bidding him go to the Magistrate that was concerned. But the Baker
believing the Kan could do any thing, sent him a present of fifty Tomans. The
Kan seeing the ill design of the Baker to oppress the poor people, and the ill
opinion he had of him as a seller of Justice, commanded him to be carried to
the Piazza, and there to be drub'd upon the soles of his feet till he paid the
other fifty Tomans, which the Kan forthwith distributed to the poor, and caused
the price of bread to be abated instead of raising it.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Manners and Customs of the Persians.
THe Manners and Customs of the people are usually correspondent to their
Religion. The Persians never preserve the name of their Predecessors, but like
the Jews, for distinction sake, say, such a one, the Son of such a one. When
they Circumcise a Child and give him a Name, they write three or four Names
like Lots in Paper, which are drawn by a Child, and which the Child draws, that
is the Name of the Child. The women that are barren, swallow that which is cut
from the Child, believing it will make them conceive.

The Persians are generally very inquisitive after the time to come, consulting
their Astrologers like Oracles: The King has always two or three by him, to
tell him the good or bad hour. There is an Almanac which is sold every year in
Persia, which they call Tacuim; but is indeed an Ephimerides, containing the
Longitudes and Latitudes of the Planets, the Conjunctions and Oppositions; and
other such things. This Tacuim is full of predictions about Wars, Sicknesses
and Famine. It sets the proper seasons to put on new clothes, to let blood, to
Purge, or travel, with many other instructions of the same nature. They give
great credit to this Tacuim, and they that can get one, govern themselves in
all things according to the Rules there set down. Others to know the success of
their affairs, go to a Doctor of the Law, and desire him to open the Al-couran,
and to tell them the issue of their business. Thereupon the Doctor muttering
some strange words, Alcouran is the Book of the Law, so entitled for its
excellency, as we say, the Bible.
opens the Book, and if he meets with affirmative commands, he declares the
undertaking shall prosper. If negatives, he disswades from the enterprise. I
remember a Gardener belonging to the Capuchin Friars, would needs go to one of
those Moullah's, to know whether he should get by an Ox that he was about to
buy. Whereupon the Moullah assured him he should reap great profit by his
bargain: but quite contrary, the Ox died upon his hands within three days, to
the great astonishment of the Gardener. When a Capuchin taxed the Moullah for
the falsities of his pretended Art, the Moullah replied, that God knew that the
Gardener would spend his Money upon lewd Women, and therefore took from him the
means and support of his debauchery.

They also use a sort of divination, which is called Rambe, by even or odd, the
Masters of which mystery, called Rammals, keep Shops on purpose to delude the
people. When they see people coming, they have persons suborned on purpose; who
holding out their hands shut, ask the Rammal what he thinks they have in their
hands. The Rammal at first seems to be at a stand; throwing certain Dice,
called Kiabetain, the specks whereof are some even, some uneven; but when there
are people enough gathered together, he tells point by point how many specks
his fellow-Cheat has in his hands. Who counterfeiting astonishment, encourages
the poor silly creatures that stand gazing, to spend something for a lie which
they sell them. They also make use of the Faal; which is to open a Book, and by
numbers even or odd, to prognosticate good or bad fortune. In their
interpretation of dreams, the Interpreter foretells the future to him that
enquires conformable to what he says he saw in his dream. He has a great Book
lying before him, full of little Pictures and Grotesco-work, wherein he strives
to show the people some Fantasm or Apparition, which they will tell you they
saw in the night. These chears are usually practiced about the Palace, where
all the idle people flock together; as also upon the Road to Zulpha, where they
lie upon the Road to catch the silly Passengers.

The Persians are mightily addicted to ill language, and foul-mouthed
reproaches. So that when two men fall out, instead of fighting with their
fists, they fight with their tongues, and curse one another. But they never
blaspheme God: for if they should hear one swear, or wish themselves at the
Devil, they would ery out in an astonishment, Is not that Fellow a fool to give
himself upon trust to the Devil, and renounce Paradise? When they would affirm
any thing to be true, all their Oaths are Ser-azire-sha, By the King's beloved
head; or, Erva pigumbir, by the Spirit of the Prophet. I remember once at
Galata, walking with some of the French Embassador's Servants, we saw two
Turks: at Cuffs; after they were parted, one of them gave the other a thousand
curses; to which, the other replied no more than only this; I wish, said he,
thy Soul may have no more repose in Paradise, than the Hat of a Frenchman has
in this World, alluding to out manner of salutation, and putting off our Hats
so often as we do.

The Persians are naturally great Dissemblers and Flatterers; and they make so
their study to acquire esteem and applause. They love to give and receive
Presents: more especially to present the King. Which Presents are valued, and
according to the estimate, they must send ten per cent. to the Sergeant Porter,
and five per cent. to his Deputy: which, if they do not pay willingly, they are
fotc'd to pay: which I saw the Deputy of the Holland-Company forced to do.

The Luxury and the Expenses of the Persians is excessive, as I have in several
places observed. And though it be against the Law of Mahomet to make use of
Gold or Silver-plate, which sets aside that metal only for Commerce and for
Money; none but the poor observe that Law, for the rich make no scruple to
transgress it.

The Persians are very much accustomed to make mutual Visits one to another at
their solemn Festivals, and to wish one another good cheer, and a merry season.
The more noble sort stay at home to expect the Visits of their Inferiors, after
that they get a Horseback, and return their Visits. The Curtisans continue
their Visits all the year long, and going to the Noble-mens Houses, stay in the
great Hall till they come out of their Harams. Whither, when the Noblemen come,
they lay their hands upon their stomachs, and bow, which is their manner of
saluting the Company that tarries for them. After some few Compliments, they
get a Horseback, attended by all their Visitants, who accompany them to the
King's House, in expectation of some kindness, by virtue of their favor. The
favors which the King usually does to such people, is to send them to the
Governors of Provinces with a Hawk or a Calaat, with order that the said
Governors remember the Sergeant Porter.

The Kan being advertised that the Calaat is coming, he rides forth of the City
to meet it, attended by all his principal Officers, the chief of the City, and
the greatest part of the Inhabitants. The Juglers also must give their
attendance, together with the Drums and Trumpets, and all the Musick-makers.
They rendezvous usually in a Garden one or two leagues from the City, where the
King's Messenger stays with the Calaat. So soon as the Governor perceives him,
he makes a low obeisance, and a Prayer for the King; giving God thanks for that
the King is pleased to preserve him in his memory: then he puts on the Calaat,
which is according to the quality of the Governor: sometimes the Robe alone;
sometimes Robe and Cloak: sometimes Robe, Cloak, Girdle, and Bonnet; to which,
if he be a Grandee, are added the Scimitar and Dagger: which method is also
observed toward Ambassadors. When the Kan has put on the Calaat, he returns to
the City with all his Retinue, goes to the King's House; (for the King has a
House in every City,) kisses the Columns of the Gate, and makes certain other
Prayers for the prosperity of the King: At length he rides home, where he makes
a great Feast, showing the Calaat to all persons that come to him, who by way
of complement cry Moubarek-bashet, that is, may it be blessed, and prove a good
omen.

The Persians are not much addicted to play: for besides, that the Law forbids
it; the Meshaldar-Bashi has a power to fine and punish Gamesters, as I have
said already. For which reason he has spies, to which the meaner sort of people
dare not refuse entrance into their Houses: but the richer sort laugh at 'em;
and will give 'em nothing. Among the Persian Games, there is one game at Cards
which the Persians call Gengese. We have but four distinct marks upon ours, but
they have eight. They also play at a kind of Chess, and at Trictrac; which two
Games are most in use. The Shopkeepers play in the Streets with little
Marble-bowls, not much unlike our Childrens Bowling-stones. But as for
Bowling-greens, or Tennis-Courts, they know not what they mean.

Neither the Persians nor any of the Eastern People accustom themselves to walk
as we do. And therefore when they see us walking to and fro together in a
Garden-Ally for two or three hours together, they are amazed. They only spread
a Carpet in the fairest place of the Garden, and set themselves down to
contemplate the verdure of the place: and if they rise, it is only to pull the
fruit from the trees. For they love to eat what they gather themselves, never
caring for what others have handled.

The Men never dance, only the Women of Pleasure, which are always sent for to
their Feasts; where they dance open-fac'd, and show a thousand postures to
divertise the Company. Their juglers are every jot as good as ours; but whereas
ours make use of Balls, they show their tricks with large Hen-eggs. Their
Dancers upon the Ropes far exceed ours. I have seen some of them that have tied
a Rope to the top of a high Tower, and fastened the other to the ground, and
then walking up to the top with their counterpoises in their hands, have laid
themselves upon the Rope upon their backs, and have slid to the bottom with a
swiftness like lightning.

The Persians are altogether as superstitious as the Turks. Before they say
their Prayers they are obliged to wash: every one having a Reservatory for
water in his own House, which is always full of water. They plunge their heads
in the water, wash their mouths, rub their forheads; and if a man shows them
any nastiness in the Vessel, there is water enough, they cry, for purification;
though, if it be Pond-water, it must be four or five foot deep. But if it be
Running-water, the least quantity in the World serves to purify 'em, and render
'em fit to pray: while they ground their beliefupon this maxim of the Law of
Mahomet, that if it should run through Pishkill, or Camels-dung, it would be
sufficient for purification. There is one sort of washing appointed by their
Law, which is, to go to their Baths after they have been with their Wives; and
there are some so superstitious as to go there every day. These Baths are round
Chambers, so close, that there is no light but what comes from little round
windows made in the top of the roof. In the first place, there is the Krasine,
which is a Chamber seven or eight foot square; where, in the middle of the
Room, is a great Copper-plate, in the form of a flat Basin, and underneath they
make a fire of Brushes or Horse-dung: so that the Plate heats all the water
which is in the Chamber: When it is hot enough, a servant belonging to the Bath
goes up to the Terras, and winds a horn, to give notice to them that have a
mind to come. Should a Persian or a Mahumetan miss once in eight days, he would
feel an itching all over his body not to be endured. For the pores, which the
heat of the Bath had opened, coming to be shut, the vapors of the body not
able to get out, prick and tickle the skin. The Men go early in the morning,
and stay till two hours after Sunrising: At the entry of the Bath is the place
where they undress; and when they are stripped all but the secret parts, which
they cover with a napkin, they pour hot water upon their shoulders; and then
comes a man and rubs off all the sweat and filth of the Body with a coarse
Cloth; after which they plunge themselves into a Reservatory of hot water,
which they call Kolletain. But these common Baths are very dangerous, and many
people of both Sexes have got the fowl Disease, who were never addicted to
impurity.

There are also in Persia hired people, which they call Saka's, whose business
it is to give water to the people as they go along the Streets. Their Barbers
are very neat, and surpass ours for lightness of hand; for a man can hardly
feel their Rasors. They have also a Knife to pare the nails of the hands and
feet, which they do very dexterously. As for their Beards, those that belong to
the Law cut it with Scissers, but they leave it not so long as the Turks do, by
much. But the Courtiers and Soldiers shave all off, except from their
upper-lips, where they take it for a mark of great honor to wear long
Mustaches, which they say is the ornament of the face.

The habit of the Persians is a Robe which they call Cabaye, that comes down a
little below their knees. This is of very fine quilted Cloth, well cotton'd in
the Winter, but much thinner in the Summer.. These Linnens would be very cheap,
but that the Persons of Quality change their Robes every day. Their Sleeves are
long, and close to their arms, and reaching as far as the wrist. The Robe is
fit to their Bodies as far as the Wast; but then it is made wide and loose.
Over this they wear a noble Girdle of Silk, adorned at the end with flowers of
Gold, over which they were another Girdle of fine Kerman-wool. The richer sort
are so vain as to wear three Girdles, two of Silk, and one of Kerman-wool,
which is tied uppermost. Under the Robe or Vest they wear a short Wastcoat of
flowered Fustian quilted, their Shirts being of Silk of diverse colors. They
use as little Soap in Persia as they can; for Soap is very rare in Persia. When
we come out of the Indies, we are forced to bring with us Linen enough to
serve us for six months, and then to carry it back again; for they wash much
better in India then in Persia. Their breeches being of Silk, come down to
their Ankles, without any codpieces. Their Sesse, or Bonnet, which we call a
Turban, is made of a piece of fine Silk mingled with Gold, being in form much
like our large Pompions: the top thereof is a little flat; and here it is that
the end of the Silk being garnished with flowers of Gold and Silver, ends in a
kind of Posie. These Bonnets are very heavy, especially those that are for the
most part nothing but Gold and Silver. The meanest of those is worth 200
Crowns; but there are some which the King and the great Lords wear, that are
worth four or five hundred. You shall seldom meet an Officer of any Quality
that does not wear a rich Jewel in his Bonnet. The Courtiers and Soldiery wear
their Daggers upon their stomachs, stuck in their girdles. The meanest Soldier
inlays the handle and sheath of his Dagger; but the Grandees have them all
beset with Pearls. There was in the handle of Sha-Abbas the Second's Dagger, a
Diamond of above sixty Carats, which, with some other Stones that belonged to
it, was valued at 13000 Tomans, or 200000 Crowns. Over their Vest they wear a
Justicoar, much like ours. It is fastened at the top with a button: and most
usually they have nine tufted buttons before set by three and three at an equal
distance: but they only serve for ornament. This Justicoar is either of Cloth,
or Tissue; which in Winter is lined with Martins, or else with a gray Lambskin
that comes from Korasan. And indeed the Persians love diversity of colors in
their habits: for their Justicoar is of one color, their Vest of another,
their Breeches of another; and their Shoes, especially the Women's are green,
red, yellow, or violet. The Girdle and Turban are always of stripped Stuff,
unless it be the Moullah's, which are always plain.

Besides all this, in the Winter they wear a long Cloak down to their heels,
with sleeves of the same length, lined with rich Furs. The Persons of Quality,
and some of the meaner sort of people make no more of Cloth of Gold and Siver,
then we do of Druggets. A man that has but seven or eight Tomans a year, shall
spend five in Clothes; which excess in habit is crept down among the Rabble, so
that a man can hardly tell the Servant from the Master. And it is a Proverb
among the Persians, Corbebe Lebas, fine Clothes make Men esteemed at Court.
Neither Sha-Abbas the Second, nor his Grandfather Sha-Abbas the First, would
allow of this disorder, but that Men should go clad according to their
conditions. For one day seeing one of his Servants with a pair of Cloth of
Gold-breeches, demanded what wages he had? but when he understood that it was
nothing near sufficient to maintain him at that rate; to deter others from the
like vanity, he ordered him so many Bastinadoes upon the soles of his feet,
that he died in a few days. Others say that the Fellow being surpised at the
King's Question, made him answer, that being troubled with the Gout, he had
been advised to wear that sort of Stuff for its warmth. To which the King
replied, that he had been told a very bad remedy, and that he would show him a
better and a shorter way to cure the Gout, and so commanded him to be drubb'd,
as before is related.

In regard it is very cold in Persia, they make use of three sorts of Furs. The
Lamb and Fox's skin for the meaner sort, together with the Cat's and Fox's
skin. But the third sort, which is the Martin's Fur, is for Grandees of the
Court, and other Persons of high Quality. They have also a way to make Callocks
that will keep out the rain, the wind, and the cold, which are made of
Kerman-wool, as our Felt-makers make their Hats.

And now I have said it is cold, give me leave to tell ye how they warm
themselves. In all Houses there are little Chambers, in the middle whereof
there is a square hole about a foot deep, and three or four foot long,
according to the bigness of the Chamber. Over the hole is a thing like one of
our Tabourets, which covers the hole with a large Carpet, to keep in the heat
of that which is kindled in the hole; so that being placed under the Tabouret
as far as the wast, though as cold as ice before, in a minute you shall be
almost in a sweat, and be ready to fall a-sleep, if you take not a great care.
All the Nobility have Chambers with Chimneys, where they set the Wood upright;
the Mantle-tree comes forward, low, and semi-circular. It is two or three foot
deep, and as many wide, to avoid smoking.

They are full of their Compliments, which they call Travezea: and their manner
of salutation is quite different from ours. For they never uncover their heads,
but bow, and lay their right hand upon their breasts. When they come into the
company of their Betters, they fall upon their knees to set themselves upon
their heels, which is a mark of respect.

The Women in Persia are very richly habited; but their habit is all of a
piece, though little different in shape from the Men's. It is open before, and
comes not down below the calf of the leg. Their Girdle is not tied fast, but
hangs carelessly: their Sleeves are also close to their arms, and reach to their
wrists. Upon their heads they wear a little Bonnet raised like a little spire,
and adorned with precious Stones, according to their Quality; from which Bonnet
falls a veil behind, which is very graceful. They wear Breeches like the men,
and their Shoes are almost like theirs. The Women of Ormus wear only a single
pair of Breeches with a shift over them. The Armenian Women wear besides, a
little Justicoar without sleeves, and upon their heads, a fine Linnen-Coif tied
under their chins. Their hair is gathered into a long tress, to which they
sometimes add more, which is false, to make a long lock that is done up in a
Velvet or Sattin-Case embroidered, and hangs behind down to the wast.

Handsome Women are very plentiful in Persia, as well the tawny as the white.
For the Merchants that bring both from all parts, choose the handsomest they
can pick out. The white Women are brought from Muscovia, Poland, Cirassia,
Mengrelia, Georgia, and the Frontiers of Tartary. The black from the coast of
Melinda, and the Red Sea.

The Persian Women are seen by none but their own Husbands. They are very idle
in their Houses, not so much as looking after any thing of Housewifery. Indeed
every thing is at the Husband's disposal, so that the Women are rather Slaves
then Wives. They spend their time in taking Tobacco, after several fashions.
When they go to the Baths, she is the Woman that wears the best Clothes, and
brings the best Collation. They that have Slaves, cause 'em to rub their arms,
their legs, and their thighs, till they fall asleep; having no other
divertisement in their voluptuous Prison. The higher a-man is in dignity, the
more he glories in having a great number of Wives and Slaves; and his absolute
power keeps them in order either willingly, or by constraint.

There are two sorts of Eunuchs for the guard of the Sultanesses and the Wives
of the Nobility: Some are white, but they never come near the Women, but are
ordered to guard the first doors of the Haram. The others are black, frightful
to look upon, and flat-nos'd; who attend only upon the Women. If there be a
necessity for a Woman of Quality to go abroad, the Eunuchs go before and behind
with Battoons in their hands, to make the Corrouk, and drive all the people out
of the way. When the King goes into the Country if any one be asleep in the
highway, and be perceived before he wakens, he is immediately cut to pieces as
he lies. In the time of Sha-Abbas the Second, one of the Fellows that helped to
set up the Women's Tents, being weary, fell asleep in one of them upon the
ground. When the Women came, they, seeing a man asleep, set up a shrieking;
upon which, the Eunuchs coming in, wrapped up the Fellow in the Carpet as he lay,
and carrying him into the Fields, buried him alive, Carpet and all.

CHAP. XV. Of the Diseases of Persia, and the manner of curing them
THE Persian Children are seldom sick of the Smallpox, but in lieu of that,
they are very subject to Scald-pates, till ten or twelve years old. Which, it
may be, proceeds from their shaving so young, and so often: for they shave at
five or six months old, and two or three times a week.

As to the Pox, the Persians would be more troubled with it, but that the dry
Air of the Country is an enemy to it: besides, they never lie twice with the
fame Woman, without going to the Bath to sweat out the venom of that distemper.
As for the Gout or Gravel, the Persians know not what it means: But the
Armenians are troubled with the latter, especially those that in their youth
accustomed themselves to drink more Wine then Water.

To those that are troubled with the Cholick, they usually prescribe the eating
of Horseflesh; and I have seen many cured by that means.

Generally the Persians, especially the rich, or those that have wherewithal to
live handsomely, are much less subject to Sickness then the people of Europe.
Some take the reason to be, because of their China-drink, which they drink
every Spring, boiling an ounce in three pints of water, and so continuing the
Dose for ten or twelve days one after the other: all which time they keep a
very moderate diet, and eat no fruit for a month together. This drink causes
the Patient to sweat; and the sweat being wiped off, dies the Linen, nay the
very walls of the Chamber of a yellow color. As for any method of Physic,
they have none in Persia. For the Dysentery, they take sower Curdl'd-milk, with
Rice unbruis'd boiled in water, to which they add a little Rhubarb powdered.

At the beginning of a Disease they forbid Bread, and instead thereof prescribe
Rice boiled in Hen-broath, or sometimes in fair water. For diet is the chief
Remedy which the Physicians prescribe in all Diseases, and account most
sovereign. Indeed the remedy is well prescribed in many distempers; however it
is by them never prescribed according to reason or method, but only according
to custom; whereby it often comes to pass that they forbid that which is good,
and prescribe that which is bad. If the Patient be so poor as not to be able to
send for a Physician, two or three men set him upon an Ass, with a Scarf about
his neck, which denotes him to be a sick person, and so lead him to the
Physician; who presently seels his Pulse, lets him Blood, and by and by taking
his Pen in his hand, in a small piece of Paper prescribes more Hog-wash at one
stroke, then three men's bellys are able to contain.

When a Physician is called to a Consultation, he pretends not to take any
Money: But his Atar or Apothecary finds a way to have the Doctor satisfied for
his pains. They never permit the Sick to change their Linen, how nasty soever
it be. When they come home to the Patient, though they find him ready to
expire, they tell the Servants that he will certainly recover; but then, on the
other side, they go to the Parents or Kindred of the Patient, and tell them
that the Patient is in a desperate condition, and cannot live. By this means
they save their credit; for happen what will, they have told truth either of
the one side, or the other.

CHAP. XVI. Of the division of Time among the Persians.
THE Persians divide the natural day into four parts. The first is from
Sunrising to Noon; the Second from Noon to Sunset: The third from Sunset till
Midnight; and the fourth from Midnight till Sunrise. At Midnight, Morning, and
Sunset, they make a most horrible din in every great City, of Kettle-Drums,
Haut-boys, Latten-Basons, and other Instruments: upon which there are certain
men hired to play for a quarter of an hour together, in some place where they
may be heard all over the City. They have also great Cornets, about seven foot
long, with deep mouths, which may be heard above half a league. But these
Cornets are never used but in Cities where the Kans or Governors reside. These
Instruments are also always employed at their great Solemnities; as also when
the King creates any new Officer or Governor. These Instruments have also a
privilege to play at all Houses where they understand there is a Male-child
born. The meaner sort dare not refuse 'em; but the Nobility value not their
privilege of a straw.

The Persians in the computation of time make use of Lunar-months. The first
Mouharrem, the second Cepher, the third Rebia-el-Avel, the fourth Akner, the
fifth Gemadil-Avel, the sixth Gemadil-Akner, the seventh Regeb, the eighth
Shaabon, the ninth Ramezan, the tenth Shaval, the eleventh Zikade, the twelfth
Zilhagge. And every Month begins from the first appearance of the Crescent.

In their Astronomical Accounts, and the Calculations of the Longitude and
Latitude of the Planets, for the composing their Almanacks, they make use of
Solar-months, thus called: Azar 31 days. Onzon 30 days. Ajar 31. Harizon 30.
Temouze 31. Ab 31. Eiloul 30. Techrion-el-Avel 31. Techrion-el-ilani 30.
Ranon-el-Avel 31. Kanon-Elsani 31. Shaabat 28 or 29, answering to our February.
The first month Azar begins upon our eleventh of March: so that it answered to
our month of March before the Gregorian Reformation. Therefore they call this
month Mah-Roami, or the Roman months. They also make use of the Egyptian
months, which are thus called: Terverdin, Erdi-be-hoct, Kourdad, Tir, Mordad,
Sheriver, Mohre, Abon, Azer, Dei, Bahmen, Espendarmouze,. The first month,
Ferverdin; begins with the Vernal Equinox, every month not containing above 30
days, adding the five which remain to the end of the year, which they call
Kramsi Mousterelze.

The day of the Vernal Equinox is the first day of the year, which they call
Neozonze, and is one of their Principal Festivals. For that day all the
Grandees appear at Court, and present the King according to their quality. If
they can meet with nothing that is rare, they present him in Ducatts of Gold,
and there are some that present him to the number of ten Thousand. They also
give God thanks for preserving them to see the new year, and for preserving the
fruits of the Earth from bad seasons, for the Corn is by that time well come
up. Upon this first day of the year, if a Persian has not money to buy him a
new habit, he will go and mortgage his own body to have one. So proud and
luxurious are the Persians from the highest to the lowest.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Feasts and ordinary Diet of the Persians.
THE Persians are nothing eager after delicacies or dainties; both the nobler
and the meaner sort being very temperate in diet. In regard that wood is so
scarce and dear about Ispahan, they never eat boiled meat above once a day: and
as for their Dinner which they call Shate, it consists of bread, cheese-curds,
milk, burnt wine, melons and other fruits in season, to which the rich add wet
and dry sweetmeats: At night their usual food is Pilaw and roast meat. They buy
their Provision from hand to mouth, especially the Mahumetans, which is a
double charge. But for the Armenians, they live thriftily, and buy at once a
good quantity of provisions to last for so long time.

Muttons, Kidds, Pullets and Pigeons, are the usual diet of the Persians; for
as for Beef they very rarely eat it. The King and the great Lords will eat a
piece of a Hare sometimes when they have been a hunting: but when they have
killed a wild Boar, they send it always to some Christian, in expectation to be
presented for the honor done him. They have no diversity of Victuals or made
Dishes in Persia, their diet being more proper to satisfy hunger, then to
please a nice palate. Mutton and Lamb would be very good in Persia, if they
knew how to roast it our way. But the Persians roast only at an oven, which is
a hole made in the ground two foot and a half broad, and five or six foot deep.
They burn nothing but bushes, and a kind of Turf mixed with the dung of Cattle,
and dried in the Sun. There are several roasting Cooks at Ispahan, that roast a
whole Sheep at a time, where he that comes to buy may have as much cut out as
he pleases. Other Cooks shops are only for boiled meat or rice: their fruits
which they pickle up in Vinegar being the only sauce which they have.

As for their Bread it is very white, for they have wheat enough to furnish the
whole Kingdom. They bake every day, making up their Dow in the form of a thin
Cake, strow'd over with Sesamum. They bake these Cakes in their Ovens in the
ground, covering the batch over with little round flint stones, that are
quickly hot and retain the heat. At Ispahan they make a great fire in an
earthen pot, and when it is hot they spread the Dow against the sides of the
pot. The Armenians make a sort of bread as thin as Paper, which they bake upon
a thin Iron plate which is as thin as paper. Their Plate and Dishes are of red
Copper tinned within side. For they are forbid to make use of Silver by the Law
of Mahomet. Nor does the King use any other then Gold Plate, of which he has
great store. They have also a sort of Porcellane made at Kerman. To eat their
broths they make use of wood'n spoons: for as for their rice, which is thick,
they take it up in their fingers, and wipe their hands upon their handkerchiefs.

The first thing set upon the Table is the Pipe, the Tobacco, and the dish of
Coffee; and indeed thus it is that they begin all their debauches. They suck
and smoke of their Tobacco through water in a long glass bottle, by which means
it comes cool into their mouths: else they would never be able to take it all
day long as they do. They sing very little in their Cups: but they recite a
vast number of wicked Verses, which they rehearse with a great deal of gravity.
They are so accustomed to take Tobacco, both men and women, that a poor
tradesman that has not above five Sous to spend, will lay out three of them in
Tobacco. If they had none, they say they should not have damaque, that is,
gladness in their hearts. Many will confess that their excessive taking Tobacco
is hurtful; but if you tell 'em of it, they answer in a word, Adedchoud, It Is
the custom.

Besides their Tobacco they have also Opium made of Poppies, cut as they grow,
out of which they draw the juice and make it into Pills. They take no more at
first then the head of a pin, increasing their dose by degrees, till they come
to take the quantity of half a wall-nut. When they are come to that pitch they
dare not give over, for fear of endangering their lives, or addicting
themselves to drink wine. In their youth you shall see these Theriakis or
takers of Opium, with pale pensive and dejected countenances, and the use of
their speech almost lost: If they omit to take for a day together this
ill-continued drug that heats their brains, and causes them to act ridiculously
and to talk idly, when it has done working, they are as cold and stupid as
before, which obliges 'em to take it again. For this reason they are short
lived: or if they do live till forty, they complain heavily of the pains that
proceed from the cold venom of the herb. They that have a mind to kill
themselves, swallow a large piece, and drink Vinegar after it, to prevent the
relief of any other Counterpoy on, and so they dye smiling.

They have another sort of drink to make themselves merry, which they call
Kokomaar, composed of boyld Poppy seed. They take it in broth, and there are
particular houses called Kokomaars Krone, where people meet to divertise those
that see the ridiculous postures which that intoxicating drink causes them to
show. Before it works they quarrel with one another, and call one another all
to naught; but never fight. When the drug begins to work, they grow friends;
and some are for making complements, others for telling a long tedious story,
which renders them very vain. They have also another sort of liquor, which is
called Bongue, very bitter, being made of the leaves of Hemp and some other
drug mixed with it. It makes those that use it shamefully foolish and
ridiculous, which is the reason the Law has forbid that and not the former. The
Usbecks have brought into Persia, the Custom of taking in Pipes Tchouherse,
which is the flower or rather the woolly substance which is found in
hemp-closes. This fills the head with strange conceits, sometimes pleasant and
sometimes furious; those that take it being quite besides their senses for two
or three hours.

Their Feasts are thus ordered: The guests come in the morning to the house
whither they are invited, and all the day long they spend their time in taking
Tobacco and telling stories. Between whiles they have Sweetmeats, Coffee, and
Fruits set before them. In the evening the Sofra is spread, and the table
served with boiled and roast. If the person that treats be of any quality, he
has a kind of a Governor of his house, that sits upon his heels with a Ladle
or great wooden spoon in his hand. Then the Inviter makes his complements to
the chief of his guests, assuring him that the entertainment is only provided
for him, only at his command he is ready to let the rest share with him. The
Complements being thus passed, the Governor of the House with his great Spoon
puts rice and meat upon the little plates, which the servants present by equal
portions to every one of the guests. Then they fall too, taking out the rice by
handfuls, and the meat with their fingers. Sometimes they mix curdl'd milk with
their rice and meat, and making up a lump of all together as big as a Tennis
ball, put it all in their mouths at a time, which is the reason they never sit
long at Table; one making room for another till they have all done: for as soon
as one has done, another comes into his place without any farther Ceremony.
They have several Liquors in the room in Porcellain Vessels, but at meals they
only drink to drive down their meat and to prevent thirst. When all is done,
they bring a Basin with an Ewre full of hot water to wash their hands and
faces. After which the Inviter complements his guests, and every one returns
home; at which time the servants are very diligent to bring every man his
shoes, in hopes of some little piece of silver.

The Armenians entertain their friends in the same manner; only that they begin
their Feasts with a cup of strong water, and some sweetmeats, after which they
give a couple of hard Eggs to every one of the guests. The Persians also have
soon done, but the Armenians eat swift, and a long time without drinking, which
they never do till the end of the meal. After they have given thanks and taken
away the cloth, then they fall to drinking to excess. He that gives the
entertainment never thinks he has done well, till his guests are not able to
find the way out of the room, and the more they tumble about the room, the less
he thinks he has spent his money in vain.

To conclude, the Persian's are very Gentile, and afford their victuals with a
freewill to all that will come and eat with them at Supper time: admiring at
the custom of the Franks, who shut their doors when they sit down to their
meals.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Marriages of the Persians.
THe Persians betroth their Children very young, that is at nine or ten years;
but among the Armenians there are some married and lie together at five or six.
The Law of Mahomet allows them but four lawful Wives, whom they call Nekha. But
there are others whom they call Amoutha or hired women, and of whom they may
have as many as they can keep, and for so long time as they please, which is
ratified by the allowance of the Judge. They may also enjoy the Slaves whom they
purchase. The Children both of the one and the other are accounted lawful, and
inherit all alike, without the distinction of Elder or Younger; but two
Daughters can have but the share of one boy. When the woman's time that was
hired is out, the man dismisses her, and she is obliged to stay forty days
before she engage again, that it may appear whither she be with Child or no.

The man gives to the woman that he marries a Dowry assigned upon his Estate,
and sends her money and silks to make her clothes. The maid also sends
something to him, but very little, and all by the interposition and intercourse
of the women. For the two parties never see one another. Upon the wedding day,
they send to the Bridegrooms house, by the sound of Drums and Trumpets, certain
Horses and Men laden with the Brides goods, which is many times done out of
vainglory, and more for show then substance. The Bridegroom is led a foot,
attended by several women with Tapers in their hands, and a noise of Drums and
other Instruments marching before them. Being come to the door of the
Bridegrooms House, if he have promised a larger Dowry to the woman then he is
able or willing to give, he keeps his door shut. The Parents of the Maid knock,
and he declares he will not have her at that price. But at length after some
contests on both sides they agree, and the Virgin enters with her Mother and
all her Kindred. Then the Moullah reads the conditions of Marriage; which being
done, the women retire into the inner part of the House, the men feasting by
themselves, and the women by themselves.

This is all that is done upon the Wedding Day, but the following days are not
always so pleasing, and it often follows that both parties do not agree, or
that the husband misuses his wife. Then the woman that requires separation,
requires the Dowry promised her by her husband: which the man oft-times refuses
and if she persists in her demand, is many times so severely used by him, that
she is constrained to cry, In The Devils name let me go, I demand nothing of
thee. Then they both repair to the Casi, or Cheit-Lesloon, who is a Doctor of
the Law, and in his presence they discharge one another. This they may do by
their Law three times. After that, the same woman can never return to her
Husband again.

The Children derive their Nobility from the Father, whither he be born of a
Slave, or an Amoutha, or a Legitimate wife. The Nobility of the Persians which
is called Negabet, is founded upon their being descended from Mahomet. They who
claim that extraction, have the title of Mir or Prince: and their Daughters
carry the appellation of Mirza or Princess. They are very numerous and very
poor. But the title of Mir without a good Estate or high Employment signifies
little or nothing.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Death and Burials of the Persians.
It Is the Custom among the Persians, that when the Patient lies very
dangerously ill, they light several fires upon the Terrass of the House, to
give the People notice to pray for him. So soon as the breath is out of his
body, the whole house rings with cries and lamentations, especially of the
women who tear their hair, and show such antic postures, that a man would
think them possessed. In the midst of their tears they make long repetitions of
the worthy actions of the deceased, and every foot they set up a yelling. Then
they go and advertize the Casi, that such a one is dead, to whom the Casi
answers Sarchoama Salamet-Bashet. May your head be in safety. In the mean while
he seals a License to the Mourderchour, to take the body and wash it in a house
which is built on purpose near a running water. After that come a great number
of Moullah's, with the Ensigns of the Mosquee, which are long staffs like
Pikes, at the end whereof are thin plates of Iron and Latten, so weak that they
bend downward with the least motion: the bodies of the staves being wrapped about
with certain pieces of Taffata. These Moullahs tear their throats crying out
Alla, Alla, Alla, repeating nothing else, and dancing sometimes upon one foot
and sometimes upon another; and because they that baul loudest get the most
money, they put their thumbs in their ears with their fingers upon their
cheeks, and tear their throats with all the force they have. The body being
washed, the clothes of the deceased belong to the Mourderchour. When they carry
the Beire, it is the custom that every one that meets it, proffers their
shoulders to help carry, while the others ease themselves; for which the
Kindred of the deceased make some acknowledgment. If he be a person of Quality,
all his Horses are bridled and saddl'd, and others perhaps borrowed: One
carries his Turban, another his Scimitar, another his Bow, another his Arrows,
another his Buckler, and whatever else is of any use to set forth his Quality
and his Courage. The biggest Churchyard that belongs to Ispahan, is Calreston,
but there is not one handsome Tomb in it. The Armenians lay a great stone over
the grave, and the rich set up an Arch with four Pillars, under which they eat
and drink in the shade when they visit the Tombs of their Ancestors.

Their graves are six foot long, six foot deep, and two foot wide, wherein they
lay the bodies with their faces turned toward Mecca; and then they set up two
tiles of each side his face to keep the earth from falling upon it. If he be a
rich man, or have been a stout Soldier, they bury with him his Turbant,
Scimitar, Bow and Arrows, and set Victuals by him; which part of the hole being
made up with brick, the rest is filled up with earth. The Moulla's alone return
to the house of the deceased, where they have meat set before 'em, and are also
farther paid for their singing and bawling. A while after the Kindred coming
to visit the Heir, discourse him upon the contempt of the world, tell him that
it is but as a Caravan, some of which arrive sooner at their journeys end then
others. Eight days after the Heir returns their visits. As for the Grandees
they order in their Wills that their bodies shall be either carried to Mecca or
Meshed.

As well the Persians as the Turks, believe that as soon as the grave is
filled, that the two Angels Neguir and Manguer, revive the dead as far as his
wast; ask him the reason of Faith, and which way he said his Prayers, and that
according to his merits they use him well or ill. As for the torment of Souls
before the Resurrection, that only consists in a grief for not having arrived
to those perfections and Sciences to which they might have attained, and
consequently for not having attained to that perfection which God required of
them. Others hold that the Souls of the unfortunate are tormented with Dreams
and Visions; but that the Souls of the happy always enjoy the sight of pleasing
objects; till the Saheb-el-zaman, or Master of time shall come to confirm the
Law of Mahomet, who shall kill Dedgar, who is like our Antichrist, with his own
hand; at which time all then alive shall dye in an instant, and then shall
happen the general Resurrection, which they call Moavedet-hechre. That the same
Bodies and Souls shall unite to appear at the day of Judgment before the Throne
of the great Judge of the world; and that to go thither they must pass over a
bridge called Polserat, sharper then the edge of a razor, which nevertheless
the Mussulmen shall pass over without any danger with the swiftness of a bird.
But that misbelievers shall fall as soon as ever they set their feet upon it,
and shall fall into a torrent of fire among a thousand Devils armed with Cramp
Irons, Pincers, and tenter-hooks. So that it is a kind of a Proverb among the
Persians, if a man cannot obtain of another the Justice of his bargain, or to
yield to right, Well, says he, before thou passest Polserat, thou shall restore
it me double, for I will take hold of thy Coat, and hinder thee from getting
over till thou have given me satisfaction; But the craftier sort laugh at this,
and make answer with a smile, Well, well, we will venture stumbling as we pass
over Polserat. The Porter of Paradise whom they call Rusuen shall open them the
gate. There they shall sit upon the banks of the great Kausser, which is a
fountain where their Prophet shall give them of the water to drink out of a
Ladle, and that afterward they shall have a great number of women created on
purpose for them, with all sorts of most delicious food. And for fear of
fouling this place of recreation and holiness with the excrements of eating and
drinking, they say, that those things shall always evacuate in a persum'd
sweat, and that they themselves shall always remain in that condition. Others
more refined, and not believing material enjoyments, affirm that Beatitude
consists in the perfect knowledge of the Sciences; and for the senses they
shall have their satisfaction according to their quality.

CHAP. XX. The Author departs from Ispahan to Ormus, and describes the Road to
Schiras.
I Set forth out of Ispahan the 24. of Feb. 1665. in the afternoon, and stayed
a League from the City, in a field whither some of my friends would needs
accompany me. About ten a clock at night, I set forward again, and traveled
till break of day; and then I came to a place where the Radars kept guard half
a league from a great Town called Ispshaneck, which you are to cross. About ten
a clock in the forenoon I came to Mahiar, where there is a very good Inn. But
the Land between this and Ispahan is all very barren and without wood.

The 26 th, three hours after midnight, I set forward through a dry Plain,
which begins to grow more fruitful, about a League from Comshe a great City,
where I arrived by eleven a Clock in the morning. In it are several Inns, and
indifferent handsome ones, considering that they are built only of Earth. This
City is composed of a row of Villages that extend about half a League in
length. About three quarters of a League on this side the City stands a neat
Mosquee with a pond full of fish. But the Moullahs will not permit you to catch
any, saying that they belong to the Prophet to whom the Mosquee is dedicated.
However because it is a shady place in the Summer, Travelers rather choose to
lie by this pond, then to shut themselves up in the City.

The 27 th I traveled from four in the morning till ten in the forenoon,
through a plain sowed with store of grain, and lodged in an Inn called
Maksoubegui.

The 28 th I departed two hours after midnight, and after eight hours travel
through a barren plain, I arrived at Yesdecas, a little City built upon a rock
in the midst of a great Valley, and lodged in an Inn at the foot of the Rock.
The same day in the morning I passed on to a neat house with sine Gardens,
called Amnebad; built by Iman-Kouli-Kan, Governor of Schiras.

The first of March I departed an hour after midnight, and a little after I
crossed a short mountain, but so rugged and so craggie, that they have given it
the name of Kotel-Innel-tebekeni, that is, the Mountain that breaks the Horses
shoes. The next day we passed by a scurvy Castle called Gombessala; then
traveling through a flat Country, I came by ten in the morning to Dehigherdou,
or the Village of Wall-nuts. I endured very sharp weather all the morning, for
all that Country, and that which I traveled the next day, is very cold at some
times of the year.

The second day I traveled from midnight till ten a clock in the morning,
through the Snow over a barren Plain to come to Cuzkuzar, where there is a new
Inn well built.

The third I was a horseback from five in the morning till noon, first over the
same Plain by a Lake side in a very bad way covered with snow that hid the
holes; then passing a tedious long and rugged mountain, I descended to a
Village called Asepas, where there is to be seen an old ruined Castle upon the
point of a Hill. The Inhabitants were all Georgians by descent, but now turned
all Mahumetans. I met with wine and fish, in regard of the many Rivolets, but
the Caravahsira is old, and ill provided.

The fourth, setting out by daybreak, I rode over a Plain, which Sha Abbas the
first gave the Georgians to till, and in eleven hours I came to Ondgiom, a
large Village upon a River, over which there is a fair stone bridge.

The fifth, I got a horseback by two a clock in the morning, and had two
leagues in the first place of deep miery way; afterward I passed a steep
Mountain, craggy and durty. I passed through a Village called Iman Shade, from
the name of one of their Prophets that lies buried there, and gave the Mountain
its name, being all covered with bitter Almond-trees. I traveled sometime
between rude and craggy rocks, after which I met with a small River, which runs
to Mayn, a little City where I lodged in a fair Inn.

The sixth, I departed three hours after midnight, and traveled through a
large Plain encompassed with high and rugged Mountains; upon one of which that
is divided from the other, stood a Castle which they say was ruined by
Alexander the Great, of which at present there does not remain the least sign
or footstep. I crossed the river of Main over two stone Bridges, and then came
to Abgherme; a place that stands in a Plain where there is an Inn half built;
so called by reason of a Spring of hot waters that rises not far from it. In
the morning I passed over a fair and long Causey, called Pouligor, being above
500 paces long, and 15 broad, divided also by certain Bridges, to give the
water free passage, by reason the Country is very full of mershes. At the end
of this Causey stands an Inn very well built, but the gants that haunt it will
not suffer it to be frequented. I passed along by the foot of a Mountain, and
after three hours travel, I stopped a while at an Inn that stands at the foot
of another steep and craggie mountain.

I arrived at Schiras about six a clock at night. But here give me leave before
I enter the City, to make two observations, the one touching the Road from
Ispahan to Schiras, the other concerning the ruins of Tche-elminar.

As to the Road from Ispahan to Schiras, observe that in winter time when the
Snow is fallen, when you come to Yesdecas, you must of necessity leave the
direct road, because it is impossible to pass the streights of those Mountains,
which I have mentioned. Therefore you must keep the left hand road eastward,
through the Plains, taking a guide along with you.

This way, which is the longer by two days journey, was formerly unknown,
because of a River, that in one place beats upon a steep rock, and closes up
the passage. But Iman-Kouli-Kan with a vast expense of time and money, caused a
way to be levelled out of the Rock about 15 or 20 foot above the River, which
he secured to the waterside with a Wall three or four foot high. This way
continues for half a league, and then you come to lie at a great Village in a
Plain, where you take Guides to show you the Fords of the River.

Having past the River, you cross over several fertile Plains watered with great
store of Rivers. Then you ascend a Mountain, from whence you have but a league
and a half to Tche-clminar.

At the point of the Mountain, upon the right hand of the great Road, are to be
seen twelve Pillars still standing, that form a kind of a square. In the spaces
of the Mountain are a great number of Niches, that are opposite to the Pillars,
and were certainly the places where the ancient Persians put their Idols.
Thence you come to Tche-elminar; where are to be seen a great many old Columns,
some standing, and some lying upon the ground, and some ill-shap'd Statues,
with little apiece dark rooms. All which together, easily persuades me,
who have well considered the principal Pagods of Iudia, that Tche-elminar was
only a Temple formerly dedicated to Idolatrous worship. And that which confirms
my opinion, is, that there is no place more proper for an Idolatrous Temple
then this, by reason of the abundance of water. Besides, that the dark Rooms
could be no other then the Chambers for the Priests,; and where the Rice and
Fruits that were the feigned nourishment of the Idols, were the better secured
from goats and flies.

Leaving Tche-elminar, you come to lie at a Village half a league farther,
where is very good Wine. From thence to Schiras is a hard days journey;
especially when the Snow begins to melt: for then the Road looks like a little
Sea.

CHAP. XXI Of the City of Schiras.
THE City of Schiras lies in 78 degr. 15 min. of Longitude, and 29 degrees. 36 min.
of Latitude. It is seated in a Plain that extends it self about four leagues
from the North to the South, and from the West to the East about five leagues.
Upon the South-east there is a Lake of salt water four leagues in compass:
leaving the Plain as you travel to the South, you pass between two Mountains,
which are not so close, but that they leave room for certain pleasant Valleys a
league and a half wide.

The Soil about Schiras is good, and fruitful; and it is particularly famous
for the most excellent Wines of all Persia. As for the City it self, there is
nothng handsome in it: for it looks rather like a Town half ruined then a City.
Formerly it was begirt with walls of Earth, which are now utterly decaid. The
Houses are of the same Earth dried in the Sun, and whitened over with lime; so
that when it happens to rain, when the Earth comes to be well moistened, the
Houses fall of themselves. Only the College which Iman-Kouli-Kan built, and
some of the Mosquees are are of Brick: and the best of those Mosquees is called
Sha-Shiraque, which out of a particular devotion is kept somewhat better in
repair. However, there is nothing in it worth taking notice of. Upon the
Northeast side, the City runs within a quarter of a league of the Mountain: and
from a Stone-bridg, as you go out of the City to the foot of the Mountain, is a
long Street in a straight line, where there stands a Mosquee, built by
Iman-Kouli-Kan. Without, it appears fair enough; but within, it falls to ruin.
There is an Octogonal Piazza before the Gate, and in the middle of the Piazza
an Octogonal Vase, which is filled by a little stream that runs through the
Street from the Mountain. Both sides of the Street from the Mosquee to the
Mountain are walled in: and at certain spaces are great Gates one against
another, with rooms over them; the Windows whereof open into the Gardens behind
the walls; all along by which runs a row of Cypress-trees in a direct line: and
in the middle of the Street, about two hundred paces on this side the Mosquee,
is another Vase, which receives the same water as it runs from the Mountain.
This Street was made by Iman-Kouli-Kan, after he had cut the Mountain at the
end of it, to shorten the way from Schiras to Ispahan.

There are in Schiras three or four Glass-houses, where they make great and
small Bottles, to transport the Sweet-waters that are made in the City. There
are also made the several sorts of Vessels wherein they pickle their fruits of
all sorts, which they send in great quantities into India, to Sumatra, Batavia,
and other places.

There is no Silk made, nor any other manufacture in Schiras: only there are
some few Chites or Painted-cloaths made there, which nevertheless are very
coarse, and in use only among the meaner sort.

As you go out of the City upon the North-west side, you meet with a long Alley
or Walk, in three parts whereof are placed three Stones, which they call Mills.
At the end of this walk is a Garden called Bay-Sha, or the King's Garden. Over
the Gate whereof is a great Room half ruined: and at the end of a large Walk
planted with Cypress-trees, stands a neat piece of building, but altogether
neglected. Upon the left hand whereof is a great Pond paved with Freestone,
being all the beauties of the Garden: which, it is true, was full of
Fruit Trees, Roses and Jasmins; yet, for want of order, it looked like a
Wilderness.

From the Garden to the Hill is a Plain of two leagues long, and one broad;
which is all but one large Vinyard belonging to several persons. Beyond the
Vinyard rise very high Mountains, from whence fall several little Springs that
form a River, which is called Bend-Emir, from the name of a Town where the
biggest Spring rises. This River of Bend-Emir waters the whole Vineyard of
Schiras; where it never rains from Spring till Autumn: which is the reason that
in the Summer there is no water in the very Channel next the City.

Their Wines are the best in Persia; but there is not so great a quantity made
as people imagine. For, of all this great Vineyard, and in all the places round
about the City for four or five leagues together, good part of the Grapes are
dried, and a greater quantity pickled: and of the Wine, there are many Vessels
full, which are burnt for the benefit of the poor Travelers, and Carriers, who
find it a great refreshment to drink it with water.

Their Wine, as all other things, is sold by weight, and not by measure: In the
year 1666, a most plentiful year for Wine, the Provision of the King's House
amounted to 50000 Men's of Keukne, or the ancient Men containing nine pound of
ours, at sixteen ounces to the pound, (being the only weight for Wine,) and the
King allows as much to the Franks, as for his own Household. The Jews of
Schiras, who boast themselves of the Tribe of Levi, make above a hundred and
ten thousand Men's, it being their chiefest livelihood; but the Governor of
Schiras knows how to share with them in their profit. The whole account of Wine
made at Schiras amounts to 200025 Men's, or 4125 Tuns, at three hundred pints
to the Tun.

In Schiras is an ancient Mosquee, wherein is the Sepulcher of a Sadi, whom the
Persians esteem the best of their Poets. It has been a very fair one,
accompanied with a large Building, which was once a College; but it runs to
ruin, as do also many other Edifices within the City. Just against this
Mosquee you descend by a pair of Stairs into a large Well, at the bottom
whereof is a Vase full of Fish, which nobody dares to touch, it being
Sacriledg to rob the Sadi of what belongs to him. A little beyond this Mosquee,
upon a high Rock, stand the ruins of a Castle; and upon the top of all the
Rock is a square Well cut out of the Rock. It is very deep, and ten or twelve
foot broad: formerly, they told me, their Adulteresses were all thrown into it.
There is one wonderful Well in this City; which is 15 years rising, and 15
years falling; that is, the water is one fifteen years rising to the top, and
another fifteen years sinking to the bottom.

There are in Schiras two or three Bazars well built, through the midst whereof
the water runs in a Channel.

To the South-west, a good league from the City, there is a little Hill divided
from the great Mountain, upon which Hill are three Gates to be seen, the
remainder of an Idolatrous Temple. There were four Gates, but the South-Gate is
tumbled down: the rest are standing, composed of three Stones: Upon both the
Stones that make the Jaums, there are two figures in half Relief, with their
faces one looking upon another, with their arms extended; one holding in his
hand a Pan, out of which issues a flame of fire; and the other a Towel folded
up. The other Statue holds as it were a Purse in one hand, and a bowl of Fire
in the other; the Figures being as big as the Life, only their faces are
spoiled; and as for the other doors, they are both the same.

Two Musket Shot from thence, in a plain, rises a little Mountain, from the
North-side of which fall many Springs that meet in a large Pond full of Fish.
Some high Trees grow there, to shade the Habitation of a Dervi's that lives
there. The place is pleasant, and all the Springs together fill a Channel large
enough to water the neighboring Fields. Here it was that certainly the ancient
Idolaters came to wash, and thence went to the Temple to say their Prayers, and
make their Offerings.

Half a league beyond, at the foot of a Mountain, is a place about 500 paces in
compass, whence there fall a good number of Springs that meet in a Pond,
environed with high Trees, and full of Fish. In one corner of the Mountain
stand Figures, cut out of the Rock much bigger than the Life. The two which are
uppermost look one upon another; and that upon the left hand carries a large
Turbant, such as the Grand Vizier of Constantinople wears when he goes to the
Divan. From his Turbant to the middle of his Forhead, he was bound with the
Tresses of his own hair, the ends whereof were fastened together with large
Buckles behind in his neck. His habit was a Robe after the ancient fashion,
with a kind of a Cutlace by his side. Nor did the opposite Statue much differ
from this, only instead of a Turbant, he wore a kind of Miter upon his head.
The two other Statues underneath the former, stretched forth their arms one to
the other: the one representing a Man, the other a Woman. The Man seemed to
present the Woman a Nosegay of Flowers; but in truth it was a difficult thing
to discern them, in regard they were both covered with a Fig Tree that grew
just before them out of the rock.

About two thousand paces farther, there is a Lake of salt water about ten
leagues in compass, which is filled by several Springs that fall from the
Mountains: and here it is that the people make a great quantity of Salt. There
runs into it also a salt River, over which you cross upon a large stone-Bridg
about three miles from Schiras, in the way to Bander-Abassi.

Half a league from the City are two remarkable Wells: the one upon the top of
the Mountain, the other upon the descent, cut out of the Rock: both of an
extraordinary depth. There is no water in either, because they are half full of
Stones, which they that come to see the Wells, throw into 'em. There are also
to be seen the ruins of a Castle formerly built there for the Guard of the
Highways. But since Iman-Kouli-Kan made the new way, he caused all those
Fortresses to be defaced, as being expensive to the King, and burdensome to
the Merchant, from whom the Guards exacted Toll in those places. Now all the
ways are free, and the Merchants travel securely.

About half a league from the City, toward the North, upon the brow of a high
Mountain, stands a little Mosquee, like a Hermitage: and fifteen foot below it
gushes out a fair Spring, which is the best in the places near to Schiras. Near
to it is a little place encompast with a Pale, with four Pillars that uphold a
Ceeling. Here it is that a Dervis sits, and entertains all them that come to
visit him, to whom he presents Tobacco, according to the custom of the
Country. This place is one of the best Prospects in all Syria, from whence you
behold one way all the plain of Schiras, and all the City from one end to the
other, with the Gardens. But people go not thither for the fair Prospect, or to
visit the Dervis, but to admire a Cypress-tree not above three or four paces
from the Prospect, planted among the Rocks; and of that bigness, that four men
can can hardly fathom it: it is proportionably high, and is looked upon to be
the fairest Cypress-tree in all Persia, where so many grow besides. This Tree
is fed by the Spring which I have mentioned, falling some eight or ten foot
below into a Cistern, which is always full; whence through a Canal it runs into
a Garden in the plain some seven or eight hundred paces from the Mountain. In
this Garden are to be seen the remains of a Palace of one of the ancient Kings
of Persia: yet what is still to be seen, does not declare it to have been very
magnificent. The King was called Padsha quieshel, the Scald-pated King. A thing
not to be wondered at, in regard there are few Persians but such as either have
or have had scald heads.

Two leagues from Schiras, to the South-west, at the foot of the great
Mountain, stands a Hermitage, called Pir-Bouno, where three or four Dervis
live, as being a pleasant place; for the Dervis always choose out the most
delightful places to pitch their Tents in: where they sit smoking their Pipes
with that gravity, that if the King himself should come by, they would not stir
to give him reverence. That which adds to the pleasure of that Hermitage, is a
fair Spring of water that refreshes the Garden, and the number of fair Trees
that are about it.

About a quarter of a league from the City, toward the West, is to be seen a
Churchyard encompast with Walls; in the middle whereof, looking toward Mecca,
stands a Monument very much frequented by the Dervis, and other devout people,
who say their Prayers there, it being the Sepulcher of Hougia Hafiz, for whom
they have a very great veneration. The year of his decease is set down upon his
Tomb; being in the year 1381: and he purchased that great esteem among the
Persians, for having composed a great Book of Morality, and for that he was
also one of the best Poets of his time. He has left one great Poem behind him
in the praise of good Wine; which has caused many to aver, that Hougia-Hafiz
was no good Mussul-man, in regard he has so highly praised a thing which is so
strictly forbidd'n by the Law of Mahomet.

Near to the Churchyard is a fair Garden, which men go to see for the beauty
of the Cypress-trees, which are its chief ornament. They are to be admired for
their height and bigness, among which there is one that was planted by the hand
of Sha-Abbas the Great himself, in the year 1607; and it may well deserve to
have been planted by the hand of a Monarch; for it was bigger then the rest
that had been planted above a hundred years before.

Without the City, upon the North-side, at the foot of the Mountain, is a
Garden belonging to the ancient Kings of Persia, called Bag-Firdous. It is full
of Fruit Trees, and Rose-trees in abundance. At the end of the Garden, upon the
descent of a Hill, stands a great piece of Building, and below a large Pond
affords it water. The rich Inhabitants of Schiras have been formerly very
curious to have fair Gardens, and have been at great expenses to that purpose.
But neither at Schiras, nor at Ispahan, is there any thing that may compare
with those lovely Paradises of France and Italy.

There are many Inns in Schiras, but the Franks generally lodge at the Convent
of the Carmelite Friars: and they that would be more private, lodge at another
House that belongs also to the same Friars, which they would fain sell, as
being a charge to 'em at this time.

CHAP. XXII. A continuation of the Road from Ispahan to Ormus, from Schiras to
Bander-Abassi.
THE sixth of March, by eight of the Clock in the morning, I departed from
Schiras; and after six hours travel through the plain that continues fertile for
a league together beyond the City, I came to an Inn called Badaadgi. The water
is bad, being as it were lukewarm. Here cold weather begins to cease. The next
day I set out by break of day, and came to a large and well built Inn, only it
stood remote from any Town. It is called Mouzaffert, and is the only place in
Persia where I met with black Saligots, or Water-nuts, as big and as good as
ours in Dauphine. The Country breeds nothing but Goats and Sheep: and about
two leagues off runs a River along by the Mountain to the West.

The 18 th I departed by daybreak, and traveled eleven hours through a
stone-Countrey, covered with bitter Almond and Turpentine-Trees. I lodged in a
fair Inn, called Paira, near to a River that comes from the West, and makes the
Country fertile. There is some Wood in the Valleys, and some Villages appear on
the other side of the River toward the South.

The 19 th I set out by four of the Clock in the morning, and traveled along a
Valley, wherein were many Villages receiving the benefit of the River last
mentioned. About eight in the morning I stopped at an Inn built in an Octogonal
form, a good league from the River, with several Villages between. The name of
the Inn is Kaffer.

The 20 th I set out two hours after midnight, and traveled till ten in the
morning through a dry Valley. By the way I met several Shepherds and Herdsmen,
who were forsaking the hot Countries, and driving toward Schiras for coolness.

They that travel upon their own Horses, and would see one of the richest parts
of Persia, and some Antiquities, setting out from Kaffer, instead of following
the Caravan-road, take the right hand way by the side of the River, that runs a
league and a half from the same Inn. When you have past the River, the way is
very straight, and lies for two leagues together through a steep Rock, the
Mountain upon the right, and the River upon the left, where there is not room
in some places for two Horses to ride a-brest. All along this way, toward the
top of the Mountain, are little paths that lead to Caverns, some of which are
so large, that they will contain two or three thousand men. Having past this
way, you come into a Plain called Dadivan, four or five leagues in circuit; the
greatest part of which is planted with Orange Trees, Citrons, and Granats. Some
of these Orange Trees two men can hardly fathom, being as high as our
Walnut-trees; and this is one of the most delicious situations in all Persia. I
have traveled through it several times, and sometimes only to divertise my
self. The rest of the Plain is sowed with Rice and Wheat. You set up your Tents
under these Trees, and then the Country people bring Provision of several
sorts, especially Partridges, Hares, and wild Goats. The River that crosses the
Plain is full of Carps, Barbels, Pikes, and Crey-Fish. I remember one time a
Countryman carried me down to the water, and before my face took up a Fish
with his hand. He was so nimble at it, that having caught one which he did not
think big enough, he threw it back again, and took up another. Now in regard
that Travelers generally stay about ten or twelve days in that place, the
Tumblers that live there-abouts, fail not to come and give you a Visit, to show
ye some of their tricks, and to taste your Schiras Wine. The English and
Hollanders usually spend the end of the Summer in this Plain, for the benefit
of the River, and the Trees: which become so large and fair, by means of the
River, which the Contrymen bring in by Canals, and shut it up in Ponds,
among the Trees, to water their Grounds; which is all the good this River does
in Persia: for all the rest of its course is through cragged Rocks, and salt
Marshes.

The 20 th of March, by ten in the morning, I came to an Inn which was called
Moushek, which is a-lone-House at the foot of a Rock. There is a Spring about
five hundred paces from it, but the water is hot, and has a sulphury taste; so
that the Cattle will hardly drink it. Therefore you must go to a Cistern about
two Musket Shot from the Inn, where there is one newly set up, instead of
another that was there before, into which a Jew once chanced to fall in, and
was therefore broken by the superstitious Mahometans.

Three quarters of a league from Moushetz are two roads that lead to Lar, the
one for the Camels, the other for the Horses and Mules. The first is the
longest by three days journey, and is called the Road of the Desert; for after
you have past a great Town inhabited only by Camel-Masters, where you lie the
first night, between that and Lar, you shall meet with nothing of Houses but
only Herdsmens Tents, that feed sometimes in one place, sometimes in another.
Upon the Camels Road there are another sort of Fowl like the great Partridges
in their bodies, but their legs and feet resemble those of wild Ducks. The
Camels take this Road, because it is impossible for them to pass the Mountain
Jarron, over which the Horses and Mules are hardly able to travel.

I set out from Moushek the 21 th of March, at two in the morning, and having
traveled till eight through a plain, but stony Country, I came to the little
City of Jarron, which is rather to be call d a Forest of Palm Trees that bear
excellent Dates. I lodged in an Inn five hundred paces from the City, and
staid there two days.

The 24 th, setting out presently after midnight, I traveled a good hour, and
then I began to mount the steep Mountain of Jarron, which is very high, and
very long; but the descent is the most dangerous that ever I saw in all my
Travels; and besides that, the Moon did not shine. Being at the top, after you
have descended three or four hundred paces, you meet with a Bridge of one Arch,
that reaches from one Mountain to another: a bold piece of Architecture, not
enough to be admired, being raised at the charges of Iman-Kouli-Kan for the
benefit of Travelers. Being come to the bottom of this, you must pass two
others as steep in their ascent as in the descent; upon the top of one of which
stands a Cistern, which, though it be very large, is generally emptied by the
end of the Summer. Upon these Mountains there is such an infinite quantity of
Partridg that a man cannot miss that will but shoot. By eight in the Morning I
came to an Inn which is called Shakal, which is a-lone House in a Desert
Country, but stored with bitter Almond-trees, and Turpentine-trees.
Approaching near to the Inn, you meet with two or three Cisterns, which are a
great comfort to Travelers, water being very scarce upon this Road. There are
at Shakal nine or ten Radar's for the Guard of the Road, who are also Masters
of the Inn: So soon as you are alighted, they ask you if you will eat any Kid,
being sure of their blow, and having no more to do but to go to the Mountain
and fetch one, where they swarm. There are store of Partridges, which are
almost as big as Pullets; of which you may easily kill as many as you please.

The 25 th I traveled five hours, from morning till noon. An hour after I took
Horse, I met with a Mountain, the descent whereof was very steep. They call it
the Mountain of H^shen, at the foot whereof is a Fountain of excellent water. A
good league farther you meet with a fair Inn called Mouezere, in the midst of a
pleasant Grove, where there is an excellent Spring of water; but because there
is no food to be had, you must go as far as Detadombe, a Village seated in a
plain. A quarter of a league on this side, upon the top of a Mountain, appears
the ruins of an old Castle; the Village it self being surrounded with
Palm Trees. The Inn is a good one, provided with a very good Cistern.

The 25 th I traveled through a plain for three hours, and stopped at Banarou, a
little City well built, at the foot of a high Mountain; upon which appears the
remains of a large Castle. Bonarou is the Frontier Town of the Province of
Fars, bordering upon the Province of Lar.

The 26 th I departed an hour after midnight, and traveled till nine in the
morning, partly through the Plain, and partly through the Mountains, where I
saw an old Tower for the guard of the Road. I staid at Bihry, a little City
seated upon a plain, that borders upon a high Mountain. The Inn is new, and
very magnificently built by the Mother of Aimas, Kan of Lar, when the great
Sha-Abbas took this Country from the Gaures, whom he constrained to turn
Mahumetans.

The 27 th I set out at four of the Clock in the morning, and about seven I
past through a Village seated in a small plain. A league from thence I lodged
in an Inn called Pai-Cotali; that is to say, the foot of the Mountain, as being
built at the foot of the Mountain. From thence to Lar is not above four or five
hours traveling; but the way is very bad, and several swift Torrents are to be
past over.

You may take another Road from Bihry, upon the right hand toward the West; it
is the shorter way by two or three leagues: but so bad, and so narrow, that in
many places two Horsemen cannot ride a-brest, being for the most part all Rocks
and Precipices.

Lar is the Capital City of the Province of the same name, which formerly bore
the title of a Kingdom. It is but of an ordinary bigness, enclosed on both
sides with high Mountains, being built round about a Rock, upon which there
stands a Castle of Freestone, wherein the King keeps a Garrison. The whole
Country is very hot, nor have they any water but Rain water, which they
preserve in Cisterns, and which sometimes causes a wide Torrent that runs by
one side of the City, and falls from a Cascade two stories high, made of
Freestone. In the City and parts adjacent, grow a great number of trees,
especially Date trees and Tamarisk. The Gardens also and Mountains are full of
Orange trees.

There are but two Inns in Lar, the one within the City, which is not a very
good one; the other at the end of the City toward Ormus, which would be
convenient, but that it is always afloat when the Rains fall; for which reason
the Franks generally lie at the Hollanders House at the end of the City. And
there is a necessity for staying at Lar, to change the Camels; for the Camels
that come from Ispahan can go no further; every City having their particular
privileges. Which sometimes proves prejudicial to the Merchant, in regard the
Governor will delay the change of the Camels till he is presented.

The Fortress of Lar takes up the whole surface of the top of the Rock; and
there is but one way to climb it up, with great difficolty. It is more long
than broad; and the four corners are fortified with four Bastions, or Bulwarks,
between which are raised several Towers, for the Soldiers Lodgings. That
Fortress is the Royal Prison, whither the King sends such Prisoners as he takes
in war, or surprises by stratagem. I met with two there, one a Prince of
Georgia, the other of Mengrelia. The two Princes had each of them a Toman a day
allowed them, and ten or twelve Servants to wait upon them. Upon one of the
corners of the Castle, toward the West, was built a Banqueting House with
three or four Chambers. In the middle of the Court stands the Magazine, full of
Bows and Arrows. Bucklers and Muskets, enough to arm fifteen hundred men. For
the Inhabitants of the Province, but more especially of the City of Lar, are
accounted the best Musketeers in Persia, and the best at making the Barrels of
Muskets, all but the Breach, which they know not how to order so well as we.
The Governors House answers to the great Road; but there is nothing at all of
nearness without, only before the door there is a good handsome Court, about
sixty paces square, and closed in with Walls, which leads you into two large
Bazars of good Stone, very well arched.

The most part of the Inhabitants of Lar are Jews, who are famous for several
Silk Manufactures, especially for making neat Girdles. The Countrymen were upon
their heads a kind of a felt of fine wool, and very well wrought. It resembles
a Cap not yet shaped, with four Corners behind, and cut on the sides; and these
sorts of Caps are made at Kerman.

There are an infinite number of Cisterns, as well within the City, as in the
parts adjacent; and all but little enough, in regard that sometimes it does not
Rain for three years together. When the Rains fall they do nor fill their
Cisterns the first day, but rather cover them quite up, till the earth be well
soaked. Now for the distribution of this water they take an excellent course;
for they never keep open above three Cisterns at a time; and when they do open
them, the Governor or some other person appointed for that purpose, is
present; so precious is water in that place, though never so bad. The water
thus standing in the Cisterns sometimes for many years together, breads worms,
so that whither you strain it, or boil it, there will appear a kind of foulness
in it, which is the seed of these worms. And this corruption it is that breeds
worms in the legs and feet of men; which puts me in mind, that after my return
to Paris, the fifth time of my traveling, I had one came out of my left foot
an Ell an a half long, and another from under the ankle of my right foot half
an Ell long.

The first of April I set out from Lar by five in the morning, and traveled
till three in the afternoon, through a barren stony Country, except it were
only one Village called Tcherkah; near to which I met with some Corn-land, and
several Palm Trees. I lodged at a little Inn called Shamzenghi. It is low,
built like a Cross, with four doors to receive the cool winds every way. All
the Inns are built in this fashion between this and Bander, and near to one
another for the ease of Travelers. As for the Beasts, they lie without, for
they have no Stables. All the Houses from Lar to Ormus are built after one
manner. For there is a kind of a Pipe, like a Chimney, that runs from the
bottom to the top to gather wind.

The second I left Shamzenghi about four in the afternoon, because the heat is
cooled by a gentle breeze toward the evening. Three hours I traveled through a
barren Plain, afterward over most fearful Rocks, and about ten at night I came
to Cormout, a great Village well stored with Palm Trees.

From Lar to Cormout is the worst way in all Persia. For many times there is no
water to be found.

The third, I parted from Cormout a little after midnight; and having traveled
seven hours in very bad way, full of great stones and filthy puddles, I came to
a new Inn called Tenquidalen. In the middle of it is a little vase of running
water, fed by a little stream that falls from the Mountain. But the water being
something brackish, they have since that built a very fair Cistern. They also
broached the Mountain to bring the water into a Plain, which was barren before,
but is now fruitful, and beautified with two good Villages. This was done by a
rich Merchant, whose Children enjoy the Revenues of both.

The fourth, I set forward an hour after midnight, and traveled through an
uninhabited Country, full of wide Torrents when the rain falls. There are but
two small Inns upon the Road, and about eight in the morning I arrived at that
which they call Gourba-Sarghant. It was built with the Money which a Merchant
of Ormus left for that purpose; whose strength failed him in that very place,
for want of a resting place. This Inn is not far from a Village that stands
upon the Mountain to the North.

The fifth, setting out a little after midnight, I traveled till seven in the
morning through a dry and desert Country, yet stored with Lentisk-trees, and
lay at a good Village called Cauvrestan, where the people were mowing large
Fields of Barley. Here, if the Inn be full, you may lie at the Countrey-mens
Houses, who are accustomed to entertain Travelers, and get well by it. This
place is famous for water-Melons, as big as our Pumpkins; and are the best in
all Persia. The meat is very red, and as sweet as Sugar, which is a great
refreshment to Travelers. The Ketonter of the place gave me two Raddishes, one
weighing 30, the other 45 pounds, and were very good meat.

The 6 th I set out after midnight, and traveled till it was day through
plains of Sand, over which it is impossible to find the way without a guide.
About three a Clock in the morning I crossed over two Bridges joined together
by a long Causey. Before I came to the first, I rode over another for a good
quarter of a league, which Causey runs on a great way to the second Bridge,
under which flows a salt River; the shore of which is full of moving sands; so
that before those Bridges were made, it was dangerous to foard it without a
guide.

This Causey and the two Bridges were made and built by a Persian, whose name
was Aly; who wanting employment at home, applied himself to the King of
Golconda, who liked him so well, that he made him General of his Army. Being
thus advanced, he also turned Merchant, and trading first with one Vessel, then
with two, got a great Estate. At length, all that he had thus got in forty
years, to get himself a name in Persia, he employed in making this Causey and
the two Bridges.

These Bridges are both built over a River that comes from toward Kerman, and
is swelled by other streams that fall from the Mountains with a great noise,
and discharges it self into the Persian Gulf, near to Bander-Congo; but
becomes brackish by passing through Mountains that are nothing but Salt.

From the great Bridge to Guitchi is one of the most pleasant Countries in all
Persia, being a continued Grove. Guitchi is a place accommodated with two Inns,
one a very fair one, and convenient; the other very ill seated, by reason of
the dust that continually annoys it, standing upon a sandy ground. It stands
near ten or twelve Arabian Tents; so that as soon as you come to the Inn, the
Arabian Women presently bring Milk and Butter, and other refreshments.

A league and a half from Guitchi you meet with two Roads, one upon the
lefthand that seems more beaten, the other upon the right. There a man may
easily be deceived that has no guides. For the left hand way is a dangerous
passage, and a kind of a continued Labyrinth among Rocks and Precipices. The
right hand way, which is the best, is all upon the sand to Bander-Abassi, and
is usually a days journey. You meet with two Inns by the way, the last of which
is called Bend-Ali, built by the Seaside.

From Ben-Ali to Bander-Abassi, is but a little more then two leagues through a
Country abounding in Palm Trees.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Island of Ormus, and of Bander-Abassi.
ORmus is an Island in 92. d. 42. m. of Longitude, and in 25. d. 30. m. of
Latitude. It lies at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, two good Leagues from the
firm Land. There is neither tree nor herb that grows in it: for it is all over
covered with Salt, which is very good and as white as snow. And as for the
black shining Sand-dust of Ormus, it is very much used for standishes.

Before the Portugueses came to Ormus, there was a City where the Kings of
Ormus, who were also Kings of Larr, resided. When the Portugals took it, there
were in it two young Princes, Sons of the deceased King, whom they carried into
Spain. Where, in regard they were handsomely proportioned, though somewhat
swarthy, the King entertained them very kindly, and gave them an honorable
allowance. One day that he had showed them the Escurial and all the chief
pieces of Architecture in Madrid, the King asked them what they thought of
living in Spain. To whom they answered, that they had seen nothing but what was
worthy admiration, but then fetching a deep sigh, and perceiving the King
desirous to know the meaning of it, they gave him to understand that it was for
grief that they must never more sit under their own Tree. For near to the City
of Ormus was a Bannians tree, being the only tree that grew in the Island.

The Portugals being masters of the Island from an ill-built City, reared it to
that hight of Magnificence which that Nation admires; so that the very bars of
their doors and windows were all guilt. The Fortress was a noble thing, and in
good repair: and they had also a stately Church dedicated to the Virgin, where
they were also wont to walk. For other place of promenading they had none.
Since the Persians took it, the Castle indeed stands in good repair, with a
Garrison in it: but the City is gone to ruin; for the Dutch carried most of
the stones away to build Battavia.

Between the Island of Ormus, and the Continent the Sea is not very deep; for
the great ships that sail in and out of the Gulf, pass by the other side of the
Island. As for the Fortress which stands upon a point of the Island, it is
almost encompassed with the Sea, and lies right over against Persia.

Bander Abassi, so called because the great Sha-Abbas the first brought it into
reputation, is at present a City reasonably well built, and stored with large
warehouses, over which are the lodgings of the Merchants. While the Portugueses
kept Ormus, though they lived in the City, all the trade was at Bandar-Abassi,
as being the most secure Landing-place upon all the Coast. About 15 years ago
it was an open town, but because it was an easy thing then to get into the
Town, and rob the Custom House in the night, it has bin since enclosed with
walls. To this place come all the ships that bring Commodities from India for
Persia, Turkey, or any part of Asia or Europe. And indeed it would be much more
frequented by the Merchants from all Regions and Countries.

But the Air of Bander is so unwholesome and so hot, that no strangers can live
there, in probability of health, unless it be in the months of December,
January, February and March; though the Natives of the Country may perhaps stay
without prejudice to the end of April. After that they retire to the cooler
Mountains, two or three days journey off, for five or six months, where they
eat what they gained before. They that venture to stay at Gomron during the hot
weather, get a malignant Fever, which if they escape death, is hardly ever
cured. However it bequeaths the yellow Jaundies during life to the party. March
being passed the wind changes, and blowing at west south west, in a short time
it grows so hot and so stifling, that it almost takes away a man's breath. This
wind is by the Arabians called El-Samiel, or the poisonous wind, by the
Persians Bade-Sambour, because it suffocates and kills presently. The flesh of
them that are thus stifled feels like a glewie fat, and as if they had been
dead a month before.

In the year 1632. riding from Ispahan to Bagdat, I and four more Persian
Merchants had bin stifled but for some Arabians that were in our Company. For
when they perceived the wind, they caused us to light, lie down upon our
bellies and cover our selves with our Cloaks. We lay so for half an hour, and
then rising we saw our horses were in such a sweat, that they were hardly able
to carry us. This happened to us two days journey from Bagdat. But this is
observable, that if a man be in a Boat upon the water when the same wind blows,
it does no harm though he were naked at the same time. Sometimes the wind is so
hot that it burns like Lightning.

And as the Air of Gomron is so bad and dangerous, the soil is worth nothing:
For it is nothing but Sand, nor is the water in the Cisterns very good. They
that will be at the charge fetch their water from a fountain three leagues from
Bander, called the water of Issin. Formerly there was not an herb to be seen:
but by often watering the ground, Lettice, Radish and Onions have begun to grow.

The People are swarthy, and wear nothing about them but only a single shirt.
Their usual diet is dates and fish. Which is almost the diet of their Cattle,
for when they come home from browsing the barren bushes, they give them the
heads and guts of their fish boiled, with the kernels of the Dates which they
eat.

The Sea of Bander produces good Soles, good Smelts and Pilchards. They that
will have oysters must have 'em caught on purpose, for the people eat none.

Upon Land they want neither for wine of Schiras nor Yesd; nor for Mutton,
Pigeons and Partridge, which are their ordinary diet.

There are two Fortresses, one upon the East, the other toward the West. The
Town increases in trade and building, and fills with inhabitants, who build
their houses with the remaining ruins of Ormus.

The reason why the Trade is settled rather at Bander Abassi, then at Bander
Congo, where the Air is good and the Water excellent, is because that between
Ormus and Congo lie several Islands, which make the passage for ships
dangerous, besides that the often change and veering of the wind is required:
neither indeed is there water enough for a Vessel of 20 or 25 guns. Then the
way from Congo to Lar is very bad. From Bander Abassi to Lar it is very good,
and provided with good Inns.

From the day that a Merchant takes up money at Gomron, he is bound to return it
in three months, and the change goes from six to twelve per Cent. When the
Goods come to Ispahan or any other place, the Merchant is not to touch them,
till he has paid the money which he borrowed, unless the Creditor will trust
him farther. Some Turkish and Armenian Merchants take up money at Gomron to pay
it at Suratt; where they take up other money for Ispahan; at Ispahan for
Erzerom or Bagdat, paying the old debt with the new sums, which they take up in
each place. The money taken up at Erzerom is pal'd at Bursa, Constantinople or
Smyrna. Money taken up at Bagdat is pai'd at Aleppo.

I always made account, that to take up money at Golconda for Ligorn or Venice,
at change for change, the money returns at the cheapest rate, to 95 per Cent.
but more oftentimes it amounts to a hundred.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Road by Land from Casbin to Ispahan to the Frontiers of the
Territories of the Great Mogul, through Candahar.
THe most usual road from Ispahan to Candahar, which the Merchants choose The
Persians count the distances of places by Agats, that make a large Provence
League.
in regard of the plenty of water which they meet with, lies thus, From Ispahan
to Sakunegi Agats 7 From Sakunegi to Mouchena de Radar. 10 From Mouchena de
Radar to Nanni. 8 From Nanni to Danaraquie. 15 From Danaraquie to Basabad. 15
From Basabad to Abiger. 9 From Abiger to Biabanact. 5 From Biabanact to Caseni.
5 From Caseni to Samagi. 10 From Samagi to Sadarou. 15 From Sadarou to
Chechme-cha. 8 From Chechme-cha to Karte. 14 From Karte to Tabas, ville. 4 From
Tabas to Espaque. 7 From Espaque to Teoque. 7 From Teoque to Talkeaue. 6 From
Talkeaue to Cors. 10 From Cors to Tesaitan. 9 From Tesaitan to Berjan. 7 From
Berjan to Moti. 7 From Moti to Sarbicha. 5 From Sarbicha to Mont. 7 From Mont
to Dourat. 12 From Dourat to Chechmeband. 6 From Chechmeband to Zela. 10 From
Zela to Fara, ville. 10 From Fara to Tecourmazetan. 6 From Tecourmazetan to
Stabe. 6 From Stabe to Bacou. 4 From Bacou to Dilaram. 6 From Dilaram to
Chaquilan. 4 From Chaquilan to Dexkak. 4 From Dexkak to Griche, ville. 12 From
Griche to Kouskienogout. 10 From Kouskienogout to Candahar. 12

All this while the Men ride upon Horses, and the goods are carried by Camels.

The City of Candahar is the chief of one of the Conquered Provinces of Persia,
having been often the occasion of war between the Kings of Persia and India. At
length Sha Abbas became Master of it, the Prince that then reigned there,
choosing to put himself under the Protection of the King of Persia rather then
of great Mogull: but upon this condition, that the Governor should be always
one of his race. And therefore Alimerdan-Kan was the Son of the last Prince of
Candahar. That Prince left behind him such a vast Treasury, that his Plate was
all of Gold, and he had so much Gold in his Coffers, that when he went to the
Great Mogul he would not accept of any thing for his maintenance, but contented
himself with one of the highest Dignities in the Empire, which he enjoyed till
his death. At Jehanabad he built a most neat House, with a fair Garden upon the
River.

He got his wealth in some measure, for the greatest part came by Inheritance,
by the great advantages which he made of the Caravans that then passed oft'ner
through Candahar then they do now adays. For by delaying the Merchants at the
Custom House, and by treating them himself, and receiving treatments from them
again, he caused them to spend their Provisions, which they were forced to
recruit again at Candahar.

The Grand Sha Abbas left the peaceable Possession of Candahar to Sha-Sefi his
Grandchild. In whose time Alimerdan-Kan delivered it up to the Great Mogul.
Sha Abbas the Second retook it in the year 1650. Whereupon Sha-gehan sent his
eldest Son to drive him out. But though his Army consisted of three hundred
thousand men, yet the place was so well defended that he lost the best part of
his Army before it. The next year Shajehan sent another Army under the Command
of Sultan-Sujah, but he had no better success then his Brother. Thereupon Begum
Saheb, Sha-jehan's eldest Daughter, and passionately beloved by him even to
Incest, bearing the greatest sway in the Kingdom, and having a vast Treasure,
raised an Army at her own charges, and made Aurengzeb Commander of it. After
many assaults, Aurengzeb discoursing with his Generals one day who should have
the honor if he took the City, and being told that his Sister would have the
honor in regard she had raised the Army, the Prince either jealous of his
Sister, or else not loath to give occasion of being envied by his Brothers,
assaulted it no more, and when the rains came, raised his siege.

A. The Principal Citadel. B. Another Citadel. C. The Mountain that reached to
the next Citadel, which Sha Sefi cut away after he took the City. D. The
Governors House. E. The Lodgings for the Officers and Soldiers. F. The Piazza
of the City. G. The great street. H. The two Causeys that lead to the City. I.
The Path that leads from the Mersh to the City. K. The lesser way that leads
from the City to the Citadel.
Thus I have finished the most considerable Observations as well in reference
to Turkey as to Persia. I have been curious to understand things, and have
looked with a strict eye upon them: and I am obliged to inform the Reader, that
he must not travel into Asia, in expectation of mending his experience in any
of the nobler Arts of Painting, Sculpture, Goldsmiths work, or Turning. As for
the Coverlets, Embroideries, Tissues of Gold and Silver, which are made in
Persia, and which we admired formerly in France, all these give place to our
new manufactures. Insomuch that the Persians themselves admire the rich goods
of Europe, and when we carry any thither, they are immediately bought up by the
King and the Nobility. They neither understand any thing of Architecture: nor
is there any thing in all Asia that equals the Riches and Beauty of the Loure,
or of any other of the Kings houses in France, which infinitely excel in
workmanship all the magnificence of the Eastern Monarchs. Which has made me
with astonishment admire that so many Travelers have ascribed to Persia and
other Regions of Asia, those beauties for which they were never beholding
either to Art or Nature. For if all they have said had been true, those wonders
could never have escaped my sight; and I dare assure the Reader that I have
described the naked truth of things as really they are.

The End of the Relations of Persia: and of the first Part of Asian Travels.
THE SIX TRAVELS OF JOHN BAPTISTA TAVERNIER, BARON of AUBONNE, THROUGH Turkey
and Persia TO THE INDIES, During the space of Forty years.

Giving an Account of the present State of those Countries, viz. of their
RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, CUSTOMS, and COMMERCE.

AS ALSO The Figures, Weights, and Value of the MONEY and COINS severally
current therein.

The Second Part: DESCRIBING INDIA and the ISLES Adjacent.

Made English by J. P.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1678.

THE INDEX TO THE Persian Travels.
A.
ACcident that befell the Author at Balsara. 64, 65. Aleppo described, 57.
Alexandretta, 55. The road dangerous for Ships, ib. Ali-Kouli-Kan his Story,
218, 219. Allachars, - vid. Philadelphia. Almanac Persian, 234. Almerdan-Kan
delivers up Candahar to the Mogul, 198. His answer to the Mogul, ib. Amadan
described, 75. Amadie, 108. Amasia, 4. Anna, 111. Antioch, 56. Aphian Carassar,
37. Arabian Princes exact from the Caravans, 59, 61, 63. Aras anciently Araxes,
9. Arbele Plun, 73. Archbishop of Armenia, 16. Ardevol described, 24.
Armenians, their behavior at Church, 13. Removed by Sha-Abbas, 16. Their
Religion, ib. Their custom before meals, 18. Great Traders, 159. Their
Languages, ib. Their Marriages, 172. Their Christnings, 171, etc. Their
Burials, 173. Artaxate, 13. Asiaticks idle, Asparagus wild, 8. Assaque, 114.
Astracan, 116. Astrology admired by the Persians, 234. Athemadoulet, vid.
Officers. Athens, 121. Aydar, 195.
B.
BAgdat described, page 84. Balsara, 88. Baker, how punished, 234.
Bandee-Abassi, 255. Bannians expelled by Sha-Abas, 202. Baptism of the
Armenians, 171. St. Bartholomew, 16, 17. Basha of Cyprus, 81. Bedovins, what;
and how they live, 66. Beauty among the Arabs, 112. Betlis, 105. Bey, what,
105, 106. Bishop Armenian buried, 18. Books Persian, 227, 229. Bread, how made
in the Desert, 62. Bufalo's; -- fighting of Bufalo's, an Armenian sport, 12.
C.
CAchan, page 30. Calaat, how received by the Kans, 236. Camels, their
breeding, nature, and several sorts, Camel-drivers, a rude sort of people, 48.
One killed by a Cafer, ib. Great cheats, 50. Candahar described, 258. Caudy,
remarks upon the Trade of it, 118. Carriage what, 11. Where paid, 38. Caravans,
where they set out, 2. Constrained to stop, 8, 9, 11. Caravanseras, the order
among them, 45. Casbin, 26. Cazerom, 65. Ceremony of the Taper among the
Armenians, and the occasion, 12. At the Enthronement of the King, 200, etc.
Chamber of the King's Accounts, 227. Charkliquen described, 6. Children of the
King's of Persia, how bred, 196. Chimneys, how made in Persia, 238. Chio, 119.
Christians of St. John, and their opinions, 90, etc. Chrysostom's Rock, 6.
Churches, the three Churches, 10, 11. The richness of the Armenian Churches,
12, 13. Circastia, 126. Customs of the people, 129. Civility of two Arabians
very remarkable, 111. Coffee-houses inspected by Sha-Abas, 154. Colleges
Persian, 227- Comania, 126. Customs of the people, 129. Combat between two
Bulls, one called Ali, the other Mahomet, 29. Comouks, their Customs and
Feasts, 128, etc. Constancy of the Armenians in defending their Religion, 174.
Corgia Petrus his Wealth, 159. Corinth, 121. Coron, ib. Corou, 31. Covents
Armenian, 16. Courriers Arabian use Dromedaries for speed, 61. Coins of Persia,
50, etc. Curtisrns, how distinguished, 86. Customers of Bagdat, 83. Curdes, a
strange sort of Arabs, 106. Customs of Persia, 234. Cyclades Islands, 120.
Byprian Birds, 80. Cyprus described, 79.
D.
DAnger of leaving the Caravan, page 6. Darius, 73. Debauchery punished, 232.
Dengbe, 26. Dervichs, the strange reverence they gave to Sultan Amurat, 60.
Desert described, 61. Diarbeguir described, 104. Diet of the Persians, 241.
Diseafes of Persia, 239. Their Cure, 240. Disposition of the Persians, 235.
Domenico Santis, the story of him, 72, etc. Dromedaries; see Courrier. Duties,
where paid, 9, 10, 14, 18, 20, 59, 106, 107, 112, 115, 116.
E.
ECclisia, 17. Ambassadors expenses born in Persia, 14. Ambassador Indian, the
story of him, 65. Emirs of Arabia, 63, 64. Ephesus, 34. Erivan described, 13.
Betrayed; retaken by the Persian, 14. Erzerome described, 8. Euphrates, 8, 58.
71. Exchequer Persian, 227. Ezekiel the Prophet, his Sepul- 86.
F.
FEast of Hozen and Hussein, 161. St. Francis of Paolo's Miracle, 113. Franks
in Alexander's Army, 14. Seat themselves near Erivan, ib. Funerals at Bagdat
described, 85, 86. Inconvenient to the poor, ib. Funerals of the Persians, 244.
G.
GAlleys of the Grand Signior; their demands when out at Sea, 54. Their present
condition, 122. Gaming not allowd, 236. Gaures, their Religion and present
condition, 163. Their Origiual and Prophets, 164. Their Books, 165. Their
Baptism, Marriages, Feasts, Fasts and Funerals, 166. Their adoration of Fire,
167. their manners and customs, ib. Beasts which they love or hate, 168.
Genealogy of the Persian Kings, 195. Georgia, the present state of it, 123.
Gezire, 108. Godfrey of Bologne's Arms, 55. Gorno Fortress, 68. Government of
Persia, 219. Grand Signior's power over his Bashas, 8. Gregory, St. martyred,
13. Gulf Persian, 95. Guni, 114.
H.
HAbit of the Persians, 237. Halicarcara, 10. Haly not much resorted to by the
Persian Pilgrims, and why, 62. St. Helena, 22. Hizargerib the fairest Garden of
Persia, 157. Highways, how secured in Persia, 233. Strangers bound to hire
Horses from Alexandretta to Aleppo, 55. Horses Arabian, 65.
I.
JAfer-Kan, the Story of him, 210. Janizary strikes out an Armenian Bishop's
eye, 10. Jasque, the Prince there of Rebels, Jealousy of the Persians, 239.
Iman-Kouli-Kan, the story of his death, 204, etc. Jonas Whale, 54. Ispahan
fully described, 148, etc. St. Jude, 86. Justice of the Persians, 232.
K.
KAffa the City, 113. Kaguisgan Fort, 10. Kalmouchs, what sort of people, 127.
Kans of Persia, 14. Civil to strangers, ib. 225. Kan of Erivan, betrays the
Town, and teaches the Grand Signior to drink, 14. The Kan of Kerman kind to the
Author, 41. Kan of Kan, his sad end, 30. Kars described, 9. Keckmish, 49.
Besieged by the Hollander, ib. Kerman described, 41. Kilet, 82. King of
Persia's favors, 236. Kom described, 28.
L.
LAke of Antioch, 56. Lance that pierced the side of Christ, 13. Languages used
in Persia, 229. Lar described, 253. Latitudes of the chiefest Cities of Persia,
135. Locusts, 65, 81. Longitudes of the principal Cities of Persia, 135, etc.
M.
MAhomet-Ali-beg, the story of him, 42, etc. He punishes his own Son, 44.
Mahomet-beg, his misfortune, 212. Revengeful, 212, etc. Malta, the great
Ceremony of the grand Muster upon Lady Day, 78. Manners of Persia. See Customs.
Marante, 20. Market-price, how settled, 55, 234. Marriages of the Persians,
243. Meal, the strange nature of Persian meal, 27. Mengrelia, the present State
of it, 125. Messina described, 2. Milo Island, 120. Mirza-Ibrahim, 23.
Mirza-Take, his story, 197. Modon, 121. Money of Persia. See Coins. Monuments
Turkish, 3, 4, 24, 25. Mother kills her own Son instead of a Bannian, 202.
Moulla's, 226. Moussal described, 71. Murder committed in the Desert, 112.
Punished in Persia, 232.
N.
NAcksivan described, 16. Names and Employments of the Officers of the King's
House, 221, etc. Of the Military Officers, 223. Naxis, 120. Nazar; vid.
Officers. Nemrod, or the supposed Tower of Babel, 86. Nibia described, 3.
Niniveh, 71. Noah, where he lived, 16. His Wife, where buried, 20. Nogaies,
their Customs, 132, etc.
O.
OFficers of the King's Household, 221. Military 223. Ecclisiastick and
Judicial, 226. Ormus, 255. Ozeman, 4.
P.
PAros Island, 12. Passage of the Author from Niniveh to Babylon, 82. From
Bagdat to Balsara, 87. From Balsara to Ormus, 94. Passengers; see Travelers.
Patras, 121. Patriarch of the Armenians, 11. Feasts the Caravan, 12. Pearls of
great beauty and value, 95, 144. Persia, its extent and Provinces, 141. The
Flowers and Fruits thereof, 144. The Beasts of service, 145. Fish and Fowl
there, ib. Buildings, 147. Persians, their Superstition, 24. Their manner of
Entertainment, 5. Their Civility, 77. Their extravagancy in Apparel, 238. Their
Religion, 160. Their Feasts and Diet, 241. Artists, wherein, 230. Commodities
of the Countries, ib. Their manners and customs, 234. Philadelphia now
Allachars, 31. Places of privilege, 24. Plains of Salt, 31, 39. Polia or Polis,
4. Policy of the Persians, 232. Pointing at the King of Persia loss of the
hand, 207. Porter of the King of Persia beloved by him for his whiskers, 47.
Printing not used; and why, 229. Proverb in Persia about living happy, 44.
Q.
Quitros Haven, 114.
R.
RAdars; what, 233. Rafedi's; what, 85. Severely chastised for Superstitiou,
ib. Restoration for robbery, how made, 233. River that peutrifies, 15. Relics
Armenian, 17. Roads from France to Constan tinople; 2. From Constantinople to
Ispahan; 3. From the borders of Persia to Erivan; 10. From Erivan to Tauris;
15. From Tauris to Ispahan through Tauris and Casbin; 24. From Tauris to
Ispahan through Zangan and Sultain; 26. From Smyrna to Ispahan; 32. From Kerman
to Ispahan; 41. From Paris to Ispahan another way; 53. From Aleppo to Ispahan
through the great Desert; 60. Through Mesopotamia and Assyria; 66. From Niniveh
to Ispahan; 72. From Smyrna to Ispahan; 102. From Aleppo to Tauris through
Diarbequir and Van; 103. Through Gezire; 108. From Aleppo to Ispahan through
the small Desert and Kengavar; 109. From Constantinople to Ispahan by the
Euxin-Sea; 113. From Warsaw to Ispahan over the black Sea; and Ispahan to
Mosco; 115. From Ormus to Schiras; 245. From Ispahan to Ormus, from Schiras to
Bandar-Abassi; 251. From Casbon to Ispahan, and so through Candahar to the
Frontiers of the Mogul, 257. Robbery committed upon the Author near Tocat, 40.
Robbery; how punished, 233. Rock of a strange nature; 107.
S.
SAdler Ralph; his sad story; 207. Salmastre; 208. Samatra, a place of Devotion
among the Mahumetans; 83. Santorini, a remarkable Island; 79. Sardis; 37. Sava;
28. Schiras; 66. Described; 247. Seal of the King of Persia, 179. Sedre, his
Office, 226. Sefi-Kouli-Kan Governor of Babylon; his death, 84, 85. Sem the Son
of Noah, 15. Sexava, 28. Sha-Abas, 158. Sends to Henry 4th of France, ib. To
Spain, ib. His answer, ib. He turns Merchant, ib. Kind to the Capuchins; 157.
His madness in drink; 172. He punishes the Baker and Cook; 203. Sha-Abas the
second, 209. Shambe; the Inhabitants mad at 18 years of age; 17. Shappars,
what; 233. Their privileges, ib. Sha-Sefi destroys the Turks Army; 20. His
madness in drink, 198. His cruelty, 206. Shaoux; what they are, 47. Sherazoul,
73. Sidi Fatima, 29. Sinopus, 118. Smyrna largely described; 32, etc. Sophiana;
20. St. Simon; 86. St. Stephens; 17. Story of four Frenchmen; 95. Students
Persian; 227. Sultan Amurat makes his entry into Aleppo; 6. Sultain described;
27. Superstation of the Persians; 236.
T.
TAmerlane; 195. Tartars eat raw Horseflesh; 7. Lesser Tartars; 132. Tauris
described; 20; 21; etc. And the places adjacent; 23. Temple of Ephesus. See
Ephesus. Teren; 108. Thievery punished, 233. Tigris; 71. Time; how divided by
the Persians; 240. Tocat; 5. Tocia; 4. Tower of Babel; vid. Nemrod. Traveling
very secure in Persia; 18; 233. Travelers; how to behave themselves; 47. The
treachery of a Janizary; 35; etc. Turkey; bad traveling in Turkey; 1. Turks;
their Superstition; 9. Turquoises; 144.
V.
VAn; 106. Voyage; The Authors Voyage from Marseilles to Alexandretta, 78. The
Authors first Voyage, 95. From Paris to Smyrna, 99.
W.
WAater bitter, 61. Scarce in Persia, 156. Women of Bagdat, 86. Of Arabia, ib.
Of Persia, 239. Wool of Persia very fine, 40. Writing Persian, 229.
Y.
YEsde described, 44. Yesdecas, 66.
Z.
ZEa Island, 120. Zulpha described; 19, 155, 157. etc.
THE FIGURES Of the PIECES of Gold, Silver, and Copper: AND OF The Sorts of
Shells and Almonds that pass for MONEY over all ASIA.
The Money of Arabia.
Larin, Figure 1. Half-Larin, Fig. 2.
THIS Money (Fig. 1.) is called The Author not having given an account of the
weight or fineness of the Coins he treats of, but having only expressed their
value in French Livres, it is thought fit for the better reduction thereof into
English Coin, to advertise, That Three French; Livres make a French Crown,
which passes in Exchange from 54 pence to 58 pencel halfpenny; so that a
French Livre may be in value as the Exchange goes, from 18 pence to: 19 pence
halfpenny. And twenty Sous make a Livre.
Larin, and signities the same with our Crowns. The Five Pieces are as much in
value as one of our Crowns; and the Ten Half-Larins as much. Only the Five
Larins want in weight Eight Sous of our Crown. This is that which the Emirs, or
Princes of Arabia take for the Coining of their Money; and the profit which
they make by the Merchants that travel through the Desert, either into Persia
or the Indies. For then the Emirs come to the Caravans, to take their Tolls,
and to change their Crowns, Reals, or Ducats of Gold, for these Larins. For
they must of necessity pass that way. And they must use very smooth words to
boot; for there is nothing to be got by rough Languages. If they see the
Merchants will not change their Money, then will they refuse to take their
Toll; but making as if they had not time to cast up the account, they go a
hunting, and leave the Merchants fifteen or twenty days without saying any
thing more to them; while they in the mean time spend their provisions, not
knowing where to get more. If the Caravan goes on without paying their Tolls,
these Arabian Prince's will either cut them in pieces, or take away their
Camels, or rob them of all they have, as they have several times done. In one
Journey that I made, one of these Princes kept us one and twenty days; after
which we thought our selves happy to be quit of him, when we had given him
whatever he demanded. If these five Larins did but weigh as much as the Crown,
or Real of Spain, the Merchants would never be much troubled. But when they
come to Persia, or the Indies, they must carry their Money to the Mint, as I
have said in another place, and loose above eight Sous in a Crown, which
amounts to 14 per Cent. As for what remains, the Larins are one of the ancient
Coins of Asia; and though at this day they are only current in Arabia, and at
Balsara, nevertheless, from Bragdatt to the Island of Ceylan, they traffic
altogether with the Larin, and all along the Persian Golf; where they take 80
Larins for one Toman, which is 50 Abassi's.

The Money current under the Dominions of the Great Mogul.
ALL the Gold and Silver which is brought into the Territories of the Great
Mogul, is refined to the highest perfection before it be coined into Money.

The Roupy of Gold weighs 2 Drams and a half, and 11 Grains, and is valued in
the Country at 14 Roupies of Silver. We reckon the Roupy of Silver at 30 Sous.
So that a Roupy of Gold comes to 21 Livres of France; and an Ounce of Gold to
58 Livres, and 4 Deneer's. This Gold is like that which we buy at 54 Livres an
Ounce. And if you bring this Gold in Ingots, or Ducats of European Gold, you
shall have always 7 and a half profit; if you can escape paying any thing to the
Custom-houses. The Half-Roupy comes to 10 Livres 10 Sous; and the Quarter-Roupy
to 5 Livres 5 Sous. As I have said, you must reckon the Silver Roupy at 30
Sous, though it weigh not above 3 Drams; whereas our pieces of 30 Sous weigh 3
Drams, and half 4 grains; but the Roupy is much the better Silver. In a word,
they that understand Traffic well, and carry hence Gold or Silver to the
Territories of the Great Mogul, get always 7 or 8 per Cent. profit, provided
they take care to shun the Custom-houses. For if you pay them, the 7 or 8 per
Cent. which you might make profit, goes to them; and so the Roupy comes to 30
Sous, the Half to 15, and the Quarter to 7 and a half, the Eighth part to 3
Sous and 9 Deneers.

As for their Copper Money, sometimes it is worth more, sometimes less, as
Copper comes to the Mint. But generally the biggest sort is worth 2 Sous of our
Money, the next 1 Sous, the next to that 6 Deneers.

As for their Shell Money, the nearer you go to the Sea, the more you give for
a Pecha; for they bring them from Maldives. Fifty or 60 of these make a Pecha,
which is that piece of Coin that is worth but 6 Deneer's.

For their Money of Mamoudi's, half Mamoudi's, and Almonds, all that sort of
Money is only current in the Province of Guzeratt, the principal Cities whereof
are Surat, Barocha, Cambaya, Broudra, and Amadabat. Five Mamoudi's go for a
Crown, or a Real. For small Money they make no use of these Shells, but of
little Almonds, which are brought from about Ormus, and grow in the Deserts of
the Kingdom of Larr. If you break one of the Shells, it is impossible to eat
the Almond, for there is no Coloquintida so bitter; so that there is no fear
least the Children should eat their small Money. They have also those little
pieces of Copper which are called Pecha, 6 Deneer's in value. They give 20 for
a Mamoudi, and 40 Almonds for a Pecha; sometimes you may have 44, according to
the quantity which is brought. For some years the Trees do not bear, and then
the price of this sort of Money is very much raised in that Country; and the
Bankers know how to make their benefit.

Fig. 1. The Roupy of Gold. Fig. 2. The Half-Roupy of Gold. Fig. 3. The
Quarter-Roupy of Gold.

Fig. 4. The Roupy of Silver. Fig. 5. Another Roupy of Silver. Fig. 6. The
Half-Roupy of Silver. Fig. 7. The Quarter-Roupy of Silver. Fig. 8. The Eighth
part of the Roupy of Silver.

Fig. 9. Four Pecha's of Copper. Fig. 10. Two Pecha's of Copper. Fig. 11. One
Pecha.

Money of Arabia Larin and half Larin Money of ye Great Mogull
The Money of a King and two Rajas


Fig. 12. The Shells. Fig. 13. A Silver-Mamoudi, which is the Money of Guzerat.
Fig. 14. Half a Mamoudi. Fig. 15. The Almond.

I have marked two sorts of Roupies, the one square, the other round. The
square one is as they coined it anciently; the round ones are as they make them
at this day.

The Money of a King and two Raja's, all three Tributaries to the Great Mogul.
MAton-cha is a Tributary to the Great Mogul; yet he has power to coin Monev.
When you are at Agra, the Territories of this King lie to the North; and before
you can come at them, you must pass over very high and cragged Mountains. It Is
a good Country, where are all things necessary for the support of humane life,
except Rice, which is a great inconvenience to the Inhabitants, who being all
Idolaters, are deprived thereby of their chiefest delicacies, in regard they
feed upon nothing so heartily as upon Rice. They have excellent Corn, and
Grapes, but they make on Wine, though they make some Aqua Vitae. They want
neither Oxen nor Cows; but their Horses are little, weak, and ill-shap'd. All
the Trade which these people have with their Neighbors, is in Copper, whereof
they have two extraordinary Mines, from whence they furnish the greatest part
of the Mogul's Territories; out of which they have Salt in Exchange, not having
any of their own. This Salt costs them dear, in regard it is four months travel
to the place where they fetch it, that is to say, from the Territories of
Maton-cha to the Indian Coast toward Bacaim. They travel upon Oxen, and the
same Oxen carry their Copper. There must be also some Mines of Lapis-Lazuli and
Garnets in that Country, in regard they bring several from thence.

Fig. 1, and 2. is the Money of Maton-cha.
Fig. 1. is the Silver-Money, which weighs not above one dram and 19 grains,
and is of the same goodness as the Roupy. The half-Roupy goes for 15 Sous, and
this for 16 Sous, which is six and a half per Cent. more. But certain it is,
that the more Northward you travel that way, Gold and Silver is more scarce.
Fig. 2. These pieces of Copper go for the value of a Pecha of the Great Mogul;
they are heavier by half, but the Copper is not so good as that of Pegu or
Japan.

Fig. 3, and 4. is the Money of the Raja of Parta Jajoumola.
The Raja of Parta, Jajoumola, is one of the great Raja's on the other side of
the Ganges. His Territories are directly North of Patna, night to the great
Mogul's, to whom he is Tributary, and bordering upon the King of Bantam. He is
bound every year to send an Ambassador with twenty Elephants to the Governor
of Patna, who sends them to the Great Mogul. The greatest part of his revenue
consists in Elephants, Musk, and Rhubarb. He lays also a great Imposition upon
Salt, as well that which is spent by his own Subjects, as upon that which is
carried abroad. This is all Seacoast Salt, which comes from the Territories of
the Great Mogul, and is brought from the Seacoast to Ganges, and so over
Ganges is carried as far as the fiftieth and five and fiftieth Degree. They
lade above 150000 Oxen; and for every burden they pay a Roupy at the
Salt Pits, and no more afterward through the whole Kingdom. Had this Raja of
Parta Salt of his own, he would never be Tributary to the Great Mogul.

Fig. 5, and 6. is the Money of the Raja of Ogen.
The Raja of Ogen is also a Tributary to the Great Mogul; his Country lies
between Brampour, Seronge, and Amadabat; and it is one of the best Soils in the
Indies. His Silver Money passes nowhere but in his own Country, not being
suffered in the Mogul's. His Silver Money goes for a quarter of a Roupy, at 7
Sous 6 Deneer's; but the Silver is base. His Copper Money goes for 6 Deneers,
and is current in the Mogul's Dominions as far as Agra. For his smaller Money
he makes use of those Shells whereof we have already spoken.

Pieces of Gold called Pagods, which are current in the Territories of the King
of Golconda, the King of Visapour, the Great Raja of Carnatica, the Raja of
Velouche, and at the Diamond Mines.
ALL the Pieces of Gold represented in the Plate of Golconda-Money, pass
through all these Countries at the same value, and are about the weight of our
half Pistol; but the Gold is of a baser Metal, so that an Ounce is not worth
above 42 or 43 Livres; not going for more than four Roupies.

Fig. 1. Is one of the ancient Pagods, at the time when the Raja's were Masters
of the Kingdom of Golconda, and they are only stamped upon one side as you see.
They are as heavy as the new ones; and though they be no better Gold, yet some
years since they went at 20, and 25 per cent. more than the new ones; the
reason is, for that the Bankers being all Idolaters, they are so superstitious
as to believe, that if they melt down that Money, some calamity will befall
their Country; and they hold this for such a certain truth, that for fear the
King of Golconda should melt it, they paid him for certain years 20000 Pagods.
But you must observe, that these old Pagods are nowhere current but in the
Kingdom of Golconda. For my part, I think it is more for their profit than out
of any superstition, that they make use of them in that manner. For in all the
Kingdom of Golconda, in matter of trade, they never mention any but the old
Pagods, though they make their payments in new Pagods, or Roupies; and in this
case they who receive those new Pagods, or those Roupies, play their game so
well, that they gain a fourth part, or a half, and sometimes one per Cent.
alleging for the reason, that those new Pagods are either the King of
Visapour's, or the Raja of Carnatica's, or the Raja of Velouche's, or the
English, or the Hollanders. And they make as much of the Roupies; for there is
no considerable payment made, which is not received by the Cheraff or Banker,
making it good to the Seller, who sometimes has no need of his Money in a month
or two, and so he receives the interest of it, though it be but for two days.
If the payment be made in old Pagods, and that the sum amount to two or three
hundred, or three or four thousand, the Banker takes them all, and viewing them
one after another, he divides them into five or six parts; and then poising
them all, he says of some, that they are more used than others, and that having
passed through many hands, there is a waste of the metal about one per Cent.
Others, says he, want not above half one per Cent. others but a fourth part.
These Pagods have been bored some half thorough, others a quarter thorough; and
it is a wonderful thing what this boring amounts to. For in regard these Pagods
are very thick, and cannot be clipped, those that are Masters of the trade, take
a Piercer, and pierce the Pagod thorough the side, half way or more, taking out
of one piece as much Gold as comes to two or three Sous. And provided they be
not taken in the fact, they choose rather to follow this trade than any other;
there being no handycraft tradesmen among the Indians, that gain more than
three Sous a day. After they have drawn out the piercer, they knock upon the
holes with a little hammer, and are so cunning in closing up the holes again,
that he must be very skilful indeed, that can discover the cheat. For this
reason, they never receive any payment till they have shown the Pieces to the
Cheraff or Banker; and though he looks only on two or three Pieces, he takes a
Sous. They have also another cunning trick, and the more the Banker is in
credit, Pieces of Gold called Pagods.
English and Holland Money.
the more he gains; for if he makes any payment, according to the quantity of
the sum, he puts the Pagods by fifty or a hundred together in little bags, and
seals them up with his Seal, and writes upon the bag the number of the Pagods
within; and so delivers them to him to whom he makes the payment. When the
party makes use of them, he never opens the bag, but gives them as they are, to
him to whom they are due; who goes to the same Banker that sealed the bags. The
Banker seeing his Seal whole, makes answer, that the Pieces are good, and in
that manner they shall pass all the year without opening the bags. But when
ever they change the hand, they send for the same Banker, who always will have
so much per Cent. for his visit. But as I have said, the Merchant leaves them
in his hand to get interest; who then pays eight per Cent. for a year, and
sometimes twelve. Thus the Bankers have always the greatest part of the Money
in the Kingdom in their hands, of which they make large profit. It Is the custom
in that Country, every Month to pay the Soldiery; but for the most part, the
Soldiers, Captains, and other Officers will not stay still the Month be up, but
come to the Bankers, who discount after the rate of eighteen or twenty per
Cent. by the year, besides that they pay them in these Pagods, against which
others would often object. If there be any large Diamond to be sold in any
Country, these Bankers have intelligence of it presently; or if there be any
fair Ruby, it is not long before they have it in pawn; for every year when the
Merchants return from Pegu, and have any Rubies, most commonly they are in
debt; and in regard it is the custom to pay within fifteen days after the
Merchant comes ashore, he pawns his best goods he has for payment, as well of
the freight of the Ship, as of what he may have taken up at Pegu. After that he
sells the worst of his goods to pay the Banker, who lent him the Money upon his
arrival. Those that work in the Diamond Mines, or the Merchants that hire the
Mine, when they have any fair Stones, they sell them to these Bankers, because
there is ready Money; or else they pawn them to the Bankers, till they can find
a Chapman to buy them.

Fig. 1. The old Pagod.

Fig. 2. The King of Golconda's Pagod.

Fig. 3, and 4. The King of Visapour's Pagod.

Fig. 5, and 6. The Raja of Carnatica's Pagod.

Fig. 7, and 8. The Raja of Velouche's Pagod.

Fig. 9, 10, 11, and 12. are the Half-Pagods of those Kings and Raja's.

Fig. 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. are little Pieces of Gold called Fanos, which are
of different value. There are some whereof six go to a Crown; others from ten
to fifteen; and some are very base metal. This is the Money that passes all
along the Coast of Coromandel; from Cape Comorin as far as Bengala. And they
have very little other than that, besides the Pecha of Copper, and the Shells,
which pass for small Money.

The Money which the English and Hollanders Coin in the Indies.
FIgure 1, and 2. is the Money which the English coin in their Fort St. George,
or else at Madrespatan, upon the Coast of Coromandel. They call them Pagods, as
those of the Kings and Raja's of the Country are called. They are of the same
weight, the same goodness, and pass for the same value. Formerly the English
never coined any Silver or Copper Money; for in some parts that border upon the
Indians, where they have Factories, as at Surat, Maslipatan, or at Bantam, they
find it more profitable to carry Gold from England, than Silver; Gold lying in
less room, and not being so troublesome; besides, that by carrying Gold they
more easily escape the paying those Customs which the Kings impose upon Gold
and Silver. But since the present King of England married the Princess of
Portugal, who had in part of her Portion the famous Port of Bombeye, where the
English are very hard at work to build a strong Fort, they coin both Silver,
Copper, and Tinn. But that Money will not go at Surat, nor in any part of the
Great Mogul's Dominions, or in any of the Territories of the Indian Kings; only
it passes among the English in their Fort, and some two or three Leagues up in
the Country, and in the Villages along the Coast; the Country people that bring
them their Wares, being glad to take that Money; otherwise they would see but
very little stirring, in regard the Country is very poor, and the people have
nothing to sell but Aqua vitae, made of Coco-Wine and Rice.

Fig. 3. and 4. is the Gold Money which the Hollanders coin at Palicate, which
is a Fort that they possess upon the Coast of Coromandel. Those pieces are also
called Pagods, and are of the same weight with the others; but for the
goodness, I think they are better by two or three in the hundred, than those of
the Kings and Raja's of the Country, or which the English make. I made this
observation, being at the Diamond-Mines, and in other parts of the Indies where
there is any great Trade. For the first thing they ask you is, whether you have
any Pagods of Pelicate; and if you have, you speed much better in your business.

Fig. 5. and 6. is a Roupv of Silver, which the Hollanders coin at Pelicate,
being of the same weight with those which the Great Mogul, or the Kings of
Golconda and Visapour make. It has in the middle upon one side the mark of the
Holland Company, to distinguish it from others. The Hollanders Roupies of
Silver are quite contrary to their Pagods of Gold, which are more esteemed by
the Indians than those of the Princes of the Country. For they make far less
account of these Roupies of Silver; and if you pay any great sum in these
pieces, though the Silver be as good as the others, you must lose one half per
Cent.

Fig. 7. and 8. is the Hollanders small Copper-Money, wherewith they ordinarily
pay their Soldiers. It has upon one side the mark of the Company. And indeed
the Hollanders, who mind nothing but their profit, had great reason to obtain
leave to coin Money; for bringing only Gold from Japan, from Macassar only Gold
in Powder, and from China Gold in Ingots, and selling all these to the Bankers,
they found that they lost five or six per Cent. which proceeded from the
mistrust of the Changers, and the chief of the Factories belonging to the
Company. Now they shun that loss, and make the same profit which the Bankers
did, coining all these metals into money. Though in every Voyage which they
make to Japan, they generally lose one Vessel by storm; yet some years they
make five or six Millions of Livres profit, all freights discharged, and
hazards escaped. But that profit is quite lost, since their loss of the Island
of Formosa.

The Money of the King of Cheda and Pera.
THis Money is of Tin, and is coined by the King of Cheda and Pera. He coins no
other Money than Tin. Some years he found out several Mines, which was a great
prejudice to the English. For the Hollanders and other Merchants buy it, and
vend it over all Asia. Formerly the English brought it out of England, and
furnished great part of Asia, where they consumed a vast quantity; they carried
it also into all the Territories of the Great Mogul, as also into Persia and
Arabia; for all their Dishes are of Copper, which they cause to be Tinned over
every month. Among the meaner sort of people, there is little to be seen but
this Tin-money, and the Shells called Cori; which I have spoken of already.

Fig. 1, and 2. is that great piece of Tin, which weighs an ounce and a half,
and in that Country goes for the value of two of our Sous. But in regard that
Tin is there at 14 Sous a pound, it is not worth above one Sous and The Money
of the King of Beda and Pera.
Money of the King of Achen.
Money of the King of Siam
three Deneers. This piece of Tin is only thick in the sides, the middle being
as thin as Paper.

Fig. 3, and 4. is a piece that goes at the value of four Deneers.

Fig. 5, and 6. are their Shells, whereof they give fifty for the little piece
of Tin.

The Money of Gold and Tin of the King of Achen. With the Money in Gold Coined
by the King of Macassar, and the Celebes. And the Silver and Copper Money of
the King of Camboya.
FIg. 1, and 2. is the Money in Gold coined by the King of Achen, in the Island
of Sumatra. In goodness it is better than our Louis; an Ounce being well worth
fifty Franks. This piece weighs 10 Grains, and would be worth sixteen Sous and
eight Deneers of our Money.

Fig. 3, and 4. is the small Money made by the same King, being of Tin, and
weighs eight Grains. The Tin being good, I value it at 16 Sous a pound; and
then 75 of these pieces is worth one Sous of ours.

Fig. 5, and 6. is the Money in Gold of the King of Macassar, or the Celebes.
This piece weighs twelve Grains, and the Hollanders take it for a Florin of our
Money; which comes to 23 Sous and eight Deneers.

Fig. 7, and 8. is the Silver Money of the King of Camboya; being good Silver,
and weighs thirty two Grains. The piece comes to 24 Sous of our Money; nor does
the King coin it at any higher rate. He has a great quantity of Gold in his
Country, but he never coins it into Money; for he trades with it by weight, as
he does with his Silver, according to the custom of China.

Fig. 9, and 10. is the Copper Money of the King of Camboya. The King of Java,
the King of Bantam, and the Kings of the Molucca Islands coin no other Money,
but pieces of Copper after the same form and manner. As for their Silver Money,
they let it pass as it comes out of other Countries, without melting it down.
In Bantam, in all Java, in Batavia, and the Molucca's, there is little other
Money stirring, but Spanish Reals, Rixdollars of Germany, and Crowns of France;
the greatest part being Half-Reals, Quarters, and Eighth parts. But in Batavia
they use besides for small Money, Shillings, double Sous and Sous, as in
Holland.

The Money in Gold, Silver, and Copper, of the King of Siam.
Fig. 1, and 2. is the Money in Gold, coined by the King of Siam; and weighs 18
Grains more than our Half-Pistol. The Gold is of the same Goodness, and may be
worth 7 Livres and one Sous of our Money. When the Merchants, that trade in
that Country, bring thence either Gold or Silver, it is for want of other
Commodities, as Silk, Musk, Sandal, Wood Gum Lake, Elephants teeth, and other
things. For by carrying out Gold or Silver, they reap but two in the hundred
profit.

Fig. 3, 4, 5, and 6. is a piece about the bigness of a large Hazle-Nut,
flatted on the four sides, like a semicircle, three sides whereof are open like
a Horseshoe; and upon two sides are certain of their own Letters. There is no
Money in the East so strangely coined as this. It weighs three Drams and a
half, and 25 Grains, and is as good as our Silver at three Livres and 10 Sous
the Ounce. It amounts to 32 Sous and 4 Deneers of our Money.

Fig. 6, 7, and 8. is the Copper Money of the King of Siam; and they give two
hundred of these pieces for one piece of Silver. For their small Money, they
make use of certain Shells that are gathered upon the Seashore, which they
bring from Maldives.

The Gold and Silver Money of the Kings of Asem, Tipoura, Arakan, and Pegu.
ALL the Silver Money coined by the Kings whom I have named, is in goodness
equal to our Crown; rating it at three Livres ten Sous the Ounce, as we rate
our Crowns here.

Fig. 1, and 2. is the Silver Money of the King of Asem; it weighs three Drams
and four Grains, and comes to 23 Sous of our Money.

Fig. 3, 4. is the Silver Money made by the King of Tipoura Chatermani. In the
language of the Country, he is called Dieu-Ara-gari, which is stamped upon one
side of the Money, and upon the other Chatermani Roy de Tipoura: His Country
begins about twelve days journey from Daca toward the North-West. This Money
weighs two Drams and a half, and twenty-two Grains; and is in value twenty-two
Sous.

Fig. 5, 6. is the King of Arakan's Money. It weighs two Drams and a half, and
15 Grains, which makes 21 Sous of our Money. This King coins no Gold; but he
trafficks in Gold uncoin'd. The Metal is very base, and not worth above 14
Carats, a Carat being the third part of an Ounce. The King however holds it at
a high rate, to keep it from being carried out of his Country. In all Bengala
this King is known by no other Name but the King of Mogue.

Fig. 7, and 8. is the King of Pegu's Silver Money, and weighs two Drams and a
half, and twelve Grains, which may come to about 20 Sous, and six Deneers of
our Money.

Fig. 9, and 10. are the King of Pegu's Fano's, or little pieces of Gold, and
weigh not above 7 Grains to boot. Fifteen of these little pieces pass for the
value of a Real, or one of our Crowns, the Gold being course.

Fig. 11, 12. are the Kings of Asem's Fano's; they weigh also 7 Grains; but
they are a much baser Metal than those of Pegu, for twenty-two of them amount
but to the value of our Crown.

Lumps or Pieces of Gold and Silver which go for Money in the Kingdom of China;
and the Kingdom of Tunquin.
YOu are first to take notice, that in all the Kingdom of China, and the
Kingdom of Tunquin, there is no Money coined, either Gold or Silver, that their
small Money is Copper, and that they make use in payments only of Lumps or
Pieces of Gold and Silver, which have every one their particular weight, as is
here'represented.

The Pieces of Gold marked Fig. 1, and 2. are by the Hollanders called
Goltschut, that is to say, a Boat of Gold, because they are in the form of a
Boat. Other Nations call them Loaves of Gold; and there are but two different
sizes of them. The Gold is of such a goodness, that an Ounce in France would
not be worth less than 42 Franks. The great Pieces come to twelve hundred
Gelders of Holland Money, and thirteen hundred and fifty Livres of our Money.
The other Piece, which weighs but half as much, is in value according to its
proportion.

As for their Pieces of Silver, they are of several sizes, and different
weight. Fig. 3. weighs six Drams and a half, and 23 Grains; and the Silver
being Money of the King of Asem.
The Iaponners Call these pieces as well Silver as Gold Coupent.
very near in goodness to the Parisian, it comes to fifty-nine Sous, and eight
Deneers of our Money. The other Pieces, as well great as small, are in value
according to their weight.

In great payments they make use of Ingots, that come to a hundred Franks in
value; and they have little Pieces of Silver that are not worth above a Sous.

When they buy any Commodity, if they have not whole Pieces enough to make up
the sum, they have always instruments ready, to cut off so much from a great
piece as will perfect the payment.

When the Chinese transport their Golden Loaves, or their Boats, into other
Countries, the Merchants cut them in the middle, not daring to trust the
Chinese, who have often deceived them; and none have been more cheated than
the Hollanders. For they have a way to stuff their Loaves of Gold, insomuch
that you shall sometimes find in the middle, a third part of Copper or Silver.
In all sorts of Bargains the Chinese are so cunning, that there are few
strangers whom they do not overreach; especially, in Batavia, the Hollanders
when they come first. They carry their weights always along with them, being
like a Roman Beam, or a Stelleer, about eight Inches long, with which they
weigh all the Gold and Silver which they receive. As for the small Money both
in China and Tunquum, it is of Copper. It is made as in Fig. 4. They also
thread these pieces, there being a hole in the middle, 12, 25, 50, and 300 upon
a string; because they will not put themselves to the trouble of telling them,
when the number exceeds a dozen.

The Gold and Silver Money of Japon.
ALL the Gold that comes from Japon, is of the same goodness; somewhat better
than our Louis; and is about that goodness for which we pay about 50 Franks the
Ounce.

Fig. 1. This piece of Gold weighs one Ounce and six Drams, at fifty Franks the
Ounce, comes to 87 Livres and 10 Sous.

Fig. 2, and 3. Every one of these pieces is of Gold, and every one weighs a
third part of the great one; which is half an Ounce, and 48 Grains; and comes
to 29 Livres, 3 Sous, and 4 Deneers.

Fig. 4. This, as it is marked, is the backside of the three pieces of Gold.

Fig. 5, and 6. are pieces of Silver of the same weight; every one weighing 4
Grains less than our pieces of 30 Sous, though it go nevertheless for the same
value. As for the Silver, it is the same in goodness with our Money. However,
in the Territories of the Great Mogul, whither the Hollanders carry all their
Silver, their Bars, and Japon pieces, to coin them into Money, sometimes they
sell them to the Bankers, where they have no convevenience of coinage, as at
Surat and Agra; and these Bankers give them from two to three in the hundred
more than they will give for our Crowns, Rixdollars, or Spanish Reals.

Fig. 7. is the backside of the two Silver pieces.

The Portraicture of the Silver Ingots of Japon, which go for Money.
I Said before, that all the Silver that comes out of Japon, is equal in
goodness to our Crowns.

Fig. 1. An Ingot of this form weighs seven ounces, at three Livres ten Sous
the ounce: the whole comes to twenty four Livres, and ten Sous.

Fig. 2. Weighs two ounces, three drams and an half: the whole comes to eight
Livres, ten Sous, and seven Deneers.

Fig. 3. Weighs once ounce, half a dram, and twelve grains: the whole comes to
four Livres, five Sous, and five Deneers.

Fig. 4. Weighs one ounce, eight grains: the whole comes to three Livres, ten
Sous, and an eleven Deneers.

Fig. 5. Weighs seven drams, one quarter, and seven grains: the whole comes to
three Livres, eight Sous, and eight Deneers.

Fig. 6. Weighs two drams and an half, and twenty four grains: the whole comes
to one Livre, five Sous, and one Deneer.

Fig. 7. Weighs two drams, twenty four Deneers: the whole comes to one Livre,
nine Deneers.

Fig. 8. Weighs one dram and an half, and twenty four grains: the whole comes
to sixteen Sous, and four Deneers.

Fig. 9. Is the Copper-Money which they thread by fifteen, thirty, fifty, to
the number of 600. which is the value of a Tell in Silver. Over all Japon they
reckon by Tells: and the Hollanders reckon, that a Tell makes three Gelders and
an half of their Money, which comes to four Livres, and five Sous of ours.

Fig. 10. Is the backside of the Copper-piece.

Money that represents the Figures of the twelve Signs; and which were Coined
during the twenty four hours, that Gehan-guir, King of the Indians, permitted
Queen Nourmahall, his Wife, to Reign in his stead.
SUltan Selim, otherwise called Gehanguir Patcha, the ninth King of the
Indians, Father of Cha-gehan, was a great Lover of Women: but he had a
particular affection for one among the rest, which he kept in his Seraglio; and
which he had Espoused, as meriting more than ordinary. She was a Woman of a
Sublime Wit, and very liberal; and she knew so well how to please the King's
humor, and to divertize him, that he could not live without her. She had two
Names; the one was Nour-gehan-begum, which signifies the light of the World;
and this was the Name which was engraven upon her Signet: for as I have
observed in my Relations, they never Sign any thing, but only set their Seals.
The other Name, by which she was called at Court, was Nour-mahall, which
signifies the Light of the Seraglio. She was always a great enemy to the King's
two Sons; more especially to the second, who was called Sultan Kourom: and who
afterward coming to the Throne, called himself Cha-gehan. He set himself to
oppose all the designs of this Princess: who, for her part, had such an
Ascendant over the King, that she persuaded him to spend the greatest part of
the year in the Country, underhand soliciting certain Raja's upon the
Frontiers to rise against him, that she might engage him in the Wars, and keep
him from the company of his Sons. This Queen, being altogether Ambitious, made
it her business to please the King, that she might the more easily accomplish
her designs; and having a great desire to eternize her Memory, she could not
think of a better way, than to Coin a good quantity of Money in her own Name:
and of a different stamp from that which the Indian Kings were wont to Coin.
For you must take notice, that all the Coins of those Kings have only the
Characters of the Country upon each side of the Piece. But this Queen caused
one of the twelve Signs to be stamped upon upon each side of Hers, which is
contrary to the Law of Mahomet, that forbids all manner of representations.
However, she had never brought her design about, had Sultan Kourom been at
Court. But she took her time, when the King had caused the eyes of his eldest
Son, Sultan Kosrou to be put out, because he had taken up Arms against him,
with an intention to depose him from his Throne. For after he had obtained that
Victory, he sent his second Son, Sultan Kourom, into Decan, Silver Ingots of
Iapan.
Money representing the 12 Signs
with a powerful Army against the King of Visapour, who was in Rebellion. Queen
Nourmahall seeing her self delivered from those that were able to cross her
designs, and particularly from Saltan Kourom, the most Potent, and the most
inveterate of all her enemies, and believing it seasonable to discover her
purpose to the King, set her self to flatter him more than she was wont;
inventing new ways to divertize him, sometimes with Hunting, and sometimes in
the Haram, with Balls and Comedies: One day that the King was extremely
well-pleased, and having drank briskly, began to be very merry; after the Queen
had Danced in his presence, he took her, and set her by him, protesting to her,
that he loved her above all the Princesses in his Court; and that but for her,
he had died for grief, to see that his Son Sultan Kosrou should be so
traitorously bold, as to endeavor to deprive him of his Scepter. The Queen
seeing the King so highly affected toward her, failed not to make use of so
favorable an opportunity. To which purpose, Sir, said she, if it be true that
your Majesty has that kindness for me, of which you would persuade me to assure
my self, I know you will grant me one favor which I have passionately desired
a long time; that I may only Reign as Sovereign the space of twenty four hours.
This request surpised the King, and kept him very sad for some days, being
unwilling to deny her any thing, and yet being as loath to grant her a Boon of
so high a nature. In the mean time the Queen plied the King with Pastime and
Divertisements, pretending to take no notice of his melancholy. At length the
fist day after she had made her Petition, the King no longer able to resist her
Charms, nor the strong Passion he had for her, told her he would retire for
twenty four hours, and that she might assume the absolute Command of the
Kingdom during that time. At the same time he caused all the Grandees that were
then at Court, to be sent for into his presence, and then commanded them to
obey her, and punctually to execute her Orders, as if it were he himself that
spoke to them. It was a long time before that the Queen had made every thing
ready, and that she had secretly hoarded up great quantities of Gold and Silver
in all the Cities where the Mints were appointed, and had distributed the
Stamps as she thought convenient. And indeed it was a wonderful thing, that a
Woman should so politickly carry on so great a design, as to have four and
twenty Stamps engraved, and to keep in a readiness in Gold and Silver above two
Millions in all the Cities, without being discovered to the King, or any of the
Court. There were none but the Mint-Masters that knew any thing of her design,
whom she engaged by large promises, and larger hopes; as believing that she
could certainly obtain her desire one day of the King; and then, if she had her
Materials ready, that she could do her business in twenty four hours. The day
being appointed, she sent away Messengers to all the Cities, commanding them on
that day to Coin Roupies of Gold and Silver, to the value already mentioned.
When the King and the Grandees came to understand the business, they were
strangely surpised; especially Sultan Kourom, the Queens implacable enemy,
who, as some persons of the Country assured me, fainted away at the news, and
did not come to himself in a good while after. The thing was so suddenly done,
especially in the Cities near at hand, that within two hours after she was sat
upon the Throne, she caused several quantities of that Gold and Silver to be
thrown among the people, which during the Reign of Gehan-guir went currantly
for Roupies. But when Sultan Kourom, who took upon him the Name of Cha-gehan
came to the Crown after the death of his Father, he forbad all persons to use
those Roupies upon pain of death, and commanded all that had any of them,
either in Gold or Silver, to carry them to the Mint; where they should receive
the value of them, to the end they might be melted down. For which reason they
are at present very rare, particularly those in Gold; among the rest, two or
three of them are so hard to be found, that an hundred Crowns has been given
for one of them. The Roupies of Gold are worth one and twenty Livres of our
Money: and those of Silver, thirty Sous. The Queen, during her Reign of twenty
four hours, had that respect for the King, that on the backside of the Pieces
whereon the twelve Signs were Engraven, she caused the Name of Gehan-guir to be
stamped with her own, and the name of the place where they were Coined, all in
Arabic Letters.

Perhaps the Reader may be curious to know from whence this Illustrious Queen
of the Indians descended: and therefore for his satisfaction, I will tell him
in a few words. Her Father, a Persian by Nation, a man naturally Ambitious, and
who in his own Country was no more than a bare Captain of Horse, without any
hopes of rising to any higher preferment, traveled into the Indies, to serve
the Great Mogul, who was then Gehan-guir, with an intention of raising his
Fortune in a strange Country. Gehan-guir had then many Enemies, the Kings of
Golconda and Visapour being in Rebellion against him, and several Raja's having
taken their part. So soon as he came to kiss the Kings Hands, the King took a
liking to him, and gave him immediately the Command of five hundred Horse. And
because he was very well skilled in Astrology, (which is a Science to which the
Asiaticks are very much addicted) the King esteemed him the more, and in a
short time made him General of his Army. But afterward, forgetting his duty,
and the benefits he had received, he joined with Sultan Kosrou, guir's eldest
Son; and having gained a great part of the Army, they conspired together to
depose the King, and set up his Son in his stead. There was at that time in the
Court, an Eunuch of great wit, who did more mischief to the Army in his Closet,
than he could have done in the Field. This Eunuch, so soon as intelligence was
brought of the Rebellion, told the King, that if his Majesty pleased, he would
deliver Kosrou and the Persian General into his hands in a short time, without
so much as striking one stroke, or losing one man. He was as good as his word
in part, for he so ordered his business, by his politic contrivances, that the
General was brought to the King, who would not presently put him to death.
Sultan Kosrou escaped that bout, and continued the War many years against his
Father, who at length took him in Fight, and caused his eyes to be pulled out.
The King detaining the General in custody, his Wife and his Daughter found a
way to save his life, as you shall hear. The Daughter of the Persian General,
who was his only Child, was about fourteen years of Age, the most accomplished
Beauty at that time in all the Kingdom; she was most rarely educated, and could
both write and read the Arabian, Persian, and Indian Languages. The Mother and
the Daughter went every day to Court, to hear what would become of the General;
and understanding at length, that the King intended either to put him to death,
or to banish him, they came to the Haram, and casting themselves at his
Majesty's feet, they humbly begged pardon, the one for her Husband, the other
for her Father; which they easily obtained; the King being surpised at the
Beauty of the Virgin, to whom he afterward surrendered his Affections. All the
Court was astonished afterward, how the General and his Wife could keep, so
private, a Daughter that was so incomparably fair, that it should not come to
the Kings knowledge. At length he loved her so tenderly, that not being able to
deny her the liberty of Reigning one whole day in his place, he gave her leave
to share with him afterward in the Government. And she it was, that gave
motion to all the most important Affairs of State; the King excusing himself to
the Grandee's of his Court, who wondered why he let the Queen bear so great a
sway, by telling them, that she was fit for the Government, and that it was
time for him to take his ease.

Fig. 1, and 2. is as all the rest are, the backside of the Twelve Signs. Fig.
1. is the backside of the Ram. and Fig. 2. of Cancer. Both of them signify the
same thing; it being the Name of the King, Queen, and City where they were
stamped. These two were coln'd at Amadabat.

The Gold, Silver, and Copper Money which the Portugals coin in the East Indies.
THe Gold which the Portugals Coin in Goa is better than our Louisse's of Gold,
and weighs one grain more than our half Pistol. At the time when I was in Goa,
this piece was worth four Roupies, or six Franks. They hold it up at so
Portugal Money.
Muscovie Money.
high a rate, to the end the Merchants, who come from all the Coasts of India
thither with their Wares, may not transport it out of the Country. This piece
is called St. Thomas. Formerly when the Portuguez had the Trade of Japon,
Macassar, Sumatra, China and Mosambique, which they still preserve; and is the
place whither the Indians bring the Gold of the Abassins and Saba, it was a
wonderful thing to see the quantity of Gold which the Portuguez Coined, and the
several pieces of workmanship which they framed in Gold, and sent into Foreign
Countries, even to the West Indies, by the way of the Philippine Islands. But
now they have no other places but only Mosambique to furnish them with Gold,
they keep up those Pieces called St. Thomass's at a very high rate, lest they
should be carried out of the Country, as I said before. They have also Silver
Pieces, which they call Pardos, which go for the value of 27 Sous of our Money:
As also a great quantity of small Copper and Tin-Money, not much unlike that of
the Kings already mentioned, which they thread upon strings in particular
numbers.

The Gold and Silver Money of Muscovy.
I Have observed in my Relations, that in all parts of our Europe, where they
Coin Money, there are great Sums transported all over Asia, where they go
currantly. But for the Money of Muscovy there is great loss in transporting it
any where else; because the Prince enhances it to so high a value. The pieces
as well of Gold as Silver are very good Metal; for the Gold in worth is
somewhat higher than our Lewis.

Fig. 1 and 2. This piece of Gold weighs 14 Grains; and to take the Gold at 48
Grains the Ounce, would amount to 20 Sous, one Deneer, and one halfpenny of our
Money. But going in Muscovy for 24 Sous, there would be nineteen and an half
loss to transport it any where else.

Fig. 3 and 4. Is a piece of Silver that weighs eight Grains; and to take an
Ounce of Silver at three Livres ten Sous, it comes to a Sous of our Money. But
in the Country you have but fifty of these pieces, or at most sometimes fifty
two for one of our Crowns, or a Real of Spain, or an High-German Rixdollar.

Fig. 5 and 6. Is a piece of Silver also which only goes in Muscovy. But I
cannot tell in what Province it is Coined, in regard there are no Arms upon it,
and that the most knowing persons, to whom I showed them, could not tell me
what the Characters meant; which makes me think it is very ancient. The piece
weighs 25 Grains, which comes to three of our Sous, one Deneer, and one
halfpenny.

This is all that I could collect of most certainty, concerning the Money and
Coins of the East, during the long course of my Travels. Nor do I believe that
any person has undertaken, before me, to write upon the same Subject. If any
one of my Readers desires to see the real Pieces themselves, as well in Gold
and Silver, as in Tin, Copper, Shells and Almonds, he may, without question,
obtain the Favor from Monsieur, the first President, to whose Study I devoted
them all, together with certain Medals, of which that Supreme Senator, most
skilful in Antiquity, has great store, being still curious in searching after
what is rare.

The end of the Coins.
TRAVELS IN INDIA.
The First Book. What Roads to take, in Traveling from Ispahan to Agra, from
Agra to Dehly and Gehanabatt, where the Great Mogul Resides at present: And how
to Travel also to the Court of the King of Golconda; to the King of Visapour,
and to many other Places in the Indies.
CHAP. I. The Road from Ispahan to Agra through Gomron: Where is particularly
described the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Suratt.
IN this Relation of my Indian, I will observe the same Method as in the
Recital of my Persian Travels; and begin with the description of the Roads,
which lead you from Ispahan to Dehly and Gehanadatt, where the Great Mogul
Resides at present.

Though the Indies stretch themselves front Persia for the space of above 400
Leagues together, from the Ocean to that long Chain of Mountains that runs
through the middle of Asia from the East to the West, and which was known to
Antiquity by the Name of Mount Caucasus, or Mount Taurus; yet there are not so
many ways to travel out of Persia into the Indies, as there are to travel out
of Turkey into Persia; by reason that between Persia and the Indies there are
nothing but vast Sands and Deserts, where there is no water to be found. So
that you have but two Roads to choose, in going from Ispahan to Agra. The one
is partly by Land, and partly by Sea; taking Ship at Ormus. The other
altogether by Land, through Candahar. The first of these two Roads is amply
described, as far as Ormus, at the end of my first Book of my Persian Travels.
So that I am now only to speak of the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Suratt.

There is no Sailing at all times upon the Indian as upon the European Seas:
You must observe the proper seasons, which being elapsed, there is no more
venturing. The Months of November, December, January, February and March, are
the only Months in the year to Embark from Ormus to Suratt; and from Suratt to
Ormus: But with this difference, that there is no stirring from Suratt after
the end of February; but you may Sail from Ormus till the end of March, or the
fifteenth of April: For then the Western-winds, that bring rain along with them
into India, begin to blow. During the first four Months there blows a
North-eastwind, which carries them from Suratt to Ormus in fifteen or twenty
days. Then veering a little to the North, it serves as well for those that are
bound for Suratt, as those that are bound from thence. Then the Merchants
generally provide for a Voyage of thirty, or five and thirty days. But if they
would Sail from Ormus to Suratt in fourteen or fifteen days, they must take
Shipping either in March, or at the beginning of April; for then the
Western-wind blows full in their Stern.

The Vessels which Sail from Ormus run within sight of Mascate upon the Coast
of Arabia, bearing off to Sea for fear of coming too near the Persian Coast.
They that come from Suratt, do the same thing, to make the Entry of the Gulf.
But neither the one nor the other touch at Mascate, to avoid paying Customs to
an Arabian Prince, who took that place from the Portugals.

Mascate is a City situated just by the Seaside, over against three Rocks that
make the Entry into the Harbor very difficult, and at the foot of a Mountain
upon which the Portugals have three or four Forts. It is observed that Mascate,
Ormus, and Balsara, are the three places in the East where the heat is most
insupportable. Formerly only the Hollanders and English understood this Course
of Navigation; but some years after the Armonians, Mahometans, Indians, and
Banians, have built them Vessels. But it is not so safe to Embark in them, for
they neither understand the Sea so well, nor are they so good Pilots.

The Vessels that Sail to Suratt, which is the only Part in the Empire of the
Great Mogul, Sail within fight of Diu, and the Point of St. John, and come to
an Anchor afterward in the Road of Couali, which is not above four Leagues
from Suratt, and two from the Mouth of the River toward the North, They
transport their Wares from one place to another, either by Wagons, or in
Boats. For great Vessels cannot get into the River of Suratt till they have
unladen, by reason of the Sands that choke it up. The Hollanders return as soon
as they have landed their Wares at Couali, and so do the English, it not being
permitted to either to enter into the River. But some years since, the King has
given the English a place to Winter in, during the rainy Seasons.

Suratt is a City of an indifferent bigness, defended by a pitiful Fortress,
by the foot whereof you must pass, whither you go by Land or by Water. It has
four Towers at the four Corners, and in regard there are no Platforms upon the
Walls, Guns are planted upon woodden-Scaffolds. The Governor of the Fort only
commands the Soldiers in the Fort, but has no Power in the City, which has a
particular Governor to receive the King's Customs, and other Revenues through
the Extent of his Province.

The Walls of the Town are only of Earth, and the generality of the Houses like
Barns, being built of Reeds, plaistered with Cow Dung, to cover the void
spaces, and to hinder them without from discerning between the Reeds what is
done within. In all Suratt there be but nine or ten Houses which are well
built: whereof the Cha-bander, or chief of the Merchants has two or three. The
rest belong to the Mahumetan Merchants; nor are those, wherein the English and
Hollanders dwell less beautiful; every President, and every Commander, being
careful to repair them; which they put upon the account of their Companies.
However, they do but hire those Houses; the King not suffering any Frank to
have an House of his own, for fear he should make a Fortress of it. The
Capuchin Friars have built them a very convenient Convent, according to the
Model of our European Houses, and a fair Church; for the building of which, I
furnished them with good part of the Money. But the Purchase was made in the
Name of a Maronite Merchant of Aleppo, whose Name was Chelebi, of whom I have
spoken in my Persian Relations.

CHAP. II. Of the Customs, Money, Exchange, Weights and Measures of the Indians.
TO avoid Repetitions, which cannot be shunned in the Course of long Travels;
it behooves me to let the Reader understand what belongs to the Custom-houses,
Money, Exchange, Weights and Measures of the Indians.

When your Commodities are unladen at Suratt, you must carry them to the
Custom-house adjoining to the Fort. They are very severe, and very exact in
searching the people. Particular Merchants pay from four to five per Cent at
the Custom-house for all sorts of Ware. But for the English and
Holland-Company; they pay less: But I believe if they did but cast up what it
costs them in Deputations and Presents which they are obliged every year to
send to the Court, they would not pay much less for their Wares, than
particular Merchants.

Gold and Silver pay two in the Hundred, and when it is brought into the
Custom-house, the Master of the Mint comes and takes it, and Coins it into the
Money of the Country. They agree with him upon the day wherein he will
undertake to return the new Pieces: And for so many days as he makes them stay
after that, he pays them Interest, according to the proportion of the Silver
which he receives. The Indians are very subtle and crafty in matters of Money
and Payments; three or four years after the Silver is coined, it loses half per
Cent. and goes at the same rate as old Silver; for, say they, it is impossible
but that it should lose in passing through so many hands. You may carry all
sorts of Silver into the Dominions of the Great Mogul. For in all the Frontier
Cities there is a Mint, where it is purified to the highest perfection, as is
all the Gold and Silver in India, by the King's Command, and coined into Money.
Silver in Bars, or old Plate, which is bought without paying for the fashion,
is the Silver by which you shall lose least: For as for coined Silver, there is
no avoiding the loss of the Coinage. All their bargains are made, with a
condition to pay in coined Silver, within the present year.. And if you make
payment in old Silver, you must resolve to lose according to the time since it
was first-coin'd. In all places far remote from Cities, where the vulgar people
have no great knowledge in Silver, and where there are no Changers, they will
not receive a piece of Silver, without putting it in the fire, to try whether
it be good or no: And this is the common practice at all Ferries and passages
over Rivers. In regard their Boats are only made of Ofier, covered over with an
Ox-hide, and by consequence are very light; they keep them in the Woods, and
will not take them upon their shoulders, till they have received their Money.

As for their Gold, the Merchants have so many cunning tricks to hide it, that
it seldom comes to the knowledge of the Customers. They do all they can to shift
off paying the Customs; and that, so much the rather, because they do not run
so much hazard as at the Custom-houses of Europe. For in the Indian
Custom-houses, if a man be caught in the fraud, he is quitted by paying double;
ten in the hundred; instead of five: The King comparing the venture of the
Merchant to a game at Hazard, where he plays quit or double. The King had
granted to the English Captains, that they should not be searched when they
came ashore. But one day one of the English Captains going to Tata, one of the
greatest Cities in India, a little above the Mouth of the River Indou, as he
was going to pass the River, he was stopped by the Officers of the
Custom-house, who searched and rifl'd him; whatever he could alledg to the
contrary. They found Gold about him, of which he had already carried off
several quantities, at several times, that he had gone from his Ship to the
City; but they quitted him, upon paying the usual Custom. The Englishman,
vexed at such an affront, resolved to revenge himself; which he did after a
very pleasant manner. He caused a sucking-pig to be roasted, and putting it,
together with the dripping, and sauce, in a China-platter, covered with a
linnen-cloath, he gave it a Slave to bring along after him to the City;
imagining what would fall out. As it passed before the Custom-house, while the
Governors or the Cha-bander, and the Mint-Master were sitting in the Divan,
they failed not to stop him; and as the Slave went forward with the Plate
covered, they told his Master that he must come into the Custom-house, and that
they must see what he carried. The more the Englishman cried, that the Slave
carried nothing that paid any duties, the less he was believed; so that after a
long debate he took the Plate from his Slave, and carried it himself into the
Divan; the Governor and the Cha-bander, gravely asked him, why he would not be
obedient to the Laws? Upon which the Englishman, replying in a great heat,
that he carried nothing which paid any duty, threw the Pigg among them with
such a fury, that the Sauce and Pigg flew all upon their Garments. Now in
regard that Swines-flesh is an abomination to the Mahometans, who believe every
thing defiled that touches it; they were forced to change their Clothes, take
down the Tapestry of the Divan, to pull down the Divan it self, and build
another, not daring to say any thing to the Englishman; for the Cha-bander,
and Mint-master are very observant to the Company, by whom they reap a great
deal of profit. As for what concerns the Heads of the Companies, as well
English, as Dutch, and their Associates, they have so great a respect for them,
that they never search them at all, when they come ashore; though they will
not stick to conceal their Gold, like particular Merchants, and to carry it
about them. The Trade of Tata; formerly very great, begins now to decay,
because the Mouth of the Rivers grows more dangerous, and full of shallows
every day more than other, the Sand-hills having almost choked it up.

The English finding they had learned the trick of rifling their Clothes,
studi'd out other little ways and contrivances to conceal their Gold: And the
fashion of wearing Perriwigs being newly come out of Europe, they hid their
Jacobus's, Rose-Nobles, and Ducats in the net of their Perriwigs, every time
they came ashore.

There was a Merchant that had a mind to convey some boxes of Coral into
Suratt, without the knowledge of the Customers. He swam then into the Town, some
days before the Ship was unladed, when it might be done securely before the
Customers had any suspicion of any thing. But the Merchant repented him
afterward, the Commodity being spol'd. For the water of Suratt River being
always thick and muddy, there clung to the Coral, which had lain a long time in
the water, a slime like a white crust or skin, which was difficult to be got
off; so that after the Coral was polished, he lost by it above twelve per Cent.

I come now to the Money which goes for current through the whole extent of the
Great Mogul's Dominions; and to all the sorts of Gold and Silver, which is
carried thither in Ingots to make profit thereof.

In the first place you must observe that it is very profitable to buy Gold and
Silver which has been wrought, to melt it into Ingots, and to refine it to the
highest purity: For being refined, you pay not for the portage of the Alloy,
which was mixed with it before: And carrying the Gold and Silver in wedges, you
pay neither to the Prince nor to the Mint what they exact for Coinage. If you
carry coined Gold, the best pieces are Jacobus's, Rose-Nobles, Albertus's, and
other ancient Pieces, as well of Portugal, as of other Countries, and all sorts
of Gold that have been coined in former Ages. For by all those old Pieces the
Merchant is sure to gain. You may also reckon for good Gold, and which is
proper to be carried thither, all the Ducats of Germany, as well those coined
by the several Princes, as by the Imperial Towns, together with the Ducats of
Poland, Hungary, Swedeland and Danemark; and indeed all sorts of Ducats are
taken to be of the same goodness. The Venetian Ducats of Gold formerly passed
for the best, and were worth four or five of our Sous, more than any others;
but about a dozen years ago they seem to have been altered, not going now for
any more than the rest. There are also Ducats which the Grand Seignior coins at
Cairo, and those of Sally, and Morocco: But these three sorts are not so good
as the others, and are not worth so much as they by four Sous of our Money.

Over all the Empire of the Great Mogul, all the Gold and Silver is weighed
with weights, which they call Tolla; which weigh nine Deneers, and eight grains
of our weights. When they have any quantity of Gold and Silver to sell, the
Indians use yellow Copper-weights, with the King's mark, to avoid cousenage.
And with these weights they weigh all the Gold and Silver at once, provided it
amount not to above a hundred Tolla's. For the Changers have no other weights,
but from one Tolla to a hundred; and a hundred Tolla's come to 38 Ounces, 21
Deneers, and 8 Grains. As for the Gold and Silver which is not coined, if there
be much, they essay it; and having put it to the touch, they bid to the utmost
value to out-vye one another.

In regard there are some Merchants that have above forty or fifty thousand
Ducats at a time, the Indians weigh them with a weight which is just the weight
of a hundred Ducats, which is also marked with the Kings Mark, and if the
hundred Ducats weigh less than the weights, they put in so many little stones
till the Scales are even; and after all is weighed, they make good to the
Changer the weight of those little stones. But before they weigh these
Gold-Coins, whether they be Ducats or other Pieces, they put the whole quantity
into a Charcoal-fire, till they be red-hot; and then quench the fire with
water, and take them out again. This they do to find out them which are false,
and to melt off the Wax and Gum, which is cunningly dropped upon them to make
them weigh the more. But because there are some Pieces so artfully hollowed and
stopped up again, that you cannot perceive it, though they have been in the fire,
the Changers take the Pieces, and bend them; by which they know whether they
are good or no; and those which they suspect they cut in pieces. After they
have viewed them all, they refine those which they do not take to be good, and
pay for so much as proves to be good, as for good Ducats. All this Gold they
coin into that sort of Money which they call Roupies of Gold; except those
Ducats, which are stamped only upon one side, which they sell to the Merchants
that come from Tartary, and other Northern Parts, as from the Kingdoms of
Boutan, Ason, and other remote parts. With these Ducats, the Women of those
Countries chiefly adorn themselves, hanging them upon their Head-attire, and
fixing them upon their forheads. As for the other Ducats, that have no figures,
they are not so much as inquired after by the Northern Merchants.

As for all the other Pieces of Gold, there are great quantities of them fold
to the Goldsmiths, to the Gold-wyar-drawers, and in general to all that work in
Gold. For if they could put their Metal unmade into Roupies, they would never
coin; which they can only do at the Coronation of their Kings, to throw Silver
Roupies among the people; or to sell them to the Governors of the Provinces,
and other Grandees of the Court, who then want great quantities of them to
present to the new King at his first coming to his Throne. For they have not
always Jewels or other things rich enough to present him, as well as that time,
as at another Festival, of which I shall speak in due place, when they weigh
the King every year. At such times I say, they are very glad of Gold Roupies;
as also to present to such Favorites at the Court, by whose interest they hope
to gain higher Commands, and more considerable Governments.

In one of my Travels, I found by experience the virtue of these Roupies of
Gold. Cha-jehan, Father of Orang-zeb who now reigns, had given to one of the
Lords of his Court, the Government of the Province of Tata, whereof Symdi is
the Metropolis. Now though the very first year of his Government, there were
very great complaints made against him, by reason of the Tyranny which he
exercised over his people, and his great extortions, the King suffered him to
continue four years, and then recalled him. All the people of Tata were
overjoyed, believing the King had called him away, only to put him to death;
but it fell out quite otherwise; for the King caressed him, and gave him the
Government of Halabas, more considerable than that which he had quitted. This
kind reception, which he had at the Kings hands, proceeded from this, that
before he came to Agra, he had sent before him a present of 50000 Roupies of
Gold, and about 20000 Roupies of Gold more to Begum-Saheb, who had then the
whole power in her hands; as also to other Ladies and Lords at the Court, to
support his Reputation. All the Courtiers are very desirous to have a great
quantity of Gold; because it lies in a little room, and then because they
covet, as a great Honor, to leave vast Sums behind them, to their Wives and
Children, of which the King must not know. For as I shall tell you in another
place, when any great Lord dies, the King is Heir to all his Estate; his Wife
having no more than his Jewels.

But to return to our Roupies of Gold; you must take notice, that they are not
so current among the Merchants. For in regard one of them is not worth above
fourteen Roupies, which make one and twenty Livres of our Money, at thirty Sous
the Roupie, and that there are sew of these Roupies of Gold to be had, but in
the Houses of Great Men; when it falls out that they make any payment, they
will put them at a Roupie of Silver, or at least at a sourth part of a Roupie
more than it is worth, which will never turn to the Merchants profit.
Cha-Est-Kan the King's Uncle, to whom I had sold a parcel of Goods at 96000
Roupies, when he came to pay me, asked me what Money I would be content to
take, whether Gold or Silver. Before I could return him an answer, he added,
that if I would leave it to him, I should take Gold Roupies: Nor did he give me
this advice, but because he believed it would turn to his advantage: I told him
I would be ruled by him; thereupon he caused his Servants to tell me out so
many Roupies in Gold, as made up the just Sum which was due: But he would force
me to take the Roupie in Gold for fourteen Roupies and an half in Silver,
though among the Merchants they went but for fourteen. I was not ignorant of
it; but I thought it best to receive my Money according to the Prince's humor,
in hopes he might make me amends another time, either for the whole, or part of
what I might lose. I let him alone two days, after which I went to him again,
and told him I had tried to put off his Roupies at the price I had received
them; so that in the payment of 96000 Roupies, I had lost 3428 and one 16 th.
the Roupie of Gold which he forced me to take at fourteen Roupies and an half
of Silver, being worth but fourteen. Thereupon he fell into a passion, and told
me he would see as many Lashes bestowed upon the Changer, or Holland-Broker,
whose fault soever it were; that he would teach them to understand Money; that
they were old Roupies, and were worth more by a sixteenth part of a Silver
Roupie, than the Roupies which were coined at that time. In regard I knew the
humor of the Asiatic Princes, with whom there is no contesting, I let him say
what he pleased; but when he came to himself, and began to put on a smiling
look, I desired him that he would be pleased to let me return the Sum which I
had received, the next day; or else that he would be pleased to pay me what was
wanting, and that I would take a Roupie at 14 and one 16 th. since he assured
me they were worth so much. The Prince for a while gave me a scurvy look, not
so much as speaking one word. At length he asked me, whether I had still the
Pearl, which he had resus'd to buy. I told him I had, and immediately pulled it
out of my Bosom, and gave it him. The Pearl was large, and of a good water,
but illshap'd; which was the reason he refused it before. When I had given it
to him, well, said he, let us talk no more of what is past; how much will you
have, in a word, for this Pearl? I asked him seven thousand Roupies, and indeed
rather than I would have carried it into France, I would have taken three. If I
give thee, said he, seven thousand Roupies for this Pearl, I shall make thee
amends for the loss thou complain'st of in the first bargain. Come to Morrow,
and I will give thee five thousand Roupies, and that is very fair: Thou shall
have also a Calaat and an Horse. I made my obeisance to him, and desired him to
give me an Horse that should be young, and fit for service, because I had a
great journey to take. The next day he sent me a Robe, a Cloak, two Girdles,
and a Cap; which is all the Apparel that the Princes are wont to give to those
to whom they intend any Honor. The Cloak and Robe was of Satin purfled with
Gold; the two Girdles stripped with Gold and Silver; the Cap was of Calicut,
died into a Flame-colour, with stripes of Gold: The Horse had no Saddle, but
was covered with a green Velvet foot-cloath, edged about with a small
Silver-fringe. The Bridle was very strait, with Silver-studs in some places. I
believe the Horse had never been backed; for so soon as I brought him to the
Holland-House, where I then lodged, a young man got upon his back; but he was
no sooner on, but the Horse flung and pranc'd at that rate, that having kicked
down an Hutt that stood in the Court, he had like to have killed the Hollander.
Finding that such a Resty-Horse was not for my turn, I sent him back to
Cha-est-Kan, and relating the Story to him, I told him I did not believe that
he desired I should return into my Country to bring him back some rarities
which I had promised him, as he made me believe he did. All the while I talked,
he laughed, and afterward sent for the Horse which his Father in his life time
used to ride upon. It was a tall Persian Horse, that had formerly cost five
thousand Crowns, but was then twenty eight years old. They brought him bridled
and saddl'd, and the Prince would needs have me get up in his presence. He had
one of the most stately walks that ever I knew in a Horse; and when I alighted,
well, said he, art thou satisfied? I dare say, that Horse will never give thee
a fall. I thanked him, and at the same time took my leave of him; and the next
day, before my departure, he sent me a great Basket of Apples. It was one of
the six that Chajehan had sent him, as they came from the Kingdom of Kachemir;
there was in the Basket also a great Persian Melon: All this might be worth a
hundred Roupies, which I presented to the Holland Commanders Wife. As for the
Horse, I rode him to Golconda, where I sold him for five hundred Roupies, as
old as he was, being a good lusty Beast.

To return to our discourse of Money, I will add this to what I have said
already, that you must never carry Louis's of Gold to the Indies, nor Spanish
nor Italian Pistols, nor any other sort of Money coined within these few years;
for there is great loss by it; for the Indians refine all, and count only upon
the refinings. Lastly, every one strives to steal the custom of their Gold; and
when the Merchant has got the knack of concealing it, he may gain five or six
of our Sous in every Ducat.

I come now to the sorts of Silver Money; which you must distinguish into Money
of the Country, and Foreign Money: And first of the Foreign Coins.

The Foreign Silver Coins which are carried into the Indies, are the
Rixdollars of Germany and the Reals of Spain. The first are brought by the
Merchants that come from Poland, from the Lesser Tartary, and the Borders of
Muscovia. The others by those that come from Constantinople, Smyrna, and
Aleppo, and the greatest part by the Armenians, who sell their Silk into
Europe. All these Merchants endeavor to convey their Silver through Persia
without being discovered; for if the Customers find it out, they will be forced
to carry their Silver to the Mint-Masters to be coined into Abassi's, which is
the Kings Coin; and these Abassi s being carried into India, are again coined
into Roupies, whereby the Merchant loses ten and a quarter per Cent. as well by
reason of the coinage, as by paying the Kings duties in Persia.

To let you understand in a few words, how they came to lose this ten and a
quarter per Cent. from Persia to the Indies, and sometimes more, according to
the nature of the Reals, which they usually carry into Persia; you must call to
mind, what I have already said concerning the Money and Exchanges of Persia, in
the first Volume. I observed, that a Real in Persia goes for 23 Chaez, which
make three Abassi's and a quarter; and that sometimes, when Silver is scarce,
they will give a Chaez and a half for one. That the Abassi is worth four Chaez,
and the Toman fifty Abassi's, or two hundred Chaez. If you carry six Tomans and
a half to the Indies, you have for every Toman twenty-nine Roupies and a half;
and consequently for six Tomans and a half, a hundred and ninety-one Roupies
and a quarter. If you carry to the Indies Reals of Sevilo, for a hundred you
shall have from 213 to 215 Roupies. If you carry Mexican Reals, for a hundred
you shall have no more than 212. So that when for a hundred Reals you have but
two hundred and twelve Roupies, you gain ten Reals and a quarter, in an hundred
Reals; but by the Sevillian Reals you profit eleven per Cent.

There are three or four sorts of Spanish Reals, and they give for a hundred
according to their goodness, from 218 to 214 and 215 Roupies. The best of all
are those of Sevil, for when they are full weight, they will give for a
hundred, 213 Roupies; and sometimes 215, according as Silver is either scarce
or plentiful.

The Real of Spain ought to weigh three Drams, seven Grains and a half more
than two Roupies. But the Silver of the Roupies is much better. For the Roupy
is in weight eleven Deneers and fourteen Grains; but the Sevil Real, like our
white Crown, is but just eleven Deneers. The Mexican Real goes at ten Deneers
and twenty-one Grains. For the Spanish Real, that weighs seventy-three Vals,
you have four Mamoudi's and a half, and one Mamoudi is worth twenty Pecha's;
but they must be very good, and as I have said already, seventy-three Vals in
weight: eighty-one Vals making an Ounce, one Val coming to seven Deneers.

For the Rixdollars of Germany, in regard they are heavier than the Reals, they
will give you for an hundred, as high as an hundred and sixteen Roupies. Where
you are to take notice, that in giving for an hundred Reals, or an hundred
Rixdollars, two hundred and fifteen, or two hundred and sixteen Roupies, it
seems that every Roupy ought to be worth less than thirty Sous. But if the
Merchant count the portage of the Silver, and the Customs, he will find that
every Roupy will stand him in more. But that the Merchant may make his profit,
he must take notice, that all the Reals of Mexico, and those of Sevil, are in
weight one and twenty Deneers and eight Grains, that is, five hundred and
twelve Grains; and for those that are no better than our white Crown, they are
to be in weight one and twenty Deneers and three Grains, which makes five
hundred and nine Grains. All Dollars and Reals are weighed, a hundred at a
time, and when they are wanting in weight, they add little stones, as when they
weigh Gold, according to what I shall tell you by and by.

We come now to the Money of the Country. The Indian Money is the Silver Roupy,
the Half, Quarter, Eighteenth and Sixteenth part. The weight of the Roupy is
nine Deneers and one Grain; the value of the Silver is eleven Deneers and
fourteen Grains. They have also another sort of Silver Money, which they call
Mamoudi's, but this goes nowhere but in Surat, and in the Province of Guzerat.

The Indians have also a sort of small Copper Money, which is called Pecha;
which is worth about two of our Liards, a Liard being the fourth part of a
Sous. There is also the Half Pecha, two Pecha's, and Four Pecha's. According to
the custom of the Province where you travel, you have for a Roupy of Silver
more or less of these Pecha's. In my last Travels, a Roupy went at Surat for
nine and forty Pecha's. But the time was, when it was worth fifty, and another
time, when it went but for six and forty. At Agra and Gehanabat, the Roupy was
valued at fifty-five and fifty-six Pecha's. And the reason is, because the
nearer you go to the Copper Mines, the more Pecha's you have for a Roupy. As
for the Mamoudi, it is always valued at forty Pecha's.

There are two other sorts of small Money in the Dominions of the Great Mogull,
which are little bitter Almonds and Shells. These little bitter Almonds, which
are brought out of Persia, are only made use of in the Province of Guzeratt; as
I have observed in the first part of my Relations. They grow in dry and barren
places among the Rocks, and the Tree, that bears them, is almost like our
Bastard Spanish-Broom. They call these Almonds Baden: Nor is there any
Coloquintida so bitter. They give for a Pecha sometimes thirty five, and
sometimes forty.

Their other small Money are the little Shells which they call Cori; the sides
whereof turn circularly inward: Nor are they to be found in any part of the
World, but in the Maldives Islands. They are the greatest part of the Revenue
of the King of that Island. For they are transported into all the Territories
of the Oreat Mogull; into the Kingdoms of Visapour and Golconda; and into the
Islands of America to serve instead of Money. Near the Sea they give 80 for a
Pecha. But the further you go from the Sea, the less you have; so that at Agra,
they will not give you above 50 or 55 for a Pecha. As to what remains according
to the Account of the Indians,

100000 Roupies make a Lekke.

100000 Lekks make a Kraur.

100000 Kraur's make a Padan.

100000 Padan's make a Nil.

In the Indies, the Village must be very small, where there does not reside a
Banker, whom they call Cheraff; whose business it is to remit Money and Bills
of Over all the Empire of the Great Mogull and in other parts of India the
Idolaters, though they differ in their languages, make use of these sort of
cifers
1 (...) 11 (...) 21 (...) 31 (...) 41 (...) 2 (...) 12 (...) 22 (...) 32 (...)
42 (...) 3 (...) 13 (...) 23 (...) 33 (...) 43 (...) 4 (...) 14 (...) 24 (...)
34 (...) 44 (...) 5 (...) 15 (...) 25 (...) 35 (...) 45 (...) 6 (...) 16 (...)
26 (...) 36 (...) 46 (...) 7 (...) 17 (...) 27 (...) 37 (...) 47 (...) 8 (...)
18 (...) 28 (...) 38 (...) 48 (...) 9 (...) 19 (...) 29 (...) 39 (...) 49 (...)
10 (...) 20 (...) 30 (...) 40 (...) 50 (...) (...) 100 (...) 1000 (...) 10000
(...) 20000 (...) 100000 (...) 1000000 Exchange. In regard that these Bankers
hold a Correspondence with the Governors of the Province, they raise as they
please themselves, the Roupie for the Pecha's, and the Pecha's for the Shells.
All the Jews that deal in Money and Exchange in the Empire of the Grand
Seignior, are accounted a most subtle sort of people. But in the Indies they
would be scarce thought fit to be Apprentices to these Bankers. They have one
very bad custom in making of Payments: And I have already observed it, in
reference to their Roupies of Gold. When they make any Payment in that sort of
money, they tell ye, 'twas a great while ago that any Silver Roupie was coined;
that they are worth less than those which are new, or but lately coined; for
that by passing through many hands they wear away, and become lighter. And
therefore when you make any bargain, you must always agree to be paid in
Roupies Cha-jenni, that is, in new Silver; otherwise, they will pay you in
Roupies coined some fifteen or twenty years ago, and upward; whereby you will
lose four in the hundred. For they will have one fourth, or at least one eighth
per Cent. allowed for those that were coined but two years before: So that the
poor people that cannot read the year wherein the Roupies were coined, are
subject to be cheated; for they will always abate a Pecha or half a Pecha upon
a Roupie, or three or four Cori's upon a Pecha.

As for counterfeit Silver, there is very little among them. If you receive one
false Roupie in a Bagg from any particular person, it is better to cut it to
pieces, and lose it, than to speak of it; for if it should come to be known,
there might be danger in it. For you are commanded by the King's Law to return
the Bagg where you received it; and to return it from one to another, till you
can find out the Counterfeiter; who, if he be apprehended, is only sentenced to
lose his hand. If the Counterfeiter cannot be found, and that it be thought
that he who paid the Money is not guilty, he is acquitted upon some small
amercement. This brings great profit to the Changers. For when there is any
Sum of Money received or paid, the Merchants cause him to look it over, and
for their pains, they have one sixteenth of a Roupie in the hundred.

As for the Money which is paid out of the Sarquet, or King's Exchequer, there
is never any found that is counterfeit: For all the Money that is carried in
thither, is exactly viewed by the King's Bankers: The Great Lords have also
their particular Bankers. Before they put up the Money into the Treasury, they
throw it into a great Charcoal-fire, and when the Roupies are red-hot, they
quench the fire, by throwing water upon it; and then take out the Money. If
there be any Piece that is white, or that has the least mark of Alloy, it is
presently cut in pieces. As often as these Roupies are carried into the
Treasury, they mark the Pieces with a Puncheon, which makes an hole, but not
quite through; and there are some Pieces that have seven or eight holes made in
that manner, to show that they have been so many times in the Exchequer. They
are all put, a thousand Pieces together, in a bagg, sealed with the Seal of the
great Treasurer; and the number of years superscrib'd, since they were coined.
And here you are to take notice, whence the Treasurers profit arises, as well
that of the King's Treasurer, as that of the particular Treasurers of the Great
Lords of the Kingdom. When there is any bargain made, they agree for new
Roupies coined the same year: but when they come to receive the payment, the
Treasurers will make it in old Roupies, wherein there is a loss of six per
Cent. So that if they will have new Silver, the Merchants must compound with
the Treasurer. In my fifth Voyage, I went to visit Cha-Est-Kan according to my
promise, to let him have the first sight of what I brought along with me. So
that as soon as I arrived at Suratt, I sent him word; and received his Orders
to meet him at Choupart, a City in the Province of Decan, to which he had laid
Siege. Coming to him, in a little time, and a few words, I sold him the
greatest part of what I had brought along with me out of Europe: And he told me
that he expected every day, that Money should be sent him from Suratt to pay
the Army, and to pay me also at the same time for what he had bought of me. I
could not imagine however, that so great a Prince as he, that commanded so great
an Army, had not store of Money by him; but rather conjectured, that he had an
intention to make me some abatement, upon those Pieces which he would put upon
me in payment, as he had served me before. It fell out, as I faresaw. But for
Provisions for my self, my Men, and my Horses, he took such order, that there
was great plenty brought me, night and morning, and for the most part he sent
for me my self, to his own Table. Ten or twelve days thus past away, and not a
word of the Money that I expected: So that being resolved to take my leave of
him, I went to his Tent. He appeared to be somewhat surpised, and looking upon
me with a frowning-brow; wherefore will you be gone, said he, before you are
paid? or who do you think, shall pay you afterward, if you go away before you
receive your Money? Upon these words, with a countenance as stern as his, my
King, replied I, will see me paid. For his goodness is such, that he causes all
his Subjects to be paid, that have not received satisfaction for such Goods as
they sell in foreign Countries. And what course will he take, answered he in a
great choler: with two or three stout Men of War, said I, which he will send
either to the Port of Suratt, or toward the Coasts to wait for the Ships that
come from Mocca. He seemed to be netled at that reply, but not daring to give
any more way to his choler, he ordered his Treasurer immediately to give me a
Letter of Exchange to Aurengabad. I was the more glad of that, because it was a
place through which I was to pass in my way to Golcanda; besides that, it would
spare me the carriage and the hazards of my Money. The next day I had my Bill
of Exchange, and took leave of the Prince, who was nothing displeased, but told
me, that if I returned to the Indies, I should not fail to come and see him,
which I did in my sixth and last Voyage. When I came to Suratt, he was at
Bengala, where I sold him all the rest of my Goods that I could not put off
either to the King of Persia, or the Great Mogul.

But to return to the payment of my Money, I was no sooner arrived at
Aurenggabat, but I went to find the great Treasurer; who no sooner saw me, but
he told me, he knew wherefore I came; that he had received Letters of advice
three days before, and that he had already taken the Money out of the Treasury
to pay me. When he had brought me all the Baggs, I caused my Banker to open
them, who saw them to be Roupies, by which I was to lose two in the hundred.
Upon that I thanked the Treasurer very heartily, telling him, I understood no
such dealing, and that I would send and complain of him to Cha-Est-Kam; and
declare to him, that he should either give order that I should be paid in new
Silver, or else let me have my Goods again, which I presently did. But not
receiving an answer so soon as I knew I might have done, I went to the
Treasurer, and told him, I would go my self, and fetch away my Goods. I believe
he had received order what to do; for seeing I was resolved to go; he told me
he was very unwilling I should put my self to so much trouble, and that it
would be better for us to agree among our selves. After many contests about the
two in the hundred, which he would have made me lose, I was contented to abate
one, and had lost the other, had I not happily met with a Banker who wanted
Silver, and had a Bill of Exchange to pay at Golconda; so that he was glad to
make use of mine, and gave me a Bill to be paid at Golconda, being my full
Sum, at fifteen days fight.

The Changers to try their Silver, make use of thirteen little pieces, one half
Copper, and the other Silver, which are their Says.

The manner how their thirteen Saypieces are filled; the upper-half being
Copper, and the lowerhalf Silver.


These thirteen pieces differing all in goodness, they never make use of them,
but when any question arises concerning a small quantity of Silver, or of any
wrought Silver. For they refine all their great quantities. All that kind of
Silver is bought by the weight which they call Tolla, which weighs nine
Deneers, and eight Grains, or 32 Val's; 81 Val's, making an Ounce: So that an
hundred Tolla's make 38 Ounces, 21 Deneers, and 8 Grains.

See here the differences of the thirteen Goodnesses of Silver.
THE first, which is the lowest in goodness, they take at fifteen Pecha's to
the Tolla, which makes of our Money nine Sous, two Deneers.

The second, at eighteen Pecha's, which make ten Sous, two Deneers.

The third, at ten Pecha's, which make twelve Sous, six Deneers.

The fourth, at thirteen Pecha's, which make fourteen Sous, six Deneers.

The fifth, at sixteen Pecha's, which make fifteen Sous, ten Deneers.

The sixth, at nineteen Pecha's, which make seventeen Sous, six Deneers.

The seventh, at thirty-three Pecha's, which make nineteen Sous, two Deneers.

The eighth, at thirty-five Pecha's, which make twenty Sous, ten Deneers.

The ninth, at thirty-eight Pecha's, which make twenty-two Sous, six Deneers.

The tenth, at forty Pecha's, which make twenty-four Sous, two Deneers.

The eleventh, at forty-three Pecha's, which make twenty-five Sous, ten Deneers.

The twelfth, at forty-six Pecha's, which make twenty-seven Sous, six Deneers.

The thirteenth, at forty-nine Pecha's, which make nineteen Sous, two Deneers.

Here it will not be amiss to give you an hint, how far the cunning extends,
not only of the Cheraffs or Changers, but of all the Indians in general; and it
shall suffice to give you one example, which is very particular, and of which
our Europeans make no account: Which is this; that of all the Gold, which
remains upon the stone upon which they make the Essay, and of which we make no
reckoning, they are so far from losing the least atome of that small matter,
that they fetch it all off, by means of a Ball made half of Black-pitch, and
half of Soft-wax, with which they rub the stone that carries the Gold; at the
end of some years the Ball will shine, and then they get our all the Gold that
sticks to it. This Ball is about the bigness of one of our Tennis-Balls; and
the Stone is such a one as our Goldsmiths generally use.

Thus much of the Custom-houses and Money current among the Indians. It remains
to speak of their manner of Exchange.

As all the Goods which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogull, and some
part of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour are brought to Suratt to be
transported into several parts of Asia and Europe; the Merchants, when they go
from Surat to buy Commodities in the several Cities where they are made, as at
Lahor, Agra, Amadabat, Seronge, Brampour, Daca, Patna, Banarou, Golconda,
Decan, Visapour, and Dult ab at, take up Money at Surat, and are discharged at
the places where they go by giving kind for kind. But when it happens that the
Merchant is short of Money in those places, and that there is a necessity for
him to take up Money to complete his Markets, he must then return it at Suratt
within two Months, paying monthly for the Change.

From Lahor to Suratt the Exchange goes at six and a quarter per Cent.

From Amadabat, from one, to one and an half.

From Seronga, at three.

From Brampour, from two and an half, to three.

From Daca, at ten.

From Banarou, at six.

From the three last places they make their Bills of Exchange only to Agra; and
at Agra they make others for Suratt, the whole at the same price as I have set
down.

From Golconda, from four to five.

And for Goa the same.

From Decan at three.

From Visapour at three.

From Dultabat, from one to one and an half.

Some years the Exchange rises from one to two per Cent. by reason of certain
Raja's or petty Vassal Princes that disturb Trade, every one pretending that
the Merchandises ought to pass through his Country, and pay Toll. There are
two particularly between Agra and Amadabatt, the one called the Raja of
Antivar, and the other the Raja of Bergam, who very much molest the Merchants
for this very cause. But you may avoid passing through the Territories of these
Princes, taking another road from Agra to Suratt, thorough Seronge and
Brampour. But they are fertile Lands, divided with several Rivers, without
Bridges or Boats, and it is impossible to go that way, till two months after
the rains are fallen. Which is the reason that those Merchants who must be at
Suratt when the season permits them to take the Sea, are forced to pass through
the Territories of these two Raja's, because they can pass that way at all
times, even in the time that the rains fall, which only knit and harden the
Sand.

Nor are you to wonder that the Exchange runs so high; for they that trust out
their Money, run the hazard, by obligation, of losing their Money, if the
Merchants should be robbed.

When you come to Suratt to Embarque, there is Money enough. For it is the
greatest Trade of the Grandees of the Indies to venture their Money by Sea from
thence for Ormus, Balsara, and Mocca; nay even as far as Bantam, Achen, and the
Philippine Islands. For Mocca and Balsara, the change runs from 22 to 24 per
Cent. And to Ormus, from 16 to 20. And to the other places which I have named,
the change runs proportionable to the distance.

I have but one word to say of their Weights and Measures; I have given you in
the Margin the fifth part of an Ell of Agra, and the fourth part of an Ell of
Amadabat and Suratt. As for their Weights, the Men is generally 69 Pound, and
the Pound 16 Ounces. But the Men which they weigh their Indico withal, is but
53 Pound. At Suratt they talk of a Serre, which is one and three fourths of a
Pound, and the Pound is 16 Ounces.

CHAP. III. Of their Carriages, and the manner of Traveling in India.
BEfore we set forward upon the road, it will be convenient to speak of their
Carriages, and the manner of traveling in India; which, in my opinion, is more
commodious than any thing that has been invented for ease in France or Italy.
Quite otherwise it is in Persia, where they neither make use of Asses, Mules,
or Horses, but transport all their Wares to the Indies upon Oxen, or in Wains,
their Countries being so near to one another. If any Merchant carries an Horse
out of Persia, it is only for show, or to walk in his hand, or to sell to some
Indian Prince.

They will lay upon an Oxes back 300, or 350 pound weight. And it is a
wonderful thing to see ten or twelve thousand Oxen at a time all laden with
Rice, Corn and Salt, in such places where they exchange these Commodities:
Carrying Corn where only Rice grows, Rice where only Corn grows, and Salt where
there is none at all. They make use of Camels sometimes, but very rarely, they
being particularly appointed to carry the luggage of great Personages. When the
season requires have, and that they would speedily conveigh their Merchandise
to Suratt to ship them off, they load them upon Oxen, and not in Wains. And in
regard that the Territories of the Great Mogul are very well manured, the
Fields are senc'd with very good Ditches; and to every Field there belongs a
Pond to preserve the water. There is this great inconvenience for Travelers;
that when they meet with these numerous Caravans in straight places, they are
forced to stay two or three days till they are all past by. They that drive
these Oxen, follow no other Calling as long as they live, nor do they dwell in
houses; yet they carry their Wives and Children along with them. There are some
among them that have an hundred Oxen of their own, others more or less; and
they have always one, who is their Chief, that takes as much state as a Prince,
and has his Chain of Pearl hanging about his neck. When the Caravan that
carries the Corn, and that which carries the Salt happen to meet, rather than
yield the road, they frequently enter into very bloody Disputes. The Great
Mogull considering one day that these quarrels were very prejudicial to Trade,
and the transportation of necessary Provisions from place to place, sent for
the two Chiefs of the Caravan, and after he had exhorted them, for the common
good and their own interest, to live quietly together, and not to quarrel and
fight when they met, gave to each of them a Leck, or an hundred thousand
Roupies, and a Chain of Pearl.

That the Reader may the better understand the manner of traveling in the
Indies, he is to take notice, that among the Idolaters of that Country there
are four Tribes, which are called Manari's, each of which may consist of an
hundred thousand Souls. These people live always in Tents, and live only upon
the transporting of Merchandise from Country to Country. The first of these
Tribes carry nothing but Corn, the second Rice, the third Pulse, and the fourth
Salt, which they setch from Suratt, and all along from as far as Cape-Camorin.
These Tribes are also distinguished in this manner: Their Priests, of whom I
shall speak in another place, mark the forheads of the first, with a red-Gum,
about the breadth of a Crown; and then they draw a streak all the length of his
nose, sticking grains of Wheat upon it, sometimes ten, and sometimes twelve.
Those of the second Tribe are marked with yellow-Gum in the same place, with
grains of Rice. Those of the third are marked with a grey-Gum, down to the
shoulders, and grains of Millet. Those of the fourth Tribe carry tied about
their necks a Bagg, with a great lump of Salt in it, weighing sometimes eight
or ten pounds, (for the heavier it is, the more they glory in carrying it;) and
with this Bagg they thump their stomachs, as a sign of repentance every morning
before they say their Prayers. They have all in general a little line or twist,
like a Scarf, about their necks at the end whereof hangs a little Silver-box,
like a Relique-box, wherein they enclose a little superstitious writing which
their Priests give them; they tie them also about their Oxen and other Cattle,
which are bred in their Herds, for which they have a particular affection, and
love them as tenderly as children, especially if they have no children of their
own. Their Women wear only a piece of Calicut white or painted, some six or
five times doubled from their wastes downward. From their wastes upward they cut
their flesh into several forms of Flowers, as they do that apply
Cupping-glasses, which they paint in various colors with the juice of Grapes,
that their skin seems to be all made of Flowers.

Every morning, while the men load the Beasts, and that the Women fold up the
Tents, the Priests that follow them, set up in the most convenient place of the
Plain where they lodged a certain Idol in the form of a Serpent in wreaths,
upon a Perch six or seven foot high; to which they come all in files to
worship, their Women going three times about. After the Ceremony is over, the
Priests take care of the Idol, and load it upon an Ox particularly appointed
for that purpose.

The Caravan of Wagons seldom exceeds the number of an hundred or two hundred
at most. Every Wagon is drawn by ten or twelve Oxen; and attended by four
Soldiers, which the person that owes the Merchandise is obliged to pay. Two of
them march upon each side of the Wagon, over which there are two Ropes thrown
across, the ends whereof they hold in their hands, to the end, that if the
Wagon come to lean on one-side in ill-way, the two Soldiers on the other side
may keep it from over-turning, by pulling the Ropes with all their strength.

All the Wagons that come to Suratt, either from Agra, or any other parts of
the Empire, and which return through Agra, or Janabatt, are bound to carry back
the Lime that comes from Barocha, which, after it is tempered, and laid on,
becomes as hard as Marble.

I come now to the manner of traveling in India, to which purpose they make
use of Oxen instead of Horses, and there are some, whose pace is as easy as the
amble of our Hackneys. But you must take a care, when you either buy or hire an
Ox to ride upon, that the horns be not above a foot in length. For if they be
longer, when the flies begin to sting, he will chafe, and toss back his horns,
and strike them into the stomach of the Rider, as oftentimes it has happened.
These Oxen are rid like our Horses, and instead of Snaffles or Bitts, they have
only a Rope drawn through the muscly part of the muzzle or nostrils. In firm
ground where there are no stones, they never shoe their Oxen; but only in
rough places, where not only the stones but the heat will wast and chop the
hoof. Whereas in Europe we tie our Oxen by the horns, the Indians only put a
thick truss upon their necks, that keeps fast a Collar of Leather four fingers
broad, which they have nothing to do but to put about their necks when they
fasten them to the Wagon.

They use also for Travel little Coaches, but very light, that will hold two
persons; but generally they ride alone for more ease; carrying only their
necessary Cloak-Bags along with them; with a small Vessel of Wine, and a small
quantity of Provisions, for which there is a proper place under the Coach,
where they tie the two Oxen. These Coaches have their Curtains and Seats like
ours, yet are not hung: But in my last Travels I caused one to be made after
our manner; and the two Oxen that drew it, cost me near upon six-hundred
Roupies. Nor is the Reader to wonder at the price; for there are some of these
Oxen that are very strong, and that will travel upon the trot twelve or fifteen
leagues a day for sixty days together. When they have gone half the days
journey, they give them two or three Balls, as big as one of our
two-pennyloaves, of Wheat kneaded up with butter and black-sugar. The hire of a
Coach comes to a Roupie a day more or less. From Suratt to Agra is forty days
journey, and you pay for the whole journey from forty to forty-five Roupies.
From Suratt to Golconda, being almost the same distance, the same price is
observed; and by the same proportion you may travel over all the Indies.

They who have more to spend, for their own ease make use of a Pallanquin,
wherein they travel very commodiously. This is a sort of little Couch six or
seven foot long, and three broad, with balisters round about it. A sort of
Cane; called Bambouc, which they bend like an Arch, sustains the covering of
the Pallanquin, which is either of Satin or Cloth of Gold; and when the Sun
lies upon one side, a Slave that goes by the side, takes care to pull down the
covering. Another Slave carries at the end of a long stick a kind of Target of
Osier, covered over with some gentile stuff, to preserve the person that is in
the Pallanquin from the heat of the Sun, when he turns and lies upon his face.
The two ends of the Bambouc are fastened on both sides to the body of the
Pallanquin between two sticks joined together like a Saltir or St.
Andrews-cross, every one of those two sticks being five or six foot long. There
are some of these Bambouc's that cost two-hundred Crowns; I my self have paid
an hundred and twenty. Three men for the most part apply themselves to each of
these two ends to carry the Pallanquin upon their shoulders; some on the right,
and some on the left, and they go swifter than our Sedan-men, and with a much
more easy pace, as being that which they practice from their youth. You give to
every one for all things not above four Roupies a Month; but it stands you in
above five if the journey be long, and exceed sixty days labor.

Whether it be in Coach, or Pallanquin, he that will travel honorably in the
Indies, must take along with him twenty or thirty armed men, with Bows and
Arrows some, others with Muskets; and they have the same rate with those that
carry the Pallanquin. Sometimes for more magnificence they carry a Banner, as
the English and Hollanders do, for the honor of their Companies. These
Soldiers are not only for show, but they watch for your defense, keeping
Sentinels, and relieving one another, and are very studious to give content.
For you must know, that in the Towns where you take them into service, they
have a Chieftain, that is responsible for their fidelity, who for his good word
has two Roupies a-piece of every one.

In the great Villages there is generally a Mahumetan that commands, of whom
you may buy Mutton, Pullets, or Pigeons. But where there live none but
Banians, there is nothing but Flower, Rice, Herbs and Milk-meats to be had.

The great heats in India enforcing the Travelers, that are not accustomed to
them, to travel by night, and rest in the daytime; when they come into any
fortified Towns, they must be gone before Sunset, if they intend to travel
that night. For night coming on, and the Gates being shut, the Commander of the
place, who is to answer for all the Robberies that are committed within his
Jurisdiction, will let no person stir forth, telling them that it is the King's
order, to which he must be obedient. When I came to any of those Towns, I
bought my Provisions, and went out again in good time, and staid in the Field
under some Tree, in the fresh air, till it was time to set forward.

They measure the distances of places in India by Gos, and Costs. A Gos is
about four of our common leagues, and a Cost one league. It is now time to
travel from Surat for Agra, and Janabat, and to observe what is most remarkable
upon the Road.

CHAP. IV. The Road from Surat to Agra, through Brampour and Seronge.
I Am no less well acquainted with all the principal Roads that lead to the
chief Cities of India, than those of Turkey and Persia; for in six times that I
have traveled from Paris to Ispahan, I have gone twice for one from Ispahan to
Agra, and many other places of the Great Mogul's Empire. But it would be
tiresome to the Reader to carry him more than once the same way, on purpose to
make a relation of every particular journey, and the accidents that accompany
them: And therefore it will suffice to give an exact description of the Roads,
without particularizing the distinct times that I went.

There are but two Roads from Surat to Agra, one through Brampour and Seronge,
the other through Amadabat. The first shall be the Subject of this Chapter.

From Surat to Barnoly, costs 14

Barnoly is a great Borough-Town, where you are to ford a great River; and this
first days journey you cross a mixed Country, part Wood, part through Fields of
Wheat and Rice.

From Barnoly to Bahor, costs. 10

Bahor is also a large Village upon a Lake, about a league in compass. Upon the
side whereof is to be seen a good substantial Fortress; though there be no use
made of it. Three quarters of a league on this side the Village you ford a
small River, though not without great difficulty, by reason of the Rocks and
Stones that hazard the over-turning of the Coach. This second days-journey you
travel almost altogether through Woods.

From Balor to Kerkoa, or as it is called at this day, Carvansera de la Begum,
costs. 5

This Carvansera or Inn is very large and commodious; being built out of
Charity by Begum-saheb the Daughter of Cha-jehan. For formerly the journey from
Balor to Navapoura was too great: And this place being upon the Frontiers of
those Raja's that sometimes will not acknowledge the Great Mogul, whose Vassals
they are, there was no Caravan that past by which was not abused; besides that
it is a wooddy-Countrey. Between Carvansera and Navapoura you ford a River; as
also another very near to Navapoura.

From Kerkoa to Navapoura, costs. 75

Navapoura is a great Town full of Weavers; but Rice is the greatest Commodity
of that place. There runs a River through the Country, which makes it very
fruitful, and waters the Rice, that requires moisture. All the Rice which grows
in this Country has one peculiar quality, that makes it more particularly
esteemed. The grain of it is less by one half, than the grain of the common
Rice; and when it is boiled, no snow is whiter; but besides all that, it smells
of Musk; and all the Grandees of the Indians eat no other. When they would make
an acceptable Present to any one in Persia, they send him a sack of this Rice.
This River which passes by Kerkoa and those other places I have mentioned,
empties it self into the River of Surat.

From Navapoura to Nasarbar, costs. 9

From Nasarbar to Dol-medan, costs. 74

From Dol-medan to Senquera, costs. 7

From Senquera to Tallener, costs. 10

At Tallener you are to pass the River, which runs to Baroche; where it is very
large, and empties it self into the Golf of Cambaya.

From Tallener to Choupre, costs. 15

From Coupre to Senquelis, costs. 13

From Senquelis to Nabir, costs. 10

From Nabir to Badelpoura, costs. 9

At Badelpoura it is, where the loaded Wagons pay the duties of Brampour; but
the Wagons that carry nothing but Passengers, pay nothing.

From Badelpoura to Brampour, costs 5

Brampour is a great City, very much ruined, the Houses being for the most part
thatched with straw. There is also a great Castle in the midst of the City,
where the Governor lies; the Government of this Province is a very
considerable command; and is only conferred upon the Son or Uncle of the King.
And Aureng-zeb, the present King, was a long time Governor of this Province in
the Reign of his Father. But since they came to understand the strength of the
Province of Bengala, which formerly bore the Title of a Kingdom, that Province
is now the most considerable in all the Mogul's Country. There is a great
Trade in this City, and as well in Brampore, as over all the Province, there is
made a prodigious quantity of Calicuts very clear and white, which are
transported into Porsia, Turkey and Muscovia, Poland, Arabia, to Grand Cairo,
and other places. There are some which are painted with several colors, with
flowers, of which the Women make Veils and Scarfs; the same Calicuts serve for
Coverlets of Beds, and for Handkerchiefs. There is another sort of Linen which
they never dye, with a stripe or two of Gold or Silver quite through the piece,
and at each end from the breadth of one inch to twelve or fifteen, in some more,
in some less, they fix a tissue of Gold, Silver, and Silk, intermixed with
Flowers, whereof there is no wrong-side, both sides being as fair the one as
the other. If these pieces, which they carry into Poland, where they have a
vast utterance, want at each end three or four inches at the least of Gold or
Silver; or if that Gold or Silver become tarnish'd in being carried by Sea from
Surat to Ormus, and from Trebizan to Mangala, or any other parts upon the
Black-Sea, the Merchant shall have much ado to put them off without great loss.
He must take care that his goods be packt up in good Bales, that no wet may get
in; which for so long a Voyage requires great care and trouble. Some of these
Linnens are made purposely for Swathbands or Shashes, and those pieces are
called Ornis. They contain from 15 to 20 Else; and cost from an hunderd to an
hunderd and fifty Roupies, the least not being under ten or twelve else. Those
that are not above two else long are worn by the Ladies of Quality for Veils
and Scarfs, of which there is a vast quantity vended in Persia and Turkey. They
make at Brampour also other sorts of Cotton-Linnen; for indeed there is no
Province in all the Indies which more abounds in Cotton.

When you leave the City of Brampoure, you must pass another River, besides
that which I have mentioned already. There is no Bridge, and therefore when the
water is low, you ford it; when the rains fall, there are Boats attending.

From Surat to Brampour it is 132 Costs; and these Costs are very short in
the Indies; for you may travel one of them in a Coach in less than an hour.

I remember a strange tumult at Brampoure, in the year 1641, when I returned
from Agra to Surat; the cause whereof was thus, in short: The Governor of the
Province who was the King's Nephew by the Mother's-side, had among his Pages a
young Boy that was very beautiful, and of a very good Family, who had a Brother
in the City that lived as a Dervich; and for whom all the Town had a very great
veneration. One day the Governor, being alone in his Chamber, did all that lay
in his power, by virtue of Gifts and Caresses, to have had the use of his Body;
but the Boy detesting his abominable purpose, made his escape from him, and
came and told his Brother. The Dervich, without deliberating what Council he
had to give his younger Brother, gave him a Sword, such a one as he might
easily hide under his Garment; and told him, that if the Governor urged him
any more, that he should make a show of complying with him, but that when he
went about to do the fact, he should be sure to run him into the Guts. The
Governor, who knew nothing of what the Page had revealed to his Brother,
ceased not every day to court him to consent to his infamous lust; and being
one day alone with him in a small Apartment of a Banqueting House, at the
lower end of his Garden, he sent for his Page to fan him, and to keep off the
Flies, after the fashion of the Country; for it was about noon, when every one
goes to sleep. Then did the Governor begin again to press the young Page; and
finding that he made no resistance, he thought he should suddenly accomplish
his design. But the Page seeing him ready to commit the act, stabbed him three
times into the Belly, before he could open his mouth to cry out for help. That
done, the Page went out of the Palace, without any disturbance In his
countenance; so that the Guards believed that the Governor had sent him out
upon some errand. The Dervich understanding by his Brother what had passed, to
save him from the fury of the people, and to discover the Infamy of the
Governor, caused the rest of the Dervichs his Companions, to take the Banners
of Mahomet, that were planted round the Mosquee; and at the same time with loud
cries encouraged all the rest of the Dervichs, Faquirs, and others that were
good Mahumetans, to follow him. In less than an hours time he had got together
an infinite multitude of the Rabble, and the Dervich marching at the head of
them, they made directly to the Palace, crying out with all their might, Let us
dye for Mahomet, or let us have that infamous person delivered up into our
hands, to the end the Dogs may eat him after his death, not being worthy to be
enterr'd among the Musselmen. The Guard of the Palace was not in a condition to
resist so great a Multitude, so that they must have been forced to have yielded
to their fury, had not the Deroga of the Town, and some five or six Lords,
found a way to make themselves to be heard, and to appease them, by
representing to them, that they ought to have some respect to the Nephew of the
King; by that means obliging them to retire. That night the Body of the
Governor was sent to Agra, with his Haram; and Cha-jehan, who then reigned,
being informed of the accident, was not much troubled, because he is Heir to
all the goods of his Subjects; and at the same time he bestowed upon the Page a
small Government in the Province of Bengala.

From Brampour to Piombi-sera, costs 5

Before we go any farther, you must take notice, that wherever you meet with
the word Sera, it signifies a great Enclosure of Walls and Hedges, within which
are about fifty or sixty Huts, covered over with Straw. There are some men and
women that there put to sale Flower, Rice, Butter, and Herbs, and make it their
business to bake Bread and boil Rice. If there be any Mahumetan in that place,
he will go to the City, and buy a little piece of Mutton, or a Fowl; and those
that sell Victuals to the Travelers, always cleanse the Hut which they take
up, and put into it a little Bed with girths, to lay a Mattress or Quilt upon,
which the Travelers carry along with them.

From Piombi-sera to Pander, costs 3

From Pander to Balki-sera, costs 6

From Balki-sera to Nevilki-sera, costs 5

From Nevilki-sera to Consemba, costs 5

From Consemba to Chenipore, costs 3

From Chenipore to Charava, costs 8

From Charava to Bich-ola, costs 8

From Bich-ola to Andy, costs 4

At Andy you must pass a River that falls into Ganges, between Banarou and
Patna.

From Andi to Onquenas, costs 4

From Onquenas to Tiquery, costs 5

From Tiquery to Tool-meden, costs 4

From Tool-meden to Nova-sera, costs 4

From Nova-sera to Ichavour, costs 4

From Ichavour to Signor, costs 5

From Signor to Chekaipour, costs 3

From Chekaipour to Dour-ay, costs 3

From Dour-ay to Aser-kaira, costs 3

From Aser-kaira to Telor, costs 3

From Telor to San-kaira, costs 3

From San-kaira to Seronge, costs 12

Seronge is a great City, the most part of the Inhabitants whereof are Banian
Merchants, and Handicraft-trades-men from Father to Son, which is the reason
that there are in this City several Houses of Stone and Brick. There is also a
great Trade for all sorts of painted Calicuts, which are called Chites; which
is the clothing of all the meaner sort of people both in Persia and Turkey: Of
which in other Countries also they make use, for Coverlets for Beds, and
Table-napkins. They make the same sort of Calicuts in other Countries as well
as at Seronge, but the colors are not so lively; besides, that they wear out
with often washing. Whereas those that are made at Seronge, the more you wash
them the fairer the colors show. There runs a River by the City, the water
whereof has that virtue, that it gives that beauty and liveliness to the
colors. And all the while the rains fall, the Workmen will make these prints
upon their Cottons, according to the Patterns which the Foreign Merchants give
them; for when the waters are ceased the water is the thicker; and the oftener
they dip their Calicuts, the better the colors hold.

There is also made at Seronge another sort of Calicut, which is so fine, that
when a man puts it on, his skin shall appear through it, as if he were naked.
The Merchants are not permitted to transport it. For the Governor sends it all
to the Seraglio of the Great Mogul, and to the principal Lords of the Court. Of
this, the Sultanesses, and great Noblemen's Wives make them Shifts and Garments
in hot-weather: And the King and the Lords take great pleasure to behold them
in those Shifts, and to see them Dance with nothing else upon their Bodies.

From Brampore to Seronge is an hundred and one costs, which are longer than
those from Surat to Brampore; for the Coach is a full hour, and sometimes five
quarters, going one of these costs. In these hundred leagues of the Country
you travel whole days journeys along by most fertile Fields of Corn and Rice,
being lovely Champaign, where you meet with very little Wood; and from Seronge
to Agra, the Country is much of the same nature: And because the Villages lie
thick together, your journey is the more pleasant; besides, that you may rest
when you please.

From Seronge to Madalki-sera, costs. 6

From Madalki-sera to Poulki-sera, costs. 2

From Poulki-sera to Kasariki-sera, costs. 3

From Kasariki-sera to Chadolki-sera, costs. 6

From Chadolki-sera to Callabas, costs. 6

Callabas is a great Town, which was formerly the Residence of a Raja, who paid
Tribute to the Great Mogul. But when Orang-zeb came to the Crown, he not only
cut off his, but a great number of the heads of his Subjects. There are two
Towers near the Town, upon the highway, and round about the Towers are several
holes, like windows; and in every hole, two foot distant one from another,
there is fixed a man's head. In my last Travels in the year 1665, it had not
been long since that Execution had been done; for then all the Heads were
whole, and caused a very ill smell.

From Callabas to Akmate, costs 2

From Akmate to Collasar, costs 9

Collasar is a little Town, all the Inhabitants whereof are Idolaters. As I
past through it upon my last Travels, there were brought to it eight Pieces of
Artillery, the one carrying 48 pound-Bullet, the rest 36. Every Piece was drawn
by 24 Yoke of Oxen. A very strong Elephant followed the Artillery, and when
they came to any bad-way, where the Oxen were at a stand, they brought up the
Elephant, who heaved the Cannon forward with his Trunk. Without the Town, all
along the highway, there grows a vast number of great Trees, which they call
Mangues; and in many places near the Trees are to be seen little Pagods, with
every one an Idol at the door. The Elephant passing by one of the Pagods,
before which I was lodged, at the door whereof there stood three Idols about
five foot high; so soon as he came near one, he took it up in his trunk, and
broke it in two pieces; the next he took, he threw it up so high, and so far,
that he broke it in four pieces; and carried away the head of the third along
with him. Some thought that the Governor of the Elephant had taught him what
to do, and made signs to him, which however I did not observe; nevertheless the
Banians were very much offended, though they durst not say any thing; for there
was a Guard of above two thousand men that convoyed the Artillery, all
Soldiers of the King, and Mahometans, besides Franguis, or Franks, English and
Hollanders that were Cannoneers. The King sent this Artillery to his Army in
Decan, being at Wars with the Raja Sova-gi, who the year before had plundered
Surat; of whom I shall have occasion to speak in another place.

From Collasar to Sansele, costs 6

From Sansele to Dongry, costs 4

From Dongry to Gate, costs 3

Gate is a strait passage of the Mountains, a quarter of a league in length,
the descent whereof leads from Surat to Agra. At the entry thereof you see the
ruins of two or three Castles, and the Road is so narrow, that two Wagons can
hardly go a breast. They that come from the South to go to Agra, as from Surat,
Goa, Visapore, Golconda, Maslipatan, and other places, cannot avoid these
streights, there being no other Road but this, especially if you take the Road
from Amadabat. Formerly there was a Gate at each end of the straight, and at
that end which is next to Agra, there are five or six Shops of Banians, that
sell Flower, Butter, Rice, Herbs and Pulse. In my last Travels I staid at one
of these Shops, to carry for the Coaches and Wagons, all the Passengers
alighting at the foot of the Streights. Not far off there is a great Magazin
full of sacks of Rice and Corn; and behind every sack lay a Serpent thirteen or
fourteen foot long, and proportionable in bigness. A Woman that went to fetch
Corn out of one of those sacks, was bitten by one of those Serpents, and
perceiving her self wounded, ran out of the Magazin, crying out Ram, Ram, that
is, O God, O God; whereupon several Banians, men and women came running to her
relief, and bound her arm very hard above the wound, thinking to stop the venom
from running any higher. But all in vain, for immediately her face swelled, and
turned black, and she died in less than an hour. The Ragipou's, who are the
best Soldiers among the Indians, and are all Idolaters, came in just as the
woman was expiring, and about four of them entering with their Skains, and
Half-pikes in their hands into the Magazin, killed the Serpent. The people of
the Village took and threw it without the Town, and immediately there came a
great number of Birds of prey, which lighting upon the Carrion, devoured it in
less than an hours time. The Parents of the woman took her body, carried it to
the River, washed it, and then burnt it. I was forced to stay two days at that
place, because there was a River to pass, which instead of falling, swelled at
that time, by reason of the rains that fell for three or four days together: So
that I was constrained to go half a league lower before I could cross it. They
always endeavored to ford this River; for otherwise they must be compelled to
unload the Wagon into the Boats; and also to carry the Goods in their arms for
above half a league, which is worse way than can be imagined. The people get
their livings by the Passengers, from whom they extort as much as they can,
there being none but they that know the ways: Otherwise it would be an easy
thing to make a Bridge, there being no want either of Wood or Stone near at
hand. For the passage is nothing but thorough Rocks, that lie between the
Mountain and the River; so that the waters when they swell, overflow all the
Road, in-so-much that nobody can pass it, but they who are very well
acquainted with it.

From Gate to Nader, costs 4

Nader is a great City upon the descent of a Mountain, at the top whereof is a
kind of a Fortress; all the Mountain being encompast with walls. The greatest
part of the Houses, as in all other Cities of India, are thatched with straw,
one Story high; but the Rich-men's Houses, are two Stories, and terrass'd.
Round about the City are several great Ponds to be seen, which were formerly
encompast with hewn-stone, but now are not at all looked after; yet there are
very fair Monuments about them. The same River which we past the day before,
and which we repass four or five Costs on this side Nader, encompasses three
parts of the City and Mountain, like a Peninsula, and after a long
winding-course which it takes, falls at length into Ganges. At Nader they make
a great quantity of quilted-Coverlets, some white, others embroidered with
Flowers of Gold, Silk and Satin.

From Nader to Barqui-sera, costs 9

From Barqui-sera to Try, costs 3

From Try to Goualeor, costs 6

Goualeor is a great City ill-built, like all the rest, after the manner of the
Indians; it is built all along the side of a Mountain that lies upon the
West Side of it; and which at the top is encompast with Walls and Towers. There
are in this Enclosure several Ponds made by the rains; and what they sow there
is sufficient to keep the Garrison: For which reason it is esteemed one of the
best in the Indies. Upon the descent of the Hill, which looks toward the
North-east, Chajehan built an House of Pleasure; from whence there is a
Prospect over all the City, and indeed it may serve for a Garrison. Below the
House are to be seen several Idols cut out of the Rock, representing the shapes
of their Gods: And among the rest, there is one of an extraordinary height.

Since the Mohammedan Kings became Masters of this Country, this Fortress of
Goualeor is the place where they secure Princes and great Noblemen. Cha-jehan
coming to the Empire by foul-play, caused all the Princes and Lords whom he
mistrusted, to be seized one after another, and sent them to the Fortress of
Goualeor; but he suffered them all to live, and enjoy their Estates, Aureng-zeb
his Son acts quite otherwise: For when he sends any great Lord to this place,
at the end of nine or ten days he orders him to be poisoned; and this he does
that the people may not exclaim against him for a bloody Prince. So soon as he
had in his clutches Prince Morat-Bakche his youngest Brother, whom he engaged
to take Arms against his Father Cha-jehan; and who being Governor of the
Province of Guzerat, took upon him the Title of King, he sent him to this
Fortress, where he died. They have made him a most magnificent Monument in the
City in a Mosquee, which they built on purpose, with a great Piazza before it
all surrounded with Vaults and Shops over them. For it is the custom of the
Indians, when they rear any public Building, to make a great Piazza before it,
where they keep their Markets, with a Foundation for the Poor, to whom they
give Alms every day, as being to pray to God for him that raised the Fabric.

Five Cost's from Goualeor, you ford a River which is called Lantke.

From Goualeor to Paterki-sera, costs 3

From Paterki-sera to Quariqui-sera, costs 10

There is a Bridge at Paterki-sera, consisting of six wide Arches; and the River
you go over is called Quarinado.

From Quariki-sera to Dolpoura, costs 6

At Dolpoura there is a great River which is called Chammelnadi, to which there
belongs a Ferry-Boat: The River it self falls into the Gemena between Agra and
Halabas.

From Dolpoura to Minasqui-sera, costs 6

At Minasqui-sera there is a River, which is called Jagounadi. You pass it over
a very long Bridge, built of Stone, the name whereof is Jaoulcapoul.

From Minasqui-sera to this Bridge, costs 8

Not far from this Bridge it is, that they view the Merchants Goods, that when
they come to Agra they may not be deceived of their duties. But more
particularly to see whether among the Casks of Fruits pickled in Vinegar, in
pots of Glass, there be no flasks of Wine.

From the Bridge Jaoulcapoul to Agra, costs

So that from Seronge to Agra it is an hundred and six Costs, which are
ordinary leagues; and from Surat to Agra, 339.

CHAP. V. The Road from Surat to Agra through Amadabat.
FRom Surat to Baroche, costs

All the Country between these two Cities is full of Corn, Rice, Millet, and
Sugarcanes. Before you enter into Baroche, you must Ferry over the River which
runs to Cambaya, and falls into the Golf that carries the same name.

Baroche is a great City, to which there belongs a Fortress, of which there is
no use made at this time. But the City has been always very famous, by reason
of the River, which has a particular quality to whiten their Cottons; which are
brought thither from all parts of the Great Mogul's Territories, where they
have not that convenience. In this place are made a great quantity of Baffa's,
or long and large pieces of Cotton. These Cottons are very fair, and close
woven; and the price of these pieces is from four to an hundred Roupies. You
must pay Custom at Baroche for all Goods that are brought in and carried out.
The English have a very fair House in the City; and I remember once, that
coming thither one day in my return from Surat to Agra with the President of
the English, presently the Mountebanks came about him, and asked him if he
would see any of their tricks. The first thing they did was to light a great
fire, and to heat certain Iron-chains red-hot, and wind them about their
bodies, making as if they felt a great deal of pain, but in truth receiving no
harm at all. Then they thrust a piece of a stick into the ground, and asked the
Company what Fruit they would have. One told them, he would have Mengues; then
one of the Mountebanks hiding himself in the middle of a Sheet, stoopt to the
ground five or six times one after another. I was so curious to go up stairs,
and look out of a window, to see if I could spy what the Mountebank did; and
perceived, that after he had cut himself under the armpits with a Razor, he
rubbed the stick with his Blood. After the two first times that he raised
himself, the stick seemed to the very eye to grow. The third time there sprung
out branches with young buds. The fourth time the Tree was covered with leaves;
and the fifth time it bore flowers. The President of the English had then his
Minister with him, having brought him from Amadabat to Christen the Commander
of the Hollander's Child, to which he had promised to be Godfather. The English
Minister protested that he could not give his consent that any Christian should
be a spectator of such delusions. So that as soon as he saw that those
Mountebanks had of a dry-stick, in less than half an hour, made a Tree four or
five foot high, that bare leaves and flowers as in the Springtime; he went
about to break it, protesting he would not give the Communion to any person
that should stay any longer to see those things. Thereupon the President was
forced to dismiss the Mountebanks, who wander about the Country with their
Wives and Children just like Gypsies; and having given them to the value of ten
or twelve Crowns, they went away very well contented.

They that are curious to see Cambaya, never go out of their way above five or
six Costs, or thereabout. For when you are at Baroche, instead of going to
Broudra, you may go directly forward to Cambaya, from thence afterward to
Amadabat. But whether it be for business, or out of curiosity, the latter Road
is never to be taken; not only because it is the longest way, but because of
the danger in crossing the mouth of the Golf.

Cambaya is a great City at the bottom of the Golf that bears its name. Here it
is that they shape those fair Agats, that come from the Indies, into Cups,
Hasts of Knives, Beads, and other sorts of Workmanship. In the parts adjacent
to the City, they also make Indigo of the same nature of that of Sarquess; and
it was famous for traffic at the time when the Portugueses flourished in
India. There are to be seen at this day, in the Quarter next the Sea, very fair
Houses, which they had built, with very rich Furniture, after the Portugal
manner; but now they are uninhabited, and fall to decay every day more and
more. There were then such good Orders observed in Cambaya, that two hours
after day was shut in, every Street was locked up with two Gates, which are
still to be seen; and still they continue to lock up the principal Streets, as
also the Streets that lead into the Town. One of the chief reasons why the Town
has lost the greatest part of its Trade is, because that formerly the Sea run
close up to Cambaya, so that little Vessels easily anchored by it; but
afterward the Sea daily lost in that part, so that a small Ship could not ride
within five or six Leagues of the City.

There are a great number of Peacocks in the Indies, especially in the
Territories of Baroche, Cambaya, and Broudra. The flesh of the young ones is
white and well-tasted, like ours, and you shall see vast numbers of them all
day in the Fields, for at night they roost upon the Trees. It Is a hard matter
to come near them in the day, for as soon as they perceive themselves hunted,
they fly away as swift as a Partridg among the Bushes; so that it is impossible
for any man to follow them without tearing his Clothes all to rags; therefore
are they only to be taken in the night time, to which purpose they have this
invention. They approach the Tree with a kind of a Banner, upon which there is
a Peacock painted to the life on both sides; at the top of the stick are
fastened two lighted Candles, the brightness whereof amazing the Peacock,
causes him to stretch out his Neck toward the end of the stick, to which there
is a Rope tied with a sliding knot, which he that holds the Banner draws, when
he finds that the Peacock has put his Neck into it. But you must have a care of
killing either Bird, or any other Animal in the Territories, of which the
idolatrous Raja's are Masters; which it is nothing dangerous to do in those
parts of the Indies, where the Governors are Mahometans, and give liberty to
Fowl or Hunt. It happened one time that a rich Persian Merchant, passing
through the Territories of the Raja of Dantivar, shot a Peacock upon the road,
and killed it, either out of rashness, or ignorance of the Customs of the
Country. The Bannians incensed at the attempt, which is accounted among them a
most abominable sacriledg, seized upon the Merchant, and all his Money to the
value of 300000. Roupies, and tying him to a Tree, whipped him in so terrible a
manner for three days together, that the man died.

From Cambaya you go to a little Village distant some three Costs, where there
is a Pagod, to which all the Indian Curtisans come to make their Offerings.
This Pagod is full of a great number of naked Images, among the rest, there is
a large Figure of one that seems to resemble Apollo, with his privy parts all
uncovered. When the old Curtisans have got together a good sum of Money in
their youth, they buy young Slaves, whom they teach to Dance, and sing wanton
Songs, and instruct in all the mysteries of their infamous Art. And when these
young Girls are eleven or twelve years old, their Mistresses send them to this
Pagod, believing it will bring them good fortune, to offer and surrender up
themselves to this Idol.

From this Pagod to Chiidabad you have six Costs. This is one of the fairest
Houses of the great Mogul, with a wide Enclosure, wherein he has vast Gardens,
and large Ponds, with all the pleasures and curiosity whereof the Genius of the
Indians is capable.

From Chiidabad to Amadabad you have but five Costs; and so I return to
Baroche, and the common Road.

From Baroche to Broudra, Costs 22

Broudra is a great City standing in a fertile Soil, wherein there is a vast
Trade for Calicuts.

From Broudra to Neriade, costs 18

From Neriade to Amadabat, costs 20

Amadabat is one of the greatest Cities in India; and where there is a mighty
Trade for Silk-Stuffs, Hangings of Gold and Silver, and others mixed with Silk;
for Saltpeter, Sugar, Ginger candid and raw; Tamarins, Mirobolans, and flat
Indigo, which is made at a great Town, not far from Amadabat, called Sarquess.
There was in that place a Pagod, which the Mahumetan's have pulled down, and
built a Mosquee in the place. Before you enter into it, you must cross three
large Courts paved with Marble, and encompast with Galleries; nor must you
enter into the third Court till you have pulled off your shoes. The inside of
the Mosquee is adorned with Mosaic-work, the greatest part whereof is of Agats
of diverse colors, which they fetch from the Mountains of Cambaya, not above
two days journey off. There are several Sepulchers of the ancient Idolatrous
Kings, that look like little Chapels, of Mosaic-work, built upon a Vaut that
is under the Sepulcher. There runs a River from Amadabat toward the North-west,
which during the rainy-seasons that continue three or four Months together, is
very wide and rapid, and does much mischief every year. It is so with all the
other Rivers in India; and after the rains are fallen, you must stay six weeks
or two months before you can ford Amadabat-River, where there is no Bridge.
There are two or three Boats; but they are of no use, when the stream is so
swift; so that you must stay till the waters are fallen. But the people of the
Country will not stay so long; for to cross from one River to another, they
only make use of Goatskins, which they blow up and fill with wind, and then tie
them between their stomachs and their bellies. Thus the poor men and women swim
cross this River, and when they would carry their children along with them,
they put them in certain round pots of Earth, the mouth whereof is four-fingers
wide, and drive the Pots before them. This puts me in mind of a Passage, when I
was at Amadabat in the year 1642, which is too remarkable to be omitted.

A Countryman and a Countrey-woman one day past the River as I have related,
and having a child about two years old, they put it into one of these Pots, so
that there was nothing but the head appeared. Being about the middle of the
River, they met with a little bank of Sand, where there lay an huge Tree, which
the stream had carried thither; whereupon the Father should the Pot toward that
part, to rest himself awhile. When he came near the Tree, the trunk whereof
lay somewhat above the water, a Serpent leapt out from among the roots, into
the Pot where the Infant was. The Father and the Mother frighted at the
accident, and having almost lost their senses, let the Pot go a-drift where the
stream carried it, and lay almost dead themselves at the bottom of the Tree.
About two leagues lower, a Banian and his Wife with a little Infant, were
washing themselves in the River before they went to eat. They descried the Pot
a-far-off, with the half of the Infant's-head that appeared above the hole. The
Banian immediately swims to the relief of the child, and having stopped the
Pot, drives it to the shore. The Mother followed by her own, comes presently to
take the other child out of the Pot, at what time the Serpent that had done no
harm to the other child, shoots out of the Pot, and winding about hers, stings
it, and infuses its venom into the Insant, so that it died immediately.
However, the accident, being so extraordinary, did not trouble those poor
people; who rather believed it to have happened by the secret disposal of their
Deity, who had taken from them one child, to give them another for it, with
which opinion they presently comforted themselves. Some time after, the report
of this accident coming to the ears of the first Countryman, he comes to the
Banian to tell him how the mischance had happened, and to demand his child of
him; the other Indian affirming that the child was his, and that his God had
sent it him, in the place of that which was dead. To be short, the business
made so loud a noise, that it was at length brought before the King, who
ordered, that the child should be restored to the Father.

At the same time there happened another very pleasant accident in the same
City of Amadabat. The Wife of a rich Merchant Banian, named Saintidas, never
having had a child, and manifesting her eager desire to have one, a servant of
the House took her a-side one day, and told her, that if she would but eat that
which he would give her, she should be with child. The woman desirous to know
what she was to eat, the servant told her it was a little fish, and that she
should eat but three or four. Now the Religion of the Banians forbidding them
to eat any thing that has life, she could not resolve at first to yield to his
proposal; but the servant having promised her that he would so order the
matter, that she should not know whether it were fish or no that she eat, she
resolved to try his receipt, and went the next night to lie with her Husband,
according to the instruction which she had received from the servant. Some time
after, the woman perceiving that she was big, her Husband happened to die, and
the kindred of the deceased would have his Estate. The Widow opposed them, and
told them that it behooved them to stay, till they saw whether the child she
went withal, would live or no. Her kindred were surpised to hear such news
that they so little expected, and taxed her for one that either ly'd or jested
with them; knowing that the woman had lived fifteen or sixteen years with her
Husband, yet never had been with child. Seeing therefore that her kindred still
tormented her, she went and threw her self at the Governor's feet, to whom she
related all that had past, who thereupon ordered that the kindred should stay
till the woman was delivered. Some days after she had lain-in, the kindred of
the deceased Merchant, who were persons of Credit, and gaped after so fair an
inheritance, affirmed that the child was not legitimate, and that she had it
not by her Husband. The Governor, to understand the truth of the matter, calls
for the Physicians; who concluded, that the Infant should be carried to the
Bath, saying, that if the Receipt which the Mother had made use of, were real,
the sweat of the child would smell of fish; which was done accordingly, and the
Experiment proved true. Thereupon the Governor ordered that the child should
have the Estate, the Merchant being so proud to be his Father: But the Kindred,
troubled that such a fat Morsel had escaped their mouths, appealed to the King.
Upon their relation of the story, the King wrote to the Governor to send him
the Mother and the Insant, to the end the Experiment might be made in his
presence: which having the same success as before, the kindred succeas'd their
claim, and the Estate remained to the Mother and the Infant.

I remember also another pleasant Story which was related to me at Amadabat,
where I have been ten or twelve times. A Merchant with whom I often dealt, and
who was very well beloved by Cha-Est-Kan, Governor of the Province, and the
King's Uncle, had the reputation never to have told a lie. Cha-Est-Kan, after
the three years of his Government were expired, according to the custom of the
Great Mogul, and that Aureng-zeb, the King's Son was come into his place,
retired to Agra, where the Court then was. One day, discoursing with the King,
he told him, that he had seen many rare things in the Governments, with which
his Majesty had honored him, but that one thing above all the rest had
astonished him, to have met with a Rich Merchant that had never told a lie, and
yet he was above threescore and ten years of age. The King surpised at a thing
so extraordinary, signified to Cha-Est-Kan, his desire to see the person, and
commanded him to send for him to Agra, which he did. The Old Man was very much
troubled, as well in regard of the length of the way, it being a journey of 25
or or 30 days, as for that he was to make a Present to the King. In short, he
provided one, esteemed at forty-thousand Roupies, to carry Betle in, enchas'd
with Diamonds, Rubies, and Emraulds. When he had made his obeisance to the
King, and given him his Present, the King asked him only what was his name, to
whom he replied, that he was called the man that had never told a lie. Then the
King asked him who was his Father? Sir, said he, I cannot tell; his Majesty
satisfied with that answer, stopped there, and unwilling to trouble him any
farther, commanded an Elephant to be given him, which is a very great Honor,
and ten-thousand Roupies to bear his charges home.

The Banians have a great Veneration for Apes, and there are some which they
breed up in their Pagods to worship. There are three or four Houses in Amadabat
which they make use of for Hospitals for Cowes, Oxen, Apes, and other fick or
maimed Beasts; and they carry all they can find thither to preserve them. This
is also very remarkable, that every Tuesday and Friday, all the Apes in the
places adjoining to Amadabat, of their own accord come to the City, and get
upon the tops of their Houses, where they lie, during the excessive heats. And
therefore upon those days the people never fail to set ready in their
Terrasses, Rice, Millet, Sugarcanes in their seasons, and other suchlike
things. For if the Apes did not find their provision when they came, they would
break the Tiles wherewith the rest of the House is covered, and do a great
deal of mischief. And you must here take notice also, that the Ape never eats
any thing which he does not very well like the scent of beforehand; and before
he swallows anything, he lays up his Magazin against future hunger; filling
his bags with provision, which he keeps till next day.

I have said, that the Banians have a particular Veneration for the Ape; of
which I will give you one Example, among many, that I could bring. Being one
day at Amadabat, at the House belonging to the Hollanders, a young man of that
Nation newly arrived to serve in the Factory, not knowing the custom of the
Country, and seeing a great Ape upon a Tree in the Court, would needs show a
piece of activity, or rather a trick of youth, to kill the Ape with a small
Gun. I was at Table then with the Dutch-Commander; and we no sooner heard the
blow, but we heard as soon a loud noise of Banians, that wait upon the
Holland-Company, who came to complain bitterly of him that had killed the Ape.
They would all have been gone; so that the Commander had much ado, and made
many excuses before he could appease them, and oblige them to stay.

In the Neighborhood about Amadabat, there are a great number of Apes. And
this is observable, that where there are a great number of those Animals, there
are very few Crows. For as soon as they have built their Nests and laid their
Eggs, the Apes get upon the Trees and throw their Eggs to the Ground. One day
returning from Agra, and departing out of Amadabat with the English President,
who came hither about some business, and was returning to Surat, we passed
through a little Forest of Trees, called Mangues, some four or five Leagues
from Amadabat; there we saw a vast number of great Monkeys, male and female,
and many of the females holding their young ones in their Arms. We had each of
us our Coach, and the English President causing his to stop, told me he had an
excellent and very neat Harquebuss, that was presented him by the Governor of
Daman, and knowing I could aim well, he desired me to try it, at one of those
Apes. One of my Servants, who was born in the Country, making me a sign not to
venture, I endeavored to dissuade the President from his design; but it was
impossible; so that I took the Harquebuss, and killed a female Monkey, who lay
stretched out upon the Boughs, letting her little ones fall to the ground. But
it fell out as my Servant had forewarned me. For immediately all the Monkeys
that were upon the Trees, to the number of sixty, came down in a great fury, to
have leaped into the Presidents Coach, where they would soon have strangled
him, had we not prevented them by closing the Shutters, and had we not had a
great number of Servants, that with much ado kept them off. And though they
came not to my Coach, yet I was very much afraid of my self; for they pursued
the President's Coach above a League, and they were stout lusty Monkeys.

From Amadabat to Panser, costs 13

From Panser to Masana, costs 14

From Masana to Chitpour, costs 14

Chitpour is a very good City, so called by reason of the great Trade for
painted-Calicuts, which are called Chites: Near which, some four or
five-hundred paces toward the South, there runs a small River. Arriving at
Chitpour in one of my Voyages, I pitched my Tent under two or three Trees at
the end of a wide-place near the Town. A little while after I saw four or five
Lions appear, which were brought to be tamed; which they told me took them up
five or six months; and their way to do it, is this: They tie the Lions at
twelve paces distance one from another by the hinder-legs, with a Rope fastened
to a great woodden-stake set deep in the ground, with another cord about the
neck, which the Master holds in his hand. These Stakes are planted in the same
Line, and in another Parallel they stretch out another Cord as long as the
space, which the bodies of the Lions so disposed of, as I have described, take
up. The two Cords which hold the Lion tied by the two hinder-feet, give him
liberty to spring out as far as that long Cord; which is a mark to those that
stand to provoke and incense the Lions, by throwing stones and pieces of wood
at them, not to venture any farther: The people run to see the sight, and when
the Lion, provoked, gives a spring toward the Cord, the Master holds another in
his hand, tied about his neck, that pulls him back. Thus they accustom the Lion
by degrees to be familiar with the people, and at my coming to Chiapour, I saw
this Divertisement without stirring out of my Coach.

The next day I had another, meeting with a knot of Faquirs, or Mohammedan
Dervichs. I counted fifty-seven, among whom, he that was the Chief or Superior,
had been Grand Esquire to Cha-jehan-guir, having left the Court, when Sultan
Boulaki, his youngest Son, was strangled by Order of Cha-jehan; there were four
others, who next to the Superior, were chief of the Company, who had been also
great Lords in the same Cha-jehan's Court. All the Clothes those five Dervichs
had, were only four else of Orange-colour-Calicut to hide what modesty will
have hid before and behind, and every one of them a Tygers-skin over their
shoulders tied together under their chins. They had led before them eight fair
Horses saddl'd and bridled; three whereof had Bridles of Gold, and Saddles
covered with Plates of Gold, and the other five had Bridles of Silver covered
with Plates of Silver, and a Leopard's-skin upon every one. The other Dervichs
had only a Cord for their Girdle, to which was fastened a piece of Calicut only
to cover their private parts. Their hair was tied in wreaths round about their
heads after the manner of a Turbant. They were all well-arm'd, the most part
with Bows and Arrows, some with Muskets, and others with Half-pikes, with
another sort of weapon which we have not in Europe; that is to say, a sharp
piece of Iron like the side of a Platter without a bottom, which they wind
eight or ten times about their necks, and carry like a Calves Chaldron. They
draw out these Iron-Circles as they intend to make use of them; and they will
throw them with such a force against a man, that they shall fly as swift as an
Arrow, and go very near to cut a man in two in the middle. They had every one,
besides all this, an Hunting-Horn, which they wind, making a prodigious noise
when they come to any place, and when they go away; together with a Grater or
Rasp, being an Iron-Instrument, made like a Trowel. This is an Instrument which
the Indians carry generally about them when they travel, to scrape and make
clean the places where they intend to rest; and some of them, when they have
scraped all the dust together into an heap, make use of it instead of a
Mattress or Pillow to lie easily upon. There were some of them that were armed
with long Tucks; which they had bought either of the English or Portugals.
Their Luggage consisted of four great Chests full of Persian and Arabian Books,
and some Kitchen-housholdstuff: They had also ten or twelve Oxen to carry their
sick. When the Dervichs came to the place where I lay with my Coach, having
about fifty persons with me, as well of the people of the Country, as of my
own servants; the Chief or Superior of the Troop seeing me so well-attended,
inquired what Aga that was; and desired me to let him have that place which I
had taken up, as being the most convenient in all that place, for him and his
Dervichs to lodge. When they told me the quality of the Chief, and the four
Dervichs that attended him, I was willing to be civil, and to yield to their
request; and thereupon I left them the place free. After they had well-water'd
the place, and laid the dust, they lighted two fires, as if it had been in the
frost and snow, for the five principal Dervichs, who sat and chafed themselves
before and behind. That very evening, after they had supped, the Governor of
the Town came to complement the principal Dervichs, and during their stay, sent
them Rice and other things, which they are accustomed to eat. When they come to
any place, the Superior sends some of his Crew a begging into the Towns and
Villages, and what Alms they get, is presently distributed equally among them;
every one of them taking care to boil his own Rice. What is over and above they
give to the Poor in the evening; for they reserve nothing till next day.

From Chitpour to Balampour, costs 12

From Balampour to Dantivar, costs 11

From Dantivar to Bargant, costs 17

Bargant is in the Territories of a Raja, to whom you pay duties. In one of my
journeys to Agra, passing through Bargant, I did not see the Raja, but only his
Lieutenant, who was very civil to me, and made me a Present of Rice, Butter,
and Fruit in season. To make him amends, I gave him three Shashes of Gold and
Silk, four Handkerchiefs of painted Linen, and two Bottles, the one full of
Aquavitae, and the other full of Spanish-Wine. At my departure he sent a Convoy
of twenty Horse four or five leagues along with me.

One evening, being about to lodge upon the Frontiers of the Territories of the
Raja of Bargant, my people came to me and told me, that if we took the Road
through Bargant, we should go near to have all our throats cut, for that the
Raja of that place lived altogether upon Robbery. So that unless I hired an
hundred more of the Countrey-people, there was no likelihood of escaping those
Freebooters. At first I argued with them, and taxed their Cowardice, but
fearing to pay for my rashness afterward, I sent them to hire fifty more, for
three days only, that we crossed the Raja's Country: for which they asked me
every one four Roupies, which is as much as you give them for a whole Month.
The next day as I was about to set forward, my Guard came and told me they
would leave me, and that they would not venture their lives, desiring me not to
write to Agra to their Captain, who was responsible for them, that they had
left me against my will. Three of my servants also did as they did, so that I
had no body left with me, but a man that lead an Horse in his hand, my
Coachman, and three other servants, and so I set forward under the protection
of God. About a league from the place which I had left, I perceived some part
of my Convoy following me. Thereupon I stopped my Coach to stay for them, and
when they came near, I bid them advance if they intended to go along with me.
But seeing them fearful, and unresolved, I bid them go about their business,
telling them I had no need of such Cowards as they were. About a league from
thence I discovered upon the brow of an Hill about fifty Horse, four of which
came riding up to me; when I perceived them, I alighted out of my Coach, and
having with me some thirteen Spit-fires, I gave to every one of my men an
Harquebuss. The Horsemen approaching, I kept my Coach between them and me, and
had my Gun ready cockt, in case they should assail me. But they made me a sign,
that I should fear nothing; only that the Prince was a Hunting, and had sent to
know what Strangers past through his Territories: I made answer, that I was the
same Franguy that had past by five or six weeks before. By good luck, the very
same Lieutenant to whom I had made the Present of Aquavitae and Spanish-Wine,
followed those four Horsemen. And after he had testified how glad he was to see
me, he asked me if I had any Wine; I told him I never traveled without that:
For indeed the English and Hollanders had presented me with several Bottels at
Agra. So soon as the Lieutenant was returned to the Raja, the Raja himself came
to me, and told me I was welcome; and bid me rest my self in a shady-place
which he pointed to, about a league and an half from the place where we were.
In the evening he came, and we staid together two days to make merry; the Raja
bringing along with him certain Morrice-dancers, without which the Persians and
Indians can never think themselves heartily merry. At my departure the Raja
lent me 200 Horse, to convoy me to the Frontiers of his Territories, for three
days together; for which I only gave them three or four pound of Tobacco. When
I came to Amadabat, the people would hardly believe that I had had so kind a
reception from a Prince, that was noted for abusing strangers that past through
his Country.

From Bargant to Bimal, costs 15

From Bimal to Modra, costs 15

From Modra to Chalaour, costs 10

Chalaour is an ancient Town upon a Mountain, encompast with Walls, and very
difficult to come to. There is a Lake at the top of the Mountain, and another
below; between which and the foot of the Mountain lies the Road to the Town.

From Chalaour to Cantap, costs 12

From Cantap to Setlana, costs 15

From Setlana to Palavaseny, costs 14

From Palavaseny to Pipars, costs 11

From Pipars to Mirda, costs 16

From Dantivar to Mirda is three days journey, being a mountainous Country
that belongs to Raja's, or particular Princes that pay tribute to the Great
Mogul. In recompense whereof the Great Mogul gives them Commands in his Armies;
by which they gain much more than they loose by the tribute which they pay

Mirda is a great City, but ill-built. When I came thither in one of my
Indian-journeys, all the Inns were full of Passengers, in regard that
Cha-jehan's Aunt, the Wife of Cha-Est-Kan, was going that way to marry her
Daughter to Sultan Sujah, the second Son of Cha-jehan; I was forced to set up
my Tent upon a Bank, with Trees on both sides: But I was not a little surpised
two hours afterward, to see fifteen or twenty Elephants loose, that tore down
the boughs as far as they could reach, breaking off the huge Arms of Trees, as
if they had been but small faggot-sticks. This spoil was done by the order of
the Begum, in revenge of the Affront which the Inhabitants of Mirda had put
upon her, who had not waited on her, and made her a Present as they ought to
have done.

From Mirda to Baronda, costs 12

From Baronda to Coetchiel, costs 18

From Coetchiel to Bandar-Sonnery, costs 14

From Bandar-Sonnery to Ladona, costs 16

From Ladona to Chasou, costs 12

From Chasou to Nouali, costs 17

From Nouali to Hindoo, costs 19

From Hindoo to Baniana, costs 10

These two last places are two Towns, where, as in all the Country round
about, they make Indigo-Plate, which is round; and as it is the best of all the
Indigo's, so is it double the price.

From Baniana to Vettapour, costs 14

Vettapour is an ancient Town where they make woollen-Hangings.

From Vettapour to Agra, costs 12

From Surat to Agra is in all, costs 415

If you could divide your journeys equally into thirteen Costs a-piece, you
might go to Surat in thirty-three days; but because you rest, and stay at some
places, it is generally thirty-five or forty days journey.

CHAP. VI. The Road from Ispahan to Agra, through Candahar.
I Have made an exact description of some part of the Road, and brought the
Reader as far as Candahar; it remains, that I carry him from Candahar to Agra;
to which there are but two ways to go, either through Caboul, or through
Mlultan. The latter way is the shorter by ten days journey. But the Caravan
never goes that way. For from Candahar to Multan you travel almost all the way
through Deserts; and sometimes you travel three or four days without meeting
any water. So that the most ordinary and beaten Road, is through Caboul. Now
from Candahar to Caboul, is twenty-four days journey; from Caboul to Lahor,
twenty-two; from Lahor to Dehly, or Gebanabat, eighteen; from Dehly to Agra,
six; which with the sixty days journey from Ispahan to Farat, and the twenty
from Farat to Candahar, makes in all from Ispahan to Agra, an hundred and fifty
days journey. But the Merchants that are in haste, take Horses, three or four
together in a company, and ride the whole journey in sixty, or sixty-five days
at most.

Multan is a City where there is made a vast quantity of Linen Calicuts, which
was all transported to Tuta, before the Sands had stopped up the mouth of the
River; but since that, it is carried all to Agra, and from Agra to Surat, as is
the greatest part of the Merchandise which is made at Lahor. But in regard
carriage is so dear, very few Merchants traffic either to Multan or at Lahor;
and many of the Workmen have also deserted those places, so that the Kings
Revenues are very much diminished in those Provinces. Multan is the place
whither all the Banians come, that trade into Persia, where they follow the
same Trade as the Jews, and outdo them in Usury. They have a particular Law
among them, which permits them to eat Fowl upon certain days in the year; and
not to have more than one Wife among two or three Brothers, the eldest whereof
is accounted the Father of the Children. This City also breeds abundance of
Dancers, of both Sexes, that spread themselves all over Persia.

I come now to the Road from Candahar to Agra, through Caboul and Lahor.

From Candahar to Charisasar, costs 10

From Charisafar to Zelate, costs 12

From Zelate to Betazy, costs 8

From Betazy to Mezour, costs 6

From Mezour to Carabat, costs 17

From Carabat to Chakenicouze, costs 17

From Candahar to Chakenicouze, a Frontier Town of the Indies, is a Country
under the command of several Princes, that acknowledge the Persian Emperor.

From Chakenieouze to Caboul, costs 40

In all these forty Costs of way, there are but three pitiful Villages; where
sometimes, though very rarely, you have Bread and Barley for your Horses; but
the surest way is to carry provision along with you. In the Months of July and
August, there blows a hot Wind in those parts, that takes away a man's breath,
and kills him upon the place; being of the same nature with those Winds, of
which I have spoken in my Persian Relations, that blow at certain seasons near
Babylon and Moussul.

Caboul is a large City, very well fortified; and is the place where those of
Usbek come every year to sell their Horses. They reckon, that there are bought
and sold, every year, above sixty thousand. They bring also out of Persia,
great numbers of Sheep, and other Cattle; it being the general Concourse of
Persians, Tartarians, and Indians. There is also Wine to be had; but Provisions
go off at a very good rate.

Before I go any farther, I must take notice of one thing in particular,
concerning the people called Augans, who inhabit from Candahar to Caboul,
toward the Mountains of Balch, a sturdy sort of people, and great Robbers in
the nightime. It is the custom of the Indians to cleanse and scrape their
tongues every morning with a crooked piece of a root, which causes them to void
a great quantity of Phlegm and Rhume, and provokes vomiting. Now though those
people that inhabit the Frontiers of Persia and India practice the same thing;
nevertheless they vomit very little in the morning, but when they come to eat,
as soon as they have swallowed two or three bits, their lungs begin to swell,
and they are constrained to go forth and vomit; after which, they return again
to their Victuals with a very good appetite. Should they not do so, they would
not live above thirty years; and besides, they would be troubled with the
Dropsy.

From Caboul to Bariabe, costs 19

From Bariabe to Nimela, costs 17

From Nimela to Aliboua, costs 19

From Aliboua to Taka, costs 17

From Taka to Kiemri, costs 6

From Kiemri to Chaour, costs 14

From Chaour to Novechaar, costs 14

From Novechaar to Atek, costs 19

Atek is a City situated upon a point of Land where two Rivers meet together.
It Is one of the best and strongest Garrisons the Great Mogul has; into which
there is no stranger permitted to enter without a Passport from the King.
Father Roux the Jesuit and his Companion, going this way to Ispahan, and not
having the King's Passport, were forced to return back to Lahor, where they
embarked upon the River for Scimdi, from whence they past into Persia.

From Atek to Calapane, costs 16

From Calapane to Roupate, costs 16

From Roupate to Toulapeca, costs 16

From Toulapeca to Keraly, costs 19

From Keraly to Zerabad, costs 16

From Zerabad to Imiabad, costs 18

From Imiabad to Lahor, costs 18

Lahor is the Metropolis of a Kingdom, built upon one of the five Rivers that
descend from the Mountains of the North to swell the River Indus; and give the
name of Peniab to all the Region which they water. This River at this time
flows not within a league of the Town, being subject to change its Channel, and
many times does very great mischief to the adjoining Fields, through the rapid
deluges which it makes. The City is large, and extends it self above a league
in length. But the greatest part of the Houses, which are higher than those of
Agra and Deli, fall to ruin, by reason of the excessive rains that have
overflowed a great number of them. The King's Palace is an indifferent fair
one, and is not, as formerly it was, upon the River, which is fallen off above
a quarter of a league from it. There is Wine to be had at Lahor.

I must observe by the by, that after you have past Lahor, and the Kingdom of
Kakemir, that lies upon it toward the North, none of their Women have any hair
upon any part of their bodies, and the Men but very little upon their chins.

From Lahor to Menat-kan, costs 12

From Menat-kan to Faty-abad, costs 15

From Faty-abad to Sera-dakan, costs 15

From Sera-dakan to Sera-balour, costs 15

From Sera-balour to Sera-dourai, costs 12

From Sera-dourai to Serinde, costs 17

From Serinde to Sera-Mogoul, costs 15

From Sera-Mogoul to Sera-Chabas, costs 14

From Sera-Chabas to Dirauril, costs 17

From Dirauril to Sera-Crindal, costs 14

From Sera-Crindal to Guienaour, costs 21

From Guienaour to Dehly, costs 24

Before you go any farther, you are to take notice that all the way from Lahor
to Dehly, and from Dehly to Agra, is a continual Walk set on both sides with
fair Trees; an object most pleasing to the sight: But in some places the Trees
are decaid, and there is no care taken to Plant others in their stead.

Dehly is a great City near the River Gemma, which runs from the North to the
South, afterward from the West to the East; and aftaer it has past by Agra and
Kadione, empties it self into the Ganges. After Cha jaehan, had built the new.
City of Gehanabad, which he called by his own Name; and where he chose rather
to keep his Court, than at Agra, because the Climate is more temperate. Dehly
is almost come to ruin, and indeed is nothing but an heap of Rubbish; there
being no other Houses remaining but only for poor people. The Streets are
narrow, and the Houses of Bambouc, as over all the rest of the Indies. Neither
are there above three or four Lords of the Court that reside at Dehly, where
they set up their Tents in great Enclosures, and in the same manner lodged the
Reverend Jesuit that was at Court.

Gehanabad, as well as Dehly, is a great City; and there is nothing but a
single Wall that makes the separation. All the Houses of particular men consist
of great Enclosures, in the midst whereof is the place for Lodgings. The
greatest part of the Lords do not live in the City, but have their Houses
without, for the convenience of the water. As you enter into Gehanabad from
Dehly, you meet with a long and broad Street, on each side whereof are Vaults,
where the Merchants keep shops, being only plat-form'd at the top. This street
ends in the great Piazza before the King's House; and there is another very
fair and large Street, that runs toward another Gate of the same Palace, in
which live the great Merchants that keep no Shops.

The King's Palace takes up above half a league in circuit: The Walls are of
fair cut-Stone with Battlements. The Moats are full of water, paved with
Freestone. The great Gate of the Palace has nothing in it of magnificence; no
more than the first Court, into which the great Lords may enter upon their
Elephants.

Having past that Court, you enter into another long and large passage, with
fair Portico's on both sides. Under which are several little Chambers, where
part of the Horse-Guard lies. These Portico's are raised some two foot above
the ground, and the Horses which are ti'd without, feed upon the steps. In some
places there are great Gates that lead to several Apartments; as to the Women's
Lodgings, and to the Seat of Justice. In the midst of the passage runs a Cut
full of water, leaving a fair Walk on each side, where, at equal distances, are
little Basins or Fountains.

This long Passage carries you into a great Court, where the Omra's, that is to
say, the great Lords of the Kingdom, such as the Basha's in Turkey, and the
Kan's in Persia, keep Guard in Person. They have low Lodgings round about the
Court, and their Horses are ti'd to their doors.

From this second Court you pass into a third, through a great Portal; on one
side whereof there is a little Hall, raised some two or three steps high from
the ground. This is the Wardrobe where the Royal Garments are kept; and from
whence the King sends for the Calaat, or a whole Habit for a man, when he would
honor any Stranger, or any one of his own Subjects. A little farther, under
the same Portal, is the place where the Drums, Trumpets, and Hautboys are laid
up; which they sound and beat a little before the King enters into his
Judgment Seat, to give notice to the Omrah's; and they make the same noise when
the King is ready to rise. Entering into the third Court, you see the Divan
before you, where the King gives Audience. This is a great Hall raised some
four-foot-high above the superficies of the Court, with three sides open.
Thirty-two Pillars sustain as many Arches; and these Columns are about
four-foot-square, with Pedestals and Mouldings. When Cha-jehan first began to
build this Hall, he intended to have enriched it, and inlaid it all over with
those Stones that seem to be naturally painted, like those in the Great Duke of
Tuscany's Chapel. But having made a trial upon two or three Pillars, about two
or three-foot-high, he found that there would not be Stones enough, of that
sort, in the World to finish the work; besides the vastness of the Sum it would
come to. So that he left off his design, contenting himself with a Painting of
several flowers.

In the middle of this Hall, next to the side which looks toward the Court,
there is a Throne erected upon a kind of Theater, where the King gives
Audience, and pronounces Judgment. The Throne is a little Bed, with four
Columns, about the bigness of one of our Field-Beds, with a Canopy, Backpiece,
Boulster and Counterpoint, all embroidered with Diamonds. Besides all this,
when the King comes to sit upon the Throne, they throw over the Bed a Coverlet
of Cloth of Gold, or some other richly-embroider'd Silk, and he ascends by
three little steps, two-foot-broad. On one side of the Bed is erected an
Umbrello upon a Staff, as long as an Half-Pike. Upon one of the Pillars of the
Throne hangs one of the King's Weapons, upon another his Buckler; upon another
his Scimetar; and then his Bow and Quiver of Arrows, and other things of the
same nature.

Below the Throne there is a place some twenty-foot-square, encompast with
Balusters, which at some times are covered with Plates of Silver, at other
times with Plates of Gold. At the four Corners of this small enclosure sit the
four Secretaries of State, who as well in Civil as Criminal Causes, do the duty
of Advocates. Many Lords stund about this Balostrade; and there is also the
Music placed, that plays all the while the King is in the Divan. This Music
is so sweet and soft, that it never takes off the mind from the seriousness of
business at that time managed. The King being sat upon his Throne, some great
Lord stands by him; generally it is some one of his own Children. Between
eleven a Clock and Noon, the Nahab; who is the chief Minister of State, like
the Grand Vizier in Turkey, makes a report to the King of what has past in the
Chamber where he Presides, which is at the Entry of the first Court; and when
he has done speaking, the King rises. For you must take notice, that from the
time that the King is sat upon his Throne, till he rises, no person whatsoever
is permitted to stir out of the Palace; and yet I can say that the King
dispensed with my performance of this Law so generally observed by all the
Court: The occasion whereof was thus in short.

Being one day going out of the Palace, while the King was sitting in the
Divan, upon some urgent business that would admit of no delay, the Captain of
the Guards held me by the arm, and told me I should go no farther; I contested
and argued the Case with him for some time, but finding his usage to be very
boisterous, I lifted up my Cane, and had certainly struck him in my passion,
had not two or three of the Guards that saw all the passages, held my hand.
Happily for me at that time, the Nahab, who was then the King's Uncle, came
by, and being informed of the ground of our quarrel; ordered the Captain of the
Guards to let me go. After that he made a report to the King how the matter
stood; and toward evening the Nahab sent me one of his Servants to tell me, it
was his Majesty's pleasure, that I might come in or go out of the Palace,
though he were sitting in the Divan, as I pleased my self; for which I went the
next day, and returned thanks to the Nahab.

Toward the middle of the same Court there is a small Channel some five or six
inches broad, where while the King is sitting upon the Seat of Justice, they
that have business are to stand. Further it is not lawful for them to go, till
they are called; and, Ambassadors themselves are not exempted from this custom.
When an Ambassador comes as far as this Channel, the Master of the Ceremonies
calls out toward the Divan where the King is sitting, that such an Ambassador
craves Audience of his Majesty. Then one of the Secretaries of State declares
it to the King; who oftentimes makes as if he did not hear: But some time after
lifting up his eyes, he casts them upon the Ambassador, making him a sign by
the same Secretary, that he may approach.

From the Hall of the Divan, turning to the left, you walk upon a Terrass,
where you discover the River. Over this Terrass the King passes into a little
Chamber, from whence he goes into his Haram. In this little Chamber it was that
I had my first Audience of his Majesty; as I shall relate in another place.

Upon the left hand of the Court where the Divan is built, stands a little
Mosquee neatly built; the Cupola whereof is covered with Lead perfectly
gilded. Here the King goes to hear Prayers every day, except it be Fridays,
when he is to go to the great Mosquee, which is a very fair one, and placed
upon an high Platform, raised higher than the Houses of the City, and there is
a noble ascent to it. That day that the King goes to the Mosquee, they place
huge rails of wood round about the steps, as well to keep off the Elephants, as
out of respect to the Mosquee.

The right-side of the Court is taken up with Portico's, that make a long
Gallery, raised from the ground about half a foot; and these are the King's
Stables, into which you have many doors to enter. They are also full of stately
Horses, the worst whereof stands the King in three-thousand Crowns; and there
are some that cost him ten-thousand. At the door of every one of these Stables
hangs a kind of Mat made of Bambouc, that cleaves like our Osiers. But whereas
we bind our Osier-twigs with the same Osier, they bind their Bambouc's with
wreath'd-Silk, which is delicate work, but very tedious. These Mats are to
hinder the Flies from tormenting the Horses; there being two Grooms to an
Horse, one of which is still employed in sanning the Beast. There are also Mats
spread before the Portico's, and before the Stable-door; which they spread or
take away as occasion requires. And the Floor of the Gallery is covered with
fair Carpets, which is taken away in the evening, and the Horses Litter strow'd
in the same place. Which Litter is nothing but the Horse-dung dried in the Sun,
and then squeezed a little flat. The Horses that are brought into India either
out of Persia, Arabia, or the Country of Vsbech, change their food: For in
India they never give them Hay nor Oats. Every Horse in the morning having for
his proportion three loaves made of Meal, Wheat, and Butter, as big as one of
our sixpenny-loaves. It Is an hard matter to bring them to this diet at first;
it being sometimes three or four Months before they can do it. The Groom is
forced to hold their tongue in one hand, and to thrust down the bread with the
other. When Sugarcanes or Millet are in season, they give them that diet about
noon; and in the evening, two hours before Sunset, they give them a measure of
Garden-Chiches which the Groom squeezes between two stones, and mixes with
water. This is instead of Barley and Oats. As for the King's other Stables,
where he has also very fine Horses, they are scurvy places, ill-built, which
deserve not to be mentioned.

The Gemene is a fair River that bears good big Boats, which running to Agra
loses its name, falling into Ganges at Hallabas. The King has several small
Brigantines at Gehanabad upon the River, to take his pleasure in; and they are
very curiously trimmed after the manner of the Country.

CHAP. VII. The continuance of the same Road from Dehly to Agra.
FRom Dehly to Badelpoura, costs 8

From Radelpoura to Pelvel-ki-sera, costs 18

From Pelvel-ki-sera to Cotki-sera, costs 15

From Cotki-sera to Cheki-sera, costs 16

At Cheki-sera is one of the greatest Pagods of the Indians, together with an
Hospital for Apes; as well for those that breed there-abouts, as for those that
come from the neighbouring-parts, which the Banians are very careful to feed.
This Pagod is called Matura, and it was formerly in far greater veneration than
it is at this day. The reason is, because the Gemene ran then just at the very
foot of the Pagod; wherein the Banians, as well those of the Country, as those
that came from remote parts in Pilgrimage, had the convenience to wash
themselves before they went to their Devotions; and when they had performed
them, to wash again before they eat; which they are not to do ere they have
washed; believing also that if they wash in running-water, their sins will be
the more easily defaced. But some years since the River, changing its course
more to the Northward, comes not within a good league of the Pagod, which is
the reason that the Pilgrims have deserted it.

From Cheki-sera to Goodki-sera, costs 5

From Goodki-sera to Agra, costs 6

Agra lies in 27 degrees. 31 min. of Lat. and in a Sandy-soil, which causes
extremity of heat. It is the biggest City in India, and formerly the Residence
of their Kings. The Houses of great Persons are fair, and well built; but the
Houses of the meaner-sort are as plain, as in all the other Cities of India.
They are built a good distance one from another, and hid by the height of their
Walls, to keep their Women from being seen: So that it may be easily
conjectured that their Cities are nothing so pleasant as ours in Europe. Add to
this, that Agra being encompast round with the Sands, the heats are there very
excessive, which constrained Cha-jehan to remove from thence, and to keep his
Court at Gehanabad.

All that is remarkable in Agra is the King's Palace; and some Monuments as
well near the City, as in the parts about it. The Palace of the King is a vast
piece of ground encompast with a double-wall, which is terrass'd in some parts,
and in those parts are built certain Lodgings for some of the Officers of the
Court: The Gemene runs before the Palace; but between the Wall and the River
there is a large space of ground, where the King causes his Elephants to fight.
This Field is on purpose near the water, because that the Elephant which gets
the victory, being in a fury, they could not bring him to himself, did they not
drive him into the River: to which end they are forced to have recourse to
Policy, by tying Squibs and Crackers to the end of an Half-Pike, and then
giving fire to them to fright him into the water: for when he is in but two or
three-foot-deep, he is presently appeased.

There is a wide Piazza upon one side of the City before the Palace, and the
first Gate, wherein there is nothing of magnificence, is guarded by a few
Soldiers. Before the King removed his Court from Agra to Gehanabad, when he
went into the Country for some time, he gave to some one of his greatest
Omrah's, who was his Confident, the Guard of his Palace, where his Treasure
lay; and till the return of the King he never stirred out of the Gate, where he
lodged, neither by night nor day. At such a time as that it was, that I was
permitted to see the Palace of Agra. The King being deparred for Gehanavad,
whither all the Court followed him, together with the Women, the Government of
the Palace was given to one that was a great Friend to the Hollanders, and
indeed to all the Franguis. Menheir Velant, chief of the Holland-Factory at
Agra, so soon as the King was departed, went to visit the Lord, and to present
him according to custom. The Present was worth about 6000 Crowns, and consisted
in Spices, Cabinets of Japan, and fine Holland-Cloath. He desired me to go
along with him when he went to Compliment the Governor. But the Lord being
offended that he had put himself to so much charge, forced him to carry the
Present back again, taking only one Japan-Cane, of six that were in the
Present, telling him he would have no more, out of the kindness which he had
for the Franguiz. Nay, he would not so much as take the Gold-head and Ferula,
but caused them to be taken off. The Complements being over, the Governor asked
Menheir Velant, wherein he might serve him: whereupon he desiring the favor,
that since the Court was gone, he might see the inside of the Palace, the
Governor granted his request, and ordered six men to attend him.

The first Gate where the Governor of the Palace lies, is a long blind Arch,
which leads you into a large Court all environed with Portico's; like our
Piazza in Covent Garden. The Gallery in front is larger and higher than any of
the rest, sustained by three ranks of Pillars, and under those Galleries on the
other side of the Court which are narrower and lower, are little Chambers for
the Soldiers of the Guard. In the midst of the large Gallery, is a Nich in the
Wall, into which the King descends out of his Haram by a private pair of
Stairs, and when he is in, he seems to be in a kind of a Tomb. He has no Guards
with him then, for he has no reason to be afraid of any thing; there being no
way to come at him. In the heat of the day he keeps himself there only with one
Eunuch, but more often with one of his Children, to fan him. The Great Lords of
the Court stay below in the Gallery under the Nich all the while.

At the farther end of this Court is another Gate that leads into a second
Court encompast with Galleries, underneath which, are little Chambers for some
Officers of the Palace. The second Court carries you into a third, which is the
King's Quarter. Cha-jehan had resolved to cover with Silver all the Arch of a
Gallery upon the right hand. And a Frenchman, Austin de Bordeaux by name, was
to have done the work: but the King not finding any one in his whole Kingdom so
capable as the Frenchman was to treat with the Portugals at Goa about some
important affair he had at that time; the design was laid aside: For they being
afraid of Austin's Parts, poisoned him upon his return to Cochin. This Gallery
is painted with branch'd-work of Gold and Azure, and the lower-part is hung
with Tapestry. There are several doors under the Gallery that lead into little
square-Chambers; of which we saw two or three opened, and they told us all the
rest were such. The other three sides of the Court lie all open, there being
nothing but a single Wall, no higher than for a man to lean over. On the side
that looks toward the River there is a Divan, or a kind of out-jutting Balcone,
where the King sits to see his Brigantines, or to behold his Elephants fight.
Before the Divan is a Gallery, that serves for a Portico; which Cha-jehan had a
design to have adorned all over with a kind of Lattice-work of Emraulds and
Rubies that should have represented to the life Grapes when they are green, and
when they begin to grow red. But this design which made such a noise in the
World, and required more Riches, than all the World could afford to perfect,
remains unfinished; there being only three Stocks of a Vine in Gold, with their
leaves, as the rest ought to have been; and enameled in their natural colors,
with Emralds, Rubies and Granates wrought into the fashion of Grapes. In the
middle of the Court stands a great Fat to bath in, 40 foot in Diameter, cut out
of one entire grey-stone, with steps wrought out of the same stone within and
without.

As for the Monuments which are in and about Agra, they are very fair ones; for
there is scarce an Eunuch belonging to the King's Haram, that is not very
ambitious of leaving a fair Monument behind him. Indeed, when they have heaped
together great Sums, they would fain be going to Mecca, and making rich
Presents to Mahomet. But the Great Mogul, unwilling to let his Money go out of
his Country, will seldom permit them leave to undertake that Pilgrimage: and
therefore not knowing what to do with their Money, they employ a great part
thereof in Monuments, to perpetuate their Memories.

Of all the Monuments that are to be seen at Agra, that of the Wise of
Cha-jehan is the most magnificent; she caused it to be set up on purpose near
the Tasimacan, to which all Strangers must come, that they should admire it.
The Tasimacan is a great Bazar, or Marketplace, composed of six great Courts,
all encompassed with Portico's; under which there are Warehouses for Merchants;
and where there is a prodigious quantity of Calicuts vended. The Monument of
this Degum, or Sultaness, stands on the East Side of the City, upon the River
side, in a great place enclosed with Walls, upon which there runs a little
Gallery, as upon the Walls of many Cities in Europe. This place is a kind of
Garden with Compartiments, like our Garden-plots; but whereas our Walks are
made with Gravel, here the Walks are black and white Marble. You enter into
this place through a large Portal; and presently upon the left hand you espy a
fair Gallery, that looks toward Mecca; wherein there are three or four Niches,
wherein the Mufti comes at certain hours to pray. A little beyond the middle of
the place, toward the Water, are three great Platforms, one raised above
another, with four Towers at the four Corners of each, and Stairs within, upon
the top whereof they call the people before the time of their prayer. On the
top there is a Cupola, little less magnificent than that of Val de Grace in
Paris; it is covered within and without with black Marble, the middle being of
Brick. Under this Cupola is an empty Tomb; for the Begum is interred under the
Arch of the lowest Platform. The same change of Ceremonies which is observed
under ground, is observed above. For they change the Tapestries, Candles, and
other Ornaments at several times, and there are always Mollah's attending to
pray. I saw the beginning and completing of this great work, that colt two and
twenty years labor, and twenty thousand men always at work; so that you cannot
conceive but that the Expense must be excessive. Cha-jehan had begun to raise
his own Monument on the other side of the River; but the Wars with his Son,
broke off that design, nor did Aurengzeb, now reigning, ever take any care to
finish it. There is an Eunuch who commands two thousand men, that is entrusted
to guard not only the Sepulcher of the Begum, but also the Tasimacan.

On another side of the City, appears the Sepulcher of King Akabar. And as for
the Sepulchers of the Eunuchs, they have only one Platform, with four little
Chambers at the four Corners. When you come to Agra from Dehly, you meet a
great Bazar; near to which there is a Garden, where King Jehanguire, Father of
Cha-jehan, lies interred. Over the Garden Gate you see the Tomb it self, beset
with Portraitures, covered with a black Hearse-Cloath, or Pall, with Torches of
white Wax, and two Jesuits attending at each end. There are some who wonder,
that Cha-jehan against the practice of the Mahumetans, who abhor Images, did
permit of carving; but the reason conjectured at is, that it is done upon the
consideration that his Father and himself learnt from the Jesuits certain
principles of Mathematics and Astrology. Though he had not the same kindness
for them at another time; for going one day to visit an Armenian, that lay
sick, whose name was Corgia, whom he loved very well, and had honored with
several Employments, at what time the Jesuits, who lived next to the Armenians
house, rang their Bell; the sound thereof so displeased the King, as being a
disturbance to the sick person, that in a great fury he commanded the Bell to
be taken away, and hung about his Elephants neck. Some few days after, the King
seeing his Elephant with that great Bell about his neck, fearing so great a
weight might injure his Elephant, caused the Bell to be carried to the
Couteval, which is a kind of a railed place, where a Provost sits as a Judge,
and decides differences among the people of that Quarter, where it has hung
ever since. This Armenian had been brought up with Cha-jehan; and in regard he
was an excellent Wit, and an excellent Poet, he was very much in the Kings
favor, who had conferred upon him many fair Commands, though he could never
either by threats or promises win him to turn Mohammedan.

CHAP. VIII. The Road from Agra to Patna, and Daca, Cities in the Province of
Bengala, and of the Quarrel which the Author had with Cha-Est-Kan, the King's
Uncle.
I Departed from Agra toward Bengala the 25 th of November 1665, and that day I
reached no farther than a very bad Inn, distant from Agra, costs 3

The 26 th I came to Beruzabad, costs 9

This is a little City where, at my return, I received eight thousand Roupies,
being the remainder of the Money which Giafer-Kan owed me for Wares that he had
bought at Janabat.

The 27 th to Serael Morlides, costs 9

The 28 th to Serail Estanja, costs 14

The 29 th to Serail Haii-mal, costs 12

The 30 th. to Serail Sekandera, costs 13

The 1 st of December to Sanqual, costs 14

I met that day 110 Wagons, every Wagon drawn by sixOxen, and in every Wagon
50000 Roupies. This is the Revenue of the Province of Bengala, with all charges
defraid, and the Governor's Purse well-fill'd, comes to 5500000 Roupies. A
league beyond Sanqual, you must pass a River called Saingour, which runs into
Gemine, not above half a league distant from it. You pass over this River of
Saingour upon a Stone-bridg, and when you come from toward Bengala to go to
Seronge or Surat, if you have a mind to shorten your journey ten days, you must
leave Agra-Road, and come to this Bridge, and so Ferry over Gemine in a Boat.
But generally Agra-Road is taken, because the other way you must travel five or
six days together upon the stones; and also for that you are to pass through
the Territories of certain Raja's, where you are in danger of being robbed.

The second day I came to an Inn called Cherourabad, costs 12

When you are got about half the way, you pass through Gianabad, a little City,
near to which, about a quarter of a League on this side, crossing a Field of
Millet, I saw a Rhinoceros feeding upon Millet-Canes, which a little Boy of
nine or ten years old gave him to eat. When I came near the Boy, he gave me
some Millet to give the Rhinoceros; who immediately came to me, opening his
chops three or four times; I put the Millet into his mouth, and when he had
swallowed it, he still opened his mouth for more.

The 3 d I came to Serrail Chajeada, costs 10

The 4 th to Serrail Atakan, costs 13

The 5 th to Aureng-Abad, costs 9

Formerly this Village had another name; but being the place where Aurengzeb
gave Battle to his Brother Sultan Sujah, who was Governor of all the Province
of Bengala; Aureng-zeb, in Memory of the Victory he had won, gave it his own
name, and built there a very fair House, with a Garden, and a little Mosquee.

The 6 th to Alinchan, costs 9

Two leagues on this side Alinchan, you meet the River Ganges. Monsieur Bernier
the King's Physician, and another person whose name was Rachepot, with whom I
traveled, were amazed to see, that a River that had made such a noise in the
World, was no broader than the River Seine before the Lovre; believing before,
that it had been as wide as the Danaw above Belgrade. There is also so little
water in it from March to June or July, when the rains fall, that it will not
bear a small Boat. When we came to Ganges, we drank every one of us a Glass of
Wine, mixing some of the River-water with it; which caused a griping in our
bellies: But our Servants that drank it alone, were worse tormented than we.
The Hollanders, who have an House upon the Bank of Ganges, never drink the
water of this River, until they have boiled it. But for the natural Inhabitants
of the Country, they are so accustomed to it from their youth, that the King
and the Court drink no other. You shall see a vast number of Camels every day,
whose business only it is to fetch water from the Ganges.

The 7 th, I came to Halabas, costs 8

Halabas is a great City, built upon a point of Land where Ganges and Gemine
meet. There is a fair Castle of hew'n Stone, with a double Moat; where the
Governor resides. He is one of the greatest Lords in India; and being very
sickly, he has always about him ten Persian Physicians. He had also in his
service, Claudius Maille of Bourges, who practices Chyrurgery and Physic both
together. This was he that advised us not to drink of Ganges Water, which would
put us into a looseness; but rather to drink Well-water. The chief of these
Persian Physicians, whom this Governor hires with his Money, one day threw his
Wife from the top of a Battlement to the ground; prompted to that act of
cruelty, by some jealousies he had entertained. He thought the fall had killed
her, but she had only a Rib or two bruised; whereupon the Kindred of the Woman
came and demanded justice, at the feet of the Governor. The Governor sending
for the Physician, commanded him to be gone, resolving to retain him no longer
in his service. The Physician obeyed, and putting his maimed Wife in a
Pallanquin, he set forward upon the Road with all his Family. But he was not
gone above three or four days journey from the City, when the Governor finding
himself worse than he was wont to be, sent to recall him; which the Physician
perceiving, stabbed his Wife, his four Children, and thirteen female Slaves, and
returned again to the Governor, who said not a word to him, but entertained
him again into his service.

The eighth day I crossed the River in a large Boat, having stayed from morning
till noon upon the bank-side, expecting Monsieur Maille, to bring me a Passport
from the Governor. For there stands a Deroga upon each side of the River, who
will not suffer any person to pass without leave; and he takes notice what sort
of Goods are transported; there being due from every Wagon four Roupies, and
from every Coach one; not accounting the charge of the Boat, which you must pay
beside. The same day I went to Sadoul-serail, costs 16

The ninth, to Yakedel-sera, costs 10

The tenth, to Bouraki-sera, costs 10

The eleventh, to Banarou, costs 10

Banarou is a large City, and handsomely built; the most part of the Houses
being either of Brick or Stone, and higher than in any other Cities of India;
but the inconveniency is, that the Streets are very narrow. There are many Inns
in the Town; among the rest, one very large, and very handsomely built. In the
middle of the Court are two Galleries, where are to be sold Calicuts, Silks,
and other sorts of Merchandise. The greatest part of the Sellers, are the
Workmen themselves; so that the Merchants buy at the first hand. These Workmen,
before they expose any thing to sale, must go to him that has the stamp, to
have the Kings Seal set upon their Linen and Silks; otherwise they would be
fined, and lambasted with a good Cudgel. This City is situated upon the North
side of Ganges, that runs by the Walls, and into which there falls also another
River, some two Leagues upward toward the West. In Banarou stands one of the
Idolaters principal Pagods, whereof I shall speak in my second Book, when I
come to treat of the Religion of the Banians.

About five hundred paces from the City Northward, there is a Mosquee, where
are to be seen many Mohammedan Sepulehers; whereof some are very curious pieces
of Architecture. The fairest are every one in the middle of a Garden enclosed
with Walls, wherein there are Holes some half a foot square, through which
Passengers may have a sight of the Tomb within. The most considerable of all is
as it were a four square Pedestal, every square whereof is forty paces wide. In
the midst of this Platform rises a Column thirty-two or thirty-five foot high,
all of a piece, which three men can hardly embrace. The Stone is of a gray
color, and so hard that I could not scrape it with my Knife. As it is
Pyramidical, there is a great Bowl at the top, which is encompassed at the
upper end with huge Grains of Wheat. All the fronts of the Tomb are full of
figures of Animals cut in the Stone; and it has been higher above ground than
now it seems to be, for several old men, that looked to some of the Sepulchers,
assured me, that within these fifty years it had sunk above thirty foot into
the Earth. They tell you moreover, that it is the Sepulcher of one of the Kings
of Boutan, who was interred here after he had left his own Country to conquer
this Kingdom, out of which he was driven by the Successors of Tamerlane. The
Kingdom of Boutan is the place from whence they fetch Musk, and I will give you
a description of it in my third Book.

I stayed at Banarou the 12 th and 13 th; and during those two days it rained
continually, but not so as to stop my journey; so that the evening of the
thirteenth day I crossed the Ganges, with the Governors Passport. Before you
go into the Boat, they search the Travelers baggage; wearing Apparel however
pays nothing of Custom, but only Merchandise.

The 13 th, I went to Baterpour, costs 2

The 14 th, to Satraguy-sera, costs 8

The 15 th, to Moniarky-sera, costs 9

The same day in the morning, after I had traveled two Leagues, I crossed a
River called Carnasarsou; and three Leagues from thence I crossed another,
which they call Saode-sou; both which I foarded.

The 16 th, to Gourmabad, costs 8

This is a Town upon a River called Goudera-sou, which is crossed over a
Stone-Bridg.

The 17 th, to Saseron, costs 4

Saseron is a City at the foot of certain Mountains, near to which there is a
great Lake. In the middle whereof there is a small Island, with a fair Mosquee
built upon it; wherein is to be seen, the Sepulcher of a Nahab or Favorite,
called Selim-Kan; who built it when he was Governor of the Province. There is
a fair Bridge to cross over into the Island, paved and lined with large free
Stone. Upon one side of the Lake is a great Garden, in the middle whereof is
another fair Sepulcher of the Son of the same Nahab, Selim-Kan, who succeeded
his Father in the Government of the Province. If you would go to the Mine of
Soulmelpour, whereof I shall speak in the last Book of these Relations, you
must leave the great Road to Patna, and bend to the South through Exberbourgh,
and the famous Fortress of Rhodes, of which I shall treat in the same place.

The 18 th, I ferry'd in a Boat over the River Sonsou, which descends from the
Southern Mountains; after you have crossed it, the Merchandise pays a certain
Toll.

The same day I traveled on to Daoud-Nagar-sera, where there is a fair Tomb,
costs 9

The 19 th, to Halva-sera, costs 10

The 20 th, to Aga-sera, costs 9

In the morning I met a hundred and thirty Elephants, great and small, which
they were leading to Dehli to the great Mogul.

The one and twentienth, to Patna, costs 10

Patna is one of the greatest Cities of India, upon the Bank of Ganges, toward
the West; not being less than two Leagues in length. But the Houses are no
fairer than in the greatest part of the other Cities of India; being covered
with Bambouck, or Straw. The Holland Company have a House there, by reason of
their Trade in Saltpeter, which they refine at a great Town called Choupar,
which is also situated upon Ganges, ten Leagues above Patna.

Coming to Patna, we met the Hollanders, in the Street returning from Choupar,
who stopped our Coaches to salute us. We did not part, till we had emptied two
Bottles of Sohiras Wine in the open Street; which is not taken notice of in
that Country, where people meet with an entire freedom without any Ceremony.

I stayed eight days at Patna, during which time there fell out an accident,
which will let the Reader understand, that Sodomy does not go altogether
unpunished among the Mahumetans. A Mimbachi, who commanded a thousand Foot,
went about to abuse a young Boy in his service; and who had several times
resisted his attempts; complaining also to the Governor, and telling him
withal, that if his Master persisted to urge him any more, he would certainly
kill him. At length the Captain took his opportunity, at a House which he had
in the Country, and forced the Boy. The Boy overwhelmed with grief and rage,
took his opportunity also to revenge himself; and being one day hunting with
his Master, about a quarter of a League from any of his other Servants, he got
behind him, and cleft his head with his Hanger. After he had done, he rode full
speed to the City, crying out all the way, that he had killed his Master for
such a reason; and went immediately to the Governors Lodging, who sent him to
prison; but he let him out at the end of six months; and notwithstanding all
the endeavors which the Captains Kindred used to have had him put to death,
the Governor durst not condemn him, for fear of the people, who affirmed that
the Boy had done well.

I parted from Patna in a Boat for Daca, the nine and twentieth of January,
between eleven and twelve at noon; and had the River been deep, as it uses to
be after the Rains, I had taken Boat at Hallabas, or at least at Banarou.

The same day I came to lie at sera-Beconcour, costs 15

Five Leagues on this side Beconcour, you meet with a River called Pomponsou,
which comes from the South, and falls into Ganges.

The thirtieth to Sera-d' Erija, costs 17

The one and thirtieth, after we had traveled four Leagues, or thereabout, we
met with the River Kaoa, which comes from the South. Three Leagues lower, you
meet with another River called Chanon, which comes from the North. Four Leagues
farther, you discover the River Erguga, which runs from the South; and at
length, six Leagues, beyond, the River Aquera, falling from the same part of
the World; all which four Rivers lose their Names in the Ganges. All that day I
saw great Mountains toward the South, distant from Ganges sometimes ten, and
sometimes fifteen Leagues, till at length I came to lodge in Monger-City, costs
18

The first day of January; 1666, after I had gone by Water two hours, I saw the
Gandet fall into the Ganges, flowing from the North. This is a great River,
that carries Boats.

That eveining I lay at Zangira, costs 8

But in regard of the winding of Ganges all that days journey, I might well
reckon them by Water two and twenty Leagues.

The second day, from between six in the morning till eleven, I saw three
Rivers that threw themselves into Ganges, all three descending from the North.

The first is called Ronova, the second Then the third Ghanan.

I came to lie at Baquelpour, costs 18

The third, after four hours upon the Ganges, I met the River Katare, which
comes from the North; and lay at a Village called Pongangel, at the foot of
certain Mountains that descend to Ganges it self, costs 13

The fourth, an hours rowing beyond Pongangel, I met a great River, called
Mart-Nadi, coming from the South; and I lay at Rage-Mehale, costs 6

Rage-Mehale, is a City upon the right hand of Ganges; and if you go by Land,
you shall find the highway, for a League or two, paved with Brick to the Town.
Formerly the Governors of Bengala resided here; it being an excellent Country
for hunting, besides that it was a place of great Trade. But now the River
having taken another course, above a good half League from the City, as well
for that reason, as to keep in awe the King of Aracan, and several Portuguese
Banditi, who are retired to the mouths of Ganges, and made excursions even as
far as Daca it self; both the Governor and the Merchants have removed
themselves to Daca, which is at present a large City, and a Town of great Trade.

The sixth, being arrived at a considerable Town, called Donapour, six Leagues
from Rage-Mehale, I parted with Monsieur Bernier, who was going to Casenbasar,
and thence to Ogouli by Land; for when the River is low, there is no going by
Water, by reason of a great Bank of Sand that lies before a City called
Santiqui.

I lay that night at Toutipour, distant from Rage-mehale, costs 12

I saw there at Sunrising a great number of Crocodiles lying upon the Sand.

The seventh, I came to Acerat, costs 25

From Acerat to Daca, it is counted by Land forty-five Leagues. All that day I
saw such a vast number of Crocodiles, that I had a great desire to shoot at
one, to try whether the vulgar report were true, that a Musket Shot would not
pierce their skin. The bullet hit him in the jaw, and made the blood gush out;
however he would not stay in the place, but plunged into the River.

The eighth, I saw again a great number lying upon the bank of the River, and
made two shot at two with three bullets at a time. As soon as they were
wounded, they turned themselves upon their backs, opening their throats, and
di'd upon the spot.

That day I came to lie at Douloudia, costs 17

The Crows were here the cause that we found a very fair Fish, which the
Fishermen had hid among the Osiers by the side of the River; for when our
Watermen saw the Crows in great numbers hovering, and making an hideous noise
about the Osiers, they presently conjectured that there was something more than
ordinary: and they made so diligent a search, that at length they found an
excellent dish of meat.

The ninth, two hours after noon, we met with a River called Chativor, that
runs from the North, and we lay at Dampour, costs 16

The tenth, we lay by the Riverside in a place remote from Houses, and we
traveled that day, costs 15

The eleventh, toward evening, being come to that part where Ganges divides it
self into three Arms, whereof one runs to Daca; we lay at a large Town, upon
the entry of the great Channel, which Town is called Jatrapour, costs 20

They that have no luggage, may make a short-cut from Jatrapour to Daca, and
save much ground, by reason of the many windings of the River.

The twelf, about noon, we past by a large Village called Bagamara, and came to
lie at Kasiata, another great Town, costs 11

The thirteenth, about noon we met with a River, two leagues from Daca, called
Laquia, which runs from the North-East. Just against the Point where the two
Rivers join, there stands a Fortress of each side, with several pieces of
Cannon. Half a league lower, appears another River called Pagalu, upon which
there is a fair Bridge of Brick, which Mirza-Mola caused to be built. This River
comes from the North-East; and half a league upward appears another River
called Cadamtali, that runs from the North, over which there is another Bridge
of Brick. On both sides of the River are several Towers, as it were enchas'd
with several heads of men, executed for robbing upon the highway.

About evening we came to Daca, having traveled by water that day, costs 9

Daca is a great Town, that extends it self only in length; every one coveting
to have an House by the Ganges-side. The length of this Town is above two
leagues. And indeed from the last Brick-Bridg which I mentioned, to Daca, there
is but one continued row of Houses separated one from the other; inhabited for
the most part by Carpenters, that build Galleys and other small Vessels. These
Houses are properly no more than paltry Huts built up with Bambout's; and
daubed over with fat Earth. Those of Daca are not much better built: The
Governor's Palace is a place enclosed with high Walls, in the midst whereof is
a pitiful House, built only of Wood. He generally lodges in Tents, which he
causes to be set up in a great Court of that Enclosure. The Hollanders finding
that their Goods were not safe in the ordinary Houses of Daca, have built them
a very fair House; and the English have another, which is reasonably handsome.
The Church of the Austin-Friers is all of Brick, and is a very comely Pile.

When I traveled last to Daca, the Nahab Cha-Est-Kan, who was then Governor of
Bengala, was at War with the King of Arakan, whose-Naval-Force consists
generally of 200 Galeasses, attended by several other smaller Vessels. These
Galeasses run through the Gulf of Bengala, and enter into the mouth of Ganges,
the Sea flowing up higher then Daca. Cha-Est-Kan, Uncle to King Aurengzeb, the
present Mogul, and the best Headpiece that ever was in all his Territories,
found out a way to corrupt several of the King of Aracan's Captains, so that of
a sudden forty Galeasses, commanded by Portugals, came and joined themselves
with him. To engage more firmly all this new multitude to his service, he gave
a larger pay to all the Portugal-Officers, and to the Soldiers proportionably:
But those of the Country had no more than their ordinary pay doubled. It Is an
incredible thing to see how swiftly these Galeasses cut their way in the water.
Some are so long that they carry fifty Oars of a side; but they have but two
men to an Oar: There are some very curiously painted, and upon which there is
no cost of Gold and Azure spared. The Hollanders have some of their own to
transport their Goods; and sometimes they are forced to hire others, whereby
many people get a good livelihood.

The next day after my arrival at Daca, which was the 14 th of January, I went
to wait upon the Nahab; and presented him with a Garment of Cloth of Gold,
laced with a Gold-needle-work Lace of Point of Spain; with a Scarf of Gold and
Silver of the same Point; and a very fair Emrald-Jewel. Toward evening, being
returned to the Hollander's House, where I lodged, the Nahab sent me Granates,
China-Oranges, two Persian-Melons, and three sorts of Pears.

The fifteenth, I showed him my Goods, and presented the Prince with a Watch,
in a Gold-Enamell'd-Case; with a pair of little Pistols inlaid with Silver, and
a very fair Prospective-Glass. What I gave to the Father and the Son, a young
Lord, about ten years old, stood me in above five thousand Livres.

The sixteenth, I treated with him about the Prizes of my Goods: And at length
I went to his Steward to take my Letter of Exchange to be paid at Casen-Bazar.
Not but that he would have paid me my Money at Daca; but the Hollanders, who
understood things better than I did, told me it was very dangerous to carry
Money to Casen-Bazar, whither there was no going, but over the Ganges by water,
the way by land being full of Bogs and Fens. And to go by water is no less
dangerous, by reason that the Boats which they use, are very apt to tip over
upon the least storm: And when the Mariners perceive that you carry Money along
with you, it is an easy thing for them to overset the Boat, and afterward to
come and take up the Money that lies but at the bottom of the River.

The twentieth, I took leave of the Nahab, who desired me to come and see him
again, and caused a Pass to be delivered me, wherein he gave me the title of
one of the Gentlemen of his House, which he had done before, when he was
Governor of Amadabad, when I went to him, to the Army, in the Province of
Decan, into which the Raja-seva-gi was entered, as I shall relate in another
place. By virtue of these Passes I could travel over all the Countries of the
Great Mogul, as being one of his Household.

The one and twentieth, the Hollanders made a great Feast for my sake; to which
they invited the English, and some Portuguese's, together with the
Austin-Friers of the same Nation.

The two and twentieth, I made a Visit to the English, whose President then was
Mr. Prat.

From the twenty-third to the twenty-ninth, I bought up Goods, to the value of
11000 Roupies; and after I had embarked them, I took my leave.

The twenty-ninth, in the evening, I departed from Daca, the Hollanders bearing
me company for two leagues, with their little Barques Armed: Nor did we spare
the Spanish-Wine all that time. Having been upon the River from the
twenty-ninth of January to the eleventh of February, I left my Goods and
Servants in the Barque at Acerat; where I took a Boat that carried me to a
great Village called Mirdapour.

The next day I hired an Horse for my self, but not finding another for my
Luggage, I was forced to hire two Women, who carried it for me. That evening I
arrived at Casen-Basar, where I was welcomed by Menheir Arnold Van
Wachttendonk, Director of all the Holland-Factories in Bengala, who invited me
to lie at his House.

The fourteenth, Menhoir Wachttendonk returned to Ouguely, where is the General
Factory. The same day one of my Servants brought me word that my People and
Goods, which I had left behind in the Barque, had been in very great danger, by
reason of the high Winds that had blown for two days together.

The fifteenth, the Hollanders lent me a Pallekis, to go to Madesou-basarki.
This was a great Town three Leagues from Casen-basar, where lay Cha-Est-Kan's
Receiver General, to whom I presented my Bill of Exchange. He told me it was
very good, and that he would willingly have paid me, had he not received order
the night before, not to pay me, in case he had not paid me already. He did not
tell me the reason that moved Cha-Est-Kan to act in that manner; so that I went
home to my Lodging infinitely surpised at his proceeding.

The sixteenth, I wrote to the Nahab, to know the reason why he had forbad his
Receiver General to pay me.

The seventeenth in the evening, I took water for Ougueli, in a Bark of
fourteen Oars, which the Hollanders lent me; and that night and the next I lay
upon the River.

The nineteenth toward evening, I passed by a large Town called Nandi, farther
than which the Sea does not flow. Here the Wind blew so fiercely, and the Water
grew so rough, that we were forced to stay three or four hours, and ly by the
shore.

The twentieth, I arrived at Ougueli, where I stayed till the second of March.
During which time the Hollanders bid me very welcome, and made it their
business to show me all the divertisements which the Country was capable to
afford. We went several times in Pleasure-Boats upon the River, and we had a
Banquet of all the Delicacies that the Gardens of Europe could have afforded
us. Salads of all sorts, Colewarts, Asparagus, Pease, but our chiefest Dish was
Japon Beans; the Hollanders being very curious to have all sorts of Pulse and
Herbs in their Gardens, though they could never get Artichokes to grow in that
Country.

The second of March I left Ougueli, and the fifth arrived at Casenbasar.

The next day I went to Madesou-Barsaki, to know whether the Nahab had sent any
other orders to his Receiver. For I told you a little before, that I wrote upon
the place to Cha-Est-Kan, to complain of his proceedings, and to know the
reason why my Bill of Exchange was not paid. The Director of the Holland
Factories writ a Letter also in my behalf, which I enclosed, wherein he
represented to the Nahab, that I was too well known to him, as having been
formerly with him at Amadabat, in the Army in Decan, and other places, to
deserve such hard usage. That he ought to consider, that I being the only
person that brought the chiefest rarities of Europe to the Indies, it was not
the way to make me eager of returning any more, as he himself had invited me to
do, to send me away in a discontent. Besides, that the credit of my report
would discourage others from coming to the Indies, fearing the same usage as I
had received. Neither mine nor the Directors Letter produced that effect which
we expected. Nor was I much better satisfied with the new order which the Nahab
sent to his Receiver; which was to pay me, abating twenty thousand Roupies of
the sum which we had agreed upon; and if I would not take the remainder, that I
might come and fetch my goods again.

This ill dealing of the Nahab, proceeded from a scurvy trick that was played
me by three Canary-birds at the Great Mogul's Court. The story whereof was thus
in short:

Aurengzeb, that now reigns, at the instigation of two Persians and a Banian,
has brought up a custom very much to the disadvantage of Merchants, that come
out of Europe, and other parts, to sell Jewels at Court. For whether they come
into India either by Land or Sea, the Governor of the place where they first
arrive, has order to send them to the King, together with their goods, whether
they will or no. As the Governor of Surat dealt by me, in the year 1665,
sending me to Delhi, or Jehanabad, where the King was. There were then
attending upon his Majesty, two Persians and a Banian, who are entrusted to
view and examine all the Jewels which are to be sold to the King. One of those
Persians is called Nahab-Akel-Kan, that is, the Prince of the Spirit; who keeps
all the Kings Jewels. The name of the other is Mirza-Mouson, whose business is
to rate every stone. The Banian, whose name is Nalikan, is to see whether the
Stones be false or not, or whether they have any defect. These three men have
obtained a License from the King, to view, before ever he does, whatever
foreign Merchants shall bring to Court, and to present their goods to him
themselves. And though they are under an Oath not to take any thing from the
Merchants, yet they extort whatever they can get from them, though it be to
their ruin. When they see any thing that is lovely, and likely to bring great
profit, they would persuade you to sell it to them for less by half than the
thing is worth; and if you refuse to let them have it, when they are in the
Kings presence, they will set a price upon it at half the value; knowing that
Aurengzeb is not very covetous of Jewels, loving his Money far better. Upon the
Kings Festival-day, of which I shall speak in another place, all the Princes
and Nobility of the Court present him with most magnificent gifts. And when
they cannot meet with Jewels, they send him Roupies of Gold, which the King
likes far better than Stones; though Jewels are the more honorable present.
Therefore when this Festival draws nigh, he issues out of his Treasury, a great
quantity of Diamonds, Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls, which he who is entrusted
to prize the Stones, delivers to several Merchants to sell to the Nobility, who
are bound to present the King; by which means the King gets the Money and his
Jewels again.

There is also another thing very disadvantageous to a Merchant Jeweller, which
is, that when the King has seen the Stones, no Prince or Nobleman that knows of
it, will ever buy them. Besides, while these three persons, who are entrusted
to view the Jewels, are considering and examining them at their Lodgings,
several Banians resort thither, who are expert, some in Diamonds, some in
Rubies, some in Emraulds, and others in Pearls, who write down the weight,
goodness, cleanness, and color of every piece. So that when a Merchant goes
afterward to any Prince or Governor of any Province, these people send them a
note of what he has, and the price, which they set down at half the value. For
in trade these Banians are a thousand times worse than the Jews; more expert in
all sorts of cunning tricks, and more maliciously mischievous in their revenge.
Now you shall hear what a trick these unworthy people served me.

When I arrived at Gehanabad, one of them came to my Lodging, and told me, he
had order from the King to see what I had brought, before I exposed my goods in
the Kings presence. They would have rather that the King had not been at
Gehanabad, for they would have then endeavored to have bought them themselves,
to gain thereby, by selling them again to the King, or the Nobility upon
occasion; which they could never persuade me to. The next day they came to see
me all three, one after another; and they would needs have of me, amongst other
things, a Jewel of nine great Pearls, in the fashion of a Pear, the biggest
whereof weighed thirty Carats, and the least sixteen; together with another
single Pearl like a Pear, of fifty-five Carats. As for the Jewel, the King took
it; but for the single Pearl, they finding that whatever they could say, I
would not be wrought upon to sell them any bargains, so ordered it, that before
I had showed my Jewels to the King, Giafer-Kan the Kings Uncle saw, and kept
it, telling me he would give me as good a price as the King; and desired me not
to speak of it, for indeed he had a design to make a present to the King.

When the King had made choice of such of my Jewels as he pleased, Giafer-Kan
bought of me several pieces, and at the same time agreed with me for the great
Pearl. Some days after he paid me, according as we had agreed, except for the
Pearl, upon which he would have abated me ten thousand Roupies. For the two
Persians and the Banian had maliciously informed him, that at my first arrival,
they could have bought the Pearl for eight or ten thousand Roupies less than I
had valued it to him; which was absolutely false. Thereupon Giafer-Kan telling
me, that if I would not take his Money, I might have my Jewel again; I took him
at his word, assuring him, he should never see it again as long as he lived.
And I was as good as my word. And indeed that which made me the more resolute
was, that I was resolved to carry somesomething which was considerable to
Cha-Est-Kan; for could I have had my liberty upon my arrival at Surat to have
gone to him, I would never have seen the King at Gehanabad; about which I had a
very great quarrel with the Governor of Surat. For when I came to visit him,
he told me presently, that the case was altered from what it had been since my
last being there, for that the King was resolved to have the first view of all
Curiosities imported into his Kingdom. I was above four Months contending in
vain with the Governor; but nothing would serve; I must go to the King, and
for fear I should take another Road, he sent fifteen Horsemen along with me as
far as Shalaour.

When I went for Bengala, these Overseers of the Jewels, our of mere spite,
and, it may be, set on by Giafer-Kan, to be revenged of me for denying to let
him have my Jewel, writ to Cha-Est-Kan, that I intended to show him certain
Jewels, among the rest a very fair Pearl, which I had sold to Giafer-Kan; but
that he had given it me again, because he understood that I would have made him
pay for it, ten thousand Roupies more than it was worth. They wrote also the
particular proportion of all the other Stones which I carried. And upon this
false and malicious advice it was, that Cha-Est-Kan, who received not this
information till he had delivered me my Bill of Exchange, would abate me for my
whole parcel, twenty thousand Roupies, which he reduced at length to ten
thousand; and well I had it too.

Since I told you before, what a Present I gave to Cha-Est-Kam; I think it not
amiss to tell you, what I gave the King, to Nahab Giafer-Kan, to the Eunuch of
the Grand Begum, Aurengzeb's Sister, the Great Treasurer, and the Porters of
the Treasury. For you must take notice, that whoever he be, that craves
Audience of the King, they ask him in the first place, where the Present is
which he intends for the King; and examine whether it be fitting to present to
his Majesty. For no man must come into his presence empty handed, though it be
an honor dearly purchased. Coming then to Gehanabad, I went to make my
obeisance to the King; and this is the Present which I made him.

In the first place, a Buckler of Brass highly embossed, and very richly guilt,
the cost of the Guilding alone amounting to two hundred Ducats of Gold, or
eighteen hundred Livres; the value of the whole piece coming to four thousand
three hundred seventy eight Livres. In the middle thereof was the story of
Curtius, who threw himself and his Horse into the Barathrum, when the Earth
gaped, near Rome. Round the outermost Circle of the Buckler, was represented
the siege of Rochel. It was wrought by one of the best Workmen in France, by
the order of Cardinal Richlieu. All the great Lords that were about Aurengzeb
at that time, were charmed at the beauty of the Workmanship, and told him, he
could not do better, than to put it upon the great Elephant, which carried the
Standard before his Majesty when he marched into the Field.

I presented him also with a Battle-Axe of Crystal of the Rock, the sides
whereof were set with Rubies and Emraulds, enchas'd in Gold in the body of the
Crystal, which cost three thousand one hundred and nineteen Livres.

Moreover, I presented him with a Saddle after the Turkey fashion, embroidered
with little Rubies, Pearls, and Diamonds, which cost two thousand eight hundred
and ninety-two Livres.

I presented him also with another Saddle and Foot-cloath, embroidered with
Gold and Silver, to the value of one thousand seven hundred and thirty Livres.
The whole Present amounting to twelve thousand one hundred and nineteen Livres.

The Present which I made to Giafar-Kan, the Great Mogul's Uncle, was a Table,
with other nineteen pieces to make a Cabinet, all nataurl Stones, of diverse
colors, representing the shapes of several Birds and Flowers. The work was
made at Florence, and cost two thousand one hundred and fifty Livres.

A perfect Ruby Ring, which cost one thousand and three hundred Livres.

To the great Treasurer, I presented a Watch in a Gold Case, set with small
Emraulds, at seven hundred and twenty Livres.

To the Potters of the Kings Treasury, and those that deliver out the Money out
of the Treasury, two hundred Roupies, at three hundred Livres.

To the Eunuch of the Great Begum, Sister to Aurengzeb, a Watch in a painted
Case, which cost two hundred and sixty Livres.

All these Presents which I made, as well to the Great Mogul, as to
Cha-Est-Kan, Giaser-Kan, his Majesty's Uncles; as also the Great Treasurer, to
the Stewards of the Houses of the Kan's, and those that brought me twice the
Calaat, or Habit of Honor from the King, and as many times from the Begum his
Sister, and once from Giafar Kan; all these Presents, I say, came to
twenty-three thousand one hundred fourscore and seven Livres. So true it is,
that they who have any business to do at the Court of the great Princes, as
well in Turkey as in Persia and in the Indies, must not pretend to do any thing
in reference to their affairs, till they have their Presents, and those very
considerable, ready. Besides, that his Purse must be continually open to diverse
Officers of meaner reputation, who may be able to serve him. I did not mention
in my first Volume the Present which I made to him that brought me the Calaat
from the King of Persia, to whom I gave two hundred Crowns.

CHAP. IX. The Road from Surat to Golconda,
I Have made several journeys to Golcondan, and have taken several Roads;
sometimes by Sea embarking from Ormus for Malispata; sometimes setting out from
Agra, but most often from Surat, which is the chiefest landing-place of
Indolstan. But in this Chapter I will only speak of the common Road from Surat
to Golconda; wherein I comprehend that of Agra; which Road comes in at
Dultabat, as I shall afterward relate, making mention only of two journeys
which I made in 1645, and 1652, for fear of tiring the Reader.

I departed from Surat in the year 1645, upon the nineteenth of January, and
came to ly at Cambari, costs 3

From Cambari to Barnoli, costs 9

From Barnoli to Beara, costs 12

From Beara to Navapour, costs 16

This is the place where grows the best Rice in the World, that smells like
Musk.

From Navapour to Rinkula, costs 18

From Rinkula to Pipelnar, costs 8

From Pipelnar to Nimpour, costs 17

From Nimpour to Patane, costs 14

From Patane to Secoura, costs 14

From Secoura to Baquela, costs 10

From Baquela to Discon, costs 10

From Discon to Dultabat, costs 10

Dultabat is one of the best Fortresses in the Kingdoms of the Great Mogul,
upon a Mountain every way steep; the only way to it being so narrow, that but
one Horse, or one Camel can go at a time. This City is at the foot of the
Mountain, very well walled. And this place of such importance, which the
Mogul's lost, when the Kings of Golconda and Visapour revolted from them, was
retaken in the Reign of Jehan-guire, by a subtle stratagem. Sultan Courom, who
was afterward called Cha-jehan, commanded in Decan the Army of the King his
Father; and Ast-Kan, Father in Law to Cha-Est-Kan, who was one of the Generals,
gave the Prince some sort of language which so highly offended him, that
immediately sending for one of his Papouche's, or Shoo's, he caused him to have
six blows given him upon the Bonnet, which among the Indians is the highest
indignity can be put upon a man, after which he is no more to appear in the
Prince's presence. This was done by consent between the Prince and the General,
to deceive the World, more especially any Spies which the King of Visapour
might have in the Prince's Army. The report of Ast-Kan's disgrace was
immediately spread abroad: and he himself flying for Sanctuary to the King of
Visapour, who had not cunning enough to discern the imposture, was welcomed by
the same King, and assured of his protection. Ast-Kan seeing himself so
wellreceiv'd, begged leave of the King, that he might retire with ten or twelve
of his Women, and as many of his Servants, into the Fortress of Dultabat, which
was granted. He entered the Town with eight or ten Camels, the two Cajava's or
Litters on each side of the Camel being close shut, to keep the Women from
being seen. But instead of Women, he had put into every Cajava two Soldiers,
all bold and resolved men, as were also every one of the supposed Eunuchs that
led the Camels: so that he had no great difficulty to cut the Garrison in
pieces, not being upon their guard; and to make himself Master of the place,
which has been ever since under the Power of the Great Mogul. There are in the
place a great number of excellent Pieces of Cannon, and the Cannoniers are
generally English or Hollanders. True it is, that there is one little Mountain
higher than the Fortress; but there is hardly any way to it, but through the
same Fortress. There was a Dutch-Engineer, who after he had served the King
fifteen or sixteen years, desired leave to be gone, and the Holland-Company it
self, that had recommended him to the Service, did all they could to obtain it;
but they could never procure it; because he was an excellent Cannonier, and
very skilful in making Fireworks. The Raja Jesseing, who is the most Potent of
all the Idolatrous Princes of India, and who was most powerfully Instrumental
to put the Crown upon Aureng-zeb's Head, was sent as Generalissimo of the Army
of this King, against the Raja Seva-gi; and passing by the Fortress of
Dultabat, this Dutch-Cannonier went to wait upon him, all the Cannoniers of the
Army being Franguis, as well as he. The Hollander laying hold of this
opportunity, told the Raja, that if he would procure him a License to depart,
he would show him a way to get up Cannon, and to mount them upon that Mountain
which commanded the Fortress: for they had already walled it about, and put
Soldiers upon it to keep it secure. The Raja pleased with his proposal,
assured him that he would procure him the King's License, if he performed what
he had proposed. Thereupon the Hollander undertaking and accomplishing his
design, the Raja was as good as his word, and obtained of the King to dismiss
the Dutch-Cannonier: who came to Surat when I was there, about the beginning of
the year 1667; whence he embarked for Holland.

From Dultabat to Aureng-abat, costs

Aureng-abat was formerly but a Village, till Aureng-zeb made it a City, though
it be not walled. It grew to be thus enlarged, as well by reason of a Lake two
leagues about, upon which the Village is built, as for the Memorys-sake of his
first Wife, who is dead, by whom he had his Children. She is Interred toward
the end of the Lake, upon the West Side, where the King has built a Mosquee,
with a stately Monument, and a fair Inn. The Mosquee and the Monument were
reared at a great expense, being covered with white-Marble, which is brought
from Lahor by Wagon; being a journey of four Months. Going one time from Surat
to Golconda, I met five days journey from Aureng-abat, more than three-hunder'd
Wagons laden with this Marble, the least whereof was drawn by twelve Oxen.

From Aureng-abat to Pipoli, costs 8

From Pipoli to Aubar, costs 12

From Aubar to Guisemner, costs 10

From Guisemner to Asti, costs 12

From Asti to Sarver, costs 16

From Sarver to Lesona, costs 16

From Lesona to Nadour, costs 12

At Nadour you must cross a River which runs into Ganges; and pay for every
Wagon four Roupies; besides that, you must have a pass from the Governor.

From Nadour to Patonta, costs 9

From Patonta to Kakeri, costs 10

From Kakeri to Sataepour, costs 10

From Satapour to Sitanaga, costs 12

From Sitanaga to Satanagar, costs 10

At Satanagar you begin to enter upon the Territories of the King of Golconda.

From Satanagar to Melvari, costs 16

From Melvari to Girballi, costs 12

From Girballi to Golconda, costs 14

So that from Surat to Golconda there are, costs 324

All this I traveled in twenty-seven days. I made five journeys more in my
Travels in the year 1653. And I also took another Road from Piplenar, where I
arrived the eleventh of March, setting out from Surat, the sixth.

The twelfth, to Birgam.

The thirteenth, to Omberat.

The fourteenth, to Enneque-Tenque, a strong Fortress, that bears the name of
two Indian Princesses. It stands upon a Mountain steep every way; there being
but one ascent to it upon the East Side. Within the enclosed compass of the
Walls there is a large Pond, and Ground enough to sow for the maintenance of
five or six-hunder'd men. But the King keeps no Garrison therein, so that it
falls to ruin.

The fifteenth, to Geroul.

The sixteenth, to Lazour, where you are to cross a River; upon which, about a
Cannons-shot from the fording place, are to be seen several large Pagods of the
Country, whither great numbers of Pilgrims repair every day.

The seventeenth, to Aureng-abad.

The eighteenth, to Pipelgan, or Piply.

The nineteenth, to Ember.

The Twentieth, to Devgan.

The one and twentieth, to Patris.

The two and twentieth, to Bargan.

The three and twentieth, to Palam.

The four and twentieth, to Candear, a large Fortress, but upon one side
commanded by an high Mountain.

The five and twentieth, to Gargan.

The six and twentieth, to Nagooni.

The seven and twentieth, to Indove.

The eight and twentieth, to Indelvai.

The nine and twentieth, to Regivali. Between these two last places there is a
little River which separates the Territories of the Great Mogul, from the
Dominions of the King of Golconda.

The thirtieth, to Masapkipet.

The one and thirtietieth, to Mirel-mola-kipet.

To go from Agra to Golconda, you must go to Brampour, according to the Road
already described from Brampour to Dultabat, which is five or six days journeys
off; and from Dultabat to those other places before set down.

You may also take another Road to go from Surat to Golconda; that is to say,
through Goa and Visapour; as I shall inform you in the particular relation of
my journey to Goa. I come now to what is most worthy observation in the Kingdom
of Golconda: And to relate what happened in the last Wars the King maintained
against his Neighbors, during the time that I have known the Indies.

CHAP. X. Of the Kingdom of Golconda, and the Wars which it has maintained for
some few years last past.
THE whole Kingdom of Golconda, take it in general, is a good Country,
abounding in Corn, Rice, Cattle, Sheep, Poultry, and other necessaries for
human life. In regard there are great store of Lakes in it, there is also great
store of Fish. Above all the rest, there is a sort of Smelt, that has but one
bone in the middle, which is most delicious food. Nature has contributed more
than Art, toward the making these Lakes, whereof the Country is full; which
are generally in places somewhat raised, so that you need do no more than make
a little Dam upon the plain-side to keep in the water. These Dams or Banks are
sometimes half a league long: and after the rainy seasons are over, they open
the Sluices from time to time to let out the water into the adjacent Fields;
where it is received by diverse little Channels to water particular grounds.

Bagnagar is the name of the Metropolis of this Kingdom; but vulgarly it is
called Golconda, from the name of a Fortress, not above two leagues distant
from it, where the King keeps his Court. This Fortress is about two leagues in
circuit, and by consequence requires a numerous Guard. It is as it were a Town
where the King keeps his Treasure: having left Bagnagar, ever since it was
sacked by the Army, which Aureng-zeb brought against it.

Bagnagar is then the City, which they vulgarly call Golconda; and it was
founded by the Great Grandfather of the present King; upon the importunity of
one of his Wives, whom he passionately loved, whose name was Nagar. Before
that, it was only a place of Pleasure, where the King had very fair Gardens,
till at length his Wife continually representing to him the delicacies of the
situation for the building a City and a Palace, by reason of the River; he laid
the foundations, and ordered that it should bear the name of his Wife, calling
it Bag-Nagar, that is to say, the Garden of Nagar. This City lies in seventeen
degrees of Elevation, wanting two minutes. The Country round about is a flat
Country, only near the City are several Rocks, as you see about Fontain-Bleau.
A great River washes the Walls of the City upon the South-west-side, which,
near to Maslipatan, falls into the Gulf of Bengala. At Bagnagar you cross this
River over a Bridge no less beautiful than Pont-Neus at Paris. The City is
little less than Orleans, well built, and full of windows. There are many fair
large Streets, but not being well-pav'd: they are dusty, as are all the Cities
of Persia and India, which is very offensive in the Summer.

Before you come to the Bridge, you must pass through a large Suburb, called
Erengabad, about a league in length; where live all the Merchants, the Brokers,
Handicraft-Trades, and in general, all the meaner sort of people; the City
being inhabited only by persons of Quality, Officers of the King's House,
Ministers of Justice, and Officers of the Army. From ten or eleven in the
forenoon, till four or five in the evening, the Merchants, Brokers and Workmen
come into the City to trade with the Foreign Merchants; after which time they
return to their own Houses. In the Suburb are two or three fair Mosquees, which
serve for Inns for the Foreigners, besides several Pagods in the
Neighbouring-parts. Through the same Suburb lies the way to the Fortress of
Golconda.

So soon as you are over the Bridge, you enter into a large Street, that leads
you to the King's Palace. On the right hand are the Houses of some Lords of the
Court; and four or five Inns two Stories-high: wherein there are fair Halls,
and large Chambers to let in the fresh Air. At the end of this Street there is
a large Piazza; upon which stands one of the sides of the Palace; in the middle
whereof there is a Balcone, wherein the King comes to sit, when he pleases to
give Audience to the People. The great Gate of the Palace stands not upon this
Piazza, but upon another very near adjoining; and you enter first into a large
Court surrounded with Portico's, under which lies the King's Guards. Out of
this Court you pass into another, built after the same form, encompast with
several fair Apartments, the Roofs whereof are terrass'd. Upon which, as upon
those where the Elephants are kept, there are very fair Gardens, wherein there
grow Trees of that bigness, that it is a thing of great wonder, how those
Arches should bear so vast a burden.

About fifty years since, they began to build a magnificent Pagod in the City;
which would have been the fairest in all India, had it been finished. The
Stones are to be admired for their bigness: And that wherein the Nich is made,
which is on that side where they say their Prayers, is an entire Rock, of such
a prodigious bulk, that it was five years before five or six-hunder'd men,
continually employed, could hew it out of its place. They were forced also to
roll it along upon an Engine with wheels, upon which they brought it to the
Pagod; and several affirmed to me, that there were fourteen-hunder'd Oxen to
drawit. I will tell you hereafter the reason it remains imperfect: For had it
been finished, in all reason it had excelled all the boldest Structures of Asia.

On the other side of the City, as you go to Maslipatan, there are two great
Lakes, being each about a league in compass, wherein there ride several Pinks
richly adorned for the King's Pleasure; and upon the Banks are several fair
Houses that belong to the Principal Lords of the Court.

Upon three sides of the City stands a very fair Mosquee, wherein are the Tombs
of the Kings of Golconda: and about four in the afternoon there is a Dole of
Bread and Pilau to all the Poor that come. If you would see any thing that is
rare, you must go to view these Tombs upon a Festival-day. For then from
morning till night they are hung with rich Tapestry.

As for the Government and Policy which is observed in this City: In the first
place, when a Stranger comes to the Gates, they search him exactly, to see if
he have any Salt or Tobacco about him; for those Commodities bring the King his
greatest Revenue. Sometimes a Stranger shall wait a day or two, before he shall
have leave to enter. For a Soldier first gives notice to the Officer that
commands the Guard, and then he sends to the Deroga, to know what he shall do.
Now, because it many times happens that the Deroga is busy, or gone to take a
walk out of the City, or else for that sometimes the Soldier himself pretends
he cannot find the Deroga, only to create himself more errands, to get the more
Money; a Stranger is forced to endure all this delay, sometimes, as I have said
before, for a day or two.

When the King sits to do Justice, I observe that he comes into the Balcone
that looks into the Piazza, and all that have business stand below, just
against the place where the King sits. Between the People and the Walls of the
Palace are fixed in the ground three rows of Poles, about the length of an
Half-Pike, to the ends whereof they tie certain ropes across one upon another.
Nor is any person whatsoever permitted to pass beyond those bounds, unless he
be called. This Bar, which is never set up, but when the King sits in Judgment,
runs along the whole breadth of the Piazza; and just against the Balcone there
is a Bar to open, to let in those that are called. Then two men, that each of
them hold a Cord by the end, extended all the breadth of the passage, have
nothing to do but to let fall the Cord, for any person that is called to step
over it. A Secretary of State sits below under the Balcone, to receive all
Petitions; and when he has five or six together, he puts them in a Bag, and
then an Eunuch, who stands in the Balcone near the King, lets down a string, to
which the Bag being ti'd, he draws it up, and presents it to his Majesty.

Every Monday the chiefest of the Nobility mount the Guard, every one in their
turn, and are never relieved till at the eight days end. There are some of
these Lords that have five or six thousand men under their command; and they
lie encamped in their Tents round about the City. When they mount the Guard,
every one goes from his own Habitation to the Rendevouz; but when they are
relieved, they march in good order over the Bridge, thence through the long
Street into the Piazza, where they draw up before the Balcone. In the first
place, march ten or twelve Elephants, more or less, according to the quality of
the Captain of the Guard. There are some of these Elephants that carry Cages,
which in some sort resemble the Body of a little Coach; there are others that
have but one man to guide them, and another in the Cage who carries a Banner.

After the Elephants, follow the Camels by two and two, sometimes to the number
of thirty or forty. Every Camel carries a kind of Packsaddle, upon which is
fastened a little Culverine, which a certain Engineer, clad in a skin from head
to foot, and sitting upon the Crupper of the Camel, with a lighted Match in his
hand; dexterously manages from one side to another before the Balcone, where the
King sits.

After them come the Coaches, attended by the Domestic Servants of the
Commander: Next to them follow the lead-Horses, and then the Lord appears, to
whom all this Equipage belongs, attended by ten or twelve Curtisans, that stay
for him at the end of the Bridge, and skip and dance before him to the Piazza.
Behind him the Cavalry and Infantry march in good order: Which being a show,
wherein there was much of delight and state, all the while I staid at Bagnabar,
which was about four Months, I had the divertisement to see them out of my
Lodging in the great Street every week as they marched by.

The Soldiers wear no other Clothes than only three or four else of Calicut,
with which they cover half their Bodies behind and before. They wear their hair
very long, and tie it up in a knot upon the top of the crown, like the women,
who have no other Headgear than only a piece of Linen with three corners, one
that comes to the middle of the head, and the other two, which they tie under
their chins. The Soldiers do not wear Hangers or Scimitars like the Persians;
but broad Swords like the Switzers, as well for a thrust, as a blow, which they
hang in a Girdle. The Barrels of their Muskets are stronger than ours, and much
neater; for their Iron is better, and not so subject to break. Their Cavalry
carry Bows and Arrows, a Buckler and a Battel-Ax, an Headpiece and a Jacket of
Mail, that hangs down from the Headpiece over their Shoulders.

There are so great a number of common Women as well in the City as in the
Suburbs, and in the Fortress, which is like another City, that there are
generally above twenty thousand set down in the Deroga's Book; without which
license, it is not lawful for any Woman to profess the Trade. They pay no
tribute to the King; only they are obliged to come, a certain number of them,
with their Governess, and their Music every Friday, and present themselves
before the Balcone. If the King be there, they dance before him: if he intend
not to come, an Eunuch comes into the Balcone, and makes them a sign to retire.
In the cool of the evening they stand at the doors of their Houses, which are
for the most part little Huts; and when night comes, they set up a Candle or a
lighted Lamp for a Signal: Then it is also that they open all the Shops where
they sell Tari; which is a certain drink made of the juice of a Tree, and is as
sweet as our new Wines. They fetch it some five or six leagues off, upon
Horses, that carry two earthen-Bottles of each side, and trot at a great rate;
of which there come every day to the City above five or six-hunder'd. The King
has a considerable Revenue by the Impost which he lays upon this Tari. And for
that reason he permits so many common Women, in regard it is for their sake
that so much Tari is consumed; those that sell it, for that cause, keeping
their Shops by those Houses.

These sort of Women are so nimble and active, that when the present King went
to see Maslipatan, nine of them undertook to represent the figure of an
Elephant; four making the four feet, four the body, and one the trunk; upon
which the King, sitting in a kind of Throne, made his entry into the City.

All the Men and Women of Golconda are well proportioned, and of comely
statures; and fair enough in their councenances; only the Countrey-people are a
little more swart.

The present King of Golconda bears the Name of Abdoul-Coutou-Sha; and I will
tell the Reader in a few words, from whence he drew his Original. In the Reign
of Axbar King of India, the Father of Jehan-Guir, the Territories of the Great
Moguls did not extend farther Southward then Narbider; to that the River which
runs by it, and which coming from the South, empties it self into Ganges,
separated their Dominions from the Territories of the Raja of Narsingue, that
stretched as far as Cape-Comorin, the other Raja's being only his Subjects, and
depending upon him. This Raja and his Successors have been always at Wars with
them that succeeded to Tamerlane or Temur-leng in India; and their Power was so
great, that the last Raja, who was at War with Akbar, brought into the Field
four Armies under as many Generals. The most considerable of his Armies lay in
those Provinces, which at this day are called the Kingdom of Golconda; the
second was quartered in the Provinces of Visapour, the third in the Province of
Dultabat, and the fourth in the Territories of Brampour. The Raja of Narsingue
dying without Children, the four Generals divided among themselves the
Countries which they possessed with their Army, and took upon them the title of
Kings, the one of Golconda, the other of Visapour, the other of Brampour, and
the fourth of Dultabat. Though the Raja were an Idolater, nevertheless his four
Generals were Mahumetans; and he of Golconda was of the Sect of Haly, descended
from an Ancient Family of the Turcomans, which inhabit the Country of Hamadan
in Persia. This General, as I have said, was more considerable than any of the
rest; and some few days after the death of the Raja, they won a famous Victory
from the Mogul; so that he could not hinder them from assuming their several
Sovereignties. But after that, Jehan-Guir, the Son of Akbar, conquered again
the Kingdom of Brampour, Cha-jehan the Son of Jehan-Guir recovered the Kingdom
of Dultabat, and Aureng-zeb the Son of Cha-jehan recovered some part of the
Kingdom of Visapour. As for the King of Golconda, neither Cha-jehan, nor
Aureng-zeb disturbed him, but let him rest in peace, upon condition that he
should pay to the Mogul an annual tribute of 200000 Pagods. At present the
greatest Raja on this side Ganges is the Raja of Velou, whose Territories
extend to Cape-Comorin, and who succeeded to some part of the Territories of
the Raja of Narsingue: But in regard there is no Trade in his Country, and by
consequence no concourse of strangers, there is little notice taken of him. The
present King of Golconda has no Sons, but three Daughters, who are all married.

The Eldest Espoused one of the Kinsmen of the Grand Chek of Mecca. Nor must we
forget some passages that fell out before this Marriage. The Chek coming to
Golconda in the habit of a Faquir,, for some Months lodged without the Gate of
the Palace, disdaining to give any answer to several Courtiers, that demanded
what his business was. At length the thing being made known to the King, he
sent his chief Physician, who spoke good Arabic, to know of the Chek what he
had to request, and the reason of his coming. The Physician, and some other
Lords of the Court that discoursed him also, finding him to be a person of
great Wit and Learning, brought him to the King, who was very well satisfied
with his aspect and his presence. But at length the Chek declaring to him, that
he came to Espouse the Princess; that proposal very much surpised the Prince,
and was looked upon by the greatest part of the Court, as made by a person not
well in his wits. At first the King only laughed at him. But when he found him
obstinately persevering in his demand, in-so-much that he threatened the
Country with some strange Calamity, if the Princess were not given to him in
Marriage, he was committed to Prison, where he lay a long time. At length the
King thinking it more to the purpose to send him back into his own Country,
caused him to be shipped away at Mastipatan, in a Vessel that carried Goods and
Pilgrims to Mocca, whence they travel by land to Mecca. About two years after
the same Chek returned again to Golconda, and ordered his affairs so well, that
he Espoused the Princess, and won an high reputation in the Kingdom, which he
governs at this day, and is very Potent. He it was that kept the King from
surrendering the Fortress of Golconda, whither he was retired, when Aureng-zeb
and his Son took Bagnabar, as I shall tell you by and by, threatening to kill
him, if he would not resolve to hold it out, and not deliver the keys to the
enemy. This bold action wss the reason which made the King love him ever
afterward; and that he takes his counsel in all weigty affairs, not as he is
the King's Son-in-Law, but as he is a great Minister of State, and the chiefest
person, next the King, in all the Court. He it was that has put a stop to the
finishing the great Pagod in Bagnagar, having threatened the whole Kingdom with
some great Calamity, if they went forward with the work. This Prince is a
passionate Lover of all those that profess the Mathematics, and understands
them as well. For which reason, though he be a Mahumetan, he is a great
Favourer of all the Christians, who are versed in that Science, as he has
particularly testified to Father Ephrahim, a Capuchin, passing through Golconda
for Pegu, whither he was sent by his Superiors. He did all he could to oblige
him to stay in the Country, and offered to build him a House and a Church at
his own expenses; telling him, he should neither want employment, nor Hearers,
in regard there were several Portuguese Christians, and several Armenians that
came thither to trade. But Father Ephraim having a particular Order to go to
Pegu, could not accept of his Offer; yet when he went to take his leave of the
Check, he presented him with a Calaat, the most noble that was in his Wardrobe;
being the whole habit; the Cap, the Cabay or large Vest, the Arcalou or short
Cassock, two pair of Drawers, two Shirts, and two Scarfs, which they wear about
their necks, and over their heads to keep off the heat of the Sun. The Friar
was surpised at the present, and gave the Check to understand, that it was not
proper for him to wear it: however the Check would force him to take it,
telling him he might accommodate some of his Friends with it. Two months after
Father Ephraim bestowed the same Present upon me, being at Surat; for which I
returned him thanks.

The Check seeing he could not detain the Father, and unwilling he should go a
foot from Golconda to Mastipatan, obliged him to take an Ox, with two Men to
lead it; and because he could not persuade him to take also thirty Pagods,
which he presented the Father withal, he commanded the two men, when they came
to Mastipatan, to leave the Ox and the thirty Pagods with him, which they did
very punctually; for otherwise at their return to Golconda, they had forfeited
their lives. I will finish the History of Father Ephraim, when I come to the
description of Goa, which is the principal place that the Portugals have in the
Indies.

The second Daughter of the King of Golconda was married to Sultan Mahumad, the
eldest Son of Aurengzeb; the occasion whereof was this: Mirgimola,
Generalissimo of the King of Golconda's Army, and who had been very serviceable
to his Master, to settle the Crown upon his head, according to the custom, left
with the King as a mark of his fidelity, both his Wife and Children in Hostage;
for he was sent to reduce certain Raja's in Bengala, that were in Rebellion. He
had several Daughters, but only one Son, who had a great train, and made a
great noise at Court. The reputation and riches which Mirgimola had gained,
raised him up several Enemies, who endeavored in his absence to ruin him, and
to put him out of the Kings favor. They pretended that the great power of
Mirgimola was very much to be suspected; that all his designs tended to
dethrone him, and to settle the Kingdom of Golconda upon his own Son; that it
behooved him not to stay till the remedy were past cure, but to rid himself of
an Enemy, so much the more to be feared, the closer he kept his intentions; and
that the shortest and best way was to poison him. The King being easily
persuaded, gave them leave and authority to act as they pleased for his
security; but having missed of their design for three or four times together,
Mirgimola's Son began to smell the plot; and immediately gave advice thereof to
his Father. It is not known what instructions he received from his Father; but
so soon as he had his answer, he went to the King, and spoke boldly to him,
taxing him with the services which his Father had done him, and that without
his assistance he had never come to the Crown. The young Lord, naturally of a
fiery disposition, kept on this discourse, so displeasing to the King, till at
length his Majesty flung away; and the Lords that were present, fell upon the
young man, and basely misused him. At the same time also he was arrested and
committed to prison, together with his Mother and Sisters. Which action, as it
made a great noise at Court, coming to Mirgimola's ears, so incensed him, that
having an Army under his command, and being beloved by the Soldiers, he
resolved to make use of the advantages he had, to revenge himself for the
injury done him. He was then not far from Bengala, being sent, as I said
before, to reduce certain Raja's to obedience, whose Territories lie upon the
Ganges; and Sultan-Sujah, Cha-jehan's second Son, being then Governor of
Bengala, the General thought it his best way to address himself to him; as
being the next Prince, with whom he might join his Forces against the King of
Golconda, whom he looked upon now no more as his Master, but as one of his most
inveterate Enemies. Thereupon he wrote to the Prince to this effect: That if he
would join with him, he would give him an opportunity to possess himself of the
whole Kingdom of Golconda; and that he should not neglect so fair an
opportunity to enlarge the Dominions of the Great Mogul, the succession whereof
might as well concern him, as any of the rest of his Brothers. But the Answer
which Sultan-Sujah sent him, was contrary to his expectation; who told him,
that he could not tell how to trust a person, who as he went about to betray
his King, might more easily be drawn to betray a Foreign Prince, whom he had
inveigl'd only for the sake of his Revenge; and that therefore he should not
rely upon him. Upon Sultan-Sujah's refusal, Mirgimola wrote to Aurengzeb, who
was then in his Government of Brampoure, who being not so nice as his Brother,
accepted of the proposal that was made him. Thus while Mirgimola advanced with
his Troops toward Bagnabar, Aurengzeb hasten's toward Decan, and both Armies
being joined, they came to the Gates of Bagnabar before the King was in a
posture to receive them. He had only time to retreat into his Fortress of
Golconda, to which Aurengzeb, after he had rifl'd the City of Bagnabar, and
plundered the Palace, laid a close Siege. The King seeing himself thus
vigorously pressed, sent away to Mirgimola his Wife and Children very
honorably. For there is virtue and generosity in the Indians, as well as in
the Europeans; of which I will give you an illustrious Example in the person of
the King of Golconda. Some days after the Enemy had besieged the Fortress, a
Canoneer espying Aurengzeb upon his Elephant, riding about to view the
Fortifications of the Castle, told the King, being then upon the Bastion, that
if he pleased he would fetch off Aurengzeb with a Canon-shot; and at the same
time was about to give fire, but the King holding his hand, told him he
perceived it well enough, but that it behooved Kings to be better Husbands of
the Lives of Princes. The Canoneer obeyed the King, and instead of shooting at
Aurengzeb, he took off the Head of the General of his Army, who was a little
before him; which put a stop to the Assault they were about to have given, the
Army being in a confusion upon his death. Abdul-jaber-Beg, General of the King
of Golconda's Army, lying not far from the Camp, with a flying Army of four
thousand Horse, understanding the disorder of the Enemy by reason of the loss
of their General, laid hold of so favorable an opportunity, gave them a
desperate charge in that confusion, and putting them to the rout, pursued them
till night, for four or five Leagues. Some few days before the General's death,
the King of Golconda finding that his provisions failed him in the Fortress,
was about to have delivered the Keys; but as I said before, Mirza-Mahomed, his
Son-in-Law, snatched them out of his hand, and threatened to kill him, if he
persever'd in that resolution. Which was the reason, that the King who loved
him not before, had ever after the greatest affection imaginable for him as
long as he lived.

Aurengzeb being thus constrained to raise his Siege, stayed some days to rally
his Troops; and having received a recruit of fresh men, returned again to the
Siege, with new resolutions. But Mirgimola, who had still some kindness for the
King remaining in his breast, would not permit Aurengzeb to use the utmost of
extremity, but by his wit and good management gained a suspension of Arms.

Cha-jehan, the Father of Aurengzeb, had formerly had great kindnesses shown
him by the King of Golconda, to whom he fled, after he had lost the Battle,
together with his eldest Brother, which he fought against Jehan-guir his
Father, with whom he made War. The eldest Son was taken, and Jehan-guir caused
his eyes to be put out; but Cha-jehan being more wary, fled, and was
entertained by the King of Golconda, with whom he entered into a particular and
strict friendship; Cha-jehan making an Oath to his Benefactor, that he would
never wage. War against him upon any occasion whatever. Mirgimola therefore
knowing that it would be no difficult thing to bring two Kings, that were
Friends, to an accommodation, wrought underhand with both, toward the
conclusion of a Peace. And he so brought his business about, that the King of
Golconda writ a Letter first to Cha-jehan, wherein he submissively requested
him to be an Arbitrator between Aurengzeb and him, promising to submit wholly
to him, and to sign such Articles as he should propose. By the same policy of
Mirgimola, Cha-jehan was advised, in answer to the King of Golconda's Letter,
to propose a Match between his second Daughter and Sultan Mahomed, the Son of
Aurengzeb, upon condition that after the death of the King her Father, the
Son-in-Law should inherit the Kingdom of Golconda. This proposition being
accepted, the Peace was concluded, and the Nuptials celebrated with an
extraordinary Magnificence. As for Mirgimola, he quitted the service of the
King of Golconda, and went with Aurengzeb to Brampour. Soon after Cha-jehan
made him his Prime Minister of State, and Generalissimo of his Armies; and he
it was that so potently assisted Aurengzeb to get the Crown, by the defeat of
Sultan-Sujah. For Mirgimola was a person of great wit, and no less
understanding in Military than in State affairs. I had occasion to speak with
him several times; and I have no less admired his justice, than his dispatch to
all people that had to do with him; while he gave out several Orders, and
signed several Dispatches at the same time, as if he had but one entire
business in hand.

The other Princess of Golconda was promised to Sultan Sejed, another Chek of
Mecca; and the Match went on so fairly, that the day was appointed for the
celebration of the Nuptials; but Abdoul-Jaber-Beg, General of the Army, with
six other Lords, went to the King to divert him from his intention; and they
brought it so to pass, that the Match was broken off, and the Princess was
given in Marriage to Mirza-Abdoul-Cofing, the Kings Cousin; by whom she has two
Sons, which have wholly annulled the Pretentions of Aurengzeb's Son; whose
Father now keeps him in Prison, in the Fort of Gavaleor, for having taken his
Uncle Sultan Sujah's part against him. The Princess had been given before to
Mirza-Abdoul-Cofing, but for his debauchery, which rendered him little regarded
by the King. But since his marriage he is very much reclaimed.

Now the King of Golconda does not stand in so much fear of the Moguls; for in
imitation of them, he keeps his Money in his own Country, and has already
hoarded up a Treasury sufficient to maintain his Wars. Besides, he is
altogether addicted to the Sect of Haly, so that he will not wear a Bonnet,
like the other Mahumetans, because they say Haly wore none; but another sort of
attire for the head. Which is the reason that the Persians, that come into
India to seek their fortune, apply themselves rather to the King of Golconda
then to the Great Mogul. Such is the condition of the King of Visapour also,
whom the Queen, Sister to the King of Golconda, takes care to educate in the
Sect of Haly, which invites great numbers of Persians into her Service.

CHAP. XI. The Road from Golconda to Maslipatan, al. Masalipatan.
FRom Maslipatan they count it an hundred costs or leagues, taking the right
way. But if you go by the Diamond-Mine, which in the Persian Language is called
Color, in the Indian, Gani; they reckon it an hundred and twelve leagues:
and this is the Road which I generally took.

From Golconda to Tenara, costs 4

Tenara is a sweet place, where there are four very fair Houses, to every one
of which belongs a large Garden. One of the four standing upon the left hand
along the Highway, is much more beautiful then any of the other three. It is
built of Freestone two stories high, wherein there are several fair Galleries,
Halls, Parlors, and lodging-Chambers. Before the front of the House is a large
apiece Piazza, little inferior to the Place Royale in Paris. Upon every
one of the other three fronts there is a great Portal, on each side whereof
there is a fair Platform raised from the earth above four or five-foot-high,
and well-Arch'd, where Travelers of Quality are lodged. On the top of each
Portal there is a strong Baluster, and a little Chamber for the Ladies. When
Persons of Quality care not to be in their Houses,, they set up Tents in their
Gardens; and you must take notice that there is no dwelling for any person but
only in the three Houses; for the fourth, which is the fairest, belongs only to
the Queen. When she is not there however, any body may see it, and take a walk
in the Garden, which is a very lovely place, and well-stor'd with water. The
whole Piazza is encompast with several Chambers for the lodging of poor
Travelers; who every day toward the evening have an Alms bestowed upon them,
of Rice, or Pulse, which they boil ready to their hands. But for the Idolaters
that eat nothing which is provided by other hands, they give them flower to
make Bread, and a little Butter. For when their Bread is baked like a broad
thin Cake, they dip it in the melted-Butter.

From Tenara to Jatenagar, costs 12

From Jatenagar to Patengi, costs 12

From Patengi to Pengeul, costs 14

From Pengeul to Nagelpar, costs 12

From Nagelpar to Lakabaron, costs 11

From Lakabaron to Color or Gani, of which I shall speak in my discourse of
the Mines, costs 11

The greatest part of the way from Lakabaron to Color, especially when you
come near to Color, is very rocky; so that I was forced in some places to
take my Coach off the Carriages, which was presently done. If you meet with any
good Earth between those Rocks, there you shall find Cassia-Trees, that bear
the best Cassia, and the most laxative in all India. Which I found by its
working with my men that eat of it by the way.

There runs a great River by the Town of Color, which falls into the Gulf of
Bengala near Mastipatan.

From Color or Gani, to Kah-Kaly, costs 12

From Kah-Kaly to Bezouar, costs 6

Near to Bezouar you must repass the River of Color.

From Bezouar to Vouchir, costs 4

From Vouchir to Nilimor, costs 4

About half the way between Vouchir and Nilimor, you must cross a great River
upon a Float-boat of Timber, there being no other kind of Boat in that place.

From Nilimor to Milmol, costs 6

From Milmol to Mastipatan, costs 4

Mastipatan is a great City, the Houses whereof are only of Wood, built at a
distance one from another. The place it self, which stands by the Sea, is
famous for nothing but the Road for Ships which belongs to it, which is the
best in the Gulf of Bengala; and from hence they set Sail for Pegu, for Siam,
for Aracan, for Bengala, for Cochinchine, for Mecca, and for Ormus, as also for
the Islands of Madagascar, Sumatra and the Manille's.

You must take notice, that from Golconda to Mastipatan, there is no traveling
by Wagons, by reason of the high Mountains, Lakes and Rivers that make the
Road very straight and impassable. It Is a very difficult thing to carry a
little Coach thither; for I was forced to have my own taken off the Carriages,
and so to have it lifted out of the bad way. The Road is every jot as bad
between Golconda and Cape-Comorin; a Wagon being hardly so much as made
mention of all the way; for that there is no other way to travel, or for the
carriage of Goods, than with Horses and Oxen. But instead of Coaches, they have
the convenience of Pallekie's, wherein you are carried with more speed and more
ease than in any part of India.

CHAP. XII. The Road from Surat to Goa, and from Goa to Golconda through
Visapour.
YOu may go from Surat to Goa, partly by Land, and partly by Sea. But the Road
being very bad by Land, generally Travelers go by Sea, and hiring an Almadier,
which is a Barque with Oars, they go by the Shore to Goa: though sometimes the
Malavares or Indian Pirates are very much to be feared all along those Coasts,
as I shall tell you in due place.

The way from Surat to Goa, is not reckoned by Costs, but by Gos, one of which
makes four of our common Leagues.

From Surat to Daman, gos 7

From Daman to Bassain, gos 10

From Bassain to Chaoul, gos 7

From Chaoul to Daboul, gos 12

From Daboul to Rejapour, gos 10

From Rejapour to Mingrela, gos 9

From Mingrela to Goa, gos 4

In all from Surat to Goa, gos 61

The great danger which you run along the Coast, is the hazard of falling into
the hands of the Malvares, who are violent Mahumetans, and very cruel to the
Christians. I saw a barefoot Carmelite-Friar who had been taken by those
Pirates. This Friar, to get his ransom the sooner, they put to that kind of
torture, that his right-arm was shorter by one half then his left, and so it
was with one leg. The Captains do not give above six Crowns to every Soldier
for the whole six months that they are usually out at Sea: Then the Soldiers
may return home, and if their Captains will have them stay longer, they must
allow'em more pay. They seldom venture out above 20 or 25 leagues at Sea, which
is no great hazard of the Vessel. But sometimes the Portuguese's snap them, and
then they either hang 'em up presently, or throw 'em overboard. These
Malavares carry sometimes 200, sometimes 250 men, and they sail together in
Squadrons of ten or fifteen Barques to attack a great Vessel, not caring a rush
for the great Guns. They come board and board so suddenly, and cast such a
quantity of Pots of Artificial Fire upon the deck, that if there be not speedy
remedy applied, they will presently do a world of mischief. Generally our
Seamen, knowing the custom of these Pirates, when they come within ken,
presently shut up the Scuttles, and fill the deck with water, to hinder the
Fire-Pots from doing execution.

An English Captain, whose name was Mr. Clark, coming from Bantam to Surat, not
far from Cochin, met a Squadron of these Malvares, consisting of 25 or 30 of
these Barques. Who came board and board, and vigorously attacked him. The
Captain seeing he could not withstand their first Fury, put fire to some
Barrels of Powder, and blowing up the deck, blew a great number of the Pirates
into the Sea. Nevertheless, the rest were nothing discouraged, but boarded the
Ship a second time. The English Captain seeing there was no help, put his men
into two Shallops, and staying behind in his Cabin, where the Pirates could not
enter so suddenly, he set fire to a Train which he had laid, that reached to
all the rest of the Powder, and at the same time leaping into the Sea, was
taken up by his own men. In the mean time the Ship being all a-fire, the Pirates
leapt into the Sea also. But for all this, the two Shallops, wherein there were
about forty English, were taken by the rest of the Malvares, that were
Fresh-men; and I was then at breakfast with the English President, Mr.
Fremelin, when he received a Letter from Captain Clark, that he was a Slave to
Samorin, who is the most considerable King all along the Pirates Coast. The
Prince would not leave the English in the hands of those Scoundrels, knowing
that they would have been in great danger of their lives, by reason that above
twelve-hunder'd Women had lost their Husbands, in the two times that the Ship
had been fired. However the King found a means to appease them, promising to
each of them that had lost their Husbands two Piasters, every Piaster being
four shillings a piece, which came to above two thousand four hundred Crowns,
besides four thousand, which were to be paid for the Ransom of the Captain and
the other Seamen, immediately the President sent the Money, and I saw them at
their return, some in health, others in violent Fevers. The Malavares are a
People so superstitious, that they never touch any thing that is foul or
soyl'd, with their Right Hands, but only with the Left, the Nails of which
Fingers they let grow, and use instead of Combs, for they wear their Hair long
like the Women, tying it about their Heads in wreaths, and binding it with a
Linen cloth with three corners.

Since I have mentioned Daman, I will tell you in a few words how that City was
besieged by Aureng-Zeb the present Great Mogul. Some are of opinion that
Elephants do great matters in War; which may be sometimes true, but not alwaws;
for very often instead of doing mischief to the Enemy, they turn upon those
that lead them, and rout their own party as Aureng-Zeb found by experience, at
the Siege of this City. He was twenty days before Daman, and resolved at length
to Storm it upon a Sunday, believing that the Christians were like the Jews and
would not defend it upon that day. He that commanded the Place was an old
Soldier, who had served in France, and had three Sons with him. In the Town
were eight hundred Gentlemen, and other stout Soldiers, who came from all
parts to signalize their valor at that Siege. For though the Mogul had in his
Army above forty thousand men, he could not hinder relief from being put into
Daman by Sea, in regard that he wanted Ships. The Sunday that the Prince
intended to Storm, the Governor of Daman, as had been ordered at the Council
of War, caused Mass to be said presently after Midnight, and then made a Sally
with all his Cavalry and some part of his Infantry, who were to fall on upon
that quarter which was guarded by two hundred Elephants. Among those Elephants
they flung a great number of Fireworks, which so affrighted them in the dark
of the Night, that knowing not whither they went, nor being to be ruled by
their Governors, they turned upon the Besiegers with so much fury, that in
less than two or three hours half the Army of Aureng-Zeb was cut in pieces, and
in three days the Siege was raised; nor would the Prince after that, have any
more to do with the Christians.

I made two Voiages to Goa the one at the beginning of the year 1641. the
second at the beginning of the year 1648. The first time I stayed but five
days, and returned by Land to Surat. From Goa I went to Bicholly, which is upon
the main Land, thence to Visapour, thence to Golconda, thence to Aureng-abat,
and so to Surat. I could have gone to Surat without passing through Golconda,
but my business led me that way.

From Goa to Visapour; costs. 85

Which takes up generally eight days journey.

From Visapour to Golconda, costs. 100

Which I traveled in nine days.

From Golconda to Aureng-abat, the Stages are not so well ordered, being
sometimes sixteen, sometime twenty five, sometimes twenty Leagues asunder.

From Aureng-abat to Surat takes up sometimes twelve, sometimes fifteen,
sometimes sixteen days journey.

Visapour is a great scambling City, wherein there is nothing remarkable,
neither as to the public Edifices, nor as to Trade. The Kings Palace is a vast
one but ill built; and the access to it is very dangerous, in regard there are
abundance of Crocodiles that lie in the Water which encompass it. The King of
Visapour has three good ports in his Dominions, Rejapour, Daboult, and
Crapaten. The last is the best of all, where the Sea beats upon the foot of the
Mountain, and you have fourteen or fifteen Fathom Water near the Land. Upon the
top of the Mountain there is a Fort, with a Spring of Water in it. Crapaten is
not above five days journey from Goa to the North. And Rabaque, where the King
of Visapour sels his Pepper, is as far distant from it to the East. The King of
Visapour and the King of Golconda have been formerly tributary to the Great
Mogul: but now they are absolute of themselves.

This Kingdom was for some time disquieted by the revolt of Nair-seva-gi,
Captain of the King of Visapour's Guards; After which the young Seva-gi his Son
conceived so deadly a hatred against the King, that he made himself the head of
certain Banditi, and as he was both wise and liberal, he got together so many
Horse and Foot, as made a complete Army; the Soldiers flocking to to him from
all parts, for the reputation of his Liberality. And he was just about to have
led them to action, when the King of Visapour happened to dye without Children,
so that with little or no trouble he got possession of one part of the Coast of
Malavar; taking Rejapour, Rasigar, Crapaten, Daboul, and other places. They
report that upon his demolishing the fortifications of Rasigar, he found vast
Treasures, which helped him to pay his Soldiers, who were always well paid.
Some years before the death of the King, the Queen perceiving no probability of
having any Children, adopted a little Boy, upon whom she bestowed all her
affections, and caused him to be brought up in the Doctrine of Haly's Sect, The
King upon his Deathbed caused this Adopted Son to be Proclaimed King; but
Seva-gi having a numerous Army continued the War, and much disturbed the
Regency of the Queen. At length he made the first propositions for Peace; which
was concluded upon conditions, that he should quietly enjoy the Territories;
which he had subdued, that he should become Tributary to the King, and pay him
the half of all his Revenue. The young King being thus fixed in his Throne, the
Queen Regent went in Pilgrimage to Mecca; and I was at Ispahan, when she passed
through the Town in her return home.

When I made my second Voyage to Goa, I embarked in a Dutch Vessel called the
Maestricht, which carried me to Mingrela, where I landed the eleventh day of
January, 1648.

Mingrela is a large Town, extended half a League in length upon the Sea, in
the Territories of Visapour. It is one of the best Roads in all India, where
the Hollanders take in fresh Provisions every time they sail to block up Goa,
as also when they are bound upon Trade for many other parts of India. For at
Mingrela there is both excellent Water, and excellent Rice. This Town is also
very famous for Cardamoms, which the Eastern people esteem the best of Spices,
not being to be had in any other Country; which makes that sort of Commodity
very scarce and very dear. There is also made great store of course Calecuts,
that are spent in the Country; besides great quantities of course Matting,
that serves to pack up goods. So that both in respect of Trade, as also for the
furnishing their Ships with fresh Provisions, the Hollauders have a Factory in
the Town. For, as I said before, not only all Vessels that come from Batavia,
from Japon, from Bengala, Ceylan, and other places, and those that are bound
for Surat, the Red Sea, Ormus, Balsara, etc. both going and coming, come to an
Anchor in the Road of Mingrela, but also while the Hollanders are at Wars with
the Portugals, and lie before the Bar of Goa, where they have usually eight or
ten Sail, they send their small Barks to Mingrela for Provisions. For the
Hollanders lie eight Months in a year before the mouth of the Port of Goa, so
that there can nothing pass into Goa by Sea all that time. You must also take
notice, that the Bar of Goa is also stopped up some part of the year by the Sands
which the South and West-winds that precede the great Rains, cast up; so that
there is not above a foot, or a foot and a half Water for very small Boats. But
when the great Rains come, the Water swells and carrying away the Sands, opens
a passage for the great Vessels.

CHAP. XIII. Observations upon the present State of the City of Goa.
GOA lies in 15 Degrees, 32 minutes of Latitude, in an Island six or seven
leagues about, upon the River of Mandoua, ten leagues from the mouth of the
River. The Island abounds in Corn and Rice, and bears several sorts of Fruit,
as Manga's, Anana's, Adam's- Figs, and Coco's. But most certainly a Pippin is
far beyond all those fruits. All those that have seen Europe and Asia, agree
with me, that the Port of Goa, the Port of Constantinople, and the Port of
Toulou, are three of the fairest Ports of all our vast Continent. The City is
very large, and the Walls are of good Stone. The Houses are for the most part
very magnificently built, especially the Viet-Roy's Palace. There are in it a
great number of Apartments, and in one part of the Rooms and Chambers, which
are very large, hang several Pictures, wherein are severally painted by
themselves, the Ships that come from Lisbon to Goa, with those that are bound
from Goa to Lisbon, with the name of the Vessel, the Captain, and the number of
Guns which the Ship carries. If the City were not so closely environed with
Hills, it would doubtless be better inhabited, and the air would be much more
wholesome. But these Mountains keep off the cool winds, which is the reason that
the heats are very excessive. Beef and Pork is the ordinary diet of the
Inhabitants of Goa. They have good store of Poultry, and some few Pigeons; but
though Goa be very near the Sea, Fish is very scarce. They have abundance of
all sorts of Sweetmeats, and feed upon them very much.

Before the Hollanders had brought down the power of the Portugals in India,
there was nothing to be seen at Goa, but Magnificence and Riches: but the Dutch
having every where got their Trade out of their hands, they have lost their
springs of Gold and Silver, and are fallen from their former splendour. In my
first Voyage to Goa I met with people of fashion, that had above two-thousand
Crowns Revenue; at my second Voyage the same persons came privately to me in
the evening, to beg an Alms; yet abating nothing, for all that, of their
inherent pride and haughtiness: Nay, their Women will come in Palleki's to the
door, and stay while a Boy, that attends them, has brought you a Complement
from his Mistress. Then usually you send them what you please, or carry it your
self, if you have a curiosity to see their faces; which rarely can be done,
because they cover themselves with a veil from head to foot. Moreover, if you
go your self to present them your Charity, they will give you a little note,
containing a recommendation of some religious Person, who signifies what
substantial persons they have been, and how they came to fall to decay.
Sometimes, if the person be handsome, she is desired to walk in; and to take a
Collation, which lasts most commonly till the next day. Hadnot the Portugals so
many Fortresses to keep upon the Land; or had, not, out of their contempt of
the Hollander they neglected their affairs, they could never have been reduced
to so low a condition.

The Portugueses have no sooner made the Cape of Good-Hope, but they are all
Fidalgues or Gentlemen; and add the Title of Dom to the single name of Pedro or
Jeronimo, which they received at their Baptism: From whence they are called the
Fidalgues or Gentlemen of the Cape of Good-Hope. As they change their Names,
they also change their Nature; for it may be truly said, that the
Indian-Portugals are the most revengeful persons, and the most jealous of their
Wives of any persons in the World. And when the least suspicion creeps into
their noddles, they rid themselves of them either by Poison or Dagger. If they
have an enemy, they never pardon him; but if he be a person of that courage
that they dare not grapple with him, their Masters have attending upon them a
sort of black Slaves, that if they command them to kill any one, the Slaves
will do it with a blind obedience; which they do either with a Dagger, or a
Pistol, or else by knocking the party on the head with a club, which they
always carry, about the length of an Half-Pike. If it happen that they stay too
long before they can meet with an opportunity ere they can dispatch their
mischief; and that they cannot conveniently meet the person to be murdered, in
the Fields or in the City, they are no such Saints, but they will kill him at
the very Altar, while he is at his devotions; of which I saw two fatal
presidents, the one at Goa, the other at Daman. At Daman three or four of these
black Slaves perceiving some persons whom they were to murder, at Mass in the
Church, discharged their Muskets at them through the windows, never considering
what other mischief they might do to any other persons, against whom they had
no quarrel or design. The same thing happened at Goa, where seven men were
killed close by the Altar, and the Priest that said Mass was dangerously
wounded at the same time. Nor do their Courts of Justice take any cognizance of
these crimes, for generally the guilty persons are the chiefest of the
Country. As for their Suits of Law, there is no end of them, for they are
managed by the Canarins, who are Natives of the Country, whose business it is
to follow the Law; the most subtle and crafty sort of people in the World.

To return to the ancient Power of the Portugals in India, most certain it is,
that if the Hollanders had never come among them, you should not have seen a
bit of Iron in any Portugal Merchant's House; but all Gold or Silver; for they
needed no more than to make three or four Voyages to Japan, the Philippin, or
Molucca Islands, or to China to enrich themselves; gaining at their return
above five or six for one upon rich Merchandises. The very Soldiers as well as
the Captains and Governors enriched themselves by Trade. There was not any
person, unless it be the Governor, who was not a Trader; or if he does Trade,
it is in another man's name, for he has Revenue enough without it. Formerly it
was one of the fairest employments of the World to be Viceroy of Goa: and
there are but few Monarchs, that have Governments at their disposal, which are
equal in value to some of those which depend upon this Viceroy. The chief
Command is that of Mozambique for three years. In those three years the
Governor gets above four or five-hunder'd-thousand Crowns, and sometimes more,
if in all that time they receive no losses from the Cafres. These Cafres are
people that bring Gold for the Commodities which they carry away; and if any
one of them happen to dye, going or coming, whatever you trusted them withal
is lost without redemption. The Governor of Mozambique trades also with the
Negro's that inhabit all along the Coast of Melinda; and they ordinarily pay
for the goods they buy, either in Elephants Teeth, or Ambergreese. When I was
last in Goa, the Governor of Mozambique, who returned to Goa after he had been
three years in his Command, had by him only in Ambergreese, two hundred
thousand Crowns, not reckoning his Gold, and his Elephants Teeth, which
amounted to a far larger sum.

The second Government was that of Malaca, by reason of the Custom which was
there to be paid. For it is a Straight through which all Vessels that are bound
from Goa, for Japon, China, Cochinchina, Java, Macassar, the Phillippin
Islands, and many other places, must of necessity pass. They may sail another
way by the Island of Sumatra, toward the West, and so through the Straight of
Sonde, or else leave the Island of Java to the North; but when the Ships return
to Goa, they must show a discharge from the Custom-House of Malaca, which
obliges them to go that way.

The third Government is that of Ormus, by reason of the great Trade which is
there, and the Custom which all Ships are to pay that are bound in and out of
the Persian Golf. The Governor of Ormus exacted great Tolls from those that
went to the Island of Bakren to fish for Pearls, for if they did not take a
License from him, he would sink their Vessels. The Persians at present exact
this Custom from the English, who have a small share in that Trade, as I have
related in my Persian Voyages. But though they are severe enough to the
Merchants, their Customs amount to nothing near so much as what the Portugueses
made of it. The Hollanders are in the same condition at Malaca, not receiving
handly sufficient to pay their Garrison which they keep there.

The fourth Government is that of Moscate, the revenue whereof was very great.
For all Vessels that are bound from India, from the Persian Golf, from the Red
Sea, and from the Coast of Melinda, must come under the Point of Muscate, where
they generally take in fresh Water. If there be any Ships that would not come
to an Anchor there, the Governor sent for his Custom, which was four in the
hundred; and if they refused, the Governor had his Galeasses ready to sink
them.

The fifth Government was that of the Island of Ceyland, to which belonged all
those places which the Portugals had, as well upon the Coast of Malavar, the
Golf of Bengala, and other parts of India; the worst of which employments was
worth ten thousand Crowns per ann.

Besides these five great Governments, which were at the disposal of the
Viceroy, he had abundance of other Offices in his Gift, as well in Goa, as in
other parts of India. The very day that he makes hid Entry into Goa, the
Captain of his Guards gets above four thousand Crowns. The three Offices of
Engineer Major, Visiter of the Forts, and chief Master of the Ordinance,
yielded every year twenty thousand Pardo's; every Pardo being worth
twenty-seven Sous of our Money. The Portugueses were then all very rich; the
Nobility by reason of their Governments and Commands, the Merchants by their
Trade, till the English and Hollanders cut them short. When they had Ormus,
they would not let any Merchant pass by Sea into India; so that they were
forced to go by Land through Candahar. Then, when the Turkey, Persian, Arabian,
Muscovite, Polonian, and other Merchants arrived at Bander-Abassy, they joined
together, and deputed four of the most experienced persons among them, to view
all the sorts of Commodities, and to understand their quality and price. After
they have made their report, they agree upon their price, and fetch away their
goods, which are distributed to every one proportionably according to the
number of Merchants. It is also the custom of all Asia, that there is nothing
sold, but a Broker has a hand in the Bargain. They make good the Money to those
that have sold, and receive it from them that buy; and there are some sorts of
Commodities upon which there is due to them for Brokage, sometimes one in in
the Hundred, sometime one and a half, and two.

At that time the Portugueses made great profit, without any loss. For the
Viceroy took care to preserve them against the Pirates. Who as soon as the Rains
are over, and that it was seasonable to put to Sea, always sent a sufficient
convoy to guard the Merchants twenty-five or thirty Leagues to Sea, the
Malvares not daring to stir above fifteen or twenty. The Captains of the
Galiots, and the Soldiers drive a small Trade also in their Voyages, and in
regard they pay no custom, they gain enough to maintain themselves handsomely
all the time they lie in Garrison, which is during the Rains. There was also
care taken for the advancement of the Soldiery; for every Soldier that came
from Portugal, after nine years service, had some Command either by Sea or Land
bestowed upon him; and if he would not accept of it, they gave him leave to
Trade as a Merchant. So that if there happened to be any person of
understanding among them, he could not fail to raise his fortune, having all
the credit he could desire. For there were people enough that being glad to let
out their Money, would venture with him at Cent. per Cent. upon his return. If
the Vessel be lost, they that lend their Money, lose either their Money or
their goods; but if the Ship come safe home, of one they make three or four.

The Natives of the Country, called Canarins, are not permitted to bear any
Offices among the Portugueses, but only in reference to the Law, that is to
say, either as Advocates, or Sollicitors, or Scriveners; for they keep them
very much under. If one of these Canarins or Blacks, happen to strike a White
or European, there is no pardon for him, but he must have his hand cut off. As
well the Spaniards as Portugueses, make use of them as Receivers, and to follow
their business. And in the Manilia's, or Philippin Islands, there are some of
these Blacks so rich, that many of them have offered twenty thousand Croisats
to the Viceroy, for liberty to wear Hose and Shoo's, which they are not
permitted to wear. Some of these Blacks have thirty Slaves attending upon them,
very richly habited; but only they go barefoot. And had the Portugals permitted
them to set out Ships of their own, and to have chosen Captains and other
Officers at their own pleasure, the Portugueses would not have made such large,
at least not so easy Conquests in the Indies. These Blacks are very courageous
and good Soldiers, and several of the Religious Orders have assured me, that
they will learn more in six months in one of their Colleges, than the Portugal
Children in a year, whatever Science you put them to; which is the reason that
the Portugals keep them so low. The natural Inhabitants of the Country about
Goa, are Idolaters, and worship several sorts of Idols, which they say are the
Resemblance of several that have done good works, to whom they ought to give
praise by adoring their Portraitures. There are many of these Idolaters who
worship Apes. And therefore in the Island of Salsete, there was a Pagod, where
the Idolaters kept in a Chest, like a Tomb, the Bones and Nails of an Ape,
which they said had been mighty serviceable to their Ancestors, by bringing
news and intelligence to them, when any hostile Princes prosecuted them; for
which purpose they would sometimes swim through the very Sea it self. The
Indians come from several parts in procession, and make Offerings to this
Pagod. But the Clergy of Goa, especially the Inquisitors, caused the Tomb one
day to be taken away, and brought it to Goa, where it remained a good while, by
reason of the difference which it made between the Ecclesiastics and the
people. For the Idolaters offering a great sum of Money to have their Relics
again, the people were willing to have restored them; saying, that the Money
would do well upon any occasion of War, or else to relieve the poor. But the
Clergy were of a contrary opinion, and maintained that such a piece of Idolatry
was not to be endured upon any account whatsoever. At length the Archbishop
and the Inquisitors, by their own Authority, took away the Tomb, and sending it
in a Vessel twenty Leagues out to Sea, caused it to be thrown to the bottom of
the Ocean. They thought to have burned it, but the Idolaters would have raked
up the Ashes again, which would have been but a new food to their Superstition.

There are in Goa abundance of Clergymen; for besides the Archbishop and his
Clergy, there are Dominicans, Austin-Fryars, Franciscans, Barefoot Carmelites,
Jesuits, and Capuchins, with two Religious Houses, whereof the Austin-Fryars
are Directors or Governors. The Religious Carmelites, that came last, are the
best seated; for though they are somewhat at a distance from the heart of the
City, yet they have the advantage of a fine Air, and the most healthy
situation in all Goa. It stands upon a rising ground, free to the refreshment
of the Wind; and it is very well built, with two Galleries one over the other.
The Austin-Fryars, who were the first that came to Goa, were indifferently well
seated, at the foot of a little rising ground, their Church also standing upon
a rising ground, with a fair Piazza before it; but when they had built their
Habitation, the Jesuits desired them to sell that rising ground, which was then
a void place, under pretense of making a Garden in it for the recreation of
their Scholars. But after they had purchased it, they built a most stately
College upon the same ground, which quite stops and choaks up the Austin-Fryars
Covent, so that they have no Air at all. There happened several Contests about
this business, but at length the Jesuits got the better. The Jesuits at Goa,
are known by the name of Paulists; by reason that their great Church is
dedicated to St. Paul. Nor do they wear Hats or Corner-Caps, as in Europe, but
only a certain Bonnet, resembling the Skull of a Hat without the Brims;
somewhat like the Bonnets which the Grand Segnors Slaves wear; of which I have
given you a description in my relation of the Seraglio. They have five Houses
in Goa, the College of St. Paul, the Seminary, the Professors House, the
Noviciate, and the Good Jesus. The paintings in this House are admirable pieces
of Workmanship. In the year 1663 the College was burnt by an accident which
happened in the night, so that it cost them near sixty thousand Crowns to
rebuild it.

The Hospital of Goa was formerly the most famous in all India. For in regard
the Revenues thereof were very great, the sick persons were very carefully
looked after. But since the change of the Governors, there is but very bad
accommodation; and several of the Europeans that have been put in, have never
come forth again, but in their Coffins. However, they have lately found out a
way to save some by frequent Bloodletting. They let Blood sometimes, as
occasion requires, thirty or forty times, even as often as any ill-blood comes
forth; as they did by me one time that I was at Surat. Butter and flesh is very
dangerous to them that are sick, and many times costs them their lives.
Formerly they made several sorts of well-tasted diet for those that recoverd:
Now they serve the Patient only with young Beef-broth, and a dish of Rice.
Usually the poorer sort that recover their health, complain of drowth, and call
for water. But they that look after them, being only Blacks, or Mongrels, a
sort of covetous and pittiless people, will not give them a drop, unless they
put Money in their hands; and to color their wickedness, they give it them by
stealth, pretending what they do to be against the Physitian's order. As for
Sweetmeats and Preserves, there is no want of them; but they are not a diet
which contributes overmuch to the restoring of decaid strength, especially in
those hot Countries, where the body requires rather cooling and refreshing
nourishment.

I have forgot one thing in reference to their more frequent blood-lettings
than among us Europeans. Which is, that to bring their color again, and to
restore them to perfect health, they order the Patient to drink for twelve days
together three glasses of Cow's Urine; one in the morning, another at noon, and
another at night. But in regard it is a very nauseous sort of drink, the
Patient swallows as little as he can, how desirous soever he may be of his
health. They learnt this remedy from the Idolaters of the Country; and whether
the Patient will take it or no, they never let him stir out of the Hospital,
till the twelve days are expired wherein he ought to drink it.

CHAP. XIV. What the Author did, during his stay at Goa, the last time he went
thither in the year 1648.
TWO days before I departed from Mingrela for Goa, I wrote to Monsieur St.
Amant, who was Engineer, to send me a Man of War, for fear of the Malvares
which are upon the Coast, which he immediately did. I parted from Mingrela the
20 th of January 1648, and arrived at Goa the 25 th. And in regard it was late,
I staid till the next morning before I went to visit the Viceroy, Don Philip
de Mascaregnas, who had formerly been Governor of Ceylan. He made me very
welcome, and during the two months that I tarri'd at Goa, he sent to me a
Gentleman five or six times, who brought me still to the Powder-House, which
was without the City, where he often used to be. For he took great delight in
levelling Guns, wherein he asked my advice, esteeming very much a Pistol very
curiously and richly inlaid, which I presented him at my arrival. This Pistol
the French-Consul at Aleppo gave me, the fellow of it being unhappily lost: for
else the Bair had been presented by the French-Nation to the Basha, who might
then have boasted himself the Master of the fairest and best-made pair of
Pistols in all Asia. The Viceroy admits no person whatever, no not his
Children to sit at his Table. But there is a little partition in the
Dining Room, where there is a Cloth laid for the Principal Officers, as is
usual in the Courts of the German-Princes. The next day I went to wait upon the
Archbishop, and the next day after I designed to have visited the Inquisition;
but I understood by one of his Gentlemen that he was busy, writing into
Portugal; there being two Ships ready to weigh Anchon, that only staid for his
dispatches. After the Ships were set sail, he sent the same Gentleman to tell
me that he expected me at the Inquisition-House, about two or three in the
afternoon. I failed not to go thither at the time prefixed When I came, a Page
brought me into a large Hall, where after I had walked a quarter of an hour, an
Officer came and carried me into the Chamber where the Inquisitor was. After I
had past through two Galleries, and some Chambers. I entered into a little
Chamber where the Inquisitor sat at the end of a great Table like a
Billiard-Table, which, as well: as the Chairs and Stools in the Chamber, was
covered with green Cloth, such as is carried out of England. He told me I was
welcome, and after a Complement or two, he asked me what Religion I was of? I
answered him, of the Protestant Religion. He asked me then, if my Father and
Mother were of the same Religion; and after I had satisfied him that they were
so; He told me again I was welcome, calling out at the same time for some other
persons to enter. Thereupon, the Hangings being held up, there came in ten or
twelve persons out of another room hard-by. The first of the Train were two
Austin-Friars, followed by two Dominicans, two barefoot-Carmelites, and some
other of the Clergy; whom the Inquisitor told who I was, and assured them I had
brought no prohibited Books; for indeed, knowing their orders, I had left my
Bible at Mingrela. We discoursed about two hours of several things, but
particularly of my Travels; the whole Company testifying their desire to hear
me make some repetitions. Three days after the Inquisitor sent for me to dine
with him at a fair House, about half a league from the City, which belongs to
the Barefoot-Carmelites. It is one of the loveliest Structures in all the
Indies; and I will tell you in short how the Carmelites came by it. There was a
Gentleman in Goa, whose Father and Grandfather had got great Estates by
Merchandising; and he it was that built this House, which might well have past
for a most noble Palace. He had no mind to Marry, but being altogether addicted
to his devotions, he very much frequented the Austin-Friars, to whom he showed
himself so affectionate, that he made his Will, wherein he gave them all his
Estate, provided they would bury him on the right-side of the High-Altar, where
he intended a sumptuous Monument. Now according to the common report, this
Gentleman was a Leaper, which some jealous persons endeavored to make the
World believe, seeing he had given away all his Estate to the Austin-Friars.
Thereupon they told him that the ground on the right hand of the High-Altar was
a place only fit for a Viceroy; and that a leaprous person was not to be laid
there: which was the opinion of the generality of the people, and of a good
part of the Austin-Friars themselves. Thereupon some of the Fathers of the
Covent coming to speak with the Gentleman, on purpose to persuade him to choose
some other place in the Church, he was so offended at the proposal, that he
never went more to the Austin-Friars, but always went to perform his devotions
among the Carmelites, who received him with open arms, and accepted the
conditions which the other had refused. Nor did he live long after he had
interested himself with that Order; so that the Carmelites having magnificently
buried him, enjoyed all his Estate, with this same House, where we were
splendidly entertained with Music all the time of Dinner.

I staid at Goa from the twenty-first of January till the eleventh of March,
departing thence that very day in the evening, after I had taken leave of the
Viceroy. I begged leave also of the Viceroy for a French-Gentleman, whose
name was Belloy, to go along with me: which was granted me; but through the
imprudence of that Gentleman, who did not tell me the reason of his coming to
Goa, he had like to have been taken from me again, and it was an even-lay, that
we had not been both carried to the Inquisition. This Gentleman had left the
place of his Nativity to travel over Holland, where having run himself in debt,
and finding no person that would lend him any Money, he resolved to go for
India. Thereupon he listed himself as a private Soldier upon the account of
the Holland-Company; and came to Batavia at the same time that the Hollanders
made War against the Portuguezes in Ceylan. Being arrived, they sent him away
among the recruits which were sent into that Island; and the Holland-General
seeing such a reinforcement of stout men commanded by a French-Captain, whose
name was St. Amant, a person of great courage and experience; he resolved to
besiege Negombe, a considerable Fort in the Island of Ceylan. They made two
assaults, wherein the Frenchmen behaved themselves valiantly, especially St.
Amant, and John de Rose, who were both wounded. The General of the Dutch,
seeing them to be two such men of courage, made a promise that if Negombe were
taken, one of them two should be Governor. The place was taken, and the General
kept his word with St. Amant: but the News being carried to Batavia, a young
Gentleman of kin to the General, and but newly arrived out of Holland, obtained
to be Governor of Negombe, to the prejudice of St. Amant, and came with an
order from the Council at Batavia to displace him. St. Amant incensed at such
ill-usage, inveigles to his Party a matter of fifteen or twenty, most part
French-Souldiers, among whom were Monsieur Belloy, Marests, and John de Rose,
and revolts to the Portuguezes. The Portugals encouraged by the reinforcement
of such a stout, though small number of men, stormed Negombe again, and took it
at the second assault. At that time was Don Philip de Mascaregnas Governor of
Ceylan, and all the places belonging to it, under the jurisdiction of the
Portugals. He lived also at the City of Colombo; and then it was, that having
received Letters from Goa that the Viceroy was dead, and that the Council and
all the Nobility desired him to come and succeed in his place, he resolved to
see St. Amant and his Companions before his departure, to the end he might
bestow upon them some proper reward. So soon as he saw them, he was resolved to
take them along with him to Goa. Whether it were that he thought he might have
better opportunities to advance them there; or that he thought it convenient to
have stout men about him, by reason of the Malavares who lay in wait for him
with forty Vessels, whereas he had but twenty-two. But they were no sooner come
to make Cape-Comorin, when the winds rose, and such a tempest followed, that
the Vessels were disperced, and many of them unfortunately cast away. They that
were in Don Philips's Vessel did all they could to get to the shore, but seeing
they could not, and that the Ship was ready to split, St. Amant and his six
other Companions threw themselves into the Sea with cords and pieces of planks,
and so bestirred themselves, that they made a shift not only to save
themselves, but Don Philip also. Hereupon Don Philip coming to Goa, after he
had made his entrance, gave to St. Amant the Command of Grand Master of the
Artillery, and Superintendent-General over all the Forts which the Portuguezes
had in India. He married him also to a young Virgin, with whom he had
twenty-thousand Crowns, whose Father was an Englishman, who had quitted the
Company, and married a Natural Daughter of one of the Viceroy's of Goa. As for
John de Rose, he desired leave of the Viceroy to return to Colombo, where, by
his favor, he married a young Widow, half Native, half Portugueze, by whom he
had a fair fortune. Marests the Viceroy made Captain of his Guards, the most
considerable Command in all his Court, being obliged to Marests for his life,
who was the person that bore him upon his shoulders to save him from drowning.
Du Belloy desired leave that he might go to Macao, which was granted him. For
he understood that the greatest part of the Portugal-Gentry retired to that
place, after they had got Estates by Merchandising; that they were very
courteous to strangers, and withal extremely addicted to play, which was Du
Belloy's chief delight. He lived two years at Macao, very much to his content;
for when he wanted Money, the Gentry lent it him freely. One day he had won
above six-thousand Crowns; but going to play again, he was so unfortunate as to
lose it all, besides a good sum of Money which his friends had lent him. Being
thus at a loss, and finding that nobody would lend him any more Money, he
began to swear against a Picture that hung in the room, which was the
Portraiture of some Papistical Saint; saying in his passion, that it was an
usual thing with them that played, that if they saw a Saints Picture hang in
their sight, it made them lose; and that if that Picture had not been there, he
had certainly won. Immediately the Inquisitor was informed of this, (for in
every City in India under the Jurisdiction of the Portuguezes there is one.
However his power is limited; having no other authority than to seize the
person of him that says or acts any thing against their Religion, to hear the
Witnesses, and to send the Offender with the examinations to Goa in the first
Ship which is bound thither: where the Inquisitor-General has an absolute Power
either to absolve him, or to put him to death. Thereupon Du Belloy was put
aboard a small Vessel of ten or twelve Guns loaded with Irons; with a strict
charge to the Captain to keep him sase, and some threats that he should be
answerable for him if he escaped. But so soon as the Ship was out at Sea, the
Captain, who was of a noble disposition, and knew Du Belloy to be of a good
Family, took off his Irons, and made him sit at his own Table; giving him also
Linen, and other convenient Apparel necessary for the Voyage, which was to
continue forty days. They put into Goa the nineteenth of February 1649; and the
Ship was no sooner come into Harbor, but St. Amant came a-board by the
Governor's order, as well to receive his Letters, as to hear what news in
China. But his surprise was very great, to see Belloy in that condition, and
that the Captain would not let him go, before he had surrendered him up into
the hands of the Inquisitor. Nevertheless, in regard that St. Amant was a
person of great credit, he obtained of the Captain, that Belloy should go along
with him into the City. As for Belloy he immediately and for the nonce shifted
himself into his old Clothes, which were all to tatters and full of Vermin; and
St. Amant, who knew there was no dallying with the Inquisition, took that
season to present him to the Inquisitor; who seeing a Gentleman in such a sad
condition, had some compassion upon him, and allowed him the whole City for his
Prison; on condition he should surrender his body upon demand, when he
understood what was informed against him. In the interim St. Amant brings Du
Belloy to my Lodging just as I was going to visit the Archbishop of Mira, whom
I formerly knew at Constantinople, when he was Prior of the Franciscans at
Galata. I desired them to stay a while and to dine with me, which they did;
after which I proffered my House and Table to Du Belloy, who lived with me; and
for whom I also bought two new Suits of Apparel, and Linen convenient.
However, all the while that I stayed at Goa, which was ten or twelve days, I
could not persuade the Sieur Du Belloy to put on those new Clothes, not knowing
the reason, though he promised me every day. But being upon my departure, I
told him I was going to take leave of the Viceroy; whereupon he desired me to
procure leave for him also; which I did. We departed toward evening in the same
Vessel wherein I came, and about midnight the Sieur Belloy began to shift
himself, and when he had done he threw his old rags into the Sea, swearing
against the Inquisition like a mad man; I understanding nothing all this while
of the business. When I heard him swear in that manner, I told him we were not
yet out of the Portugals hands; neither were he and I with five or six
Servants, able to defend our selves against forty Seamen that belonged to the
Ship. I asked him then, why he swore so heartily against the Inquisition; he
replied, that he would tell me all the circumstances of the story; which he did
when we came to Mingrela, which was about eight a Clock in the morning. When we
landed we met certain Hollanders with the Commander, who were eating Oysrers
and drinking Sack upon the Shore. Immediately they asked me who that person was
with me. I told them it was a Gentleman who attending the French Ambassador
into Portugal, had taken Shipping there for India, together with four or five
more whom he had left at Goa; but that neither the situation of the place, nor
the humor of the Portugals pleasing him, he had desired my assistance in his
return for Europe. Three or four days after, I bought him an Ox to carry him
to Surat; and I gave him a Servant to assist him, together with a Letter to
Father Zenon, a Capuchin, wherein I desired him to speak to my Broker to pay
him ten Crowns a month for his subsistence, and to desire of the English
President to embark him for Europe with the first opportunity. But it fell out
contrary to my intentions; for Father Zenon carried him back again along with
him to Goa, where he had some business to do for Father Ephraim his Companion;
of whom I shall speak in the next Chapter. Father Zenon without doubt believed,
that Du Belloy making his appearance to the Inquisition, and desiring his
pardon, might have easily obtained it. It Is very true he did obtain it, but it
was after he had been two years in the Inquisition, from which he was not
discharged but with a Sulphur'd Shirt with a St. Andrews Cross upon his
Stomach. There was with him another Gentleman, called Lewis de Bar upon the
Seine, who was used in the same manner; and they always put them to accompany
those who were put to death. The Sieur Du Belloy did very ill to return to Goa,
and worse to appear afterward again at Mingela, where the Hollanders, who
understanding he had formerly revolted out of their service, by the
intelligence they received from their Commander at Surat, seized his person,
and sent him away in a Ship that was going for Batavia. They pretended that
they sent him to the General of the Company, to do with him as he should think
fitting. But I am in part assured, that as soon as the Vessel was out at Sea,
they put the poor Gentleman into a Sack, and threw him into the Sea. This was
the end of the Sieur Du Belloy.

As for Sieur des Marests, he was a Gentleman, born in the Dauphinate, near to
Loriol, who having killed his Adversary in a Duel, fled into Poland, where he
so far signalized himself, that he won the esteem and affection of the General
of the Polonian Army. At that time the Grand Seignior kept in the Prison of the
Seven Towers at Constantinople, two Noble Polonians; whereupon the Polonian
General observing the courage and address of this Des Marests, who was a daring
Fellow, and a good Engineer besides, made a proposal to him, to go to
Constantinople, and to endeavor, if he could by any means in the world, to set
those Princes at liberty. Des Marests willingly accepted the employment, and
without doubt he had succeeded in his design, had he not been discovered by
some Turks, who accused him for having been too circumspect in viewing the
seven Towers, seeing him with a Chalk Pencil in his hand, ready to take the
draught thereof, which seemed to tend to no good design. This had been enough
to have ruined the Gentleman, had not Monsieur de Cesy the French Ambassador
stifled the further examination of the business by some present; which in Turkey
is the most sovereign remedy upon all accidents of danger; telling the Vizier,
that he was only a French Gentleman that traveled for his pleasure, and one
that was going for Persia with the first opportunity. However it was not
Marests design at that time to go very far, for he intended to have returned
into Poland, so soon as he had used his utmost endeavors to set the Princes at
liberty; but for his own safety it behooved him to give it out that he was gone
to Persia; and at length he was constrained to go thither indeed. As for the
Grand Seignior, he had resolved never to set the two Noblemen at liberty. But
at length they were so fortunate as to gain the love of a young Turk, who was
the Son of the Captain of the Seven Towers; with whom the Father usually
trusted the Keys to open and shut the Gates of the Prison. The night appointed
for their flight, he made as if he had shut some doors, the Padlocks whereof he
left all open. But he durst not do so by the two first Gates, near one of which
the Captain with a strong Guard lay, for fear of being discovered. The young
man, who had entirely devoted himself to serve the Princes, having foreseen
this difficulty before, had bethought himself of Rope-Ladders to get over the
two Walls; to which purpose it was necessary to have a correspondence within
and without. Finding therefore that because the utmost of severity was not used
toward those Princes, they had the liberty to receive several Dishes of Meat
from the French Ambassadors Kitchen, the Clerk of the Kitchen was made of the
plot, who thereupon sent them in several Cords in Pasties, whereof they made
Ladders. The business succeeded so well, that the escape was made, and the
young Turk fled with the Polonian Lords into Poland, where he turned Christian,
and received ample rewards both in Employments and Money. The same gratitude
proportionably was observed toward those who had contributed toward the liberty
of the Princes, who amply acknowledged the services which they had received
from every one of them.

In the mean time the Sieur Des Marests arrives at Ispahan, and addressing
himself to the Capuchin Friars, they brought him to my Lodging, where he had
the freedom of my Table, and a Chamber. He staid some time at Ispahan, during
which he got acquainted with the English and Hollanders, who had a great esteem
for him, finding him to be a person of merit. But it happened one day, that his
curiosity putting him upon a bold attempt, had like to have been the ruin of
him and all the Franks in Ispahan. Near the Inn where we lodged there was a
large Bath, where the men and women by turns take their times to come and bath
themselves; and where the Queen of Visapour, during her stay at Ispahan, as she
returned home to Mecca, delighted to go and prattle with the French men's wives.
The Sieur Des Marests having a passionate desire to see what the women did,
satisfied his curiosity, by means of a cranny in the Arch of the Vault, which
he had observed when he went thither; for having found out a way without side
to get up to that Arch, through a blind hole that was next to the Inn where we
lay, the Arch being flat, as I have described them in my relations of Persia,
and the Seraglio, he laid himself upon his belly, and saw through the cranny
what he so much longed to behold. He was at this sport some ten or twelve
times; and not being able to contain himself, he told me one day what he had
done. I bid him have a care of going there any more, for fear of ruining
himself and all the French men in the City. But he contrary to my advice went
thither two or three times after that, till at length he was discovered by one
of the women of the Bath that took care of the Linen, and dry them without,
upon Perches as high as the top of the Arch, to which they get up by a little
Ladder. The woman seeing a man lying all long upon his belly, seized upon his
Hat, and began to cry out. But Marests, to get himself out of the mire, and to
hinder the woman from making more noise, put two Tomans into her hand. When he
returned to the Inn, I perceived him to look as if he had been scared, and
conjecturing that some ill accident had befallen him, I pressed him to confess
what was the matter. He was loath at first, but at length he confessed how he
had been discovered by a woman, and how he had stopped her mouth with money.
Thereupon I told him, that there was a necessity for him to fly, for that the
danger was far greater than he imagined. The Dutch President also, to whom I
thought it convenient to tell what had passed, was of the same opinion; upon
which we gave him a Mule, and as much money as was necessary for him, ordering
him to go to Bander, and thence by Sea to Surat. I gave him a Letter of
Recommendation to the English President, who was my Friend; whom I also desired
to let him have two hundred Crowns, if he had occasion for them. I wrote very
much in his commendation; and mentioned the proffer which the Dutch President
at Ispahan had made him, to send him with Letters to the General, who would not
fail to employ him according to his merit. For indeed at that time that the
Hollanders had War with the Portugueses in Ceylan, any person of wit and
courage, like the Sieur Des Marests, was very acceptable to them. Which made
them very earnest with him, to take an empolyment among them; and to that end,
they caressed him, and presented him very nobly during his stay at Ispahan. But
he told them, that not being of their Religion, he was unwilling to serve them
against the Portugueses; which was the only reason that hindered him from
accepting the offers which I had made him. These particulars I wrote in his
behalf to the English President at Surat; so that the Sieur Des Marests being
desirous to go to Goa to serve the Portugals, the President wrote in his behalf
to the Viceroy, by whom he was very much beloved, relating to him, besides,
what the Hollanders had proffered him, that his recommendation might be the
more acceptable. Thereupon the Viceroy made him very welcome; and upon the
Sieur Marests desire to be employed in Ceylan in the Portugal Army, he sent him
away with the first opportunity, with Letters of Recommendation to Don Philip
de Mascaregnas, who was then Governor of Ceylan, and all those places that
belonged to it under the jurisdiction of the Portugueses. It happened three
days after, that they lost Nagombe, and when they retook it, the Sieur Marests
was one of those that received most wounds, and won most honor in the
Assaults. He it was that afterward was most instrumental in saving Don Philip
from being drowned; so that when Don Philip came to be Viceroy of Goa, he
could not think he deserved a less reward than the Command of his Guards; in
which employment he died within three or four months. He was very much lamented
by the Viceroy, by whom he was entirely beloved. But he left his Estate to a
Priest, with whom had contracted a particular friendship; upon condition that
he should only pay me two hundred and fifty Crowns that I had lent him; which
however I had much ado to get out of the Priest's Clutches.

While I stayed at Goa, I was told a pretty story concerning a Caravel, or
Portugal Vessel, which arrived there but a little before, and came from Lisbon.
When she was about to make the Cape of Good Hope, there happened such a violent
Tempest, as lasted five or six hours, and put the Mariners to such a nonplus,
that they knew not where they were, At length they fell into a Bay, where they
saw several Inhabitants; and as soon as they came to an Anchor, they beheld the
shore covered with men, women, and children, that testified a strange amazement
to see white people, and such kind of building as the Caravel. The mischief
was, that they could not understand one another, but by signs. But after the
Portugals had given those Casres Tobacco, Biscuit, and Water, the next day the
people brought them a great quantity of young Ostriches, and other Fowl that
seemed to resemble large Geese, but so fat, that they had very little lean. The
Feathers of those Birds were very lovely, and those upon the belly proper for
Beds. One of the Portuguese Mariners sold me a large Cushion stufft with those
Feathers, and related to me what had happened to them in that Bay, where they
stayed seven and twenty days. They gave those Cafres one thing or other every
foot, as Knives, Axes, false Coral, and false Pearls, out of hopes to have
discovered some Trade, and particularly whether they had any Gold; for they
observed that some of them wore pieces of Gold in their Ears; some beaten thin
upon one side, and others like the Nails of a Lock. They brought two of the
people to Goa; and I saw one of them that wore several of those pieces of Gold
in several parts of each Ear. The Mariner told me, that there were some of
their women that wore of those pieces of Gold under their Chins, and in their
Nostrils. Eight or nine days after the Portugals arrived in that Bay, those
Cafres brought them little pieces of Ambergreese, some Gold, but very little;
some Elephants teeth, but very small; some Ostriches, and other Birds, some
Venison; but for Fish, there was abundance. The Portugals endeavored all they
could by signs to know where they found the Ambergreese, for it was very good.
The Viceroy showed me a a piece that weighed not above half an Ounce, but he
assured me withal, that he had never seen so good. They also labored to
discover where they had the Gold. After the Elephants teeth they made no great
enquiry, seeing a great number of Elephants that came to drink at a River that
threw it self into the Bay. At length after they had stayed three weeks, the
Portugals finding it impossible for them to discover any thing more, because
they understood not one another, resolved to set sail with the first wind. And
because they had always some of these Cafres aboard, in regard they were very
liberal of their Tobacco, Biscuit, and strong Water, they thought good to bring
two of them along in the Vessel; in hopes that they might learn the Portuguese
Language, or that there might some Child be found out that might understand
what they said. The Mariners told me, that when they set sail, after the Cafres
saw that they had carried two of their people away, who perhaps were no
inconsiderable persons, they tore their Hair, struck their Breasts as if they
had been frantic, and set up a most horrible yelling and howling. When they
were brought to Goa, they could never be brought to learn any thing of the
Portugal Language. So that they could gettout of them nothing of that further
discovery at which they aimed, of a Country from whence they only brought away
two pound of Gold, three pound of Ambergreese, and thirty-five or forty
Elephants teeth. One of the Cafres lived but six months, the other fifteen; but
both languish'd and pined to death for grief to be so trapann'd.

From Goa I passed to Mingrela, where there fell out an accident not to be
forgotten. An Idolater dying, and the Fire being ready prepared for the burning
of the Body, his Wife who had no Children, by the permission of the Governor,
came to the Fire, and stood among the Priests and her Kindred, to be burnt with
the Body of her deceased Husband. As they were taking three turns, according to
custom, about the place where the Fire was kindled, there fell of a sudden so
violent a Shower, that the Priests willing to get out of the rain, thrust the
Woman all along into the Fire. But the Shower was so vehement, and endured so
long a while, that the Fire was quenched, and the Woman was not burned. About
midnight she rose, and went and knocked at the door of one of her Kinsmens
Houses, where Father Zenon and many Hollanders saw her, looking so ghastly and
grimly, that it was enough to have scared them; however the pain that she
endured did not so far terrify her, but that three days after accompanied by
her Kindred, she went and was burned according to her first intention.

CHAP. XV. The Story of Father Ephraim, and how he was put into the Inquisition
at Goa by a surprisal.
THE Chek, who had married the Eldest of the Princesses of Golconda, not being
able to persuade Father Ephraim to stay at Bagnabar, where he promised to build
him an House and a Church, gave him an Ox and two Men to carry him to
Maslipatan, where he staid to embark for Pegu, according to the order of his
Superiors. But finding no Vessel ready to set sail, the English drew him to
Madrespatan, where they have a Fort called St. George, and a general Factory
for every thing that concerns the Countries of Golconda, Pegu and Bengala. They
over-perswaded him that he might reap a fairer Harvest in this place, than in
any other part of the Indies; to which end they presently built him a very neat
House, and a Church. But in the conclusion, the English sought not so much the
interest of Father Ephraim, as their own. For Madrespatan is but half a league
from St. Thomas, a Sea-Town upon the Coast of Cormandel, indifferently
well built, as formerly belonging to the Portugals. In that place there was a
very great Trade, especially for Calicuts, and a very great number of Merchants
and Workmen lived there, the greatest part whereof desired to inhabit at
Madrespatan with the English, but that there was no place for them to exercise
their Religion in that place. But when the English had built a Church, and
persuaded Father Ephraim to stay, many of the Portuguezes quitted St. Thomas,
by reason of the frequent Preaching of Father Ephraim, and his great care as
well of the Natives, as of the Portugals. Father Ephraim was born at Auxerre,
the Brother of Monsieur Chateau de Boys, Counselor of the Parliament of Paris;
who was very happy in learning Languages, so that in a little time he spoke
English and Portuguez perfectly well. But now the Clergy of St. Thomas-Church
seeing Father Ephraim in so high a reputation, and that he drew the greatest
part of their Congregation to Madrespatan, were so enraged against him, that
they resolved to ruin him. And thus they laid their plot. The English and
Portuguezes being neer-neighbours, could not choose but have several quarrels
one among another, and still Father Ephraim was applied to for the composing
their differences. Now one day it happened, that the Portuguezes quarreled on
purpose with some English Mariners that were in St. Thomas-Road, and the
English came by the worst. The English President resolving to have satisfaction
for the injury, a War broke out between the two Nations: which had ruined all
the Trade of that Country, had not the Merchants on both sides been very
diligent to bring things to an accommodation: not knowing any thing of the
wicked contrivance of particular persons against Father Ephraim. But all the
interposition of the Merchants availed nothing: the Friar must be concerned in
the affair, he must be the Mediator to act between party and party, which he
readily accepted. But he was no sooner entered into St. Thomas, but he was
seized by ten or twelve Officers of the Inquisition, who shipped him away in a
Frigate that was bound at the same time for Goa. They fettered and manacl'd him,
and kept him two and twenty days at Sea, before they would let him once put his
foot a-shoar: though the best part of the Mariners lay a-shoar every night.
When they came to Goa, they staid till night before they would land Father
Ephraim, to carry him to the Inquisition-House. For they were afraid, left if
they should land him in the day, the people should know of it, and rise in the
rescue of a person, who was in an high veneration over all India. The news was
presently spread abroad in all parts, that Father Ephraim was in the
Inquisition, which very much amazed all the Frenchmen. But he that was most
surpised, and most troubled at it was Friar Zenon, the Capuchin, who had been
formerly Father Ephraim's Companion; who after he had consulted his friends,
resolved to go to Goa, though he were put into the Inquisition himself. For
when a man is once shut up there, if any one have the boldness to speak to the
Inquisitor, or to any of his Council in his behalf, he is presently put into
the Inquisition also, and accounted a greater Offender than the other. Neither
the Arch Bishop nor the Viceroy themselves dare interpose; though they are the
only two persons over whom the Inquisition has no power. For if they do any
thing to offend them, they presently write to the Inquisitor and his Council in
Portugal, and as the King and the Inquisitor-General commands, they either
proceed against, or send those two great persons into Portugal.

Notwithstanding all these considerations, Father Zenon, taking along with him
the Sieur de la Boulay,, a decaid Gentleman, goes to Goa; where, when he
arrived, he was visited by some friends, who advise him to have a care not to
open his mouth in the behalf of Father Ephraim, unless he intended to bear him
company in the Inquisition. Father Zenon seeing he could do nothing at Goa,
advised the Sieur de Boulay to return to Surat: and goes himself directly to
Madrespatan, more particularly to inform himself concerning the reason of
Father Ephraim's being sent away. But when he understood how he had been
betrayed at St. Thomas, he resolved to have satisfaction, and without
acquainting the English-President, communicates his design to the Captain that
commanded in the Fort: Who being incensed, as were all the Soldiers, at the
injury done Father Ephraim, not only approved, but also promised Father Zenon
to assist him in his design. Thereupon the Father sets his spies; and
understanding by them, that the Governor of St. Thomas went every
Saturday-morning, early, to a Chapel upon a Mountain half a league from the
City, dedicated to the Virgin- Mary, he causes three Iron-Bars to be fixed in
the window of a little Chamber in the Covent, with two good locks to the door,
and as many padlocks. And having so done, he goes to the Governor of the Fort,
who was an Irishman, and a very stout person; who with thirty Soldiers, and
Father Zenon, issued out of the Fort about midnight, and hid themselves till
day near the Chapel, in a part of the Mountain, where they could not be
discovered. The Governor of St. Thomas came exactly, according to his custom, a
little after Sunrising; and as soon as ever he alighted from his Pallequin,
was immediately surpised by the Ambuscade, and carried to Maslipatan, into the
Chamber in the Covent which the Friar had provided for him. The Governor thus
surpised, made great protestations against Father Zenon, and threatened him
with what the King would do when he should come to hear what he had practiced
against the Governor of one of his Garrisons. To which Father Zenon said no
more, but only that he believed that he was better used at Madrespatan, than
Father Ephraim was used at the Inquisition at Goa, whither he had sent him:
That if he would obtain liberty for Father Ephraim to return, he would leave
him in the same place where they had seized his person, with as much Justice,
as he had to send Father Ephraim to Goa,. Many people came to the English
President, desiring him to use his authority for the Governor's liberty. But
his answer was, that the Governor was not in his jurisdiction, neither could he
compel Father Zenon to release him, who had been one of the Authors of the
injury which had been done his Companion. So that he contented himself only to
desire of Father Zenon that his Prisoner might dine at his Table in the Fort,
promising him to return him when he should require his body; a request which he
easily obtained, but could not so easily keep his word. For the Drummer of the
Garrison being a Frenchman, with a Merchant of Marseilles, called Roboli, then
in the Fort, two days after came to the Governor, and promised him, for a good
reward, to procure his escape. The agreement being made, the Drummer in the
morning beat the Reveillez sooner than he was wont to do, and louder, while
Roboli and the Governor let themselves down at a corner of a Bastion that was
not very high; and were presently as nimbly followed by the Drummer; so that
Madrespatan and St. Thomas being but half a league asunder, they were all three
in the Town before their escape was known. The whole City greatly rejoiced at
the return of their Governor, and immediately dispatched away a Barque to Goa
to carry the news. The Drummer also and the Merchant set sail at the same time,
and when they came to Goa with Letters of recommendation in their behalf, there
was no House or Covent which did not make them Presents: The Viceroy also
himself caressed them extremely, and took them into his own Ship to have
carried them into Portugal along with him; but both he and the two Frenchmen
died at Sea.

Never did any Viceroy depart from Goa so rich as Don Philippo de Mascaregnas;
for he had a great parcel of Diamonds, all large stones, from ten Carats to
forty. He showed me two when I was at Goa, one whereof weighed 57 Carats, the
other 67 and an half; clean Stones, of an excellent water, and cut after the
Indian manner. The report was that the Viceroy was poisoned in the Ship, and
that it was a just punishment of Heaven, for that he had poisoned several
others, especially when he was Governor of Ceylan. He had always most exquisite
poisons by him, to make use of when his revenge required it: for which reason,
having raised himself many enemies, one morning he was found hung in Effigy in
Goa; when I was there in the year 1648.

In the mean time, the Imprisonment of Father Ephraim made a great noise in
Europe; Monsieur de Chasteau des Bois his Brother complained to the Portugal
Ambassador, who presently wrote to the King his Master to send a positive
command by the first Ships, that Father Ephraim should be discharged. The Pope
also wrote, declaring that he would excommunicate all the Clergy of Goa, if
they did not set him at liberty. But all this signified nothing. So that Father
Ephraim was beholding for his liberty to none but the King of Golconda, who had
a love for him, and would have had him have staid at Bagnagar. For the King was
then at Wars with the Raja of Carnatica, and his Army lay round about St.
Thomas's. Hearing therefore what a base trick the Portuguezes had played with
Father Ephraim, he sent Orders to his General Mirgimola to lay siege to the
Town, and put all to Fire and Sword, unless the Governor would make him a firm
promise that Father Ephraim should be set at liberty in two months. A Copy of
this Order was sent to the Governor, which so alarmed the Town, that they
dispatched away Barque after Barque, to press the Viceroy to use his
endeavors for the release of Father Ephraim. Thereupon he was released; but
though the door were set open, he would not stir, till all the Religious
Persons in Goa came in Procession to fetch him out. When he was at liberty he
spent 15 days in the Convent of the Capuchins. I have heard Father Ephraim say
several times, that nothing troubled him so much all the while of his
imprisonment, as to see the ignorance of the Inquisitor and his Council, when
they put him any question: and that he did not believe that any one of them had
ever read the Scripture. They laid him in the same Chamber, with a Maltese, who
never spoke two words without a desperate oath; and took Tobacco all day, and a
good part of the night, which was very offensive to Father Ephraim.

When the Inquisitors seize upon any person, they search him presently; and as
for his Goods and wearing-Apparel, it is set down in an Inventory, to be
returned him again in case he be acquitted; but if he have any Gold, Silver, or
Jewels, that is never set down; but is carried to the Inquisitor to defray the
expenses of the Process. They searched the Reverend Father Ephraim, but found
nothing in his Cloak-pockets, unless it were a Comb, an Inkhorn, and two or
three Handkerchiefs. But forgetting to search the little Pockets which the
Capuchins carry in their sleeves toward their armpits, they left him four or
five black-lead pens. These Pencils did him a great kindness. For the Maltese
calling for such a deal of Tobacco, which is always cut and ti'd up in
white-paper, for the profit of the seller, who weighs both Tobacco and Paper
together: these Papers Father Ephraim kept very charily, and with his Pencil
wrote therein whatever he had studi'd at any time: though he lost the sight of
one of his eyes, through the darkness of the Chamber, which had but one window,
half a foot square, and barred with iron. They would never so much as lend him
a Book, or let him have an end of Candle; but used him as bad as a certain
Miscreant that had been twice let out already with his Shirt sulphur'd, and a
St. Andrews-Cross upon his stomach, in company with those that are lead to the
Gallows, and was then come in again.

Father Ephraim having staid 15 days in the Convent of the Capuchins to recover
his strength after 20 months imprisonment, returned for Madrespatan, and
passing through Golconda, went to return his humble thanks to the King of
Golcolda and his Son-in-law, who had so highly interess'd themselves for his
liberty. The King importuned him again to stay at Bagnagar, but seeing him
resolved to return to his Convent at Madrespatan, they gave him as before, an
Ox, two Servants, and Money for his journey.

CHAP. XVI. The Road from Goa to Maslipatan through Cochin, here described in
the story of the taking of that City by the Hollanders.
AFter the Dutch had dispossessed the Portugals of whatever they had in Ceylan,
they cast their eyes upon Cochin, in the Territories whereof grows the Bastard
Cinnamon, which hindered the utterance of Ceylan Cinnamon. For the Merchants
seeing that the Hollanders kept up their Cinnamon so dear, bought up that of
Cochin, which they had very cheap; and that coming into request, was
transported to Gomron, and distributed there among the Merchants that came from
Persia, from Tartary, from Moscovia, from Georgia, Mingrela, and all the places
upon the black Sea. It was also carried away in great quantities by the
Merchants of Balsara and Bagdat, who furnish Arabia; as also by the Merchants
of Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Constantinople, Romania, Hungary, and Poland: For in
all those Countries, they use it either whole or beaten in most of their meats,
to heighten the taste thereof.

The Army which was commanded out of Batavia for the Siege of Cochin, landed at
a place called Belli-Porto; where the Hollanders had a Fort made of Palm Trees.
It is near to Cranganor, a small City which the Hollanders took the year
before; not being able to take Cochin then though they had made some attempts
upon it. So soon as the Army landed, they murch'd within Cannon-shot of the
City, there being a River between them and the City. That part where the
Hollanders encamped, is called Belle-Epine, where after they had fortified
themselves, as well as the Nature of the place would permit, they raised some
Batteries, which could not much annoy the City, by reason of the distance. They
lay there till they had recruits of more men; for they had but three Ships
full, though he that commanded them were one of the bravest Captains of his
time. Some few days after, the Governor of Amboyna arrived with two Ships
more, and afterward a Dutch Captain brought a great number of Chinglas, who
are the Natives of the Island of Ceylan. For the Forces of the Hollander would
not be so considerable as they are, did they not make use of the Natives of the
Country to fill up the Companies which they bring out of Europe. The Natives of
Ceylan, are good for digging Trenches, and raising Batteries, but for a Storm
they signify little. Those of Amboyna are good Soldiers, four hundred of which
were left at Belle-Epine. The Body of the Army took Shipping again, and landed
near to Cochin, not far from a Church dedicated to St. Andrew; where the
Portugals, with certain Malavares, seemed to have stayed ashore for the
Hollanders coming: But seeing the Enemy to land with so much resolution, they
only gave them one Volly and retreated. In their March the Hollanders descried
certain Companies of Portugueses near the Seashore, others somewhat farther up
in the Land, in a Church called St. John's. Thereupon they sent out some
Horsemen to discover their number; but the Portugals still retreated, after
they had set fire to the Church. Thereupon the Hollanders made their approaches
to the Town; and after they had besieged it for some time, a French Soldier,
who was under their pay, seeing a Pannier tied at the end of a Cord, hanging
over one of the Bastions, ventured notwithstanding all the Bullets that flew
about his Ears, to see what was in it. But he was strangely surpised, to find
nothing but a languishing infant, which the Mother had hung there, that she
might not see it perish for hunger. The Soldier moved to compassion, took the
Infant and gave it such as he had to eat; at which the Dutch General was so
incensed, saying that the Soldier should have let the Infant perish, that he
called a Council of War, where he would have had the Soldier run the Gauntlet,
which was very cruel; but the Council, moderating the sentence, condemned him
only to the Strappado.

The same day ten Soldiers out of every Company were commanded to go to one of
the Houses of the King of Cochin; but they found no body there, having
plundered it the year before. At which time the Hollanders slew four Kings of
the Country, and six hundred Blacks; nor did there escape but only one ancient
Queen, who was taken alive by a common Soldier, called Van Rez, whom the
Commander of the Army made a Captain immediately, for his reward. They left one
Company in that House; but the Queen stayed there but six days, for they gave
her into the custody of Savarin, one of the most potent of the petty Kings upon
that Coast, to whom the Hollanders had promised to give the City of Cranganor,
if they took Cochim, provided he would be faithful to them.

Six weeks passed ere any thing considerable was done; but then the Hollanders,
storming the Town by night, were repulsed, and lost abundance of men, slain and
taken Prisoners, through the Governor of Cranganors fault, who commanded them,
and was drunk when the assault was made. Two months after, the General of the
Hollanders resolved to make another assault in the same place; and because he
would not want men, he sent for those that lay upon the side of Belle-epine.
But by misfortune the Frigate struck upon the Sands, and splitting, abundance of
the Soldiers were drowned. They that could swim, got to land near Cochin, not
finding any other place convenient, and were all taken Prisoners by the
Portugals, being not above ten in all, Soldiers and Mariners. The General
however would not give over the assault, but causing the Seamen to land, he
armed some with half-Pikes, others with Swords, to others he gave
hand-Granadoes, and about ten a Clock in the morning he began the assault, with
four Companies, consisting each of a hundred and fifty men. The Hollanders lost
abundance of men in this last assault, and so did the Portugueses, for they
defended themselves stoutly, being seconded by two hundred Soldiers, who were
all Dutchmen, tho they sided with the Portugueses, because their Countrymen
had bated them six months and a half pay for the loss of Touan. Without the
assistance of these Soldiers, the City had never held out two months, there
being among them one of the best Dutch Engineers of his time, who had left his
Countrymen by reason of their ill usage of him.

At length the Hollanders having entered the Town toward evening, on Calivete
side, and being Masters of the chief Bulwark, the Portugals came to a
Capitulation, and the City was surrendered. The Portugals by their Articles
marched out of Cochin with their Arms and Baggage; but when they came out of
the City where the Hollanders were drawn up in Battalia, they were all forced
to quit their Arms, and to lay them at the Generals feet; except the Officers,
who kept their Swords. The General had promised the Soldiers the Pillage of the
Town, but not being able to keep his word, for several plausible reasons which
he told, he promised them six months pay, which in a few days after was reduced
to eight Roupies a man. Samarin also demanded of him the City of Cranganor,
according to his promise; which the General made good; but he caused all the
Fortifications to be slighted first, and left Samarin nothing but the bare
Walls. For being of a very mean Extraction, he was naturally as cruel and
barbarous in his disposition. One time the Soldiers being so put to it for four
days together, that they could get no food for money, two of them had somewhere
taken a Cow and killed her; for which the General, when he came to know of it,
caused one of them to be hanged immediately, and had ordered the other to have
run the Gauntlet, had not King Perca interceded for him.

King Perca was a petty King of that Country, with whom the General was then in
Treaty; and the Treaty being at length concluded, the General mustered all his
Land and Seamen, to the number of about six thousand men. A few days after, he
sent some Companies to besiege the City of Cananor, which surrendered without
any resistance. When they returned, the General caused a Crown to be made for
the new King of Cochin, the other being expelled his Country. And upon the day
which he had appointed for this most solemn Coronation, the General sat upon a
kind of a Throne, at the foot whereof, a Malavare or Pirat, being led thither
between three Captains of each side, fell upon his knees to receive the Crown
from the Generals hand, and to do homage for a petty Kingdom, that is to say,
the little City of Cochin and its Territories, which were very small. The King
and the King-maker were both alike. For no doubt it could not but be a pleasant
sight, to see a Hollander, that had been only the Cook of a Ship, crowning a
miserable Pirat with those hands that had oft'ner handled a Ladle than a Sword.

In the mean time the Ships that carried the Inhabitants of Cochin to Goa,
returned laden with the spoils of those distressed people; for contrary to the
Articles of Capitulation, the Hollanders were no sooner out at Sea, but they
took from those poor Creatures whatever they had, rifling both men and women,
without any regard to sex or modesty.

The General being returned into Batavia, they sent a Governor to Cochin, who
to make the place the stronger, demolished a great part of the City. But this
Governor used the greatest rigor imaginable, even toward the Soldiers; he
shut them up in the City as if they had been in a Prison; nor could they drink
either Wine, or Sury, or Strong-water, by reason of the great Imposts which he
laid upon them. (Sury is a drink which flows from the Palm Trees.) So that when
the Portugueses kept Cochin, men might live better for five or six Sous, than
under the Hollander for ten. This Governor was so severe, that he would banish
a man for the smallest fault in the world, to the Island of Ceylan, to a place
where they made Brick, sometimes for five or six years, sometimes as along as
the party lived. For it is oftentimes observed, that when any one is banished
thither, though the sentence be only for a term of years, yet the Exile never
obtains his freedom afterward.

CHAP. XVII. The Passage by Sea from Ormus to Maslipatan.
I departed from Gomron to Maslipatan the eleventh of May, 1652, and went
aboard a great Vessel of the King of Golconda's, which is bound every year from
Persia, laden with fine Calicuts, Chites, or Calicuts painted with a Pencil,
which makes them much more beautiful and dearer than those which are printed.
The Holland Company are wont to allow to those Vessels which belong to any of
the Kings or Princes of India, a Pilot, and two or three Gunners; neither the
Indians nor Persians being expert in Navigation. In the Vessel where I was
aboard, there were but six Dutch Mariners at most, but above a hundred Natives.
We sailed out of the Persian Golf with a pleasing and favorable Gale; but we
had not sailed very far before we found the Sea very rough, and the Winds at
South-West, so violent, though full in our Stern, that we were not not able to
carry out more than one small Sail. The next day, and for some days after, the
Wind grew more violent, and the Sea more boisterous; so that being in the
sixteenth Degree, which is the elevation of Goa, the Rain, the Thunder, and
Lightning, rendered the Tempest the more terrible; insomuch that we could not
carry out any other than our top-sail, and that half furled. We passed by the
Maldives Islands, but were not able to discern them, besides that the Ship had
taken in very much water in the Hold. For the Ship had lain five months in the
Road of Gomron, where if the Mariners are not very careful to wash the Planks
that lie out of the water, they will be apt to gape, which causes the Ship to
leak when she is laden. For which reason the Hollanders wash the outside of
their Ships morning and evening. We had in our Vessel five and fifty Horses,
which the King of Persia had sent as a Present to the King of Golconda; and
about a hundred Merchants, Persians and Armenians together, who were Traders to
India. One whole day and night together there rose a cross Wind, so violent,
that the Water rolled in from Stern to Stern, and the mischief was, that our
Pumps were naught. By good fortune there was a Merchant that had two Bails of
Russia Leather, besides four or five Sadlers that knew how to sow the Skins,
who were very serviceable as well to the whole Ship as to themselves. For they
made great Buckets of the Skins, four Skins to a Bucket, which being let down
from the Masts with Pullies, through certain great Holes which were cut in the
Deck, drew up a vast quantity of Water. The same day the violence of the
Tempest continuing, there fell three Thunderbolts into the Ship. The first fell
upon the Boltsprit, and split it quite in two; and running along upon the Deck
killed three men. The second fell two hours after, and killed two men, shooting
along as the other did from Head to Stern. The third followed presently after,
the Master, the Masters Mate, and my self standing together near the main Mask.
At what time the Cook coming to ask the Master whether he should take up the
Victuals, the Thunderbolt took him in the lower part of his Belly, made a
little hole, and took off all the Hair as clean as they dress a Pig with hot
water and Rosin, without doing him any more harm. Only when they came to anoint
the little hole with Oil of Coco's, he roared out through the sharpness of the
pain which he endured.

The twenty-fourth of June in the morning, we discovered Land; and making
toward it, we found our selves before Ponte de Galle, the first Town in the
Island of Ceylan, which the Hollanders had taken from the Portugals. From
thence to the Road of Maslipatan we had very good weather; where we arrived the
second of July, an hour or two after Sunset. There I went ashore, and was most
civilly treated by the Dutch President, and Merchants, as also by the English.

The eighteenth and nineteenth of June, the Sieur Du Jardin and I, bought us
two Palleki's, and six Oxen to carry our selves, our Servants, and our Luggage.
Our design was to have gone directly to Golconda, there to have sold the King a
parcel of long Pearls, the least whereof weighed thirty-four Carats, and the
biggest thirty-five, with some other Jewels, the most part whereof were
Emraulds. But the Hollanders assuring us, that our journey would be to no
purpose, in regard the King would buy nothing that was rare, or of a high
price, till Mirgimola, his General and prime Minister of State, had viewed the
Commodity understanding therefore, that he was then at the Siege of Gandicot,
in the Province of Carnatica, we resolved to go thither to him.

CHAP. XVIII. The Road from Maslipatan to Gandicot, a City and Garrison in the
Province of Carnatica. And of the dealings which the Author had with Mirgimola,
who commanded the King of Golconda's Army. With a discourse at large concerning
Elephants.
WE set forth from Maslipatan the twentieth of June, about five of the Clock in
the Evening.

The next day, being the one and twentieth, we traveled three Leagues, and lay
at a Village called Nilmol.

The two and twentieth, we traveled six Leagues, to Wouhir, another Village;
crossing the River upon a floating Bridge, before we came thither.

The three and twentieth, after we had traveled six hours, we came to Patemet,
a pitiful Village, where we were constrained to lie three days by reason of the
Rains.

The twenty-seventh, we came to a great Town, called Bezouart; not being able
to travel above a League and a half, because the Road was all overflowed. There
we were forced to stay four days, for the Rains had so swelled the River which
we were to cross, that the Ferryman could not govern his Boat against the
violence of the Stream. There we also left the Horses which the King of Persia
sent to the King of Golconda; which by that time were reduced to fifty.

While we stayed at Bezouart, we went to see several Pagods, of which the
Country is full; there being more than in any other part of India; for unless
it be the Governors of Towns; and some of their Domestics, all the rest of
the Inhabitants are Idolaters. The Pagod belonging to the Town of Bezouart, is
a very large one, but not closed with Walls; it consists of fifty-two Pillars
twenty foot high, that uphold a flat roof of Freestone; they are adorned with
several embossed Figures of ugly Devils, and several sorts of Creatures. Some
of those Devils are made with four Horns, others with many Legs and many Tails,
others lilling out their Tongues, and others in several other ridiculous
postures. The same Figures are cut in the Stone of the Roof, and between the
Pillars stand the Statues of their Gods upon Pedestals. The Pagod is built in
the midst of a Court, of a greater length than breadth, encompassed with Walls,
which are adorned within and without, with the same Figures as the Pagod; and a
Gallery upheld by sixty-six Pillars, runs round the Wall, after the manner of a
Cloister. You enter into this Court through a wide Portal, upon which are two
Niches, one above another, the first upheld by twelve, the other by eight
Pillars. At the bottom of the Pillars of the Pagod, are certain old Indian
Characters, of which the Priests of those Idolaters themselves can hardlytell
the meaning.

We went to see another Pagod, built upon a Hill, to which there is an ascent
of a hundred and ninety-three steps, every one a foot high. The Pagod is
apiece, with a Cupola at the top; and has the same embossed Figures, as
the Pagod of Bezouart, round about the Walls. In the middle, there is an Idol
sitting cross-leg'd, after the manner of the Country; and in that sitting
posture it is about four foot high; upon the Head it has a Triple Crown, from
which four Horns extend themselves; and it has the Face of a man, turned toward
the East. The Pilgrims that come out of devotion to these Pagods, when they
enter, clasp their hands together, and rear them up to their foreheads; then
they advance toward the Idol, tossing their two hands so claspt together, and
crying out several times Ram, Ram, that is to say, God, God. When they come
near, they ring a little Bell that hangs upon the Idol it self; after they have
besmeared the Face, and several parts of the Body, with several sorts of
Painting. Some there are that bring along with them Viols of Oil, with which
they anoint the Idol; and besides, they make an Offering to it of Sugar, Oil,
and other things proper to be eaten; the richer sort also adding pieces of
Silver. There are sixty Priests that belong to this Idol, and maintain
themselves, their Wives, and Children upon the Offerings brought to the Idol.
But to the end the Pilgrims may believe the Idol takes them, the Priests let
them lie two days, and the third day in the evening they take them away. When
any Pilgrim goes to a pagod, to be cured of any distemper, he brings the Figure
of the Member affected made either in Gold, Silver, or Copper, according to his
quality, which he offers to his god; and then falls a singing, as all the rest
do, after they have offered. Before the Gate of the Pagod, there is a flat
Roof, upheld by sixteen Pillars, and right against it, is another upheld by
eight; which serves for the Priests Kitchen. On the South Side there is a large
Platform cut in the Mountain, where there is a pleasing shade of many fair
Trees, and several Wells dug in the ground. Pilgrims come far and near to
this Pagod; and if they be poor, the Priests relieve them with what they
receive from the rich, that come there out of devotion. The great Feast of this
Pagod is in the month of October, at which time there is a great concourse of
people from all parts. While we were there, there was a Woman that had not
stirred out of the Pagod for three days together; and her prayer to the Idol
was, since she had lost her Husband, to know what she should do to bring up her
Children. Thereupon asking one of the Priests, wherefore she had no answer, or
whether she was to have any answer or no; he told me, that she must wait the
pleasure of their God, and that then he would give her an answer to what she
expected. Upon this I mistrusted some cheat, and to discover it, I resolved to
go into the Pagod when all the Priests were absent at Dinner, there being only
one that stood at the Gate, whom I sent to fetch me some water at a Fountain
two or three Musket Shot from the place. During that time I went in, and the
Woman hearing me, redoubled her cries; for there being no light in the Pagod,
but what comes in at the door, it is very dark. I felt my way to the Idol, and
by the glimmering light observed an hole behind the Idol. I could not do this
so quickly, but that the Priest returned before I had done; He cursed me for
profaning his Temple, as he called it. But we became suddenly very good
friends by the mediation of two Roupies which I put into his hands, whereupon
he presently presented me with some of his Betle.

The one and thirtieth, we departed from Bezouart, and past the River which
runs to the Mine of Gani or Color. It was then near half a league broad, by
reason of the great rains which had fallen continually for eight or nine days
together. After we had traveled three leagues on the other side of the River,
we came to a great Pagod built upon a large Platform, with an ascent of 15 or
20 steps. Within it stood the Figure of a Cow, all of very black-Marble: and a
number of deformed Idols four or five-foot-high; some having many heads, others
many hands and legs: and the most ugly are most adored, and receive most
Offerings.

A quarter of a league from this Pagod is a large Town; but we traveled three
leagues farther, and came to lie at another Town, called Kab-Kali, near to
which there is a small Pagod, wherein there stand five or six Idols of Marble
very wellmade.

The first of August we came to a great City called Condevir, with a
double-Moat, paved at the bottom with Freestone. The way to this Town is
closed on each side with strong Walls, and at such and such distances are built
certain round Towers of little or no defense. This City toward the East
stretches out to a Mountain about a league in compass, and surrounded with
Walls. At the distance of every 150 paces, there is as it were an Half Moon,
and within the Walls are three Fortresses.

The second, we traveled six leagues, and lay at a Village called Copenour.

The third day, after we had traveled eight leagues, we came to Adanquige, a
very fair Town, where there is a very large Pagod, with abundance of Chambers
which were built for the Priests; but are now gone to ruin. There are also in
the Pagod certain Idols, but very much maimed, which the people however very
superstitiously adore.

The fourth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to lie at the Town of
Nosdrepar. Half a league on this side there is a great River; but at that time
it had but little water in it; by reason of the drowth.

The fifth, after eight leagues journey we lay at Condecour.

The sixth, we traveled seven hours, and lay at a Village called Dakije.

The seventh, after three leagues journey we came to Nelour, where there are
many Pagods, and having crossed a great River, a quarter of a league farther,
we traveled six leagues, and came to Gandaron.

The eighth, after a journey of eight hours we lay at Serepele, a small Village.

The ninth, we traveled nine leagues, and lay at a good Town called Ponter.

The tenth, we traveled eleven hours, and lay at Senepgond, another good Town.

The eleventh, we went no farther than Palicat, which is but four leagues from
Senepgond; and of those four leagues we traveled above one in the Sea, up to
the Saddles of our Horses in water. There is another way, but it is the farther
about by two or three leagues. Palicat is a Fort that belongs to the Hollanders
that live upon the Coast of Coromandel; and where they have their chief
Factory, where lives also the chief Intendent over all the rest that are in the
Territories of the King of Golconda. There are usually within the Fort 200
Soldiers, or thereabouts, besides several Merchants that live there upon the
account of Trade; and several others, who having served the Company according
to their agreement, retire to that place. There also dwell some of the Natives
of the Country; so that Palicat is now as it were a little Town. Between the
Town and the Castle there is a large distance of ground, lest the Fort should
be annoid by shot from the Town. The Bastions are well-stor'd with good Guns:
And the Sea comes up to the very Wall of it; but there is no Haven, only a
Road. We staid in the Town till the next day in the evening, where we observed,
that when the Inhabitants fetch their water to drink, they stay till the Sea is
quite out, and then digging holes in the Sand as near the Sea as they can, they
meet with freshwater.

The twelth, we departed from Calicat, and the next morning about ten of the
clock we came to Madrespatan, otherwise called Fort St. George, which belongs
to the English, having traveled not above seven or eight leagues that day. We
lay at the Covent of Capuchins, at what time Father Ephraim, and Father Zenon
were both there.

The fifteenth, we went to St. Thomas's Town, to see the Austin-Friars, and the
Jesuits Church, in the first whereof is an Iron-lance, wherewith they say that
St. Thomas was martyred.

The two and twentieth, in the morning we departed from Madrespatan, and after
a journey of five leagues we arrived at a large Town called Serravaron.

The three and twentieth, after 7 leagues travel, we came to Oudecot, the whole
days journey being over a flat sandy Country. On each side there are only
Copses of Bambou's that grow very high. Some of these Copses are so thick, that
it is impossible for a man to get into them; but they are pestered with
prodigious numbers of Apes: Those that breed in the Copses upon one side of the
way, are enemies to them that are bred on the other side; so that they dare not
cross from one side to the other, but they are in danger of being immediately
strangled. Here we had good sport in setting the Apes together by the ears;
which is done after this manner. This part of the Country, at every leagues
end, is closed up with Gates and Barricado's, where there is a good Guard kept,
and where all Passengers are examined whither they go, and whence they come; so
that men may safely travel there with their Money in their hands. In several
parts of this Road there is Rice to be sold; and they that would see the sport,
cause five or six Baskets of Rice to be set in the Road, some forty or fifty
paces one from the other, and close by every Basket they lay five or six
Battoons about two-foot-long, and two inches about; then they retire and hide
themselves: presently they shall see the Apes on both sides of the way descend
from the tops of the Bambou's, and advance toward the Baskets which are full of
Rice: They are about half an hour showing their teeth one at the other before
they come near the Baskets; sometimes they advance, then retreat again, being
loath to encounter. At length the female-Baboons, who are more courageous than
the males, especially those that have young ones, which they carry in their
arms, as Women do their Children, venture to approach the Basket, and as they
are about to put in their heads to eat, the males on the other side advance to
hinder them. Immediately the other party comes forward, and thus the seud being
kindled on both sides, they take up the Battoons that lie by the Baskets, and
thrash one another in good earnest. The weakest are constrained to fly into
the wood with their pates broken, and their limbs maimed; while the Masters of
the Field glut themselves with Rice. Though it may be, when their bellies are
full, they will suffer some of the female-party to come and partake with them.

The four and twentieth, we traveled nine leagues, all the way being like the
Road the day before, as far as Naraveron.

The five and twentieth, after a journey of eight hours, through a Country of
the same nature, meeting at every two or three leagues end with Gates and
Guards, we came in the evening to Gazel.

The six and twentieth, we traveled nine leagues, and came to lie at Courva,
where there was nothing to be found neither for Man nor Beast, so that our
Catte! were forced to be contented with a little Grass, which was cut on
purpose for them. Courva is only a celebrated Pagod; by which, at our arrival,
we saw several bands of Soldiers pass by, some with Half-pikes, some with
Muskets, and some with Clubs, who were going to join with one of the principal
Commanders of Mirgimola's Army, who was encamped upon a rising-ground not far
from Courva; the place being pleasant and cool, by reason of the great number
of Trees and Fountains that grace it. When we understood the Captain was so
near, we went to wait upon him, and found him sitting in his Tent with many
Lords of the Country, all Idolaters. After we had presented him with a pair of
Pocket-Pistols inlaid with Silver, he demanded of us what had brought us into
that Country; but when we told him that we came to attend Mirgimola,
Generalissimo of the King of Golconda's Army, about business, he was infinitely
kind to us: However, understanding that he took us for Hollanders, we told him
we were not Hollanders, but Frenchmen. Thereupon, not understanding what
Nation we were, he fell into a long discourse with us about the Government of
our Country, and the Grandeur of our King. Six or seven days before, they had
taken five or six Elephants, three whereof had escaped, having killed ten or
twelve of the Natives who assisted in the Chase; in pursuit whereof the General
was preparing; and because we could not stay to see the sport, we were
contented to inform our selves of the manner of hunting that vast Animal; which
is thus. They cut out several Alleys or Walks in the Wood, which they dig full
of great deep holes, and cover with Hurdles strow'd over with a little earth.
Then the Hunters hooping and hollowing, and beating up Drums, with Pikes that
have Wildfire ti'd to the end of them, force the Elephant into those Walks,
where he tumbles into the holes, not being able to rise again. Then they fetch
Ropes and Chains: and some they bring under their bellies, others they wind
about their legs and trunk, and when they think they have sufficiently hampered
the Beast, they have certain Engines ready, wherewithal to draw him up.
Nevertheless, of five, three escaped, notwithstanding the cords and chains
about their bodies and their legs. The people told us one thing which seemed
very wonderful; which was, that these Elephants having been once deceived, and
having escaped the snare, are very mistrustful ever after; and when they get
into the Wood again, they break off a great bough from one of the Trees with
their trunk, with which they examine every step they go, before they set down
their feet, to try whether there be any hole or no in their way. So that the
Hunters that told us the Story, seemed to be out of hopes of ever taking those
three Elephants which had escaped. Had we been assured that we might have been
eyewitnesses of this miraculous precaution of the Elephant, we would have
staid three or four days, whatever urgent business we had had. The Captain
himself was a kind of a Brigadeer, that commanded three or four-thousand men,
who were quartered half a league round the Country.

The seven and twentieth, after two hours travel, we came to a great Village,
where we saw the two Elephants which had been so lately taken. Every one of the
two wild Elephants was placed between two tame ones. Round about the wild
Elephants stood six men, with every one an Half-pike in their hands, and a
lighted-Torch fastened at the end of the Pike, who talked to the Beasts, giving
them meat, and crying out in their language, Take it, eat it. The food which
they gave them was a little bottle of Hey, some pieces of brown-Sucre, and Rice
boiled in water, with some few corns of Pepper. If the wild Elephants refused
to do as they were bidden, the men made signs to the tame Elephants to beat
them, which they did, banging the refractory Elephant upon the head and
forehead with their trunks; and if he offered to make any resistance, the other
Elephant thwackt him on the other side; so that the poor Elephant, not knowing
what to do, was constrained to learn obedience.

Being thus fallen into the Story of Elephants, I will add some other
observations, which I have made upon the nature of those Animals. Though the
Elephant never meddles with the female, after he is once taken, yet he is
sometimes seized with a kind of lustful rage. One day that Sha-jehan was an
Hunting upon one of his Elephants, with one of his Sons that sat by him to fan
him, the Elephant became so furious by reason of his lust, that the Governor
who was by no means able to master him, declared to the King, that to allay the
fury of the Elephant, who would else doubtless bruise him to pieces among the
Trees, there was no way, but for one of the three to forfeit his life: and that
he would willingly sacrifice his for the safety of the King and the Prince his
Son. Only he desired his Majesty to take care of three small Children which he
must leave behind him. Having so said, he threw himself under the
Elephant's-feet, who had no sooner taken him in his trunk and squeezed him to
pieces with his feet, but he grew as quiet and peaceable as before. The King,
as an acknowledgment for so famous a deliverance, gave to the poor
two-hunder'd-thousand Roupies, and highly advanced every one of the Sons of him
that had so generously laid down his life for the safety of his Sovereign.

I observed also, that though the Elephant's skin be very hard while he is
alive; yet when he is dead, it is just like melted-glue.

Elephants are brought from several parts of India; as from the Island of
Ceylan, where they are very small; but the most courageous of all: from the
Isle of Sumatra; from the Kingdom of Cochin; from the Kingdom of Siam; and from
the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Boutam near the Great- Tartarie. They are
brought also from the Coast of Melinda, Eastward of Africa: where they are in
very great numbers, according to the report of a Portugueze-Captain, made at
Goa, who came from thence to make some complaint against the Governor of
Mozambique. He told me that he had seen all along that Coast several Parks that
were empal'd with nothing but Elephants-teeth, the least of which Parks is
above a league about: He added farther, that the Blacks of the Country hunt
their Elephants, and eat the flesh. But they are obliged to give the tusks of
every one they kill to the Lord of the place. When they intend to take their
Elephants in the Island of Ceylan, they make a long lane, closed in on both
sides, so that the Elephant can neither run to the right nor to the left: this
lane is broad at the first, but grows narrower and narrower, till there is no
more room left at the farther-end than for the female-Elephant to lie down,
which must be one that is covetous of the male at the same time. Though she be
tame, yet she is bound with good Ropes and Cords, and by her cries will call
the male-Elephant, who presently runs through the lane toward her. Now when
the Elephant comes where the lane grows narrow, they that lie hid for that
purpose, immediately barricado up the lane behind, and when he comes near the
female, there is another barricado set up that stops him from going any
farther. When he is thus between the Barricado's, they so entangle his legs and
trunk with ropes and cords, that he is soon taken, having no way to help
himself. The same way they use for the most part in the Kingdoms of Siam, and
Pegu, only that the Natives there mount the female-Elephant, and go to find out
the male in the Forests. And when they have met with his haunt, they tie the
female to the most convenient place they can find, and then they fix their
snares for the Elephant, who in a short time hastens toward the female, hot for
generation, where her cries call him.

This is observable of the female-Elephant, that when she begins to be hot, she
gathers together a great heap of herbs and weeds, and makes her self a kind of
bed some four or five-foot-high from the ground, where contrary to the custom
of all other creatures, she lies upon her back, in expectation of the male,
whom she calls to her by a peculiar cry.

This is also particular to the Elephants in the Isle of Ceylan, that only the
first Elephant which the female produces, has any tusks. And it is also
observable that the Ivory which comes from Achen when it is wrought, has this
peculiar quality with it, that it never grows yellow, like that which comes out
of the Continent, and from the East Indies, which makes it more esteemed, and
dearer than any other.

When the Merchants bring Elephants to any place to sell; it is a pleasant sight
to see them go along. For in regard there are generally old and young together,
when the old ones are gone by the children will be running after the little
ones to play with them, and give them something or other to eat. While the
young Elephants, which are very wanton, are busily taking what is offered them,
the children leap upon their backs: but then the young Elephants, that lately
stopped for the lucre of victuals, perceiving their Dams a great way before them,
double their pace, and playing with their trunks, throvv the children off their
backs to the ground, yet without doing them any harm.

Notvvithstanding all the enquiry I have made, I could never find exactly how
long an Elephant will live. Nor can all the governors and keepers of those
creatures tell you more, then that such an Elephant has been in the possession
of their Father, their Grandfather, and great Grandfather. And by that
computation, I found that they had lived some of them six-score, or an hundred
and thirty years.

The greatest part of those that have made Relations of India, boldly affirm
that the Great Mogul keeps three or four-thousand Elephants. But being my self
at Jehanabad, where the King at present resides, he that was chief Master of
the Elephants, assured me that the King had not above five-hunder'd Elephants,
which were called Elephants of the House, made use of only to carry the Women,
their Tents, and Luggage; but that for the Wars, he only kept fourscore, or
four-score and ten at most. The noblest of the latter sort is always reserved
for the King's Eldest Son, the allowance for his food and other necessaries
being 500 Roupies a month, which comes to 750 Livres. There are some that are
not allowed above 50, others 40, others 30, and some but 20 Roupies. But those
Elephants that are allowed an hundred, two-hunder'd, three-hunder'd or
four-hunder'd Roupies a-month, have belonging to them certain Horsemen that
live upon the same pay, and two or three young fellows to fan them during the
heat of the weather. All these Elephants are not always kept in the City: the
greatest part being led out every morning into the fields, or among the
thickets, where they feed upon the branches of Trees, Sucre-canes, and Millet,
to the great detriment of the poor Country man. But not a little to the profit
of their Keepers; for the less they eat at home, the more they gain into their
own purses.

The twenty-seventh of August, we traveled six leagues, and lay at a great
Town called Ragia-peta.

The twenty-eighth, after eight leagues journey we came to Ondecour.

The twenty-ninth, after nine hours travel we arrived at Outemeda, where there
is one of the greatest Pagods in all India. It is all built of large
Freestone, and it has three Towers, where there stand several deformed figures
of Emboss'dwork. It is encompast with many little Chambers for the Priests
Lodgings: five-hunder'd paces beyond there is a wide Lake, upon the banks
whereof are built several Pagods eight or ten-foot-square; and in every one an
Idol representing the shape of some Devil, with a Bramere, who takes care that
no stranger that is not of their superstition, shall come to wash, or take any
water out of the Lake. If any stranger desires any water, they bring it in
earthen-pots: and if by chance their pot touches the stranger's Vessel, they
break it immediately. They told me also, that if any stranger, not of their
superstition, should happen by accident to wash in that Lake, they must be
forced to drain the Lake of all the water that was in at that time. As for
their Alms, they are very charitable; for there passes by no person in
necessity, or that begs of them but they give them to eat and drink of such as
they have. There are several Women that sit upon the Road, whereof some of them
always keep fire for Travelers to light their Tobacco by. Nay, they will give
a Pipe to some that have none at all. Others boil Rice with Quicheri, which is
a grain somewhat like our Hemp Seed. Others boil Beans with their Rice, because
the water wherein they are boiled never puts those that are over-hot into a
Pleurify. There are Women that have vowed to perform these acts of Charity to
strangers for seven or eight years, some for more, some for less, according to
their convenience. And to every Traveller they give some of their Beans, and
Rice-water, and an handful of Rice to eat. There are other Women upon the
highway, and in the fields, looking behind their Horses, their Oxen, and their
Cows, who have made vows never to eat but what they find indigested in the dung
of those Beasts. Now in regard there is neither Barley nor Oats in that
Country, they give their Cattle certain great crooked Pease, which they bruise
before between two Millstones: and then lay them in steep for half an hour;
for they are a very solid substance, and hard to be digested. They give their
Cattle these Pease every evening; and in the morning they feed them with
two-pound of dark-brown-Sugar, like Wax, kneaded together with as much Meal,
and one-pound of Butter, whereof the Ostlers or Grooms make little round Balls
which they thrust down their throats; for otherwise they would never eat them.
Afterward they wash their mouths, that are all over clamm'd, especially their
teeth, which makes them have such an aversion against that sort of food. All
the day long they pull up the grass and weeds by the roots, and give their
Cattle, being very careful of letting them eat any of the earth.

The thirty'th, we traveled eight leagues, and lay at a place called Goulupale.

The one and thirty'th, after we had traveled nine hours, we stopped at Gogoron.

The first of September we traveled but six leagues, and came to lie at
Gandicot. It was but eight days before, that the Nahab had taken that City,
after a Siege of three months. Nor had it been taken without the assistance of
certain Frenchmen, who had forsaken the service of the Dutch-Company, by
reason of ill-usage. They had also several English and Dutch-Cannoneers, with
two or three Italians, which mainly forwarded the surrender of that place.

Gandicot is one of the strongest Cities in the Kingdom of Carnatica. It is
situated upon the point of an high Mountain; there being but one ascent to it,
not above twenty or five and twenty-foot-broad at most; in some places not
above seven or eight-foot-wide. On the right hand of the way, which is cut out
of the Mountain, there is a most hideous precipice; at the bottom whereof runs
a vast River. Upon the top of the Mountain there is a small plain, about a
quarter of a league broad, and about half a league long. This is all sowed with
Rice and Millet, and watered with many little Springs. The top of the plain on
the Southside, where the City is built, is encompast with precipices, two
Rivers running at the bottom, which form the point. So that there is but one
Gate to enter into the City from the plain-side; and that too fortified with
three good Walls of Freestone, with Moats paved at the bottom with Freestone;
so that the besieged had but only one quarter of the City to defend, containing
about five-hunder'd paces. They had but two Iron-Guns, the one carrying
twelve-pound-Ball, the other eight. The one was planted upon the Gate, the
other upon a point of a kind of a Bastion. So that until the Nahab had found
the way to mount his Cannon upon a very high place near the City, he lost a
great number of men by several sallies which the Besieged made. The Raja that
was within, was esteemed one of the bravest and most experienced Captains that
ever were amongst the Idolaters: whereupon, the Nahab finding that the place
was not to be taken, unless he could get up his Cannon to the top of that steep
ascent, sent for all the Frenchmen that were in the King's service, promising
to every one four months extraordinary pay, if they could find a way to mount
his Cannon upon the top of such a place; wherein they had the good-hap to be
very succesful. For they mounted four pieces of Cannon, and were so prosperous,
as to hit the great Gun that was planted upon the Gate, and render it
unserviceable. At length, when they had beaten down good part of the Wall of
the City, the Besiege^ came to capitulate, and marched out of the Town upon
very good Articles. The day we arrived, all the Army was encamped at the foot
of the Mountain, in a plain, through which there ran a very fair River; where
the Nahab mustered his Cavalry, and found them in a very good condition. An
English-Cannoneer and an Italian seeing Monsieur Jardin and my self pass by,
guessed us to be Frangui's; and because it was late, accosted us very civilly,
and obliged us to stay with them all night. By them we understood that there
was in the City a French-Engineer, whose name was Claudius Maille of Bourges,
and that he was employed by the Nahab to cast some pieces of Cannon which the
Nahab intended to leave in the City.

The next day we went into the City, and found out Maille's Lodging, having
been acquainted with him at Batavia; who informing the Nahab of our arrival, he
presently sent us Provision for our selves and our beasts.

The third day we went to wait upon the Nahab, who had pitched his Tents upon
that part of the plain near the place where the way is cut out of the Rock. We
informed him of the cause of our coming, telling him that we had some
commodities that were rare, and worth the King's buying; but that we were
unwilling to show them to the King till he had seen them; believing it our duty
to render him that respect. The Nahab was very well-pleased with our
Complement; and after he had caused us to be presented with Betle, we took our
leaves of him, and returned to our Lodgings, whither he sent to us two Bottles
of Wine, one of Sack, and the other of Sohiras, which is a rare thing in that
Country.

The fourth day we waited upon him again, and carried along with us some
Pearls of an extraordinary weight. beauty and bigness, the least whereof
weighed twenty four Caratts. After he had vewd them and showed them to some of
the Lords that were about him, he asked the price, which when we had set him,
he returned us our Jewels and told us he would consider of it.

The tenth day he sent for us in the morning, and after he had caused us to sit
down by him, he sent for five small Bags full of Diamonds, every Bag containing
a good handful. They were loose Stones, of a very black Water, and very small;
none of them exceeding a Carat, or a Carat and a half; but otherwise very
clean. There were some few that might weigh two Carats. After the Nahab had
shown us all, he asked us whether they would sell in our Country. We made
answer, that they might have been for sale in our Country, provided they had
not been of a black Water; for that in Europe we never esteemed any Diamonds,
but such as were clean and white, having but a small esteem for any others. It
seems, that when he first undertook the Conquest of this Kingdom for the King
of Golconda, they informed him that there were Diamond Mines in it. Whereupon
he sent twelve thousand men to dig there; who in a whole years time could find
no more than those five small Bags full. Whereupon the Nahab perceiving that
they could find none but brown Stones, of a Water enclining much more to black
than white, thought it but loss of time, and so sent all the people back to
their Husbandry.

The eleventh, the French Canoneers came all to the Nahabs Tent, complaining
that he had not paid them the four months pay which he had promised them;
threatening him, that if he did not discharge it, they would leave him; to which
the Nahab promised to give them satisfaction the next day.

The twelfth, the Canoneers not failing to give him another visit, the Nahab
paid them three months, and promised to pay them the fourth before the month
were out; but so soon as they had received their Money, they fell a feasting
one another, so that the Dancing Wenches carried away the greatest part of
their Coin.

The thirteenth, the Nahab went to see the Guns which Maille had undertaken to
cast. For which purpose he had sent for Brass from all parts, and got together
a great number of Idols which the Soldiers had pillaged out of the Pagods as
they marched along. Now you must know, that in Gandicot there was one Pagod,
said to be the fairest in all India, wherein there were several Idols, some of
Gold, and others of Silver; among the rest there were six of Brass, three
sitting upon their Heels, and three upon their Feet, ten foot high. These
Idols' were made use of among the rest. But when Maille also had provided all
things ready, he could not make those six Idols run, that were taken out of the
great Pagod of Gandicot, though he melted all the rest. He tried several ways,
but it was impossible for him to do it, whatever expense the Nahab was at; nay
though the Nahab threatened to hang the Priests for having enchanted those
Idols. And thus Maille could never make any more than only one single piece,
and that split upon trial; so that he was forced to leave the work unfinished,
and soon after left the Nahabs service.

The fourteenth, we went to take our leaves of the Nahab, and to know what he
had further to say to us, concerning the Commodities we had then shown him.
But then he told us, he was busy at present about the examination of certain
Offenders which were brought before him. For it is the custom of that Country,
never to put a man in Prison; but as soon as the Offender is taken, he is
examined, and sentence is pronounced upon him, according to his crime, which is
immediately executed; or if the party taken, be found innocent, he is as soon
acquitted. And let the controversy be of what nature it will, it is presently
decided.

The fifteenth in the morning, we went to wait upon him again, and were
immediately admitted into his Tent, where he sat with his two Secretaries by
him. The Nahab was sitting according to the custom of the Country, barefoot,
like one of our Tailors, with a great number of Papers sticking between his
Toes, and others between the Fingers of his left hand, which Papers he drew
sometimes from between his Toes, sometimes from between his Fingers, and ordered
what answers should be given to every one. After his Secretaries had wrote the
answers, he caused them to read them, and then took the Letters and sealed them
himself; giving some to Foot Messengers, others to Horsemen. For you must know,
that all those Letters which are sent by Foot-Posts all over India, go with
more speed than those which are carried by Horsemen. The reason is, because at
the end of every two Leagues there are little Huts, where there are men always
ready, who are engaged to run away immediately; so that when one of these men
that carries the Letters, comes to one of these Huts, he throws the Letters
into the Hut, and then he that is appointed, runs with them to the next Stage.
They look upon it as an ill Omen, to give the Letters into the Messengers
hands; but they must be thrown at his feet, and he must gather them up. It is
to be observed also, that the Highways in most parts of India, are like Walks
of Trees; and that where there are no Trees, at every five hundred paces
distance there are set up little Heaps of Stones, which the Inhabitants of the
next Villages are bound to white-wash from time to time, to the end those
Letter-Carriers may not miss their ways in dark and Rainy nights. While we
stayed with the Nahab, certain Officers came to tell him, that they had brought
certain Offenders to the door of his Tent. He was above half an hour before he
returned them any answer, writing on, and giving instructions to his
Secretaries; but by and by, all of a sudden he commanded the Offenders to be
brought in, and after he had examined them, and made them consess the crime of
which they stood accused, he was above an hour before he said a word, still
writing on, and employing his Secretaries. In the mean while several of the
Officers of the Army came to tender their respects to him in a very submissive
manner, all whom he answered only with a nod. There was one of the Offenders
which were brought before him, had broken into a House, and had killed the
Mother and three Children. He was condemned upon the spot to have his Hands and
Feet cut off, and to be cast out into the high way, there to end his days in
misery. Another had robbed upon the Highway; for which the Nahab ordered his
Belly to be ripped up, and himself to be cast upon the Dunghill. I know not what
crimes the other two had committed, but their Heads were both cut off. When we
perceived him at a little leisure, we asked him whether he had any other
Commands to lay upon us, and whether he thought our Commodities fitting to be
shown to the King. He answered, that we might go to Golconda, and that he
would write to his Son in our behalf, and that his Letter would be there sooner
than we. And in order to our journey, he ordered us sixteen Horsemen to convoy
us, and to provide us necessaries upon the Road, till we came to a River
thirteen Leagues from Gandicot, which no persons are to pass, unless they have
the Nahabs Passport, to keep the Soldiers from running from their Colors.

CHAP. XIX. The Road from Gandicot to Golconda.
THE sixteenth in the morning, we set out of Gandicot, accompanied with the
greatest part of the Canoneers, who brought us the first days journey upon our
way; and that day having traveled seven Leagues, we came to lie at Cotepali.

The seventeenth, the Canoneers took their leaves of us; and we kept on our
journey with our Horsemen; and having traveled six Leagues, we lay at a Village
called Coteen, on the other side of the River, which is very broad. So soon as
we had crossed it, the Horsemen took their leaves of us; and though we made
them a present of Roupies, to buy them Tobacco and Betle, yet we could not
persuade them to take it. Their Ferry-Boats wherewith they cross the River, are
like broad bottomed Wicker Flaskets, covered without with Oxe's Hides; at the
bottom whereof they lay certain Faggots, over which they spread a piece of old
Tapestry, to keep the Wares and Merchandise from the wet. As for their Coaches
and Wagons, they fasten them between two Boats, by the Wheels and the Pole;
the Horses swimming all the while, one man whipping them on behind, while
another in the Boat holds them up by the Head-Stall. As for the Oxen that carry
the Luggage, as soon as ever they come to the River side, and that they have
unladed them, they only drive them into the River, and they will swim over of
themselves. There are four men that stand upright at the four Corners of the
Boat, and row it along with broad pieces of Wood, made like Shovels. If they do
not all strike their strokes together, but that any of the four misses, the
Boat will turn round two or three times; and the stream carries it a great way
lower than where they intended to land.

The eighteenth, after five hours travel we arrived at Morimal.

The nineteenth, we traveled nine Leagues, and lay at Santesela.

The twentieth, we traveled nine Leagues more, and lay at Goremeda.

The one and twentieth, after six hours travel, we spent the night at Kaman, a
Frontier Town in the Kingdom of Golconda, till the Conquest of Carnatica by
Mirgimola.

The two and twentieth, we traveled seven Leagues, and came to lie at
Emelipata. When we were about half the way, we met above four thousand persons,
men and women; and above twenty Palleki's, in every one whereof was an Idol.
They were adorned with Coverings of Satin, purfled with Gold, and Velvets with
Gold and Silver Fringe. Some of these Palleki's were born by four men; others
by eight, and some by twelve, according as the Idols were in bigness and
weight. On each side of the Pallekie, walked a man, with a large Fan in his
hand, five Foot in compass, made of Ostriches and Peacocks Feathers, of various
colors. The Handle of the Fan was five or six foot long, laid all over with
Gold and Silver, about the thickness of a French Crown. Every one was officious
to carry one of those Fans, to keep the Flies from the Idols Face. There was
another Fan which was carried close by the Idol, somewhat larger than the
former, without a handle, and was born just like a Target. It was adorned with
Feathers of several colors, and little Bells of Gold and Silver, round about
the edges. He that carried it, went always near the Idol upon the same side, to
shade the Idol; for to have shut the Curtains would have been too hot. Ever and
anon, he that carried that sort of Fan, brandished it in the air, to make the
Bells ring; which they presumed to be a kind of Pastime to the Idol. All these
people with their Idols came from Brampour, and the adjacent parts, and were
going to visit their great Ram, that is to say, their chief God, who stands in
a Pagod in the Territories of the King of Carnatica. They had been about thirty
days upon the Road, and were to travel fourteen or fifteen more, before they
came to this Pagod. One of my Servants, who was a Native of Brampour, and of
the same Superstition, begged me to give him leave to bear his Gods company,
telling me withal, that he had made a Vow long since to go this Pilgrimage. I
was constrained to let him go. For had I not given him leave, I knew he would
have taken it, by reason he had much acquaintance and kindred among the Rabble.
About two months after, he returned again to us to Surat, and because he had
faithfully served Monsieur Jardin and my self, we made no scruple to take him
again. Asking him some questions about his Pilgrimage, he related to me this
following passage: Six days after he left me, all the Pilgrims had made an
account to go and lie at such a Village, to which before they came they were to
cross a River, that has but little Water in Summer, so that it is easily
fordable. But when it rains in India, the Water falls with such a force, that
it seems to be a perpendicular deluge; and in less than an hour or two, a small
River shall swell three or four foot high. The Rains having overtaken those
Pilgrims, the River was swelled in that manner, that it was impossible to pass
it that day. Now because it is not necessary for Travelers in India to carry
provisions, especially for the Idolaters, who never eat any thing that ever had
life; in regard that in the least Village you may meet with abundance of Rice,
Meal, Butter, Milk Meats, Lentils, and other Pulse, besides Sugar, and
Sweetmeats, dry and moist. The people were very much surpised, having no
Victuals, when they came and saw the River swelPd. In short, they had nothing
to give their Children to eat; which caused great lamentations among them. In
this extremity the chiefest of their Priests fat himself down in the midst of
them, and covering himself with a sheet, began to cry out that they who would
have any Victuals should come to him; when they came, he asked every one what
they would have, whether Rice, or Meal, and for how many persons; and then
lifting up the corner of the sheet, with a great Ladle he distributed to every
one that which they asked for; so that the whole multitude of four thousand
Souls was fully satisfied. My Servant did not only tell me this story, but
going several times afterward to Brampour, where I was known to the chief men
in the City, I inquired of several, who swore to me by their Ram, Ram, that it
was truth. Though I am not bound to believe it.

The twenty-third, we arrived at Doupar, after we had traveled eight leagues,
and crossed several Torrents.

The twenty-fourth, we traveled four leagues, and came to Tripante; where there
is a great Pagod upon a Hill, to which there is a circular ascent of Freestone
every way; the least Stone being ten foot long, and three broad: and there are
several Figures of Damons in the Pagod. Among the rest, there is the Statue of
Venus, standing upright, with several lascivious Figures about her; all which
Figures are of one piece of Marble; but the Sculpture is very ordinary.

The twenty-fifth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to Mamli.

The twenty-sixth, we traveled eight leagues more, and came to lie at Machels.

The twenty-seventh, we traveled not above three leagues, being to cross a wide
River in Boats like Panniers; which usually takes up half the day; for when you
come to the River side, there is neither Pannier nor any thing else to cross
it. There was only one man, with whom we bargained for our passage; who to try
whether our Money were good or no, made a great fire and threw it into the
flame, as he does to all others that pass that way. If among the Roupies which
he receives, he meets with any one that turns a little black, you must give him
another, which he presently heats red hot; when he finds his Money to be good,
he calls to his Companions to fetch the Manequin or Flasket-Boat, which lay hid
before in some other part of the River. For these sort of people are so
cunning, that if they descry any Passengers afar off, they will row their
Mamequin to the other side, because they will not be constrained to carry any
person over without Money. But the Money being paid, the man that receives it
calls his Companions together, who take the Boat upon their Shoulders, and when
they have launched it into the River, they fetch their Passengers and goods
from the other side.

The twenty-eighth, having traveled five leagues, they came to a place called
Dabir-Pinta.

The twenty-ninth, after twelve hours travel, we came to lie at Holcora.

The thirtieth, we traveled eight leagues, and came to spend our night at
Peridera.

The first of October, after we had traveled ten leagues, we came to lie at
Atenara. This is a House of Pleasure, which the present King's Mother caused to
be built. There are many Chambers in a great Piazza belonging to it, for the
convenience of Travelers.

You must take notice, that in all the Countries where we traveled, as well in
the Kingdom of Carnatica, as the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, there are
no Physicians, but such as attend Kings and Princes. As for the common people,
after the Rains are fallen, and that it is time to gather Herbs, you shall see
every morning the good women of the Towns going into the Fields, to gather such
Simples which they know to be proper for such Diseases as reign in the Family.
It Is very true, that in great Cities there may be one or two men that have some
common Receipts, who go every morning and sit in some known places, to give
their Remedies to such as enquire for them, whether they be Potions or
Plasters. First they feel their Pulses, and then giving them some remedy, for
which they do not demand the value of six pence; they also at the same time
mutter certain words between their teeth.

The second of October, we had but four leagues to travel before we came to
Golconda. We went immediately to the Lodging of a young Dutch Surgeon,
belonging to the King, whom the Sieur Cheteur, Envoy from Batavia, had left at
Golconda upon the King's earnest entreaty. The King was always very much
troubled with the headache: for which reason the Physicians had ordered that he
should be let blood in four places under the tongue; but there was no person
that would undertake to do it: for the Natives of the Country understand
nothing of Surgery. Now before that Peter de Lan, for that was the
Dutch-Chirurgion's name, was entertained in the King's service, he was asked
whether he could let blood? To which he answered, that there was nothing so
easy in Surgery. Some few days after the King sent for him, and gave him to
understand that he was resolved to be let blood the next day in four parts
under the tongue, as the Physicians had ordered, but he should take a care of
not drawing away above eight ounces. De Lan returning the next day to Court,
was lead into a Chamber by three Eunuchs, and four Old-women, who carried him
to a Bath, and after they had undrest him, and washed him, especially his
hands; they anointed him with Aromatick-drugs, and instead of his own
European-Clothes, they brought him a Robe according to the fashion of the
Country. After that, they brought him before the King; where he found four
little Porringers of Gold, which the Physicians, who were present, had weighed.
In short, he let the King blood under the tongue in four parts, and performed
his business so well, that when the blood came to be weighed, it weighed but
bare eight ounces. The King was so satisfied with the Operation, that he gave
the Surgeon three-hunder'd Pagods, which comes to almost seven-hunder'd
Crowns. The Young-Queen and the Queen Mother understanding what he had done,
were resolved to be let-blood too. But I believe it was rather out of a
curiosity to see the Surgeon, than out of any necessity which they had to be
let-blood. For he was a handsome young man; and perhaps they had never seen a
stranger near at hand, for at a distance, it is no improbable thing, in regard
the Women are shut up in such places where they may see, but not be seen. Upon
this, de Lan was carried into a Chamber where the same Old-women that had
waited on him before he let the King blood, stripped up his arm, and washed it,
but more especially his hands; which when they were dry, they rubbed again with
sweet-Oils as before. That being done, a Curtain was drawn, and the Queen
stretching out her arm through a hole, was let-blood; as was the Queen Mother
afterward in the same manner. The Queen gave him fifty Pagods, and the
Queen Mother thirty, with some pieces of Cloth of Gold.

Two days after we went to wait upon the Nahab's Son, but were told we could
not speak with him that day; the next day receiving the same answer, we were
advertised upon enquiry, that we might wait long enough in that manner; that he
was a young Lord that never stirred from the King; or that if he did leave the
Court, it was only to keep his Misses company in his own Haram. The young
Surgeon seeing us so delaid, offered to speak to the King's first Physician,
who was also of the King's Council, and who had testified a great affection
toward the Batavian-Envoy, and for de Lan himself; for which reason, he thought
he might embrace an opportunity to do him a kindness. In short, de Lan had no
sooner spoke to him, but he sent for us, and having, after much civility shown
us, informed himself of the cause of our coming, he desired us to show him our
Pearls, which we did the next day. After he had viewed them, he made us seal
them up again in our own bags: for all that is presented to the King must be
sealed with the Merchants-Seal; and when the King has had a sight of the
Commodity, it is sealed up with his own Seal, to prevent any fraud, Thereupon
we left the Pearls, so sealed up, in his hands, who promised to show them to
the King, and to give us a good account of the trust we had put into his hands.

The next day about nine of the Clock before noon we went to the River to see
how they wash the King's and the Great Noble-men's Elephants. The Elephant goes
up to the belly in the water, and lying down upon one side, with his trunk he
throws the water several times upon that side which lies out of the water; and
when he has soaked himself sufficiently, the Master comes with a kind of a
Pumice-stone, and rubbing the Elephant's-skin, cleanses it from all the filth
that clings to it. Here some believe, that when this creature is once laid
down, it cannot rise of its self; which is contrary to what I have seen. For
when the Master has well-cleans'd the one side, he commands the Elephant to
turn the other, which the beast immediately does; and when both sides are
well-wash'd, he comes out of the River, and stays awhile upright upon the
bank-side to dry himself. Then comes the Master with a pot full of some red or
yellow color, and streaks the beast in the forehead, about the eyes, upon the
breast, and all behind, rubbing him afterward with Oil of Coco's to strengthen
the nerves; and some when all is done, he fastens a gilt-Plate upon their
foreheads.

The fifteenth, the chief Physician sent for us, and returned us our bags
again, sealed with the King's Signet, wherewith his Majesty had sealed them
after he had looked upon them. He demanded the price; which we told him:
Whereupon, an Eunuch that stood by him, and wrote down every thing, wondering at
the highprice of the Pearls, told us that we took the King of Golconda's
Courtiers for persons that had neither knowledge nor judgment; and that he saw
every day things of greater value brought to the King. I briskly retorted upon
the Eunuch, that he was better skilled in the price of a young Slave, than the
value of a Jevvel; and so saying, we put up our Pearls, and returned to our
Lodging. The next day we set out from Golconda for Surat, in which Road there
is nothing considerable but what I have already described, only this is to be
remembered, that we were not gone above five days journey from Golconda, but
the King, who had not heard in two days after we were gone, what I had
retorted upon the Eunuch, sent four or five Horsemen after us with Orders, if
they overtook us, to bring us back: but in regard we were got one days
journey into the Territories of the Mogul before one of the Horsemen overtook
us, (for the rest staid upon the Frontiers of the two Kingdoms;) I, that knevv
the humor of the Country very well, made answer for my self and Companion,
that at that time our business would not permit us; and that therefore we
begged in most humble manner his Majesty's pardon; and afterward I made my
Companion allow my reasons.

Being arrived at Surat, Monsieur de Jardin died of an overflovving of choler:
And I made a full account to have gone to Agra to Sha-jehan who then reigned.
But at the same instant the Nahab, Sha-Est-Kan, the King's Brother-in-Lavv, and
Governor of the Province of Guzerat, sent one of the principal Officers of his
House to me from Amadabat, to tell me he understood I had some extraordinary
Jewels to sell; for which reason he would be glad to see me, and that he
would pay me as much for them as the King should do. I received this Message
while Sieur de Jardin lay sick, and the ninth day after his death I got to
Amadabat, and spoke with the Nahab. Now in regard he was a man that
understood Jewels perfectly well, we presently came to an agreement: so that
we had no dispute together, but about the quality of the Coin to be paid. He
allovv'd me two sorts to choose, Roupies of Gold, or Roupies of Silver: but
the Prince seeming to intimate to me that he should not be vvell-pleas'd to let
such a Sum in Silver be seen to go out of his House, he vvish'd I would rather
accept my payment in Roupies of Gold, that made not such a great heap. I
consented to his desire; and he showed me very fair Gold, and many Roupies,
that had not seen the Sun in a long time. But in regard the price current of a
Roupy of Gold, is not above fourteen Roupies of Silver, and for that he would
have had me taken my Roupies at fourteen and a half, or at least for fourteen
and a quarter, it had like to have spoiled our bargain; for I gave him to
understand, that in so large a sum, it would not quit cost to lose a fourth
part in every Roupy of Gold. At length to please him, I was forced to take the
Gold at fourteen Roupies of Silver and an eighth part. Thus a Prince otherwise
magnificent and generous, yet in matter of buying and selling, would needs
approve himself to be a good Husband. While I stayed at Amadabat, he sent me
every day to my Lodging four Silver Plates of Pilaw, and other excellent Diet;
and one day that the King had sent him as many Apples as ten or twelve men
could carry, he sent me as many as for their rarity at Amadabat, were worth
three or four hundred Roupies. Besides all this, he gave me a complete Habit of
Honor, with a Sword and a Cangiar, worth a thousand Roupies; and resolving
also to give me a Horse, he asked me what kind of one I would have. I told him,
since he was pleased to give me my choice, that I rather desired a young lively
Horse, rather than an old one. Thereupon he sent me one that was so given to
bounding and prancing, that he threw a young Hollander out of the Saddle; but
upon my desire to have him changed, he sent me another, which I sold afterward
for four hundred Roupies.

From Amadabat I returned to Surat; from Surat I traveled again to Golconda,
and thence to the Mine to buy Diamonds. From whence returning back for Surat, I
resolved for Persia.

CHAP. XX. My return from Surat to Ormus.
BEing upon my return to Surat from the Diamond Mine, I understood that the War
was proclaimed between the English and the Hollanders, and the latter would
send no more Ships into Persia. The English also gave out the same resolutions;
for indeed they had sent four Ships into Persia, which they expected back every
hour. While I was thus in fear of staying long in a place where I had no
business, there arrived at Surat five great Dutch Ships from Batavia; three of
which being rather Men of War, than Merchantmen, were ordered to be unladen
with all speed, with an intention to look out for the four English Vessels that
were expected out of Persia. The other two were appointed to follow two or
three days after, being in that time to take in provisions for the whole Fleet.

In one of those two Vessels I embarked, and setting sail the eighth of
January, we came before Diu the twelfth, where we overtook the other three
Ships. There it was debated at a Council of War, what course to steer to meet
the English; and it was resolved, that we should steer away for Scindi, where
we arrived the twentieth of the same month, and stayed there till the
twenty-eighth, and then setting sail with a fair Wind, we landed at Gomrom the
seventh of March.

The End of the First Book.
TRAVELS IN INDIA. The Second Book. Containing an Historical and Political
Description of the Empire of the Great Mogul.
CHAP. I. A Relation of the last Wars of Indolstan; which gives an insight into
the present Estate of the Empire and Court of the Moguls.
IHave written this History in such manner, as I knew things to be transacted,
during my stay in the Country; leaving it to the Reader to make his own
reflections as he pleases; it being sufficient for me to make a faithful
description of the Potent Empire of the Moguls, according to the Observations I
have taken upon the place.

This great and vast Empire, which contains the greatest part of Indolstan, and
which extends from the Mountains on this side the River Indus, to the Mountains
on the other side of Ganges; borders Eastward upon the Kingdoms of Aracan,
Tipra, and Asia. Toward the West upon Persia, and the Usbeg Tartars. Southward
upon the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour. Northward it runs up as far as the
Mountain Caucasus. North-Eastward the Kingdom of Bantam, whence comes our Musk,
parts it. North-Westward it borders upon the Country of Chegathay, or the
Usbegs.

They are called Moguls, that is, white of complexion; for the last Conquerors
of the Indies were Whites; the Natives being all Brown, or Olive-colour.

Aureng-zeg, the present Emperor, is the eleventh in a direct line, of the
Descendants from the great Temur-Leng, commonly called Tamerlane; the extent
and renown of whose Conquests, from China to Poland, has exceeded all the
actions of the greatest Captains of the former Ages. His Successors completed
the Conquest of all India between the two Rivers, with the destruction of
several Kings. So that Aureng-zeb has at this time under his Dominion, the
Territories of Gouzerat, Decan-Dehly, Multan, Lahor, Kashemire, Bengala, and
many other Territories; not to mention several Raja's, or petty Kings, who pay
him Tribute, and are his Vassals. The Succession of the Kings of India is as
follows:

1. Termur-Leng, that is to say, the Lame, because one of his Legs was shorter
than the other, lies buried at Samarchand, in the Country of Chegathay, or the
Usbeg Tartars, being the place of his Nativity.

2. Miram-Cha, the Son of Temurleng.

3. Sultan Mahomet, the Son of Miram-Cha.

4. Sultan Abousaid-Mirza, the Son of Mahomet.

5. Hameth-Sheck, the Son of Sultan Abousaid.

6. Sultan Babur, that is, the Valiant Prince, the first Mogul thatwas of
greatest power in India. He died in the year 1532.

7. Homajon, that is, the Happy, the Son of Sultan Babur, died in the year 1552.

8. Abdul Feta Gelal-Eddin Mahomet, commonly called Akabar, that is, the Great,
reigned fifty four years; and died in the year 1605.

9. Sultan Selim, otherwise called Jehan-guir Patsha, that is, the Victorious
Emperor of the World, succeeded Akabar his Father, and died 1627. He had four
Sons, the eldest named Sultan Kosrou, the second Sultan Kourom, the third
Sultan Perviz, the fourth Cha-Daniel.

10. Sultan Kourom, the second of the four, succeeded Jehan-guir his Father;
and was acknowledged by all the Nobility, at the Castle of Agra, by the Name of
Cha-Bedin Mahomed, but he would be called Cha-jehan, that is, King of the World.

11. Aureng-zeb, that is, the Ornament of the Throne, is the present Monarch.

The following Figure shows you what sorts of pieces the Kings cause to be
thrown among the people when they come to the Throne. They represent the Arms
or Signets of the Kings which I have named. The biggest, in the middle, was
Cha-jehan's, the tenth King. These pieces are most of them Silver; there being
very few of Gold. And as for Aureng-zeb, he never coln'd any particular pieces
to throw away at his Coronation.



The Great Mogul is without all question the richest and most potent Monarch of
Asia; the Territories which he possesses, being his own Hereditary Possession;
and being absolute Master of all the Territories whence he receives his
Revenues. For in the Territories of this Prince, the great Lords are but the
Royal Receivers, who give an account of the King's Revenues to the Governors
of the Provinces, and they to the chief Treasurers and Controllers of the
Exchequer.

CHAP. II. Of the Sickness and supposed Death of Cha-jehan, King of India, and
the Rebellion of the Princes his Sons.
THis great King had reigned above forty years, not so much as a King over his
Subjects, but rather as a Father over his Family and Children. Insomuch, that
during his Reign there was such a strictness in the Civil Government, and
particularly for the security of the Highways, that there was never any
occasion to put any man to death for Robbery. In his declining years he fancied
a young Lady of an extraordinary Beauty, that was not above thirteen years of
age; and because the strength of nature would not permit him to satisfy his
passion; he took certain provocative's, which were so hot, that he fell
thereupon into a distemper that had almost killed him. This obliged him to shut
himself up in his Haram, together with his Women, for two or three months;
during which time he appeared very rarely to the people, and that at a great
distance too, which made them believe he was dead. For they are obliged by
Custom to show themselves to the people three times in a week, or in fifteen
days at most.

Cha-Jehan had six Children, four Sons and two Daughters. The Name of the
eldest was Dara-Cha, the second was called Sultan Sujah, the third Aureng-zeb,
and the fourth Morad-Bakche. The eldest of his two Daughters was called
Begum-Saheb, and the name of the second was Rauchenara Begum.

Cha-jehan loved all his four Sons alike, and had made them Governors or
Viceroys of four of his principal Provinces or Kingdoms. Dara-Cha, who was the
eldest, stayed with his Father in Dehly, and had the Government of the Kingdom
of Sandi, into which he put a Deputy. Sultan Sujah had for his share the
Government of Bengala. Aureng-zeb was Viceroy of the Kingdom of Decan; and
Morad-Bakche of the Kingdom of Guzerat. But though Cha-jehan endeavored to
give equal content to his four Sons, their Ambition was not satisfied with this
division, but ruined all the good designs which so kind a Father had laid to
preserve peace among his Children.

Cha-jehan being thus sick, and retired into the Women's quarter, without
showing himself for many days; the report ran that he was dead, and that
Dara-Cha concealed his death, to gain time to provide for himself, and to
secure the Empire: True it is, that the King believing he should dye, commanded
Dara-Cha to call together all the Omrahs or Lords, and to seat himself upon the
Throne, which belonged to him, as the eldest of his Brothers. He also testified
the desire he had to see him quietly settled in the peaceable possession of the
Empire. And this intention of his was looked upon as the more just, in regard
the other three Brothers had been for some time observed to have less respect
for their Father, than Dara-Cha. Dara-Cha, who honored and respected the King
with a real tenderness, made answer to the King, that he desired of Heaven
nothing more than the preservation of his Majesty's life, and that so long as
Heaven should continue that preservation, he should take it to be a greater
honor to continue himself a Subject, than to ascend the Throne. And indeed he
was never absent from his Father, that he might be the better able to serve him
in his sickness; and because he would be present upon all occasions, he lay by
his Fathers Bedside, upon a Tapestry spread upon the ground.

During the false report of the death of Cha-jehan, his three other Sons
immediately rebelled, every one laying claim to their Fathers Crown.
Morat-Bakche the youngest, who had the Government of Guzerat, sent away Forces
immediately to besiege Surat, the most considerable Port, and most frequented
of any other all over India. The City made no resistance, for the Walls are
very weak, and broken down in several places. But they defended the Citadel,
where the Treasure was, very stoutly; though the young Ambitious Prince did all
he could to make himself Master of it. Chabas-Kan, one of his Eunuchs, who was
General of his Army, an industrious and active person, and who carried on the
Siege with all the experience of an old Captain; when he saw he could not carry
the Castle by main force, caused it to be undermined in two places, by the
assistance of an European Engineer, which took effect; so that upon the
twenty-ninth of December, 1659, he threw down a good part of the Walls, and
filled up the Moat; which very much terrified the besieged. But they presently
recovered their courage, and though they were but a small number, they defended
themselves for above forty days, to the great damage and slaughter of
Morat-Bakche's Army. Chabas-Kan, provoked at such a vigorous resistance, sought
for all the Wives and Children, Parents and Kindred of the Canoneers that were
within the Castle, to place them at the head of his men, when they made their
approaches. He also sent one of the Brothers of the Governor of the place, to
offer him advantageous conditions. But the Governor, being a very loyal person,
and uncertain of the Kings death, rejected all his offers. The Eunuch
perceiving the Resolution of the Governor, threatened the besieged to kill all
their Wives and Children, Parents and Kindred, if they did not surrender the
place the next day. But neither did any of those considerations prevail, till
at length the breach being made wider, and the number of defendants decreasing,
the Governor surrendered upon honorable conditions; which were punctually
performed by Chabas-Kan, who seized upon all the Treasure, and carried it to
Amadabat; where Morat-Bakche was busily employed in squeezing the people to get
Money.

The news of the taking Surat being brought to this Prince, he presently
provided himself a Throne, and sitting upon it on the day which was appointed
for the Ceremony, he caused himself to be declared King, not only of Guzerat,
but of all the Dominions of Cha-jehan his Father. At the same time he also
coined Money, and sent new Governors into all the Cities. But his tottering
Throne, not being well fixed, fell soon to the Ground; and the youngest of all
the Brothers, for having usurped a Scepter that no ways appertained to him, was
confined to a severe imprisonment. Prince Dara-Cha fain would have relieved
Surat; but it was impossible. For besides that he was busied in the assistance
of his Father the King, his second Brother Sultan-Sujah, more powerful than
Morat-Bakche, found him far more work to do. He was already advanced into the
Kingdom of Lahor, having absolutely reduced the Kingdom of Bengala. All that
Dara-Cha could do, was to send Soliman Checour his eldest Son, with an Army
against Sultan Sujah. The young Prince having defeated his Uncle, and driven
him back into Bengala, the Frontiers whereof he secured with good Garrisons,
returned to Dara-Cha his Father. In the mean time Morat-Bakche, acknowledged
for King in the Kingdom of Guzerat, bends all his Force and Counsels to make
himself Emperor of the Indies, to destroy his Brothers, and to fix his Throne
either in Agra or Jehanabat.

Whiles these things passed, Aureng-zeb as ambitious, but more crafty than his
Brothers, lets them alone to kindle the first Fires; and conceals his own
designs, which afterward appeared so much to the damage of the rest. At first
he feigned to lay no claim to the Empire, but lived a private life, like a
Dervich, or Religious Hermit. And the better to act his part, he declared to
his younger Brother Morat-Bakche, whom he saw to be so ambitious, how willing
he should be to assist him in his designs; telling him, that because he merited
the Empire by his Valor, he would aid him with his Money and his Forces to
overthrow Dara-Cha, who only stood in his way. The young Prince, blinded with
the hopes of his good Fortune, easily believed Aureng-zeb. And so joining
Forces together, he advances toward Agra, to make himself Master of that City.
Dara-Cha marches to meet them; but the Battle was as imprudently managed by
him, as fortunately fought by his Brothers. For Dara-Cha, confiding too much in
the principal Officers of his Army, against the advice of his General, who was
his chief Minister of State, and faithful to him; thought himself sure of the
Victory, by falling on before his Brothers had time to repose themselves. The
first onset was very rude and bloody, where Morat-Bakche, full of fire and
courage, fighting like a Lion, was shot with five Arrows into the body. The
Victory leaning to Dara-Cha, Aureng-zeb retreated; but soon turned head again,
when he saw those Traitors advancing to his aid, who were in the Army of
Dara-Cha, and who had treacherously deserted him, after he had lost his best
Officers and his General. With this assistance Aurengzeb renews the fight
against Dara-Cha; who seeing himself betrayed, and unable to maintain the fight
with the small number of men which he had left, retreats to Agra, where the
King his Father was, who began to mend. The King advised his Son to retire to
the Fortress of Dehly, and to carry the Treasure that was in Agra with him;
which he did without delay. Thus the Victory fell entirely to Aureng-zeb and
Morat-Bakche, who before the end of the Battle, being weakened with the loss of
blood, was forced to retire to his Tent, to have his wounds dressed. Now it was
an easy thing for Aureng-zeb to gain those Traitors, as well by reason of the
vast Treasures which he had, as also for that the Indians are very inconstant,
and want generosity. Besides, the Commanders are generally Fugitive Persians,
persons of little worth, who are altogether for them that give most.
Cha-Est-Kan, who was Uncle to these four Princes, whose Mother was the King's
Sister, went over to Aureng-zeb with the greatest part of the principal
Commanders that had adhered to Dara-Cha, and Morat-Bakche, and had forsaken
their Masters. Morat-Bakche then began to see his Error in having trusted
Aureng-zeb, who seeing himself favored by Fortune, lost no time to accomplish
his ends. Thereupon Morat-Bakche sends to his Brother for the half of the
Treasure that he had seized, that he might retire to Guzerat. But Aureng-zeb
for answer assured him, that he had no other design than to advance him to the
Throne, to which purpose he desired to confer with him by word of mouth.
Morat-Bakche in order to that, finding himself indifferently well recovered of
his wounds, goes to visit his Brother, who kindly welcomed him, extolled his
courage, and told him he deserved the best Empire of the world. The young
Prince was charmed by the melody of such sweet language, while his Eunuch,
Shabas-Kan, did all he could to make him sensible of the snares that were laid
for him. But when Morat-Bakche should have taken the Eunuchs advice, it was too
late; for Aureng-zeb had already laid his plot to destroy him. He invites
Morat-Bakche to a Feast; and the more the one excuses himself, the more the
other presses him to come. The young Prince perceiving he would take no denial,
resolved to go, for fear of discovering the mistrust he had, although he verily
believed that that day would be the last of his life, and that some deadly
poison was brewed for him. However, he was deceived in that particular, for
Aureng-zeb not aiming at his life then, contented himself only to deprive him
of his liberty, and so instead of advancing him to the Throne, sent him away,
to be safely kept in the Castle of Gavaleor.

CHAP. III. Of the Imprisonment of Cha-jehan, and how he was punished by
Aureng-zeb his third Son, for the injustice he had done Prince Boulaki his
Nephew, the Grandchild of Gehan-guir, to whom, as to the Son of the Eldest Son,
the Empire of the Moguls belonged.
GEhan-guir, King of India, Son of Achbar, and Grandchild to Houmajon, reigned
very peaceably during the space of twenty-three years, equally beloved both by
his Subjects and Neighbors. But his life seemed too long to his two Sons, who
were both ambitious to reign. The eldest raised a powerful Army near Lahor,
with an intention to have surpised his Father, and to have possessed himself
of the Throne by force. The King incensed at the insolence of his Son, resolved
to chastise him; meets him with a considerable Army, defeats him, and takes him
Prisoner, with many of the most considerable Nobility that adhered to him.
After which, out of a natural affection to his Children, he saved his life, but
put out his Eyes. And when he was blind he always kept him about his person,
with an intention to have preferred his eldest Son Boulaki to the Crown, whose
Father had already many Sons, but all very young. But Sultan Courom, his second
Son, believing it his right to be preferred before a Nephew, resolved to leave
no stone unturned to remove him from his hopes, and to settle himself in
possession before the death of his Father. However he concealed his intentions
from him, appearing outwardly very obedient to his Father, who always kept
about him the Children of his eldest Son. By that submission he more easily
brought about his designs; for having by that means gained the good will of his
Father, he obtained leave to carry along with him the blind Prince, his eldest
Brother, to his Government of the Kingdom Decan. He laid before his Father,
that it would be far better to remove from his sight, an object that could not
choose but be so afflicting to him; and that the Prince himself, being blind,
would spend the rest of his days more comfortably in Decan, where he might be
more retired. The King not penetrating into his design, readily consented to
his request. Who when he had that poor Prince in his Clutches, made him away
with that secrecy which was not to be discovered; and under the most plausible
pretense imaginable, to conceal him from the eyes of men.

After the death of the blind Prince, Sultan Courom took upon him the name of
Cha-jehan, that is, King of the World; and to uphold his Title, he raised an
Army to finish what his Brother had begun, which was to dethrone his Father,
and to take possession of the Empire. The King incensed as well at the death of
his Son, as at the attempt against his own person, sent a considerable Army to
chastise Courom for so bold an Enterprise. But the rebellious Prince finding
himself too weak to stand his Fathers force, quitted the Kingdom of Decan, and
with certain Vagabonds that followed him, wandered from place to place, till he
came to Bengala, where he raised an Army with an intention to give the King
Battle. To which purpose, passing the Ganges, he marches directly toward the
Kingdom of Lahor; whom the King in person met, with an Army much more numerous
and stronger than his. But Gehan-guir being old, and wearied with the troubles
that his Sons had put him to, died by the way, leaving Cha-jehan at liberty to
pursue his own designs. However before he expired, the good King had time to
recommend his Grandchild Boulaki to Asouf-Kan, his Generalissimo and prime
Minister of State, who was Protector of the Empire. He commanded also all the
Officers of the Army to acknowledge him for King, as being the lawful Heir;
declaring Sultan Komrom a Rebel, and incapable of the Succession. Moreover he
made Asouf-Kan to swear in particular, that he would never suffer Boulaki to be
put to death, which way soever affairs went; which Asouf-Kan swear upon his
Thigh; and as religiously observed as to the Article of not putting him to
death; but not as to that of helping him to the Crown, which he designed for
Cha-jehan, who had married his eldest Daughter, the Mother of four Princes, and
two Princesses.

The news of the Kings death being known at Court, caused a general
lamentation. And presently all the Grandees of the Kingdom set themselves to
execute the Kings Will and Testament, acknowledging Sultan Boulaki for Emperor,
who was very young. That Prince had two Cousin-Germans, who were both of them
by the Kings consent turned Christians, and made public profession thereof.
Those two young Princes, being very apprehensive, perceived that Asouf-Kan,
Father-in-Law to Cha-jehan, and Father of Cha-Est-Kan, had no good intentions
toward the young King, and gave him notice of it; which cost them their lives,
and the King the loss of his Dominions. For the young King, having no more with
than was agreeable to his age, openly declared to Asouf-Kan what his Cousins
had revealed to him in private, and asked the General whether it were true,
that he had a design to set up his Uncle against him or no. Asuof-Kan
immediately accused the Reporters of salsity and impudence, and protested his
fidelity to his King, and vowed to spend the last drop of his blood to preserve
him in the possession of the Empire. However seeing his Conspiracy discovered,
he resolved to prevent the punishment; to which end having got the two Princes
into his possession, he put them both to death. But before that, in regard of
his power in the Army and in the Empire, he had already brought over to
Cha-jehans party the greatest part of the Commanders and Lords of the Court;
and the better to play his game, and deceive the young King, he raised a report
that Cha-jehan was dead; and because he had desired to be buried near his
Father Gehan-guir, the body was to be brought to Agra. This Stratagem being
cunningly managed, Asouf-Kan himself gave advice of the feigned death to the
King; telling the King withal, that it would be but a common civility for him
to go and meet the Corpse when it came within a League or two of the City, being
an Honor due to a Prince of the Blood of the Moguls. All this while Cha-jehan
kept himself incognito, till coming within sight of the Army that lay about
Agra, he caused himself to be put into a Coffin, wherein there was only a hole
left for him to breath at. This Coffin being carried under a moving Tent, all
the principal Officers who were of the plot with Asouf-Kan, came to perform the
usual Ceremonies of State to the body of the deceased Prince, while the young
King was upon the way to meet the body. But then Asouf-Kan finding it
seasonable to execute his design, caused the Coffin to be opened, and Cha-jehan
rising up, and showing himself to the eyes of all the Army, was saluted Emperor
by all the Generals and other principal Officers, who had their Cue ready; so
that the name of Cha-jehan running in a moment from one man's mouth to another,
the Acclamation became public, and the Empire was settled upon him. The young
King hearing the news by the way, was so surpised, that he thought of nothing
but how to save himself by flight, being upon a sudden forsaken by all his
followers. And Cha-jehan not believing it any way necessary to pursue him,
suffered him to wander a long time in India like a Fakir. At length he retired
into Persia, where he was magnificently received by Cha-Sefi, who allowed him a
pension fit for so great a Prince, which he still enjoys.

Cha-jehan having thus usurped the Crown, the better to secure himself, and to
stifle all Factions that might arise during the life of the lawful Prince, whom
he had so unjustly despoiled of his right, by degrees put to death all those
that had shown any kindness to his Nephew. So that the first part of his Reign
was noted for many acts of cruelty, that blemished his reputation. No less
unfortunate was the end of his Reign. For as he had unjustly deprived the
lawful Heir, of the Empire which belonged to him; he was himself, while he yet
lived, deprived of his Crown by Aureng-zeb his own Son, who kept him Prisoner
in the Fortress of Agra.

For after Dara-Cha had lost the Battle against his two Brothers, Aureng-zeb
and Morat-Bakche, in the Plain of Samonguir, and was treacherously abandoned by
the principal Officers of the Army, he retired into the Kingdom of Lahor, with
all the Treasure which the confusion of his affairs would suffer him to get
together. In the King to resist the violence of his victorious Sons, shut
himself up in the Castle of Agra, to the end he might not be surpised, but
have time and leisure to observe how far the insolence of his children would
transport them. As for Aurengzeb, who had Morat Bakche safe enough, he enters
Agra, feigning to believe a report that Cha-jehan was dead, that he might have
liberty to get into the Fortress, where he said one of the Omra's would make it
out. The more he reported the death of Cha-jehan, the more did the King
endeavor to let the people know he was alive. But finding both Power and
Fortune had taken Aureng-zeb's party; and being also in great necessity for
want of water, he sent Fazel-Kan, grand Master of his Household, to assure his
Son that he was alive; and withal to tell him that it was the King's command,
that he should retire to his Vice-Roy-ship in Decan, without putting him to any
more vexation, and that upon his obedience, he would forgive whatever had past.
Aurengzeb, firm in his resolution, returned for answer to Fazel-Kan, that he
was certain that the King his Father was dead, and that upon that account he
had only taken Arms to secure the Crown to himself, which he thought he
deserved, as well as the rest of his Brothers. That if his Father were living,
he had too great a respect for him to undertake the least enterprise that
should displease him; and therefore that he might be certain he was not dead,
he desired to see him, and to kiss his feet; and having so done, he would
retire to his Government, and punctually obey his Commands. Fazel-Kan returned
this answer to the King, who declared that he should be glad to see his Son,
and sent back Fazel-Kan, to tell him he should be welcome. But Aureng-zeb more
cunning than Cha-jehan; assured Fazel-Kan that he would not set his foot in the
Castle, till the Garrison that was in it should be sent away to make room for
his men. For the Prince was afraid, and not without reason, if he should
adventure into a Fortress where he was not absolute Master himself, lest they
should seize his person, of which the King being apprehensive, consented to his
proposal, not being able to do better at that time. Thereupon the Garrison
which belonged to Cha-jehan was sent out of the Castle, and another of
Aureng-zeb's entered, commanded by Sultan Mahomet the eldest of his Sons, to
whom he gave order to secure his Father's person. When they were thus got in,
and his Father safe, he delaid seeing his Father from day to day, waiting (as
he gave ou t for excuse) a kind opportunity for the enterview; and pretending
his Astrologers did not presently think it seasonable, he retired into the
Country, to a House about two or three leagues from Agra, which very much
displeased the people, who waited every day for the fortunate hour, from which
they expected a conclusion of their miseries by the Father and Son's discourse
together. But Aureng-zeb, who was in no great have to see his Father, took up
another resolution, which was to seize upon all his Fathers treasure, which
Dara-Sha had not time to carry away. He also shut up in the same Fortress
Begum-Saheb his Sister, to keep the King company, by whom she was entirely
beloved: and took into his own hands all the wealth she had got, by her
Father's liberality.

Cha-jehan enraged to see himself used in that manner by his own Son, made an
attempt to escape, and killed some of the Guards that opposed him; which caused
Aureng-zeb more strictly to confine him. In the mean time it was a wonderful
thing to see that not one of the Servants of so great a King so much as offered
to help him; that all his Subjects should forsake him, and turn their eyes upon
the rising-Sun; acknowledging only Aureng-zeb for King, while they seemed to
have forgotten Cha-jehan, though still alive. Thus this great Monarch sadly
ended his days in Prison, and died in the Fortress of Agra in the year 1666 the
last time that I was in India.

During his Reign he had begun to build the City of Jehanabad, though he had
not quite finished it, and therefore he desired to see it once more before he
died; but Aureng-zeb would not give him leave, unless he would be content to go
and come back by water, or else to be confined to the Castle of Jehanabad, as
he was at Agra, which refusal of his Son did so torment him, that it hastened
his end. Which as soon as Aureng-zeb heard of, he came to Agra, and seized upon
all the Jewels, whick he had not taken from his Father while he lived.
Begum-Saheb had also a quantity of Jewels, which he had not taken from her when
he put her into the Castle. But now, because she had formerly taken her
Father's part, he found out a way to deprive her of them after a very plausible
manner; making a show of bestowing very great Honors and Caresses upon his
Sister, and taking her along with him to Jehanabad. But in a short time after
we heard the news of her death; which proved, and all people suspected her to
have been poisoned.

CHAP. IV. Of the Flight of Dara-cha to the Kingdoms of Scindi and Guzerat: Of
the second Battle which he fought against Aureng-zeb: His being taken Prisoner,
and death.
DAra-cha having carried along with him the best part of the Gold and Silver
which was in the Fortress of Agra by his Father's advice, and being got into
the Kingdom of Lahor, was in good hopes to have raised an Army in a short time
to have stopped the proceedings of his Brother. His most faithful Servants and
Friends had always accompanied him in his misfortune. And as for his Eldest
Son, Soliman Shekour, he went, with the Raja Roup, into the Territories of that
Raja's own demeans, to levy men; carrying along with him five-millions of
Roupies, which make of our Money seven-millions and 500000 Livres. But that
great Sum opening the Raja Roup's eyes, he most treacherously and infamously
seized upon it; whereupon Soliman Chekour, fearing he should proceed farther,
and make some attempt upon his person, fled in all have into the Kingdom of
Sireneguer, under the protection of the Raja Nakti-Rani, who more foully and
basely delivered him up sometime after to Aureng-zeb.

Dara-cha having notice of the Raja Roup's treason, and seeing all his friends
had forsook him, and were revolted to Aureng-zeb, quitted Lahor, and retired
into the Kingdom of Scindi. Before he left the Fortress, he sent all the Gold,
Silver, Jewels and Wealth that was in the Fort, away by water to Baker, a Fort
in the midst of the River Indus. To guard all that Wealth, he lest an Eunuch,
and six-thousand men, with all provisions necessary for a Siege; after that he
went to Scindi, where he left several great pieces of Cannon. Then he marched
through the Territories of the Raja of Kachnagana, who made him mountainous
promises to no effect; then he came into the Kingdom of Guzerat, where the
people received him as their lawful King and Heir to Cha-jehan. He sent his
Orders to all the Cities, and particularly to Surat, where he appointed a
Governor; but the Governor of the Fortress, who was left there by Morat-Bakche,
refused to submit to Dara-cha, so that he was forced to let him alone.

In the mean time Dara-cha received news at Amadabat, that Jessomseing, one of
the most potent Raja's in all India, was fallen off from Aureng-zeb. The same
Raja also solicits him to advance with his Army. Dara-cha confiding in his
words, followed his counsel, and marched to Emir, which was the place of
Rendevouz appointed. But Raja Jessomseing being regained by the persuasions of
Raja Jesseing, more potent than himself, to favor Aureng-zeb, never met
according to his promise; nor did he come till the last push; and then only
with a design to betray the poor Prince. Thus the two Brothers meeting, they
came to a Battle which lasted three days: but in the heat of all the Fight,
Jessomseing showing an apparent treachery, went over to Aureng-zeb; upon which
Dara-cha's Soldiers immediately fled. Dara-cha having thus lost all his hopes,
and finding Fortune contrary to all his expectations, fled away likewise with
his Wives, some of his Children, and his most faithful Servants, in an equipage
that drew compassion. But coming to Amadabat, the Governor having declared for
Aureng-zeb, denied him entrance. Thereupon he discamp'd in the middle of the
night, and took the road for Scindi.

He arrived at Scindi, with an intention to pass into Persia, where Cha-Abas
the Second expected him with a magnificent Retinue, and a resolution to have
assisted him with Men and Money. But not daring to trust himself by Sea; as he
passed through the Country of the Patanes, in the way to Candahar, he was
unworthily betrayed by one of the Lords of the Country, called Gion-Kan; who
had been an Officer under the King his Father, and who having been condemned
for his crimes by the mouth of his Father, and ready to be thrown under the
Elephant's-feet, had been pardoned at the intercession of Dara-cha. For an
addition to his affliction, before he came to Gion-Kan's House, he received the
news of the death of that particular Wife which he loved most entirely, and
which had always accompanied him in his misfortunes. He understood that she
died through heat and drowth, not being able to get a drop of water in the
Country to refresh her thirst. The Prince was so moved at the news, that he
fell down, like one that had been struck quite dead; and when he came to
himself, he tore his clothes in the excess of his grief: an ancient custom
still continued in the East. He had always showed himself insensible upon all
other occasions of misfortune, but this fatal stroke so deeply pierced him,
that he would receive no consolation from his friends. After this, he clad
himself according to his misfortune; and instead of a Turbant, he only put
about his head a piece of coarse Calicut. In this miserable equipage he entered
into the House of the Traitor Gion-Kan, where being laid down to rest himself
upon a Field-bed, a new subject of sorrow awaked him. For Gion-Kan having a
design to seize Sepper-Shekour, Dara-cha's second Son, the young Prince, though
but a Youth, made a bold resistance, and with his Bow and Arrows laid three men
upon the ground; but not being able to resist a multitude, he was at length
taken. Dara-cha wakened with the noise, saw before his eyes his Son, whom they
were leading toward him, with his hands tied behind him. Then the miserable
Father of the young Prince, no longer misdoubting the horrid treason of
Gion-Kan, could not refrain from letting fall in his passion these expressions.
Finish, said he, ungrateful and infamous Villain as thou art, finish the work
thou have begun; we are become Victims to bad Fortune, and Aureng-zeb 's unjust
Ambition. But remember that I only deserve death for having saved thy life: for
never Prince of the Royal Blood had his hands tied behind him before. Gion-Kan
in some measure moved at these words, caused the little Prince to be unbound,
and only set guards upon Dara-oha and his Son. At the same time he also sent
expresses to Raja Jessomseing, and to Abdulla-Kan, to give them advice that he
had selz'd upon Dara-cha and his Train. Thereupon they made have to share in
the spoils of that poor Prince. But they could not be so swift, but that
Gion-Kan had seized upon all that Dara-cha had of most precious in the World;
using as inhumanly both his Wives and his Children. The Raja and Abdulla being
arrived, provided Elephants for the Prince, his Son, and his Wives, and carried
them away immedlately to Jehanabat; the people crowded to behold them, every
one being desirous to see the Prince whom they so earnestly desired to have had
for their King. Aureng-zeb caused them to be shown in all the Streets and
Marketplaces of Jehanabat, that no man might question hereafter their being
taken; and as if he had glori'd in his treachery toward his Brother, he
presently condemned and sent him away to the Castle of Asser. But of all that
crowded to behold, not one would stir to assist or succor their lawful Prince.
Only some few generous Soldiers who had served him, and had received some
kindnesses from him, seeing themselves not able to deliver their Prince, yet
desirous to show him some proofs of their acknowledgment, fell with all their
fury upon the Traitor Gion-Kan, who though he were rescued from them at that
time, yet soon after met with the reward due to his crime; for he was killed as
he was crossing a Wood in his return home.

In the mean time Aureng-zeb, like a good Politician, and an extraordinary
Dissembler, gave it out, that it was by no order of his that Dara-cha was
seized; only he desired him to retire out of the Kingdom, which he refusing to
do, Gion-Kan, unknown to him, had unworthily seized his person; and without
respect to the Royal-Blood, had shamefully tied the hands of the young
Sepper-Shekour behind him: which being a crime and an indignity done to his
Majesty, had been punished, by the death of Gion-Kan and his accomplices. But
this was only published to abuse the people; for had it been true, Aureng-zeb
would never have given order to have his Brother's head cut off.

For Dara-Cha being sent from Jehanabat with a Guard to the place of his
imprisonment; when he came to a fair place where he thought to repose him self,
they dressed up the Tent where he was to leave his Head. After he had eaten,
Seif-Kan came and brought him the sentence of his Death. Dara-Cha seeing him
enter, told him he was very welcome, and that he was glad to see one of his
most faithful Servants. Seif-Kan made answer, that indeed he had formerly been
one of his Servants, but that now he was the Slave of Aurengzeb, who had
commanded him to bring him his Head. Must I dye then? said Dara-Cha. It Is the
Kings command, replied Seif-Kan, and I am entrusted to execute it.
Sepper-Chekour, who lay in an Antichamber of the Tent, waking upon this
contest, would have seized upon certain weapons which had been taken from him,
with an intention to have assisted his Father; but he was prevented by those
that accompanied Seif-Kan. Dara-Cha would have made some resistance himself,
but seeing it was in vain, he only desired time for his devotions, which was
granted him. In the mean time Sepper-Chekour was taken from him; and while they
held him a story, a Slave took off Dara-Cha's. Head, which was carried to
Aureng-zeb by Seif-Kan. This bloody Tragedy being thus acted, Sepper-Chekour
was sent to the Castle of Goualeor, to keep his Uncle Morat-Bakche company. As
for the Wives and Daughters of Dara-Cha, they were allotted an Apartment in
Aureng-zeb's Haram.

CHAP. V. How Aureng-zeb caused himself to be declared King; and of the Flight
of Sultan Sujah.
AS it is the custom at the performance of that Ceremony, for the new King to
seat himself upon the Throne; there was not much time required to prepare one,
in regard that Cha-jehan before his imprisonment had finished that which the
Great Tamerlane had begun; which was the richest and most magnificent that ever
was seen. But as the Grand Cadi of the Empire, and Chief of the Law was to
Proclaim the new King, Aureng-zeb found himself opposed by him. For the Cadi
told him, that the Law of Mahomet and the Law of Nature equally forbad him to
declare him King, while his Father lived; besides, that he had put his elder
Brother to death, to whom the Empire belonged after the death of Cha-fehan
their Father. This stout resistance of the Cadi did not a little perplex
Aureng-zeb; and therefore that he might not seem to appear irreligious, he
called all the Doctors of the Law together, to whom he represented the
incapacity of his Father to govern, through age and many infirmities that
troubled him; as for Dara-Cha his Brother, he had put him to death, because he
was a slighter of the Law, drank Wine, and favored Infidels. Those reasons,
intermixed with threats, caused his Council of Conscience to conclude, that he
deserved the Empire, and ought to be proclaimed King; though the Cadi
obstinately persisted in his first resolution. There was no other remedy
therefore, but to remove him from his employment, as a disturber of the public
peace, and to choose another for the Honor of the Law, and the Good of the
Kingdom. The person who was elected by the Council was soon confirmed by
Aureng-zeb; in acknowledgment whereof, he proclaimed him King the twentieth of
October, 1660. This Proclamation being made in the Mosquee, Aureng-zeb seated
himself upon the Throne, and received the Homages of all the Grandees of the
Kingdom.

However, Aureng-zeb did not think his Throne fast enough, nor himself secure
in the Empire, so long as Sultan Sujah was raising a powerful Army in Bengala
to release his Father. Thereupon he sent a considerable Force against him,
under the Command of Sultan Mahomed his eldest Son; to whom he appointed for
his Lieutenant the Emir-Jemla, one of the greatest Captains that ever came out
of Persia into India. His great Conduct and Courage had rendered him a person
to be reverenced by all posterity, had he been faithful to the Princes whom he
served. But first he betrayed the King of Golconda, under whom he advanced his
Fortune; and next to him Cha-jehan, under whose protection he rose so high,
that there was not a Nobleman in all India more powerful or richer than he.
Otherwise he is both beloved and feared by the Soldiers, and perfectly
understands the Art of War, according to the custom of the Country. The two
Armies engaging several times, the Victory was sometimes on the one side, and
sometimes on the other; so that Sultan Mahomed finding it likely to be a
tedious War, assisted by the Counsels of his Lieutenant, resolved to add policy
to strength. Thereupon he treats underhand with the Officers of his Uncle's
Army, makes them magnificent promises, and so earnestly sollicites them to come
over to Aureng-zeb's party, whom he called the Pillar and Protector of
Mahomet's Law, that he gained the principal, to whom he sent considerable
Presents, to confirm them in their resolutions. This was a mortal blow to
Sultan-Sujah, against which he could not provide. For they that adhear'd to him
being a mercenary generation, that serves whoever gives most, finding they had
little more to expect from a Prince whose Exchequer was empty, resolved to
drive a Trade with Aureng-zeb, who was Master of all the Treasure in the
Kingdom. And thus did Aureng-zeb debauch the Army of his Brother, who in the
last Battle, seeing himself abandoned by all his Soldiers, was forced to save
himself by flight, with his Wives and Children. The Traitors ashamed of their
treachery, did not so smartly pursue the unfortunate Prince as they might have
done, but presently fell to plund'ring his Tents and Baggage; which Emir-Jemla
suffered them to do, in recompense of their Treason. Sultan-Sujah in the mean
time crossing the Ganges with his Retinue, retired some time afterward into
the Kingdom of Arakan, upon the Confines of Bengala, where we shall leave him
for a time.

CHAP. VI. Of the imprisonment of Sultan-Mahomed, Aureng-zeb's eldest son; and
of Sultan Soliman Chekour, eldest son of Dara-Cha.
THough Aureng-zeb were esteemed a very great Politician, and were so indeed,
yet he failed in his Politics, to trust his Son with such a powerful Army,
under the Conduct of a Captain who had already betrayed two Masters. However at
length he began to be jealous, left Heaven should inspire his own Son to
revenge the crimes which he had committed. And upon this, receiving
intelligence, that Sultan Mahomed began to be very pensive and melancholy, he
then absolutely believed that his Son was practicing mischief against him; for
the better discovery whereof, he wrote to Emir-Jemla. But the Letter unhappily
miscarrying, was taken by Sultan Mahomed's Guards, and given to the young
Prince; who being a person of a quick apprehension, concealed the business from
Emir-Jemla; and fearing left he should receive other Orders more precise to
take away his life, he resolved to pass the Ganges, and throw himself upon his
Uncle Sultan Sujah; from whom he expected more mercy than from his Father. With
this resolution he feigned to go a fishing, and passing the Ganges, with
several Officers that adhered to him, he went directly to Sultan Sujah's Camp,
which lay on the other side of the River; the Sultan having raised a
considerable Force in the Kingdom of Arakan. Sultan Mahomed coming into his
Uuncles presence, threw himself at his feet, begging his pardon for having
taken Arms against him, as being forced thereto by his Father. Now though
Sultan Sujah had reason enough to believe, that Mahomed's coming into his Camp,
was only a trick of his Father, to send his Son as a Spy to discover his
condition; yet being a virtuous and generous Prince, and seeing his Nephew
prostrate at his feet, he could not but raise him up; after which, embracing
him, he assured him of his protection against Aureng-zeb. Some days after,
these two Princes made an attempt, and passing Ganges, and fetching a compass
thought to have surpised the Enemies Army, who dreamt not of their coming.
They made a vigorous onset, and killed a great number of men. But when they
found the whole Army had taken the Alarm, they contented themselves with the
mischief they had done, and repassed the Ganges, for fear of being surrounded
by number.

Emir-Jemla had already given intelligence to Aureng-zeb of the flight of his
Son; which sensibly grieved the Father, though he durst not show his anger, for
fear of incensing the Emir to betray him, as he had betrayed his Father.
Thereupon he cunningly wrote to him, that he relied altogether upon his
prudence and policy to retrieve his Son to his duty; that he was young, and
that what he had done, was only out his heat of youth, and the inconstancy
incicident to his years. The confidence which Aureng-zeb seemed to put in
Emir-Jemla incited the General to use all his endeavors to get Mahomet out of
Sultan Sujah's hands. Thereupon he gave the young Prince to understand his
Fathers good intentions toward him, and that he was ready to receive him with
open Arms, so that he would but make good use of his Residence with Sultan
Sujah, which he might pretend was done for the advantage to his Father, and for
which his Father would have rather cause to extol his prudence and affection
than otherwise. The young Prince easily suffered himself to be persuaded, and
the same way he went to his Uncle's, the same way he returned to his Fathers
Camp; where Emir-Jemla received him honorably, and with all the demonstrations
of joy. He advised him also, to tell his Father when he saw him, that he did
not go over to Sultan Sujah, but only with a design to observe what Forces he
had, and the Discipline of his Army; and that he intended to have speedily
returned, and to have given him an account of what he had done for his service.
Presently Orders came from Aureng-zeb, that his Son should be sent to him; so
that Mahomed, whether by constraint, or willingly, set forward for Jehanabat,
attended by the Guards which Emir-Jemla had appointed. The King having notice
of his arrival, his Majesty ordered him a Lodging without the Palace, and would
not permit him to kiss his hands; pretending he was not well.

All this while Soliman-Chekour, after he had been betrayed by the Raja Roup,
had continued under the protection of Nacti-Rani in the Province of Serenaguer.
This Prince, as stout as he was unfortunate, was constrained to lead a Savage
life among the Mountains, for fear of falling into the hands of Aureng-zeb, nor
could he with all his Forces do him any harm in that place. Beside Nacti-Rani
had assured him with an Oath, accompanied with all the Ceremonies that could
make it solemn, and inviolable; that he would rather lose his Territodom, then
that Aureng-zeb should do the least violence to that protection which he
afforded him. This was done upon the Banks of a River, which passes through his
Country, where he washed his body, in token of the purity of his Soul; and
being thus purified in the Water, he made his protestations to Soliman-Chekour,
never to forsake him, taking his Gods to Witness of the sincetity of his
intentions. Upon this, Soliman-Chekour never took any farther care, but every
day went to divertise himself with hunting. While he gives up himself to his
pleasure, Aureng-zeb marches his Army toward the Mountains, thinking to force
the Nacti-Rani to surrender Soliman-Chekour into his power. But the Raja with a
thousand men being able to defend the Avenues of his Country against a hundred
thousand, Aureng-zeb finding he could do no good that way, has recourse to
policy. He undertakes at first to treat with the Raja, but in vain, for the
Raja would not violate his Oath; and his Priests assured him besides, that
Aureng-zeb should e're long be deposed, and that Soliman Chekour should Reign
in his room.

Aureng-zeb thus prevented, resolves to make another kind of War upon him.
Thereupon he forbids all commerce between his and the Raja's Subjects; which
was very prejudicial to the latter. This caused the people to murmur at the
protection which he had given to Soliman-Chekour; and at length they publicly
cried out, that it was to the prejudice of the public. Their Priests also,
thus alarmed, began to doubt the truth of their Oracles, and to think it
convenient to put another interpretation upon them. But the main thing was,
that the Raja Jessomseing who had betrayed Dara-Cha, wrote privately to
Nacti-Rani, that it was for the safety of his Person and Dominions, to submit
to Aureng-zeb; and to surrender his kinsman up into his hands. This advice of
Jessomseing put him to a very great plunge; dreading on the one side the breach
of his oath; on the other, the revolt of his people. Uncertain what course to
take, he consults the Bramins, who gave their opinions that it was his duty
rather to preserve his People and his Laws, which would be both destroid,
should they fall into the hands of Aureng-zeb, than to keep his Faith with a
Prince from whom he could never expect any advantage. These consultations being
kept private from Soliman Chekour, his ruin was concluded upon, while he
thought himself most secure. Thereupon Nacti-Rani, with a Salvo, as he thought,
to his Honor and his Conscience, returned for answer to Jessomseing, that he
could not consent to betray the Prince; but that Aureng-zeb might take his
opportunity to seize his person, yet preserve his reputation too: in regard
that Soliman Chekour was wont to go a Hunting upon certain Mountains in his
Country with a small retinue, and that it would be an easy thing for him to
send a number of Soldiers sufficient to apprehend him.

So soon as Jessomseing had received this answer, he gave order to his Son to
see the business effected as the plot was laid. So that Soliman Chekour one day
going a Hunting to the usual place, was snapt by a strong party that lay in
Ambuscade. The Prince presently apprehended the treason, and defended himself
with the assistance of his Attendants, who were all slain; he himself slew
nine, but at length over-number'd, was taken and carried to Jehanabat. When he
came into Aureng-zeb's presence, the King asked him how he did? As well as a
Prisoner of yours can do, said he, who expects no better usage from you, than
his Father received before. The King bid him not be afraid, that he had no
design to put him to death, but only to secure his person. Aureng-zeb after
that, demanding of him what was become of all the Treasure which he had carried
away, the Prince made answer that he had spent a great part in raising
Soldiers against him to have ruined him, if it had been his good fortune: That
a good part was in the hands of Raja Roup, whose avarice and perfidiousness was
sufficiently known. And that Nacti-Rani had got the remainder to deliver him to
his enemies, to the prejudice of his word and honor. Aureng-zeb was surpised
and touched at the boldness of his Nephew; but ambition shutting his eyes, and
stifling all thoughts of justice, which the just remorse of Conscience might
excite within him, he gave order that Sultan Mahomet his Son, and Soliman
Chekour his Nephew should both be committed to the Fort of Goualeor to keep
Morat-Bak-che company, which was done the 30 th of Jan. 1661.

Sultan Sujah, who was yet alive, but still lived miserably, was the last thorn
in Aureng-zeb's foot; and the person that drew it out for him, and rid him of
his last pain, was the King of Arakan, whither the unfortunate Prince was at
length forced to retire. Who finding all his hopes to be lost, began to think
of a Pilgrimage to Mecca, and from thence to go into Persia, and implore a
Sanctuary under the protection of that Prince. To this purpose he thought he
might obtain a Vessel from the King of Arakan, or the King of Pegu, to carry
him to Mecca: but he was ignorant that neither of those Kings had any Vessels,
that would live in the main Ocean. So that he was constrained to stay with the
King of Arakan, an Idolater, whose Daughter he desired in Marriage, which the
King granted, and by whom he had a Son. But that which ought to have been the
greatest occasion of friendship between the Son-in-law and the Father-in-law,
was the greatest reason of their hatred and falling-out. For some Lords of the
Country, who began to be jealous of Sultan Sujah, buzzed the King of Arakan in
the ear, as if he had an intention by virtue of his Marriage, to dispossess him
of his Throne, and to leave it to his own Son. The Pagan King easily believed
what they said. Nor were these supitions ill-grounded; for Sultan Sujah having
good store of Gold and Jewels, easily corrupted several Mahumetans that lived
in the Kingdom of Arakan, and with those and about two-hunder'd men more that
had followed him after the rout of his Army, he undertook a most bold
enterprise, which was yet a mark rather of despair than courage. He appointed a
day to those of his party to force the Palace, and after they had put all the
Royal Family to the Sword, to proclaim him King of Arakan. But this Plot being
discovered the day it should have been executed, Sultan Sujah, and Sultan
Bangue, his Son, had no other way to save themselves, but by flight into the
Kingdom of Pegu. But their way lying over Mountains almost impassable, and
through thick Forests full of Tigers and Lions, and being also closely
pursued, their flight availed them little or nothing. Sultan Bangue however
being behind, to keep the Pursuers in play while his Father and his Family
gained ground, stoutly defended himself against the first Assailants, but at
length being overpowered by number, he was taken together with his two little
Brothers, his Mother and his Sisters; who were all put in Prison, where they
were very ill-us'd. But some time after, the King having a desire to marry the
eldest Sister of Sultan Bangue, they had a little more liberty allowed them.
However they enjoyed it not long, for the young Prince being of a turbulent and
ambitious spirit, plotted new treasons against the King, which being
discovered, the King immediately caused the whole Family to be put to death,
not sparing the young Princess his Wife, though she were big with Child.

As for Sultan Sujah, who was foremost among those that fled, it is most
generally thought that either he was slain by the Soldiers who were sent to
apprehend him, or that he was torn in pieces by the Tigers and Lions; of which
those Forests are full.

CHAP. VII. Of the beginning of Aureng-zeb's Reign, and the Death of Cha-jehan
his Father.
SOme days before he ascended the Throne, he sent to his Father to send him
some of his Jewels, to the end he might appear before his people with the same
magnificence as his Predecessors had done. Cha-jehan taking this request of his
Sons for an affront put upon him in Prison, fell into such a rage that he
continued mad for some days, and had like to have died upon it. In the excess
of his vexation he called several times for a Mortar and a Pestle, threatening
to beat all his Jewels to powder, before his Son should have them. But
Begum-Saheb, his eldest Daughter, never forsook him, throwing her self at his
feet, and by virtue of that criminal power which she had over him, as being
both his Daughter and his Wife, kept him from using that extremity; more out of
a design to preserve the Jewels for her self, than for her Brother, to whom she
had always been a mortal enemy. For this reason, when Aureng-zeb ascended the
Throne, he had no more than one Jewel upon his Bonnet: This Bonnet cannot be
called a Crown; and by consequence neither can the Ceremony be called a
Coronation.

At the time that Aureng-zeb took possession of the Throne, he would not eat
any wheaten-bread, nor meat, nor fish, but fed upon barly-bread, herbs and
sweetmeats, which was a kind of Penance that he imposed upon himself for so
many crimes.

When Aureng-zeb was settled in the Empire, several Ambassadors came to
Jehanabat to congratulate him, on the behalf of the Kings their Masters, as
from the King of the Usbeck Tartars, the Sheriff of Mecca, the Prince of
Balsara, and the Kings of Arabia Felix, and Ethiopia. The Hollanders also sent
Menheir Adrican, chief of their Factory in Surat, who was kindly received, and
first dispatched. For it is a piece of State, to keep the Ambassadors a good
while at Court before they have Audience. All these Ambassadors presented
Aureng-zeb with the rarities of their Country; who to get himself a good name
in Asia, sent them away very well satisfied.

Some months before the death of Cha-jehan, Aureng-zeb sent an Ambassador into
Persia, who was magnificently received. For a month together he was nothing but
feasted and caressed with all manner of divertisements. The day that he was to
make his Present from the Great Mogul, the King of Persia sat upon his Throne
in a most magnificent habit; and having received the Embassador's Present, he
presently divided it in contempt among the Officers of his House; only keeping
for himself a Diamond that weighed sixty Carats. Some few days after he called
for the Ambassador, and after some discourse, he asked him if he were of the
Sect of the Turks? To which the Ambassador returning an answer, and leting some
words fall against Haly, the King asked him what his name was.? He replied that
Cha-jehan had given him the Name of Baubec-kan, that is, Lord of a free heart;
and had honored him with one of the chief employments at Court. Then thou art a
Villain, replied the King of Persia, with an angry countenance, to desert thy
Sovereign in his necessity, having received so many favors from him, and to
serve a Tyrant, that keeps his Father in Prison, and has massacr'd all his
Brothers. How dares he, pursued the King, take upon him the arrogant Title of
Alem-guir Aureng-sha, or King of all the World, who never conquered any thing,
but possesses all he has by treachery and parricide? Have thou been one of
those that counseled him to shed so much blood, to be the Executioner of his
Brothers, and to keep his Father in Prison? Thou art not worthy to wear a
Beard; and with that immediately caused it to be shaved off; which is the
greatest indignity that can be put upon a man in that Country. Shortly after
he commanded the Ambassador to return home, sending along with him for a
Present to Aureng-zeb, an hundred and fifty beautiful Horses, with a great
quantity of Gold and Silver-Carpets, Cloth of Gold, rich Shashes, and other
Stuffs, to a vast value. When Baubec-kan was come back to Agra, where the King
then was, Aureng-zeb incensed at the affront which the Sophi of Persia had
given him in the person of his Ambassador, he took the Horses and sent some of
them into the great Piazza, others to the corners of the Streets, causing it to
be proclaimed that the followers of Haly could not ride those Horses without
being Nigss, that is to say, unclean, as coming from a King that did not obey
the true Law. After that he caused the Horses to be killed, and all the rest of
the Present to be burnt; uttering many reproachful words against the King of
Persia, with whom he was mortally offended.

At length Cha-jehan happ'ning to dye toward the end of the year 1666.
Aureng-zeb found himself rid of an object that every hour reproached his
Tyranny; and began to enjoy himself with more delight. Soon after he received
his Sister Begum-Saheb into favor, restoring to her all her Governments, and
giving her the Name of Cha-Begum, that is to say, Princess Queen. The truth is,
she is a Woman of prodigious parts, and able to govern the whole Empire. And
had her Father and Brothers taken her counsel at the beginning of the War,
Aurengzeb had never been King. As for Rauchenara Begum his Sister, she had
always taken his side, and when she heard he had taken Arms, she sent him all
the Gold and Silver she could procure. In recompense whereof he promised her,
when he came to be King, to give her the Title of Cha-Begum, and that she
should sit upon a Throne: in all which he was as good as his word; and they
continued very loving together till I was last at Genanabat: but then they were
not so good friends, upon this occasion. The Princess having cunningly stoll'n
into her Apartment a handsome young fellow, could not so privately let him out
again after she had quite tired him; but the King was advertised thereof.
Thereupon the Princess, to prevent the shame and reproach, ran to the King in a
great pretended fright, and told him that there was a man got into the Haram,
even to her very Chamber, and that his intention was certainly either to have
killed or robbed her: that such a thing was never seen; that it concerned the
safety of his Royal Person, and that he would do well to punish severely the
Eunuchs that kept guard that night. Presently the King ran in person with a
great number of Eunuchs, so that the poor young man had no way to escape but by
leaping out of a window into the River that runs by the Palace-walls; whereupon
a world of people ran out to seize him; the King commanding them to do him no
harm, but to carry him to the Officer of Justice: However he has been not heard
of ever since that time.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparations against the Feast of the Great Mogul, when he
is weighed solemnly every year. Of the richness of his Thrones, and the
Magnificence of his Court.
THis great Feast begins the fourth of November, and lasts five days. They
usually weigh the King at the time of his Birth; and if he weighs more than he
did the year before, there is great rejoicing. When he is weighed he seats
himself upon the richest of his Thrones; and then all the Grandees of the
Kingdom come to congratulate and present him. The Ladies of the Court send him
their Presents also, as likewise do the Governors of Provinces, and others in
great Employments. The Presents consist of Jewels, Tissues, Carpetts and other
Stuffs; besides Camels, Elephants, Horses, and indeed any thing that is rare
and of value. It Is said he receives that day thirty Millions of Livres.

They begin to prepare for this Feast the seventh of September, about two
Months before it begins. The first thing they do, is to cover the two great
Courts overhead, from the middle of each Court to the Hall, which is open upon
three sides. The Pavilions that cover these two void places, are of Purple
Velvet, Embroidered with Gold, and so weighty, that the Posts which sustain
them are as big as the Mast of a Ship; some thirty, some forty foot high. There
are thirty-eight of these Posts to uphold the Tent in the first Court; and
those next the Hall, are plated with Gold as thick as a Ducket. The rest are
plated with Silver of the same thickness. The Cords are of Cotton of diverse
colors; some of them as big as a good Cable.

The first Court is surrounded with Portico's and little Chambers, where the
Omrahs keep Guard. For every eight days the Omrahs relieve the Guard; and
during those eight days, the Omrah who is upon the Guard, has a Dish of Meat
out of the Kings Kitchen. When he sees it coming afar off, he makes three
obeysances, laying his hand three times upon the Ground, and three times upon
his Head, crying out at the same time, God preserve the Kings health, give him
long Life and Victory over his Enemies. They take it for a great Honor to
Guard the King; and when they go upon the Guard, they put on all their most
sumptuous Apparel; and their Horses, Camels, and Elephants are all richly
adorned. Some of the Camels carry a small Piece of Ordinance, with a man behind
to shoot it off. The meanest of these Omrahs commands a thousand Horse; but if
he be a Prince of the Blood, he commands six thousand.

The Great Mogul has seven Thrones, some set all over with Diamonds; others
with Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls.

The largest Throne, which is set up in the Hall of the first Court, is in form
like one of our Field-Beds, six foot long, and four broad. The Cushion at the
back is round like a Bolster; the Cushions on the sides are flat.

I counted about a hundred and eight pale Rubies in Collets, about this Throne,
the least whereof weighed a hundred Carats; but there are some that weigh two
hundred. Emraulds I counted about a hundred and sixty, that weighed some
threescore, some thirty Carats.

The under-part of the Canopy is all embroidered with Pearls and Diamonds, with
a Fringe of Pearls round about. Upon the top of the Canopy, which is made like
an Arch with four Panes, stands a Peacock, with his Tail spread, consisting all
of Saphirs, and other proper colored Stones; the Body is of beaten Gold,
enchas'd with several Jewels; and a great Ruby upon his breast, at which hangs
a Pearl, that weighs fifty Carats. On each side of the Peacock stand two
Nose-gays, as high as the Bird, consisting of several sorts of Flowers, all of
beaten Gold enameled. When the King seats himself upon the Throne, there is a
transparent Jewel, with a Diamond Appendant, of eighty or ninety Carats,
encompassed with Rubies and Emraulds, so hung that it is always in his Eye. The
twelve Pillars also that uphold the Canopy, are set with rows of fair Pearl,
round, and of an excellent Water, that weigh from six to ten Carats apiece. At
the distance of four feet, upon each side of the Throne, are placed two
Parasols, or Umbrello's, the handles whereof are about eight foot high, covered
with Diamonds; the Parasols themselves are of crimson Velvet, embroidered and
fringed with Pearls.

This is the famous Throne which Tamerlane began, and Cha-jehan finished; which
is really reported to have cost a hundred and sixty Millions, and five
hundred-thousand Livres of our Money.

Behind this stately and magnificent Throne there is another less, in the form
of a Tub, where the King bathes himself; it is an Oval, seven foot long, and
five broad. The outside whereof shines all over with Diamonds and Pearls; but
there is no Canopy over it.

Coming into the first Court, on the right hand, you see a particular Tent,
where during all the Feast, the Morice-Dancers are appointed to make sport,
while the King sits upon his Throne. On the left hand is another Tent,
appointed for the principal Officers of the Army and Household.

In the same Court, while the King sits upon his Throne, are to be seen thirty
Horses, fifteen upon one side, and fifteen upon the other, lead by two men.
Their Bridles are very short, but for the most part enriched with Diamonds,
Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls, the Bits whereof are of pure Gold. Every Horse
wears between his Ears a rich Plume of Feathers, with a little Cushion upon his
Back, tied on with a Surcingle; both being embroidered with Gold; and about his
Neck hung some fair Jewel, which was either a Diamond, a Ruby, or an Emrauld.
The worst of those Horses cost three thousand, some five thousand Crowns; and
some there were, that were never bought under ten thousand. The young Prince,
who was between seven and eight years old, rode upon a Horse no higher than a
good big Greyhound, but very well shaped.

About an hour after the King has bin sitting upon his Throne, seven stout
Elephants bred up for War, are brought out. One of those Elephants has his Seat
fixed upon his back, if the King should have a mind to ride out. The others are
covered with Clothes richly embroidered, with Chains of Gold and Silver about
their Necks; and there are four that carry the Kings Standard upon their
Cruppers, fastened to a Half-Pike, which a man seated on purpose close by,
holds upright with his hand. These Elephants are brought within fifty paces of
the Throne, and when they come before the King, they make their obeysances to
him, laying their Trunks to the ground, and then lifting them up above their
Heads three times; every time he makes a great cry, and then turning his back
to the King, one of the Leaders turns up the Cloth, that the King may see he
is in good case. There belongs also to every one a Cord, which is put round his
body, to show how much he is grown since the last year. The first of these
Elephants, which the King most esteems, is a great furious Creature, that has
five hundred Roupies allowed him every month. He is fed with good Victuals, and
a great quantity of Sucre, and they give him Aqua-vitae to drink. When the King
rides forth upon his Elephant, the Omrahs follow on Horseback. And when he
rides on Horseback, the Omrahs follow him on foot.

After the King has seen his Elephants, he rises up, and goes into his Haram
through a little oval door behind the Throne.

The five other Thrones are set up in another magnificent Hall in another
Court, all covered over with Diamonds, without any colored Stone.

When the King has staid about half an hour, he comes out again, attended by
three or four Eunuchs, and seats himself in the other Hall, upon the middlemost
of the five Thrones, where the Omrahs come, as long as the five days of the
Festival last, and make their Presents to him.

CHAP. IX. Some other Observations upon the Court of the Great Mogul.
AFter Aureng-zeb had settled himself in the Empire, which he usurped from his
Father and his Brothers, he imposed upon himself a very severe penance, eating
nothing but Pulse and Sweetmeats, which has made him very meagre and lean. All
the time the Comet lasted in the year 1665, which appeared very great in the
Indies, where I then was, Aureng-zeb drank nothing but Water, and eat nothing
but Bread made of Millet; which so impaired his health, that it had like to
have cost him his life. Besides, he always lay upon the ground, only with a
Tigers Skin under him; since which time he has never been perfectly well.

I saw him drink three several times, while he sat upon his throne; to which
purpose he had brought him a large Cup of Crystal of the Rock, round and all
of a piece, with a Gold Cover, enriched with Diamonds, Rubies, and Emraulds,
the foot thereof being of the same. But no person sees the King eat, only his
Wives and his Eunuchs. And it is but very rarely that he goes to Dine or Sup
with any of his Subjects. When I was last in India, Giafer-Kan, who was his
Grand Vizier, and his Uncle by marriage of his wife, invited the King to see a
new Palace which he was building, who went accordingly, and it was the greatest
Honor his Majesty could do him; in retaliation whereof, Giafer-Kan and his
Wife presented him with Jewels, Elephants, Camels, Horses, and other things, to
the value of a Million and fifty thousand Livres of our Money. For Giafer-Kan's
Wife is the most magnificent and liberal Woman in all India, and spends more
her self than all the Kings Wives and Daughters, which makes her Husband in
debt, though he be almost Lord of all the Empire.

When the King is carried in his Palleki to the Mosquee, one of his Sons
follows him a Horseback, and all his Omrahs and Officers of his Household come
behind him a foot. Those that are Mahumetans stay for him at the top of the
ascent to the Mosquee, and when he is ready to come out, they march before him
to the Gate of his Palace. Eight Elephants always go before the King, to every
one of which belong two men; one to lead the Elephant, and the other, who sits
upon his back, carries a Standard fixed to a Half-Pike. The other four carry
Seats or Thrones upon their backs, the one square, the other round; one
covered, the other enclosed with Glass of several fashions. When the King goes
abroad, he has usually five or six hundred men to attend him for his Guard,
armed every one with a kind of an Half-Pike. To the heads of their Pikes they
tie two Squibs cross-wife, about a foot long, and as big as a man's Arm, which
will carry the Half-Pike five hundred paces. The King is also attended by three
or four hundred Musquateers; but they are very Cowards, and hardly know how to
shoot off their pieces. He has also a certain number of Cavalry, which are
Soldiers much alike. A hundred Europeans might well beat a thousand Indians;
but they would hardly accustom themselves to live such sober lives. For as well
the Horse as the Infantry will live upon Meal kneaded with Water and brown
Sugar; but in the evening, when they have convenience, they make Quichery,
which is Rice boiled in Water and Salt, with a Grain so called. When they eat
it, they stir it with the ends of their Fingers in melted Butter, which is the
usual food of the Soldiers and poor people. Beside, the heat would kill our
Soldiers, who would never be able to endure the Sun all the day long, as the
Indians do. By the way, give me leave to tell you, that the Country people have
no other clothing than a piece of Linen to hide their secret parts, being
miserably poor; for if their Governors know they have any thing about them,
they seize it either as their right, or by force. There are some Provinces in
India that lie waste, the Natives being forced to fly, by reason of the cruelty
of their Governors. Under the pretense of being Mahumetans they persecute the
poor Idolaters beyond all measure; and if any of them embrace Mahumetism, it is
only because they would not work any longer. For then they turn Soldiers or
Faquirs, who are a sort of people that profess a renunciation of the World, and
live upon Alms, but are indeed very Rascals. They reckon that there are in
India 800000 of these Mahumetan Faquirs, and twelve hundred thousand Idolaters.

Once in fifteen days the King goes a Hunting, mounted upon his Elephant, and
so continues during the chase. All the Game he takes is brought within
Musketshot of his Elephants. Which consists generally of Lions, Tigers, Hearts,
and wild-Goats. For they will not meddle with Boars, as being Mahumetans. When
he returns home he puts himself into his Palleki, and goes in the same order,
and with the same Guard, as when he returns from the Mosquee, saving that when
he goes a Hunting, he is attended with three or four-hunder'd Horsemen, that
ride without any discipline in the World.

As for the Princesses, as well the Wives, Daughters and Sisters of the King,
they never stir out of the Palace, unless it be to spend a few days in the
Country for their pleasure. Some of them go abroad, but very rarely, to visit
some great Noble-mens Wives, as the Wife of Giafer-Kan, who is the King's Aunt.
But that is only by particular leave of the King. And then it is not the custom
as in Persia, where the Ladies make their visits only by night, and with a
great number of Eunuchs, who clear the Streets of all people they meet. For in
the Mogul's Court, they usually go out about nine in the morning, with only
three or four Eunuchs, and ten or twelve Slaves, which are instead of Maids of
Honor.

The Princesses are carried in Palleki's covered over with Embroidered
Tapestry, and a little Coach to hold one single person that follows the
Palleki, drawn by two men, the wheels not being above a foot in diameter. The
reason why they carry that Coach along with them, is, because that when the
Princesses arrive at the House where they intend to alight, the men that carry
the Palleki, not being permitted to go any farther than the first Gate, they
then take their Coaches, and are drawn by their female-Slaves to the Women's
Apartment. I have also observed, that in all the Houses of great Noblemen, the
Women's Apartment is at the farther-end of all. So that you must cross two or
three great Courts, and a Garden or two, before you can come as it.

When the Princesses are married to any of the Court-Grandees, they become
absolute Mistresses of their Husbands; so that if they study not to please
them, and do not as they would have them, in regard of their free access to the
King, they overruled the King many times to their prejudice, even to the
turning them out of their employments.

As it is a custom that the firstborn always is Heir to the Throne, though he
be the Son of a Slave, so soon as the Princesses of the King's Haram perceive
that there is any one among them big with Child, they use all the artifices
imaginable to make them miscarry. Insomuch that being at Patna in the year
1666, Cha-Est-Kan's Surgeon assured me, that the Wife of Cha-Est-Kan had
procured the miscarrying of eight Women, because she would suffer no other
Women's Children but her own.

CHAP. X. Of the Commodities which are brought as well out of the Dominions of
the Great Mogul, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other
neighboring Territories.
IT will be necessary for the Reader to take notice what I have already said
concerning the Weights and Measures in use among the Indians, where I spoke
concerning the Mines, and the Serre. Now for the Cobit.

The Cobit is a measure for all Commodities that are measured by the Ell, of
which there are several sorts, as in Europe there are several sorts of Else.
The Cobit is divided into 24 Tasots: and in regard the greatest part of the
Commodities of India are uttered at Surat, I have given you a description in
the margin of the fourth part of a Surat-Cobit, divided into six Tasots.

Of their Silk.
KAsembasar, a Village in the Kingdom of Bengala, sends abroad every year two
and twenty-thousand Bales of Silk; every Bale weighing a hundred pound. The
two and twenty Bales make two millions and two-hunder'd-thousand pound, at
sixteen ounces to the pound. The Hollanders usually carry away six or
seven-thousand Bales, and would carry away more, did not the Merchants of
Tartary, and the Mogul's Empire oppose them: for they buy up as much as the
Hollander; the rest the Natives keep to make their Stuffs. This Silk is all
brought into the Kingdom of Guzerat, the greatest part whereof comes to
Amadabat, and to Surat, where it is wrought up.

In the first place they make Carpets of Silk and Gold, others of Silk and
Silver, others all of Silk: For the Worsted Carpets are made at Vettapour, some
twelve leagues from Agra.

In the second place they make Satins with streaks of Gold and Silver; others
plain: with Taffata's after the same fashion.

In the third place they make Patoles, which are a fort of Silk-stuff very
thin, but painted with all sorts of Flowers, the manufacture whereof is at
Amadabat. They cost from eight Roupies to forty the piece. This is a Commodity
wherein the Dutch will not suffer any one of the Hollanders to trade in
particular: for they transport it to the Philippine-Islands, to the Islands of
Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other neighboring Islands.

The raw-Silk of Kasembasar is yellowish, as are all the raw-Silks that come
from Persia and Sicily; but the Natives of Kasembasar have a way to whiten it,
with a Lie made of the ashes of a Tree which they call Adam's Fig Tree; which
makes it as white as the Palestine-Silk. The Hollanders send away all their
Merchandise which they fetch out of Bengala, by water, through a great Canal
that runs from Kasembasar into Ganges, for fifteen leagues together; from
whence it is as far by water down the Ganges to Ouguely, where they lade their
Ships.

Of the Calicuts: and first of the painted Calicuts, called Chites.
CHites or Painted Calicuts, which they call Calmendar, that is to say, done
with a Pencil, are made in the Kingdom of Golconda; and particularly about
Maslipatan. But there is made so little, that though a man should employ all
the Workmen that understand the art of weaving Calicuts, he would hardly find
enough to make three Bales.

The Chites which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogul are all Printed;
and nothing so beautiful, neither for the figures nor the fineness of the
Linen. Those which are made at Lahor, are the coarsest, and consequently the
cheapest of all. They are sold by Corges, every Corge consisting of twenty
pieces, which cost from 16 to 30 Roupies.

The Chites which are made at Seronge, are sold from 20 to 50 Roupies the
Corge, or thereabouts.

These Chites serve for Coverlets for Beds, for Sofra's or Table-cloaths after
the Countrey-fashion, Pillowbears, Handkerchiefs, but more especially for
Wastcoats as well for the men as women in Persia.

The fine Calicut- Chites are made at Brampour; and are used for handkerchiefs
by those that snuff Tobacco.

The women also, over all Asia, make Veils of these Calicuts, to wear over
their heads, and about their shoulders, which Veils are called Ormis.

The Basta's or Calicuts painted red, blue, and black, are carried white to
Agra, and Amadabat, in regard those Cities are nearest to the places where the
Indigo is made that is used in coloring. They cost from two Roupies to 30 or
40 a-piece, according to the fineness and the quantity of Gold at the ends, and
sometimes upon the sides. The Indians have a way to dip some of these Calicuts
in a certain water that makes them look like Water'd-Chamlets, which adds also
to the price.

That sort which is sold for two Roupies, and so onward till ye come to twelve,
is transported to the Coast of Melinda, and it is the greatest Trade the
Governor of Mozambique drives, who sells them to the Cafres, that vend them
again among the Abyssins, and into the Kingdom of Saba: for those people not
understanding the use of Soap, need no more but only to wash these Calicuts in
water. That sort which is valued from 12 Roupies upward, is transported to the
Philippine-Islands, the Islands of Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other adjacent
places. Where the women wear no other clothes, than a single piece of this
Calicut. One part whereof, without cutting it, serves for a Petticoat; the
other they wind about their stomachs and their heads.

White Calicuts.
White Calicuts come partly from Agra, and about Lahor, part from Bengala:
some from Brouda, Baroche, Renonsari, and other places. They are brought out of
the Loom to Renonsari, and Baroche, where they are whitened by reason of the
convenience of their Meadows, and the great store of Limons that grow
thereabouts. For the Calicuts are never so white as they should be, till they
are dipped in Limon-water.

The Calicuts that come from Agra, Lahor, and Bengala, are sold by the Corge,
and they are of several prices, from seventeen Roupies to three or
four-hunder'd, as the Merchant will have them wov'n.

The Calicuts that come from Renonsari, and Baroche, are one and twenty cubits
long, new out of the Loom; but in the whitening they shrink to twenty cubits.

Those of Brouda twenty cubits from the Loom, and shrink in the whitening to
nineteen and a half.

All the Calicuts or Basta's that come from these three Cities, are of two
sorts: for some are broad, some are narrow. The narrow are those I have already
mentioned, the prices whereof are various, from two Mamoudi's to six.

The broad Basta's are a cubit, and one third part wide; the whole piece twenty
cubits long. The usual price of them is from five Mamoudi's to twelve: but a
Merchant being upon the place, may cause them to be made much more large and
fine, till they are worth five-hunder'd Mamoudi's a-piece. I saw two pieces
sold for a thousand Mamoudi's.

The English bought one, and the Hollanders another, each piece containing
eight and twenty cubits.

Mahamed Alibeg returning into Persia out of India where he had been
Ambassador, presented Cha-Sef the second with a Coco-nut, about the bigness of
an Austrich-egg, all beset with Pearls: and when it was opened there was taken
out of it a Turbant that had sixty cubits of Calicut in length to make it, the
Cloth being so fine, that you could hardly feel it in your hand. For they will
spin their thread so fine, that the eye can hardly discern it, or at least it
seems to be but a Cobweb.

Twisted-Cotton.
COtton twisted and untwisted comes from the Provinces of Brampour and Guzerat.
Untwisted Cotton is never transported into Europe, being too cumbersome, and of
little value; only they send it to Ormus, Balsara, and sometimes to the
Philippine-Islands, and the Islands of Sinde. As for the twisted Cottons, the
English and Hollanders transport a good quantity, not of the finest, but of
that sort which is prized from fifteen to fifty Mamouds's: It serves for wieks
for Caudles, for Packsaddles, and for the ground of Silk-stuffs.

Indigo.
INdigo comes from several parts of the Great Mogul's Empire; and according to
the diversity of the places it differs in quality, and consequently in price.

In the first place, it comes from the Territories of Biana, Indoua, and Corsa,
a day or two's journey from Agra: which is esteemed the best of all. It is made
also eight days journey from Surat, in a Village called Sarquess, two leagues
distance from Amadabat. Here the flat Indigo is made. There is also Indigo
little inferior in goodness and price, which comes from the King of Golconda's
Territories. The Mein of Surat, which contains 42 Serre's, or 34 and a half of
our pounds, is valued from 15 to 20 Roupies. They make as good as this at
Baroche. That which is made up about Agra is made up in half Balls, and is the
most sought for in all India. It is sold by the Mein, which is those places
contains 60 Serres, or 51 and three quarters of our pounds. The usual price is
from 36 to 40 Roupies. There grows also Indico some 36 leagues from Brampour,
about a great Village called Raout, and round about the neighboring Towns in
the road to Surat: Of which the Natives usually make above a hunder'd-thousand
Roupies.

There comes Indigo also from Bengala, which the Holland-Company transports for
Maslipatan. But they buy this Indigo, and that of Brampour and Amadabat,
cheaper by 24 in the hundred, than that of Agra.

Indigo is made of an Herb which they sow every year after the rains are over:
which when it is grown up, is very like our Hemp. They cut it three times a
year; first when it is about two or three foot high; and they cut it within
half a foot of the ground; the first cutting far exceeds the two latter. The
second cutting is worse than the first by ten or twelve in the hundred, and
the third worse than the second by twelve in the hundred. The difference is
found by breaking a piece of the Paste, and observing the color. The color of
that Indigo which is made of the first cutting, is a Violet-blue, but more
brisk and lively than the two others: and that which is made of the second is
more lively than the third.

When they have cut the Herb, they throw it into Pits which they make with
Lime, which becomes so hard, that you would judge it to be one entire piece of
Marble. They are generally fourscore or a hundred paces in circuit; and being
half full of water, they fill them quite up with the Herb. Then they bruise and
jumble it in the water till the leaf, for the stalk is worth nothing, become
like a kind of thick mud. This being done, they let it settle for some days;
and when the settling is all at the bottom, and the water clear above, they let
out all the water. When the water is all drained out, they fill several baskets
with this slime, and in a plain Field you shall see several men at work, every
one at his own basket, making up little pieces of Indigo flat at the bottom, at
the top sharp like an egg. Though at Amadabat they make their pieces quite flat
like a small cake. Here you are to take particular notice, that the Merchants,
because they would not pay custom for an unnecessary weight, before they
transport their Indigo out of Asia into Europe, are very careful to cause it to
be sifted, to separate the dust from it; which they sell afterward to the
Natives of the Country to dye their Calicuts. They that sift this Indigo must
be careful to keep a Linnen-cloath before their faces, and that their nostrils
be well-stopt, leaving only two little holes for their eyes. Besides, they must
every half hour be sure to drink milk, which is a great preservative against
the piercing quality of the dust. Yet notwithstanding all this caution, they
that have sifted Indigo for nine or ten days, shall spit nothing but blew for a
good while together. Once I laid an Egg in the morning among the sisters, and
when I came to break it in the evening it was all blew within.

As they take the Paste out of the Baskets with their Fingers dipped in Oil, and
make it into Lumps, or Cakes they lay them in the Sun to dry. Which is the
reason that when the Merchants buy Indigo, they burn some pieces of it, to try
whether there be any dust among it. For the Natives who take the Paste out of
the Baskets to make it into Lumps, lay it in the Sand, which mixes with the
Paste, and fouls it. But when the Merchants burn it, the Indigo turns to Ashes,
and the Sand remains. The Governors do what they can to make the Natives leave
their Knavery; but notwithstanding all their care, there will be some deceit.

Saltpeter.
GReat store of Saltpeter comes from Agra and Patna; but the refined costs
three times more than that which is not. The Hollanders have set up a
Warehouse fourteen Leagues above Patna, and when their Saltpeter is refind,
they transport it by Water by Ogueli. A Mein of refined Saltpeter is worth
seven Mamoudi's.

Spice.
CArdamom, Ginger, Pepper, Nutmegs, Nutmeg-Flowers, Cloves and Cinnamon, are
all the different sorts of Spices known to us. I put Cardamom and Ginger in the
first place, because that Cardamom grows in the Territories of Visapour, and
Ginger in the Dominions of the Great Mogul. And as for other Spices, they are
brought from other Foreign parts to Surat, which is the grand Mart.

Cardamom is the most excellent of all other Spices, but it is very scarce; and
in regard there is no great store in the place where it grows, it is only made
use of in Asia, at the Tables of great Princes. Five hundred pound of
Cardamoms, are prized from a hundred to a hundred and ten Reals.

Ginger is brought in great quantities from Amadabat, where there grows more
than in any other part of Asia; and it is hardly to be imagined how much there
is transported candited into Foreign parts.

Pepper is of two sorts. There is a sort which is very small, another sort much
bigger; both which sorts are distinguished into small and great Pepper. The
larger sort comes from the Coast of Malavare; and Tuticorin and Calicut are the
Cities where it is brought up. Some of this Pepper comes from the Territories
of the King of Visapour, being vended at Rejapour, a little City in that
Kingdom. The Hollanders that purchase it of the Malavares, do not give Money
for it, but several sorts of Commodities in Exchange; as Cotton, Opium,
Vermillion, and Quicksilver; and this is the Pepper which is brought into
Europe. As for the little Pepper that comes from Bantam, Afchen, and some other
parts toward the East, there is none of it carried out of Asia, where it is
spent in vast quantities, especially among the Mahumetans. For there are double
the Grains of small Pepper in one pound, to what there are of the great Pepper;
besides that the great Pepper is hotter in the mouth.

The little Pepper that comes to Surat, has been sold some years for thirteen
or fourteen Mamoudi's the Mein; and so much I have seen the English give for
it, to transport it to Ormus, Balsara, and the Red Sea. As for the great Pepper
which the Hollanders fetch from the Coast of Malavare, five hundred pound in
truck brings them in not above thirty-eight Reals; but by the Commodities which
they give in Barter, they gain Cent. per Cent.

The Nutmeg, the Nutmeg-Flow'r, the Clove, and Cinnamon, are the only Spices
which the Hollanders have in their own hands. The three first come from the
Molucca Islands; the fourth, which is Cinnamon, from the Island of Ceylan.

It Is observable of the Nutmeg, that the Tree which bears it is never planted,
which has been confirmed to me by several persons that have lived several years
in the Country. They related to me, that the Nutmeg being ripe, several Birds
come from the Islands toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forced to
throw it up again before it be digested. The Nutmeg then besmeared with a
viscous matter, falling to the ground takes root, and produces a Tree, which
would never thrive were it planted. This puts me in mind of making one
observation upon the Birds of Paradise. These Birds being very greedy after
Nutmegs, come in flights to gorge themselves with the pleasing Spice; at the
season, like Felfares in Vintage time; but the strength of the Nutmeg so
intoxicates them, that they fall dead drunk to the Earth, where the Emets in a
short time eat off their Legs. Hence it comes, that the Birds of Paradise are
said to have no Feet; which is not true however, for I have seen three or four
that had Feet; and a French Merchant sent one from Aleppo as a Present to Lewis
the Thirteenth that had Feet; of which the King made great account, as being a
very lovely Fowl.

But notwithstanding all the Hollanders Projects, you may buy Cloves at
Macassar without purchasing them of the Hollander; in regard the Islanders buy
them of the Dutch Captains and Soldiers, which the Hollanders have in those
place where the Cloves grow, giving them in exchange Rice, and other
necessaries for the support of life, without which they would starve, being
very sadly provided for.

When the Natives of Macassar are thus furnished of Cloves, they barter them in
Exchange for such Commodies as are brought them; sometimes they give
Tortoise-Shells in exchange, and Gold Dust; by which the Merchant gains six or
seven in the hundred, being better than the Money of the Island, though it be
Gold, by reason the King ofttimes enhances the value of it. The places where
Cloves grow, are Amboyna, Ellias, Seram, and Bouro.

The Islands of Banda also, in number six, viz. Nero, Lontour, Poulcay,
Roseguin, and Grenapuis, bear Nutmegs in great abundance. The Island of
Grenapuis is about six Leagues in compass, and ends in a sharp point, where
there is a continual fire burning out of the Earth. The Island Damme, where
there grows great store of Nutmegs, and very big, was discovered in the year
1647, by Abel Tasman, a Dutch Commander.

The price of Cloves and Nutmegs, as I have known them sold to the Hollanders
at Surat, was as follows.

The Mein of Surat contains forty Serres, which make thirty-four of our Pounds,
at sixteen Ounces to the Pound.

A Mein of Cloves was sold for a hundred and three Mamoudi's and a half.

A Mein of Mace was sold for a hundred and fifty-seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Nutmegs for fifty-six Mamoudi's and a half.

Cinnamon comes at present from the Island of Ceylan. The Tree that bears it is
very much like the Willow, and has three Barks. They never take off but the
first and second, which is accounted the best. They never meddle with the
third, for should the Knife enter that, the Tree would dye. So that it is an
art to take off the Cinnamon, which they learn from their youth. The Cinnamon
Spice is much dearer to the Hollanders than people think; for the King of
Ceylan, otherwise called King of Candy, from the name of his principal City,
being a sworn Enemy to the Hollanders, sends his Forces with an intention to
surprise them, when they gather their Cinnamon; so that they are forced to
bring seven or eight hundred men together to defend as many more that are at
work. Which great expense of theirs very much enhances the price of the
Cinnamon. There grows upon the Cinnamon Tree a certain fruit like an Olive,
though not to be eaten. This the Portugals were wont to put into a Caldron of
Water, together with the tops of the Branches, and boiled it till the Water was
all consumed. When it was cold, the upper part became a Paste like white Wax;
of which they made Tapers to set up in their Churches, for no sooner were the
Tapers lighted, but all the Church was perfumed. Formerly the Portugals brought
Cinnamon out of other Countries, belonging to the Raja's about Cochin. But the
Hollanders have destroyed all those places, so that the Cinnamon is now in their
hands. When the Portugals had that Coast, the English bought their Cinnamon of
them, and usually paid for it by the Mein fifty Mamoudi's.

Drugs that are brought to Surat, and brought from other Countries, with the
price of every one by the Mein.
Salt Armoniack, according to the usual price, costs by the Mein twenty
Mamoudi's.

Borax, comes unrefin'd from Amadabat, as does Salt Armoniack, and costs by the
Mein thirty-five Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lack, seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Gum-Lack washed, ten Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lack in sticks of Wax, forty Mamoudi's.

There are some of these Sticks that cost fifty or sixty Mamoudi's the Mein,
and more when they mix Musk in the Gum.

Saffron of Surat, which is good for nothing but for coloring, four Mamoudi's
and a half.

Cumin White, eight Mamoudi's.

Cumin Black, three Mamoudi's.

Arlet small, three Mamoudi's.

Frankincense, that comes from the Coast of Arabia, three Mamoudi's.

Myrrh, that which is good, called Mirra Gilet, thirty Mamoudi's.

Myrrh Bolti, which comes from Arabia, fifteen Mamoudi's.

Cassia, two Mamoudi's.

Sugar Candy, eighteen Mamoudi's.

Asutinat, a sort of Grain, very hot, one Mamoudi.

Annise-Seed Gross, three Mamoudi's and a half.

Annise-Seed small and hot, one Mamoudi and a half.

Oupelote, a Root, fourteen Mamoudi's.

Cointre, five Mamoudi's.

Auzerout, from Persia, a hundred and twenty Mamoudi's.

Aloes Succotrine, from Arabia, twenty eight Mamoudi's.

Licorice, four Mamoudi's.

Lignum Aloes, in great pieces, two hundred Mamoudi's.

Lignum Aloes, in small pieces, four hundred Mamoudi's.

Vez-Cabouli, a certain Root, twelve Mamoudi's.

There is a sort of Lignum Aloes very Gummy, which comes to, by the Mein, four
thousand Mamoudi's.

Gum-Lake for the most part comes from Pegu; yet there is some also brought
from Bengala, where it is very dear, by reason the Natives fetch that lively
Scarlet color out of it, with which they paint their Calicuts. Nevertheless,
the Hollanders buy it, and carry it into Persia for the same use of painting.
That which remains after the color is drawn off, is only fit to make sealing
Wax. That which comes from Pegu is not so dear, though as good for other
Countries. The difference is only this, that it is not so clean in Pegu, where
the Pismires soul it, as in Bengala, where it grows in a heathy place, full of
Shrubs, where those Animals cannot so well come at it. The Inhabitants of Pegu
never make any use of it in painting, being a dull sort of people, that are in
nothing at all industrious.

The Women of Surat get their livings by cleansing the Lake after the Scarlet
color is drawn from it. After that they give it what color they please, and
make it up into Sticks for sealing Wax. The English and Holland Company carry
away every year a hundred and fifty Chests. The price is about ten Sous the
pound.

Powdered Sugar is brought in great quantities out of the Kingdom of Bengala;
it causes also a very great Trade at Ougeli, Patna, Daca, and other places. I
have been told it for a very great certainty, by several ancient people in
Bengala, that Sugar being kept thirty years becomes absolute poison, and that
there is no Venom more dangerous, or that sooner works its effect. Loaf-Sugar
is also made at Amadabat, where they are perfectly skilled in refining it; for
which reason it is called Sugar Royal. These Sugar-Loaves usually weigh from
eight to ten pound.

Opium is brought from Brampour, a Town of good Trade between Agra and Surat.
The Hollanders buy great quantities, which they truck for their Pepper.

Tobacco also grows in abundance round about Brampour; sometimes there has been
so much that the Natives have let vast quantities rot upon the ground, for want
of gathering.

Coffee grows neither in Persia nor in India, where it is in no request; but
the Hollanders drive a great Trade in it, transporting it from Ormus into
Persia, as far as Great Tartary, from Balsara into Caldea, Arabia, Mesopotamia,
and other Provinces of Turkey. It was first found out by a Hermit, whose name
was Scheck-Siadeli, about twenty-years ago, before which time it was never
heard of in any Author either ancient or modern.

Deceits in Silk Wares.
Plain Silk Wares may be altered in length, breadth, and quality. The quality
shows it self when they are of an even thread, when the weight is equal, and
when there is no Cotton thread in the West.

The Indians not having the art of guilding silver, put into their stripped
Wares threads of pure Gold, so that you must count the quantity of Gold threads
to see whether the Silk have its due number. And this also you must observe in
your Silks wov'n with Silver. As for Taffata's, you are only to mind whether
the pieces be all of a fineness, and to see by unfolding some of them, that
there be nothing within to augment the weight, and then weighing all the pieces
by themselves, to see that they all agree.

The colors of those Carpetts which are made in India, do not last so long as
the color of those which are made in Persia; but for the workmanship it is
very lovely. The eye of the Broaker is to judge of the largeness, beauty, and
fineness of those Carpetts which are wrought with Gold and Silver, and whether
they be fine and rich. But whether they be Carpetts, or other Stuffs mixed with
Gold and Silver, it behooves the Buyer to pull out some of the Gold and Silver,
Threads, to see whether they be of the right value or no.

Deceits in the White Calicuts.
The deceits usually put upon Calicuts, are in fineness length, and breadth.
Every Bale may contain two hundred pieces; among which they will juggle in five
or six or ten, less fine, or less white, shorter or narrower than according to
the scantling of the Bale, which cannot be found out but by examining them
piece by piece. The fineness is discerned by the eye, the length and breadth by
the measure. But the Indians practice a more cunning way, which is to count the
number of threads which ought to be in the breadth, according to the fineness
of the scantling. When the number fails, it is either more transparent, more
narrow, or more course. The difference is sometimes so difficult to be
perceived, that there is no way to find it out but by counting the threads. And
yet this difference in a great quantity comes to a great deal. For it is
nothing to cosen a Crown or two Crowns, in a piece that comes but to fifteen
or twenty Crowns. Those that whiten these Calicuts, to save charges of a few
Limons, will knock the Calicuts excessively upon a Stone, which does fine
Calicuts a great injury, and loars the price.

As for their Calicuts died blew or black, you must take care that the Workmen
do not knock them after they are folded, to make them look sleek; for many
times when they come to be unfolded, you shall find holes in the creases.

As for your painted and printed Calicuts, which are painted and printed as
they come out of the Loom, the Merchant must take care that what he bespeaks be
finished before the end of the Rains, for the thicker the Water is where they
are washed, the more lively will the printed and painted colors appear. It is
easy to distinguish between the printed and the painted Calicuts; and between
the neatness of the work: but for the fineness and other qualities, they are
not so easily discerned; and therefore the Broaker must be more careful.

Cheats in Cotton.
THE cheat in the weight is twofold. The first, by laying them in a moist
place; and thrusting in the middle of every Skain something to add to the
weight. The second, in not giving good weight when the Broaker receives it from
the Workman, or Merchant that delivers it.

There is but one cheat in the quality, that is by putting three or four
Skains, of a coarser Commodity than that which is uppermost, into one Mein.
Which in a great quantity mounts high; for there are some Cottons that are
worth an hundred Crowns the Mein. These two cheats being often used by the
Holland-Company, there is no way but to weigh your Commodity in the presence of
the Dutch-Commander, and his Council, and to examine every Mein, Skain by
Skain. When this is done, they who are ordered to be at this examination, are
obliged to fix to every Bale a ticket of the weight and quality: for if there
be a faileur, they who fix the ticket are engaged to make good what is wanting.

Deceits in Indigo.
I Have told you, that when the Workmen have made up the Indigo-Paste into
lumps, with their fingers dipped in Oil, they lay them in the Sun a drying. Now
those that have a design to cheat the Merchants, dry them in the sand, to the
end that the sand sticking to the Indigo, should increase the weight. Sometimes
they lay up their Paste in moist places, which makes it give, and consequently
renders it more heavy. But if the Governor of the place discovers the cheat,
he makes them severely pay for it: and the best way of discovery is to burn
some pieces of Indigo, for the sand will remain.

Indian Broakers.
THE Broakers are as it were the Masters of the Indian Families; for they have
all Goods at their disposal. The Workmen choose the most aged and most
experienced, who are to endeavor equal advantages for the whole Tribe they
undertake for. Every evening that they return from their business, and that,
according to the custom of the Indians, who make no Suppers, they have eaten
some little piece of sweet-meat, and drank a glass of water, the eldest of the
Tribe meet at the Broaker's House, who gives them an account of what he has
done that day, and then they consult what he is to do next. Above all things,
they caution him to look to his hits, and to cheat, rather than be cheated.

CHAP. XI. Of Diamonds, and the Mines and Rivers where they are found; and
first of the Author's journey to the Mine of Raolconda.
THE Diamond is the most precious of all Stones, and it was in that sort of
Commodity wherein I most dealt. And therefore to acquire a perfect experience,
I went to all the Mines; and to one of the Rivers where they are found. To
which purpose I traveled to four Mines; of which I will give you a
description; and of one of the Rivers where I have also been.

The first of these Mines, where I was, is in the Territories of the King of
Visapour, in the Province of Carnatica; and the place is called Raolconda, five
days journey from Golconda, and eight or nine from Visapour. This Mine was
discovered not above two-hunder'd years ago, as I was informed by those of the
Country.

Round about the place where the Diamonds are found, the ground is sandy, full
of Rocks, much resembling the parts near Fountain-Bleau. There are in the Rocks
several veins, some half a finger, some a whole finger-wide: And the Miners
make use of Irons with hooks at the end, with which thep pick out the earth or
sand, which they put into tubs, and among that earth they find the Diamonds.
But because these veins do not run always straight, but sometimes down,
sometimes upward, the Miners are constrained to break the Rock, following
always the trace of the veins: When they have opened all the veins, and taken
out all the sand, then they wash it two or three times over to look for the
Diamonds. In this Mine it is that they find the cleanest Stones, and of the
whitest water. But the mischief is, that to setch the sand out of the Rock,
they are forced to strike such terrible blows with a great Iron-leaver, that
they flaw the Diamond, and make it look like Crystal. Which is the reason there
are found so many soft Stones in this Diamond-Mine, though they make a great
show. If the Stone be clean, they only give it a turn or two upon the wheel,
not caring to shape it, for fear of losing the weight. If there be any flaws,
or any points, or any black or red specks in it, they cut all the Stone into
Fossets; or if there be only a little flaw, they work it under the ridg of one
of the Fossets, to hide the defect. Now because a Merchant desires rather to
have a black speck than a red one; it is but burning the Stone, and the speck
becomes black. This trick at length I understood so well, that when I saw any
Stones in them that came from the Mine made into Fossets, especially very small
ones, I was certain there was either some speck or some flaw in the Stone.

There are several Diamond-Cutters at this Mine, but none of them have above
one Mill, which is of Steel. They never cut but one Stone at a time upon each
Mill, casting water continually upon the Mill, to find out the grain of the
Stone; which being found, they pour on Oil, (not sparing for powder of
Diamonds, though it be very dear,) to make the Stone slide the faster; and they
lay on more weight than we do. I have seen them lay upon one Stone an hundred
and fifty pound of Lead. I must confess it was a great Stone, which weighed an
hundred and three Carats, after it was cut; and the Mill was like ours, only
the great Wheel was turned by four Negro's. The Indians are not of the same
opinion that we are; for they do not believe that the weight gives any luster
to the Stones. If theirs be not subject to take their luster, it is because
there is always a Boy that stands with a thin woodden-slice in his hand, and
waters the Wheel continually with Oil and Powder of Diamonds. Besides, their
Wheel does not go so fast as ours, because the Woodden-wheel that turns the
Steel-wheel, is not above three foot in Diameter.

They cannot give that lively polishment to Stones, as we give to ours in
Europe; and I believe the reason to be, because their Wheel does not run so
flat as ours. For in regard it is of Steel, to rub it upon the Emeril, as must
be done every four and twenty hours, the Tree must be taken off, which can
never be put on again so as to run so flat as it did. Had they the invention of
Iron-mills, upon which they never use Emeril, but only the File, because there
is no necessity to take off the Tree to file the Mill, they might polish their
Stones better than they do. I have told you they must either rub the Mill with
Emeril, or file it every four and twenty hours. For when the Stone has run for
some time, that part of the Mill becomes as smooth and bright as glass: so that
if you do not rough it again either with Emeril or the File, the powder will
not stay; whereas if the powder stay, there is more work done in an hour than
otherwise in two.

Though a Diamond be naturally very hard, having a kind of a knot, as you see
in wood, the Indian Lapidaries will cut the Stone, which our European
Lapidaries find great difficulty to do, and usually will not undertake to
perform; which makes the Indians require something more for the fashion.

As for the Government of the Mines, they trade very freely, and very
faithfully. They pay two per cent. to the King for all that they buy: besides
that, he has also a duty from the Merchants for leave to dig. The Merchant
after he has made search with the Miners, who know all the places where the
Diamonds grow, chooses out a place about two-hunder'd paces in compass, where
they set at work sometimes fifty, sometimes an hundred Miners, as they are in
have of work. And from the day that they begin to work, to the day that they
end, the Merchants pay to the King two Pagods a day; and four when they employ
an hundred men.

These poor people never get above three Pagods all the year long, though they
understand their business extremely well; so that their wages being so small,
they make no scruple, when they can handsomely, to hide a Stone for their own
profit: and in regard they are quite naked, only for a rag about their
privities, sometimes they are so dextrous as to swallow the Stone. The chief of
the Merchants who employ these Miners showed me one of them, that had cozened
him of a Stone, and had put it into the corner of his eye, but he took it from
the fellow so soon as he had discovered the cheat. To prevent this cozenage,
there are twelve or fifteen in fifty, who are engaged to the Merchant, that he
shall have no injury done him, nor any thefts committed. If by accident they
meet with a Stone that weighs 14 or 16 Carats, they presently carry it to the
Master of the work, who gives him in recompense the Sarpo, which is a piece of
Calicut to make him a Bonnet, to the value of 25 Sous, together with half a
Pagod in Silver, or else a whole Pagod, when he gives him neither Rice nor
Sugar.

The Merchants that come to trade at the Mines keep their Lodgings; and every
morning about ten or eleven a clock, after they have dined, the Masters of the
Miners bring their Diamonds to show them. If the Stones are large, or that
there be so many as amount from two-thousand to sixteen-thousand Crowns, they
will leave them with the strange Merchant seven or eight days, for the
Merchants to consider. When the Merchant has seen the Stones, it becomes him to
agree upon the price in a short time. Otherwise the party that owes the Stones,
takes them away again, and you shall never see the same Stones again, unless
mixed with others, When the bargain is concluded, the Purchaser gives a Bill of
Exchange upon the Banker. If you have agreed to pay him in four days, and make
him stay longer, you must pay him down one and an half in the hundred for a
months interest. Most commonly when they know the Merchant to be sufficient,
they will choose to take a Bill of Exchange for Agra, for Golconda, or
Visapour, but more especially for Surat, as being the most frequented Port in
all India, where they may furnish themselves with all Commodities which they
want.

It Is very pleasant to see the young children of the Merchants and other people
of the Country, from the age of ten to fifteen or sixteen years, who seat
themselves upon a Tree that lies in the void place of the Town: Every one of
them has his Diamond-weights in a little Bag hanging at one side, on the other
his Purse with five or six-hunder'd Pagods in Gold in it. There they sit
expecting when any person will come to sell them some Diamonds. If any person
brings them a Stone, they put it into the hands of the eldest Boy among them,
who is as it were their chief; who looks upon it, and after that gives it to
him that is next him; by which means it goes from hand to hand, till it return
to him again, none of the rest speaking one word. After that he demands the
price, to buy it if possible; but if he buy it too dear, it is upon his own
account. In the evening the children compute what they have laid out, then they
look upon their Stones, and separate them according to their water, their
weight, and clearness. Then they bring them to the great Merchants, who have
generally great parcels to match: and the profit is divided among the children
equally; only the chief among them has a fourth in the hundred more than the
rest. As young as they are, they so well understand the price of Stones, that
if one of them have bought any purchase, and is willing to lose one half in the
hundred, the other shall give him his Money. They shall hardly bring you a
parcel of Stones, above a dozen, wherein there is not some flaw or other defect.

When I came to the Mine, I went to wait upon the Governor, who told me I was
welcome; and because he made no question but that I had brought Gold with me,
(for they talk of nothing under Gold at the Mines,) he bid me only lay it in my
Chamber, and he would undertake it should be safe. Thereupon he presented me
with four servants to watch my Gold day and night, and to follow my orders,
bidding me withal fear nothing, but eat, drink, and sleep, and take care of my
health; but withal he told me I must be careful of not cheating the King.
Thereupon I fell to buying, and found profit enough, above twenty in the
hundred cheaper than at Golconda.

I have one thing to observe which is more than ordinarily curious, concerning
the manner how the Indians, as well Mahumetans as Idolaters, drive their
bargains. Every thing is done with great silence, and without any talking on
either side. The buyer and the seller sit one before another like two Tailors,
and the one of the two opening his Girdle, the seller takes the right hand of
the purchaser, and covers his own hand and that with his Girdle: under which,
in the presence of many Merchants that meet together in the same Hall, the
bargain is secretly driven without the knowledge of any person. For then the
purchaser nor seller speak neither with their mouths nor eyes, but only with
the hand, as thus. When the seller takes the purchaser by the whole hand, that
signifies a thousand, and as often as he squeezes it, he means so many thousand
Pagods or Roupies, according to the Money in question. If he takes but half to
the knuckle of the middle-finger, that is as much as to say fifty: The small end
of the finger to the first knuckle signifies ten. When he grasps five fingers,
it signifies five-hunder'd; if but one finger, one-hunder'd. This is the
mystery which the Indians use in driving their bargains. And many times it
happens, that in the same place, where there are several people, one and the
same parcel shall be sold seven or eight times over, and no person know that it
was sold in that manner every time.

As for the weight of the Stones, no person can be deceived in them, unless he
purchase them in hugger-mugger. For if they are publicly bought, there is a
person on purpose paid by the King, without any benefit from particular
persons, whose place it is to weigh the Diamonds; and when he has spoken the
weight, the buyer and seller are satisfied in his words, as not being a person
any way obliged to favor any person.

Having dispatched all my business at the Mine, the Governor appointed me six
Horsemen to convoy me through the Territories under his Government, which
extends to a River that separates the Kingdom of Visapour from that of
Golconda. It Is a very difficult thing to cross that River, it being deep, broad
and rapid; besides that, there are no Boats. But they ferry over Men,
Carriages, Oxen and Coaches upon a round Vessel, ten or twelve foot in
Diameter, made of Osiertwigs, like our Flaskets, and covered without with
Ox-hides; as I have already related. They might easily use Boats, or make a
Bridge; but the King of Golconda will not suffer either, because the River parts
the two Kingdoms. Every evening the Ferry-men on both sides are bound to carry
to two Governors on each side the River, an exact account of the Persons,
Carriages and Merchandises which they ferri'd over that day.

Coming to Golconda, I found that the person whom I had left in trust with my
Chamber, was dead: but that which I observed most remarkable, was, that I found
the door sealed with two Seals, one being the Cadi's or chief Justice's, the
other the Sha-Bander's, or Provost of the Merchants. An Officer of Justice,
together with the Servants I had left behind, watched the Chamber night and
day. This Officer hearing of my arrival, went and gave notice to the Cadi and
Sha-Bander, who sent for me. The Cadi presently asked me, if the Money I had
left in the Chamber where the person died were mine, and how I could prove it.
I told him I had no better proofs than the Letters of Exchange which I had
brought to the Banker that paid it by my order to the person deceased; to whom
I had also given farther order, that if the Banker paid me in Silver, he should
change the sum into Gold. Thereupon the Bankers were sent for, who affirming
the payments accordingly, the Cadi sent his Deputy to open the Chamber door;
nor would he leave me, till I had counted over my Money, and had assured him it
was right. After that I returned to the Cadi and the Sha-Bander, and signified
as much to them; and having paid them some Fees which they demanded, to the
value of four Crowns and a half of our Money, I returned them my thanks for
their care. This I relate to show the justice of the Country.

CHAP. XII. The Authors Journey to the other Mines; and how they find the
Diamonds there.
SEven days journey from Golconda Eastward there is another Diamond Mine,
called in the language of the Country Gani, in the Persian tongue Color. It
is near a great Town, by which the same River runs, which I crossed coming from
the other Mine; and a League and a half from the Town is a high Mountain in the
form of a Half Moon; the space between the Town and the Mountain is a Plain
where they dig and find Diamonds. The nearer they dig to the Mountain, the
larger Stones they find; but at the top they find nothing at all.

It is not above a hundred years since this Mine was found out by a Countryman,
who digging in a piece of ground to sow Millet, found therein a pointed Stone
that weighed above twenty-five Carats; he not knowing what the Stone was, but
seeing it glister, carried it to Golconda, where as it happened well for him,
he met with one that traded in Diamonds. The Merchant informing himself of the
place where the Stone was found, admired to see a Jewel of that bigness, not
having seen any one before that weighed above ten or twelve Carats. However his
report made a great noise in the Country; insomuch that the Mony'd men in the
Town set themselves to work, and causing the ground to be searched, they found,
and still do find bigger Stones, and in greater quantity than in any other
Mine. For they found a great number of Stones from ten to forty Carats, and
sometimes bigger; among the rest that large Stone that weighed nine hundred
Carats, which Mirgimola presented to Aureng-zeb.

But though this Mine of Color be so considerable for the quantity of great
Stones which are there found, yet the mischief is, the Stones are not clean;
the Waters having something of the quality of the Earth where they are found.
If the Ground be mershy, the Water enclines to black; if it be red, there is a
redness in the Water; in other places the Stones appear somewhat greenish, in
others yellowish; such a diversity of Soils there is between the Town and the
Mountain. Upon the most part of these Stones after they are cut, there appears
a kind of greasy moisture, which must be as often wiped off.

As for the Water of the Stones, it is remarkable, that whereas in Europe we
make use of daylight to examine the rough Stones, and to judge of their Water,
and the specks that are found therein, the Indians do all that in the
nightime, setting up a Lamp with a large Wiek, in a hole which they make in
the Wall, about a soot square; by the light whereof they judge of the Water and
clearness of the Stone, which they hold between their Fingers. The Water which
they call celestial is the worst of all, and it is impossible to discern it so
long as the Stone is rough. The most infallible way to find out that Water, is
to carry the Stone under a Tree thick of Boughs, for by the verdure of that
shade you may easily discern whether the Water be bluish or no.

The first time I was at the Mine, there were above sixty thousand persons at
work, men, women, and children; the men being employed to dig, the women, and
children to carry the Earth.

After the Miners have pitched upon the place where they intend to work, they
level another place close by, of the same extent, or else a little bigger,
which they enclose with a Wall about two foot high. In the bottom of that
little Wall, at the distance of every two foot, they make small holes to let in
the water; which they stop up afterward, till they come to drain out the water
again. The place being thus prepared, the people that are to work meet all
together, men, women, and children, with the Workmaster in the Company of his
Friends and Relations. Then he brings along with him some little Image of the
God that they adore; which being placed upright upon the ground, they all
prostrate themselves three times before it, while their Priest says a certain
prayer. The prayer being ended, he marks the forehead of every one with a kind
of Glue, made of Saffron and Gum, to such a compass as will hold seven or eight
Grains of Rice, which he sticks upon it; then having washed their bodies with
water, which every one brings in his pot, they rank themselves in order to eat
what the Workmaster presents them, before they go to work, to encourage them
both to labor and be faithful. This Feast consists of nothing else but every
one his Plate of Rice, distributed by the Bramin; for an Idolater may eat any
thing from the hands of one of their Priests. The Plates are made of the Leaves
of a certain Tree, not much unlike our Walnut-tree Leaves. Besides this, every
one has a quarter of a pound of Butter, melted in a small Copper pot with some
Sugar.

When their Feast is over, the men fall to digging, the women and children to
carry Earth to the place prepared in that manner as I have already described,
They dig ten, twelve, and sometimes fourteen foot deep; but when they come to
any water they leave off. All the Earth being carried into the place
beforementioned, the men, women, and children with Pitchers throw the water
which is in the drains upon the Earth, letting it soak for two or three days,
according to the hardness of it, till it come to be a kind of Batter; then they
open the holes in the Wall to let out the water, and throw on more water still,
till all the mud be washed away, and nothing left but the Sand. After that they
dry it in the Sun; and then they winnow the Sand in little Winnows, as we
winnow our Corn. The small dust flies away, the great remains, which they pour
out again upon the ground.

The Earth being thus winnow'd, they spread it with a kind of Rake, as thin as
they possibly can; then with a wooden Instrument, like a Paviers Rammer, about
half a foot wide at the bottom, they pound the Earth from one end to the other,
two or three times over. After that they winnow it again then; and spreading it
at one end of the Van, for fear of losing any of they Earth, the look for the
Diamond.

Formerly they were wont to pound the Earth with great Flint-stones, instead of
wooden Rammers; which made great flaws in the Diamonds, and is therefore now
left off.

Heretofore they made no scruple to buy those Diamonds that had a green
outside; for being cut, they proved very white, and of an excellent water.

Since they have been more nice; for there was a Mine discovered between
Color and Raolconda, which the King caused to be shut up again, by reason of
some cheats that were used there; for they found therein that sort of Stones
which had this green outside, fair and transparent, and which appeared more
fair than the others; but when they came to the Mill they crumbl'd to pieces.

CHAP. XIII. A Continuation of the Authors Travels to the Diamond Mines.
I come to the third Mine, which is the most ancient of all, in the Kingdom of
Bengala. You may give it the name of Soumelpour, which is the name of the Town
next to the place where the Diamonds are found; or rather Gonel, which is the
name of the River in the Sand whereof they seek for the Stones. The Territories
through which this River runs, belong to a Raja, who was anciently tributary to
the Great Mogul, but revolted in the time of the Wars between Sha-jehan and
Gehan-guir his Father. So soon as Sha-jehan came to the Empire, he sent to
demand his Tribute of this Raja, as well for the time past, as to come; who
finding that his Revenues were not sufficient to pay him, quitted his Country,
and retired into the Mountains with his Subjects. Upon his refusal, Sha-jehan
believing he would stand it out, sent a great Army against him, persuading
himself that he should find great store of Diamonds in his Country. But he
found neither Diamonds, nor People, nor Victuals, the Raja having burnt all the
Corn which his Subjects could not carry away; so that the greatest part of
Sha-jehans Army perished for hunger. At length the Raja returned into his
Country, upon condition to pay the Mogul some slight Tribute.

The Way from Agra to this Mine.
From Agra to Halabas, costs 130

From Halabas to Banarous, costs 33

From Banarous to Sasaron, costs 4

From Agra to Saferon you travel Eastward; but from Saferon to the Mine you
must wind to the South, coming first to a great Town, costs 21

This Town belongs to the Raja I have spoke of. From thence you go to a
Fortress called Rodas, costs 4

This is one of the strongest places in all Asia, seated upon a Mountain,
fortified with six Bastions, and twenty-seven pieces of Cannon, with three
Moats full of Water, wherein there are good Fish. There is but one way to come
to the top of the Mountain, where there is a Plain half a League in compass,
wherein they sow Corn and Rice. There is above twenty Springs that water that
Plain; but all the rest of that Mountain from top to bottom is nothing but a
steep Precipice covered with overgrown Woods. The Raja's formerly used to live
in this Fort with a Garrison of seven or eight hundred men. But the Great Mogul
has it now; having taken that Fort by the policy of the famous Mirgimola, which
all the Kings of India could never take before. The Raja left three Sons, who
betrayed one another; the eldest was poisoned, the second went and served the
Great Mogul, who gave him the command of four thousand Horse; the third
possesses his Fathers Territories, paying the Mogul a small Tribute.

From the Fortress of Rodas to Soumelpour, costs 30

Soumelpour is a great Town, the Houses whereof are built of Earth, and covered
only with Branches of Coco-trees. All these thirty Leagues you travel through
Woods, which is a very dangerous passage, as being very much pestered with
Robbers. The Raja lives half a League from the Town, in Tents set upon a fair
rising ground, at the foot whereof runs the Gouel, descending from the Southern
Mountains, and falling into Ganges.

In this River they find the Diamonds. For after the great Rains are over,
which is usually in December, they stay all January till the River be clear; by
reason that by that time in some places it is not above two foot deep, and in
several places the Sand lies above the water. About the end of January, or the
beginning of February, there flock together out of the great Town, and some
others adjoining, above eight thousand persons, men, women and children, that
are able to work. They that are skilful know by the sand whether there be any
Diamonds or no, when they find among the sand little Stones like to those which
we call Thunder-Stones. They begin to make search in the River from the Town of
Soumelpour to the very Mountains from whence the River falls, for fifty Leagues
together.

Where they believe there are Diamonds, they encompass the place with Stakes,
Faggots, and Earth, as when they go about to make the Arch of a Bridge to drain
all the water out of that place. Then they dig out all the Sand for two foot
deep, which is all carried and spread upon a great place for that purpose
prepared upon the side of the River; encompassed with a little Wall about a
foot and half high. When they have filled this place with as much Sand as they
think convenient, they throw water upon it, wash it, and sift it; doing in
other things as they do at the Mines which I have already described.

From this River come all those fair Points which are called natural Points,
but a great Stone is seldom found here. The reason why none of these Stones
have been seen in Europe, is because of the Wars, that have hindered the people
from working.

Besides the Diamond Mine which I have spoken of in the Province of Carnatica,
which Mirgimola caused to be shut up, by reason of the yellowness of the
Diamonds, and the foulness of the Stones; there is in the Island of Borneo, the
largest Island in the World, another River called Succadan, in the Sand whereof
they find Diamonds as hard as any in the other Mines. The principal reason that
dissuaded me from going to the Island of Borneo was, because I understood that
the Queen of the Island would not permit any Strangers to carry away any of
those Diamonds out of the Island. Those few that are exported, being carried
out by stealth, and privately sold at Batavia. I say the Queen, and not the
King, because in that Island the Women have the Sovereign Command, and not the
Men. For the people are so curious to have a lawful Heir upon the Throne, that
the Husband not being certain that the Children which he has by his Wife are
his own; but the Wife being always certain that the Children which she bears
are hers, they rather choose to be governed by a Woman, to whom they give the
Title of Queen; her Husband being only her Subject, and having no power but
what she permits him.

CHAP. XIV. Of the diversity of Weights used at the Diamond Mines. Of the
Pieces of Gold and Silver there Current; and the Rule which they observe to
know the Price of Diamonds.
AT the Mine of Raolconda they weigh by Mangelins, a Mangelin being one Carat
and three quarters, that is seven Grains.

At the Mine of Gani or Color they use the same Weights.

At the Mine of Soumelpour in Bengala, they weigh by Rati's, and the Rati is
seven eighths of a Carat, or three Grains and a half. They use the same Weights
over all the Empire of the Mogul.

In the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, they make use of Mangelins: but a
Mangelin in those parts is not above one Carat and three eighths. The Portugals
in Goa make use of the same Weights in Goa; but a Mangelin there is not above
five Grains.

As for the Money in use: First, in Bengala, in the Territories of the Raja
before mentioned, in regard they lie enclosed within the Dominions of the Great
Mogul, they make their payments in Roupies.

At the two Mines about Raolconda in the Kingdom of Visapour, the payments are
made in new Pagods, which the King coins in his own Name, as being independent
from the Great Mogul. The new Pagod is not always at the same value; for it is
sometimes worth three Roupies and a half, sometimes more, and sometimes less;
being advanced and brought down according to the course of Trade, and the
correspondence of the Bankers with the Princes and Governors.

At the Mine of Color or Gani, which belongs to the Kingdom of Golconda, they
make their payments in new Pagods, which are equal in value to the King of
Visapour's. But sometimes you are forced to give four in the hundred more, by
reason they are better Gold, and besides, they will take no others at the Mine.
These Pagods are coined by the English and Hollanders, who, whether willingly
or by force, are priviledg'd by the King to coin them in their Forts: And those
of the Hollanders cost one or two per cent. more than the English, by reason
they are better Gold, and for that the Miners choose them before the other. But
in regard the Merchants are prepossessed that the Miners are a rude and savage
sort of people, and that the ways are dangerous, they stay at Golconda, where
the Workmasters keep correspondence with them, and send them their Jewels.
There they pay in old Pagods coined many ages ago by several Princes that
Reigned in India before the Mahumetans got footing therein. Those old Pagods
are worth four Roupies and a half, that is to say, a Roupy more than the new:
not that there is any more Gold in them, or that they weigh any more. Only the
Bankers, to oblige the King, not to bring down the price, pay him annually a
very great Sum, by reason they get very much by it. For the Merchants receive
none of those Pagods without a Changer to examine them, some being all defaced,
others low-metal, others wanting weight: so that if one of these Bankers were
not present at the receipt, the Merchant would be a greater loser, sometimes
one, sometimes five, sometimes six in the hundred: for which they also pay them
one quarter in the hundred for their pains. When the Miners are paid, they
also receive their Money in the presence of Bankers, who tells them which is
good, and which is bad; and has for that also one quarter in the hundred. In the
payment of a thousand or two-thousand Pagods, the Banker, for his fee, puts
them into a bag, and seals it with his Seal; and when the Merchant pays for his
Diamonds, he brings the Seller to the Banker, who finding his bag entire,
assures the party that all is right and good within; and so there is no more
trouble.

As for the Roupies, they take indifferently, as well the Great Mogul's as the
King of Golconda's: by reason that those which that King coins, are to be
coined, by Articles, with the Great Mogul's stamp.

It Is an idle thing to believe that vulgar error, that it is enough to carry
Spices, Tobacco, Looking-glasses, and such trifles to truck for Diamonds at the
Indian-Mines: For I can assure ye, these people will not only have Gold, but
Gold of the best sort too.

As for the roads to the Mines, some fabulous modern relations have rendered
them very dangerous, and filled them full of Lions, Tigers, and cruel People;
but I found them not only free from those wild creatures, but also the People
very loving and courteous.

From Golconda to Raolconda, which is the principal Mine, the road is as
follows: the road being measured by Gos, which is four French-leagues.

From Golconda to Canapour, one Gos.

From Canapour to Parquel, two Gos and a half.

From Parquel to Cakenol, one Gos.

From Cakenol to Canol-Candanor, three Gos.

From Canol-Candanor to Setapour, one Gos.

From Setapour to the River, two Gos.

That River is the bound between the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour.

From the River to Alpour, three quarters of a Gos.

From Alpour to Canal, three quarters of a Gos.

From Canal to Raolconda, two Gos and a half.

Thus from Golconda to the Mine, they reckon it seventeen Gos, or 68
French-Leagues.

From Golconda to the Mine of Color or Gani, is reckoned thirteen Gos and
three quarters, or 55 French-leagues.

From Golconda to Almaspinda, three Gos and a half.

From Almaspinda to Kaper, two Gos.

From Kaper to Montecour, two Gos and a half.

From Montecour to Naglepar, two Gos.

From Naglepar to Eligada, one Gos and a half.

From Eligada to Sarvaron, one Gos.

From Sarvaron to Mellaseron, one Gos.

From Mellaseron to Ponocour, two Gos and a quarter.

At Ponocour you only cross the River to Color.

CHAP. XV. The Rule to know the just price and value of a Diamond of what
weight soever, from three to a hundred, and upwards: a secret known to very
few people in Europe.
I Make no mention of Diamonds of three Carats, the price thereof being
sufficiently known.

First then, as to others above that weight, you must know how much the Diamond
weighs, and see if it be perfect; if it be a thick Stone, well-squar'd, and
have all its corners, if the water be white and lively, without specks and
flaws. If it be a Stone cut in Facets, which we call a Rose-Diamond, you must
take notice whether the form be round or oval, whether it be of a fair breadth,
and not of Stones clapped together; whether it be of a good water, and without
specks or flaws.

Such a Stone weighing one Carat, is worth 150 Livres or more. Now to know how
much a Stone of the same perfection, weighing 12 Carats, is worth.

Multiply 12 by 12, it makes 144. Then multiply 144 by 150, which is the price
of a Stone of one Carat, it comes to 21600 Livres.

As for Example. ^

To know the price of imperfect Diamonds, you must observe the same rule,
grounded upon the price of a Stone of one Carat.

You have a Diamond of fifteen Carats shown ye, neither of a good water, nor
good form, and full of specks and flaws besides: such a Diamond cannot be worth
above 60, or 80, or 100 Livres at most, according to the goodness of the Stone.
Multiply therefore the weight of the Diamond of 15 Carats by 15: then multiply
the product, which is 125, by the value of the Stone of one Carat, which we
will grant to be 80 Livres, the product whereof is 10000 Livres, the price of a
Diamond of 15 Carats.

The Example. ^

By that it is easy to discover the difference between a perfect and an
imperfect Stone. For if that Stone of 15 Carats were perfect, the second
multiplication should be wrought by 150, which is the price of a perfect Stone
of one Carat: and then the Diamond would come not to 10000 Livres, but to 33750
Livres, that is 23750 Livres more than an imperfect Diamond of the same weight.

By this rule observe the price of two the greatest Diamonds of the World for
Cut-stones, the one in Asia, belonging to the Great Mogul; the other in Europe,
in the possession of the Duke of Tuscany.

The Great Mogul's Diamond weighs 279 and 9 16 th Carats. It is of a perfect
good water, of a good shape, with only a little flaw in the edg of the cutting
below, which goes round about the Stone. Without that flaw, the first Carat
were worth 160 Livres, but for that reason I reckon it not at above 150; and so
by the rule it comes to 11723278 Livres, 14 Sous, and 3 Liards. Did the Diamond
weigh no more than 279 Carats, it would not be worth above 11676150 Livres, so
that the nine 16 ths comes to 47128 Livres, 14 Sous, and 3 Liards.

The Great Duke of Tuscany's Diamond weighs 139 Carats, clean and wellshap'd,
cut in facets every way: but in regard the water enclines somewhat toward the
color of Citron, I do not value the first Carat above 135 Livres; so that by
the rule the Diamond ought to be worth 2608335 Livres.

A Diamond by the Miners is called Iri, which the Turks, Persians and Arabians
call Almas.

CHAP. XVI. Of Colored Stones, and the Places where they are found.
THere are but two places in all the East where Colour'd-Stones are found,
within the Kingdom of Pegu, and the Island of Ceylan. The first is a Mountain
twelve days journey, or there-abouts, from Siren, toward the North-east; the
name whereof is Capelan. In this Mine are found great quantities of Rubies, and
Espinels, or Mothers of Rubies, yellow Topazes, blew and white Saphirs,
Jacinths, Amethysts, and other Stones of different colors. Among these Stones
which are hard, they find other Stones of various colors, that are very soft,
which they call Bacan in the language of the Country, but are of little or no
esteem.

Siren is the name of the City where the King of Pegu resides; and Ava is the
Port of his Kingdom. From Ava to Siren you go by water in great
flat-bottom'd-Barks, which is a voyage of sixty days. There is no going by
land, by reason the Woods are full of Lions, Tigers, and Elephants. It is one
of the poorest Countries in the World, where there is no Commodity but Rubies;
the whole Revenue whereof amounts not to above a hunder'd-thousand Crowns.
Among all the Stones that are there found, you shall hardly see one of three or
four Carats that is absolutely clean, by reason that the King strictly enjoins
his Subjects not to export them out of his Dominions; besides that, he keeps to
himself all the clean Stones that are found. So that I have got very
considerably in my Travels, by carrying Rubies out of Europe into Asia. Which
makes me very much suspect the relation of Vincent le Blanc, who reports that
he saw in the King's Palace Rubies as big as eggs.

All Rubies are sold by weights, which are called Ratis; that is, three grains
and a half, or seven 8 ths of a Carat: and the payments are made in old Pagods.

A Ruby weighing one Ratis, has been sold for Pagods 20

A Ruby of 2 Ratis and one 8 th, Pagods 85

A Ruby of 3 Ratis and one 4 th, Pagods 185

A Ruby of 4 Ratis and five 8 ths, Pagods 450

A Ruby of 5 Ratis, Pagods 525

A Ruby of 6 Ratis and a half, Pagods 920

If a Ruby exceed six Ratis, and be a perfect Stone, there is no value to be
set upon it.

The Natives of the Country call all Colour'd-Stones Rubies, distinguishing
them only by the color. Saphirs they call Blue-Rubies, Amethysts they call
Violet-Rubies, Topazes Yellow-Rubies; and so of other Stones.

The other place where Rubies are found, is a River in the Island of Ceylan,
which descends from certain high Mountains in the middle of the Island; which
swells very high when the rains fall; but when the waters are low, the people
make it their business to search among the Sands for Rubies, Saphirs and
Topazes. All the Stones that are found in this River, are generally fairer and
clearer than those of Pegu.

I forgot to tell you that there are some Rubies, but more Balleis-Rubies, and
an abundance of Bastard-Rubies, Saphirs and Topazes found in the Mountains that
run along from Pegu to the Kingdom of Camboya.

Colour'd-Stones are also found in some parts of Europe, as in Bohemia and
Hungary. In Hungary there is a Mine where they find certain Flints of different
bigness, some as big as eggs, some as big as a man's fist, which being broken,
contain a Ruby within as hard and as clean as those of Pegu.

In Hungary there is a Mine of Opals, which Stone is nowhere else to be found
in the World but there.

The Turquoise is nowhere to be found but in Persia. Where there are two
Mines. The one is called the Old-Rock, three days journey from Meched, toward
the North-west, near a great Town which goes by the name of Michabourg. The
other which is called the New-Rock is five days journey off. Those of the
New-Rock are of a paler blue enclining to white, and less esteemed, so that you
may have a great many for a little Money. Some years since the King of Persia
commanded that no Turquoises should be dug out of the Old-Rock, but only for
himself; making use of those Turquoises instead of enamelling, to adorn Hilts
of Swords, Knives and Daggers; of which the Persians are altogether ignorant.

As for Emraulds, it is a vulgar error to say they come originally from the
East. And therefore when Jewellers and Goldsmiths, to prefer a deep-colour'd
Emrauld enclining to black, tell ye, it is an Oriental Emrauld, they speak that
which is not true. I confess I could never discover in what part of our
Continent those Stones are found. But sure I am, that the Eastern-part of the
World never produced any of those Stones, neither in the Continent, nor in the
Islands. True it is, that since the discovery of America some of those Stones
have been often brought rough from Peru to the Philippine-Islands, whence they
have been transported into Europe; but this is not enough to make them
Oriental. Besides that, at this time they send them into Spain through the
North-Sea.

CHAP. XVII. Of Pearls, and the Places where they Fish for them.
IN the first place, there is a Fishery for Pearls in the Persian Gulf, round
about the Island of Bakren. It belongs to the King of Persia, and there is a
strong Fort in it, Garrisoned with three hundred men. The Water which the
people drink in that Island, and all along the Coast of Persia, is brackish and
ill-tasted, so that only the Natives of the Country can drink it. Fresh water
costs Strangers very dear; for the people fetch it sometimes one League,
sometimes two Leagues from the Island, from the bottom of the Sea, being let
down by a Rope, with a Bottle or two tied about their wastes, which they fill,
and stop it well; and then giving the Rope a twitch, are hall'd up again by
their Companions.

Every one that fishes pays to the King of Persia five Abassi's, whether he get
any thing or no. The Merchant also pays the King some small matter for every
thousand Oysters.

The second Fishery for Pearls is right against Bakren upon the Coast of Arabia
the happy, near the City of Catifa, which together with all the Country about
it, is under the Jurisdiction of an Arabian Prince. The Pearls that are fished
in these places are sold to the Indians, who are not so nice as we; for they
give a good price for all, as well the uneven as the round ones. Over all Asia
they choose the yellow Water enclining to white; for they say those Pearls that
incline somewhat to a Gold color, are more brisk, and never change color; but
that the white ones will change in thirty-years time, throughthe very heat of
the weather and the sweat of the person that wears them, turning the
scandalously yellow.

There is a wondrous Pearl in the possession of an Arabian Prince, that took
Mascate from the Portugals. He then called himself Imenhect Prince of Mascate;
being known before only by the name of Aceph Ben-Ali Prince of Norennae. It is
but a small Province, but it is the best of all in the Happy Arabia. Therein
grow all things necessary for the life of man; particularly, delicate fruits,
but more especially most excellent Grapes, which would make most incomparable
Wine. This Prince has the most wonderful Pearl in the world, not so much for
its bigness, for it weighs not above twelve Carats and one sixteenth, nor for
its perfect roundness, but because it is so clear and so transparent that you
may almost see through it. The Great Mogul offered him by a Banian forty
thousand Crowns for his Pearl, but he would not accept it. By which you see,
that it is more profitable to carry Jewels that are rare out of Europe into
Asia, than to bring them out of Asia into Europe; unless it be to Japan or
China, where Jewels are little esteemed.

There is another Fishery for Pearls in the Sea that beats against the Walls of
a great Town called Manar, in the Island of Ceylan. For their roundness and
their Water, they are the fairest that are found in any other Fishery; but they
rarely weigh above three or four Carats.

There are excellent Pearls, and of a very good water, and large, which are
found upon the Coast of Japan; but there are few fished for, in regard Jewels
are of no esteem among the Natives.

There are other Fisheries in the West Indies; in the first place all along the
Island of Cubagna, three Leagues in compass, lying ten Degrees and a half of
Northern Latitude, a hundred and sixty Leagues from Santo Domingo. The Pearls
are small, seldom weighing above five Carats.

The second Fishery is in the Island of Manguerita, or the Island of Pearls, a
League from Cubagna, but much bigger. This Fishery is not the most plentiful,
but it is the most esteemed of all those in the West Indies, by reason the
Pearls are of most excellent water, and very large. I sold one Pear-fashion'd
to Sha-Est-Kan, the Great Moguls Uncle, that weighed fifty-five Carats.

The third Fishery is at Camogete, near the Continent.

The fourth at Rio de la Hacha, all along the same Coast.

The fifth and last, at St. Martha's, sixty Leagues from Rio de la Hacha. All
these three Fisheries produce very weighty Pearls; but they are generally
illshap'd, and of a water enclining to the color of Lead.

As for Scotch Pearl, and those that are found in the Rivers of Bavaria, tho a
Neck-lace of them may be worth a thousand Crowns, yet they are not to be
compared with the Eastern and West Indian Pearls.

Some years since there was a Fishery discovered in a certain place upon the
the Coast of Japan, and I have seen some which the Hollanders have brought
thence. They are of a very good water, and large, but very uneven.

Take this observation along with you, touching the difference of their waters;
some being very white, others inclining to yellow, others to black, others to a
leaden color. As for the last, there are no such but only in America, which
proceeds from the nature of the Earth at the bottom of the Water, which is
generally more ouzy than in the East. I once met with six Pearls in the return
of a Cargo from the West Indies that were perfectly round, but black like jet,
which weighed one with another twelve Carats. I carried them into the East
Indies to put them off, but could meet with no Chapman to buy them. As for
those that incline to yellow, it proceeds from hence, that the Fishermen
selling the Oysters to the Merchants in heaps, while they stay fourteen or
fifteen days till the Oysters lose their water, the Oysters wast and begin to
smell, for which reason the Pearl grows yellow by injection, which appears to
be a truth, in regard that where the Oysters preserve their Jiquor the Pearls
are white. Now the reason why they stay till the Oysters open of themselves, is
because that if they should force them open, they might perhaps injure and cut
the Pearl. In short, the Eastern people are much of our humor in matter of
whiteness, for they love the whitest Pearls and the blackest Diamonds; the
whitest bread, and the fairest women.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Pearls are bred in the Oysters; how they Fish for them,
and at what time.
SOme ancient Writers have vulgarly reported, that Pearls are produced by the
Dew of Heaven, and that there is but one in an Oyster; but experience teaches
the contrary. For the Oyster never stirs from the bottom of the Sea, where the
Dew can never come, which is many times twelve fathoms deep; besides, that it
is as often observed, that there are six or seven Pearls in one Oyster; and I
have had in my hands an Oyster, wherein there were above ten beginning to
breed. It Is very true, that they are not always of the same bigness; for they
grow in an Oyster after the same manner as Eggs in the Belly of a Pullet. But I
cannot say there are Pearls in all, for you may open many Oysters and find none.

It Is no advantage to them that fish for Pearls; for if the poor people could
find any other employment, they would never stick to such a one as merely keeps
them alive. But the Land is so barren, that you may travel twenty Leagues
before you meet with one blade of Grass; and the people are so miserably poor,
that they feed upon nothing but Dates and Salt-fish.

They fish in the Eastern Seas twice a year; the first time in March and April,
the second time in August and September; and they keep their Fairs in June' and
November. However they do not fish every year; for they that fish, will know
beforehand whether it will turn to account or no. Now to the end they may not
be deceived, they send to the places where they are wont to fish, seven or
eight Barks, who bring back each of them about a thousand Oyste^^^ which they
open, and if they find not in every thousand Oysters to the value of five
Fano's of Pearl, which amounts to half a Crown of our Money, it is a sign that
the Fishing will not turn to account, in regard the poor people would not be
able to defray their charge. For partly for a stock to set out, and partly for
victuals while they are abroad, they are forced to borrow Money at three and
four in the hundred a month. So that unless a thousand Oysters yield them five
Fano's of Pearls, they do not fish that year. As for the Merchants, they must
buy their Oysters at hap-hazard, and be content with what they find in them. If
they meet with great Pearls, they account themselves happy; which they seldom
do at the Fishery of Manar, those Pearls being fit for little else but to be
sold by the Ounce, to powder. Sometimes a thousand Oysters amounts to seven
Fano's, and the whole Fishery to a hundred thousand Piasters. The Hollanders
take of every Diver eight Piasters, in regard they always attend the Fishery
with two or three small Men of War, to defend them from the Malavares Pirates.

The more Rain falls in the year, the more profitable the Fishery happens to
be. They fish in twelve fathom water, five or six Leagues off at Sea, sometimes
two hundred and fifty Barks together, among which there is not above one or two
Diverse at most.

There is a Cord tied under the Arms of them that dive, one end whereof is held
by them that are in the Bark. There is also a great stone of eighteen or twenty
pound tied to the great Toe of him that dives; the end of the Rope that fastens
it being also held by them in the Vessel. The Diver has beside a Sack made like
a Net, the mouth whereof is kept open with a Hoop. Thus provided, he plunges
into the Sea, the weight of the stone presently sinking him; when he is at the
bottom, he slips off the stone, and the Bark puts off. Then the Diver goes to
filling his Sack, as long as he can keep his breath; which when he can do no
longer, he gives the Rope a twitch, and is presently hall'd up again. Those of
Manar are better Fishers, and stay longer in the water than those of Bakren and
Catifa; for they neither put Pincers upon their Noses, nor Cotton in their
Ears, as they do in the Persian Gulf.

After the Diver is draw'n up, he stays half a quarter of an hour to take
breath, and then dives again, for ten or twelve hours together. As for the
Oysters themselves, they throw 'em away, as being ill-tasted and unsavory.

To conclude the discourse of Pearls, you are to take notice, that in Europe
they sell them by the Carat weight, which is four Grains. In Persia they sell
them by the Abas, and one Abas is an eighteenth less than our Carat. In the
Dominions of the Mogul, the Kings of Visapour and Golconda weigh them by the
Ratis, and one Ratis is also an eighteenth less than our Carat.

Goa was formerly the greatest place of the world for the trade of Jewels and
Pearls. You must know therefore, that in Goa, and in all other places which the
Portugals had in the Indies, they used a particular weight to sell their Pearls
by, which they call Chego's; the proportion whereof to Carats appears in the
following Table.

Carats. Chegos. Carats. Chegos. 1 5 21 306 2 8 22 336 3 11 and a half 23 367
and a quarter 4 16 24 400 5 21 25 430 6 27 26 469 and a quarter 7 34 27 506 and
a quarter 8 44 28 544 and a quarter 9 56 29 584 10 69 30 625 11 84 31 667 and a
quart. 12 100 32 711 13 117 33 756 and a quart. 14 136 34 802 and 3 quart. 15
156 35 850 and a quart. 16 177 and 3 quart. 36 900 17 200 and a half 37 950 and
a half 18 225 38 1002 and 3 quar. 19 250 and a half 39 1056 20 277 and 3 quar.
40 1111 and a quar.

CHAP. XIX. Observations upon the fairest and largest Diamonds and Rubies which
the Author has seen in Europe and Asia, represented according to the Figures in
the Plates; as also upon those which the Author sold to the King upon his last
return from the Indies: with the Figure of a large Topaz, and the fairest
Pearls in the World.
Number 1.
THis Diamond belongs to the Great Mogul, being cut into the same form; and it
weighs 319 Ratis and an half, which make 279 and nine 16 ths of our Carats:
when it was rough, it weighed 907 Ratis, which make 793 Carats.

Numb. 2.
Is the figure of a Diamond belonging to the Great Duke of Tuscany. It weighs
139 Carats and an half: the fault of it is, that the water enclines somewhat to
a Citron-colour.

Numb. 3.
Is a Stone that weighs 176 and one 8 th Mangelins, which makes 242 Carats and
five 16 ths. A Mangelin coming to one and three 8 ths of our Carats. Being at
Golconda I saw this Stone; and it was the biggest that ever I saw in my life in
a Merchant's-hands. It was valued at 500000 Roupies, or 750000 Livres of our
Money: I offered 400000 Roupies, but could not have it.

Numb. 4.
Is the figure of a Diamond which I bought at Amadabat; and it weighed 178
Ratis, or 157 Carats and a quarter.





(...), and for several services done the Kingdom His Majesty honored him
with the Title of Noble.


Numb. 5.
Is the figure of the forementioned Diamond, after it was cut on both sides;
there remaining 94 Carats and a half; the water being perfect. The flat-side
where there were two flaws below, was as thin as a sheet of brown-paper: When
the Stone was cut, I caused all that thin side to be taken off, with one part
of the end above, where there remains one little speck of a flaw.

Numb. 6.
Is another Diamond which I bought at the Mine of Color. It is fair and
clean, and weighs 36 Mangelins, or 63 and 3 8 ths of our Carats.

Numb. 7 and 8.
Are two pieces of a Stone that was cut in two, which being entire, weighed 75
Mangelins and a half, or 104 Carats. Though it were of a good water, it seemed
so foul in the middle, that, in regard it was large, and held at a high price,
there was never a Banian would venture upon it. At length an Hollander bought
it, and cutting it in two, found in the middle of it eight Carats of filth like
a rottenweed. The small piece happened to be clean, excepting a little flaw
hardly to be perceived, but for the other, wherein there are so many other
cross flaws, there was no way but to make seven or eight pieces of it. The
Hollander ran a great risco in cutting it a-sunder; for it was very great luck
that it had not broke into a hundred pieces. Yet for all that it did not turn
to account; so that it is in vain for another to buy that which a Banian
refuses.

CHAP. XX. The Forms of twenty Rubies which the Author sold to the King upon
his last return from the Indies. The first part of the Plate shows the weight,
extent, and thickness of every Stone.
Numb. 1.
IS the Figure of a Ruby that belongs to the King of Persia. It is in shape and
bigness like an Egg, boar'd through in the middle, deep colored, fair and
clean, except one flaw in the side. They will not tell you what it cost, nor
let you know what it weighs; only it appears by the Register that it has been
several years in the Kings Treasury.

Numb. 2.
Is the Figure of a Balleis Ruby; sold for such to Giaser-Kan, the Great Moguls
Uncle, who paid 950000 Roupies, or 1425000 Livres for it. But an old Indian
Jeweller affirming afterward, that it was no Balleis Ruby, that it was not
worth above 500 Roupies, and that Giafer-kan was cheated; and his opinion being
confirmed by Sha-jehan, the most skilful in Jewels of any person in the Empire,
Aureng-zeb compelled the Merchant to take it again, and to restore the Money
back.

Numb. 3, and 4.
Is is the Figure of Ruby belonging to the King of Visapour. Numb. 4, is the
height of the Stone above the Gold. And Numb. 3, is the roundness of the
Beazil. It weighs fourteen Mangelins, or seventeen Carats and a half; a
Visapour Mangelin being but five Grains. It cost the King 14200 new Pagods, or
74550 Livres.

Numb. 5.
Is the Figure of a Ruby that a Banian showed me at Banarous; it weighs 58
Rati's, or 50 Carats and 3 quarters; being of the second rank in beauty. In
shape it is like a Plump Almond, bored through at the end. I offered 40000
Roupies, or 60000 Livres for it; but the Merchant demanded 55000 Roupies.

Numb. 6.
Is the Figure of a great Topaz belonging to the Great Mogul; nor did I see him
wear any other but that, all the while I was in India. This Topaz weighs 181
Rati's and half a quarter, or 157 Carats and three quarters. It was bought at
Goa for the Great Mogul, and cost 181000 Roupies, or 271500 Livres of our Money.

Numb. 7, 8, 9.
Are the Figures of three several Rubies belonging to the King of France.

Numb. 1.
Is the Figure of a Pearl which the King of Persia bought at the Fishery of
Catifa in Arabia. It cost him 82000 Tomans, or 1400000 Livres of our Money, at
forty-six Livres and six Deneers to a Toman. It is the fairest and most perfect
Pearl that ever was yet found to this hour, having no defect.

Numb. 2.
Is the Figure of the biggest Pearl that ever I saw in the Court of the Great
Mogul. It hangs about the artificial Peacocks neck that adorns his great Throne.

Numb. 3.
Is the Figure of a Pearl that I sold to Cha-Est-Kan; the Water is somewhat
saint, but it is the biggest Pearl that was ever carried out of Europe into
Asia.

Numb. 4.
Is a great perfect Pearl, as well for its Water as for its form, which is like
an Olive. It is in the midst of a Chain of Emraulds and Rubies, which the Great
Mogul wears; which being put on, the Pearl dangles at the lower part of his
Breast.

Numb. 5.
Is a Pearl perfectly round, the biggest I ever saw, and belongs to the Great
Mogul. The like could never be found; for which reason the Great Mogul lays it
up very charily, and never uses it. For if it could be matched, both would make
a Pair of Pendants for the Ears, set between Rubies or Emraulds, according to
the custom of the Country; there being no person of any quality that does not
wear a Pearl between two colored Stones in his Ear.

The form of three Balais Rubies belonging to his Majesty transparent quite
through.




CHAP. XXI. Of Coral, and Yellow Amber, and the places where it is found.
COral, but little valued in Europe, is highly esteemed in all the three other
parts of the World; and there are three places where they fish for it upon the
Coast of Sardigna. That of Arguerrel is the fairest of all. The second place is
called Boza; and the third is near the Island of St. Peter. There are two other
places upon the Coast of France, the one near the Bastion of France; the other
at Tabarque. There is also another Fishery upon the Coast of Sicily, near
Trepano, but the Coral is small, and ill-colour'd. There is another upon the
Coast of Catalogna, near Cape de Quiers; where the Coral is large, and of an
excellent color, but the branches are short. There is a ninth Fishery in the
Island of Majorque, much like that near the Island of Corsica. And these are
all the places in the Medsterranean-Sea, where they fish for Coral; for there
is none at all in the Ocean.

Because that Coral grows under the hollow Rocks where the Sea is deep, the
Fishers fix two spars of wood across, fastening a great piece of Lead in the
middle to make it sink: after that they wind carelessly about the spar good
store of tufted Hemp, and fasten the wood to two Cords, one end whereof hangs
at the Poop, the other at the Prow of the Vessel. Then letting go the wood with
the stream or current by the sides of the Rock, the Hemp twists it self among
the Coral, so that sometimes they stand in need of five or six Boats to pull up
the wood again: and if one of the Cables should chance to break with the
stress, all the Rowers are in danger to be lost. While they tear up the Coral
thus by force, there tumbles as much into the Sea as they fetch up: and the
bottom of the Sea being generally very ouzy, the Coral will be eaten as our
fruits are eaten by the worms; so that the sooner they get it out of the mud,
the less it will be wasted.

This puts me in mind of one thing that I saw at Marseilles in a Shop where
they dealt in Coral. It was a great piece of Coral, as big about as a man's
fist, which because it was a little worm-eaten, was cut in two pieces. When it
was so cut, there was a worm that stirred, and had life, and lived for some
months after, being again put into the hole. For among some branches of Coral
there engenders a kind of spongy-matter, like our honey-combs, where these
worms lie like bees.

Some think that Coral is soft in the Sea, though in truth it be hard. But this
indeed is as true, that in certain months of the year you may squeze out of the
end of a branch a kind of milky-substance; and this perhaps may be a kind of
seed, which falling upon any thing that it first meets with in the Sea (as if
it light upon a dead Skull, the blade of a Sword, or a Pomgranate) produces
another branch of Coral. And I have seen a Pomgranate, and had it in my hand,
that had fallen into the Sea, about which the Coral had twined at least half a
foot high.

They fish for Coral from the beginning of April to the end of July; to which
purpose there are employed above 200 Vessels, some years more, and some years
less. They are built all along the River of Genoa, being very swift. Their
sails are very large for more swiftness, so that there are no Galleys can reach
them. There are seven men and a boy to every Barque. They never fish above
forty miles from the Land, where they think there are Rocks, for fear of the
Pirates, from which they make all the Sail they can when they see them, and
easily escape them through the nimbleness of their Vessels.

I have one observation to make concerning Coral, in respect of the
Eastern-people. The Japonners make little account of Jewels or Pearls; valuing
nothing so much as a good grain of Coral, wherewith they pull the string that
shuts their Purses, such as we had formerly in England. So that they strive who
shall have the fairest grain of Coral hanging at the end of the Silk-string
that draws their Purses. For this reason a piece of Coral as big as an egg,
fair and clean without any flaw, will produce what any man will ask in reason
for it. The Portugueses have assured me they would sometimes give 20000 Crowns
for such a piece. And no wonder they will give so much Money for a piece of
Coral, who despising all other Jewels and Pearls, care for nothing but that
which is in no esteem any where else. They set a great value upon the Skin of a
certain Fish which is rougher than a Seal-skin. Upon the back of the Fish there
are six little holes, and sometimes eight, somewhat elevated, with another in
the middle; in the form of a Rose. They make Scabberds for Swords of the Skin;
and the more those holes grow in the form of a Rose, the higher value they put
upon them; having given ten-thousand Crowns for a Skin. To conclude the
discourse of Coral, you must know that the meaner sort of people use it for
Bracelets and Neck-laces all over Asia, especially toward the Northern
Territories of the Great Mogul; and all along the Mountains as you go to the
Kingdom of Asen and Boutan.

Yellow-Amber is only found upon the Coast of Prussia in the Baltick-Sea, where
the Sea throws it upon the Sand when such and such winds blow. The Elector of
Brandenburgh, who is Sovereign of that Coast, farms it out for 20000 Crowns a
year, and sometimes 22000. And the Farmers keep guards on both sides of the
shore, in regard the Sea casts it up sometimes upon one side, and sometimes
upon the other, to prevent the stealing of it.

Amber is nothing but a certain congelation made in the Sea, like a certain
Gum; for you shall find in several pieces, Flies, Gnats, and other insects
congealed therein. I saw seven or eight Flies so congealed in one piece.

In China, when any great Lord makes a Feast, it is for his Grandeur and
Magnificence to cause three or four several sorts of Perfuming-pots to be set
upon the Table, and to throw into every one of them a vast quantity of Amber;
for the more it burns, and the bigger the pieces are, the more magnificent is
the Entertainment accounted. The reason of this custom is, because they adore
the fire; and besides, that the Amber casts forth a scent pleasing to the
Chinese, there is a kind of Oil in it, that flames after a more unusual manner
than other materials of fire. This wast of Amber makes it the best Commodity
that could be imported into China, if the Trade were free for Strangers. At
present the Hollanders have engrossed all this Trade to themselves, and the
Chinese come all to Batavia to buy it.

As for Amber-grise; there is no person in the World that knows either what it
is, or where, or how it is produced. But the fairest probability is, that it
must be only in the Eastern-Sea: though some parcels have been found upon the
Coast of England, and in some other parts of Europe. The greatest quantity is
found upon the Coast of Melinda, but more especially int he mouth of a River
called Rio de Sena. The Governor of Mozambique gets in the three years of his
Government above 300000 Pardo's of Amber-grise, every Pardo containing 27 Sous
of our Money. Sometimes they meet with very large and very considerable pieces.
In the year 1627 a Portugal setting Sail from Goa to the Manilles, after he had
past the Straight of Malacca, was by tempest driven near an unknown Island,
where they came to an Anchor. Several of the Ship's-Company ventring ashore,
met with a River; and going to bath themselves in it, one of them found a great
piece of Amber-grise that weighed thirty-three pounds; but falling together by
the ears about their shares, the Captain, to reconcile them, told them 'twas
pity to deface it, in regard it was a Present fit for the King; and therefore
advised them to present it to the Viceroy, who would no doubt reward them for
their pains. By that means the Captain got the parcel out of their clutches,
and presenting it to the Viceroy, got a reward for himself; and the Party that
found it: but the rest had nothing at all.

In the year 1646 or 1647, a Middleburgher of good quality found a piece of
forty-two pounds upon the Coast of the Island of St. Maurice, where he
commanded for the Holland-Company, East of the Island of St. Lawrence, and sent
it to Batavia: but there being a mark, as if some piece of it were broken off,
the Zelander was accused to have taken half, and turned out of his Command,
whatever he could say to justify himself.

The Best Which yields Musk


CHAP. XXII. Of Musk and Bezoar; and some other Medicinal Stones.
THE best sort, and the greatest quantity of Musk, comes from the Kingdom of
Boutan, from whence they bring it to Patna, the chief City of Bengala, to truck
it away for other Commodities. All the Musk that is sold in Persia comes from
thence. And the Musk-Merchants had rather deal with you for Coral and
Yellow-Amber, than for Gold or Silver; in regard the other is more in esteem
among the Natives where they live. I was so curious as to bring the Skin of one
to Paris, of which I caused the figure to be cut.

After they have killed the creature, they cut off the bladder that grows under
the belly as big as an egg, nearer to the genital parts than to the navil. Then
they take out the Musk that is in the bladder, which at that time looks like
clottedblood. When the Natives would adulterate their Musk, they stuff the
bladder with the liver and blood of the Animal sliced together, after they have
taken out as much of the right Musk as they think convenient. This mixture in
two or three years time produces certain Animals in the bladder that eat the
good Musk; so that when you come to open it, there is a great wast. Others, so
soon as they have cut off the bladder, and taken out as much of the Musk, as
that the deceit may not be too palpable, fill up the Vessel with little stones
to make it weight. The Merchants are less displeased at this deceit than the
former, by reason that they do not find the Musk to be eaten. But the deceit is
harder to be discovered, when they make little Purses of the skin of the belly
of the Beast, which they sow up with strings of the same skin, which are like
the true bladders; and then fill those Purses with what they have taken out of
the right bladders, and the other fraudulent mixture which they design to put
among it. True it is, that should they tie up the bladder so soon as they cut
it off, without giving it air or time to lose its force, the strength of the
perfume would cause the blood to gush out of the nose, so that it must be
qualified to render it acceptable, or rather less hurtful to the brain. The
scent of the Beast which I carried to Paris, was so strong, that I could not
keep it in my Chamber; for it made all peoples heads ache that came near it. At
length my Servants laid it in a Garret, and cut: off the bladder, and yet the
scent remained very strong. This creature is not to be found in 65 degrees, but
in 60 there are vast numbers, the Country being all over covered with
Forests. True it is, that in the months of February and March, after these
creatures have endured a sharp hunger, by reason of the great Snows that fall
where they breed, ten or twelve foot deep, they will come to 44 or 45 degrees
to fill them themselves with Corn and new Rice. And then it is that the Natives
lay gins and snares for them to catch them as they go back: shooting some with
Bows, and knocking others of the heads. Some have assured me that they are so
lean and faint with hunger at that time, that you may almost take them running.
There must be surely a prodigious number of these creatures, none of them
having above one bladder no bigger than a Hen's-egg, which will not yield above
half an ounce of Musk: and sometimes three or four will not afford an ounce;
and yet what a world of Musk is bought up?

The King of Boutan fearing that the cheats and adulterations of Musk would
spoil the Musk-Trade, ordered that none of the Bladders should be fow'd up, but
that they should be all brought to Boutan, and there, after due inspection, be
sealed up with his Seal. Yet notwithstanding all the wariness and care of the
King, they will sometimes cunningly open them, and put in little pieces of Lead
to augment the weight. In one Voyage to Patna I bought 7673 bladders, that
weighed 2557 ounces and an half; and 452 ounces out of the bladder.

Bezoar comes from a Province of the Kingdom of Golconda toward the Northeast.
It is found among the ordure in the paunch of a wild-Goat, that browzes upon a
certain Tree, the name whereof I have forgot. This shrub bears little buds,
round about which, and the tops of the boughs, the Bezoar engenders in the maw
of the Goat. It is shaped according to the form of the buds or tops of the
branches which the Goats eat: which is the reason there are so many shapes of
Bezoar-Stones. The Natives, by feeling the belly of the Goat, know how many
Stones she has within, and sell the Goat according to the quantity. This they
will find out by sliding their hands under their bellies, and then shaking both
sides of the paunch; for the Stones will fall into the middle, where they may
easily count them all by their feeling.

The rarity of Bezoar is in the bigness; though the small Bezoar has the same
virtue as that which is larger. But there is more deceit in the large Bezoar;
for the Natives have got a trick to add to the bigness of the Stone, with a
certain Paste composed of Gum, and something else of the color of Bezoar. And
they are so cunning too, to shape it just like natural Bezoar. The cheat is
found out two ways; the first is by weighing the Bezoar, and then steeping it
in warm water; if neither the water change color, nor the Bezoar lose any
thing of its weight, the Stone is right. The other way is to thrust a red-hot
Bodkin of Iron into the Stone; if the Bodkin enters, and causes it to fry,
there is a mixture. Bezoar is dearer according to the bigness of the Stones,
advancing in price like Diamonds. For if five or six Bezoars weigh an ounce, an
ounce will be worth fifteen or eighteen Franks; but if it be a Stone of one
ounce, that very ounce is well worth 100 Franks. I have sold one of four ounces
and a half for 2000 Livres.

I have been very curious to inform my self of all things that concerned the
nature of Bezoar; but could never learn in what part of the body of the Goat it
was to be found. One time among the rest, having obliged several Native
Merchants by putting off for them a great quantity of Bezoar; upon my request,
though it be death without mercy to transport any of these Goats out of the
Country, they brought me six Goats by stealth to my lodging. When I asked the
price of them, I was surpised, when they told me one was worth but three
Roupies; that the two other were worth four Roupies; and the three others four
and three quarters a piece. I asked them why some were more worth than others;
but I found afterward that the first had but one Bezoar, that the rest had
two, or three, or four. The six Goats had in all seventeen Bezoars in them, and
a half one, as big as the half of a Hazel-nut. The inside was like the soft
ordure of the Goat, the Bezoar lying among the dung, which is in the belly of
the Goat. Some averred that they grew right against the liver, others right
against the heart, but I could never find out the truth.

As well in the East, as West, there are a great quantity of Bezoars that breed
in the same manner in Cows; of which there have been some that have weighed
seventeen or eighteen ounces; For there was such a one that was given to the
Great Duke of Tuscany. But those Bezoars are little esteemed, six grains of the
other Bezoar working more powerfully than thirty of this.

As for the Bezoar which breeds in Apes, as some believe, it is so strong, that
two grains work as effectually as six of Goat's-Bezoar: but it is very scarce,
as being only sound in those Apes that breed in the Island of Macassar. This
sort of Bezoar is round, whereas the other is of several fashions, as I said
before. As the Apes Bezoar is stronger, and scarcer than the Goats, so it is
dearer, and more sought after; a piece as big as a nut, being sometimes worth a
hundred Crowns. The Portugals make great account of this Bezoar, standing
always upon their guard for fear of being poisoned.

There is another Stone in great esteem, that is called the Porcupine's-Stone,
which that creature is said to carry in its head, and is more precious than
Bezoar against poison. If it be steeped in water a quarter of an hour, the
water becomes so bitter, that nothing can be more bitter. There is also a Stone
sometimes found in the belly of that creature of the same nature; and as good
as that which comes from the head; nevertheless with this difference, that
being steeped in water, it loses nothing of its weight nor bulk, as the other
does. I have bought in my time three of those Stones. One of them cost me 500
Crowns, and I exchanged it to advantage. I paid four-hunder'd Crowns for the
other, which I keep: the other was sold me for 200 Crowns, which I presented to
a friend.

There is the Serpent-Stone not to be forgot, about the bigness of a double;
and some are almost oval, thick in the middle, and thin about the sides. The
Indians report that it is bred in the head of certain Serpents. But I rather
take it to be a Story of the Idolater's Priests, and that the Stone is rather a
composition of certain drugs. Whatever it be, it is of excellent virtue to
drive any venom out of those that are bit by venomous creatures. If the person
bit be not much wounded, the place must be incis'd; and the Stone being applied
thereto, will not fall off till it has drawn all the poison to it. To cleanse
it, you must steep it in Womans-milk, or for want of that, in Cows-milk; after
the Stone has lain ten or twelve hours, the milk will turn to the color of an
Apostemated matter. The Archbishop of Goa carrying me to his Cabinet of
Rarities, showed me one of these Stones: and after he had assured me of the
rare qualities it had, he gave it me. Once as he crossed a Mersh in the Island
of Salsete where Goa stands, one of the men that carried his Pallequis, being
half naked, was bit by a Serpent, and healed at the same time. I bought
several; but there are none but the Bramines that sell them, which makes me
believe that they compound them. There are two ways to try whether the
Serpent-Stone be true or false. The first is, by putting the Stone in your
mouth, for then it will give a leap, and fix to the palate. The other is, by
putting it in a glass full of water; for if the Stone be true, the water will
fall a boiling, and rise in little bubbles up to the top of the Glass.

There is another Stone, which is called the Serpent's-Stone with the hood.
This is a kind of Serpent that has a kind of a hood hanging down behind the
head, as it is represented in the Figure. And it is behind this hood that the
Stone is found, many times as big as a Pullet's-egg. There are some Serpents
both in Asia and America of a monstrous bigness, 25 foot long; as was that, the
skin whereof is kept in Batavia, which had swallowed a Maid of 18 years of age.
These Stones are not found in any of those Serpents that are not at least two
foot long. This Stone being rubbed against another Stone, yields a certain
slime, which being drank in water by the person that has the poison in his
body, powerfully drives it out. These Serpents are nowhere to be found but
upon the Coasts of Mclinde; but for the Stones you may buy them of the
Portugueze Mariners and Soldiers that come from Mozambique.



CHAP. XXIII. Of the Places where they find their Gold both in Asia and America.
JApon, which consists of several Islands Eastward of China, bending to the
North, some people believing that Niphon, which is the biggest, is in a manner
joined to the firm Land, is that Region of all Asia that yields the greatest
quantity of Gold: Though others believe it is found in the Island of Formosa,
and carried thence to Japon. For as long as the Hollanders have had the Island,
they could never yet tell what is the Trade of that Coast, whence they believe
the Gold comes.

There comes also Gold from China, which the Chinese exchange for the Silver
which is brought them. For price for price, they love Silver better than Gold;
because they have no Silver-Mines. Yet it is the coarsest metal of all the
Asiatsck Gold.

The Island of Celebes or Macassar produces Gold also, which is drawn out of
the Rivers, where it rowls among the Sand.

In the Island of Achen or Sumatra, after the rainy season, when the Torrents
are wasted, they find veins of Gold in the Flints, which the waters wash down
from the Mountains that lie toward the North-east. Upon the West Side of the
Island, when the Hollanders come to lade their Pepper, the Natives bring them
great store of Gold, but very coarse metal, if not worse than that of China.

Toward the Thibet, which is the ancient Caucasus, in the Territories of a
Raja, beyond the Kingdom of Cachemir, there are three Mountains close one by
another, one of which produces excellent Gold, the other Granats, and the third
Lapis-Lazuli.

There is Gold also comes from the Kingdom of Tipra, but it is coarse, almost
as bad as that of China; and these are all the places in Asia that produce
Gold. I shall now say something of the Gold of Africa, and the places where it
is found in greatest quantities.

Observe by the way, that the Viceroy of Mozambique has under his Command the
Governors of Sofala and Chepon-Goura. The first of these two Governments lies
upon the River Seen, sixty leagues from the Mouth of the River; and the other
ten leagues higher. From the Mouth of the River to those very places on each
side of the River, great numbers of Negro's inhabit, which are all commanded by
one Portugueze. The Portuguezes have been Masters of this Country for many
years, where they take upon them like Lords, and make War one upon another for
the slightest occasions in the World; some of them having under them
five-thousand Cafres, which are their Slaves. The Governor of Mozambique
furnishes them with Calicuts, and all other necessary Commodities which they
want, which he sells them at his own rates. When he enters upon his Government
he carries with him great quantities of all sorts of Commodities, especially
Calicuts died black. His Correspondents also in Goa send him every year two
Vessels, which he sends to Sofala, Chepon-Goura, and even as far as the City of
Monomotopa, the chief City of a Kingdom of the same name, otherwise called
Vouvebaran, distant from Chepon-Goura fifty leagues, or there-abouts. He that
commands all that Country, assumes the name of Emperor of Monomotopa,
extending his Dominions as far as the Confines of Prestor John's Country. From
this Country of Monomotopa it is, that the most pure and finest Gold of all
Africa comes: where they dig it with ease out of the earth, not being put to
labor above two or three foot deep. In some places of that Country which are
not inhabited by reason of the scarcity of water, the people find great pieces
of Gold, of several forms and weights, upon the surface of the earth, some of
which weigh an ounce. One I have by me that weighs an ounce and a half, or
thereabouts. Being at Surat, I went to visit the Ambassador of the King of the
Abyssins. He showed us the Present which his Master had sent to the Great
Mogul, consisting of fourteen stately Horses, the remainder of 30, the rest
dying by the way; and a great number of Slaves of both Sexes. But what was most
remarkable, was a natural Tree, all of Gold, two foot and four inches high, and
six inches about in the stock. It had ten or twelve branches, some whereof shot
out half a foot in length, and an inch about; others much smaller. In some
parts of the great branches appeared certain bunches that resembl'd buds. The
roots of the Tree, which were also natural, were thick and short; the longest
not exceeding four or five inches.

The Natives of Monomotopa knowing the time of the year that the Commodities
arrive, come to Sofala and Chepon-Goura to furnish themselves. Thither also
come the Cafres of other Provinces and Kingdoms for the same purpose. Whereupon
the Governors of those places sell them what they want, trusting them till the
next year, when they oblige themselves to bring their Gold, which they are very
punctual to do, for else there could be no Trade between them. The Natives of
Monomotopa never live long, by reason of the badness of the waters in the
Country: For at the age of five and twenty years they begin to be dropsical;
so that it is a great wonder if any among them live above forty years. The
Province where the River Seen has its head, is called Monkaran, and is under
the Jurisdiction of a certain King, beginning a hundred leagues, or
there-abouts, above Chepon-Goura. The people of that Country find great store
of dust-Gold in the Rivers that fall into the Seen; but it is much coarser than
the other, though they bring it to Chepon-Goura and Sofala. The Country is
very healthy, and the people live as long as they do in Europe. Some years
there are Cafres that come from beyond the Province of Monkaran, even as far as
the Cape of good Hope. The Portuguez have inquired after their Country, and
the name; but they can tell no more, only that it is called Sabia, commanded by
a King; and that they are four months generally traveling to Sofala. The Gold
which they bring is very fine, and in pieces like that of Monomotopa, which
they say they find in the high Mountains, digging only ten or twelve foot in
the ground. They also bring great quantities of Elephants-teeth; wherewith, by
their report, the Country does so abound, that you may see them in herds in
the fields; and that all the Palisado's of their Fortresses, and the Pales of
their Parks, are made of Elephantsteeth. Their usual Diet is Elephants-flesh;
which four Cafres will kill with their Ageagayes, or a sort of Half-pikes. The
water of their Country is very bad, which is the reason that their thighs are
swelled, and it is a wonder to see any one of them free.

Beyond Sofala there is a Country commanded by a King who is called the King
of Beroe. In some parts of his Country there grows a Root about an inchthick,
and of a yellow color. It heals all sorts of Fevers, causing the Patient to
vomit. But because it grows very scarce, the King strictly forbids his Subjects
to export it. The taste of it is very bitter upon the tongue.

As for Silver-Mines, there are none in all Asia but only in Japon; but some
years since, at Delegora, Sangora, Bordelon and Bata, have been discovered
plentiful Mines of Tin, to the great damage of the English, there being now
enough in Asia of their own besides.

CHAP. XXIV. The Relation of a Notable piece of Treachery, whereby the Author
was abused when he Embarked at Gomrom for Surat.
IN the Month of April 1665, being ready to depart from Gomrom for Surat, in a
Vessel that belonged to a Holland-Broaker, commanded by a Holland-Captain, the
English Agent gave me a Packet of Letters to deliver to the President at Surat.
The Packet was large, containing not only the Companies-Letters, but several
private Letters to particular persons at Surat and other parts of India. This
Packet I received in the presence of one Casembrot, a Hollander, who informed
another Dutchman, whose name was Wauwuck, of it. Thereupon they presently
contrived a design to seize this Packet, upon the report that ran of the
rupture between England and Holland. Casembrot having seen the bigness of the
Packet, gives Wauwuck a description of it, and so both together they contrive
another of the same form and bigness as near as they could. When I came
a-board, I took the English Packet, and locked it up in my Bouccha, which is
the sort of Cloakbag that is used in that Country, and laid it behind my
Bolster. There were two Shallops sent a-board us, wherein there were sixty bags
of Silver, containing some fifty, some a hundred Tomans a piece. These bags
they unladed very leisurely to gain time, watching when I would be gone to bed.
But when they saw that I did not go to rest, the Dutch consulted together, and
agreed to let fall a bag of Tomans into the Sea; and so came all a-board,
sending away a Shallop to Gomron for a Diver. When I found that the Vessel
would not set Sail till two or three hours after daylight, I went to rest, my
Bouccha lying in the same place, half out, and half with inside of my Bolster:
But when my Servants were gone, and I alone and a-sleep in the Cabin, they
cunningly stole my Bouccha, took out the English Packet, and left the other
which they had counterfeited, in the place; being only so many Letters of
blank-paper. Coming to Surat the sixth of May following, I gave the Packet, as I
thought, which I had received from the English Agent at Gomron, to two
Capuchin-Erlers to deliver to the President at Surat. But when the President
came to open the Packet before several of the Company, there was nothing but
white-paper made up in the form of Letters; which when I heard, too much to my
sorrow, I understood the villainous trick that Van-Wuck had put upon me. I wrote
a smart Letter of complaint to the Dutch-General in Batavia, but finding no
redress, I was forced to undergo the hard censure of the English, who would not
permit me to justify my self. However, as it is rare to see treachery go
unpunished, the Complotters all died miserably. Van-Wuck fell into a violent
Fevor, and being charged with the theft; thinking to defend himself with an
equivocation, that if he took the Cloak-bag, he wished he might dye without
speaking a word, in three days ended his life just in the same manner, and at
the same time that he had imprecated upon himself. Bozan his Lieutenant, after
a great debauch, going to sleep upon the Terrass of the Cabin, where he lay for
coolness, (there being no Balisters,) rolling and tumbling in his sleep, fell
down, and the next day was found dead in the Sea.

The Captain, four or five days after his arrival at Surat, being met in the
Street by a Mohammedan, who was jealous of his Wife, and being mistak'n by him
for one among several Franks, that had parted him, and kept him from correcting
his Wife some few days before, was stabbed by him in three or four places with
a Dagger, and killed him outright. And this was the end of those treacherous
people.

The End of the Second Book.
TRAVELS IN INDIA. The Third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the particular Religion of the Mahometans in the East Indies.
THE diversity of Opinions among the Mahometans, does not consist in the
different Expositions which they put upon the Alcoran; but in the contrariety
of Belief which they received by Tradition from the first Successors of
Mahomet. From thence there sprung two Sects, directly opposite: The one, which
is called the Sect of the Sounnis, followed by the Turks; and the other of the
Chiais, which is adhered to by the Persians. I will not enlarge my self upon
these two Sects, that divide all Mahumetism; it being my design, only to tell
you how the condition of that false Religion stands in the Empire of the Great
Mogul, and in the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour.

When Mahumetism was first brought into the Indies, there was an excess of
pride, but no devotion among the Christians; and the Idolaters were an
effeminate people, able to make little resistance; so that it was easy for the
Mahumetns to subdue both the one and the other by force of Arms, which they did
so advantageously, that many, as well Christians as Idolaters, embraced the
Mahumetan Religion.

The Great Mogul, with all his Court, follows the Sect of the Sounnis; the King
of Golconda, that of the Chiais. In the King of Visapour's Territories the
Sounnis and Chiais are mingled together; which may be said also of the Court of
the Great Mogul, in regard of the great numbers of Persians that flock thither
to serve in his Armies. True it is, that though they abhor the Sounnis, yet
they adhere to the Religion of the Prince; holding it lawful for the
preservation of their Estates to conceal their belief. As for what concerns the
Kingdom of Golconda, Koutoub-Cha, the present King, very zealously maintains
the Law of the Chiais; in regard the Grandees of his Court are almost all
Persians.

Aureng-zeb testifies above all things an extraordinary devotion for the Sect
of the Sounnis; of which he is so zealous an observer, that he surpasses all
his Predecessors in outward profession; which was the Cloak under which he
usurped the Crown. When he took possession of his Throne, he gave it out that
he did it only out of a design to cause the Law of Mahomet to be more strictly
observed, which had been very much neglected in the Reign of Shajehan his
Father, and Gehan-guir his Grandfather; and to show himself more zealous to the
Law, he turned Faquir or Dervich, that is, poor Volunteer; and under that false
pretense of Piety he cunningly made way to the Empire. And indeed though he has
a great many Persians under his pay, yet he will not permit them to keep holy
the day consecrated to the memory of Hosen and Heussin, the two Sons of Ali,
who were put to death by the Sounnis; besides that they, to please him, are
willing enough to conform.

CHAP. II. Of the Faquirs, or poor Mohammedan Volunteers in the East Indies.
THey reckon that there are in the Indies eight hundred thousand Faquirs, and
twelve hundred thousand Idolaters; which is a prodigious Number. They are all
of them Vagabonds, and lazy Drones, that dazzle the eyes of the people with a
false zeal, and make them believe that whatever comes out of their mouths is an
Oracle.

There are several sorts of Mohammedan Faquirs. The one sort go almost naked,
like the Idolatrous Faquirs, having no certain abode in the world, but giving
themselves up to all manner of uncleanness. There are others whose Garments are
of so many different pieces and colors, that a man can hardly tell of what
they are made. These Garments reach down to the half Leg, and hide the rags
that are underneath. They go generally in Troops; and have their Superior of
the Gang, who is known by his Garment, which is generally poorer, and consists
of more patches than the other. Besides, that he draws after him a great Iron
Chain, which is tied to his Leg, and is about two Else long, and proportionably
thick. When he says his prayers, he does it with a loud voice, and rattling his
Chain all the while, which is accompanied with an affected gravity, that draws
the Veneration of the people. In the mean time the people prepare Dinner for
him and his company, in the place where he takes up his stand, which is usually
in some street or public place. There he causes his Disciples to spread
certain Carpets, where he sets himself down to give audience to the people. On
the other side, the Disciples go about publishing through the Country the
virtues of their Master, and the favors he receives from God, who reveals his
most important secrets to him, and gives him power to relieve persons in
affliction by his counsel. The people, who give credit to him, and believe him
to be a holy man, approach him with a great devotion, and when they come near
him, they pull off their Shoes, and prostrate themselves to kiss his feet. Then
the Faquir, to show his humility reaches out his hand to kiss; that done, he
causes them that come to consult him, to sit down by him, and hears every one
apart. They boast themselves to have a prophetic Spirit; and above all to
teach barren women a way how to have Children, and to be beloved by whom they
please.

There are some of these Faquirs who have above two hundred Disciples, or more,
which they assemble together by the sound of a Horn, or the Beat of a Drum.
When they travel, they have their Standard, Lances, and other Weapons which
they pitch in the ground, near to their Master, when he reposes in any place.

The third sort of East Indian Faquirs, are those that being born of poor
Parents, and desirous to understand the Law, to the end they may become
Moulla's or Doctors, retire to the Mosquees, where they live upon the Alms
which is given them. They employ all their time in reading the Alooran, which
they get by heart; and if they can but add to that study the knowledge of some
natural things, and an exemplary life withal, they come to be chief of the
Mosquees, and to the dignity of Moullahs, and Judges of the Law. Those Faquirs
have their Wives; and some, out of their great zeal to imitate Mahomet, have
three or four; thinking they do God great service in begetting many Children to
be followers of their Laws.

CHAP. III. Of the Religion of the Gentiles, or Idolatrous Indians.
THe Idolaters among the Indians are so numerous, that they are reckoned to be
five or six for one Mohammedan. It seems a wonderful thing, that such a
prodigious multitude of men should be cowed by a handful, and bow so easily
under the yoke of the Mohammedan Princes. But that wonder well may cease, when
we consider that those Idolaters are not in union among themselves; for
Superstition has introduced such a diversity of Opinions and Customs, that they
can never agree one with another. An Idolater will not eat Bread nor drink
Water in the House of any one that is not of his Cast; though it be more
noble, and much more superior to his own. Yet they all eat and drink in the
Bramins Houses, which are open to all the world. A Cast among the Idolaters,
is very near the same thing which was anciently called a Tribe among the Jews.
And though it be vulgarly believed, that there are seventy-two Castes, yet I
have been informed by some of their most ingenuous Priests, that they may be
all reduced into four principal ones, from whence all the rest drew their
Original.

The first Cast is that of the Brammins, who are the Successors of the ancient
Brachmans, or Indian Philosophers, that studied Astrology. You may also meet
with some of their ancient Books, in reading whereof the Brammins spend all
their time; and are so versed in their observations, that they never fail a
minute in the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. And to preserve this knowledge among
themselves, they have a kind of University, in a City which is called Benarez,
where they make all their Exercises in Astrology, and where they have Doctors
that expound their Law, which they very strictly observe. But in regard they
are so great a number, and cannot all come to study at that University, they
are all very ignorant, and consequently very superstitious; those that go for
the most refined Wits, being the greatest Sorcerers.

The second Cast is that of the Raspoutes or Ketris, that is to say, Warriors
and warlike people. These are the only Idolatrous Indians that have any courage
to signalize themselves in War. All the Raja's that I have so oft'n mentioned,
are of this Cast. These are so many petty Kings, whom their disunion has
rendered Tributary to the Great Mogul. But in regard that the greatest part of
them are in his service, they are highly recompensed by the large Salaries they
receive for the small Tribute which they pay. These Raja's, and the Raspoutes
their Subjects, are the chiefest support of the Dominions of the Great Mogul;
for indeed the Raja's Jesseing and Jessomseing were those that lifted up
Aurengzeb to the Throne. But you must take notice, that all of this second
Cast are not Warriors; for they are the Raspoutes only that go to War, and are
all Horsemen. But for the Ketris, they are degenerated from their Ancestors,
and of Soldiers are become Merchants.

The third Cast is that of the Bannians, who are altogether addicted to Trade;
of whom some are Sheraffs or Bankers, others broakers, employed between
Merchant and Merchant for buying and selling. Those of this Cast are so subtle
and nimble in Trade, that as I have said before, the Jews may be their
Prentices. They accustom their Children betimes to fly idleness. And instead of
suffering them to lose their time in playing in the streets, as we generally
do, they teach them Arithmetic; which they are so perfect at, that without
making use either of Pen and Ink, or Counters, but only of their memories, they
will in a moment cast up the most difficult account that can be imagined. They
always live with their Fathers, who instruct them in Trade, and do nothing but
what they show them. If any man in the heat of passion chafe at 'em, they hear
him patiently without making any reply, and parting coldly from him, will not
see him again in three or four days, when they think his passion may be over.
They never eat any thing that has life; nay they would rather dye, than kill
the smallest Animal or Vermin that crawls; being in that point above all things
the most zealous Observers of the Law. They never fight, nor go to War; neither
will they eat or drink in the House of a Raspoute, because they kill the
Victuals they eat, all but Cows, which they never touch.

The fourth Cast is that of the Charados or Soudras; who go to War as well as
the Raspoutes, but with this difference, that the Raspoutes serve on Horseback,
and the Charados on Foot. Both of them take it for an Honor to dye in Battle;
and let him be Horse or Foot, that Soldier is accounted infamous that retreats
in Fight; it is an eternal blot in his Family. Upon which subject I will tell
you a story. A Soldier who was passionately in love with his Wife, and
reciprocally beloved by her, had fled from the fight, not so much out of any
fear of death, as out of a consideration of the grief which it would occasion
to his Wife, should he leave her a Widow. When she knew the reason of his
flight, as soon as he came to the door, she shut it against him, and ordered
him to be told, that she could never acknowledge that man for a Husband, who
had preferred the Love of a Woman before his Honor; that she did not desire to
see him any more, as being a stain to the Reputation of her Family; and that
she would endeavor to teach her Children to have more courage than their
Father. The Wife continuing firm to her resolution, the Husband to regain his
Honor and her affection, returned to the Army, where he so behaved himself,
that he became famous; and having highly made amends for his Cowardice, the
door of his House was again set open, and his Wife received him with her former
kindness.

The rest of the Natives, that are not reckoned in the number of these Castes,
are called Pauzecour. These are such as employ themselves in Handicraft Trades;
among which there is no other distinction, but according to the Trades which
they follow from Father to Son. So that a Tailor cannot prefer his Son, but
only in his own Calling, though he be never so rich; nor marry either Son or
Daughter, but to one of his own Craft. By the same rule, when a Tailor dies,
all those of his own Trade accompany the Corpse to the place where it is burnt:
and the same practice is observed in all other Trades.

Among the particular Castes, there is one that goes by the name of Alecors,
whose employment is only to clean Houses; for which every Family pays him
something once a month, according to their proportion and quality. If a person
of quality in the Indies keeps fifty Servants, let him be Mohammedan or
Idolater, there is not one of them will take a Besome in his hand to sweep the
House; for he would think himself affronted, it being one of the greatest
scorns you can put upon an Indian, to call him Alacor. Besides, every one of
those Servants knows his business; whether it be to carry the pot of Water to
drink by the way, or to give his Master his Pipe of Tobacco when he calls for
it; so that if the Master should bid one to do that which the other was
appointed to do, that Servant would stand like a Statue, and never make him any
answer. But for the Slaves, they are obliged to do what ever the Master
commands them. These Alacors having no other business but only to make clean
the Houses, eat the scraps of all the other Castes; and so without scruple feed
upon any thing. There are none but those of this Tribe make use of Asses, to
carry away the filth of the Houses into the Feilds; for which reason none of
the rest of the Indians will so much as touch that Animal; which is quite
otherwise in Persia, as well for carriage, as to ride upon. Moreover, there are
none of the other Indians, except the Alacors that will eat Pig.

CHAP. IV. Of the Kings and Idolatrous Princes of Asia.
THE chiefest of the Idolatrous Kings of Asia, are the King of Aracan, the King
of Pegu, the King of Siam, the King of Cochinchina, and the King of Tunquin. As
for the King of China, we know that he was an Idolater before the Tartars
invaded his Dominions. But since that, we know not what to report of certainty,
in regard that the Tartars who are now Masters of the Country, are neither
Idolaters nor Mahometans, but rather both together. In the Islands, the King of
Japon, the King of Ceylan, and some petty Kings of the Molucoa Islands are
Idolaters; as are all the Raja's as well in the Empire of the Great Mogul, as
in the neighboring Kingdoms of Visapour and Golconda. In a word, all the
meaner sort of people, as well in the Territories of the Great Mogul, Kings of
Golconda and Visapour, as in the Isles of Achan, Java, and Macassar, though
their Kings are Mahumetans, are all themselves Idolaters.

Some fifty years ago, one of the Kings of Ceylan became a Christian, and was
baptized by the name of John, being called before the Emperor Priapender. But
as soon as he had embraced the Christian Faith, the Princes and Priests of the
Country set up another King in his room. He endeavored all he could to bring
his people to follow his example; to which purpose he assigned to the Father
Jesuits, twelve large Villages about Colombo, for the bringing up the youth of
the Country in their Colleges; to the end that they being well instructed,
might instruct others. For the King made it plain to the Jesuits, that it was
impossible for them so well to understand the Language of the Country, as to be
able to preach to the Natives. Besides, that they found the ingenuities of the
Youth of Ceylan so quick and apprehensive, that they learnt more Latin,
Philosophy, and other Sciences in six months, than the Europeans learnt in a
year; and that they put such subtle Questions to their Masters, as were beyond
imagination.

Some years after the King had professed Christianity, a witty man of the
Island of Ceylan, and a good natural Philosopher, whose name was Alegamma
Motiar, or the Master of the Philosophers, after he had conversed with the
Jesuits and other Religious persons, was inspired to turn Christian. Thereupon
he went to the Jesuits, and told them, that he desired to be a Christian; but
withal he was very earnest to know what Jesus Christ had done, and lest in
writing. They gave him the New Testament, which he set himself to read with
that heed and study, that in less than six months there was hardly a passage
which he could not repeat. After that he again testified to the Jesuits and
other Religious persons, that he had a great desire to turn Christian, in
regard he found their Religion to be such as Jesus Christ had taught; but only
he wondered that they themselves did not follow his example. For that he could
never find by his reading, that Jesus Christ ever took any money of any body;
but that they took all they could get, and never baptized nor buried unless
they were well paid. But though he started the Question, he was baptized, and
afterward became a sedulous converter of others.

CHAP. V. What the Idolaters believe touching a Divinity.
THough the Idolatrous Indians attribute to the Creature, as to Cows, Apes, and
several Monsters, those Divine Honors which are only due to the true Deity;
yet they acknowledge one only Infinite God, Almighty, and only Wise, the Creator
of Heaven and Earth, who fills all places with his presence. They call him in
some places Permesser, in others Peremael, and Westnon among the Bramins that
inhabit the Coast of Cormandel. It may be, because they have heard that the
Circle is the most perfect of all Figures, therefore it is that they say God is
of an Oval Figure; for they have in all their Pagods an Oval Flintstone, which
they fetch from Ganges, and worship as a God. They are so obstinately wedded to
this foolish imagination, that the wisest among the Bramins will not so much as
hear any argument to the contrary. So that it is no wonder that a people led by
such blind Guides, should fall into such Abysses of Idolatry. There is one
Tribe so superstitious, in reference to that Article, that they carry those
Oval Flints about their Necks, and thump them against their Breasts, when they
are at their devotions. In this dark and lamentable mist of Ignorance, these
Idolaters make their Gods to be born like men, and assign them Wives, imagining
that theirs are the pleasures of men. Thus they take their Ram for a great
Deity, in regard of the Miracles which they believe he wrought while he lived
upon Earth. Ram was the Son of a potent Raja, who was called by the name of
Deseret, and the most virtuous of all his Children, which he had by two lawful
Wives. He was particularly beloved by his Father, who designed him to be his
Successor. But the Mother of Ram being dead, the Raja's other Wife, who had her
Husband entirely at her beck, prevailed with him to exterminate Ram and his
Brother Lokeman from his House, and all his Territories; upon whose exclusion
the Son of that Wife was declared the Raja's Successor. As the two Brothers
were about to be gone, Ram's Wife Sita, of whom he went to take his leave, and
whom the Idolaters worship as a Goddess, begged of him that she might not leave
him, having made a resolution never to forsake him; whereupon they all three
went together to seek their fortunes. They were not very successful at first;
for as they passed through a Wood, Ram being in pursuit of a Bird, strayed from
the Company, and was missing a long time; insomuch that Sita fearing that some
disaster was befallen him; besought Lokeman to look after him. He excused
himself at first, by reason that Ram had obliged him never to leave Sita alone,
foreseeing by a Prophetic Spirit what would befall her, should she be left to
her self. Nevertheless Lokeman being over persuaded by the prayers of his fair
Sister, went to seek for Ram his Brother; but in the mean time Rhevan another
of the Idolaters Gods, appeared to Sita in the shape of a Faquir, and begged an
Alms of her. Now Ram had ordered Sita, that she should not stir out of the
place where he left her; which Rhevan well knowing, would not receive the Alms
which Sita presented him, unless she would remove to another place; which when
Sita had done, either out of negligence or forgetfulness, Rhevan seized upon
her, and carried her into the thick of the Wood, where his Train stayed for
him. Ram at his return missing Sita, fell into a swoon for grief, but being
brought again to himself by his Brother Lokeman, they two immediately went
together in search of Sita, who was so dearly beloved by her Husband.

When the Bramins repeat this Rape of their Goddess, they do it with tears in
their eyes, and great demonstrations of sorrow; adding upon this subject, an
infinite company of Fables more ridiculous, to show the great courage of Ram in
pursuit of the Ravisher. They employed all Creatures living upon the discovery;
but none of them had the luck to succeed, only the Monkey called Harman. He
crossed over the Sea at one Leap, and coming into Rhevans Gardens, found Sita
in the extremity of affliction; and very much surpised to hear an Ape speak to
her in her Husbands behalf. At first she would not give any credit to such an
Ambassador; but the Ape, to show that his Commission was authentic, presents
her with a Ring which her Husband had given her, and that she had left behind
her among her Furniture. She could hardly however believe so great a Miracle,
as that Ram her Husband should make a Beast speak, to bring her the news of his
health, and to testify, as he did, the marks of his affection. But the Ape
Harman wrought Miracles himself, for being taken for a Spy by some of Rhevans
Servants, who therefore would have burnt him, he made use of the fire which
they had prepared to burn him, to set Rhevans Palace on fire, which he almost
consumed to the ground, with all the tatters and rags which were tied to his
tail and his body. When the Ape had thus done, the better to escape out of
Rhevans hands, he took the same way he came, and repassing the Sea again at one
jump, he came and gave Ram an account of his adventures; and told him in what a
sorrowful condition he had found Sita, who did nothing but mourn by reason of
her absence from her Husband. Ram touched with his Wives affection, resolved to
deliver her out of Rhevans hands, whatever it cost him; whereupon he raised
Forces, and being guided by the Ape, at length he came to Rhevans Palace, that
still smoked, the fire had been so great; and by reason that Rhevans Servants
were dispersed, Ram had an easy opportunity to see his beloved Sita again;
whom Rhevan abandoned wholly to him, flying for fear to the Mountains. Ram and
Sita were infinitely overjoyed at their coming together again, and returned
very great Honors to Harman, who had done him so eminent service.

As for Rhevan, he spent all the rest of his days like a poor Faquir, seeing
his Country ruined by Ram's Troops, who was resolved to be revenged for the
injury which he had received; and from this Rhevan it was, from whence that
infinite multitude of Faquirs, that swarm all over India, first took their
Original.

CHAP. VI. Of the Faquirs, or poor Volunteers among the Indians, and of their
Pennances.
THE Original of the Faquirs, as I said before, came from that Rhevan, whom Ram
dispoil'd of his Kingdom; at which he conceived such an unspeakable sorrow,
that he resolved to lead a Vagabond life, and to wander about the world, poor,
stripped of all, and in a manner quite naked. He found a now to follow him in a
course of life that gives them so much liberty. For being worshipped as Saints,
they have in their hands all opportunities of doing evil.

These Faquirs wander generally in Troops, every one of which has a Superior.
And in regard they are quite naked, Winter and Summer lying upon the hard
ground, when it is cold, the young Faquirs, and others that are most devout, go
in the afternoon to seek for the dung of Cows and other Creatures, of which
they make their fires. They rarely burn Wood, for fear of killing any living
Animal which is wont to breed in it; and therefore the Wood wherewith they burn
their dead, is only such as has floated long in the Water, which never breeds
any sort of living Creature. The young Faquirs having got together a good
quantity of dung, mixed with dry turf, make several fires, according to the
bigness of the Company; round about every one of which the Faquirs seat
themselves. When they grow sleepy, they lay themselves upon the ground,
spreading the Ashes abroad, which serve them for a Mattress; without any other
Canopy than that of Heaven.

As for the Faquirs that do Penance, when they are laid down in the same
posture as you see them in the day time, they kindle a good fire on each side
of them, for otherwise they would not be able to endure the cold. The rich
Idolaters account themselves happy, and their Houses to be filled with the
benedictions of Heaven, when they have any of these Faquirs for their Guests,
which the more austere they are, the more they honor: and it is the glory of
the Troop to have one among them that does some considerable act of Penance.

These Crews of Faquirs many time join together to go in Pilgrimage to the
Principal Pagods, and public Washings, which they use upon certain days in the
year in the River Ganges, whereof they make the chiefest account; as also in
that which separates the Territories of the Portugals of Goa from the Dominions
of the King of Vssapour. Some of the most austere Faquirs live in little
pitiful Huts near their Pagods, where they have once in four and twenty hours
something to eat bestowed upon them for God's sake. The Tree whereof I have
given the description, is of, the same sort as that which grows near Gomron,
which I have described in my Persian Relations. The Franks call it the
Bannians-Tree, because in those places where those Trees grow, the Idolaters
always take up their quarters, and dress their victuals under them. They have
those Trees in great reverence, and oft-times build their Pagods either under
or very near them. That which the Reader sees here described, grows at Surat;
in the trunk whereof, which is hollow, is the figure of a Monster, representing
the face of a deformed Woman, which they say was the first Woman, whose name
was Mamaniva; thither great numbers of Idolaters every day resort: near to
which there is some Bramin or other always appointed to be ready to say
Prayers, and receive the Alms of Rice, Millet, and other Grains which the
charitable bestow upon them. The Bramin marks the forhead of all, both Men and
Women, that come to pray in the Pagod, with a kind of Vermillion, wherewith he
also besmears the Idol; for being thus marked, they believe the evil Spirit
cannot hurt them, as being then under the protection of their God.

Number I, is that part where the Bramins paint their Idols; such as Mamaniva,
Sita, Madedina, and others; whereof they have a great number.

Numb. 2, is the figure of Mamaniva, which is in the Pagod.

Numb. 3, is another Pagod near the former. There stands a Cow at the door, and
within stands the figure of their God Ram.

Numb. 4, is another Pagod, into which the Faquirs, that do Penance, often
retire.

Numb. 5, is another Pagod dedicated to Ram.

Numb. 6, is a Hut into which a Faquir makes his retirement several times a
year, there being but one hole to let in the light. He stays there according to
the height of his devotion, sometimes nine or ten days together, without either
eating or drinking; a thing which I could not have believed, had I not seen it.
My curiosity carried me to see one of those Penitents, with the President of
the Dutch-Company, who set a Spy to watch night and day whether any body
brought him any victuals. But he could not discover any relief the Faquir had,
all the while fitting upon his Bum like our Tailors, never changing his posture
above seven days together, not being able to hold out any longer, by reason
that the heat and stench of the Lamp was ready to stifle him. Their other sorts
of Penance out-doing this, might be thought incredible, were there not so many
thousand witnesses thereof.

Numb. 7, is the figure of another Penitentiary, over whose head several years
have past; and yet he never slept day nor night. When he finds himself sleepy,
he hangs the weight of the upper part of his body upon a double-rope that is
fastened to one of the boughs of the Tree; and by the continuance of this
posture, which is very strange and painful, there falls a humor into their
legs that swells them very much.

Numb. 8, is the figure of two postures of two doing Penance; who, as long as
they live, carry their arms above their heads in that manner; which causes
certain Carnosities to breed in the joints, that they can never bring them down
again. Their hair grows down to their wastes, and their nails are as long as
their fingers. Night and Day, Winter and Summer they go always stark naked in
the same posture, exposed to the heat and rain, and the stinging of the Flies;
from which they have not the use of their hands to rid themselves. In other The
Figure of a Penitent as they are represented in little under the Banians great
Tree.
necessities they have other Faquirs in their company always ready to assist
them.

Numb. 9, is the posture of another Penitent, who every day for several hours
stands upon one foot, holding a Chasing-dish in his hand, into which he pours
Incense, as an Offering to his God, fixing his eyes all the while upon the Sun.

Numb. 10 and 11, are the figures of two other Penitents sitting with their
hands raised above their heads in the air.

Numb. 12, is the posture wherein the Penitents sleep, without ever resting
their arms; which is certainly one of the greatest torments the body of man can
suffer.

Numb. 13, is the posture of a Penitent, whose arms, through weakness, hang
flagging down upon his shoulders, being dried up for want of nourishment.

There are an infinite number of other Penitents; some who in a posture quite
contrary to the motion and frame of nature, keep their eyes always turned toward
the Sun. Others who fix their eyes perpetually upon the ground, never so much
as speaking one word, or looking any person in the face. And indeed there is
such an infinite variety of them, that would render the farther discourse of
them more then tedious.

True it is, that I have hid those parts which modesty will not suffer to be
exposed to view. But they both in City and Country go all as naked as they
came out of their Mothers wombs; and though the Women approach them to take
them by the fingers-ends, and to kiss those parts which modesty forbids to
name; yet shall you not observe in them any motion of sensuality; rather quite
contrary, seeing them never to look upon any person, but rolling their eyes in
a most frightful manner, you would believe them in an ecstasy.

CHAP. VII. Of the Idolaters belief touching the estate of the Soul after death.
IT IS an Article of the Idolaters Faith, that the Souls of Men departing out of
the body, are presented to God; who according to the lives which they lead,
orders them another body to inhabit. So that one and the same person is born
several times into the World. And that as for the Souls of wicked and vicious
persons, God disposes them into the bodies of contempt'ble Beasts, such as
Asses, Dogs, Cats, and the like; to do Penance for their crimes in those
infamous Prisons. But they believe that those Souls that enter into Cows are
happy; presuming that there is a kind of divinity in those creatures. For if a
man dye with a Cows-tail in his hand, they say it is enough to render him happy
in the other World.

The Idolaters believing thus the transmigration of the Souls of men into the
bodies of other creatures, they abhor to kill any creature whatever, for fear
they should be guilty of the death of some of their kindred or friends doing
Penance in those bodies.

If the Men in their lifetime are famous for their virtuous deeds, they hold
that their Souls pass into the bodies of some Potent Raja's: where they enjoy
the pleasures of this life in those bodies, as the reward of those good works
which they did.

This is the reason why the Faquirs put themselves to such horrible Penances.
But because that all are not able to endure so much torment in this World, they
labor to supply the defect of that cruel Penance by good works. And besides,
they charge their Heirs in their Wills to give Alms to the Bramins, to the end
that by the powerful effect of their Prayers, their God may assign them the
body of some Noble Personage.

In January 1661, the Broaker belonging to the Holland-Company, whose name was
Mondas-Parek, died at Surat. He was a rich Man, and very charitable, giving his
Alms very liberally as well to the Christians as to the Idolaters; the
Capuchins at Surat living one part of the year upon the Rice, Butter and Pulse
which he sent them. This Banian was not sick above four or five days; during
all which time, and for eight days more after he was dead, his Brothers
distributed nine or ten-thousand Roupies; and in the burning of his body they
mixed Sandal-wood, and Lignum-Aloes, with the ordinary wood, believing that by
that means the Soul of their Brother transmigrating into another body, he would
come to be some great Lord in another Country. There are some that are such
fools that they bury their treasure in their lifetime, as it is the usual
custom of all the rich Men in the Kingdom of Asen; to the end that if they
should be condemned to the body of some poor miserable person, they might have
wherewithal to supply their necessities. I remember one day that I bought in
India an Agate-Cup half a foot high; he that sold it me, assured me that it had
been buried under ground above 40 years, and that he kept it to serve his
occasions after death; but that it was to him a thing indifferent whether he
buried his Cup or his Money. In my last Voyage I bought of one of these
Idolaters sixty-two Diamonds, of about six grains a-piece; and while I was
wondering to see so fair a parcel, he told me I needed not to wonder; for he had
been fifty years getting them together, to serve him after his death, but that
having occasion for Money, he was forced to part with them. This buried
treasure stood the Raja Seva-Gi in great stead, when he took Arms against the
Great Mogul, and the King of Visapour. For that Raja having taken Callian
Biondi, a small City in the Kingdom of Visapour, by the advice of the Bramins,
who assured him he should find great store of treasure buried, caused the
greatest part thereof to be demolished; and found so much wealth, as to
maintain his Army, which was above thirty-thousand Men. It is impossible to
convince these poor Idolaters of their errors; in regard they will hear no
reason, but submit themselves altogether to their old forms and customs.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Custom among the Idolaters to burn the Bodies of their Dead.
THE custom of burning the Bodies of the dead is very ancient among the
Gentiles; which Ceremony they most commonly perform by the banks of Rivers,
where they wash the dead; which is the last purgation of them from their sins.
Nay, their superstition is so great sometimes, that they will carry the sick
person, death approaching, to the bank of some River or Pond, and put his feet
in the water. As nature fails, they dip him deeper and deeper, till at length
they hold him expiring up to the chin in the River: to the end that at the same
time that the Soul departs out of the Body, both Body and Soul may be cleans'd
from all defilement; and then plunging the newly dead Body over head and ears,
they bring it out, and burn it in the place appointed; which is generally near
some Pagod. There are some persons that make it their business to fetch Wood,
and agree what they shall have for their pains. An Idolater being dead, all
those of his Cast or Tribe assemble together at the House of the deceased, and
laying the Body upon a Beer covered with clean fine Linen according to his
Quality and Estate, they follow the Beer, which is carried by such as are
appointed for that purpose to the place where the Body is to be burned. As they
go along they sing certain Prayers to their God, pronouncing several times the
words Ram, Ram, while another going before the Beer, sounds a little Bell, to
advertize the living to pray for the dead. The Body being set down by the bank
of the River or Pond, they first plunge it into the water, and then they burn
it. According to the quality of the deceased they also mingle with the ordinary
wood Sandal-wood, and other Sweet-woods. But the Idolaters do not only burn the
Bodies of the dead, but the Bodies of the living. They scruple to kill a
serpent, or a louse, but account it a meritorious thing to burn a living Wife
with the Body of the deceased Husband.

CHAP. X. How the Wives are burnt in India with the Bodies of their deceased
Husbands.
IT is also an ancient custom among the Indians, that the Husband happening to
dye, the Wife can never marry again. So that as soon as the Man is dead, the
Wife retires to bewail her Husband; some days after that, they shave off her
hair; she lays aside all the ornaments of her apparel; she takes off from her
arms and legs the Bracelets which her Husband put on when he espoused her, in
token of her submission, and her being chained to him: and all the rest of her
life she lives slighted and despised, and in a worse condition than a Slave in
the very House where she was Mistress before. This unfortunate condition causes
them to hate life, so that they rather choose to be buried alive with the body
of their deceased Husbands, then to live the scorn and contempt of all the
World. Besides that, the Bramins make them believe, that in dying after that
manner, they shall revive again with him in another World, with more honor and
more advantages than they enjoyed before. These are the motives that persuade
the Women to burn with their Husbands; besides that, the Priests flatter them
with a hope, that while they are in the midst of the flames, before they
expire, Ram will appear, and reveal wonderful visions to them; and that after
their Souls have transmigrated into various Bodies, they shall at length obtain
a high degree of Honor to eternity.

However, there is no Woman that can burn with her Husband's body, till she has
the leave of the Governor of the place where she inhabits, who being a
Mahumetan, and abhorring that execrable custom of Self-murder, is very shy to
permit them. Besides, there are none but Widows that have no children, that lie
under the reproach that forces them to violent death. For as for the Widows
that have children, they are by no means permitted to burn themselves; but
quite the contrary, they are commanded to live for the education of the
children. Those Women whom the Governor will not permit to burn themselves,
spend the rest of their lives in doing Penance, and performing works of
Charity. Some make it their business to sit upon the Road to boil certain Pulse
in water, and to give the liquor to Travelers to drink. Others sit with fire
always ready for them to light their Tobacco. Others make vows to eat nothing
but the undigested grains which they find in Cow Dung.

The Governor finding no persuasions will alter the Woman's resolution, but
more especially perceiving by the sign which his Secretary makes him, that he
has received the Coin, in a surly manner gives the Woman leave, bidding the
Devil take her and all her kindred.

When they have got this leave, their Music begins to strike up, and away they
ding to the House of the deceased, with Drums beating, and Flutes playing
before them; and in that manner they accompany the person that is to be burnt,
to the place appointed. All the kindred and friends of the Widow that is to
dye, come to her, and congratulate her for the happiness she is to enjoy in the
other World: and for the honor which the Cast she is of receives by her
generous resolution, she dresses her self as she were going to be married, and
she is conducted in triumph to the place of execution. For the noise is loud of
Musical Instruments, and Women's Voices, that follow her singing Songs in honor
of the miserable creature that is going to dye. The Bramins that accompany her,
exhort her to give public testimonies of her constancy and courage: and many
of our Europeans are of opinion, that to take away the fears of death, which
naturally terrifies humanity, the Priests do give her a certain Beverage to
stupify and disorder the senses, which takes from her all apprehension of her
preparations for death. It Is for the Bramins interest that the poor miserable
creatures should continue in their resolutions; for all their Bracelets as well
about their legs as their arms, the Pendents in their ears; their Rings
sometimes of Gold, sometimes of Silver; (for the poor wear only Copper and
Tin,) all these belong to the Bramins, who rake for them among the ashes when
the party is burned.

I have seen Women burnt after three several manners, according to the
differrence of the Country. In the Kingdom of Guzerat, as far as Agra and
Dehli, they set up a little Hut about twelve foot square upon the bank of a
Pond or River. It Is made of Reeds, and all sorts of small Wood, with which they
mingle certain pots of Oil and other Drugs to make it burn more vehemently. The
Woman is placed in the middle of the Hut, in a half-lying-down posture, leaning
her head upon a kind of a wooden Bolster and resting her back against a Pillar,
to which the Bramin ties her about the middle, for fear she should run away
when she feels the fire. In this posture she holds the body of her deceased
Husband upon her knees, chewing Betle all the while: and when she has continued
in this posture about half an hour, the Bramin goes out, and the Woman bids
them set fire to the Hut; which is immediately done by the Bramins, and the
kindred and friends of the Woman; who also cast several pots of Oil into the
fire, to put the Woman the sooner out of her pain. After the Woman is burnt,
the Bramins search the ashes for all her Bracelets, Pendants and Rings, whether
Gold, Silver, Copper or Tin, which is all free booty to themselves.

In Bengala they burn the Women after another fashion. In that Country a Woman
must be very poor that does not accompany the Body of her deceased Husband to
the Ganges to wash his Body, and to be washed her self before she is burnt. I
have seen dead Carcasses brought to the Ganges above twenty days journey off
from the place, and smelt 'em to boot; for the scent of them has been
intollerably noysom. There was one that came from the Northern Mountains near
the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Boutan, with the body of her Husband carried in
a Wagon; she traveled twenty days a-foot, and neither eat nor drank for 15 or
16 days together till she came to the Ganges, where after she had washed the
body that stank abominably, and had afterward washed her self, she was burnt
with him with an admirable constancy. Before the Woman that is to be burnt,
goes the Music, consisting of Drums, Flutes and Hautboys, whom the Woman in
her best Accoutrements follows, dancing up to the very Funeral-pile, upon which
she gets up, and places her self as if she were sitting up in her Bed; and then
they lay across her the body of her Husband. When that is done, her kindred
and friends, some bring her a Letter, some a piece of Callcut, another pieces
of Silver or Copper, and desire her to deliver them to their Mother, or
Brother, or some other Kinsman or Friend. When the Woman sees they have all
done, she asks the Standers-by three times, if they have nothing more of
service to command her; if they make no answer, she ties up all she has got in
a piece of Taffata, which she puts between her own belly, and the body of her
Husband, bidding them to set fire to the Pile; which is presently done by the
Bramins and her Kindred. I have observed, because there is scarcity of Wood in
Bengala, that when these poor Creatures are half griddl'd, they cast their
bodies into the Ganges, where the remains are devoured by the Crocodiles.

I must not forget a wicked custom practiced by the Idolaters of Bengala. When
a Woman is brought to bed, and the Child will not take to the Teat, they carry
it out of the Village, and putting it into a Linen Cloth, which they fast'n by
the four Corners to the Boughs of a Tree, they there leave it from morning till
evening. By this means the poor Infant is exposed to be tormented by the Crows,
insomuch that there are some who have their eyes picked out of their heads:
which is the reason that in Bengala you shall see many of these Idolaters that
have but one eye, and some that have lost both. In the evening they fetch the
child away, to try whether he will suck the next night; and if he still refuse
the teat, they carry him again to the same place next morning; which they do
for three days together; after which, if the Infant after that refuses to suck,
they believe him to be a Devil, and throw him into Ganges, or any the next Pond
or River. In the places where the Apes breed, these poor Infants are not so
exposed to the Crows; for where the Ape discovers a Nest of those Birds, he
climbs the Tree, and throws the Nest one way, and the Eggs another. Sometimes
some charitable people among the English, Hollanders, and Portugals,
compassionating the misfortune of those Children, will take them away from the
Tree, and give them good education.

All along the Coast of Coromandel, when the Women are to be burnt with their
Husbands, they make a great hole in the ground nine or ten foot deep, and
twenty-five or thirty foot square, into which they throw a great quantity of
Wood and Drugs to make the fire burn more fiercely. When the fire is kindled,
they set the body of the man upon the brink; and then presently up comes the
Woman dancing and chewing Betle; accompanied by her Friends and Kindred, with
Drums beating, and Flutes sounding. Then the Woman takes three turns round the
hole, and every time she has gone the round, she kisses her Friends and
Kindred. After the third time the Bramins cast the Carcass of her Husband into
the flame; and the Woman standing with her back to the fire, is pusht in by the
Bramins also, and tumbles backward. Then her Kindred and Friends cast Oil and
other combustible Drugs upon the fire, to make it burn more vehemently, that
the Bodies may be the sooner consumed.

In most places upon the Coast of Coromandel, the Women are not burnt with
their deceased Husbands, but they are buried alive with them in holes which the
Bramins make a foot deeper than the tallness of the man and woman. Usually they
choose a Sandy place; so that when the man and woman are both let down together,
all the Company with Baskets of Sand fill up the hole above half a foot higher
than the surface of the ground, after which they jump and dance upon it, till
they believe the woman to be stifled.

When some of the Idolaters upon the Coast of Coromandel are upon the point of
death, their Friends do not carry them to the side of a River or Lake to
cleanse their Souls, but they carry them to the fattest Cow they can find; and
laying the sick party just behind the Cow, they lift up her Tail, and provoke
her to piss. If she piss, so that it falls upon the face of the sick party, all
the Company are overjoyed, saying, that his Soul is happy. But if the Cow do
not piss, to wash the sick parties face, they burn him with a great deal of
sadness. If a Cow be sick, the owner must be careful to lead her to a Pond or
River; for should she dye at his House, the Bramins would fine him.

CHAP. X. Remarkable Stories of Women that have been burnt after their Husbands
decease.
THE Raja of Vilou having lost his City and his life, through the loss of a
Battle gained against him by the King of Visapour's General, he was extremely
lamented at Court. Eleven of his Wives also were no less concerned for his
death, and resolved to be burnt when his Body was burned. The General of
Visapour's Army understanding their resolution, thought at first to divert
them, by promising them all kind usage. But finding persuasions would not
prevail, he ordered them to be shut up in a Room. He who had the order, going
to put it in execution, the Women in a rage told him, that 'twas to no purpose
to keep them Prisoners, for if they might not have leave to do what they had
resolved, in three hours there would not one of them be alive. The person
entrusted, laughed at their threats; but the Keeper of those women opening the
door at the end of the three hours, found them all stretched out dead upon the
place, without any mark in the world to be seen that they had any way hastened
their own deaths.

Two of the most potent Raja's of India came to Agra in the year 1642, to do
homage to Sha-jehan, who then reigned; who not having acquitted themselves as
they ought to have done, in the judgment of the Grand Master of the Kings
Household, he told one of the Raja's one day, in the presence of the King, that
they had not done well, to behave themselves in that manner toward so great a
Monarch, as was the King his Master. The Raja looking upon himself to be a
great King, and a great Prince, he and his Brother having brought along with
them a Train of 15 or 16000 thousand Horse, was netl'd at the bold reproof
which the Grand Master gave him, and drawing out his Dagger, slew him upon the
place, in the presence of the King. The Grand Master falling at the feet of his
own Brother, who stood close by him, he was going about to revenge his death,
but was prevented by the Raja's Brother, who stabbed him, and laid him athwart
his Brothers Body. The King, who beheld these two murders one upon the neck of
the other, retired into his Haram for fear. But presently the Omrahs and other
people fell upon the Raja's, and cut 'em to pieces. The King incensed at such
an attempt committed in his House and in his presence, commanded the Raja's
bodies to be thrown into the River; which their Troops that they had left about
Agra understanding, threatened to enter the City and pillage it. But rather
than hazard the City, the King was advised to deliver them the Bodies of their
Princes. When they were to be burned, thirteen Women belonging to the two
Raja's Houses, came dancing and leaping, and presently got upon the Funeral
pile, holding one another by hands, and being presently after stifled with the
smoke, fell together into the fire. Presently the Bramins threw great heaps of
Wood, pots of Oil, and other combustible matter upon them, to dispatch them the
sooner.

I observed a strange passage at Patna, being then with the Governor, a young
Gentleman of about twenty-four years of age, in his own House. While I was with
him, in came a young woman, very handsome, and not above two and and twenty
years old, who desired leave of the Governor to be burnt with the Body of her
deceased Husband. The Governor compassionating her youth and beauty,
endeavored to divert her from her resolution; but finding he could not
prevail, with a surly countenance, he asked her whether she understood what the
torment of fire was, and whether she had ever burnt her fingers? No, no,
answered she more stoutly than before, I do not fear fire, and to let you know
as much, send for a lighted Torch hither. The Governor abominating her answer,
in great passion bid her go to the Devil. Some young Lords that were with the
Governor, desired him to try the woman, and to call for a Torch; which with
much ado he did, and a lighted Torch was brought. So soon as the woman saw the
lighted Torch coming, she ran to meet it, and held her hand in the flame, not
altering her countenance in the least; still searing her arm along up to the
very elbow, till her flesh looked as if it had been broiled; whereupon the
Governor commanded her out of his sight.

A Bramin coming to Patna, and assembling all his Tribe together, told them,
that they must give him two thousand Roupies, and twenty-seven Else of Calicut.
To which the chief among them made him answer, that they were poor, and could
not possibly raise such a sum. However he persisted in his demand, positively
affirming to them, that he would stay there without eating or drinking till
they brought him the Money and the Cloth. With this resolution he climbed a
Tree, and setting in the fork between the boughs, remained there without eating
or drinking for several days. The noise of this extravagance coming to the ears
of the Hollanders where we lay, we set Sentinels to watch whether it were true,
that a man could set so long without victuals, which he did for thirty days
together. The one and thirtieth day of such an extraordinary Fast, the
Idolaters fearing to kill one of their Priests for want of granting him his
demand, club'd together, and brought him his twenty-seven Else of Calicut, and
two thousand Roupies. So soon as the Bramin saw the Money and the Cloth, he
came down from the Tree; and after he had upbraided those of his Tribe for want
of Charity, he distributed all the Roupies among the poor, reserving only five
or six for himself. The Cloth he cut into little pieces, and gave away, keeping
only to himself enough to cover his own nakedness; and having made this
distribution, he disappeared of a sudden, and nobody knew what became of him,
though diligent search was made after him.

When a Chinese lies at the point of death, all his Kindred and Friends gather
about him, and ask him whether he intends to go; they tell him also, that if he
want any thing, he need but only ask and have, let it be Gold, Silver, or a
Woman. When they are dead they perform many Ceremonies at their Funerals, which
consists chiefly in artificial fires, wherein the Chinese are the most expert
in the world; so that he must be a very poor man that has no fireworks at his
Funeral. Besides that, they put Money in a little Box, and bury it by the
deceased; and leave good store of victuals upon the Grave, out of an opinion
that they rise and eat. Which the Soldiers of Batavia observing, used to fill
their Bellies at these Graves every time they walked their rounds. But when the
Chinese perceived it, they poisoned the victuals to spoil the Dutchmens
feasting. The Townsmen of Batavia taking the Soldiers part, accused the
Chinese for poisoning several of the Dutch. But the Chinese pleaded, that if
the Soldiers had over-eat themselves, or surfeted themselves upon what was left
for the dead to eat, 'twas none of their fault; for that they did not leave
their victuals for the Soldiers; and besides that, among all the multitudes
which they had buried, they never had heard the least complaint before of any
one that ever came by any harm by eating their food. Thus the business was
hushed over; nor did the Soldiers dare to pilfer any more.

CHAP. IX. Of the most celebrated Pagods of the Idolaters in India.
THE Indian Idolaters have a great number of Temples, small and great, which
they call Pagods, where they pray to their Gods, and make their Offerings. But
the poor people that live in the Woods and Mountains, and remote from Towns,
are contented only with some stone, whereon they make a rude kind of Nose, and
paint it with some Vermilion color, which serves all the whole neighborhood
to worship.

The four most celebrated Pagods, are Jagrenate, Banarous, Matura, and Tripeti.

Jagrenate is one of the mouths of Ganges, whereupon is built the Great Pagod,
where the Arch Bramin, or chief Priest among the Idolaters keeps his residence.
The great Idol that stands upon the Altar in the innermost part of the Pagod,
has two Diamonds for his Eyes, and another that hangs about his neck, the least
of those Diamonds weighing about forty Carats. About his Arms he wears
Bracelets sometimes of Pearls, and sometimes of Rubies; and this magnificent
Idol is called Resora. The Revenues of this Pagod are sufficient to feed
fifteen or twenty thousand Pilgrims every day; which is a number often seen
there, that Pagod being the greatest place of devotion in all India. But you
must take notice, that no Goldsmith is suffered to enter this Pagod, because
that one of them being locked in all night long, stole a Diamond out of one of
the Idols eyes. As he was about to go out, when the Pagod was opened in the
morning, he died at the door; their God, as they affirm, revenging his own
sacriledg. That which renders this Pagod, which is a large building, the most
considerable in all India, is, because it is situated upon the Ganges; the
Idolaters believing that the waters of that River have a particular quality to
cleanse them from their sins. That which makes it so rich (for it maintains
above twenty thousand Cows) is the vast Alms that are continually bestowed by
so incredible a multitude as comes from all parts. Which Alms are not so much
at the discretion of the Donor, as at the will of the chief Priest, who before
he gives them leave to shave and wash in Ganges, taxes them according to their
quality, of which he has information. Thus he collects vast sums, of which he
makes little or no profit himself; all going to feed the poor, and the repair
of the Pagod. The chief Bramin causes Victuals to be distributed to the
Pilgrims every day; as Milk, Rice, Butter, and Wheat; but to the poor, who want
wherewithal to cook it, they distribute their food ready dresst. In the
morning they boil a quantity of Rice in Earth'n pots of different bigness; and
at the hour when the Pilgrims come for their meat, the chief Bramin orders
another Bramin to take a pot of boiled Rice; this pot he lets fall; and if
there be five, the pot breaks into five equal parts, and every one takes his
own share. And in the same manner he breaks it into more pieces, if there be
more persons, to whom he is to distribute the food. Which is a thing very
strange and worthy observation. They never boil twice in an Earthen pot; but in
a Copper pot; nor have they any other Dishes, than only certain Leaves, which
they fasten together, and a certain kind of a Basin, about a foot in compass,
wherein they melt their Butter, and stir the Rice with the ends of their
fingers when they eat. They have also a kind of a Shell, wherein they pour
their melted Butter, which they will swallow down, as we do Sack.

Now for the description of a particular Idol which stands upon the Altar in
the Pagod of Jagrenate: It is covered from the Shoulders downward with a great
Mantle that hangs down upon the Altar. This Mantle is of Tissue of Gold or
Silver, according to the Solemnities. At first it had neither feet nor hands;
but after one of their Prophets was taken up into Heaven, while they were
lamenting what to do for another, God sent them an Angel in the likeness of
that Prophet, to the end they might continue their Veneration toward him. Now
while this Angel was busy in making this Idol, the people grew so impatient,
that they took him out of the Angels hands, and put him into the Pagod without
hands or feet; but finding that the Idol appeared in that manner too deformed,
they made him hands and arms of those small Pearls which we call Ounce-Pearls.
As for his feet, they are never seen, being hid under his Cloak. There is no
part open but his hands and feet; the head and body being of Sandel-wood; round
about the Duomo, under which this Idol stands, being very high, from the bottom
to the top, are only Niches filled with other Idols; the greatest part whereof
represent most hideous Monsters, being all of different colors. On each side
of this Pagod, there stands another much less, where the Pilgrims make their
lesser Offerings. And some that have in sickness, or upon business made any
Vows to any Deity, bring thither the resemblance thereof in remembrance of the
good which they have received. They rub this Idol every day with sweet Oils,
that make it of a black color. And at the right hand of this Idol sits his
Sister, who stands upon her feet, and is well clad, being called by the name of
Sotora; upon his left, stands his Brother, clothed all over also; whom they
call Balhader. Before the Idol, somewhat toward his left hand, stands the Idols
Wife upon her feet, all of massy Gold, by the name of Remin; whereas the other
three are only of Sandal-wood.

The two other Pagods are appointed for the residence of the chief Bramin, and
other Bramins that officiate in the great Pagod. All these Bramins go with
their heads bare, and for the most part shaved; having no other Clothes but
only one piece of Calicut, with one half whereof they cover their bodies; the
other part serves them instead of a Scarf. Near the Pagod stands the Tomb of
one of their Prophets, whose name was Cabir, to whom they give great honor.
You are to take notice also, that their Idols stand upon a kind of Altar,
encompassed with Iron Bars. For no persons are to touch them, but only certain
Bramins, appointed for that service by the chief Bramin.

Next to that of Jagrenate, the most famous Pagod is that of Banarous, being
also seated upon the Ganges, in a City that bears the same name. That which is
most remarkable is, that from the Gate of the Pagod to the River there is a
descent all of Stone; near to which are certain Platforms, and small blind
Chambers, some for the Bramins lodging, others where they dress their victuals;
for so soon as the Idolaters have said their Prayers, and made their Offerings,
they dress their food, not suffering any person to touch it but themselves, for
fear lest any unclean person should come near it. But above all things, they
passionately desire to drink of Ganges water; for as often as they drink it,
they are washed, as they believe, from all their sins. Great numbers of these
Bramins go every day to the cleanest part of the River, where they fill their
little round earthen-pots full of water, the mouths whereof are very small, and
contain every one of them a Bucket-full. Being thus filled, they bring them
before the great Priest, who covers them with a fine piece of flame-colour'd
Calicut, three or four times doubled, to which he sets his Seal. The Bramins
carry these pots, some six of them tied together with six little cords fastened
to the end of a stick as broad as a lath, shifting their shoulders often;
traveling sometimes three or four hundred leagues with those precious
burdens up into the Country. Where they sell it, to present it; but that is
only to the rich, from whence they expect great rewards. There are some of
these Idolaters, who when they make any great Feast, especially when they marry
their children, will drink four or five-hunder'd Crowns in this water. They
never drink of it till the end of their meals; and then a glass or two
according to the liberality of the Master of the Feast. The chief reason why
they esteem the water of Ganges so highly, is, because it never putrifies, nor
engenders any vermin; though I know not whether they may be believed,
considering the great quantity of dead bodies which they fling into the Ganges.

The body of the Pagod of Banarous is made like a Cross, as are all the rest of
the Pagods, the four parts whereof are equal. In the midst there is a Cupola
raised very high, the top whereof is pyramidal; at the end also of every four
parts of the Cross there is a Tower, to which there is an ascent on the
outside. Before you come to the top, there are several Balconies and Niches
wherein to take the fresh air: and round about are figures of all sorts of
creatures, but very Lewd work. Under the Duomo, in the middle of the Pagod
there is an Altar, like a Table, eight foot long, and six foot broad, with two
steps before, that serve for a footstool, which is covered sometimes with a
rich Tapestry, sometimes with Silk, sometimes with Cloth of Gold or Silver,
according to the solemnity of their Festival. Their Altars are covered with
Cloth of Gold or Silver, or else with some painted Calicuts. Approaching the
entry of the Pagod, you see the Altar right before ye, together with the Idols
which are upon it. For the Women and Virgins worship without, not being
permitted to enter the Pagod, no more than is a certain Tribe which is among
them. Among the Idols that stand upon the great Altar, there is one placed
upright some five or six foot high; but you can see neither arms, nor legs, nor
body: nothing appears but the head and neck, all the rest being covered down to
the Altar with a Robe that spreads it self below. Sometimes you shall see the
neck set out with some rich Chain either of Gold, Rubies, Pearls, or Emraulds.
This Idol was made in honor and likeness of Bainma-dou, who was heretofore a
very great and holy Personage among them, whose name they oft'n have in their
mouths. Upon the right-side of the Altar stands the figure of a Chimera, part
Elephant, part Horse, part Mule. It is of massive Gold, and they call it Garou,
not suffering any person to approach it but the Bramins. They say it is the
resemblance of the Beast which carried that holy person when he lived upon
earth. And that he traveled long journeys upon his back, to see if the people
remained in their duty, and whether they did no wrong one to another. Between
the great Gate and the great Altar upon the left hand, there is a little Altar,
upon which there stands an Idol of black Marble sitting crosslegg'd, about two
foot high. While I was there, a little Boy who was the Son of the High Priest
stood upon the left-side of the Altar, and all the people threw him certain
pieces of Taffata, or embroidered Calicut, like Handkerchiefs, all which he
returned to the people again after he had wiped them upon the Idol. Others
threw him Bracelets of Coral, others of yellow Amber, others threw him fruits
and flowers; whatever they threw him, he rubbed it upon the Idol, put it to his
lips, and then restored it to the people. This Idol is called Morli-Ram, that
is to say God-Morli, and was the Brother of him that stands upon the great
Altar.

Under the Portal of the Pagod sits one of the principal Bramins with a great
Basin by him, full of a yellow color mixed with water. All these poor
Idolaters come and present themselves before him, who gives them a mark from
between the eyes to the top of the nose, then upon the arms, and upon the
stomach; by which marks they know who have washed themselves in Ganges, and who
not. Those that never washed themselves but in the waters of their own Wells,
or have only sent for it from the River, they do not believe to be perfectly
purified, and by consequence they are not to be marked with that color. By the
way take notice, that these Idolaters are marked with different colors,
according to the Tribe they are of. But in the Empire of the Great Mogul, they
who are painted with yellow compose the biggest Tribe, and are the least
defiled. For when they are necessitated to the deeds of nature, some think it
not enough to wash the part defiled; but they first rub the part with a handful
of sand, and then scour it with water. After so doing, they affirm their bodies
to be clean, and that they can eat their food without fear.

Near to this great Pagod upon the Summer-west, stands a kind of a College,
which the Raja Jesseing, the most Potent of all the Idolaters in the Mogul's
Empire, built for the education of the youth of the better sort. I saw two of
the children of that Prince there at School, who had for their Masters several
Bramins, who taught them to write and read in a language peculiar to the
Idolaters Priests, and far different from the speech of the common people.
Entering into the Court of that College, and casting my eyes up, I discovered
two Galleries that went round the Court, where I saw the two Princes sitting,
attended by several petty Lords and Bramins, who made several Mathematical
Figures upon the ground with chalk. The two Princes seeing me, sent to know who
I was; and understanding that I was a Frank, they sent for me up, and asked me
several questions touching Europe, and particularly touching France. Whereupon
there being two Globes in the room which the Hollanders had given the Bramins,
I showed the Princes where France lay upon one of them. After I had taken
leave, I asked one of the Bramins when I might see the Pagod open: he answered
me, the next morning before Sunrising. When I came there, I observed before
the door, a Gallery supported with Pillars, where there was already a great
crowd of men, women and children expecting when the Pagod would be opened. By
and by, the Gallery, and a great part of the Court being full, there came eight
Bramins, four of each side of the Gate, with every one a Censer in his hand,
followed by a rabble of other Bramins that made a hideous noise with Drums and
other Instruments. The two eldest of the Bramins sing a Song; and then all the
people, falling into the tune, fall a singing and playing, with every one a
Peacock's-tall, or some other kind of flabel, to drive away the flies, that the
Idol may not be anannoid when they open the Pagod. This fanning, and the
Music, lasted a good half hour. Then the two principal Bramins made a great
noise three times with two little Bells, and with a kind of a Mallet knocked at
the Pagod-door. Which was presently opened by six Bramins within, discovering,
some six or seven paces from the entrance, an Altar with an Idol upon it, which
they call Ram, Ram, the Sister of Morli-Ram. Upon her right hand she has a
child made like a great Cupid, which they call the God La-kemin, and in her
left-arm a little Girl, which they call the Goddess Sita. So soon as the Pagod
was open, and that a great Curtain was drawn, the people, who perceived the
Idol, fell upon the ground, laying their hands upon their heads, and
prostrating themselves three times. Then rising up, they threw great quantities
of Nosegays and Garlands to the priests; with which the Bramins touched the
Idol, and then restored them again. Before the Altar stood a Bramin, who held
in his hand a lamp of nine weeks lighted, upon which he cast Incense every
foot, and then held it to the Idol. All these ceremonies lasted above an hour;
after which the people departed, and the Pagod was shut. They presented the
Idol with great store of Rice, Meal, Butter, Oil, and Milk-meats, of which the
Bramins lose nothing. Now in regard this Idol is the representation of a Woman,
the Women all invoke it, and call her their Patroness: which is the reason that
the place is generally crowded with Women and Maids. The Raja, to have this
Idol in the Pagod of his own house, and for taking it out of the great Pagod,
has expended as well upon the Bramins, as in alms to the poor, above five
Lacres of Roupies, or 750000 Livres of our Money.

On the other side of the Street where the College is built, there stands
another Pagod, called Richourdas, from the name of the Idol, which is within
upon the Altar: and somewhat lower upon another small Altar stands another
Idol, which they call Goupaldas, the Brother of Richourdas. You see nothing but
the face of all these Idols, which is either of wood or jet; unless it be the
Idol of Morly-Ram, which stands in the great Pagod stark naked. As for the Idol
Ram-Kam, which stands in the Raja's Pagod, it has two Diamonds instead of eyes,
which the Prince caused to be set there, with a Collar of Pearl, and Canopy
over his head, supported with four Silver-Pillars.

Some eight days journey from Banarous, bending Northward, you enter into a
Mountainous Country; but which sometimes op'ns it self into very large plains,
sometimes three or four leagues in length. They are very fertile in Corn, Rice,
Wheat and Pulse. But that which is the plague and ruin of the people of that
Country, is the vast number of Elephants that breed there, and devour their
Harvest. If a Caravan pass through any part of that Country where there are no
Inns, in regard the people are forced to lie in the open Fields, they have much
ado to defend themselves from the Elephants that will come to take away their
provisions. To skare them, the people make great fires, shoot off their
Muskets, hooping and hollowing ever and anon. In this place there is another
Pagod, well built, and very ancient, adorned with many figures both within and
without, which are only the representations of Maids and Women; so that Men are
seldom known to repair thither for devotion's-sake; and therefore it is called
the Women's Pagod. There is an Altar in the middle, as in other Pagods; and upon
the Altar an Idol of massy Gold, four foot high, representing a Maid standing
upright, which they call Ram-Marion. At her right hand stands a Child of massy
Silver, about two foot high; and they say that the Maid lived a very holy life,
that that Child was brought to her by the Bramins to be instructed in her
belief, and in the knowledge of well-living: but that after two or three years
that the Child had lived with her, the Infant grew so knowing and ready-witted,
that all the Raja's of the Country longed for her company; so that being
stoll'n from her one night, she was never seen afterward. Upon the left hand
of this Idol stands another Idol, representing an old Man; who, as they say,
was the servant of Ram-Marion and the Infant: for which reason the Bramins do
very much reverence this Idol. They never come but once a year in devotion, but
they must be there upon a prefixed day, which is the first of November, though
they never open the Pagod till the full of the Moon. During those fifteen days,
the Pilgrims, as well Men as Women, fast from time to time, and wash themselves
three times a day, not leaving a hair in any part of their bodies, which they
take off with a certain earth.

CHAP. XII. A Continuation of the description of the principal Pagods of the
Indian Idolaters.
NExt to the Pagods of Jngrenate and Banarous, the most considerable is that of
Matura, about eighteen leagues from Agra, upon the way to Dehly. It is one of
the most sumptuous Edifices in all India, and the place to which the greatest
number of Pilgrims was wont to resort: But now there are very few or none; the
Idolaters having insensibly lost the reverence which they had for that Pagod,
since the River of Gemena, that formerly ran by that Pagod, has changed its
course, above half a league from it. For it requires so much time to return to
the Pagod, after they have washed in the River, that they were many times
defiled again before they could reach it. Though this Pagod stand in a bottom,
yet you may discover it five or six leagues before you come at it, the building
being very lofty and magnificent. The Stones are of a red color, which they
fetch from a Quarry near Agra. They cleave like our Slates, some of them being
fifteen foot long, and nine or ten foot broad, yet not above six fingers thick,
especially when you cleave them as you would have them for use: They also make
very fair Pillars. The Fortress of Agra, the Walls of Jehanabat, the King's
House, the two Mosquees, and several Noblemens Houses are all built of this
Stone.

The Pagod is built upon a great Platform of an Octogonal Figure, paved with
Freestone; being adorned round about with the figures of all sorts of
creatures, especially Apes. There is an ascent to it two ways of fifteen or
sixteen steps a-piece, every step being two foot broad, for two persons to go
a-brest. One of the ascents leads up to the great Portal of the Pagod, the
other behind up to the Chancel. The Pagod does not take up above half the
Platform, the other half serving for a Piazza before it. The Structure is in
the form of a Cross, like the rest of the Pagods, in the midst whereof a great
Duomo, with two others of each side somewhat less, advance themselves above the
rest of the building. The outside of the building from top to bottom is
adorned with the figures of Rams, Apes and Elephants, and several sorts of
Monsters. From one foot below every one of these Duomo's, to the Roof, at such
and such spaces, are Windows, some five, some six feet high, and to every
Window belongs a Balcone, where four persons may stand. Every Balcone is
covered with a little Arch, supported by four Pillars, others by eight, every
two touching one another. Round about the Duomo's are Niches filled with the
figures of Demons. Some with four arms, some with four legs. Some with men's
heads upon the bodies of Beasts, and long tails that hang down to their
thighs: There are abundance of Apes; and indeed it is an ugly sight to behold
so many deformed spectacles. There is but one great door to the Pagod, upon
each side whereof there are Pillars and Figures of Men and Monsters. The
hinder-part is closed with a close Balister of Stone-Pillars five or six inches
in Diameter, into which, as into a kind of Sanctum Sanctorum, none but the
Bramins are permitted to enter: but for Money, I got in, and saw a square Altar
some fifteen or sixteen foot from the door, covered with an old Tissue of Gold
and Silver, upon which stood the great Idol, which they call Ram, Ram. You see
nothing but his head, which is of a very black Marble, with two Rubies instead
of eyes. All the body, from the shoulders to the feet, is covered with a Robe
of Purple-Velvet, with some small embroidery. There are two other Idols on each
side of him two foot high, apparelled in the same manner; only their faces are
white, which they call Becchor. There I also saw a Machine sixteen foot square,
and between twelve and fifteen foot high; covered with painted Calicuts,
representing the shapes of Devils. This Machine running upon four Wheels, they
told me, was a moving Altar, upon which they carried their great God in
Procession to visit the other Gods, as also to the River, whither all the
people went upon their great Festival.

The fourth Pagod is that of Tripeti, in the Province of Carnatica, toward the
Coast of Coromandel, and Cape Comorin. I saw it as I went to Maslipatan. It is
a Pagod to which there belong a great number of little lodgings for the
Bramins: so that altogether it seems to be a great Town. There are several
Ponds round about it; but their superstition is so great, that no Passenger
dare take any water out of them, but what the Bramin gives him.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Pilgrimages of the Idolaters to their Pagods.
ALL the Idolaters under the Dominion of the Great Mogul, and other Princes,
both on this side and beyond Ganges, at least once in their lives go in
Pilgrimage to one of these Pagods that I have named; but most generally to that
of Jugrenate, as being the first and most considerable above all the rest. The
Bramins and rich people go oftener. For some go every four years, some every
six, or eight; and putting the Idols of their Pagods upon Pallekies covered
with Tissues, they travel with their Bramins, as it were in procession to the
Pagod which they most esteem.

They go not in Pilgrimage one by one, or two and two, but whole Towns, and
many times several Towns together. The poor that go a great way, are supplied
by the rich; who spend very freely in such acts of Charity. The rich travel in
Pallekies or Chariots, the poor on foot, or upon Oxen; the Wife carrying the
Child, and the man the Kitchen Implements.

The Idol which they carry in procession, by way of visit, and out of respect
to the great Ram-Ram, lies at length in a rich Palleky, covered with Tissue of
Gold and Silver, fringed as richly; the Mattress and Bolster being of the same
stuff under the head, feet, and elbows. The Bramins also distribute Flabels to
the most considerable of the Company, the handles whereof being eight foot
long, are plated with Gold and Silver. The Flabel being three foot in Diameter,
of the same Tissue as the Pallekies; round about, it is adorned with Peacocks
Feathers to gather more wind, and sometimes with Bells to make a kind of
tingling. There are six of these Flabels usually employed to keep off the Flies
from their God; the better sort taking it by turns, that the honor of waiting
upon their God may be more equally shared.

CHAP. XIV. Of diverse Customs of the Indian Idolaters.
THE Bramins are well skilled in Astrology; and will exactly foretell to the
people the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. The second of July 1666, about one a
Clock in the afternoon, at Patna in Bengala, there was an Eclipse of the Sun;
at which time it was a prodigious thing to see the multitudes of people, men,
women, and children, that ran to the River Ganges, to wash themselves. But it
behooves them to begin to wash three days before the Eclipse; all which time
they labor day and night in providing all sorts of Rice, Milk, Meats, and
Sweatmeats, to throw to the Fish and Crocodiles, as soon as the Bramins give
the word. Whatever Eclipse it be whether of the Sun or Moon, the Idolaters as
soon as it appears, break all their Earthen Pots and Dishes in the house, which
makes a hideous noise altogether.

Every Bramin has his Magic Book, wherein are abundance of Circles and
Semicircles, Squares, Triangles, and several sorts of Cifers. They also make
several Figures upon the ground, and when they find that the good hour is come,
they cry aloud to the people to feed the fish. Then there ensues a most
horrible din of Drums, Bells, and great noise of sounding Metal, which they
twang one against another. And as soon as the victuals are thrown into the
River, the people are to go in and wash and rub themselves till the Eclipse be
over. So that in regard the waters were at that time very high, for more than
three Leagues above and below the City, and all the breadth of the River, there
was nothing to be seen but the heads of the people. As for the Bramins, they
stay ashore to receive the richer sort, and those that give most; to dry their
bodies, and to give them dry Linen to their bellies. Afterward they cause
them to sit down in a Chair, where the most liberal of the Idolaters have
provided Rice, Pulse, Milk, Butter, Sugar, Meal, and Wood. Before the Chair the
Bramin makes a place very clean about five foot square; then with Cow Dung
steeped in a kind of yellow Basin, he rubs all the place, for fear any Emet
should come there to be burnt. For indeed they would never make use of Wood if
they could help it; and when they do, they are very careful that there be no
Worms or Insects in it. In the place which they have thus cleans'd, they draw
several Figures, as Triangles, Ovals, Half-Ovals, etc. Then upon every Figure
they lay a little Cows-dung, with two or three small sticks of Wood, upon every
one of which they lay a several sort of Grain; after that pouring Butter, and
setting fire to each; by the smoke which rises, they judge of the plenty of
every sort of Grain that year.

When the Moon is at the full in March, they keep a solemn Festival for their
Idol, which is in form of a Serpent. This Festival continues nine days; and
when it comes, they do nothing but make Holiday all the while, as well men as
beasts, which they beautify by making Circles about their eyes with
Vermillion, with which they also color the Horns; and if they have a
particular kindness for the beast, they hang them with Leaves of gilded Tin.
Every morning they worship the Idol, and the Maids dance about it for an hour,
to the noise of Fluits and Drums; after which they eat and drink and are merry
till the evening, and then they worship and dance about their Idol again.

Though the Idolaters never drink any strong drink at other times, yet at this
Festival they drink Palm-wine, and strong water, which is made of the same in
remote Villages; for else their Mohammedan Governor would not suffer them to
make Wine, nor to sell any which might be brought out of Persia.

Their strong Water is thus made: They take a great Earthen pot, well glazed
within, which they call Martavane; into one of these Vessels, that holds three
hundred Paris pints of Palma-wine, they put in fifty or sixty pound of brown
Sugar unrefin'd, which looks like yellow Wax; with about twenty pound of a
great thick bark of a Thorn, not much unlike that which our Leather-dressers
use. This bark sets the Palma-wine a bubling and working just like our new
wines, for five or six days together, till it becomes of a sweet Liquor, as
sour as our Crabs. Then they distill it, and according to the taste they would
give, they either put into a Cauldron full, a little Bag of Mace, or three or
four handfuls of Annise-seed. They can make it also as strong as they please.

Being at Agra in the year 1642, an Idolater, whose name was Woldas, Broaker to
the Hollanders, about seventy years of age, receiving news that the chief
Bramin of the Pagod of Matura was dead, went to the Hollander and desired him
to even all accounts; for said he, the chief Priest being dead, it behooves me
to dye, that I may serve him in the other world. Thereupon having ended his
accounts, he took his Coach, with some of his Kindred; but having neither eaten
nor drank from the time he received the news, he died by the way; having
famished himself for grief.

The Indian Idolaters have a custom, that when any person gives a thing, they
snap their fingers, crying out, Gi-Narami, remember Narami, who was a great
Saint among them, for fear the Evil Spirit should enter into the body of him
that gives.

Being at Surat in the year 1653, a Raspoute being demanded Custom for three or
four pieces of Calicut, boldly asked the Governor, whether a Soldier that had
served the King all his lifetime, ought to pay Custom for two or three pitiful
pieces of Calicut, not worth four or five Roupies; telling him it was only to
cloth his Wife and Children. The Governor netl'd at his sawciness, called him
Bethico, or Son of a Whore; adding, that if he were Prince he would make him
pay his Customs. Whereupon the Soldier incensed at the affront, making as if
he felt for Money to pay his dues, bearing up to the Governor, stabbed him in
the belly, so that he died immediately. But the Soldier was presently cut in
pieces by the Governors Servants.

Though the Idolaters are in utter darkness as to the knowledge of the true God,
however the Law of Nature teaches them Morality in many things. When they are
married they are seldom false to their Wives. Adultery is very rare among them.
And as for Sodomy I never heard it mentioned. They marry their Children between
seven and eight years old, for fear they should fall into that vice; the
Ceremonies whereof are these: The day before the Nuptials, the Bridegroom,
accompanied by all his Kindred, goes to the House where the Bride lives, with a
great pair of Bracelets, two fingers thick, hollow within, and in two pieces,
with a hinge in the middle to open them. According to the quality of the Bride
those Bracelets are of more or less value, sometimes of Gold, sometimes of
Silver, Tin, or Latten, the poorest sort of all making use of Lead. The next
day there is a great Feast at the Bridegrooms House, whether all the Kindred on
both sides are invited, and about three a Clock in the afternoon the Bride is
brought thither. Then the chief of the Bramins that are there, of which there
are always several, laying the head of the Bride to the Bridegrooms, pronounces
several words, sprinkling their heads and bodies all the while with water. Then
they bring him upon Plates or Fig Leaves several sorts of Meats, Calicuts, and
Stuffs; and then the Bramin asks the Bridegroom, whether so long as God shall
make him able, he will let his Wife share with him, and whether he will
endeavor to maintain her by his labor. If he says yes, they all set
themselves down to the Feast prepared for them, where every one eats by
himself. If the Bride be rich, and be acquainted among the Nobility, their
Weddings are very pompous and expensive. The Bridegroom is mounted upon an
Elephant, and the Bride rides in a Chariot; the whole Company carrying Torches
in their hands. They also borrow of the Governor and the Nobility of the
place, as many Elephants and prancing Horses as they can get. And they walk
some part of the night with Fireworks, which they throw about the Streets and
Piazza's. But the greatest expense to those that live three or four hundred
Leagues from it, is to get the water of Ganges; for in regard they account that
water sacred, and drink it out of devotion, it must be brought them by the
Bramins, and in Earthen Vessels, glazed within side, which the chief Bramin of
Ingrenate fills himself with the purest Water of the River, and then seals up
with his own Seal. They never drink this water till the end of the Feast, and
then they give their guests three or more glasses apiece. This water coming so
far, and the chief Bramin demanding a Tribute for every pot, which contains a
Pail-full, sometimes a wedding comes to two or three thousand Roupies.

The eighth of April, being in a City of Bengala called Malde, the Idolaters
made a great Feast, according to the particular Custom of that place; they all
go out of the City, and fasten Iron hooks to the boughs of several Trees, then
come a great number of poor people and hang themselves, some by the sides, some
by the brawn of their backs, upon those hooks, till the weight of their body
tearing away the flesh, they fall of themselves. It Is a wonderful thing to see
that not so much as one drop of blood should issue from the wounded flesh, nor
that any of the flesh should be left upon the hook; besides, that in two days
they are perfectly cured by such Plasters as their Bramins give them. There
are others who at that Feast will lie upon a bed of nails, with the points
upward, the nails entering a good way into the flesh; however while these people
are under this Penance, their Friends come and present them with Money and
Linen. When they have undergone their Penance, they take the presents and
distribute them to the poor, without making any farther advantage of them. I
asked one, why they made that Feast, and suffered those severe Penances; who
answered me, that it was in remembrance of the first man, whom they called
Adam, as we do.

In the year 1666, I saw another sort of Penance, as I crossed the Ganges; upon
the Bank of which River they had prepared a clean place, where one of the poor
Idolaters was condemned to rest upon the ground, touching it only with his
hands and feet; which he was to do several times a day, and every time to kiss
the earth three times before he rose up again. He was to rise up upon his left
foot, never touching the ground with his right all the while. And every day for
a month together before he either eat or drank he was obliged to this posture
for fifty times together, and consequently to kiss the ground a hundred and
fifty times. He told me, that the Bramins had enjoined him that Penance because
he had suffered a Cow to dye in his House, and had not lead her to the water to
be washed before she died.

When an Idolater has lost any piece of Gold or Silver, or sum of Money either
by negligence, or as being stolen from him, he is obliged to carry as much as he
lost to the great Bramin; for if he does not, and that the other should come to
know of it, he is ignominiously cast out of his Tribe, to make him more careful
another time.

On the other side the Ganges Northward, toward the Mountains of Naugrocot,
there are two or three Raja's, who neither believe God nor the Devil. Their
Bramins have a book containing their Belief, full of ridiculous absurdities,
whereof the Author whose name is Baudou gives no reason. These Raja's are the
Great Moguls Vassals, and pay him Tribute.

To conclude the Malavares carefully preserve the nails of their left hands,
and let their hair grow like women's. These nails, which are half a finger
long, serve them instead of Combs; and it is with their left hand that they do
all their drudgery, never touching their faces, nor what they eat, but with
their right hands.

CHAP. XV. Of the Kingdom of Boutan, whence comes the Musk, the good Rhubarb,
and some Furs.
THE Kingdom of Boutan is of a large extent; but I could never yet come to a
perfect knowledge thereof. I have set down all that I could learn at Patna,
whither the Merchants of Boutan come to sell their Musk. The most excellent
Rhubarb comes also from the Kingdom of Boutan. From hence is brought also that
Seed which is good against the worms, therefore called Wormseed; and good store
of Furs. As for the Rhubarb, the Merchants run a great hazard which way soever
they bring it; for if they take the Northern Road, toward Caboul, the wet
spoils it; if the Southern Road, in regard the journey is long, if the Rains
happen to fall, there is as much danger that way; so that there is no Commodity
requires more care then that.

As for the Musk, during the heats the Merchant loses by it, because it dries
and loses its weight. Now in regard this Commodity pays twenty-five in the
hundred Custom at Gorrochepour, the last Town belonging to the Great Mogul,
next to the Kingdom of Boutan, when the Indian Merchants come to that City,
they go to the Officer of the Custom-House, and tell him that they are going to
Boutan to buy Musk or Rhubarb, and how much they intend to lay out; all which
the Officer Registers, with the name of the Merchant. Then the Merchants
instead of twenty-five, agree with him for seven or eight in the hundred, and
take a Certificate from the Officer or Cadi, that he may not demand any more at
their return. If the Officer refuses a handsome composition, then they go
another way, over Deserts and Mountains covered with Snow, tedious and
troublesome, till they come to Caboul, where the Caravans part, some for great
Tartary, others for Balch. Here it is that the Merchants coming from Boutan
barter their Commodities for Horses, Mules, and Camels; for there is little
Money in that Country. Then those Tartars transport their Commodities into
Persia, as far as Ardevile and Tauris; which is the reason that some Europeans
have thought that Rhubarb and Wormseed came out of Tartary. True it is, that
some Rhubarb comes from thence; but not so good as that of Boutan, being sooner
corrupted; for Rhubarb will eat out its own heart. The Tartars carry back out
of Persia Silks of small value, which are made in Tauris and Ardevile, and some
English Cloth brought by the Armenians from Constantinople and Smyrna. Some of
the Merchants that come from Caboul and Boutan go to Candahar, and thence to
Ispahan; whether they carry Coral in Beads, yellow Amber, and Lapis Lazuli
Beads, if they can meet with it. The other Merchants that come from the Coast
of Multan, Lahor, and Agra, bring only Linnons, Indigo, and store of Cornelian
and Crystal Beads. Those that return through Gorrochepour, and are agreed with
the Officer of the Custom-House, carry from Patna and Daca, Coral, yellow
Amber, Bracelets of Tortois-shells, and other Shells, with great store of round
and square thick pieces of Tortois. When I was at Patna, four Armenians who had
been before at Boutan, returned from Dantzick, where they had made certain
Figures of yellow Amber, representing the shapes of several Creatures and
Monsters, which they were carrying to the King of Boutan, who is an Idolater,
as are all his people, to set up in his Pagods. For the Armenians for Money
will sell any thing of Idolatry; and they told me besides, that if they could
but have made the Idol which the King of Boutan bespoke of them, they should
have done their business. Which was to have been a Monsters head, with six
horns, four ears, four arms, and six fingers upon every hand, all of yellow
Amber; but they could not find pieces big enough.

The Caravan is three months traveling from Patna to the Kingdom of Boutan. It
sets out from Patna about the end of December, and eight days after arrives at
Gorrochepour.

From Gorrochepour to the foot of the high Mountains, is eight or nine days
journey more, during which the Caravan suffers very much hardship, for the
Country is nothing but wide Forests, full of wild Elephants. So that the
Merchants, instead of taking their rests, are forced to watch, keep fires, and
shoot off their Muskets all the night long. For the Elephant making no noise in
treading, would else be upon the Caravan before they were aware; not that he
comes to do any mischief to the men, but to get what victuals he can find. You
may travel from Patna to the foot of those Mountains in Palleki's. But
generally they ride upon Oxen, Camels, or Horses, bred in the Country. Those
Horses are generally so little, that when a man is upon the back of them, his
feet touch the ground; but they will travel twenty Leagues an end, and never
bait, or else with a very small one. Some of those Horses cost two hundred
Crowns; for indeed when you come to cross the Mountains, you can make use of no
other sort of carriage but them, in regard of the narrowness and ruggedness of
the Passes; which many times put the Horses very much to it, as strong and as
low as they are.

Five or six Leagues beyond Gorrochepour you enter into the Territories of the
Raja of Nupal, which extend to the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Boutan. This
Raja is a Tributary to the Great Mogul, and pays him every year an Elephant for
his Homage. He resides in the City of Nupal, from whence he derives his Title;
but there is little either Trade or Money in his Country, which is all Woods
and Forests.

The Caravan being arrived at the foot of these Mountains, which are called at
this day by the name of Naugrocot, abundance of people come from all parts of
the Mountain, the greatest part whereof are women and maids, who agree with the
Merchants to carry them, their goods and provisions cross the Mountains, which
is eight days journey more.

The women carry upon each shoulder a woollen Roll, to which is fastened a
large Cushion, that hangs down upon their backs, upon which the man sits. There
are three women to carry one man, relieving one another by turns. And for their
luggage and provisions, they lade them upon Goats, that will carry a hundred
and fifty pound weight apiece. Those that will ride, are in many places forced
to have their Horses hoisted up with Cords. They never feed them but morning
and evening, mixing a pound of meal, half a pound of brown Sugar, and half a
pound of Butter together, with water sufficient. In the evening they must be
contented only with a few flat Peason, bruised, and steeped half an hour in
water. The women that carry the men, get for their ten days travel two Roupies
apiece, and as much for every burden which the Goats carry, and for every
Horse which they lead.

After you have passed the Mountains, you may travel to Boutan upon Oxen,
Camels, Horses, or Palleki's, which you please. The Country is good, abounding
in Rice, Corn, Pulse, and store of wine. All the people both men and women are
clad in the Summer with a large piece of Fustian, or Hempen-Cloath; in the
Winter with a thick Cloth, almost like Felt. Both men and women wear upon their
heads a kind of Bonnet, much like our drinking Cans, which they adorn with
Boars teeth, and with round and square pieces of Tortois-Shells. The richer
sort intermix Coral and Amber Beads, of which their women make them Neck-Laces.
The men as well as the women wear Bracelets upon their left hands only, from
the wrist to the elbow. The women wear them strait, the men loose. About their
necks they wear a silken twist, at the end whereof hangs a Bead of yellow Amber
or Coral, or a Boars Tooth, which dangles upon their breasts. On their left
sides, their Girdles are buttoned with Beads of the same. Though they be
Idolaters, yet they feed upon all sort of food, except the flesh of Cows, which
they adore as the common Nurses of all men; they are besides great lovers of
strong water. They observe also some Ceremonies of the Chinese, burning Amber
at the end of their Feasts, though they do not worship fire like the Chinese.
For which reason the Merchants of Boutan will give at Patna for a Serre of
large pieces of yellow Amber, as big as a Nut, bright and clean, thirty-five
and forty Roupies. The Serre of yellow Amber, Musk, Coral, Ambergrise, Rhubarb,
and other Drugs, containing nine Ounces to the pound. Saltpeter, Sugar, Rice,
Corn, and other Commodities, are also sold by the Serre in Bengala; but the
Serre contains seventy-two of our Pounds, at sixteen Ounces to the Pound; and
forty Serres make a Mein, or 2824 Pounds of Paris.

To return to yellow Amber, a piece of nine ounces is worth in Boutan from 250
to 300 Roupies, according to its color and beauty. Coral rough, or wrought
into Beads, yields profit enough; but they had rather have it rough, to shape
it as they please themselves.

The Women and Maids are generally the Artists among them, as to those toys.
They also make Beads of Crystal and Agat. As for the Men, they make Bracelets
of Tortoise-shell, and Sea-shells, and polish those little pieces of Shells
which the Northern people wear in their ears, and in their hair. In Patna and
Daca there are above two thousand persons that thus employ themselves,
furnishing the Kingdoms of Boutan, Asem, Siam, and other Northern and Eastern
parts of the Mogul's Dominions.

As for Wormseed, the Herb grows in the Fields, and must dye before the Seed
can be gathered: but the mischief is, that before the Seed is ripe, the wind
scatters the greatest part, which makes it so scarce. When they gather the
Seed, they take two little Hampers, and as they go along the Fields, they move
their Hampers from the right to the left, and from the left to the right, as if
they were mowing the Herb, bowing it at the top, and so all the Seed falls into
the Hampers.

Rhubarb is a Root which they cut in pieces, and stringing them by ten or
twelve together, hang them up a drying.

Had the Natives of Boutan as much art in killing the Martin as the Muscovite,
they might vend great store of those rich Furs, considering what a number of
those Beasts there are in that Country. No sooner does that creature peep out
of his hole, but the Muscovites, who lie upon the watch, have them presently,
either in the nose or in the eyes; for should they hit them in the body, the
blood would quite spoil the skin.

The King of Boutan has constantly seven or eight thousand Men for his Guard.
Their Weapons are for the most part Bows and Arrows. Some of them carry
Battel-axes, and Bucklers. It Is a long time ago since they had the first use of
Muskets and Cannons: their Gunpowder being long, but of an extraordinary
force. They assured me that some of their Cannons had Letters and Figures upon
them, that were above five-hunder'd years old. They dare not stir out of the
Kingdom without the Governor's particular leave; nor dare they carry a Musket
along with them, unless their next Kindred will undertake for them that they
shall bring it back. Otherwise I had brought one along with me; for by the
characters upon the Barrel, it appeared to have been made above 180 years. It
was very thick, the mouth of the bore being like a Tulip, polished within as
bright as a Looking-glass. Two thirds of the Barrel were garnished with
embossed Wires, with certain Flowers of Gold and Silver inlaid between; and it
carried a Bullet that weighed an ounce. But I could not prevail with the
Merchant to sell it me, nor to give me any of his powder.

There are always fifty Elephants kept about the King's House, and twenty five
Camels, with each a Piece of Artillery mounted upon his back, that carries half
a pound Ball. Behind the Gun sits a Cannoneer that manages and levels the Guns
as he pleases.

There is no King in the World more feared and more respected by his Subjects
then the King of Boutan; being in a manner adored by them. When he sits to do
Justice, or give Audience, all that appear in his presence hold their hands
close together above their forheads: and at a distance from the Throne
prostrate themselves upon the ground, not daring to lift up their heads. In
this humble posture they make their Petitions to the King; and when they
retire, they go backwards till they are quite out of his sight. One thing they
told me for truth, that when the King has done the deeds of nature, they
diligently preserve the ordore, dry it and powder it, like sneezing-powder: and
then putting it into Boxes, they go every Market Day, and present it to the
chief Merchants, and rich Farmers, who recompense them for their kindness: that
those people also carry it home, as a great rarity, and when they feast their
Friends, strew it upon their meat. Two Boutan Merchants showed me their Boxes,
and the Powder that was in them.

The Natives of Boutan are strong and well proportioned; but their noses and
faces are somewhat flat. Their women are said to be bigger and more vigorous
than the men; but that they are much more troubled with swellings in the throat
then the men, few escaping that disease. They know not what war is, having no
enemy to fear but the Mogul. But from him they are fenced with high, steep,
craggy, and snowey Mountains. Northward there are nothing but vast Forests and
Snow. East and West nothing but bitter water. And as for the Raja's near them,
they are Princes of little force.

There is certainly some Silver Mine in the Kingdom of Boutan, for the King
coins much Silver, in pieces that are of the value of a Roupy. The pieces are
already described. However the Boutan Merchants could not tell me where the
Mine lay. And as for their Gold, that little they have is brought them from the
East, by the Merchants of those Countries.

In the year 1659, the Duke of Muscovy's Ambassadors passed through this
Country to the King of China. They were three of the greatest Noblemen in
Muscovy, and were at first very well received; but when they were brought to
kiss the Kings hands, the custom being to prostrate themselves three times to
the ground, they refused to do it, saying that they would complement the King
after their manner, and as they approached their own Emperor, who was as great
and as potent as the Emperor of China. Thereupon, and for that they continued
in their resolution, they were dismissed with their presents, not being
admitted to see the King. But had those Ambassadors conformed to the custom of
China, without doubt we might have had a beaten rode through Muscovy and the
North part of Great Tartary, and much more commerce and knowledge of the
Country than now we have.

This mentioning the Muscovites, puts me in mind of a story that several
Muscovy Merchants averred to be true, upon the rode between Tauris and Ispahan,
where I overtook them, of a woman of fourscore and two years of age, who at
those years was brought to bed in one of the Cities of Muscovy, of a Male
Child, which was carried to the Duke, and by him brought up at the Court.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Kingdom of Tipra.
MOst people have been of opinion till now, that the Kingdom of Pegu lies upon
the Frontiers of China; and I thought so my self, till the Merchants of Tipra
undeceived me. I met with three, one at Daca, and two others at Patna. They
were men of very few words; whether it were their own particular disposition,
or the general habit of the Country. They cast up their accounts with small
Stones likes Agats, as big as a man's nail, upon every one of which was a
Cipher. They had every one their weights, like a Stelleer; though the Beam were
not of Iron, but of a certain Wood as hard as Brazile; nor was the Ring that
holds the weight, and is put thorough the Beam to mark the weight, of Iron, but
a strong Silk Rope. And thus they weighed from a Dram to ten of our Pounds. If
all the Natives of the Kingdom of Tipra were like the two Merchants which I met
at Patna, I dare affirm them to be notable topers; for they never refused
whatever strong Liquor I gave them, and never left till all was out; and when I
told them by my Interpreter that all my Wine was gone, they clapped their hands
upon their stomachs and sighed. These Merchants traveled all three through the
Kingdom of Arakan, which lies to the South and West of Tipra, having some part
of Pegu upon the Winter West. They told me also, that it was about fifteen days
journey to cross through their Country; from whence there is no certain
conjecture of the extent to be made, by reason of the inequality of the stages.
They ride upon Oxen and Horses, which are low. but very hardy. As for the King
and the Nobility, they ride in their Pallekies, or upon their Elephants of War.
They are no less subject to Wens under their throats, than those of Boutan;
insomuch that the women have those Wens hanging down to their Nipples; which
proceeds from the badness of the waters.

There is nothing in Tipra which is fit for strangers. There is a Mine of Gold,
but the Gold is very course. And there is a sort of very course Silk, which is
all the Revenue the King has. He exacts no Subsidies from his Subjects; but
only that they, who are not of the prime Nobility, should work six days in a
year in his Mine, or in his Silk-works. He sends his Gold and his Silk into
China, for which they bring him back Silver, which he coins into pieces to the
value of ten Sous. He also makes thin pieces of Gold, like the Aspers of Turkey;
of which he has two sorts, four of the one sort making a Crown, and twelve of
the other.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Kingdom of Asem.
IT was never known what the Kingdom of Asem was, till Mirgimola had settled
Aureng-zeb in the Empire. For he considering that he should be no longer valued
at Court, after the war was at an end, being then General of Anreng-zeb's Army,
and powerful in the Kingdom, where he had great store of Creatures, to preserve
the Authority he had, resolved to undertake the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Asem; where he knew he should find little or no resistance, that Kingdom having
been at peace above 500 years before. It Is thought these were the people that
formerly invented Guns and Powder; which spead it self from Asem to Pegu, and
from Pegu to China, from whence the invention has been attributed to the
Chinese. However certain it is, that Mirgimola brought from thence several
pieces of Canon, which were all Iron Guns, and store of excellent Powder, both
made in that Country. The Powder is round and small, like ours, and very
strong.

Mirgimola embarked his Army in one of the mouths of Ganges, and sailing up one
of the Rivers that comes from the Lake Chiamay, to the twenty-ninth or
thirtieth Degree, he landed his Army, and came into a Country abounding in all
humane necessaries, still finding the less resistance because the people were
surpised. Being a Mahumetan, he spared not the very Pagods, but burned and
sacked all wherever he came to the thirty-fifth Degree. There he understood
that the King of Asem was in the field with a more powerful Army than he
expected, and that he had several pieces of Canon, and great store of
fireworks withal. Thereupon Mirgimola thought it not convenient to march any
farther; though the chief reason of his return was the drawing on of Winter;
which the Indians are so sensible of, that it is impossible to make them stir
beyond the thirti'th or thirty-fifth Degree, especially to hazard their lives.

Mirgimola therefore turns to the South-west, and besieges a City called Azoo,
which he took in a small time, and found good plunder therein. In this City of
Azoo, are the Tombs of the Kings of Asem, and of all the Royal Family. For
though they are Idolaters, they never burn their dead bodies, but bury them.
They believe that the dead go into another world, where they that have lived
well in this, have plenty of all things; but that they who have been ill
livers, suffer the want of all things, being in a more especial manner
afflicted with hunger and drowth; and that therefore it is good to bury
something with them to serve them in their necessities. This was the reason
that Mirgimola found so much wealth in the City of Azoo. For many ages
together, several Kings had built them Chapels in the great Pagod to be buried
in, and in their life times had stored up in the Vaults of their particular
Chapels, great sums of Gold and Silver, and other movables of value. Besides,
that when they bury the deceased King, they bury with him likewise whatever he
esteemed most precious in his lifetime, whether it were an Idol of Gold or
Silver, or whatever else, that being needful in this, might be necessary for
him in the world to come. But that which favors most of Barbarism is, that
when he dies, all his best beloved Wives, and the principal Officers of his
House poison themselves, to be buried with him, and to wait upon him in the
other world. Besides this, they bury one Elephant, twelve Camels, six Horses,
and a good number of Hounds, believing that all those Creatures rise again to
serve their King.

The Kingdom of Asem is one of the best Countries of all Asia, for it produces
all things necessary for humane subsistence, without any need of foreign
supply. There are in it Mines of Gold, Silver, Steel, Lead, Iron, and great
store of Silk, but course. There is a sort of Silk that is found under the the
Trees, which is spun by a Creature like to our Silkworms, but rounder, and
which lives all the year long under the trees. The Silks which are made of this
Silk glist'n very much, but they fret presently. The Country produces also
great store of Gum-Lake; of which there is two sorts, one grows under the trees
of a red color, wherewith they paint their Linen and Stuffs; and when they
have drawn out the red juice, the remaining substance serves to varnish
Cabinets, and to make Wax; being the best Lake in Asia for those uses. As for
their Gold they never suffer it to be transported out of the Kingdom, nor do
they make any Money of it; but they preserve it all in Ingots, which pass in
trade among the Inhabitants; but as for the Silver, the King coins it into
Money, as is already described.

Though the Country be very plentiful of all things, yet there is no flesh
which they esteem so much as Dogs flesh; which is the greatest delicacy at all
Feasts; and is sold every month in every City of the Kingdom upon their
Market-days. There are also great store of Vines, and very good Grapes, but
they never make any Wine; only they dry the Grapes to make Aqua Vitae. As for
Salt they have none but what is artificial, which they make two ways. First
they raise great heaps of that green Stuff that swims at the top of standing
waters, which the Ducks and Frogs eat. This they dry and burn; and the ashes
thereof being boiled in a Cloth in water, become very good Salt. The other way
most in use is to take the leaves of Adams Fig Tree, which they dry and burn;
the ashes whereof make a Salt so tart, that it is impossible to eat it until
the tartness be taken away; which they do by putting the ashes in water, where
they stir them ten or twelve hours together; then they strain the substance
through a Linen Cloth and boil it; as the water boils away, the bottom
thick'ns; and when the water is all boiled away, they find at the bottom very
good and white Salt.

Of the ashes of these Fig Leaves they make a Lie, wherewith they wash their
Silk, which makes it as white as Snow; but they have not enough to whiten half
the Silk that grows in the Country.

Kenneroof is the name of the City where the King of Asem keeps his Court;
twenty-five or thirty days journey from that which was formerly the Capital
City, and bore the same name. The King requires no Subsidies of his people; but
all the Mines in his Kingdom are his own; where for the ease of his Subjects,
he has none but slaves that work; so that all the Natives of Asem live at their
ease, and every one has his house by himself, and in the middle of his ground a
fountain encompassed with trees; and most commonly every one an Elephant to
carry their Wives; for they have four Wives, and when they marry, they say to
one, I take thee to serve me in such a thing; to the other, I appoint thee to
do such business; so that every one of the Wives knows what she has to do in
the House. The men and women are generally well complexion'd; only those that
live more Southerly are more swarthy, and not so subject to Wens in their
throats; neither are they so well featured, besides that the women are somewhat
flat Nosed. In the Southern parts the people go stark naked, only covering
their private parts, with a Bonnet like a blew Cap upon their heads, hung about
with Swines teeth. They pierce holes in their ears, that you may thrust your
thumb in, whete they hang pieces of Gold and Silver. Bracelets also of
Tortoise-shells, and Sea-shells as long as an egg, which they saw into Circles,
are in great esteem among the meaner sort; as Bracelets of Coral and yellow
Amber among those that are rich. When they bury a man, all his Friends and
Relations must come to the burial; and when they lay the body in the ground,
they all take off their Bracelets from their Armsand Legs, and bury them with
the Corpse.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Kingdom of Siam.
THE greatest part of the Kingdom of Siam lies between the Golf of Siam and the
Golf of Bengala; bordering upon Pegu toward the North, and the Peninsula of
Malacca toward the South. The shortest and nearest way for the Europaeans to go
to this Kingdom, is to go to Ispahan, from Ispahan to Ormus, from Ormus to
Surat, from Surat to Golconda, from Golconda to Maslipatan, there to embark for
Denouserin, which is one of the Ports belonging to the Kingdom of Siam. From
Denouserin to the Capital City, which is also called Siam, is thirty-five days
journey, part by Water, part by Land, by Wagon, or upon Elephants. The way,
whether by Land or Water, is very troublesome; for by Land you must be always
upon your guard, for fear of Tigers and Lions; by Water, by reason of the many
falls of the River, they are forced to hoise up their Boats with Engines.

All the Country of Siam is very plentiful in Rice and Fruits; the chiefest
whereof are Mangos, Durions, and Mangustans. The Forests are full of Hearts,
Elephants, Tigers, Rhinocero's, and Apes; where there grow also large Bambou's
in great abundance. Under the knots of these Bambou's are Emets nests as big as
a man's head, where every Emet has his apartiment by himself; but there is but
one hole to enter into the nest. They make their nests in these Canes to
preserve themselves from the rains which continue four or five months together.

In the night time the Serpents are very busy. There are some two foot long,
with two heads; but one of them has no motion.

There is also another creature in Siam, like our Salamander, with a forked
tail, and very venomous.

The Rivers in this Kingdom are very large; and that which runs by Siam is
equally as large as the rest. The water is very wholesome; but it is very full
of Crocodiles of a monstrous bigness, that devour men if they be not very
careful of themselves. These Rivers overflow their banks while the Sun is in
the Southern Tropic; which makes the fields to be very fertile as far as they
flow; and it is observed, that the Rice grows higher or lower, as the floods do
more or less increase.

Siam, the Capital City of the Kingdom, where the King keeps his Court, is
walled about, being about three of our Leagues in circuit; it is situated in an
Island, the River running quite round it, and might be easily brought into
every street in the Town, if the King would but lay out as much Money upon that
design, as he spends in Temples and Idols.

The Siamers have thirty-three Letters in their Alphabet. But they write from
the left to the right, as we do, contrary to the custom of Japon, China,
Cochinchina, and Tunquin, who write from the right to the left.

All the Natives of this Kingdom are slaves, either to the King or the great
Lords. The women as well as the men cut their hair; neither are they very rich
in their habits. Among their complements, the chiefest is, never to go before a
person that they respect, unless they first ask leave, which they do by holding
up both their hands. Those that are rich have several Wives.

The Money of the Country is already described.

The King of Siam is one of the richest Monarchs in the East, and styles
himself King of Heaven and Earth; though he be Tributary to the Kings of China.
He seldom shows himself to his Subjects; and never gives Audience, but to the
principal Favorites of his Court. He trusts to his Ministers of State, for the
management of his affairs, who sometimes make very bad use of their authority.
He never shows himself in public above twice a year; but then it is with an
extraordinary magnificence. The first is, when he goes to a certain Pagod
within the City, which is gilded round both within and without. There are
three Idols between six and seven foot high, which are all of massy Gold;
which he believes he renders propitious to him, by the great store of Alms that
he distributes among the poor, and the presents which he makes to the Priests.
Then he goes attended by all his Court, and puts to open view the richest
Ornaments he has. One part of his magnificence consists in his train of two
hundred Elephants; among which there is one that is white, which the King so
highly esteems, that he styles himself King of the White Elephant.

The second time the King appears in public, is when he goes to another Pagod
five or six Leagues above the Town, up the River. But no person must enter into
this Pagod, unless it be the King and his Priests. As for the people, so soon
as they see the Door open, they must presently fall upon their faces to the
Earth. Then the King appears upon the River with two hundred Galleys of a
prodigious length; four hundred Rowers belonging to every one of the Galleys;
most of them being gilded and carved very richly. Now in regard this second
appearance of the King is in the month of November, when the waters begin to
abate, the Priests make the people believe that none but the King can stop the
course of the waters, by his Prayers and by his Offerings to this Pagod. And
they are so vain as to think that the King cuts the waters with his Sabra, or
Skain; thereby commanding it to retire back into the Sea.

The King also goes, but incognito, to a Pagod in an Island where the
Hollanders have a Factory. There is at the entry thereof an Idol sitting
crossleg'd, with one hand upon his knee, and the other arm akimbo. It is above
sixty foot high; and round about this Idol are about three hundred others, of
several sorts and sizes. All these Idols are guilt. And indeed there are a
prodigious number of Pagods in this Country; for every rich Siamer causes one
to be built in memory of himself. Those Pagods have Steeples and Bells, and the
Walls within are painted and gilded; but the Windows are so narrow that they
give but a very dim light. The two Pagods to which the King goes publicly, are
adorned with several tall Pyramids, well gilded. And to that in the Hollanders
Island there belongs a Cloister, which is a very neat Structure. In the middle
of the Pagod is a fair Chapel, all gilded within side; where they find a
Lamb, and three Wax Candles continually burning before the Altar, which is all
over covered with Idols, some of massy Gold, others of Copper guilt. In the
Pagod in the midst of the Town, and one in of those to which the King goes once
a year, there are above four thousand Idols; and for that which is six Leagues
from Siam, it is surrounded with Pyramids, whose beauty makes the industry of
that Nation to be admired.

When the King appears, all the Doors and Windows of the Houses must be shut;
and all the people prostrate themselves upon the ground, not daring to lift up
their eyes. And because no person is to be in a higher place than the King,
they that are within doors, are bound to keep their lowest Rooms. When he cuts
his hair, one of his Wives performs that office, for he will not suffer a
Barber to come near him.

This Prince has a passionate kindness for his Elephants; which he looks upon
as his Favorites, and the Ornaments of his Kingdom. If there be any of them
that fall sick, the Lords of the Court are mighty careful to please their
Sovereign; and if they happ'n to dye, they are buried with the same Funeral
Pomp as the Nobles of the Kingdom; which are thus performed: They set up a kind
of Mausoleum, or Tomb of Reeds, covered with Paper; in the midst whereof they
lay as much sweet wood as the body weighs, and after the Priests have mumbl'd
certain Orisons, they set it a-fire, and burn it to ashes; which the rich
preserve in Gold or Silver Urns, but the poor scatter in the wind. As for
offenders, they never burn, but bury them.

It Is thought that in this Kingdom there are above two hundred Priests, which
they call Bonzes, which are highly reverenced as well at Court as among the
people. The King himself has such a value for some of them, as to humble
himself before them. This extraordinary respect makes them so proud, that some
of them have aspired to the Throne. But when the King discovers any such
design, he puts them to death. And one of them had his head lately struck off
for his Ambition.

These Bonzes wear yellow, with a little red Cloth about their Wastes, like a
Girdle. Outwardly they are very modest, and are never seen to be angry. About
four in the morning, upon the tolling of their Bells, they rise to their
prayers, which they repeat again toward evening. There are some days in the
year when they retire from all converse with men. Some of them live by Alms;
others have Houses with good Revenues. While they wear the Habit of Bonzes,
they must not marry; for if they do, they must lay their Habit aside. They are
generally very ignorant, not knowing what they believe. Yet they hold the
transmigration of Souls into several Bodies. They are forbidd to kill any
Creature; yet they will make no scruple to eat what others kill, or that which
dies of it self. They say that the God of the Christians and theirs were
Brothers; but that theirs was the eldest. If you ask them where their God is,
they say, he vanished away, and they know not where he is.

The chief strength of the Kingdom is their Infantry, which is indifferent
good; the Soldiers are used to hardship, going all quite naked, except their
private parts; all the rest of their body, looking as if it had been cupt, is
carved into several shapes of beasts and flowers. When they have cut their
skins, and stanch'd the blood, they rub the cut-work with such colors as they
think most proper. So that afar off you would think they were clad in some kind
of flowered Satin or other; for the colors never rub out. Their weapons are
Bows and Arrows, Pike and Musket, and an Azagaya, or Staff between five and six
foot long with a long Iron Spike at the end, which they very dexterously dart at
the Enemy.

In the year 1665, there was at Siam a Neapolitan Jesuit, who was called
Father Thomas; he caused the Town and the Kings Palace to be fortified with
very good Bulwarks, according to Art; for which reason the King gave him leave
to live in the City, where he has a House and a little Church.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Kingdom of Macassar; and the Ambassadors which the
Hollanders sent into China.
THE Kingdom of Macassar, otherwise called the Isle of Celebes, begins at the
fifteenth Degree of Southern Latitude. The heats are excessive all the day; but
the nights are temperate enough. And for the Soil, it is very fertile; but the
people have not the art of building. The Capital City bears the name of the
Kingdom, and is situated upon the Sea. The Port is free; for the Vessels that
bring great quantities of goods from the adjacent Islands, pay no Customs. The
Islanders have a custom to poison their Arrows; and the most dangerous poison
which they use, is the juice of certain Trees in the Island of Borneo; which
they will temper so as to work swift or slow, as they please. They hold that
the King has only the secret Receipt to take away the force of it; who boasts
that he has the most effectual poison in the world, which there is no remedy
can prevent.

One day an English man in heat of blood had killed one of the Kings of
Macassars Subjects; and though the King had pardoned him, yet both English,
Hollanders, and Portugals fearing if the English man should go unpunished, lest
the Islanders should revenge themselves upon some of them, besought the King to
put him to death; which with much ado being consented to, the King unwilling to
put him to a lingering death, and desirous to show the effect of his poison,
resolved to shoot the Criminal himself; whereupon he took a long Trunk, and
shot him exactly into the great Toe of the right foot, the place particularly
aimed at. Two Surgeons, one an English man, and the other a Hollander,
provided on purpose, immediately cut off the member; but for all that, the
poison had dispersed it self so speedily, that the English man died at the same
time. All the Kings and Princes of the East are very diligent in their enquiry
after strong poisons. And I remember that the chief of the Dutch Factory and I
tried several poisoned Arrows, with which the King of Achen had presented him,
by shooting at Squirrels, who fell down dead, as soon as ever they were touched.

The King of Macassar is a Mohammedan, and will not suffer his Subjects to
embrace Christianity. Yet in the year 1656, the Christians found a way to get
leave to build a fair Church in Macassar. But the next year the King caused it
to be pulled down, as also that of the Dominican Friars, which the Portugals
made use of. The Parish Church, which was under the Government of the secular
Priests, stood still, till the Hollanders attacked Macassar, and compelled him
to turn all the Portugals out of his Dominions. The ill conduct of that Prince
was in part the occasion of that war; to which the Hollanders were moved, to
revenge themselves upon the Portugal Jesuits, who had crossed their Embassy to
China. Besides, that they offered great affronts to the Hollanders at Macassar,
especially when they trod under foot the Hat of one of the Dutch Envoys, who
was sent to treat with the King in behalf of the Company. Thereupon the
Hollanders resolved to unite their forces with the Bouquises, that were in
rebellion against their Sovereign, and to revenge themselves at any rate.

Now as to the business of China, it happened thus: Toward the end of the year
1658, the General of Batavia and his Council, sent one of the chief of the
Holland Company with Presents to the King of China; who arriving at Court,
labored to gain the friendship of the Mandarins, who are the Nobility of the
Kingdom. But the Jesuits, who by reason of their long abode in the Country,
understood the language, and were acquainted with the Lords of the the Court,
lest the Holland Company should get footing to the prejudice of the Portugals,
represented several things to the Kings Council to the prejudice of the
Hollanders; more especially charging them with breach of Faith in all the
places where they came. Upon this the Holland Agent was dismissed, and departed
out of China without doing any feats. Afterward coming to understand what a
trick the Portugal Jesuits had put upon him, he made report thereof to the
General and his Council at Batavia; which so incensed them, that they resolved
to be revenged. For by the Deputies accounts, the Embassy had cost them above
fifty thousand Crowns; for which they consulted how to make the Portugals pay
double. Understanding therefore the trade which the Jesuits drove in the Island
of Macao, and to the Kingdom of Macassar, whither upon their own account they
sent seven Vessels, laden with all sorts of Commodities, as well of India as
China; they took their opportunity, and the seventh of June 1660, appeared with
a Fleet of thirty Sail before the Port of Macassar. The King thinking himself
obliged to make defense against so potent an Enemy, endeavored to sustain the
brunt of the Hollander with the Portugal Ships in the Road; but the Hollander
dividing their Fleet, part of them fought the Portugal, the other half battered
the Royal Fortress so furiously, that they carried it in a short time. Which so
terrified the King, that he commanded the Portugals not to fire any more for
fear of farther provoking his Enemies. The Prince Patinsaloa was slain in the
fight, which was a great loss to the King of Macassar, who was become
formidable to his neighbors by the good Conduct of that Minister. As for the
Hollanders, they took, burnt, and sunk all the Portugal Vessels, and
sufficiently re-imburs'd themselves for their China Expenses.

The thirteenth of June the King of Macassar, whose name was Sumbaco, hung out
a white Flag from another Tower, whence he beheld the fight environed by his
Wives. During the truce, he sent one of the Grandees of his Court to the Dutch
Admiral, to desire peace, which was granted, upon condition he should send an
Ambassador to Batavia, expel the Portugals out of the Island, and not permit
his Subjects to have any more to do with them.

Thereupon the King of Macassar sent eleven of the greatest Lords of his Court,
with a train of seven hundred men; the Chief of the Embassy being the Prince of
Patinsaloa. The first thing they did, was to pay two hundred Loaves of Gold to
redeem the Royal Fortress again; and then submitting to the Conditions which
the Dutch Admiral had proposed, the General of Batavia signed the Articles,
which were punctually observed. For the Portugals immediately quitted the
Country, some departing for Siam and Camboya, others for Macoa and Goa. Macao,
formerly one of the most famous and richest Cities of the Orient, was the
principal motive that inclined the Hollanders to send an Ambassador into
China; for being the best station which the Portugals had in all those parts,
the Dutch had a design to win it wholly. Now, this City, lying in twenty-two
Degrees of Northern Latitude, in a small Island next to the Province of Kanton,
which is a part of China, has very much lost its former luster.

But this was not all which the Jesuits and the Portugal Merchants suffered.
The Chief of the Dutch Factory at Mingrela, which is but eight Leagues from
this City, understanding the bad success of the Dutch in China, had a
contrivance by himself to be revenged. He knew that the Jesuits of Goa and
other places, drove a great trade in rough Diamonds, which they sent into
Europe, or else carried along with them when they returned; and that for the
more private carrying on of their trade, they were wont to send one or two of
their Order, that knew the language, in the habit of a Faquir, which consists
of a Tigers Skin to cover their back-parts, and a Goats Skin to cover the
breast, reaching down to the knees. Thereupon the Chief of the Factory of
Mingrela taking his opportunity, and having notice that two of the supposed
Faquirs were gone to the Mines, to lay out 400000 Pardo's in Diamonds, gave
order to two men, which he had fee'd for the purpose, that as soon as the
Fathers had made their purchase, he should give notice to the Officer of the
Custom-House at Bicholi.

Bicholi is a great Town upon the Frontiers of those Lands that part the
Kingdom of Visapour from the Territories of the Portugals; there being no other
way to pass the River, which encompasses the Island where the City of Goa is
built.

The Fathers believing that the Customer knew nothing of their purchase, went
into the Boat to go over the River; but as soon as they were in, they were
strictly searched, and all their Diamonds confiscated.

To return to the King of Macassar; you must know, that the Jesuits once
endeavored to convert him; and perhaps they might have brought it to pass, had
they not neglected one proposal which he made them. For at the same time that
the Jesuits labored to bring him to Christianity, the Mahumetans used all
their endeavors to oblige him to stick to their Law. The King willing to leave
his Idolatry, yet not knowing which part to take, commanded the Mahumetans to
send for two or three of their most able Moulla's, or Doctors from Mecca; and
the Jesuits he ordered to send him as many of the most learned among them, that
he might be instructed in both Religions; which they both promised to do. But
the Mahometans were more diligent then the Christians, for in eight months they
fetched from Mecca two learned Moulla's; whereupon the King seeing that the
Jesuits sent no body to him, embraced the Mahumetan Law. True it is, that three
years after there came two Portugal Jesuits, but then it was too late.

The King of Macassar being thus become a Mahumetan, the Prince his Brother was
so mad at it, that when the Mosquee, which the King had caused to be built, was
finished, he got into it one night, and causing the throats of two Pigs to be
cut, he all besmeared the walls of the new Mosquee, and the place which was
appointed for the Moulia to perform Divine Service with the blood; so that the
King was forced to pull down that, and build another. After which the Prince
with some Idolatrous Lords stole out of the Island, and never since appeared at
Court.

CHAP. XX. The Author pursues his Travels into the East, and embarks at
Mingrela for Batavia. The danger he was in upon the Sea; and his arrival in the
Island of Ceylan.
I Departed from Mingrela, a great Town in the Kingdom of Visapour, eight
Leagues from Goa, the fourteenth of April, 1648, and embarked in a Dutch Vessel
bound for Batavia. The Ship had orders to touch at Bokanour, to take in Rice.
Whereupon I went ashore with the Captain, to obtain leave of the King to buy
Rice. We found him upon the shore, where he had about a dozen Huts set up,
which were covered with Palm-leaves. In his own Hut there was a piece of
Persian Tapestry spread under him, and there we saw five or six women, some
fanning him with Peacocks Feathers, others giving him Betle, others filling him
his Pipe of Tobacco. The most considerable persons of the Country were in the
other Huts; and we counted about two hundred men that were upon the Guard,
armed only with Bows and Arrows. They had also two Elephants among 'em. It Is
very probable, that his Palace was not far off, and that he only came thither
to take the fresh air. There we were presented with Tari or Palm-wine; but
being new, and not boiled, it caused the headache in all that drank it,
insomuch that we were two days before we could recover it. I asked the reason,
how the Wine came to do us so much prejudice; to which they answered me, that
it was the Planting of Pepper about the Palmtrees, that gave such a strength to
the Wine.

We were no sooner got aboard, but a mighty tempest arose, wherein the Ship,
men, and goods had all like to have been cast away, being near the shore; but
at length, the wind changing, we found our selves by break of day three or four
Leagues at Sea, having lost all our Anchors; and at length came safe to Port in
the Haven of Ponte de Galle, the twelfth of May.

I found nothing remarkable in that City; there being nothing but the ruins
made by the underminings and Canon-shot, when the Hollanders besieged it, and
chased the Portugals from thence. The Company allowed ground to build upon, to
them that would inhabit there, and land to till; and had then raised two
Bulwarks which commanded the Port. If they have finished the design which they
undertook, the place cannot but be very considerable.

The Hollanders, before they took all the places which the Portugals had in the
Island of Ceylan, did believe that the trade of this Island would have brought
them in vast sums, could they but be sole Masters of it; and perhaps their
conjectures might have been true, had they not broken their words with the King
of Candy, who is the King of the Country; but breaking faith with him, they
lost themselves in all other places thereabouts.

The Hollanders had made an agreement with the King of Candy, that he should be
always ready with twenty thousand men, to keep the passages that hinder the
Portugals from bringing any succors from Colombo, Negombe, Manar, or any other
places which they possessed upon the Coast. In consideration whereof the
Hollanders, when they had taken Ponte Galle, were to restore it to the King of
Candy; which they not performing, the King sent to know why they did not give
him possession of the Town; to which they returned answer, that they were ready
to do it, provided he would defray the expenses of the war, But they knew, that
if he had had three Kingdoms more, such as his own, he could never have paid so
great a sum. I must confess indeed the Country is very poor, for I do not
believe that the King ever saw fifty thousand Crowns together in his life; his
trade being all in Cinnamon and Elephants. As for his Cinnamon, he has no
profit of it since the Portugals coming into the East Indies. And for his
Elephants, he makes but little of them; for they take not above five or six in
a year; but they are more esteemed than any other Country Elephants, as being
the most courageous in war. One thing I will tell you hardly to be believed,
but that which is a certain truth, which is, that when any other King or Raja
has one of these Elephants of Ceylan, if they bring him among any other breed
in any other place whatever, so soon as the other Elephants behold the Ceylan
Elephants, by an instinct of nature, they do him reverence, laying their trunks
upon the ground, and raising them up again.

The King of Achen, with whom the Hollanders also broke their word, had more
opportunity to be revenged upon them then the King of Candy. For he denied them
the transportation of Pepper out of his Country, without which their trade was
worth little. His Pepper being that which is most coveted by the East. So that
they were forced to make a composition with him. The King of Achens Ambassador
coming to Batavia, was strangely surpised to see women sitting at the Table;
but much more, when after a health drank to the Queen of Achen, the General of
Batavia commanded his Wife to go and kiss the Ambassador. Nor was the King
behind hand with the Dutch Ambassador another way; whom the King beholding in a
languishing distemper, asked him whether he had never any familiarity with any
of the Natives. Yes, replied the Ambassador; however I left her to marry in my
own Country. Upon that the King commanded three of his Physicians to cure him
in fifteen days, upon the forfeiture of their lives. Thereupon they gave him a
certain potion every morning, and a little Pill at night; and at the end of
nine days he took a great Vomit. Every body thought he would have died with the
working of it; but at length it brought up a stopple of course hair, as big as
a nut; after which he presently recovered. At his departure the King gave him a
Flint about the bigness of a Goose Egg, with veins of Gold in it, like the
veins of a man's hand, as the Gold grows in that Country.

CHAP. XXI. The Authors departure from Ceylan, and his arrival at Batavia.
THE twenty-fifth of May we set fail from Ponte Galle. The second of June we
passed the Line. The sixth we saw the Island called Nazaco's. The seventeenth
we discovered the Coast of Sumatra, the eighteenth the Island of Ingamina, and
the nineteenth the Island of Fortune. The twentieth we were in ken of certain
little Islands, and the Coast of Java; among which Islands there are three
called the Islands of the Prince. The one and twentieth we discovered Bantam,
and the two and twentieth we anchored in the Road of Batavia.

There are two Councils in Batavia, the Council of the Fort, where the General
presides, and where all the affairs of the Company are managed. The other which
is held in a House in the City, and relates to the Civil Government, and
decides the petty differences among the Citizens.

All the kindness I had shown me here, was to be prosecuted by the City
Council, for being suspected to have bought a parcel of Diamonds for Mounsieur
Constant, my very good Friend, and President of the Dutch Factory at Gomron;
but when they could make nothing of it, they ceased their suit, ashamed of what
they had done.

CHAP. XXII. The Author goes to visit the King of Bantam, and relates several
Adventures upon that occasion.
BEing so ill treated in Batavia, I resolved to visit the King of Bantam; to
which purpose I took my own Brother along with me, because he spoke the
Language called Malaye; which in the East is as universal as Latin among us.
Being arrived at Bantam in a small Bark, which we hired for our selves; we went
first and visited the English President, who kindly entertained and lodged us.

The next day I sent my Brother to the Palace, to know when it would be
seasonable for me to come and kiss the Kings Hands. When the King saw him (for
he was well known to him) he would not suffer him to return, but sent others to
fetch me, and to tell me withal, that if I had any rare Jewels, I should do
him a kindness to bring them along with me.

When I saw my Brother returned not with the persons which the King sent, I was
almost in the mind not to have gone; remembering how the King of Achen had
served the Sieur Renaud. For the French having set up an East India Company,
sent away four Vessels, three great ones, and one of eight Guns, for the
service of the Company. Their Voyage was the shortest that ever was heard of;
arriving at Bantam in less than four months. The King also courteously received
them, and let them have as much Pepper as they desired, and cheaper by twenty
in the hundred then he sold it to the Hollanders. But the French not coming
only for Pepper, sent away their small Ship with the greatest part of their
Money to Macassar, to try the Market for Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace.

The French being so soon dispatched at Bantam, had not patience to stay till
the return of the small Vessel which they had sent to Macassar; but to pass the
time, must needs run over to Batavia, being not above fourteen Leagues off; so
that you may be at Batavia from Bantam in a tide with a good wind. When they
came to an Anchor, the General of the French Fleet sent to Complement the
General of Batavia, who failed not to answer his civility, and invited the
Admiral ashore. Moreover he sent to those that stayed aboard, great store of
excellent cheer, and a good quantity of Spanish and Rhenish Wine, with
particular order to them that carried it, to make the French drunk. His order
was so well followed, that 'twas easy to set the Ships on fire, according to
the private instructions which they had. So soon as the flame was discovered
from the Generals window, which overlooked all the Road, there was a wonderful
pretended astonishment among the Dutch. But the French Admiral too truly
conjecturing the ground and Authors of the treachery, beholding the company
with an undaunted courage; Come, come, cried he, lets drink on; they that set
the Ships a-fire shall pay for'em. However the French Ships were all burned,
though the men were all saved in Boats which were forthwith sent to their
relief. After that, the General of Batavia made them great offers, which they
refused, and returned to Batavia, in expectation of their small Vessel. When it
returned, they could find out no better way then to sell Ship, and goods, and
all to the English, and to share the Money among themselves, every one
according to their condition.

But the trick which they put upon the English was far more bloody. The English
were the first that found out the danger of sailing from Surat, Maslipatan, or
any other distant parts, to Japon without touching by the way. Whereupon they
thought it convenient to build a Fort in the Island of Formosa, which not only
saved the loss of several Vessels, but also brought them in great gain. The
Hollanders mad that the English were possessed of such an advantageous
situation, being the only place in all the Island where Vessels could ride in
safety; and finding they could not carry it by force, bethought themselves of a
Stratagem; to which purpose they sent away two Ships, wherein they stored the
best of their Soldiers, who pretending they had been in a storm in Sea, put
into the Harbor of Formosa, with some of their Masts by the board, their Sails
scattered, and their Seamen seemingly sick. The English compassionating their
miseries, which was only in outward appearance, invited the chief of them to
come ashore to refresh themselves; which they were very ready to do, carrying
as many men with them as possibly they could under pretense of sickness. While
the chief of them were at Dinner with the chief of the English, they all plied
their Cups; and when the Dutch saw the English had drunk hard enough, taking
their opportunity, they picked a quarrel with the Commander of the Fort, and
drawing their Swords, which they had hidden under their Coats for that purpose,
they easily surpised and cut all the throats of the Soldiers in the Garrison;
and being thus Masters of the Fort, they kept it from that time till they were
routed out by the Chinese.

Now for the trick that the King of Achen served the Sieur Renaud; he having
got a good Estate by Jewels, arrived at length at Achen, and as it is the
custom for the Merchants to show the King what Jewels they have, the King had
no sooner cast his eye upon four Rings which the Sieur Renaud showed him, but
he bid him fifteen thousand Crowns for them; but Renaud would not bate of
eighteen thousand. Now because they could not agree, the Sieur Renaud carried
them away with him, which very much displeased the King; however he sent for
him the next day. Whereupon Renaud returning to him, the King paid him his
eighteen thousand Crowns; but he was never seen after that, and it is thought
he was secretly murdered in the Palace.

This story came to my remembrance, when I found my Brother did not come along
with those that were sent to fetch me. However I resolved to go, taking with me
12 or 13000 Roupies worth of Jewels; the greatest part being in Rose Diamond
Rings, some consisting of seven, some of nine, and some of eleven Stones; with
some small Bracelets of Diamonds and Rubies. I found the King with three of his
Captains and my Brother sitting together, after the manner of the East, with
five great Plates of Rice before them of diverse colors. For their drink they
had Spanish Wine, strong Waters, and several sorts of Sherbets. After I had
complemented the King, and presented him with a Diamond Ring, a blew Saphir
Ring, and a little Bracelet of Diamonds, Rubies, and blew Saphirs, he commanded
me to sit down, and ordered me a glass of strong Water to whet my appetite. The
glass held a quarter of a pint, and therefore I refused it, which the King very
much wondered at; but being told by my Brother, that I never drank any strong
Water, he ordered me presently a glass of Sack.

After that he rose up, and seated himself in a Chair, the Elbows whereof were
gilded. His feet and legs were bare, having a Persian Carpet of Gold and Silk
to tread upon. He was clad with a piece of Calicut, part whereof covered his
body from his waste to his knees, the rest being wound about his back and
shoulders like a Scarf. Instead of Shoes he had a pair of Sandals, that stood
by the Chair side, the straps whereof were embroidered with Gold and small
Pearl. About his head he had a thing like a Handkerchief, with three Corners,
bound about his head like a Fillet. His hair also, which was very long, was
twisted and tied together over his head. Two persons stood behind him with
great Fans of long Peacock Feathers, the handles whereof were five or six foot
in length. Upon his right hand stood an old black woman, holding in her hand a
little Mortar and a Pestle of Gold, to beat his Betle in; wherewith he mixed
the Kernel of the Nut of Araque, and Seed Pearl dissolved. When it was all
beaten together, the old woman gave it the King over his Shoulders, who opening
his mouth, the old woman sed him as our women feed their Children. For the King
had chaw'd so much Betle, and taken so much Tobacco, that his teeth were all
fallen out of his head.

The King of Bantam's Palace was never built by any curious Architect. It is a
square place, encompassed with a great many Pillars, varnished over with
several sorts of colors, against which the King leans when he sits down. At
the four Corners there are four great Pillars set in the Earth, at forty foot
distance the one from the other, lined with a Mat made of the Rhind of a
certain Tree, so thin that it looks like a piece of Linen, which neither Fleas
nor Punies will come near. The Roof was covered with Coco-Branches. Not far
off, under another Roof supported with four great Pillars, he had sixteen
Elephants, the noblest of all those that are in the Kings service: for he has a
far greater number trained up for war, that are not afraid of wildfire. For
his Guard he might have about two thousand men, that were drawn up in Companies
under the shade of the next Trees. They are good Soldiers as well by Sea as by
Land; great Mahometans, and stand not at all in fear of death. His Haram, or
the Women's Apartment, was certainly a very small place. For when he had viewed
what I brought him, he sent for two old women, to whom he gave some of the
Jewels, to go and show them to his Wives. The two women returned back through a
little pitiful door; the enclosure being nothing but a kind of Wall made up of
Earth and Cow Dung mixed together. Whatever he sent to the Women, they never
returned any thing again. Which made me believe they would bear a good price;
and indeed whatever I sold to him, I sold to good profit, and had my Money well
paid me. After this we took our leaves; but the King obliged us to come next
day in the evening, because he had a desire to show us a Turkey Dagger, the Haft
whereof, being thin of Diamonds, he had a mind to enrich with more Stones.
Coming to the English House with our Money, they wondered that the King had
laid out twenty thousand Roupies, telling me, they believed it was the best
part of his treasure.

The next day my Brother and I went to wait upon him at the appointed hour, and
we found him sitting in the same place where he sat before. There was a Moulla
then read to him, who seemed to interpret to him something of the Alcoran in
the Arabic Language. The Lecture being ended, they both rose and went to
prayers; which being concluded, the King sent for the Dagger and the Have which
was of Gold. The top of the Handle was already set with Diamonds, and upon the
upper part of the cross Bar was cut in Facets, which could not be less worth
than fifteen or sixteen thousand Crowns. The King told me, it was presented to
him by the Queen of Borneo, and that it was cut at Goa; but that he put a far
higher value upon it than I esteemed it to be worth. The Dagger, as well as the
Sheath was full of Beazils, or Collets, in very good order; but the King had
neither Diamond, Ruby, nor any other Stone to set in the Collets; and therefore
desired me to help him to some that might come at an easy rate. I told him it
was impossible to find Stones that would fit the Beazils; and therefore that it
was better, when he had got Stones enough, to fix other Beazils according to
the proportion of the Stones. To which purpose he was first to range all his
Stones in Wax; which I showed him how to do at the same time; but that was
above his skill. And therefore do what I could to excuse my self to the
contrary, he would needs oblige me to carry the Dagger to Batavia; whereupon I
took my leave of the King, and departed.

CHAP. XXIII. The Authors return to Batavia. His re-visiting the King of
Bantam. And a relation of several Extravagancies of certain Faquirs in their
return from Mecca.
ABout elev'n a Clock at night we embarked for Batavia; for the night winds
blowing from the Land, are the only winds to serve out turn; so that we were at
Batavia between ten and elev'n the next morning. There I stayed twenty days for
the King of Bantam's sake, to make him believe I had sought for that which I
knew was impossible to to be found. I had nothing to do all the while, for in
Batavia there is no other recreation than gaming and drinking, which was none
of my business. At that time the Sieur Cant died, one of the Indian
Counselors, who was sumptuously buried for his good services done to the
Company; but the people complained heavily of the injustice which he had done
as well to the Soldiers as Mariners.

Having stayed twenty days at Bantam, I resolved to go and return the King of
Bantam his Dagger again; for it was impossible to meet with Stones to fit his
Beazils. However I took along with me some other Stones which he had not seen.
Coming to Bantam, the King caused us to be lodged in one of his own Houses in
the City, which was made of Bamboo's. Thither in less then a quarter of an
hour, the King sent us some Pateches, or sweet Water-Melons, red within like
Scarlet. We had also Mango's, and a certain large Fruit called Pompone, red
also within, the meat of it being soft and spungy, but of an excellent taste.
Having stayed our stomachs, we went to wait upon the King, whom we found in the
same place, with his old Mortar-bearer, who every foot fed him with Betle with
her fingers. There were sitting about the Hall five or six of his Captains,
viewing a certain parcel of Fireworks, as Granado's, Rochets, and other
devices to run upon the water, which the Chinese had brought; who are the most
exquisite at those sports of any people in the world. When the King was at
leisure, I returned him his Dagger, telling him, that Batavia was no place to
meet with Stones; and that such as were to be found, were valued at double the
price they were worth; and that there was no place where he could fit himself,
but at Golconda, Goa, or the Diamond Mines. Thereupon the old woman took the
Dagger, and carried it into his Haram; nor did the King speak a word more about
it. After that I showed him what other Stones I had brought, a parcel whereof I
sold him to good profit; the King ordering us to come the next day for payment.

The next day about six a Clock in the morning, my Brother and I, and a Dutch
Surgeon, were going along a narrow way, between a River on the one hand, and
the Pales of a great Garden on the other. Behind the Pales a Rascally Bantamois
had hid himself; one of those that was newly come from Mecca, and was upon the
design of Moquae; that is, in their Language, when the Rascality of the
Mahumetans return from Mecca, they presently take their Cric in their hands,
which is a kind of Poniard, the Blade whereof is half poisoned; with which they
run through the streets, and kill all those which are not of the Mahumetan Law,
till they be killed themselves. These Furies think that in so doing they do God
and Mahomet good service, and shall be saved thereby. If any of these madmen be
killed, the Rabble of Mahumetans buries them as Saints, and every one
contributes to make them a fair Tomb. Sometimes you shall have an idle Rogue,
in the Habit of a Dervich, that will build him a Hut near the Tomb, which he
undertakes to look to, and strew with Flowers. And as his Alms increase, he
adds some other ornament to it. For the fairer and better set out the Tomb is,
the more devoutly it is worshipped, and the more Alms it brings in. I remember
in the year 1642, that at Souali, which is the Port of Surat, it happened that
a Vessel of the great Moguls returned from Mecca, with a great number of
Faquirs or Dervichs. For every year the King sends two Vessels to carry and
bring back the Pilgrims, who have their passage free. And when these Vessels
are to go, the Faquirs come from all parts of India to embark. These Vessels
are lad'n with very good Commodities, which are sold at Mecca, and the profit
is distributed among the poor Pilgrims. But the principal is brought back for
the next year, amounting to six hundred thousand Roupies at least. It Is an ill
Market when they do not gain 30 or 40 per Cent. by their Commodities; nay there
are some that produce Cent. per Cent. besides, that the principal persons of
the Moguls Haram, and other particular persons, send very large gifts to Mecca.

One of these Faquirs returning from Mecca in the year 1642, and being landed
at Souali, had no sooner said his prayers, but he took his Dagger, and ran
among several Dutch Mariners that were unlading goods upon the shore, and
before they were aware this mad Faquir had wounded seventeen of them, of which
thirteen died. The Canjare which he had in his hand, was a kind of Dagger, the
Blade whereof toward the Handle was three fingers broad; and because it is a
very dangerous weapon, I have here given you the figure of it. At length the
Sentinel that stood at the entry of the Tent where the Governor and Merchants
were, shot him through the body, so that he fell down dead. Immediately all the
other Faquirs and Mahumetans that were upon the place took up the body and
buried it: and at the end of fifteen days they put him up a fair Monument.
Every year the English and Hollanders pull it down; but when they are gone, the
Faquirs set it up again, and plant Banners over it; nay some there are that
perform their devotions to it.

But to return to the Bantam Faquir. That Villain lying, as I said, behind the
Pales, as my Brother and I, and the Dutch Surgeon came toward him, all three
abreast, thrust his Pike between the Pales, thinking to have astbb'd it into
one of our breasts. The Dutch man being next the River, and somewhat before the
rest, the head of his Pike ran into his Breeches; whereupon we both laid hold
of the Staff. But my Brother being next the Pales, presently leaped over, and
ran the Faquir thorough. Whereupon several Chinese, and other Idolaters, came
and gave my Brother thanks for killing him. After that we waited upon the King,
and told him what my Brother had done; who was so far from being displeased,
that he gave my Brother a Girdle. For the King and his Governors are glad when
those Rogues are slain, knowing them to be Desperado's, not fit to live.

The next day, coming to take my leave of the English President, he showed me
two strings of Diamonds, and two Services of Silver, which came from England.
He would have sold them all, but I only bought one of the strings of Diamonds,
the other being foul; and for the Silver, I would have bought it, had they
coined Silver in Batavia, as they were wont to do. Formerly the Hollanders
coined Reals, Half-Reals, and Quarter-Reals, bearing on the one side the stamp
of a Ship, on the other V, O, C, like a Character, as in the Figure, signifying
in Dutch, Vor Ost Indian Compagnie, for the East Indian Company. Which they did
for the sake of the Chinese, who loving Silver better than Gold, carried away
all the Silver that was coined at Batavia, at good rates. But length they left
it off, finding so few people that made use of Silver.



CHAP. XXIV. Of the War of the Hollanders with the Emperor of Java.
HAving taken my leave of the English President, I returned to Batavia; where
having little to do, I resolved to give a visit to the King of Japar, otherwise
called the Emperor of Java. This King was formerly King of all the Island, till
the King of Bantam, who was only Governor of a Province, rebelled against him;
the Hollanders being made by the divisions of those two Princes. For when the
King of Japar besieged Batavia, the King of Bantam relieved the Hollanders; and
when they were attacked by the King of Bantam, the King of Japar came to their
assistance. And when those two Kings were together by the ears, the Hollanders
always aided the weakest.

The King of Japar keeps his Court in a City of the same name, distant from
Batavia some thirty Leagues. You may coast along the shore to it by Sea; but
the City stands above eight Leagues up in the Land. From the City there is a
fine Walk to the Sea, where there is a handsome Port, and fairer Houses than
any in the City. And the King would live there if he thought it safe.

The day before I departed, I went to take my leave of one of the Indian
Counselors, and telling him that I was going to wait upon the King of Japar,
he stood amazed, in regard the King and the Hollanders were mortal Enemies; of
which he gave me this account: The deceased King, Father to the King that now
reigns, since the Hollanders built their Fort of Batavia would never have any
peace with them. And though that during the war the Hollanders took ten of his
Subjects, for one of theirs, and offered ten for one in exchange, yet he would
never exchange one upon any condition whatsoever, and charged his Son upon his
deathbed never to release one. This obstinacy very much troubled the Dutch
General, and all the rest in Batavia, and obliged them to consult upon ways how
to right themselves Now it is the custom, when a Mohammedan King dies, that his
Successor sends certain great Lords of his Courtto Mecca with Presents, as well
to engage them to pray for the Soul of the deceased; as also to give thanks to
God and Mahomet for the coming of a new King to the Throne without any
impediment; and to pray for the blessing of Victory over all his Enemies. But
the new King and his Council were at a loss how to accomplish this Voyage; for
first the King had none but little Vessels, that were wont only to sail along
by the shore, by reason of the inexperience of his Seamen; and in the second
place the Dutch were always plying to and fro about the mouths of his Havens,
to surprise his Subjects if they stirred forth. For the safety therefore of his
Pilgrims, the King at last concludes upon making an agreement with the English.
For which reason he dispatches away an Envoy to Bantam, to the English
President and his Council, who promised to lend him the biggest Vessel and the
best mounted which the Company had in the Indies. In lieu whereof the English
were to pay but half Customs for ever, for all Commodities exported or imported
out of his Country. Which Treaty being ratified, the English furnished him with
three stout Vessels, Manned and Gunn'd beyond an ordinary rate. Thereupon nine
of the principal Lords of the Court, and most of the Blood Royal, with a Train
of a hundred persons, embarked themselves in the great Vessel. But all these
preparations could not be carried so privately, but that the Dutch had
intelligence of it by their Spies. Thereupon the General of the Dutch makes
ready three Ships, and lying just in the straight of Bantams mouth; so soon as
the English came up, (for they had no other way) let fly at them so roundly,
that the English fearing lest their Vessels would be sunk, struck Sail; which
the Java Lords seeing, called the English Traitors, and drawing their poisoned
Daggers, cried a Mocca upon the English, killing a great number of them before
they had time to put themselves into a posture of defense. And perhaps there
would not one of them have escaped, had not the Hollanders come aboard as they
did. Some of the Java Lords, and about twenty of their Attendants, would take
no quarter; so that the Hollanders were forced to fight for it, and at last they
got the better, with the loss of seven or eight men. The English Vessel being
carried into Batavia, the General very civilly sent both the Prisoners and the
Vessel home again; withal giving notice to the King, that he was ready to make
an exchange of Prisoners with him. But the King would not so much as Hearken to
any such proposition; returning for answer, that though the Hollanders had
three times as many of his Subjects, he would not release so much as one
Hollander. So that the poor Dutch were kept slaves in Java, and the Javanners
died miserable in Batavia.

As for the Javanners, they are good Soldiers. And it is reported, that while
Batavia was besieged by the King of Bantam in the year 1659, a Dutch Soldier
lying in Ambuscade in a Marsh, a Javanner, little dreaming that any body had
been there, came to the same place to discover the Enemy; and was by the Dutch
man thrust with his Pike into his Body. Upon which the Javanner finding himself
wounded, did not strive to pull the Pike out of the body, but thrust himself
farther upon it, to the end he might come at his Enemy, whom he stabbed to the
heart, as soon as he got within his reach.

CHAP. XXV. The Author buries his Brother; and is again quarreled withal by by
the General and his Council.
WHile I stayed at Batavia, my Brother died; and it was pretty to consider what
the Dutch made me pay for his Funeral. The first expense is for the Fees of
those that beg leave for the Corpse to be buried; of whom the more there are,
the more honorable the Funeral is esteemed. I sent six, and paid them to my
wonder for that seventy-two Crowns. The sea for the Pall is a right that
belongs to the poor, for which I paid two Crowns. There was a Vessel of Spanish
Wine drank out, that cost me two hundred Piasters. I gave twenty-six more for
three Westphalia Hams, and some Neats-tongues, and twenty-two for Baked Meats.
To the Bearers I gave twenty Crowns, and sixteen for a place in the
Churchyard, for they asked me a hundred to bury him in the Church. And all
these are Fee's demanded. So that my Brothers Funeral cost me twelve hundred
and twenty three Livres of French Money.

Being thus put by the two Voyages which I intended to Japan and Sumatra, I was
advised to lay out my Money in Requenings or Debentures of the Servants of the
Holland Company; which they that have no mind to return into their own Country,
as being settled in the Indies, will sell at an easy rate; insomuch, that for
sixty or seventy you may buy a hundred Piasters; the Act and Acquittance of the
Seller being made and registered by the Public Notary. Thereupon I bought of
one of the public Notaries, who had Bills in his hands, to the value of about
eleven thousand Guelders, at fourscore and two for the hundred. After that, I
bought by means of the Advocate of the Treasury, six thousand Guelders more, at
seventy-nine for the hundred. But some few days after, meeting with the same
Advocate again, he passed a Complement upon me, and told me, he was very much
troubled for those that had bought Debentures, in regard that the General and
the Council had commanded him to recall all Debentures that had been sold; for
they had considered, how sad a thing it would be, for the poor men to lose so
much of their Salaries. I answered him, that for my part I was willing to
return mine, provided I might have my Money again. About six or seven hours
after, I was sent for by the General and his Council. When I came there, they
asked me why I had not returned the Debentures, which I had bought, to the
Advocate, who had demanded them by their order. I answered them, that they were
at Bantam, whither I had sent them in order to my passage home; in regard that
the English President had offered me a convenience to go along with him. The
Council answered me, that the Dutch Ships were as good as the English, and very
courteously assured me, they would give order for a Cabin to my self in the
Vice Admiral. But withal they told me, I must deliver up my Debentures before
I stirred; assuring me, that they would give me a Bill to be re-imburs'd my
Money by the Company in Holland. I thought it very hard, for I knew not how to
trust 'em; but seeing the Merchants, Commanders, and all other persons clapped
up, and their Papers taken from them by force, that had bought Debentures; I
thought it the best way to deliver mine, and stand to their courtesy. I often
pressed the General and the Council for my Bill, but after many delays the
General ascertained me, that my Bill should be in Holland as soon as I.
Thereupon desiring the Vice Admiral and some others to be my Wirnesses of what
the General promised, I took my leave of him, very much repenting my going to
Batavia.

CHAP. XXVI. The Author embarks in a Dutch Vessel, to return into Europe.
THE next day I went aboard the Vice Admiral, and the third day after we set
sail, and as soon as we were out of the Straight, we discovered the Islands of
the Prince. From thence being in the Altitude of the Coco Islands, we beat
about two days to discover them; but all to no purpose, thereupon we made
directly for the Cape of good Hope.

The fourty-fifth day after our departure from Batavia, our Vice Admiral
neglected to put out his Lights; believing all the Fleet had been before at the
Cape; so that it happened that one of the Fleet being behind, and not carrying
any Lights out neither, it being a dark night, fell foul upon us, which put
every man to his prayers, all people believing the Vessel had been lost; and
indeed had she not been a sound stanch Ship (for the Provinces were so
accounted) she could never have endured so terrible a shock. At length we
cleared our selves, by cutting off the Yards of the Maestricht that hung in our
Cordage.

The fifty-fifth we came within view of the Cape of good Hope; but were forced
to keep the Sea, because the waves rolled so that we were not able to come to
an Anchor; not that the Wind was extreme high, but because the Southwind had
blown so long that it had forced the Water to that part. When the Sea grew
calm, we came to an Anchor.

But of all the people that ever I saw in all my travels, I never saw any so
hideous nor so brutish as the Comoukes, of which I have spoken in my Persian
Travels; and those of the Cape of good Hope, whom they call Cafres, or
Hosentotes. When they speak, they make a noise with their tongues, like the
breaking of wind backward; and though they hardly speak articulately, yet they
easily understand one another. They cover themselves with the Skins of wild
Beasts, which they kill in the Woods; in Winter wearing the hairy part
innermost, and in Summer outermost. But there are none but the best sort among
them who are thus clad, the rest wear nothing but a nasty rag about their privy
parts. The men and the women are lean and short; and when they bring forth a
Male-child, the Mothers cut out his right Stone; and presently give him Water
to drink, and Tobacco to eat. They cut out the right Testicle, because, say
they, it makes them swifter to run. There are some of them that will catch a
Roe-Buck running. They neither know what belongs to Gold nor Silver; and for
Religion, they have none among them.

So soon as we cast Anchor, four women came aboard us, and brought us four
young Ostriches; which were boiled for some sick people that we had aboard.
After that they brought great store of Tortoise-Shells, and Ostriches Eggs, and
other Eggs as big as Goose Eggs; which though they had no Yolk, tasted very
well. The Birds that lay these Eggs are a sort of Geese, and so fat that they
are hardly to be eaten, tasting rather like Fish than Flesh. The women seeing
our Cook throw away the Guts of two or three Fowl which he was dressing, took
them up, and squeezing out the Ordure, eat them as they were; being hugely
pleased with the Aqua Vitae which the Captain gave them. Neither men nor women
are ashamed to show their nakedness, for indeed they are but a sort of human
Beasts.

So soon as the Ship arrives, they bring their Beeves to the shore, with what
other Commodities they have, to barter for strong Water and Tobacco, Crystal or
Agat Beads; or any sort of old Iron work. If they are not satisfied with what
you offer them, away they fly; and then giving a whistle all their Cattle
follow 'em; nor shall you ever see 'em again. Some, when they saw 'em fly,
would shoot and kill their Cattle; but after that for some years they would
never bring any more. It Is a very great convenience for the Vessels that touch
there, to take in fresh Victuals; and the Hollanders did well to build a Fort
there. It is now a good handsome Town, inhabited by all sorts, that live with
the Hollanders; and all sorts of Grain, which are brought out of Europe or Asia
and sowed there, come to better perfection there then in other parts. The
Country lies in thirty-five Degrees, and some few Minutes over, so that it
cannot be said that either the heat or situation of the Climate makes these
Cafres so black. Being desirous to know the reason, and why they stunk so
terribly, I learnt it from a Girl that was bred up in the Fort, who was taken
from her Mother, as soon as she was born, and was white like our women in
Europe; she told me, that the reason why the Cafres are so black is, because
they rub themselves with a Greafe or Ointment composed of several sorts of
Drugs; wherewith should they not anoint themselves very often, and as soon as
they were born, they should become Hydropsical, as the Blacks of Africa, and
the Abyssins are; or like the people of Saba, that never live above forty
years, and are always troubled with one Leg twice as big as the other. These
Cafres, as brutish as they are, have yet some knowledge of Simples, which they
know to apply to several Diseases; which the Hollanders have several times
experienced. Of nineteen sick persons that we had in our Ship, fifteen were
committed to the care of these Cafres, being troubled with Ulcers in their
Legs, and old wounds which they had received in the wars; and in less then
fifteen days they were all perfectly cured. Every one of these had two Cafres
to look after him; and according to the condition of the wound or Ulcer, they
went and fetched Simples, which they bruised between two Stones, and applied to
the sore. As for the other four, they were so far gone with the Pox, that they
would not trust the Cafres with them, having been given over at Batavia, and so
they all died, between the Cape and St. Helens.

In the year 1661, a Gentleman of Britanny being at Batavia, was so bit by the
Gnats in the night, that his Leg exulcerated presently in such a manner, as to
puzzle all the art and skill of the Surgeons in that Town. When he came to
the Cape of good Hope, the Captain of the Ship sending him ashore, the Cafres
came about him, and after they had beheld him, they told him if he would trust
to them they would cure him. The Captain thereupon committed him to their care,
who cured him and made him a sound man in less then fifteen days.

When a Ship comes to an Anchor in the Cape, it is the fashion for him that
commands the Ship, to give leave to some part of the Mariners and Soldiers to
go ashore to refresh themselves. The sickly have first leave by turns, and go
to the Town, where they are dyeted and lodged for seven or eight Sous a day,
and are very well used.

It is the custom of the Hollanders, when they stay here, to send out parties
of Soldiers upon the discovery of the up-land Country, and they that go
farthest are best rewarded. With this design a party of Soldiers, under the
Command of a Sergeant, far advanced in the Country; and night coming on, they
made a great fire, as well to keep themselves from the Lions, as to warm
themselves, and so lay down to sleep round about it. Being asleep, a Lion came
and seized one of the Soldiers Arms, which the Sergeant perceiving,
immediately shot the Lion with his Carbine; but when he was dead, they had much
ado to open the Lions mouth, to get out the Soldiers Arm. Thus it appears a
vulgar error, to believe that Lions will not come near the fire. As for the
Soldier, the Cafres cured his Arm in twelve days. There are in the Fort
abundance of Lions and Tigers Skins; among the rest, there was the Skin of a
Horse which the Cafres had killed; it was white, crossed with black streaks,
spotted like a Leopard, without a Tail. Two or three Leagues from the
Hollanders Fort, there was a Lion found dead, with four Porcupines Quils in his
body, the third part whereof had pierced his flesh. So that it was judged, that
the Porcupine had killed the Lion. The Skin, with the Quils in it, is kept in
the Fort.

A League from the Fort, is a fair Town, that grows bigger and bigger every
day. When the Holland Company arrives there with their Ships, if any Soldier
or Mariner will live there, they are very glad of it. They have as much ground
as they can manage; where they have all sorts of Herbs, and Pulse, and as much
Rice, and as many Grapes as they can desire. They have also young Ostridges,
Beef, Seafish, and sweet water. To catch the Ostridges when they please, they
got their Nests when they are young, and driving a stake in the ground, tie the
Birds by one Leg to the stake, and when they are old enough they come and take
them out of the Nest, from whence it is impossible to fly away.

When the Hollanders began to inhabit the Cape, they took a young Girl from her
Mother, as soon as she was born; she is white, only her Nose is a little flat.
A French man got her with Child, and would have married her; but the Company
were so far from permitting him, that they took away above a hundred Livres of
the Maids wages from her, to punish her for the misdemeanour, which was
somewhat hard.

There are great numbers of Lions and Tigers, which the Hollanders have a
pretty invention to take; they fasten a Carbine to a stake, driven into the
Earth, and lay meat round about the Gun, which meat is fastened with a string
to the Trigger. So that when the Beast snatches the meat, the string pulls the
Trigger, and the Gun going off, hits the Lion either in the throat or the
breast.

The Cafres feed upon a Root like our Skerrets, which they roast and make bread
of. Sometimes they grin'd it into flower, and then it tastes like a Walnut. For
their food they eat the same Root raw, with raw Fish; with the Entrails of
Beasts, out of which they only squeeze the ordure. As for the bowels of the
wild Beasts, the women wear them dried about their Legs, especially the bowels
of those Beasts which their Husbands kill, which they look upon as a kind of
Ornament. They also feed upon Tortoises, when they have so far heated them at
the fire, as to make the Shells come off. They are very expert in darting their
Azagaya's; and those that have none, make use of pointed sticks, which they
will lance a great way. With these they go down to the Seaside, and as soon as
ever they spy a Fish near the top of the water, they will not fail to strike
him.

As for their Birds, which are like our Ducks, whose Eggs are without any Yolk;
they breed in such great quantities in the Country, that in a Bay about
eighteen Miles from the Cape, you may knock them on the head with a stick.

The Hollanders once carried a young Cafre to the General at Batavia, who bred
him carefully up, teaching him to understand the Dutch and Portugal Languages
perfectly well. At length being desirous to return into his Country, the
General gave him very good Clothes, and good Linen, hoping that he would have
lived among the Hollanders, and bin serviceable to them in the discovery of the
Country; but so soon as he got home, he flung his Clothes in the Sea, and
returned wild among his fellow Natives, eating raw flesh as he did before, and
quite forgetting his Benefactors.

When the Cafres go a hunting, they go a great number together, and make such a
prodigious howling and yelling, that they fright the very Breasts themselves,
and in that affright with ease destroy them; and I have been assured, that
their cries do terrify the Lions themselves.

The women are of so hot a constitution of Body, that at the times that their
monthly customs are upon 'em, they happen to make water, and that an European
chances to set his feet upon it, it causes an immediate Headache and Fever,
which many times turns to the Plague.

CHAP. XXVII. The Holland Fleet arrives at St. Helens. The description of the
Island.
HAving staid two and twenty days at the Cape of good Hope, seeing that the
Wind was favorable, we weighed, and steered for St. Helens. When we were under
Sail, the Mariners cried out, they would sleep till they came into St. Helens
Road. For the wind is very constant, and carries you in sixteen or eighteen
days to the Road of the Island. All the trouble that our Mariners had, was that
fourteen days after our departure from the Cape, they were often forced to the
Topmast head, upon discovery of the Island; for as soon as you discover the
Island, the Pilot must take care to steer to the North-side of the Island,
because there is no casting Anchor but on that side, and that very near the
shore too; by reason of the deepness of the water; for if the Anchors come not
to take hold, the current of the water and the wind carries the Ship quite out
of the Road, which there is no recovering again, because the wind never changes.

So soon as the Ships came to an Anchor, part of the Seamen were sent ashore to
get wild Hogs, of which there are great plenty; and to gather Sorrel, which
grows in great abundance; and indeed they not only send the Seamen, but all the
Pigs, Sheep, Geese, Ducks, and Pullets aboard, to feed upon that Sorrel, which
purges them in such a manner, that in a few days they became so fat, that by
that time we came to Holland they were hardly to be eaten. That Sorrel has the
same operation upon the men, who boiling their wild Swines flesh, Rice, and
Sorrel together, make thereof a kind of Potage so excellent, that it keeps
their bodies open by an insensible purgation.

There are two places upon the Coast of St. Helens where Ships may come to an
Anchor. But the best is that where we lay, by reason that ground is very good,
and for that the water that falls from the Mountain is the best in the Island.
In this part of the Island there is no plain, for the Mountain descends to the
very shore of the Sea.

It is not so good anchoring in the other Road; but there is a very handsome
plain, where you may sow or plant whatever you please. There are great store of
Citrons, and some Oranges, which the Portugals had formerly planted there. For
that Nation has that virtue, that wherever they come, they make the place the
better for those that come after them; whereas the Hollanders endeavor to
destroy all things wherever they set footing. I confess the Commanders are not
of that humor, but the Seamen and Soldiers, who cry one to another, we shall
never come hither any more, and out of greediness will cut down a whole tree
instead of gathering the fruit.

Some days after there arrived a Portugueze Vessel from Guiny, full of Slaves,
which were bound for the Mines of Peru. Some of the Hollanders that understood
the language of the Negro's, told 'em how miserably they would be used, and
thereupon the next night two hundred and fifty of them threw themselves into
the Sea. And indeed it is a miserable slavery; for sometimes after they have
min'd in some places for some days together, the Earth being loose, falls down
and kills four or five hundred at a time. Besides, that after they have been
mining awhile, their Faces, their Eyes, and their Skins change color; which
proceeds from the vapors that arise from those concavities; nor could they
subsist in those places, but for the quantity of strong Water which they give
both to the men and women. There are some that are made free by their Masters,
who labor however for their living; but between Saturday night and Monday
morning they spend all their weeks wages in strong Water, which is very dear;
so that they always live miserably.

Being ready to depart the Island of St. Helens, the Admiral called a Council,
to advize which way to steer. The greatest part were for steering more to the
West, then to the South; because the season for sailing was far spent; and for
that if we steered for the West Indies, we should find the wind more proper to
carry us into Holland. But we had no sooner crossed the Line, but we found the
wind quite contrary to what the Mariners expected; so that we were forced to
steer to the sixty-fourth Degree of Altitude with the Island, and so return by
the North into Holland.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Holland Fleet sets Still from St. Helens, and prosperously
arrives in Holland.
THE next day after the Admiral had called a Council, we weighed and set Sail
about ten a Clock at night. Three days after our departure from St. Helens, the
Seamen were called very duly to prayers morning and evening; though all the
time we stayed in the rode, they never minded any such matter; which made me
wonder, to find they should be more devout when they were out of danger, than
when they were in jeopardy.

After several other days sailing, we discovered the Coast of Island, and then
the Island of Ferella, where we joined with the Holland Fleet that stayed for
us. Here it is that the Commander in chief calls to account all the Mariners
for their misdemeanors during the whole Voyage.

Our Ship was bound for Zealand; but we were forced to lie out at Sea seven
days before we could get into Flushing, because the Sand had changed its place.
Coming to an Anchor before Flushing, two of the Company came aboard to welcome
us home, and to advise us to lock our Chests, and put our marks upon them; for
all Chests are carried into the East India House, where when the owners come
for them, they are ordered to open them, lest they should have any counterband
goods therein. Thereupon I set a mark upon my Chests, and went ashore, after I
had given a good character of the Captain, and his civility to me all the
Voyage, and thence proceeded by Land to Middleburgh.

Four days after I came to Middleburgh, I went to fetch my Chests; and finding
the two Directors there, one a Zealander, the other of Horn, who came first
aboard us; I produced my Keys, and offered my Chests to be opened. But the
Zealander more civil than the Horner, delivered me my Keys again, and taking my
word, told me I was free to take away my goods. And indeed I have always
observed, that the Northern people are always more rude and ungentile than the
Southern.

As for the 17500 Florins which the General of Batavia promised should be paid
me upon my arrival in Holland, I received so many delays and put off's, that I
was at length forced to commence a Suit that lasted above two years; nor could
I get a public Notary either at Amsterdam or the Hague, that would make me out
a Protest, every one fearing the Directors, who were both Judges and Parties.
At length after five years wrangling and jangling, the Director wrote to my
Brother at Batavia (for I was then returned again to the Indies) that if I
would accept of 10000 Livers, he might receive it for me; which he did, and was
forced to give them an acquittance for the whole.

This is the return which I made from the Indies in the year 1649, and the only
time that ever I returned by Sea; having performed all the rest of my Travels
by Land, not counting my short Voyages through the Mediterranean for any thing.
And as for my first Travels, I performed them all by Land, from Paris through
Germany and Hungary, as far as Constantinople; whither I returned again in the
year 1669. From Constantinople I went to Smyrna, thence I sailed for Ligorn;
from Ligorn I traveled by Land to Genoa, thence to Turin, and so to Paris.

The End.
THE INDEX TO THE Indian Travels.
A.
ABdoul-Coutou-Sha, the present King of Golconda, page 65. His Children, 66.
His reply to the Canoneer that would have taken off Aurengzeb's head, 68. See
Mirgimola. Abdul Feta, Gelul Eddin Mahomet, 107. Aceph Ben Ali takes Mascate
from the Dutch, 145. His wondrous Pearl. ibid. Agra, the King's Palace there,
48, 49. Alegamma Motiar of Ceylan turns Christian, and his answer to the
Jesuits, 163. Amadabat, and the Trade thereof, 37. Amber, where found, 151,
152. Ambergreese, where found, 152. Apes, their antipathy against the Crows,
40. The danger of killing one, ibid. Hospitals for them, 48. How set together
by the ears, 94. Asem, the Kingdom, 187. Asouf-Kan's Policy, 112. Assists
Sha-Jehan, ibid. Ast-Kan, 60. Takes Dultabat, 60, 61. Atek, 44. Ava, 143.
Augans, a strange sort of people, 44. Aureng-abat made a City, 61. Aureng-zeb
his cruelty at Callabas, 33, 35. His Dominions, 106. His Power, 108. His
Ambition and craft: he joins with his Brother, Morad-Backshe, 110, defeats
Dara-Sha, ibid. deceives Morad, and sends him to Prison, ibid. He ascends the
Throne, 116. He affronts his Father, 120. His Ambassadors affronted by the King
of Persia, 121. His State when he sits upon his Throne, 123.
B.
BAgnagar, see Golconda. page 61. Banarou, 52. Bannians never kill any living
thing, 37. Their cruelty to them that do, ibid. Their veneration for Apes. 39,
outdo the Jews, 44. Bantam the King visited by the Author; his Entertainment,
196, 197, etc. Bargant, 41. The Raja of Bargant entertains the Author. Baroche,
36. Begum Saheb, 108, imprisoned by Aurengzeb; deprived of her wealth: her
death suspected, 113, 114: restored to favor: her wit, 121. Bengala, the
Revenue of it, 51. Bezoar, 153, etc. Boutan, a Kingdom; the Commodities
thereof, 182, 183, etc. Bramins, a strange story of one, 172. Brampour, 31; a
Tumuli there, and the occasion, ibid. Broakers Indian, 133. Buildings public
in India, how reared, 35.
C.
CAboul, page 44. Callabas, 33. Calicuts, where made, 31, 33, 40, 43, 52.
Cambava, 36. Caravasera's Indian, the method therein, 32. Cardamoms, where had,
73. Carriages Indian, 27. Carriers; the Order and Government among them. Cast,
the signification and kinds, 161, 162. Cattle, how fed in India, 97. Chalaour,
42. Cheats in Indian Commodities, 132, 133. Check of Mecca comes to Golconda in
disguise, 66. Marries the King's Daughter, 67. Hinders him from surrendering to
Aurengzeb, 68. Cheraffs-Indian Bankers, 22, subtiler then the Jews, 23.
Chinese poison the Dutch Soldiers, 173. Chites, 40. Chitpour, ib. Cifers
Indian, 23. Cochin Besieged by the Dutch, 88, Taken, 89. Dutch make a mock King
of it, ibid. Collasar, 33. Commodities of the Great Mogul's Country, 126, etc.
and their price, 128, 129, 130. Comoukes, a description of the People and
Country, 204, etc. Candevir, 93. Corral, Where found, 151. Cottons, where
made, 31, 36. Where whitened, 36. Color, the Diamond-Mine, 137, 141. Coins
Arabian, 1. Mogul's, 2. His Tributaries, 3. Coins called Pagods, 4, 5. English
and Dutch, 5, 6. Made by the King of Chida and Pera, 6. By the King of Achen,
Kings of Macassar, the Celebes, and Camboya, 7. By the King of Siam, ib. By the
Kings of Asem, Tipoura, Arakan and Pegu, 8. Coins of China and Tunquin, ib. Of
Japon, 9. Coins Indian, representing the twelve signs, 10. Coins Indian, 22.
Coins made by the Portugals, 12. Coins Muscovian, 13. Coins European, their
value in India, 21, 22. Coinage Indian, 17. What loss, what gain by it, ib.
Thrown about at the King's Ascent to the Throne, 107. Current at the
Diamond-Mines, 141. Cranganor, 89, promised by the Dutch to Samarin, ib.
Demolished, ib. Crocodiles may be wounded, 55. How they dye, ib. Customs
Indian, 17. Customs affronted by an English Captain, 17. Exacted by the
Persians from the English, 75.
D.
DAca, page 55. Daman besieged by Aurengzeb, 72. Dara-Sha his duty to his
Father, 108. Defeated by his Brother, 110. He flies into Scindi, he fights a
second Battle with Aurengzeb: He is betrayed by Jessomseing, 114, then by
Gion-Kan, 115. His death, 116. Dehly, 45. De Lan, a Dutch Surgeon, lets the
Mogul, his Mother and Wife Blood, 103. Dervichs, 4. See Faquirs. Diamonds, a
discourse thereof, 134, etc. The forms of several Diamonds, 148, 149. Vulgar
error concerning the purchase of them, 141. Diamond Miners, their customs, 138.
Dultabat, 60, 61. Dutch send an Ambassador to China, 192. Their revenge upon
the Jesuits, 193. Dutch break their word with the King of Caudy, 194; with the
King of Achen; at War with the King of Java, 202; they quarrel with the Author.
E.
ELephants destroy the Bannian's Idols, page 34; the Woods of Mirda, 43,
affrighted; the loss of Aurengzeb's Army, 72; how taken, 95; how tamed, ib.
Their fury, ib. The difference between them, 96. Eaten by the Natives, ib. How
taken in Ceilan, ib. The tusks due to the Lord, ib. How the female receives the
male, ib. A remark peculiar to Ceilan Elephants, ib. Their age, ib. The number
kept by the Great Mogul, and his Expenses, 97; how washed, 103. Emir-jemla,
116, 118. Emraulds, the vulgar error concerning them, 114. Eunuchs, covetous of
Monuments, 5. Exchange Indian, 26, 27.
F.
FAquirs; their manner of traveling, page 41; their Habit and Arms, ib. The
respect given them, ib. Their Religion, 160: their Penances, 165, etc. Their
extravagancies returning from Mecca. Feast; the Great Mogul's grand Feast when
he is weighed, 122.
G.
GAnges, page 51, an ordinary River, ib. and bad water, 52. Gani; see Color.
Gate, what manner of place, 34. Gehanabad, 45; the Mogul's Palace there, 45,
46, 47. Gehanguir, ninth King of the Indians. He permits Nourmahal his Wise to
Reign in his stead. He put out his Eldest Son's eyes, 111. He prefers his
Grandchild to the Throne, ib. Dies, ib. Gion-Kan a Traitor; his death, 115.
Goa, the present State of it, 74. Golconda described, 61. The Policy and
Government of the City, 64. Gold, where found, 156, etc. Gomron. Road heat
excessive, injures the Ships, 90. Gondicot taken by Mirgimola, 98. Described,
ib. Govaleor, 35. The Prison for the Indian Grandees, ib. Guards, how relieved
at Golconda, 64.
H.
HAlabas, page 52. The Governor a great Person, ib. The cruelty of his
Physician, ib. Hameth-Sheck, 107.
I.
JAva, the King thereof, page 202. Javaniers, good Soldiers, 203. Jessom-seing
betrays Dara-Sha, 114. Idolaters belief touching a Deity, 164. Of the state of
the Soul after death, 167. Of their burning their dead, 168. Their several
customs, 179. Idolatrous Princes of Asia, 163. Indians cunninger then the Jews,
23. Their manner of crossing Rivers, 100, 102. Their Superstition, 97. The
Penance of the Women, ib. Their Alms, ib. Their Pilgrimages, 101. Their
craftiness, 102. Their Physic, 102. Their honesty, 136, 137. Their manner of
driving bargains, ib. Their Penances, 181. Indigo, where made, 36, 37, 43.
Indolstan bounded, 106. Iron of Golconda, the best, 65. Island of St. Helens
described. Ivory the best, 96. Justice in India quick, 99, 100.
K.
Kemerouf, a City, page 188.
L.
LAhor, page 45. Letter-Carriers, 110. Lions, how tamed, 40.
M.
MAcassar, a Kingdom described, 191. The King shoots an English Malefactor with
a poisoned Arrow, 191. His difference with the Hollanders, 192. Maldives
Islands, 90. Malvares, Indian Pirates, 71, 182. Mascate, 16. Maslipatan, 70.
Matura, one of the chiefest Pagods of the Indians, 48. Measures Indian, 27.
Mingrela, 73. A Miracle done by a Bramin, 101, 102. Miram-Sha, 107. Mirda, 43.
Mirgimola, the King of Golconda's General, 67. He is suspected by the King, ib.
He revolts, 68. He joins with Aurengzeb, ib. besieges the King, ib. and
cunningly settles a new Peace, ib. entertains the Author at Gondicot, 98, 99.
How he dispatched business, 99. He conquers Asem, 187. Mirza-Abdoul-Cofing
marries the King of Golconda's third Daughter, 69. Mirza Mahomed, 68. See Check
of Mecca. Moguls, why so called, 106. Money; the force of it in India, 19. What
most proper to be carried into India, 18, 21. Monuments Indian; their
sumptuousness, 49, 50, 52, 61. Morad-Backshe, 108, Viceroy of Guzerat, ib. He
rebels against his Father, 109, besieges Surat, ib. proclaims himself King, ib.
He gives credit to Aurengzeb's fallacies, ib. joins with him, 110, and defeats
Dara-Sha, ib. wounded, ib. He sees his error, is betrayed, and sent to Govaleor,
ib. Mountebanks, Indian, 36. Multan, 43. Musk, 153. Its adulterations. ib.
N.
NAder, page 35. Nahab, what it signifies, 53. Navapoura, 30, famous for Rice,
ib. Nava-Sevagi revolts from the King of Visapour, 73. Nourmahal, Queen of
India, her Extraction, 11, 12.
O.
OBservations particular upon the Mogul's Court, page 124, 125. Omrahs, their
duty, 122. Ormus; the manner of Sailing from Ormus to Surat, 15. Outemeda, 97.
P.
PAgods Indian described, 92, 93, 94, 97, 102. The most celebrated among the
Indians, 173, etc. Palicat, 93. Passage by Sea from Ormus to Maslipatan, 90.
Passes, where required, 44, 52. Patna, 53. Peacocks plentiful, 37. How caught,
ib. Pearls, and where fished for, 145. How bred, how fished for, and at what
time, 146, etc. Perca, a petty Indian King, 89. Physicians, none in India, but
such as attend Princes, 102. Pilgrimages of the Indians, 179. Ponte Galle, 194.
Portugals, their power in Goa, 74, 75. Their excessive proneness to revenge,
ib. discover a strange Country, 83, 84. Priests Indian, how maintained,
Presents given by the Author at the Great Mogul's Court, 59.
R.
RAge-Mehide, 54. Raolconda, Diamond-Mine, 134. Rauchenara-Begum, 108, always a
friend to Aurengzeb. His kindness to her; their falling out, 121. Religion of
the Mahumetans in the Indies, 159, etc. Of the Idolatrous Indians, 161. Roads
from Ispahan to Agra through Gomron, 15; from Surat to Agra through Brampour
and Seronge, 30, through Amadabat, 36. From Ispahan to Agra, through Candahar,
43. From Dehly to Agra, 48. From Agra to Patna, and Daca, 51. From Surat to
Golconda, 60. From Golconda to Maslipatan, 69. From Surat to Goa; from Goa to
Golconda, through Visapour, 71. From Goa to Maslipatan, through Cochin, 88.
From Maslipatan to Gandicot, 91. From Gandicot to Golconda, 100; to the Mines,
137, 139, 141. Rodas the Fortress, 139. Roupies, the difference of them, 20.
Rubies, the forms of several, 149, 150. Rule to know the price of Diamonds,
142, 143.
S.
SAltpeter, where refined, 53. Samarin, an Indian King, 89. Saseron, 53.
Say-pieces Indian, 25, 26. Sepper chekour, 115, sent to Govaleor, 116. Sera,
the signification of the word, 32. Seronge, 33. Serpents, their vast bulk, and
deadly venom, 34. Seva-gi continues the revolt, 73. He finds vast Treasures,
ib. Sha-Est-Kan, 20, 24, 56; buys the Authors Jewels, 104; his kindness to the
Author, ib. revolts to Aurengzeb, 110. Sha-Jehan first called
Sha-Bedin-Mahomet, 107. His good Government, 108. He marries a young Lady, ib.
His children, ib. His love to his children, ib. He rebels against his Father,
is disinherited, 111. He is advanced to the Throne, 112. His cruelty, ib. He is
kept Prisoner by Aurengzeb, and dies, 113. Siam, a Kingdom; the King of it,
119, etc. Siren, 143. Sodomy abominated by the Indians, 54. Solomon Chekour
defeats. his Uncle, 109 Betrayed by Raja Roup, flies to Nactiran, 114. Is
delivered up by him, 119. Sent Prisoner to Govaleor. Soumelpour, 139. Stones
colored, where found, 143. Stones medicinal, and their effects, 154, 155.
Stories of the man that lost his child in Swimming, 38. Of the Merchant's Wife
that desired a child, 39. Of the Merchant that never told lie, ib. The Story of
Monsieur Belloy, 79. Of the rich Leaper in Goa, ib. Of St. Amant, and John de
Rose, and the Sieur Marests, ib. 80, 81, etc. Of Father Ephraim, 85, 86, 87.
Sultan Abousaid-Mirza, 107. Sultan Babur, 107. Sultan Boulaki preferred by
Sha-Jehan, 111. Betrayed by Asouf-Kan, 112. Retires into Persia, ib. Sultan
Kourom, 107. See Sha-Jehan. Sultan Mahomed, Mogul, 107. Sultan Mahomed,
Aurengzeb s Son, marries the second Daughter of the King of Golconda, 69. He
flies to his Uncle, 117. Is betrayed by Emir-Jemla, and imprisoned, 118, 119.
Sultan Selim, alias Jehanguir Patska, 107. Sultan Soujah, 108. Rebels, 109. He
flies to the King of Arakan, marries his Daughter, 119. Plots against him, ib.
His death, 120. Sumbaco King of Macassar, 192. Surat, 15.
T.
TAmurleng, 106. Tari, what, 65. Tavernier abused at the Mogul's Court, 57, 58.
Tenara a sweet place, 69. Thrones; the description of the Mogul's Thrones, 122,
etc. Thunderbolts three at a time, 91. Tipra a Kingdom, 186. Traveling, the
manner in India, 27, 29. Treachery, a notable piece put upon the Author at
Gomron, 157. Turquoises, where found, 144.
V.
Visapour described, 72.
W.
WAys; Highways in India, 100. Weights Indian for Gold and Silver, 18. Other
weights, 27. Of Diamonds, 140. Of colored Stones, 144. Of Pearls, 148. Winds
hot, their stifling nature, 44. Wives of the Indians burnt alive with their
dead Husbands, 169, 170, 171, 172. Woods of Bambous, 94.
A NEW RELATION OF The Inner-Part OF THE Grand Seignor's SERAGLIO.

Containing Several Remarkable Particulars, never before exposed to public
view.

By J. B. TAVERNIER, Baron of Aubonne.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by R L. and Moses Pit. 1677.

THE Author's Design.
I Question not but that several Relations of the Grand Seignor's Seraglio have
been published; but I am to acknowledge withal, that I have not had the leisure
to read any one of them. I have traveled Six several times, by Land, into the
East, and by different Roads, during the space of Forty Years; and most Persons
know, that my Employments were such, as would not allow me much time for the
reading of Books. But when my Affairs afforded me any remission, I wholly
employed those spare hours, in the collection of things the most worthy to be
remarked, whether the Scene lay in Turkey; or in Persia, or in the Indies, on
this, or the other side of the River Ganges, or in the Diamond-Mines, which are
in the Territories of diverse Princes. While I am busied in putting into order
those Memoires, which I conceive my self obliged to gratify the Public
withal, I make it a Present of this Relation of the Seraglio, attended with
some Observations sufficiently remarkable, which, happily, will not be unpleasant.

The Ottoman Court, which makes so much noise in the World, has not, to my
thinking, been yet sufficiently well known, if I may judge of it, by what I
have seen thereof my self, and have heard from several Persons. I do here
communicate a faithful and ample description thereof: which I have extracted,
as well out of what I had observed my self, in the several Voyages I made to
Constantinople, as out of the informations I received from two intelligent
Persons, who had spent many years in the Seraglio, in very considerable
Employments. One of whom was a Sicilian, advanced to the Charge of
Chasnadar-bachi, or chief Officer belonging to the Treasury; and after Five and
Fifty Years Service in the Seraglio, was, for some slight miscarriage committed
by him, banished to a place near Bursa, in Natolia, from whence he made his
escape into the Indies. The other, a Parisian-born, named De Vienne, had been
one of the Pages of the Treasury. In his Return from the Jubilee at Rome, in
the Year M. DC. L. being aboard a Brigantine bound from Civita Vecchia to
Marseilles, he was taken by the Pirates of Tripoli, and the Bassa finding that
young Lad well shaped, and looking like one that promised much, sent him, as a
Present, to the Grand Seignor. He was also packed away out of the Seraglio,
after Fifteen Years Service, only upon this score, that there was some
discovery made, of his holding a secret correspondence with the disgraced
Sicilian, who had heretofore shown him much kindness, and indeed it was by his
credit that the Parisian was first advanced to the Chamber of the Treasury.

From those two men, who were in a fair capacity to make exact Observations of
things, have I extracted the better part of this Relation. Though they had been
forced to embrace the erroneous persuasion of Mahomet, yet were there some
Relics of the good sentiments of Christianity: And whereas there was not the
least hope of recovering the honors, wherein they pride themselves who are
exalted to Charges in the Seraglio, it is not to be imagined, that they could
have any design to disguise things to me. They themselves thought it a certain
pleasure to descend to a greater familiarity of Discourse, and to specify even
the least circumstances: but I am to discover withal, that having had their
education amongst the Turks, and learnt of them, to love Money, it must have
been so much the greater charge to me, to give them content. I have kept them
for a considerable space of time, at my own charge, and that in several places,
one at Ispahan in Persia, and the other in the Indies, where they had made
their residences, and the Memoires which they supplied me withal were perfectly
concordant.

To the Instructions, which I made a shift to get from those two men, and to
what discoveries I may have made my self, of the present state of the Grand
Seignor's Palace, I shall add some necessary Observations of the Manners and
Customs of several Provinces of the Ottoman Empire, slightly passing over
those things, which, in all probability, are generally known. But that the
Reader may with greater ease comprehend the matters I treat of, and that the
Discourse may not be interrupted, by the necessary explication of the several
names of Charges and Dignities, I have thought it fit, in the first place, to
give a short List of them, after which shall follow another, of the different
Species of Money, which are current all over the Turkish Empire.

A TABLE OF The Chapters contained in this RELATION. Of the Charges and
Dignities as well of the Seraglio, as of the Ottoman Empire; AND Of the
different Species of Gold and Silver, now current in TURKEY.
Chap. I. Of the Extent, and outside of the Seraglio. II. Of the first Court
of the Seraglio, and particularly of the Infirmery. III. Of the second Court,
in which are the lesser Stables; the Kitchins, and the Divan. IV. Of the
Divan-Hall, and the exact administration of Justice there by the Grand Seignor.
V. Of the inner part of the Seraglio in general, and particularly of the
Quarter of the Eunuchs and the Ichoglans. VI. Of the Hall, where the Grand
Seignor gives Audience to Ambassadors, and how they are received. VII. Of the
Baths of the Seraglio. VIII. Of the Grand Seignor's Treasure. IX. Of the secret
Treasure. X. Of the means used by the Grand Seignor, to augment his Treasury,
besides the ordinary Revenues of the Empire. XI. A subtle way which the Grand
Seignor has to bestow great Liberalities without meddling with his Revenues.
Chap. XII. Of the Present which the Grand Seignor sends every Year to Mecha.
XIII. Of the Cellar, and diverse other Appartments. XIV. Of the Quarter of the
Dogangi-bachi, or Grand Falconer, and some other Officers. XV. Of the Grand
Seignor's own Appartment. XVI. Of the Grand Seignor's ordinary Occupations.
XVII. Of the Women's Quarter. XVIII. The Entrance into Constantinople of the
Sultaness, (Mother to the Grand Seignor) who has the honorary Title of La
Valide, on the second of July, 1668. XIX. Of the Gardens of the Seraglio. XX.
Of the Princes, who follow the Mahumetan Religion in Europe, Asia, and Africa.
A NEW AND EXACT RELATION OF THE Grand Seignor's SERAGLIO. OF The Charges and
Dignities as well of the Seraglio, as of the OTTOMAN EMPIRE. As also, Of the
different Species of GOLD and SILVER-COINS, now current in TURKEY.
The Principal Heads of the following Discourse.
THe Origin of the Grandees of the Port. The severe Discipline of the
Seraglio. The Authority of the four Principal Bassa's, of dangerous consequence
to the Grand Seignor, and how he can take it off. Observations upon Standarts.
Of the Plume of Herons Feathers which the Grand Seignor wears in his Turbant.
The Honors and Disadvantages attending the Charge of the Grand Visir. The
particular Privilege of the Caimacan. The number of the real Janissaries. The
transcendent privilege of their Aga, or Colonel-General. The happy condition
of the Spahis, and the Zaims. The prodigious number of Eunuchs all over the
Eastern parts. Exquisite Observations upon that Subject. The principal Charges
of the Seraglio. The noble advantages of the Capi-Aga. The Repute and Riches of
the Kislar-Agasi, Intendant, or Overseer, of the Apartment of the Women. That
the Charge of Bostangi-Bachi is one of the most eminent of those belonging to
the Port. The great Economy of the Partisans. The Policy of the Port, to keep
the Cham of the lesser Tartary in subjection. The Principal Dignities of
Persons relating to the Law. The Species of Gold and Silver-Coins current in
Turkey. Whence, and how, the Gold coined at Cairo is brought thither. The
sincerity of the Abyssins. The Story of the Commerce carried on in the disposal
of the five Sols Pieces, French Money. The jealousies of the Persons concerned
in that Trade. Amischievous Fraud mildly punished. The ancient sincerity of the
Turks corrupted by the Commerce of the Europaeans.

THey who are advanced to Charges, whether it be in the Seraglio, or in the
Empire (excepting only the Eunuchs, of whom I shall give an account anon) are
The Origin of the Grandees of the Port.
generally raised out of the Children taken in War, or sent by way of Presents,
by the Bassa's, or out of the Tributary Children, who, about nine or ten years
of Age, are taken out of their Mothers arms, through all the Provinces subdued
by the Ottoman Princes. They are all to be of Christian Parents; and counting
only the Slaves taken from the Enemy, we find by the Registers of the
Custom-house of Constantinople alone, that, of both Sexes, there are brought
thither every year, near twenty thousand. The Inhabitants of the lesser
Tartary, who make continual Incursions into all the Countries, that are in
hostility against the Ottoman Empire, send up vast numbers of them, and the
Grand Seignor having the choice of all those young Children, the best shaped,
and such as have the most promising looks, are distributed into several
Seraglio's, to be there instructed in the Law of Mahomet, and all sorts of
Exercises. And afterward, out of the choice or cullings of these last is the
Seraglio of Constantinople replenished; and they are to be distinguished into
two Orders. The first and the most eminent is that of the Ichoglans, designed
for the great Charges and Dignities of the Empire: The second, that of the
Azamoglans, employed in such Offices as require only strength of body. The
Ichoglans, are those, in whom, besides the accomplishments of the Body, they
discover also a noble Genius, fit for a high Education, and such as may render
them capable of serving their Prince, some time or other.

These are accordingly instructed with great care, and educated with the
observance of a most severe Discipline. They pass through four several
Chambers, called Oda's, The severe Discipline of the Seraglio.
which are as it were four Forms, where they learn, in order, whatever is
convenient for young persons, who are to be continually about a great Prince,
and are as it were his Pages, or Gentlemen. If they commit the least fault,
they are severely chastis'd, and there is a great stock of patience requisite,
for any one to be advanced to the fourth Oda, which when they have attained,
they begin to take a little breath. But the hopes of being exalted to the
greatest Honors, and the most eminent Dignities, makes them endure the
barbarous treatments of the Eunuchs, who are appointed to be their Masters, and
are very liberal of the Bastinado to them. I shall give an account elsewhere of
the manner of their Education, and of those four Oda's, or Chambers, where they
learn those things, whereby they are qualified for the Charges, for which the
Grand Seignor designs them. Though it be appointed by the received Custom of
the Empire, that those Children should be all descended from Christian Parents,
of the best extraction, and the best shaped that can be found; yet the
Capi-Aga, or Grand Master of the Seraglio, the Principal of the white Eunuchs,
who has the chief Command over the Ichoglans, sticks not to admit into their
number some natural Turks, such as may be recommendable, upon the score of
their good qualities and endowments: But that happens very seldom, and that not
without the particular permission of the Prince, who would rather have all
those Children to be Renegado-Christians. And this is the Origin of the Great
Persons belonging to the Grand Seignor, and the Port. They are all Slaves, and
not having any knowledge of their Parents, or Relations, they wholly apply
their affections to the Service of their Prince, who has been pleased to
advance them to such high Fortunes.

The Bassa's therefore are taken out of the Order of the Ichoglans, and the
name of The Authority of the four Principal Bassa's, of dangerous consequence
to the Grand Seignor, and how he can take it off.
Bassa, or Basha, is only a Title of Honor and Dignity; common to all the
Grandees of the Port, who are distinguishable, according to the difference of
their Charges. The four Principal are these. The Vizir-Azem, or Grand Vizir,
the Caimacan, the Bassa of the Sea, and the Aga of the Janissaries. The
Authority of these four Bassa's is so great, that sometimes they deprive their
Sovereign of the Crown, and bestow it on whom they please; as it has happened,
in our Age, to two Emperors immediately succeeding one the other, Mustapha,
and Osman, of whom the later died in Prison, by the infamous hand of a common
Executioner. But, on the other side, if these Bassa's know not how to take
their measures rightly, they lose their heads upon the least miscarriage, the
Grand Seignor seizing to himself all their Estates at their death, and taking
their Children into the Seraglio. Nay, these last are so far from succeeding
their Fathers, either as to wealth or employments, even though it were the Son
of a Grand Vizir, or of a Sister of the Emperor himself, that the highest
advancement they are admitted to, is to be made Captains of Galleys; the policy
of the Turks not permitting, that in any one House there should be a
transferrence of power from Father to Son, that so they may be prevented from
taking any occasions to disturb the State. It may be seen by this account of
them, that the fortune of the Bassa's, which, for a time, seems so splendid, is
but a tottering fortune, upon which, neither the Son, nor the Father himself,
what repute soever he may be in, can make any sure relyance.

The Bassa's, who have the denomination of Vizirs, carry three Banners or
Standards, Observations upon the Standards.
at the top of which there is a Horse-tayl fastened, put into what color they
please themselves, green only excepted, though they are permitted to paint the
Staff, to which the Standard is fastened, with that color. The Origin of this
Custom was thus, according to the Story which the Turks relate of it. Having
one day given Battle to the Christians, their Standard was taken in the heat of
the Engagement, and the General of the Turks, perceiving that the loss of the
Standard was a discouragement to the Soldiers, who were beginning to take
their flight, he with a Cymitar cut off a Horse's tail, and fastened it to the
top of a half-Pike, and advanced it on high, crying out, Here is the Grand
Standard, let him who loves me follow me. Immediately the Turks re-assum'd
courage, and, having rallied, renewed the Charge, and gained the Victory. The
Officers, who are about the Persons of the Bassa's, have also their Standards,
but they are not allowed to add thereto one of those tayls; and it is to be
observed, that the Bassa's, who are not Vizirs, can carry but two of them; as
the Beys, who are inferior to the Bassa's, and Governors of lesser Provinces,
carry but one of them. When the Grand Seignor goes into the Country, there are
seven Standards carried, in regard that, according to the Turks, the World is
divided into seven parts, or seven Climats, whereof the Grand Seignor is
Master, if taken according to its breadth, and it is for that reason, that, in
their language, they give him the title of Master of all Kings. This is
grounded upon what Mabomet said, That he, who, after his death, should be
Master of those Territories, where his Sepulcher were found, should assume the
title of Master or chief of all the Kings upon Earth. They add, that there are
but three Empires, which are, those of Constantinople, Babylon and Trebizond:
And it is for that reason, that the Grand Seignor wears three plumes of black
Heron-tops, in his Turbant. Take notice by the way, that they are only the
Herons of Candia which have their tops perfectly black, the Herons of all other
Countries having them, either white, or of a mixed color. And because there
must be a considerable quantity of them to make up a plume, it must accordingly
be of a very great value, which possibly has occasioned its being out of use in
Europe: For as to all the Princes of Asia, they have still a great esteem for
the Heron-tops; but they must not have the least defect, and if the points of
them be ever so little broken, there is no account made of them, as being
things of very little value. By those three Heron-tops upon the Grand Seignor's
Turbant, it is known that the Grand Vizir is in the Army; inasmuch as at that
time, he wears but two of them, and the thing is worthy our observation. When
the Army is to march, the Grand Seignor gives order for the drawing up of those
Troops, which are at Constantinople, and the parts adjacent, and having the
Grand Vizir near him, he presents him to them for their General. The Soldiers,
at that time, say not a word, nor do they make the ordinary salute, till after
the Grand Seignor has caused one plume of the Heron-tops to be taken out of his
Turbant, and to be put upon that of the Grand Vizir; and upon that Ceremony,
the whole Army salutes him, and acknowledge him for their General, and from
that very time are to receive their Pay from him.

Having spoken of the Bassa's in general, it is requisite I should give some
Idea of those, who are advanced to the principal Charges of the Empire; and I
shall bring into that List, the Grand Vizir, accompanied by six others, who
have the quality of Vizirs, the Caimacan, the Bassa of the Sea, and the Aga of
the Janissaries; after whom I shall come down to the Beglierbeys, and to the
Sangiacbeys, and to the Bostangi-Bachi, who has one of the most eminent Charges
of the Port.

The Vizir-Azem, or Grand Vizir, is the Lieutenant General of the Empire, and
of The Honors and Disadvantages attending the Charge of Grand Vizir.
the Armies, the principal Person of the Council, and he who, under the Grand
Seignor's Orders, has the absolute disposal of all Affairs, relating to the
State, or to the War, having in his custody the Imperial Seal. He is attended
by, and has assistant to him, in the Divan, six other Vizirs, whom they call
Vizirs of the Bench, and who are properly Counselors of State, but yet such as
have not any deliberative voice, and come not into the Divan, but only to be
consulted upon some point of Law, wherein they are well skilled, without
intermedling with the Government of the State; or concerning themselves in any
Affair, unless their advice be required. There are also five Beglerbeys, on
whom the Grand Seignor bestows the qualification of Vizirs, and are possessed
of the greatest and wealthiest Governments of the Empire, to wit, the Bassa's
of Babylon, Cairo, Buda, Natolia and Romania. The three former, who are the
three principal, had heretofore the privilege (exclusively to all the other
Bassa's) of having carried before them (in the same manner as the Grand Vizir
had) the three Horse-tayls, of which I have related the Story. But at the
present, that privilege extends to the two other Bassa's of Natolia and
Romania, and they are all five equal, as to that point.

I am now to return to the Grand Vizir, who has a magnificent Court, answerable
to the greatness of the Master, whom he serves, and there are in his house
above two thousand Domestics. Though he lies exposed, as well as the other
Bassa's, to the indignation of the Prince, and forced to send him his Head,
when he requires it; yet does the Grand Seignor, in the Affairs of greatest
importance, and such as concern the State, comply much with the Sentiments of
his Grand Vizir, and his Propositions in Council are as so many definitive
Sentences. It Is that which renders his Power so absolute, that in all the
Empires and Kingdoms of the World, there is not any chief Minister of State,
whose Authority can be paralleled to that of the Grand Vizir. Whoever comes to
make him a Visit, he rises not out of his Chair, either to give him a
reception, or to conduct him out again, unless it be the Mufti, who is the
principal Person relating to the Law (of Mahomet) upon whose access, the Grand
Seignor himself rises from his Throne. But this is particularly worth our
observation, That as it belongs only to the Grand Vizir, to propose all Affairs
of importance, so does it concern him to be very careful, not to advance any
thing that may be displeasing to the Grand Seignor; for if it should so happen,
he gives immediate Order for the strangling of him, without making him any
answer at all, upon this Maxim of the Ottoman Court, that there must not be
any thing proposed to the Prince, which may give him any cause of
dissatisfaction.

The Caimacan is the Captain, and Governor of the City of Constantinople,
Lieutenant A Privilege particular to the Caimacan.
to the Grand Vizir, yet so as not to have any Authority, but only in his
absence. And then he performs all the functions of that important Charge; he
has the absolute Command, and gives Audience to Ambassadors. He is not subject,
as the other Bassa's are, to that rigorous necessity of resigning his Head;
upon this account, that if he does any thing, which may be displeasing to the
Grand Seignor, he lays the blame thereof upon the Grand Vizir, from whom he
receives his Orders.

The Bassa of the Sea is the Admiral, and Captain General of the Naval Forces.
The Beys, Governors of the Maritime Provinces, and such as are obliged to
maintain the Grand Seignor's Galleys in good order, are to obey the Commands
they receive from him, and to go to Sea upon the first advertisement they
receive to that purpose.

The Janizary-Aga, whom the Turks call Yengeri-Agasi, is the Colonel-General of
The number of the real Janizarles.
the Janissaries. This Charge is very considerable, inasinuch as the Turkish
Infantry, at this time, does for the most part pass under the name of
Janissaries, though such as are really Janissaries, who derive their Institution
from Ottoman the First, and their great Privileges from Amurath the Third, do
not at this day amount to a Body of above five and twenty thousand Men. They
have excellent Regulations amongst themselves, and are distributed into several
Chambers, in the spacious Lodgings, whereof they are possessed, whether it be
at Constantinople, or in other places. The order observed there is so excellent
in all things, and so exactly maintained, that they live more like Religious
Persons, than Soldiers; and though they are not forbidden to marry, yet it is
very seldom that they do it. The great Privileges which they enjoy all over
the Empire, wherein they are so highly respected, induce abundance of Persons,
merely in order to their exemption from the paying of Taxes, and their being
discharged from public Duties, to prevail with the Officers, by Money, to
protect them, and make them pass for Janissaries. But they receive no Pay from
the Prince, and all their advantage is restrained to the enjoyment of those
Privileges, which indeed are great enough. It is by this intermixture of the
real Janissaries, with those who are admitted by corruption, that the number of
them amounts at this day to above a hundred thousand; and yet not accounting
any but such as are effectively Janissaries, their Body has sometimes been so
dreadful, as that they have unthron'd the Ottoman Monarchs, and changed the
whole face of the Empire, of a sudden.

The Power of their Aga is very great, and there is not any Person can approach
the The great Privilege of the Aga.
Prince, as he is permitted to do. For he may come into the Grand Seignor's
presence, with his arms at absolute liberty, and with a confident deportment,
whereas all the other Grandees of the Port, without any exception, even to the
Grand Vizir himself, dare not appear before him, otherwise than with their arms
cross their bodies, and the hands, one upon the other, on the breast, as the
mark of a profound submission.

The Beglerbeys are, in dignity, next the four first Bassa's, and are as 'twere
so many Sovereigns, in the general Governments of the Empire, whereof the Grand
Seignor bestows the Command on them. But in regard it is not my design to speak
of the Government of Turkey, any further than is requisite for the Subject
whereof I treat, there is not any necessity, that I should inform the Reader of
the number of those Beglerbeys, and it is enough, that I have named the five
principal ones, of whom I shall have occasion to speak elsewhere. I shall only
add here, That those great Bassa's have, under them, a certain number of
Sangiac-Beys, who are Governors of Sangiacs, or particular Provinces, as the
Sangiacbey of Salonica, or of Morea.

And whereas there will also be frequently mentioned some others, under the
Denominations of Spahis, Zaims and Chiaoux, we must give a short account of
those three sorts of Persons.

The Spahis, who make up a Body of about fifteen thousand Men, are a kind of
Knights, who would pass for the Gentry or Nobility of the Country, and stand
very much upon their Gallantry. They are maintained out of the Revenue of the
Timars, that is to say, out of the Manors, or Commanderies, which the Grand
Seignor bestows on them, according to the recompense he would make them for
their services. Those Timars cannot be taken away from them, unless they be
negligent in their duty, which is, that they should be in the Army, when the
Grand Vizir is there in person. These are the happiest Persons in all the
Ottoman Empire, and as it were petty Sovereigns, in the places where they
command.

The Zaims differ not much from the Spahis, and, as the other, have the Command
and Revenues of certain Lands, or Fiefs, which the Grand Seignor bestows on
them. There is a very great number of them, over all the Empire, and they look
on themselves, as the Lords and Barons of the Country. The Turkish Cavalry
consists of the Zaims and the Spahis, and they know what number of Horse they
are to bring into the Field, according to the Revenue of their Timars.

The Chaoux, or Chiaoux-Bachi, is the Chief of all the Chaoux of the Empire,
whose employment it is, to carry the Prince's Commands, to any part either
within his Territories, or without, and to be sent upon Embassies, though
indeed they are but as so many Messengers, or Expresses. It Is ordinarily into
their custody that Prisoners of Quality are committed, and they suffer them not
to be out of their sight.

And thus you have an account of the principal Charges and Dignities of the
Empire, all possessed by Persons, taken out of the rank of the Ichoglans. I now
come to the Officers of the Seraglio, and in regard they are Eunuchs, on whom
the Grand Seignor bestows the most eminent Charges, and who, besides, have the
Government of the Ichoglans, I shall follow the order of the things, in my
placing of them here, before I say ought of the second order or rank of
tributary Children, or such as are taken in War, who are the Azamoglans.

Of the Eunuchs there are also two ranks. There are some white, who have
endured only a simple castration; and there are black ones, who have all cut
off, even The prodigious number of Eunuchs all over the East.
with the belly. Both sorts of them are severe, humourous and morose, and their
Treatments are almost insupportable to all those who are under their Charge.
There is a prodigious number of them, as well in Constantinople, as all over
the Empire, and generally all over the Eastern parts of the World, where there
is hardly a private Person, having any thing of abilities, but keeps an Eunuch
or two, as Sentinels over his Women. And it is this that causes so great a
commerce of Eunuchs in several parts of Observations upon this Subject.
Asia and Africa, and in the single Kingdom of Colconda, where I chanced to be
in the year 1659, there were put off, of them, in that very year, about two and
twenty thousand. It comes into my mind, that the Grand Mogor's Ambassador, in
whose Country, that Barbarism is not suffered, but the Eunuchs he makes use of
are brought out of other places, took me one day aside, to tell me, that he
cared not how soon he returned into his Country, out of the fear he was in,
lest that Kingdom of Colconda might sink into the ground, after such cruelties.
Most of the Fathers and Mothers, who are extremely poor, and have no love for
their Children, and whom they are also afraid that they cannot maintain, have
no other shift, upon the first dearth of Provisions, than to sell them to
certain Merchants, who afterward have them gelt, and sometimes make clear
work, and cut off all. Some of those, who have not any thing left, when they
would urine, are forced to make use of a little Cane or Pipe, and to put it to
the bottom of the belly. And whereas few escape after so dangerous an
operation, such are accordingly much dearer than the others, and they are sold
in Persia and Turkey, at the rate of six hundred Crowns; when a hundred, or a
hundred and fifty, is the price of the ordinary Eunuchs. For the supply
therefore of all Turkey, all Persia, all the Indies, and all the Provinces of
Africa, it may be easily judged, that there must come millions of them from
several places. The Kingdom of Colconda, in the Peninsula on this side Ganges,
and the Kingdoms of Assan, Boutan, Arachan, and Pegu, on the other side of it,
afford a prodigious number of them. All these Eunuchs are either white, or of
duskish color. The black Eunuchs, who are brought out of Africa, much
inferior in point of number, are, as I said, much the dearer. The most
deformed yield the greatest price, their extreme ugliness being looked on as
beauty in their kind. A flat Nose, a frightful Aspect, a large Mouth, thick
Lips, the Teeth black, and standing at a distance one from another (for
ordinarily the Moors have fair Teeth) are so many advantages to the Merchants
who sell them. The Seraglio at Constantinople is full of these two sorts of
Eunuchs. The black are designed for the custody of the Apartment, where the
Women are, and sent to Court by the Bassa's of Grand-Caire. The white, who are
somewhat less savage, and have been educated with some care, are for the Grand
Seignor's own Apartment.

The four principal Eunuchs, who approach the Prince's Person, are the
Hazodabachi, the Chasnadarbachi, the Kildrgibachi, and the Sarai-Agasi, who
have for their Superior, The principal charges of the Seraglio.
the Capi-Aga, who has the superintendency of all the Chambers of the
Ichoglans. They ordinarily succeed one the other, that is to say, the
Sarai-Agasi succeeds the Kilargibachi; the Kilargibachi succeeds the
Chasnadarbachi; and the last named succeeds the Hazodabachi; and in fine, the
Hazodabachi succeeds the Capi-Aga, who is always of the longest standing in
service of the white Eunuchs.

The Capi-Aga, or Capou-Agasi, is as it were the Grand Master of the Seraglio,
he is The noble Advantages of the Aga.
the principal in dignity and repute, of all the white Eunuchs, and he is
always near the Grand Seignor's Person, wherever he is. He is the Person who
introduces Ambassadors to Audience, and all great Affairs passing through his
hands, ere they come into those of the Prince, his Charge renders him necessary
to all others, and procures him many rich Presents. All those Persons also, who
are to make any Present to the Grand Seignor, must address themselves to the
Capi-Aga, in order to their being presented to his Highness, of which he makes
great Advantages. No Man can enter into the Emperor's Apartment, nor get out
of it, without his Order; and when the Grand Vizir would speak to him, it is the
Capi-Aga's place, to take and present him to his Highness. Whether it be by
night, or by day, if there happen some pressing Affair, whereof the Vizir would
give the Grand Seignor immediate notice in writing, the Capi-Aga receives it
from him, and brings him the answer thereto. He wears his Turbant in the
Seraglio, and rides up and down on Horseback, by a Privilege particularly
annexed to his Charge. He accompanies the Grand Seignor even into the Apartment
of the Sultanesses; but he stays at the door, as having no Command in that
place. When he leaves the Seraglio, upon his being dismissed from his Charge,
which very seldom happens, he cannot be a Bassa. As to his Table, all is at the
Prince's Charge, and he has, over and above, ten Sultanines a day, which amount
to sixty Livers, French Money. There have been some Capi-Aga's, who have died
worth two millions, all which returned into the Grand Seignor's Coffers. The
chief of the white Eunuchs is attended by four others, who, next to him, have
the principal Charges of the Grand Seignor's Quarter.

The Hazodabachi, is, as it were, the Lord High-Chamberlain, having under his
Charge the forty Pages of the Chamber, who ordinarily approach the Grand
Seignor's Person.

The Serai-Agasi has the general Superintendency of all the Chambers of the
Grand Seignor's Quarter, as to what relates to Embellishment, and the necessary
Reparations. He has a particular inspection over the Seferli Odasi, which is
the Chamber of the Pages, who are to look after the Grand Seignor's Linen, and
attend him in his Progresses. It Is incumbent also upon him to give Order for
their Clothes, and whatever else they stand in need of: And his Charge does
somewhat resemble that of Captain of the Louver-Castle, in France, since it is
his work, generally to make provision for whatever may contribute to the
decency and well-ordering of that great Palace. He has for his Assistant, or
Lieutenant, the Seraiket-Odasi, who is also an Eunuch, whose employment it is,
to have the Tapistry and Carpets, which are spread upon the Floors, in the
Halls and Lodgings of the Seraglio, changed every six months.

The Haznadar, or Chaznadar-Bachi, is the chief Intendant of the Treasury, and
has the inspection of the conduct and deportment of the Pages of that Chamber.
Which is not to be understood of the Treasury, designed for the exigencies of
the State, and the ordinary Pay of the Soldiery, and whereof the Grand Vizir,
and the three Testenders, or Treasurers-General have the Keys, and Intendency.
But the Treasury I here speak of, is the place, where they keep the Jewels of
the Crown, and all the other Rarities, and the wealth gathered together, from
Father to Son, by the Ottoman Princes; which I shall endeavor to lay down
distinctly, before the Reader's prospect, in my Relation, when I come to open
unto him both the Treasuries. However it is to be observed, that the
Chaznadar-Bachi has only the honorary title of Chief of the Treasury, nay, that
he cannot so much as enter into it, since that in the Reign of Sultan Amurat,
the Pages of the Treasury having complained to the Grand Seignor of the ill
conduct of that Eunuch, he, upon their Petition, ordered, that the
Chaznadar-bachi should no longer have any Command there, and that the
Chaznaket-odasi should for the future exercise his Charge, without depriving
him of the title thereof. But in regard the Chaznadar-bachi is the better
known, and the more pronounceable Name, I shall always make use of it, instead
of the other; and we must not omit giving you this remark, That when the Chief,
or Overseer, of the Treasury, is removed from his Charge, he is made a Bassa.
Upon this counterchanging of these two Officers of the Seraglio, it is to be
observed, That, amongst all the Mahumetan Princes, Turks, Persians, Indians,
and of what Sect soever they may be of, what has been ordered and established
in the Reign of one Prince, is never revoked by his Successor: And under the
same Sultan-Amurat; the Capou-Agasi having committed some little impertinence,
whereat the Grand Seignor took offense, he excluded, thence forwards, all the
Capou-Agasis, who should be removed out of the Seraglio, from the privilege of
coming into a capacity to be made Bassa's. I shall not think it much to
allege, upon this particular, another example of that Maxim, of which I was
an eyewitness my self, in the King of Persia's Court. 'Twas in the Reign of
Schach Abas, against whom some Grandees of the Court had entered into a
Conspiracy, and attempted to take away the King's Life, yet with a design to
have put his Son into the Throne. About Two or Three in the afternoon, when
every one in Persia is retired to the Haram, which is the Appartment of the
Women, the Conspirators sent, to the Palaces, twenty Men well armed, with
Order, first, to put to the Sword all they should find at the Gates, which
ordinarily are guarded only by two or three Men, armed with a massy Club, and
afterward to go and murder the King himself in the Haram, which would be but
poorly defended by black and white Eunuchs, who are poor Soldiers. But the
intended blow of the Conspirators was prevented, and the chief Porter, a Person
accounted one of the most valiant of his time, being in his Station, with two
of his Servants, Georgians by Country, that is to say, valiant, as all those
People are, fell upon the Traitors with his Cuttelas, and beat them back so
smartly, that they thought it the best way to run for it. The King having been
informed of that action, ordered him to be brought into his Presence, and after
he had commended him, made this establishment, That the Charge of chief Porter,
should ever continue in his Family, from Father to Son. He also commanded the
Keeper of the Archives, or Records, to insert that action into the History, and
wished that his own Name might be dashed out of it, and all that had been done
during his Reign, if any of his Successors attempted to change any thing of his
Will, and deprive the House of the Faithful Georgian of that Charge.

The Kilargi-bachi is the chief Governor of the Pages of the Kilar, which is
the place, where they keep all the exquisite Drinks for the Grand Seignor's own
drinking. It is a kind of Cup-Bearers Office, and the Kilargi-bachi, a kind of
Cup Bearer; and he is also made a Bassa, upon his removal from the Charge of
Kilargi-bachi. He is moreover the Chief of all the Akegis, who are the Cooks
and Confectioners, since no Body can have any entrance into those Offices, but
by his Order; and he has under his custody all the Plate, which is for the
peculiar service of the Grand Seignor. This Officer has for his Substitute the
Kilarketodasi. Now having told you, that, upon the resignation of his Charge,
he is made a Bassa, it were not amiss to advertise you further, That they who
are removed out of the Seraglio, in order to their being Bassa's, ought to have
been of the number of the forty Pages of the Chamber, and to have passed
through one of these six Charges, of Chashaketodasi, and of Kilarketodasi, of
whom I have spoken already, of Dogangibachi, of the Chokadar, of the Seligdar,
and of the Rikabdar, of whom I shall discourse anon. Otherwise, they can only
be Beys, or Zaims, or Sphais, or at most, but Capigibachis, by the Grand
Seignor's singular favor. The case is the same with the Gugombachi, who is the
second Person of the Office of the Treasury, as also with the Anakdar-Agasi,
who is the third. If these People remove out of the Seraglio, before they are
admitted into the number of the Forty Pages of the Chamber, they have only a
certain Pay, more or less, the highest whereof amounts not to above two hundred
Aspers. I proceed to the other Officers of the Seraglio, of whom there will be
some mention made in my Relation.

The Dogangi-bachi is the Grand Falconer, and his Charge makes him a
considerable Person about the Prince.

The Chokadar is he who carries the Royal Robe, called the Ciamberlue, the same
Officer, which the French call Portemanteau.

The Rikabdar is he who holds the Stirrup, when the Grand Seignor gets on
Horseback.

The Seligdar is the first of the Pages of the Chamber; he carries the Grand
Seignor's Sword upon days of Ceremony, and they ordinarily advance to that
Charge one of the handsomest Pages.

The Hammangibachi is the chief Overseer of the Bath. When he leaves the
Seraglio, as also when the Kamachirbachi, who is the chiefest of the Pages of
Seferli, does so; their Pay is an hundred Aspers a day; and if they are in
favor, it may amount to an hundred and fifty. It is to be observed in the
general, that when any one of the Forty Pages of the Chamber is removed, the
vacancy is supplied sometimes out of the Treasury, sometimes out of the Kilar,
and sometimes out of the Seferti, and in that they take their turns. They
always take out the most Ancient; and they who were next to them come into
their places. How that is done, we shall take occasion to explicate more
plainly in the Chapter of the Treasury.

The Chiamcibachi is the grand Laundry-man, or the Principal of those, who wash
and order the Grand Seignor's Linen.

The Giritbey is the chief Director of those who are exercised in shooting with
the Bow, and calling the Dart. These two Exercises are much practiced every
Friday, in a place of the Seraglio, appointed for that Divertisement. Thus have
you, in few words, an account of whatever relates to the principal Charges of
the Seraglio, possessed by those who have passed through the Chambers of the
Ichoglans.

The Black, or Negro-Eunuchs, of whom I have but a word more to say,
additionally to what I have intimated before, are appointed to guard the
Appartment of the Women, and they make choice, for that Office, of the most
deformed and the most Aesopical, that can be found. They are all cut even with
the belly, ever since the time of Solomon the Second, who being one day in the
fields, and seeing a Gelding offering to leap a Mare, inferred thence, that the
Eunnchs, who kept his Wives, might likewise endeavor to satisfy their
passions; for which he bethought himself of a present remedy, by ordering them
to have all cut off; and his Successors have since observed that Rule. There is
a great number of those Negro-Eunuchs, and they have their variety of Chambers,
and their Regulations, as the white ones have. I say nothing here of their
different Employments, and the Reader will find, in the Chapter, concerning the
Appartment of the Women, all can be known, that is certain upon that Subject.

The Kislar-Agasi, or, as others name him, the Kuezer-Agasi, which is as much,
in The credit and wealth of the Kislar-Agasi, who keeps the Appartment of the
Women.
our Language, as to say, the Guardian of the Virgins, is the chiefest of all
the Negro-Eunuchs, and is of equal authority and credit with the Capi-Aga, who
is the Supreme of the white Eunuchs. The former is the Overseer of the
Appartment of the Women, has the Keys of the Doors in his custody, and has
access to the Emperor when he pleases himself. The charge he is possessed of
brings him in Presents from all parts; and there are not any such made to the
Sultannesses, by the Bassa's, and other Persons, who stand in need of their
favor, in reference to the Sultan, but there comes along with it one to
himself, which makes him one of the richest and most considerable Officers,
belonging to the Seraglio.

I come now to the Azamoglans, who make the second Order of young Lads,
wherewith the Seraglio is replenished, and out of whose number they take such
as are designed for mean Officers, of whom I shall give you the List.

The Azamoglans, as well as the Ichoglans, are, as I said before, Tributary
Children, taken away from the Christians, or made Captives, by Sea, or Land.
They make choice of the handsomest, the best shaped, and most robust, for the
Seraglio, and they have neither wages nor allowances of any profit, unless they
be advanced to some small Employments. Nor can they attain those, till after
many years Services, and what is then allowed them does not amount to above
four Aspers and a half per diem. As for those who are brought up in other
places, under the simple denomination of Azamoglans, and are not received into
the Seraglio at Constantinople, their fortune can amount no higher, than to
become Zanizaries.

When these young Boys are brought up to Constantinople, the first distribution
which is made of them is into the Seraglio's, or Royal Houses of the Grand
Seignor: there are some of them left in the City, to be put to Trades; and
others are sent to Sea, to serve for Seamen, and so gain experience in
Navigation, by which means they capacitate themselves for some Employments. But
to confine our discourse to the Azamoglans received into the great Seraglio,
they are employed in several Offices, and some of them are made Bostangis, some
Capigis, some Atagis, some Halvagis, and some, Baltagis; which terms I shall
explicate to the Reader in as few words as I can.

The Bostangis are they who are employed in the Gardens of the Seraglio, out of
whose number they take out those who are to row in the Grand Seignor's
Brigantines, when he has a mind to divert himself in fishing, or take the air
upon the Canal. They who thus serve in the Brigantines, and row on the right
hand, may be advanced to the charge of Bostangi-Bachi, which is one of the most
cousiderable places of the Seraglio: But they who row on the left hand, are
capable only of the mean Employments, which are bestowed in the Gardens. If it
happen that any one of them break his Oar, by strength of rowing, in the Grand
Seignor's presence, his Highness immediately orders him a gratuity of fifty
Crowns; and there is also a certain distribution made of some Money to the
others, as the Grand Seignor takes his diversion in the Brigantine. Their
greatest Pay, after they have served some years, is seven Aspers and a half per
diem, besides clothing and diet, which they all equally have.

The Bostangi-Bachi has the general Intendency or Oversight of all the Grand
Seignor's Bostangi-bachi one of the nob'est Charges of the Port.
Gardens, as well those of Constantinople as those of the neighboring
Villages, and commands above ten thousand Bostangis, who are employed in the
culture of them. Though he be taken out of the meanest rank of the Azamoglans,
yet his power is very great, and his Employment one of the noblest and most
considerable about the Court. That gives him access to the Prince's Person, to
whom he may speak familiarly, when he carries him by Sea; for he has his Seat
at the Helm of the Brigantine, wherein the Grand Seignor is, who most commonly
makes use of him, to carry his Orders to some Bassa, when he would have his
Head. All the Grandees of the Port stand in awe of him, and endeavor to gain
his affection by their Presents, because it lies in his power, to do them
either good or bad Offices about the Prince, whom he can dispose, as he
pleases, when he has him abroad upon the Water. For being as 'twere at his
elbow, and having the whip of the Rudder in his hand, with the privilege of
sitting in his presence, that he may the more easily govern it, he has then the
opportunity to entertain him with affairs of State, and the conduct of the
Bassa's, and answerably to his passion, or interest, clearly to acquaint him
how things pass, or turn and disguise them as he pleases. In fine, if he be
highly in favor, he may obtain one of the great Governments, and become Bassa
of Buda, Babylon, or Cairo, nay happily Grand Vizir, which is the most eminent
Charge of the Empire.

The Capigis are the Porters or Keepers of the Gates of the Seraglio, that is
to say, of the first and second Courts; for the third Gate, which gives
entrance into the inner Seraglio, is kept by Eunuchs. The Chief of the Capigis
is called Capigi-bachi, who has under him other Officers, bearing the same
Name; and whom the Grand Seignor makes use of, to carry his Orders. The
Capi-Aga is above all.

The Attagis are the Cooks of the Seraglio, over whom as well as over the
Halvagis, the Kilargi-bachi has full Power. Every Kitchen has its Attagi-bachi,
that is to say, its chief Director, or Master-Cook. And the Moutbak-Emin is the
Intendant or Overseer, who supplies the Kitchins with all that is necessary,
taking care also for the Tables of the Ambassadors, according to the Orders he
has received from the Grand Vizir.

The Halvagis are the Confectioners, of whom I shall have occasion to speak
more at large elsewhere. They give also the same Name to those who serve the
Grandees of the Seraglio, and are permitted to go out of it and into it, when
they please.

The Baltagis are a robust sort of People, employed in the carrying of
Burdens, as Porters, and Cleavers of Wood are amongst us. Baltagi implies
properly a Laboring Man, who makes use of the Wedge.

The Hasteler-Agasi is the Overseer of the Infirmary, who observes what comes
in, and what goes out, and especially that there be no Wine brought in.

I shall have occasion also, in my Relation, to speak of two others, to wit,
the Emirahour-bachi, and the Ekmeggi-bachi, who are two Officers belonging to
the Sultan, but have their Habitations out of the Seraglio.

The Emirahour-bachi is the great Gentleman Usher, who goes before the Grand
Seignor, when he appears in public, and in all Ceremonies.

The Ekmeggi-bachi is the Master-Baker, who has the oversight, and gives
direction for the Baking, of all the Bread that is eaten in the Seraglio. These
two Employments are not bestowed on any of those who have their abode within
the Seraglio, but to Persons who live out of it, but have the liberty of
ingress into it, egress out of it, at any time.

To be short, I shall have occasion to speak of the Caragi-bachi, and of the
Cham of the lesser Tartary, and I have some curious Observations to make upon
both of them.

The Caragi-bachi is the Chief of those, who collect the Tributes, and it is of
him, The Economy of the Partisans, or Collectors of public Moneys.
as also of the Gemmerou-bachi, or grand Farmer of the Customs, and of the
Bazarcanbachi, or Chief amongst the Merchants, that the Grand Seignor makes use
of, to make Advancements, when he wants Money, and that there is not any in the
Public Treasury, he being unwilling that they should meddle with the Secret
Treasury. They must of necessity find it out, and it is no hard matter for them
to do, in regard that of all the Tributes, Customs, and other Impositions due
to the Grand Seignor, there is not any thing paid till the end of the Year,
and these Officers oblige Men to the payment thereof, at the beginning of it.

All sorts of Persons, what Religion soever they are of, except the Mahumetan,
are obliged to pay the Tribute without any exception, from the time of their
settling in the Empire, and having attained the sixteenth year of their Age.
And this Tribute, or Poll-Money, amounts to five hundred and fifty old Aspers,
which neither rise nor fall, but always keep at the same rate of eighty, to a
Piastro, which, in the French Money, and consequently with little difference in
ours, amounts to five Crowns and 5/^. All other Christians who come into the
Empire, upon the score of Trade, or Business, though 'twere but for one day,
are forced to pay, at the first City where they arrive. The foreign Greeks,
such as they from Muscovy or other places, pay three hundred and fifty Aspers;
but the Armenians, who come from Persia, Georgia, Mingrelia, and other
Countries, are taxed but at three hundred. As to the Christians, whom they call
Franguis, they pay nothing; and that has given much trouble to the Ambassadors
of Europe, especially to the French Ambassador, there being more French that
are Inhabitants in Turkey, than there are of any other Nation. And yet though
the Turks make their Year to consist but of twelve Moons, ours being near
twelve and a half, they make the Tributaries pay but for twelve Moons; yet in
requital, and that nothing may be lost, they make them pay that Tribute double,
every three and thirtieth year, and are very frugal Husbands for the benefit
and advantage of their Master.

There are but two Princes in the World that are known by the Name of Cham, to
The policy of the Port, to keep the Cham of the lesser Tartary quiet.
wit, the Emperor of great Tartary, and the King of the little Tartary, a
Vassal to the Ottoman Monarchs. I conceive my self obliged, to give the Reader
some information of the present condition of the latter. When the Cham of the
lesser Tartary enters upon the Government, he comes to take his Oath of
Fidelity to the Grand Seignor, and the Turks look upon him no otherwise than as
a Governor of a Province, or at most, but as a Vassal-Prince. But those of his
own Country, the Muscovites, the Poles, the Georgians, the Mingrelians, and
the other Nations bordering upon him, treat him as a King, when they write to
him. The Grand Seignor uses much Policy toward the Cham, lest he should revolt
from him, and render himself more powerful than he is, by Alliances with the
neighboring Princes. For it is to be observed, That the lesser Tartary,
whereof the City Cassa, near the Cimerian Straight, is the Metropolis, is not a
Country subdued by the Arms of the Ottomans. The ancient Kings of it did only
put themselves under the Grand Seigner's protection, who received them into it,
upon condition, that when the Father died, his Son, or the next of kin, his
Successor, was not to enter upon the Government, till he had received the
Investiture from the Port, and taken the Oath of Fidelity to the Grand Seignor,
obliging himself to come to him, upon the first Orders to that purpose. The
Grand Seignor promised in requital, that he would not establish any other than
what were of their race, to command in the lesser Tartary. And whereas there
are two branches of that Family, he keeps one of them always banished, in the
Island of Rhodes, while the other governs. But if, after fifteen or twenty
years, there should be any suspicion of this latter Family's having a design,
to render it self absolute, he sends for the Cham and his Children, when he has
any, and sending them to Rhodes, brings thence him who was there in exile, and
orders him to reign in his turn, for some years. The form of his Oath you will
find in the sixth Chapter of my Relation, where I speak of the Hall of
Audience, and the manner, in which that Prince is there received.

I have only now somewhat to say of the Moufti, the Cadilesquer, and the Cadis
The principal Dignities of those who study the Law.
and the others relating to the Law, which I shall do in few words. Only let it
be here observed in the general. That, according to the persuasion of the
Turks, the Civil Laws are part of their Religion, and that having been given
them by their Prophet, they are derived from God, and require an implicit
obedience. It Is by this course, that they are kept within their duty, and that
they obey the Laws, as much out of a principle of Religion and Conscience, as
out of the fear of chastisement; and in that they do not much recede from our
Christian Maxims. The Mouftis and the Cadis pass therefore indifferently under
the Name of Persons well skilled in the Law, as if we should reduce our Divines
and our Civil Lawyers into the same Class, and in civil and criminal Causes the
Moufti is often consulted.

The Moufti is the honourary Chief of the Law all over the Empire, and
accounted to be the Interpreter of the Alchoran. I speak of the grand Moufti of
Constantinople, who is the most esteemed, and the principal of all. For there
are several others of them in Turkey, over whom he has no more jurisdiction,
than he has over the Imans, or Priests; every one of them submitting themselves
only to the Magistrate, and there being no Ecclesiastical Superiority amongst
them. That hinders not but that the Grand Moufti is honored by all the rest,
and in great veneration among the Turks. The Grand Seignor never bestows that
Dignity, but upon a Person of great abilities, and great integrity; he often
consults him in the Affairs of greatest importance; he always follows his
Directions, and he is the only Person in the World, at whose approach he rises
up to receive him.

The Cadilesquers follow the Moufti, and are Judges-Advocates of the Militia,
the Soldiers having this Privilege, That they are judged only by them; whence
they also call them, Judges of the Armies. There are but two of them all over
the Empire, the Cadilesquer of Romania, and the Cadilesquer of Natolia, who are
in highest esteem next to the Moufti, and have their Seats in the Divan,
immediately next to the Grand Vizir.

The Mollah, or Moula-Cadis, are the Judges of great Cities, who receive their
Commissions from the Cadilesquers, to whom there may be an Appeal made from
their Sentence, in civil Concerns only; for as to the criminal part, the Cause
is soon decided, and the least Judge condemns to death without any Appeal.

The Cadis are under the Mollah, and ought to be well versed in the Laws and
Customs of the Country. They have also under them the Naips, who administer
Justice in the Villages, and that is done with much expedition, without the
help of Proctors, or Advocates.

The Imans, or Emaums, are the Priests of the Turks, and as 'twere the Parsons
of their Mosqueys, where they take care that all things be done in order, and
at the times appointed.

The Hogias are the Doctors of the Law, and as it were the Regents, and
Instructors of Youth.

The Sheiks are to them, instead of Preachers, and they make public
Exhortations.

The Muezims are they, who cry upon the Towers of the Mosquey, to call the
People together at the hour of Prayer; the Turks not using any Bells, not the
Christians, in the Levant.

The Dervis are Religious Men, among the Turks, who live poorly, and indeed the
very word signifies poor. They are for the most part ridiculously clothed, and
all, generally, great Hypocrites.

OF THE DIFFERENT SPECIES OF Gold and Silver-Coins, And the small MONEY Now
current in TURKEY. Together With the History of the TRADE in Five Sols Pieces
(French MONEY) and the Abolition of it.
THere are but two Species of Gold-Coins current all over the Turkish What
Money current in Turkey.
Empire; the one is the proper Country Money, the other comes out of Foreign
parts. The former is the Scherif, otherwise called Sequin, or Sultanine; and
that kind of Gold is worth at the present six Franks, French Money, though
heretofore it yielded but five Franks, nay came so low as four.

The Scheriffs come from Egypt, and Cairo isthe only City of the Empire, where
The Gold brought to Cairo and coined there.
Gold is coined. That Gold is brought out of the Kingdom of the Abyssines, and
this is the manner how it is brought to Cairo. The quantity is not the same
every year, and when the passages are shut up, whether by War, or by
extraordinary Rains, whereby the Fields are overflown,, there comes but little
Gold into Egypt, during that time. As soon as those obstructions are taken
away, and that there is a freedom of Commerce, you shall see arriving at Cairo,
nay at Alexandria too, several Abyssines, who bring in, one man, two pounds,
another four, every one more or less, according to his abilities. Those poor
People run a thousand risques in their Travels, and it is almost a miracle, how
they bring them to a period. Some of them are of that Country, whence the Queen
of Sheba came, and which is now called the Kingdom of Sabour. Others come from
places at a greater distance, and they have sometimes fifteen days journeys to
make, and cannot meet with any waters to drink, but what are corrupt, and
destructive to health: which I found but too true my self, when I crossed the
Deserts of Arabia. If by chance they come to some Cottage or Hut, where they
have killed an Elephant, it is a place for them to feast in. This considered,
we need not wonder at the short lives of those miserable people, whose bodies
are destroyed in those Voyages, and who for the most part do not exceed forty
years of age. The case is the same with those, who trade with the Portugueses,
on the Coasts of Melinda and Mozambico, the corrupt waters they are forced to
drink in their way make them hydropical at five and twenty years at age, and
generally, all the several peoples of the Kingdom of Sabour, have the right Leg
swelled, and twice as big as the left, and seldom exceed five and thirty years.

It Is a miraculous thing to see the fidelity wherewith those poor Abyssines
demean The sincerity of the Abyssines.
themselves in trading, as well those of the Southern parts, who are
Christians, as those of the North, who border upon Egypt, and are Mahumetans.
For after they have taken the Commodities they like for the Gold they have
brought, if the Merchant they deal with will supply them with any thing
further, to be paid at their return, and upon their own words, he is sure
enough of it, and need not break his sleep for it. For if it happen that one of
those Abyssines, who is a Debtor, should die by the way, some of his Relations,
or Friends, whom he acquaints with his affairs, brings the Gold at the next
return, for the Commodity which had been taken up; and it could never hitherto
be found, that any Merchant could complain, that ever he had lost ought by any
one of them. All that is to be feared, is, that they should fall into the hands
of their Enemies, who rob, and kill them, and particularly on the South Side,
there being less danger, toward the North.

The foreign Coins of Gold in Turkey are the Ducates of Germany, Holland,
Hungary, and Venice. They are very much sought after, and they are changed, at
six Livers and a half, and sometimes at six Livers and fifteen Sols; and that
is done in order to the sending of them to the Indies, where they drive a great
Trade with them, as I shall make it appear, in my Relations of the Levant.
Sometime since, there has been some abatement made in the Ducates of Venice,
upon a discovery of their not being of so good an alloy, as those of Germany.

There will be often mention made of Purses, in that Relation of the Seraglio.
A Purse implies as much as the sum of five hundred Crowns, and it is of those
Purses that the Grand Seignor makes his ordinary Presents. But a Purse of Gold,
wherewith he regales his Sultanesses, and his peculiar Favorites, amounts to
fifteen thousand Sequins, or thirty thousand Crowns. A Kize is also a bag of
fifteen thousand Ducates.

In all the Ottoman Empire, there is not any Money of Copper to be seen, and
the Species current there must be either of Silver or Gold. True it is, that
there are some pieces of Silver taken there, of a very base alloy, especially
the Roup, which are quarter-Ryals, coined in Poland; and with the assistance of
the Jews, the Bassa's, in their several Governments, counterfeit certain
foreign Coins, which are all much different from those which they are intended
to imitate.

The case is the same as to Silver-Coins in Turkey, as it is with those of
Gold. There are some coined in the Country, as the Asper, and the Parasi,
which are the least of all. And there are some foreign Moneys, as the Spanish
Ryal, and the Rix-dollars of Germany and Holland.

An Asper is the least of all the Moneys, which heretofore was worth eight
Deniers, French Money, that is about of the English Penny, as being of good
Silver, and the value set upon them was after the rate of 80, for the
Crown-piece. But in the more remote Provinces, the Bassa's, and the Jews cause
such an abundance of counterfeit ones to be made, that at present, a
Crown-piece will yield one hundred and twenty Aspers.

A Parasi is another kind of small Money, which is worth four Aspers, and
coined at Cairo.

Groche is the Crown, or Spanish Ryal, otherwise called the Piece of eight.

Kara-Groche is the Rix-dollar of Germany.

Aselani is the Rix-dollar, marked with the Lion of Holland. After which follow
the Pieces of four Ryals, of two Ryals, and of one Ryal; and heretofore the
Pieces of five Sols, French Money, wherewith there was a great Trade driven in
Turkey. It Is a thing not well known to all, and therefore the History thereof
will happily not be unpleasant to the Reader.

A certain Merchant of Marseilles, without any forethought design, sent as
many Pieces of five Sols, newly come out of the Mint, as amounted to the sum of
two, or The Trade driven in the five Sols-pieces.
three hundred Crowns, amongst some other Pieces of Silver-Coins, to buy Silks.
The Turks found those little Pieces so pretty and so beautiful, and were at the
first so taken therewith, that they thought them to be the eighth parts of a
Ryal, and were content to allow a Crown, for every eight of them. The Factor,
perceiving it, writ to Marseilles, whence he received a very great sum in that
Money, and gained very much thereby. If the French could have contented
themselves with that honest profit, the commerce of those Pieces, which was
quashed by the excessive frauds committed in the management of it, might have
continued still, and would have been very advantageous to them. The Turks were
unwilling to trade in any other kind of Money, and in the payment of the
Armies, to give the Soldiers content, there was a necessity of dispersing them
among them. One day, returning out of Persia into Turkey, I was persecuted by
several Women, who would needs have me give them some Temins, (so they call
that kind of Money) and I could not have any thing to eat, for any other Money.

Our French Merchants were gainers at the first, after the rate of fifty, per
cent. allowing in Turkey but eight of those Pieces for a Crown, whereas they
had twelve of them in France for the same Piece. But the other Europaean
Nations, the English, the Dutch, and the Italians, envying their happiness,
came to give a check to their design, and making their complaints to the Grand
Vizir, that Minister ordered, That, for the future, they should allow twelve of
those Pieces for the Crown, or that they should not be current any longer, and
that whatever sums thereof were found in the Ships, should be confiscated.

The French were not at all satisfied with that; and whereas there was a
necessity of submitting to the Grand Vizir's Decree, they bethought themselves
of having some of those Pieces coined, which should not have above four Sols of
good Silver, which was a considerable advantage, of twenty five upon the
hundred. They passed well enough for some time, before the Turks had discovered
the fraud; they being satisfied, that the Stamp was fair, and that the Pieces
looked very white: And the Women and Maidens, of the meaner sort of People,
made them contribute to the ornament of their Heat-tires, about which they
fastened those pretty little Pieces, and they came down flapping about their
Foreheads, as the wealthyer sort fastened Pieces of Gold to theirs.

But the better to compass their design, the French Merchants were obliged to
find out other Countries, where it might be lawful for them to traffic in
those Pieces. Their first recourse was to those of Dombes, Orange, and Avignon,
and passing into Italy, they found work for some time for those of Monaco, and
Massa. But having observed, that the Turks were more taken with the Pieces
which had the impression of a Woman's Head, and those Princes being unwilling
to suffer them to coin among them any Money of so base an alloy, or to give it
the Stamp of Ja, the Princess of Dombes, they cast their eyes upon some Castles
situate within the Territories of the Genueses, yet subject to the jurisdiction
of the Empire, where they obtained what they desired, upon conditions not
disadvantageous to the Lords of those places. The Pieces they got coined at
Orange, were also sought after, and pleased the Turks, in regard the Stamp was
beautiful, and very clear; but those of the Legate of Avignon were not so
current, the Effigies thereof not being well done, and the Cross, hanging at
the Neck, displeasing to the Turks. Had they contented themselves, in that
Trade, with twenty five upon the hundred, it might have continued, and the
profit would have been considerable: but by little and little, the thing came
to so great an excess, till, at last, there was not one pennyworth of good
Silver in every piece.

The French, to make them pass the better, gave eighteen, and sometimes twenty
for a Crown, of which abuse the great Merchants of Constantinople, Aleppo,
Smyrna, and other Cities of Trade, made a good hand, they giving but twelve or
thirteen for the worth of a Crown, in the payments they made to the petty
Merchants of the Provinces of the Empire, for the Merchandises they brought out
of Turkey, there was none of that counterfeit Money dispersed, and the
Armenians were far enough from burthening themselves with it, in regard that
all the Money, which is carried into Persia, is presently conveyed to the
Mints, upon the Frontiers, to be melted down, and afwards coined into Abassis,
whereof they give the Merchant an account, answerably to the Standard of his
Money, after it has been examined; and by that means there can be no fraud
committed. The same course is taken over all the Great Mogol's Empire; and of
all the Princes in the World, he causes all the Species of Gold and Silver of
the best Standard to be coined without admitting the least alloy.

The Genuese Merchants, perceiving that the French had, at the beginning been
fortunate The jealousy of the other Merchants.
in their Commerce, would needs imitate them in other sorts of Money, and got
two or three hundred thousand Ducats coined, which they carried into Turkey.
But they had not the success they expected, the Gold was so counterfeit, that
the cheat was immediately discovered, the Consul, and the Captain of the
Vessel, were in some trouble about it, and the persons concerned therein, saved
what they could of that distaster.

The Germans also would needs come in for a share, taking another course all
along the Dannow, quite to the mouth of it, from whence they got to
Constantinople, through the Black Sea. With other their Merchandises, most
whereof consisted in the counterfeit Copper-wares of the City of Nuremberg,
things fit enough those Nations, which border upon the Euxine Sea, they carried
a quantity of Roups, or quarter- Ryals, of the coinage of Poland, which were
pleasant to the eye, and might have been commodious enough for the Merchants,
if the adulteration had been moderate. But the Italians need not be much
ashamed, that the Germans should be more successful than they upon that
occasion, since that both Nations came short in point of subtilty, to deceive
the Turks.

But to return to the French, the first concerned in this History, to which it
is time to pur a period. In the heat of their Commerce, and while all things
were very well with them, they thought it not enough, to carry away the richest
Merchandises, but they also bought up all sorts of good Money they could meet
withal, and brought it into France, to carry on and continue the coinage of
their counterfeit pieces. This Trade was carried on so far, through the whole
extent of that vast Empire, and there was so prodigious a quantity of that
counterfeit Money spread abroad, that it was found by the Register-Books of the
Farmers of the Customs, that the sum of what had been dispersed of it amounted
to a hundred and fourscore millions [of Livers] not accounting what had never
come to their knowledge, and what Seamen, and other private Persons might have
concealed.

The other Merchants and Traders of Europe, who brought none but good Money,
having exclaimed against that disorder, and renewed their complaints to the
Grand Vizir; the Turks at last opened their eyes, and that principal Minister,
having comprehended, that if the thing continued, in a short time, in stead of
Silver, there would be nothing but Copper in the Empire, prohibited the
bringing in of any more of those pieces of five Sols, upon pain of
confiscation, and great penalties to be inflicted on those, who durst do any
thing contrary thereto,

Yet could not that crying of them down, and the Grand Vizir's prohibition make
the Soldiers, who served in Candia, out of love with those little pieces, the
beauty whereof they were so much taken withal. Notwithstanding all the
Remonstrances that could be made to them, they would not be paid in any other
kind of Money; and some discontented Persons and Mutineers, beginning to show
their Teeth, they were forced immediately to to send Galleys to Smyrna, and
some other Cities of great Commerce, to bring away all that could be found of
that sort of money. The incredible quantity of those counterfeit pieces,
dispersed in all the Provinces of the Ottoman Empire, is at least vanished,
they are grown red, and no longer current.

At the first crying down of that counterfeit money, before the news of it
could A mischievous fraud gently punished.
have been brought to foreign Countries, a certain Person named Goulin, engaged
all he had in the world, to make up to the sum of five and twenty thousand
Crowns in those pieces of five Sols, so extremely falsify'd, that there was
harldly so much Silver as was requisite to whiten them. He came to Smyrna,
where I then was, and where he soon found, that there was no way to put off his
counterfeit Merchandise. Whereupon he imagined, that he might get it off, if he
could make a speedy Voyage to Constantinople, where, as he had been assured,
some Persons took them, even after they had been cried down. Being unwilling to
hazard all by Sea, he sent away, by Land, four or five thousand Crowns, which
were taken away by Thieves, near Bursa, and carried the much greater part to
Constantinople, in a Dutch Vessel, of which he had also sufficient cause to
repent him. After he had exposed it at the Custom-house, for the payment of the
Duties, the Chief Officer of the Customs told him, that he might return within
two or three days, to take back what belonged to him; and as soon as the other
was gone, he caused all to be melted down in his presence. The separation being
made, upon twenty thousand Crowns, which was the sum he had brought thither,
there was not the full fourth part of Silver, and the Merchant coming again to
the Customer, fell down all along, out of pure fear lest a severe punishment
might follow the fraud whereof he was visibly convicted, seeing so much scum of
brass on the one side, and so little silver on the other. But the Turks are not
so rigorous, as some persons imagine, all was restored to him, nay there was no
penalty inflicted upon him, and they only ordered him to be gone.

Certain it is, that the Europaeans, more addicted to subtilty and
circumvention, than the Levantines, and for the most part not endeavoring to
be sincere in Commerce, The ancient sincerity of the Turks corrupted by the
commerce of the Europaeans.
have taught the Turks several Cheats, which they were either ignorant of, or
did not practice, especially since the Inhabitants of Granada, being driven out
of Spain, dispersed themselves into several Provinces of the Levant. Before
that time, a man might have relied on their integrity and fair dealing. But
now, when you treat with them, you must stand upon your guard; so prevalent is
the example of evil to corrupt men's minds. Nor are we to be astonished at that
ancient undisguized humor of the Turks in their Commerce, since we find, that
the poor Abyssines, who come from the lower parts of Ethiopia to traffic at
Cairo, and the Idolaters themselves in the Indies amongst themselves and with
Strangers, with a strict observance of an inviolable fidelity.

CHAP. I. Of the extent, and external parts of the Seraglio.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Origin of the word Serrail, or Seraglio, common to all the Royal Houses,
as well in Turkey as Persia. The admirable Situation of the Grand Seraglio at
Constantinople. Its extent, figure, and externals. The Artillery not kept in
good order, and the Gunners not well skilled. A delightful place of it self;
but restraint makes it otherwise.

THE Grand Seignor's Seraglio, whereof I undertake to give a Description, The
origins of the word Seraglio, common to all the Royal Houses in Turkey and
Persia.
is the Palace, where the Ottoman Princes ordinarily keep their Court. All the
Royal Houses, as well in Turkey, as Persia, have the same Name, which derives
its Origin from the word Serrai, which signifies a great Noble House, in the
Persian Language. The Grand Seignor has many Seraglio's, in the Provinces of
his Empire, and the principal of them are those of Bursa, and Adrianople, two
Residences which that Monarch does ordinarily make use of, according to the
conjuncture of his Affairs.

But to confine our selves to Constantinople, we find there three Seraglio's,
which have all their different Beauties. The old Seraglio is the Palace,
appointed for the retirement of those Women, who have served the Predecessors
of the Prince Regent, and whence they never get out, unless it be in order to
Marriage. The Grand Seignor goes thither but very seldom, and that when he is
out of humor, to pass away some days there in solitude. The Seraglio of the
Hippodrome, so called from the Exercises done there on Horseback, which was
built by Ibrahim Bassa, Son-in-law, and Favorite to the Emperor Solomon the
Second, serves now for an Amphitheatre for public Festivals, Exercises,
Combats, Carousels, and particularly for the Circumcision of the Ottoman
Princes, which is their greatest Solemnity. The third is the Grand Seraglio,
whereof I make the Relation, and to which that Name is principally attributed,
so as that there needs not any thing else to be added thereto, to distinguish
rit from the others. I shall have but little to say concerning the Structures
of it, wherein there is not any thing extraordinary to be observed, but shall
rather insist upon what is privately done, in each Appartment of that great
Palace.

The Grand Seraglio is a vast place enclosed, which reaches to that point of
Land, where the ancient Byzantium was built, upon the Bosphorus of Thrace, and
the joining The admirable situation of the Seraglio of Constantinople.
together of the Aegean Sea and the Euxine, which contribute so much to the
beauty and wealth of Constantinople. This great City, let the Wind sit where it
will, does every hour receive some refreshments or other, from one of those
Seas; and the Seraglio, advancing it self into the Channel, which makes a
communication between them, receives the first Advantages that may be derived
thence.

That great Enclosure makes a Triangle, one side whereof is to the Land-side,
and Its extent, figure, and extenals.
reaches to the City, and the two others lie open to the Sea and a River which
falls into it. This Triangle is unequal, and if it be divided into eight parts,
that side, toward the Land takes up three of them, and the five others are for
the two sides abutting on the Sea. Its compass is about three Italiah miles, or
one of our common Leagues. And this Palace is surrounded all about with high
and strong Walls, flanked on the Seaside with square Towers, at a considerable
distance one from another; and toward the City, with round Towers, which are
at a nearer distance one from another, from the great Gate of the Seraglio,
which is toward St. Sophia, as far as the Sea, where you imbark for Galata. In
those Towers, in the nightime, there are Guards of the Azamoglans, to see
that no Body approaches the Seraglio, by Sea or Land; and if occasion require,
they may fire some pieces of Artillery, which stand always laden upon a Quay,
of five fathom breadth, which is carried quite about the Seraglio.

Upon one of those Towers, about a hundred paces from the great Gate of the
Seraglio, as you go down, in order to your passage over to Galata, they have
wrought a Closet, into which the Grand Seignor goes sometimes to divert
himself, and to see People passing to and fro, without being seen himself.
Somewhat lower, and upon the Seaside, there is a spacious place covered over,
under which, as if it were in a little Haven, they keep the Caicks or
Brigantines, wherein the Prince takes his divertisement by Water, when he is
pleased to do it.

Not far thence, within the enclosure of the Seraglio, are the Habitations of
the Bostangis, who are entrusted with the conduct of the Brigantines; and at a
little farther distance, in your way to the point of the Seraglio, which is
toward Scudaret, stands the Quarter of the Bostangi-bachi, Overseer of the
Gardens of the Seraglio, and of all the other Gardens belonging to the Grand
Seignor.

Upon the Quay, which, as I told you, does surround the Walls of the Seraglio,
The Artillery out of order, and the Gunners not well skilled.
there are forty or fifty pieces of Canon of different bigness, and there are
some of so great a bore, that a Man might get into them. Opposite thereto, and
in the middle of the Channel, there is a Tower built upon a Rock, which the
Turks call Quisler houlesi, or the Tower of the Virgins. It is kept by
Bostangis, and has its Guns levelled with the Water, which better defend the
Straight, than those at the point of the Seraglio, which for the most part are
without Carriages, and unserviceable. Besides, they want good Gunners, and if
all that Artillery were well mounted, and managed by skilful Persons, it would
better keep in awe, whatever comes out of the Mediterranean, and the Black Sea.

Some few paces from the place where these Canons are planted, there springs a
Fountain which comes out of the Seraglio, and casts a great quantity of Water,
for the convenience of the Vessels, which lie at Anchor near it, and supply
themselves therewith; it being not permitted that any should land on that side
of the Seraglio, but upon that account.

We have spoken sufficiently of the external parts, it is time we now enter into
the A pleasant abode, but restraint makes it otherwise.
Seraglio, and rather consider what passes in every Appartment of it, than the
Structures thereof, wherein, as I said, there is not any thing of Magnificence,
whatever some Persons might invent, who, in my presence, have made noble
Draughts of it, grounded on their own pure Imaginations. I have seen as much of
the Seraglio, as a Stranger could do, and I have seen it several times, in
several Voyages, having had time enough to consider, the two first Courts, the
Divan, and the Hall of Audience, but cannot celebrate them much for any great
Beauties I could find in them. There is, I must confess, abundance of Marble
and Porphyry in all the Appartments; but on the other side, all those
Appartments are confusedly shuffled together; there is no regularity at all;
most of the Rooms have but little light, and all the ornament of them consists
in rich Tapistry laid all over the Floors thereof, and some Cushions of gold
and silver Brokado, some whereof are embroidered with Pearls. But taking things
generally, ^f the Walls and the Towers, which enclose the Seraglio, look more
like a frightful Prison, than a Royal Palace, the Appartments, whereof it
consists, have not also that wealth, or pleasure, for which the Palaces of
France and Italy are so highly celebrated, and they offer not any thing which
may long entertain the sight of a curious Person. All that can make the
Seraglio a pleasant place of abode, is, the advantage of its situation, and
indeed a nobler cannot be imagined. For it looks toward the East, and takes up
the upper part, and the descent of a sloping Hillock, from St. Sophia, quite to
the Channel. The Buildings are upon the most eminent places, and have a
prospect into the Gardens, which run along the descent, as also into the two
Seas which meet at the point of the Seraglio, whence the Grand Seignor may at
the same time see Europe and Asia, in both which parts of the World, his
Territories are very great. But never was any Prison thought a pleasant place,
and there are few in the Seraglio, who rather would live in a Hut, and have
their liberty, than be continually confined in a Palace under such severe
Discipline.

CHAP. II. Of the first Court of the Seraglio, and particularly, of the
Infirmary.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Regulations of the Infirmary of the Seraglio. The difficulties of getting
Wine into it. The subtilty of some people to be received into it, though they
are not sick. An abominable vice, common all over the East. The fruitless
endeavors used to check the course of it. The sacrilegious action of two
Ichoglans. The Wood-piles of the Seraglio. The great advantages of those who
have the charge thereof. The exercise of the Girit. The Grand Seignor's
Liberalities. The counterfeit Modesty of the Grandees of the Port.

OF the many Gates which give a Man entrance into the Seraglio, as well on the
Seaside, as on the Land-side, that toward S. Sophia is the greatest. That is
always open, the others not being so, but according to the Grand Seignor's
pleasure. You first come to a great Portal, which has not any thing of
magnificence, and where you only find certain golden Letters, and about them
Feuillages and Compartiments, according to the Arabian way of Painting. That
Gate is kept by Fifty Capigis, who have for their Arms, the Firelock, the
Dart, and the Cymitar, and gives you entrance into the first Court of the
Seraglio, which is Four hundred paces in length, and a hundred in breadth,
without any paving.

On the right hand of that first Court, there runs all along a spacious
structure, containing The Regulations of the Infirmary of the Seraglio.
several Appartments or Chambers, and serving for an Infirmary to the whole
Seraglio. The Gate of it is kept by an Eunuch, who has under him a great many
People, employed in attending on, and ministering to the sick, whom, answerably
to their quality, they dispose into convenient quarters in that house, where
they may be better assisted, then in those which their indisposition had
obliged them to quit. The two principal Physicians, and the two principal
Surgeons, whom they call Hequinz-bachi, and Geirah-bachi, make their visits
there every day, at certain hours. A man cannot imagine a place better ordered
and regulated then that is: and the Grand Seignior himself sometimes comes
thither in person, to take an exact account of the Sick and their condition, as
also to enquire whether they are well treated, whether the Physicians visit
them often, and whether every officer of the Infirmary perform the duty
incumbent on him. There is seldom any place void in that House, for as soon as
one is gone out, another comes in: and though it be designed only for such as
are sick, yet several persons, who are well, are brought thither, under
pretense of indisposition, or to enjoy themselves a while, or to weather out
some trouble or discontent. They continue there for the space of ten or twelve
days, and are diverted, according to their mode, with a wretched kind of vocal
and instrumental Music, which begins betimes in the morning, and holds on till
night. The permission they have there to drink wine, which they never have
elsewhere, is a greater inducement for their coming in thither, than the
Music. But that permission, which they would as 'twere conceal, and which the
superstition of the Turks dares not publicly own, is accompanied by a thousand
difficulties. They are not permitted to bring in any wine in the sight of the
Eunuch, who stands at the entrance of the place: and if any one should be
surpised in the doing of it, his punishment would be to receive three hundred
bastinadoes, and a penalty of three hundred Aspers, to be paid to those from
whom he had received them. But if he can cunningly get in with the Wine, not
having been stopped at the Gate, as soon as he is got in, he runs no risque at
all, and may drink of it without fear of any chastisement, though 'twere in the
presence of the Grand Seignor.

The small quantity of wine which can be got in by this way, would signify but
The difficulty of getting wine into the Infirmary.
little among so many People, if there were not some other less difficult
contrivances to supply them therewith. And this is one of them. The Infirmary
adjoins to one side of the Gardens, from which it is separated only by a wall
which is not very high; so that the Bostangis, who find that wine goes off at a
good rate, and that they who are within the Seraglio know not how to spend
their money, do, in the night time, by ropes convey over the wall, so many
Borrachoes or bags of Buck-Skins, full of wine, containing forty or fifty
quarts, which some other persons of the Infirmary stand ready to receive. This
way brings in abundance of wine, but not without fear of being surpised by the
Bostangi-bachi, who goes the rounds every night.

Nor is the drinking of wine the main inducement which makes those counterfeit
siek persons to seek out pretenses, to go and pass away some days in the
Infirmary; insomuch The subtilty of some persons to be received in, though not
sick.
that some have the lewd artifice to put themselves into a slight Fever, which
is presently removed. A detestable passion, and which is in a manner natural
to them, though it be against nature, makes them study all the imaginable ways
to satisfy it. This proves a hard matter for the Ichoglans to do, while they
are in their chambers observed and watched night and day by severe Overseers,
who never pardon them the least misdemeanour.

For though the Grand Seignor be himself subject to the same passion, the very
name whereof causes a horror, yet he orders cruel punishments to be inflicted
on those who shall presume to imitate him. He does what he can to prevent the
mischief, which he would not have countenanced by his example, and imposes the
prevention of it as a task upon the Eunuchs, a vigilant sort of animals, whose
Eyes are always open. But in the Infirmary, all these precautions prove
fruitless; the Eunuchs belonging to that place being corrupted partly by
presents, partly by treats, or being made drunk with wine, or some other
liquors, they bring in thither some young lads, of whom there is great store in
the City of Constantinople. The better to overreach the Eunuchs, they put
those young lads into the habits of the Halvagis, and so the cheat succeeds, in
regard they are the attendants on the Officers of the Seraglio, and do all the
errands they have to do in the City.

Of these Halvages, there is ordinarily to the number of six hundred, and they
have only their clothing and sustenance allowed them, without any wages, till
such time as they have served thirteen or fourteen years. Their wages begin at
the rate of two Aspers [per diem] and in time may rise to seven Aspers and a
half: but they have other contingent Profits, and they know well enough, how to
make their advantage of the Employments they are put upon. For whereas they
only are the Persons who have the freedom of going and coming in and out of the
Seraglio, they set double the price on every thing they buy. But their most
cunsiderable gain proceeds from the infamous commerce of those young Lads, whom
they bring in to their Masters, and whom they cunningly slip into the
Infirmary, after they had put them into Habits like their own. They wear a
white Cap, which rises up from the Crown of the Head, to a pretty height
somewhat to the resemblance of a Sugar Loaf.

The Hasteler-Agasi, or chief Overseer of the Infirmary, is indeed continually
at the The fruitless endeavors used to check its course.
Gate, with five or six other Eunuchs, and carefully observes whatever goes in,
or comes out. But all that vigilence will not do the work; nay though he had a
hundred eyes, yet were it impossible for him to discern those young Lads,
amidst the great number of those Halvagis, and that the rather, for these
reasons, that they are frequently changed, that some of them are made
Janissaries, and that new ones are taken in upon the advancement of the old ones
to some other Employments. But if it should happen that the said Superintendent
Eunuch should have any secret information of what is designed, and seems as if
he would make some noise about it, he is presently appeased with a silk Vest,
or some other Present, and it is thence that he derives his greatest advantages.
In fine, that brutish Passion is so ordinary amongst the Turks, Absminable
excess over all the East.
and generally over all the Eastern parts, that notwithstanding all the
endeavors that have been used to prevent the effects of it, they will hardly
ever be able to do it. There happened a memorable Example of this in my time.
Two Pages of the Chamber, The Sacrilegious action of two Pages.
who could not have the convenience of executing their wicked design in the
Seraglio, would needs aggravate their crime, by going into the Mosquey to
satiate their brutality. After Prayers were ended, they suffered all the people
to go out, and having so well hid themselves that he who shut the doors could
not perceive them, they fell to the doing of an action, whereof the very Idea
causes horror.

On the left hand of this first Court, there is a spacious Lodgement,
answerable to The Wood-Pi of the Straglio.
that of the Infirmary; and that is the habitation of the Azamoglans, persons
designed for the meanest Employments of the Seraglio. Within that Structure
there is a spacious Court, where you shall find disposed in order, all about,
and in the middle, so many Wood-piles, which are renewed every year, and there
are brought in thither above forty thousand Cart-loads of wood, every Cart-load
being as much as two Oxen can draw. Some part of this wood comes in by the
Black Sea, and the rest out of the Mediterranean; and whereas there is a great
quantity of it left every year, especially when the grand Seignor does not
winter at Constantinople, that remainder, which must be very considerable, is
disposed of to the advantage of the principal persons among the Azamoglans.
They are cunning enough to take their opportunity, when it is The great profit
of such as have the Charge thereof.
unloaden upon the Port, and computing, as well as they can, how much may go to
make up the Piles, they proportionably send, what they think may be spared, to
the City, and lodge it in the houses, where they are acquainted. Which they may
do with so much the more security, in regard that no body minds what they do,
and that they perform their duty, when the Piles are completed, in the season,
during which they are wont to make their Provisions. The wood they thus convert
to their own use they are paid for, and the sum raised thereby is considerable
for Persons of so mean a Quality.

On the same side as the Infirmary, and a little lower, (for the Seraglio is a
rising The Exercise of the Girit.
ground for a certain space, and then there is an insensible descent on both
sides, quite down to the point, whereby it is terminated) you discover the
great Portal of the Gardens, which they call Bagge-Karpousi. From that Gate,
which overlooks the foresaid descent, and where you are as it were upon an
Eminency, you descend into a very noble Place, which the Grand Seignor causes
to be always kept neat and even, where the Great Persons of the Court come to
do the Exercises of the Girit, or the Dart, which is performed, most commonly,
upon Fridays, immediately after their coming out of the Mosquey. There are
about two hundred paces from the Portal to that place, and in the Court there
may ordinarily be, upon those days above fifteen hundred Persons, yet so as
that not any person whatsoever is permitted to go any further, unless he be
called by the Order of the Girit-Bey, who is the chief Overseer, and Director
of that Exercise. They who enter into the Lists, do many times amount to the
number of a thousand Persons. If the Grand Seignor himself, who is present at
those Exercises, the The Grand Seignors liberalities.
end whereof proves many times Tragical to those, by whom they are performed,
has found any particular divertisement therein, especially when there are Limbs
lost or broken, he orders every one to receive a Purse, which, as I told you,
amount to five hundred Crowns. The distribution of those Presents is greater or
lesser, according to his being in a good or bad humor, and sometimes there are
distributed at his departure thence, to the number of ten Purses. The
Treasurer, who is always attending on him, and has ordinarily brought along
with him fifteen or twenty thousand Ryals in Gold and Silver, stands ready,
upon a beck, to obey his Orders.

But this is worth our observation, That when the Prince is ready to bestow his
Liberalities, on those who had behaved themselves valiantly in that exercise,
the Grandees The counterfeit modesty of the Grandees of the Port.
of his Court, who had appeared therein as well as others, purposely shift
themselves out of the way, and leave him to make his Presents to other less
considerable Persons, as being such as stand more in need of them than they do.
This is their custom ordinarily, whether it proceed from Generosity, or from a
counterfeit and personated Modesty, it matters not. And after the Grand Seignor
is withdrawn, it is lawful for those who are left in the foresaid Court, and
are skilled in the handling of the Dart, to spend the remainder of the day in
that Exercise. But those, how great soever their performances may be, and what
wounds soever they may receive, are not to expect any Presents; There Is no
Prince to be a spectator of their Gallantry, nor Treasurer, to distribute his
Liberalities. They only lay some wagers amongst themselves, and he who gives
the fairest blow, wins, and the fairest blow is in the head, or face. There is
ever and anon an Eye struck out, or a Cheek carried off, and that Solemnity
proves very fatal in the end to some of them.

And this is an account of all that is observable in the said first Court, Let
us now make our entrance into the second, and observe what is most remarkable
in all its Appartments.

CHAP. III. Of the second Court, wherein are the little Stables, the Kitchins,
and the Divan.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
A square and spacious Court, and its Embellishments. The Janissaries extremely
sprightful, active, and well ordered. The number of the Kitchins. The ordinary
dishes of meat that are served up in the Seraglio. The way of ordering the
Pilau. A particular way of roasting in the Levant. The Turks cannot endure the
Hare. Conserves of all sorts. Several compositions of Sherbet. Receptacles for
all the waters of the Seraglio. The little Stables. The Quarter of the Eunuchs.

OUt of the first Court, into which the Bassas and Grandees of the Port, may
come on Horseback, and where they are obliged to alight, if they intend to go
any further, there is an entrance into another, through a second Gate, kept, as
the former, by fifty Capigis. The second Court, much more noble, and more
delightful, then that whereof we gave you the precedent description, is near
three hundred paces square, and only the walks, leading to the several
Appartments, are paved, the rest being in Grass-plots, planted about with
Cypress, and watered by Fountains, with rails all about, to hinder people from
going upon the grass. Over the gate of that Court, may be seen these words,
written in great golden Characters.

(...)
La Illahe Illa Alla,
Muhammed Resoul Alla.
That is to say, There is no other God than God,
Mahomet is sent by God.


Resoul signifies sent, which is the greatest Title given by the Turks to their
Prophet.

On both sides of that Court there runs a very noble Gallery, the pillars
whereof are of marble, all along which the Companies of the Janissaries are
drawn up, and disciplined, The Janissaries well ordered.
when the Grand Seignor orders them to show their activity, and to appear well
armed, at the arrival of some Ambassador, who is to have Audience.

On the right hand, behind the Gallery, where the Janissaries are drawn up, on
the Divan-dayes [that is to say, upon Council-dayes] are the Kitchins, and the
Offices of the Seraglio, distinct one from the other, and every one served by
its peculiar Officers. Heretofore there were nine of them, but now that number
is reduced to seven. Every Office or Kitchen, has its chief Director, or
Master-Cook, and there is a Superintendent above them all, named the
Akegi-bachi, who has the command over four hundred Cooks.

The chiefest of these Kitchins, which is for the Grand Seignior himself is
called Hasmoutbak. The number of the Kitchins.


The Second is called Valede-Sultanum-Moutbaki, and is designed for the
Sultanesses, as for instance, the Mother, the Wife, or, to say better, the
Princess, for whom the Grand Seignor has the greatest kindness, and who had the
happiness to bring into the World a Successor to the Empire, as also for his
Sisters and Daughters.

The third Kitchen, which they call Kisler-Agazinum-Moutbaki is appointed for
the Overseer of the Appartment of the Women, and the other Negro-Eunuchs who
are employed about the guarding of them.

The fourth is for the Capou-Agasi, or Grand Master of the Seraglio, who has
the greatest access to the Grand Seignor's Person, and whose Charge (as I said
elsewhere) generally extends over whatever enters into the Palace. And this
Kitchen serves also for the Officers of the Divan.

The fifth is for the Chasnadarbachi, or the chief Person concerned about the
Treasury, and for those who are under his jurisdiction, and obey his Orders.

The sixth is for the Kilargibachi, or principal Cup Bearer, and those who have
their dependence upon him.

The seventh and last, is that of the Sarai-Agasi, and of all the Officers,
who are under his charge.

Lastly, as for the Bostangis, whose work lies in the Gardens, they dress their
Meat themselves, and appoint some among them to execute that Office, and they
provide the Commons for all the rest. There are also some of these Bostangis
employed in the Offices designed for the Grand Seignor.

There enters no Beef into the Kitchins of the Seraglio: but the ordinary
consumption The ordinary meats served up in the Seraglio.
of every day, including all, as well those who eat within, as without, may
amount to Five Hundred Sheep, in which number must be comprehended Lambs and
Kids; and the greatest part of those Sheep, are brought from the Frontiers of
Persia; which Country excels all others, as to that creature. According to this
proportion of Mutton, may be computed the quantity of Pullets, Chickens, and
young Pigeons, the number whereof is limited, according to the Seasons; as
also what may be consumed in Rice, and Butter, for the Pilau, which is
accounted the best dish in Turkey, and all over the East. Those Nations, who
are lovers of Temperance, and do not much study the satisfaction of the palate,
seldom have any other dish: and that not being contemptible, some happily will
give me thanks, for communicating the ordering of it.

The Turks, and generally all the Inhabitants of the Eastern parts, make the
Pilau, The way of ordering the Pilau.
after this manner. According to the quality of the persons who are to be
entertained, and the quantity which is to be made of it, you take either a
piece of Mutton alone, or together with that some Pullets or Pigeons, which
are to be boiled in a pot, till they are half done, or somewhat more. When you
think them so far boiled, then pour out both meat and broth into a Basin, and
the Pot being washed, put it on the fire again with Butter in it, which they
suffer to melt, till such time as it is very hot. Then they chop the meat,
which had been but half-boyl'd into little pieces, the Pullets into quarters,
and the Pigeons into halves, and so they cast it into the Butter, they fricass
it, till it be of a very brown color. The Rice being well washed, they put
some into the Pot over the meat, as much as they think fitting, and the broth,
which had been poured into the Basin, they also put it into the Pot, Ladle-ful
after Ladle-ful, over the Rice, till such time as it stands two fingers breadth
above it. Then is the Pot immediately covered, there is a clear fire made under
it, and they ever and anon take out some grains of the Rice, to see if it be
softened, as also whether it be requisite to put in some more of the broth, to
complete the stewing of it. For it is not like the Rice brought into our parts,
which presently breaks asunder, but their Rice is of such a kind, that is must
be fully boiled, and yet the Grain entire, as well as the whole Pepper,
wherewith they season it. As soon as it is come to that condition, they cover
the Pot with a cloth three or four times doubled, and set the Potlid upon
that, and some time after, they make another melting of Butter, till it be very
red; to be cast into the holes, which are made in the Rice, with the handle of
the Ladle, after which they cover it again of a sudden, and so let it stand
soaking awhile, and then serve it up. It is put into large Dishes, with the
meat handsomely disposed upon it, and some part will be white, that is,
continued in its natural color, some part, yellow, occasioned by a little
mixture of Saffron, and a third part of a Carnation-colour, done by the
tincture of the juice of Pomegranate. Nay, though the meat be as fat as is
requisite for the ordering of this Dish, yet to make the Pilau more delicate
and palatable to them, they bestow three pounds of Butter on six pounds of
Rice, which makes it so extraordinary fat, that it disgusts, and is nauseous to
those who are not accustomed thereto, and accordingly would rather have the
Rice it self simply boiled with water and salt. There are always two or three
Dishes served up after that manner, to the Grandees of the Port, who, for the
most part, keep open Table, and instead of flesh, they cover them with a great
Aumelet or Omelet, made with good Herbs, and about three fingers thick, or with
some poach'd Eggs, which are neatly disposed all about it. A man is never
incommodated by this kind of Rice, but the other, which is too fat, is not fit
for those who drink wine, and will not excite in them a desire to eat of it
often.

Since I have given you an account how they order the Pilau, I cannot forbear
making A particular way of roasting in the Levant.
you a further discovery of the Turks management of the Kitchen, and telling
you how they roast their meat. The greater sort of meat, as sheep and Lambs are
roasted whole, in Ovens made in the Floor, wherein they hang them by the heads,
and they are taken out thence as it were brown-bak'd, and Cooked well enough,
so as to excite appetite. At the bottom of the Oven there is ordinarily a Basin
placed, having in it some Rice and fair Water, which receives the drippings of
the Beast, the very Tail it self, which sometimes weighs fifteen or twenty
pound, yielding a good quantity thereof, as being in a manner all fat. The
Tayls of the Lambs, having not so much fat, are excellent meat, and in a manner
as delicate as the Sweet-breads of Veal. These Lambs being thus roasted, are
always served up with Rice under them; and for the greater Tables, they serve
up two of them in a Dish. So that there is no use of Spits in the Turkish
Kitchins, but what is for Poultry, or Fowl, which they order so untowardly,
that when they are brought up to the Table, they appear so mangled and
disordered, that it is no easy matter to distinguish the head from the feet.
But it is to be observed, that the Pilau, and all sorts of Flesh-meat are not
served up, but only at Supper, about five of the Clock in the Evening; and that
in the morning, those of better Quality eat only Sallets, Herbs, Fruits, and
Conserves; the meaner sort of people contenting themselves with meats made of
Milk, Melons, and Cucumbers, according to the Season.

As for Fish, the Turks care not much for it, and though the Seas and Rivers
are well replenished therewith, yet they seldom eat of them. It seldom happens
also, that any Venizon or Wild-Fowl comes into their houses, as being a kind of
meat they do not any way relish. But above all meats they have an aversion for
the Hare; which observation I made also in the Armenians, who are of a
persuasion, that the Female The Turks have an aversion for the Hare.
of that Creature has its monthly courses regularly, as the Woman has. It is
easily perceivable, by what account I have given, that there is no great
variety or delicacy in the Turkish Entertainments, and that the French and
other Europaeans would not think themselves well treated thereat. But, however,
their Kitchins are kept very neat, they have all the accommodations requisite
for their way of dressing, and whether you consider the Dishes and other
Vessels they use, or the meat it self, there is as much cleanliness as can be
expected.

The Officers where the Conserves and Sweetmeats are made (there being six or
Conserves.
seven of them) are above the Kitchins, and served by four hundred Halvagis,
who were established by Sultan Solomon, a magnificent Prince, who also
regulated all the Offices and Officers of the Seraglio. They are perpetually at
work in those seven Offices, and there they prepare all sorts of Conserves, dry
and liquid, and several sorts of Syrups, as also several kinds of Turchi, which
are Fruits preserved in Vinegar and Salt, into which, they put a quantity of
fragrant Herbs, such as Rosemary, Marjoram, and Sage.

In the same Offices they also prepare the ordinary drink of the Turks, which
they call Sherbet, and it is made several ways. That which is most common in
Turkey comes Several compositions of Sherbet.
somewhat near our Lemonade, but there is very little water in it; it is in a
manner all juice of Lemmon, or Citron, having an intermixture of Sugar, Amber,
and Musk. They make another sort of it, which is highly in esteem, and that is
made with the water distilled from the flower of a Plant, which grows in Pools
and Rivers, and has the figure of a Horse-shooe. These flowers are yellow, and
called Nuloufer. But the Sherbet which they most esteem, and which is drunk by
the Grand Seignor himself, as also by the Bassa's and other Grandees of the
Port, is made of Violets and Sugar, and there is but little juice of Citron put
into it. They make also another sort of drink, which they call Magion, composed
of several Drugs, whereby it is made hot: and there is another sort purposely
prepared for the Grand Seignor himself, called Muscavi, of which he takes a
Dose, when he intends to visit the Sultanesses. The principal Persons about the
Court send for it secretly to the Halvagibachi, who does not deny them, as
being a great advantage to him, because he is well paid for it. Nor do they
want Snow and Ice, to cool all those Liquors, and the Turks are much more
humorous and delicate in their drinks, than they are in their Meat.

At a place ten or twelve paces distant, and opposite to these Offices, is the
Receptacle, Receptacles for the Waters of the Seraglio.
or Reservatory, which distributes all the Waters of the Seraglio, and they are
thence directed to every Quarter, into the places where there is a necessity of
them. One of the Baltagis has his station there all the day long, to give Water
as he is directed. And when the Grand Seignor passes from one Quarter to
another, the fountain of that, where he is in person, plays continually during
his abode there, by a Signal which is given to the Baltagi.

On the left hand, in the same Court, and opposite to the Kitchins, may be seen
the Grand Seignor's little Stables, which do not hold above twenty five or
thirty The little Stables.
choice Horses, designed for his Exercises with his Favorites, and above the
Stables, in great Rooms, they keep the Saddles, Bridles, Housses, Trappings,
Foot-cloaths, and Stirrops, which are of inestimable value, by reason of the
abundance of precious Stones, whereby they are enriched. There are some
Harnesses which amount to a million of Livers, French Money. The great Stables
stand all along the Canal, which beats against the Walls of the Seraglio. They
are always well replenished, and in good order, and they take care, that there
be not so much as one vacant place therein. In those Stables does the Grand
Seignor keep a great number of Horses of value, to be reserved for the War, or
to be used in some Magnificent Solemnity, that Strangers may see the Splendour
of his Court.

CHAP. IV. Of the Hall of the Divan, and the exact Justice which the Grand
Seignor causes to be admitted there.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Divan-Hall not very magnificent. The Councildays. Causes quickly decided.
The causes of that expedition of Justice in Turkey. The subtle Policy of the
Ottoman Family. The care which is taken to prevent the revolt of the
Janissaries. How the Grand Seignor assists at the Divan, or Council. The bold
action of a Timar-Spahi, who kills a Grand Vizir, and is pardoned. The noble
Genius of Sultan Amurat, and by what Artifices he discovered a great breach of
Trust. A kind of Beads used by the Turks at their Prayers. A noble Example of a
severe act of Justice. At what times, and how, the Grand Seignor rids those out
of the way whom he suspects. The days on which Ambassadors come to the Divan.

THe Hall of the Divan, which belongs to this Second Court, is, on the left The
Divan-Hall not very Magnificent.
hand, next to the little Stables, as you go toward the Grand Seignor's
Quarter. It Is a great low Hall, covered with Lead, and wainscoted and gilt in
some places within, from which it derives a little Ornament. The Floor of it is
covered with a great Carpet, and there are some Benches for the Officers, of
whom that Council consists, which the Turks call Divan. There are, as I told
you, Galleries of all the sides of that Court, which makes it look as it were
like a Cloister; and it is under that Gallery which is on the right hand, that
the Janissaries have their station, while the Divan is sitting.

The Council sits, ordinarily, four days in the week, which days are answerable
to Council-days.
the Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday of the Christians.

Justice is there exactly administered to any one that desires it, and for what
cause Causes soon decided.
soever it be, so, as that the differing Parties have no need either of
Proctors or Advocates names not known in Turkey, and the Persons concerned are
to lay open their Cases themselves. There is no talk of delays, or putting off
from one time to another; people shall not languish in expectation, but the
business is decided immediately, what nature soever it may be of.

Though this Custom be very commendable, yet can it not be so well practiced
The Reasons of that Expedition of Justice.
amongst Christians, because they stand upon the property of what they have,
and that is derived by Inheritance from some to others, and the litigious
partitions of them do many times engage the Proprietors thereof in long Suits
of Law. It Is quite otherwise amongst the Great Officers of the Port, who are
all Slaves, either taken in War, or sent up, as Presents, by the Bassa's, and
Governors of Provinces. All their Estates, when they die, return to the Grand
Seignor, from whom they had received them, so that it is a perpetual
Circulation: and their Children, as I told you in the beginning of this
Discourse, are brought up to the Seraglio, to be educated there, and that
without any hope of ever succeeding their Parents, either in their Estates, or
Employments. The Ottoman Monarchy has always observed this subtle Policy, not
to permit that any Family should aggrandize it self, and be powerful from
Father to Son: but they bring it down, as soon as they have raised it up, and
timely enough deprive them of the means whereby they might create Factions, to
the disturbance of the State. Thence it comes, that, besides the Royal Family
of the Ottomans, they know not what Gentility, and antiquity of Extraction
means; there is no emulation upon that score, and Charges and Dignities are
bestowed answerably to the Merit of the Person, without any consideration of
his Extraction. Nay, it sometimes happens, that the Principal Ministers of the
Empire, are the Sons of Cow-keepers, as was one Rustan, a Grand Vizir, who made
so much noise under the Reign of Solomon. And so, being not any way obliged to
their birth, they acknowledge their Fortunes to be the reward of their
Education.

But to return to the administration of Justice amongst the Turks. Those who
make the Law their profession, and are looked upon as the Clergy of Mahomet,
leave no place for suits at Law; every one knows his privileges, and what
belongs to the function of his Charge, and there arise no differences among
them, because all things are perfectly well regulated.

In like manner, the people are ignorant what pleading signifies. There Is no
occasion for public Notaries, in order to Matrimonial contracts; There Is no
great sums given with a daughter, and the jewels and clothes which she can get
out of her Fathers house, are all the portion she brings to her Husband. And
this, in few words, is the reason that the Turks can put an expeditious end to
all their affairs, without giving any toleration to that pettifogging, which,
among Christians, proves the ruin of so many People.

The Officers, who sit in the Divaen are, first, the Grand Vizir, the
Lieutenant General of the whole Empire, who is President of it, and represents
the Grand Seignor's Person; Then the six other Vizirs; Then the Cadilesquers of
Romania and Natolia, who are the Judges and Intendants of the Armies; Then the
three Tefterdars, or Treasurers-General; Then the Nissangibacha, the Lord
Chancellor; And the Netangi, who is as 'twere the Secretary of State, with
some Clerks, or Notaries. All these Officers come into the Divan-Hall, at four
in the Morning, and continue there till noon, to administer Justice. The
Chiaoux-bachi has his station at the Gate, with a troop of those that are under
his charge, to execute the Grand Vizir's Orders, and has a silver-rod in his
hand, as a badge of his Authority.

On those days that the Divan sits, the Officers are entertained at dinner in
the same The care taken to prevent the revolt of the Janissaries.
Hall, which is done with much sobriety, and little Ceremony. All is over and
taken away, in half an hours time. The Grand Vizir eats alone, unless he call a
Bassa or two, to keep him company. There are carried also messes of Chourba,
which is a kind of pottage made with Rice, for the dinners of the Janissaries,
who are in their stations, under the Galleries. But if it happen, that they are
in a mutinous humor, and incensed against a Vizir, or against the Grand
Seignor himself, not one of them will put his hand to the Chourba, but they
scornfully thrust back the dishes, and by that action discover their discontent.

The Grand Seignor is presently advertised of it, and sends to them the
Capou-Agasi, Grand Master of the Seraglio, to know what their pleasure is, and
what they desire. Then they depute one of their own Body to go, and speak on
the behalf of them all; and that person whispering the Capou-Agasi in the Ear,
declares to him the occasion of their discontent. That Eunuch presently carries
it to the Grand Seignor; And if they have a peek against a Vizir, or a
Cadilesquer, or sometimes against their Aga, or Colonel, it often happens that
to appease those mutineers, the Grand Seignor orders them to be strangled, and
sends them their heads.

Sunday and Tuesday are the principal days of the Divan, and then it is
properly a How the Grand Seignor is present at the Divan.
Council of State, and of public affairs. The Grand Seignor most commonly
assists at it, but is not seen; and that keeps in awe as well the Grand Vizir,
as the other Officers. He can come thither from his own Appartment, through a
close Gallery, and seat himself at a window, which looks into the Divan-Hall,
and has always a velvet Curtain before it, which he draws when he pleases, and
especially when he perceives that they have not done Justice. I shall produce
here, an example, famous enough as to that particular, which happened in the
Reign of Sultan Achmet, the Father of Amurath, and one of the justest Princes,
that ever the Ottoman Empire had.

The Reader is to call to mind, what I said at the beginning, concerning the
Timar-Spahi, on whom they bestow, during their lives, the Government and
revenue of The bold action of a Timer-Spahi, who kills a Grand Vizir, and is
pardoned.
some Town, according as they have deserved by their Services. The Spahi, whose
story I am going to relate, had a Timar, between Aleppo and Damas, which might
bring him in a revenue of fifteen hundred Crowns. The Grand Vizir, either out
of some aversion to the Spahi, or upon some false reports which had been made
of him, and which he had been too forward to believe, without taking an exact
information of things, took away from him the Timar, whereof he was possessed,
and bestowed it on one of his own Creatures.

The Spahi, finding himself so unjustly dispossessed comes to Constantinople,
enters into the Divan, and presents a Petition to the Grand Vizir, wherein he
remonstrates to him his long Services, and how he never was chargeable with any
negligence of his duty. The Grand Vizir having read it, tears it in his
presence, which was to signify as much, as that he would not answer it, and
that there was nothing for the Spahi to hope for. The Petitioner withdrew,
without saying any thing: but some days afterward, he returns to the Divan,
and presents a second Petition, which the Grand Vizir likewise tears, as he had
done the former, without making any answer thereto. Upon this second injury,
the Spahi, full of fury, and justly exasperated, draws his Poniard, falls upon
the Vizir, and kills him.

The Grand Seignor, who was then at the Window, having observed that action,
draws the Curtain, and with a loud voice commanded that no hurt should be
offered to the person who had done it. He thereupon orders the Spahi to
approach, and asked him the Reason of his having demeaned himself with so much
violence. The other much ashamed, humbly makes answer, but with resolution
enough, That he could not forbear doing what he had done, upon the sight of so
great a piece of Injustice: and thereupon presenting to him the Petition, which
had been torn to pieces; the Grand Seignor caused it to be read, and patiently
hearkened to the just complaints which it contained. Having fully examined the
Affair, his Highness commended the Spahi for the Action he had done, using the
word Aferim, which is as much as to say, It Is well done, and which is ordinary
in that Language, when they approve a thing; and thereupon, there was an
additional Liberality made by the Grand Seignor to the Command which he gave,
that he should be re-established in his Timar. He thereupon took occasion to
speak to the other Vizirs, and to tell them, That that Example should teach
them to do just things, and not to suffer themselves to be so blinded by
favor, as not to observe Equity. The violent action of the Spabi is certainly
not to be approved, though the injustice of the Vizir was manifest: but the
procedure of the Grand Seignor, cannot be looked on otherwise then as most
commendable, and a great Model of perfect Equity.

I shall not think it much, to produce here a second Example of the exact
Justice, which the Grand Seignor would have administered to the People: and in
this Example there is something that is signally remarkable. A great
Stone-Mortar, which may be seen at the Gate of the Divan, serves for a
Monumental confirmation of this Story; and whereas it is accompanied by many
circumstances worthy our observation, I think my self obliged not to conceal
them from the Reader.

In the Reign of Sultan Amurat, a certain private Person finding himself
without How Sultan Amurat discovered a secret breach of trust.
Wife or Children, resolved to undertake the Pilgrimage of Mecha. Before his
departure, he conceived, that he could not better dispose what he left behind
him that was most valuable, then by putting it into the hands of a Hoggia, a
Doctor of the Law. He thereupon left in his custody certain Jewels, in a little
bag, entreating him to keep them till he returned, and declaring him his Heir,
in case he died in his Pilgrimage. It was the Pilgrim's fortune to return
safely from Mecha, and making no question but to get what he had entrusted the
Hoggia withal, calls for what he had deposited in his hands. The other makes
him a very cold answer, telling him, That he knew not what he meant, leaving
him very much surpised at so unexpected an account of his concerns. The
Pilgrim, smothering his discontent, and reflecting, that the thing had been
done without witnesses, did nothing for some days; but, afterward, he Presents
a Petition to the Grand Vizir, and acquaints him how all things had passed
between him and the Doctor. The Grand Vizir perceiving there was a great nicety
in that affair, and that the Doctor might easily deny a thing which had been
transacted without witnesses, bid the Pilgrim have patience awhile, and that he
would give the Grand Seignor an account of it; which he accordingly did.

The Grand Seignor Commands the Vizir to be very circumspect in the management
of that Affair, as being very desirous to sift out the truth of it, and orders
him to send for the Doctor, to make protestations of friendship to him, and to
put him in hopes of being employed in things of great importance. Some days
pass on, while the Grand Vizir minds what Game he had to play. At length, he
sends for the Doctor, he commends his Ingenuity, and his Conduct; and so
putting him into very fair hopes, he promises him to prevail so far with the
Grand Seignor, as that he should have the honor to kiss his hands, since it
was not just, that so transcendent a Wit as he should be any longer unknown to
his Highness. The Doctor overjoyed at that discourse, thought himself the
happiest man in the World, especially when he saw, that the Grand Vizir had
made him his Hougia, which is as much as to say, his Almoner. The Vizir
proceeds, and according to the secret Orders he had received from the Grand
Seignor, gives the Doctor another Employment, which was, that he should bring
him in a Report of all the Criminal Affairs which could be presented. The Grand
Seignor, upon the Report of the Hougia, asked him his advice, and what
punishment the guilty Person deserved for the Crime whereof he was convinced,
the execution being to be done according to the judgment which the Doctor had
passed, whom he made his ordinary Reader, and would have near his Person.

Five or six months pass on in this manner, ere there could be any discovery
made of the falsify'd Trust. And it is to be observed, That the Pilgrim had
given the Grand Seignor an exact Inventory of all the several things, which he
had put into the little Bag. Among other things, there was particular mention
made of a Tesbuch of fine Coral. This Tesbuch is a kind of Chappelet, or String
of Beads, consisting of ninety and nine beads, upon each of which, the Turks
repeat certain words taken out of some sentences of the Alcoran. That Chapelet
is divided into three parts, from thirty three, to thirty three beads, by a
little string, which separates them: and at the end, there hanged a long piece
of Corral, next to which there was another round bead, of the same material, of
an extraordinary bigness.

The more Puritanical sort of Turks have their Beads in their hands when they
are upon visits, and especially when they approach great Persons, and that very
thing made the first discovery of the Hoggia's theft, and breach of trust. One
day, coming into the Seraglio with his Coral-beads in his hand, the Grand
Seignor, before whom he presented himself, casting his eyes upon them, and
presently imagining, that it might well be the Pilgrim's Tesbuch, according to
the description he had given of it in the Catalogue of what things were left in
the little bag, told the Doctor, that he had a great rarity there. The other
immediately approaches him, and entreats his Highness with all submission to
accept of it. The Grand Seignor takes it, and making some discoveries how
acceptable that Present was to him, does, by that prudent dissimulation, cause
a joy in him, whose chastisement he was then contriving.

But that single indicium the Grand Seignor does not think enough, but he will
have other discoveries; and knowing that among other things that were in the
bag, there was a Ring, the work of an excellent and an ancient Master, famous
for that sort of Rings, which the Turks wear on the Thumb, when they shoot with
the Long-bowe, he expects a second occasion, in order to a fuller discovery of
the Cheat, and the more absolute conviction of the Doctor.

'Twas not many days ere that happened, by the contrivance of the Emperor
himself, who calling for one of his Pages, one well skilled in Archery, went to
the place of the Girit, where he also called for a Bow, there being not any
person in the whole Empire but was inferior to him, as to strength and
dexterity in the Exercises of the Bow and the Dart. When he came to bend the
Bow, he complained that the Ring hurt his Thumb, presuming that the Doctor,
who stood near him, and had already presented him with the Coral-Beads, would
also make him a proffer of the Ring, which he had of the Pilgrim's. It is
possible, says the Grand Seignor, that there is not at this time any Master
living who can make a Ring any thing like such a one, whom he named? The
Doctor, whose apprehension was not so good, as to see that this trap was laid
for his destruction, and thinking to insinuate himself more and more into the
Grand Seignor's favor, told him T, hat, by good Fortune he had a Ring of that
very Master's work, which he had kept a long time, and that if his Highness
would be pleased to accept of it, he would bring it thither, which he presently
did.

As Soon as the Grand Seignor was returned to his own Quarter, he sent for the
Grand Vizir, and the Pilgrim, who came into his presence, and he had in his
hand the Chapelet of Corral, which he made as if he were repeating, to try
whether the Pilgrim would know it again. The other having well observed it,
addressed himself to the Emperor, saying, If it shall please your Highness to
permit me to open my mouth, I dare affirm, that the Chapelet, you have in your
hands, is very like that, which was in my little bag of Jewels, and possibly I
shall not be mistaken, if I say it is the very same. Whereupon the Grand
Seignor commands him to come nearer, and putting the Chapelet, and the Ring
into his hands, the Pilgrim affirms, upon his life, that they are the very same
things, which he had left in the custody of the Doctor. He coming the next
morning, according to his custom to make a report of some criminal cause to the
Grand Seignor, that Prince, who was a person of great ingenuity and
apprehension, proposes to him a case somewhat of the same nature with that
between him and the Pilgrim, and asked him what punishment such a crime
deserved. The unfortunate man, blinded by a good fortune wherein he thought
himself already well established, and what was past being clearly got out of
his remembrance, pronounced sentence against himself, and answers the Grand
Seignor, That such a person, deserved to be pounded alive in a Mortar.

Upon that sentence, the Emperor caused him to be immediately secured, and
having A severe, but just Punishment.
ordered all his chests to be brought into the Seraglio, by the Baltagis, whom
he sent to his Lodgings, pulls out of his pocket the Chapelet of Coral, and the
Ring, which he shows him, and told him, that those two pieces were taken out
of a little bag, which a Pilgrim of Mecha had entrusted him with the custody
of. He afterward shows him the note or schedule of all the other pieces, and
commanding him to open his Chests, the Jewels were there found, which that
unhappy man, convinced of his guilt, and trembling for fear, delivered up into
the hands of the Grand Seignor. The Pilgrim was called, and presently knew his
bag, and his Jewels; and the Doctor, by an open confussion, acknowledged his
crime, and perfidiousness.

The next day, the Emperor ordered the Divan to be Assembled, at which he
commanded that all the Grandees about Constantinople should be present, to
render the Judgment the more solemn. He first commanded, that whatever belonged
to the Pilgrim should be restored to him, together with some additional
recompense: and his next command was, That the Doctor should be punished,
according to his own Sentence. To that end, order was given, that a stone
should be made hollow, after the form of a Mortar, into which he was thrown
stark naked, and pounded alive by the common Executioners. And that is the same
Stone-Mortar, which I have often seen near the Gate of the Divan, and is left
there, for a Memorial of so admirable and so solemn a Judgment. And this was
the period of a History, whereof all the circumstances are remarkable, and
which is not one of the least Monuments of the Wisdom of the Emperor Amurat.
That Prince, instead of using his absolute power at the first overture of such
an Affair, thought it fitter, by a perspicacity of mind and prudence, patiently
to expect remote occasions, that he might thence deduce evident proofs of a
concealed crime: and his intention was to raise the Doctor to great dignities
if he had found him innocent; and to punish him severely, as he did, upon the
discovery of his guilt.

I told you at the beginning of this Chapter, that of the four days of the
Week, appointed At what time, how, the Grand Seignor rids out of the way,
those, whom he suspects.
for the sitting of the Divan, those which are answerable to our Sunday and
Tuesday are the principal, as being those on which the Affairs of greatest
importance are debated. They call those two days Arzghiunz, in regard, that
after the Grand Vizir, the six other Vizirs, and the two Cadilesquers, who
assist at the Divan, have administered Justice, they go all together to kiss the
Grand Seignor's hands. If any one of those Nine Judges have ought to say to
him, he is permitted, on those days, to speak to him freely: and it is
ordinarily upon those days also, that the Grand Seignor takes his time, if he
has a mind to take off any one. He then orders the Bostangi-Bachi to be ready,
with some of those who attend him, to execute his will; and having declared to
him who they are, whom he would have strangled, the order is no sooner given,
but that either at their arrival, or at their departure, it is punctually
obeyed. True it is, that he does not demean himself so, but when he is afraid
of some popular sedition, in case he should send to punish them in their own
Houses, where they might make some resistance. But within the Seraglio, and in
sight of the Janissaries, who are in their stations near the Divan, the
unfortunate Person, whom they would have to be strangled, has no more to do
then to bow down his Head, and to stretch out his Neck, without thinking of any
resistance, which would be to no purpose. In the Eleventh Chapter, I shall give
an account at large, how they proceed to that execution.

A little beyond the Hall of the Divan, you come to another Hall, raised up
after the The days on which Ambassadors come to the Divan.
manner of a Balcony, where the Ambassadors are seated, when they assist at the
Divan, and that they do, once in three months, and upon the days, that the
Janissaries receive their pay. There is notice sent them to be there, out of a
vain ostentation, that they may see, what abundance of money goes out of the
Treasury. Between these two Halls there is a Gate, which leads to the Quarter
of the Baltagis. Those are a sort of strong and robust People, employed, as I
told you, in carrying of Wood all about the Seraglio, and other mean and
painful Offices. As to the wood, which is burnt in the Appartments of the
Women, they disburthen themselves of it at the door, where the Negro-Eunuchs
take it up, and carry it into the Baths and other rooms, into which they only
are permitted to go. And this is all that is considerable in that second Court.
Let us now enter further into the Seraglio, and see how things are managed
there.

CHAP. V. Of the inner part of the Seraglio, in general, and particularly, of
the Quarter of the Eunuchs, and the Ichoglans.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Ichoglans educated under a severe Discipline. The great Officers of the
Port taken out of the same School. The miserable condition of the Children of
the Bassa's. The great Authority of the Capi-Aga. The Classes, through which
the young Lads of the Seraglio are to pass. The Quarters of the four principal
Eunuchs.

THE inner Seraglio is that part of the great Palace of the Ottoman Emperors,
which, from the Second Court, whereof we have given a description, extends to
the point, at which place the Gardens are terminated, and which comprehends, in
general, the Grand Seignors Quarter, and the Quarter of the Sultanesses. But in
regard the former is distinguished into several Appartments, appointed for the
Habitations of the Officers, who ordinarily approach the Grand Seignor's
Person, and are his most necessary attendants, I will conduct the Reader from
one to another, and give a distinct relation of every one of them. In this
Chapter, I shall treat only of those Appartments which are taken up by the
Eunuchs; and the Ichoglans, who are under their Discipline.

At the beginning of this Discourse, I made mention of the four principal
Eunuchs, who have others substitute to them, to observe the actions of those
young Lads, who The Ichoglans kept under a severe discipline.
are committed to their charge, and to instruct them, as well in the Mahumetan
Religion, as in the Exercises of the Body, and particularly, as to what relates
to the Grand Seignor's Service. The Quarter, as well of the Eunuchs, as the
Ichoglans stands next to the Divan-Hall, and begins to make part of the third
Court, all along which it reaches on the left hand. It is divided into several
Appartments, and among others, there are four, which they call Oda's, that is
to say Chambers, into which are distributed six hundred Ichoglans, according to
the orders of the Capi-Aga; who, with the other principal Eunuchs, judges of
every ones capacity. It Is the Capi-Aga also, who orders their passing out of
one Oda into another, as we remove our Scholars from a sixth form to a fifth;
and the case is the same in their Oda's as in our Forms, or Classes, ths first
of the four Oda's, the severities whereof they must weather out as well as they
can, being the last in point of dignity. When he makes his general Visitation,
upon which follows the foresaid promotion, he turns out of the Seraglio, all
those whom he thinks incapable of doing their Prince good Service, and that
such as betray their disgust of so austere a life; and then they are put out of
all hopes of ever entering into the Seraglio any more, and cannot pretend to any
other Fortune, then that of Spahis, with a small pay. The advantage of
capacitating themselves for the most eminent Charges of the Court and the
Empire, makes those who remain behind to take the greater courage, and
accordingly they patiently suffer, for the space of many years, the harsh and
unmerciful treatments of the Eunuchs, whom, upon all occasions, they always
find very liberal of the Bastinado.

They are those Ichoglans, whom we may also call the Grand Seignor's Pages, who
are advanced to the dignity of Bassa's, Beys, Capigi-bachis, Haznadar-Bachis,
and the other great Offices of the Port. But they are particularly culled out
of the number of the Tributary Children, who are taken away from the
Christians, or taken in War, by The wretched condition of the Bassa's Children.
Sea or Land. For, as to the Beiczades, or Children of Bassa's, whom they bring
up in the Seraglio, you are to remember what I have already said, that they can
never ascend higher, than to the Charges of Beys, or Captains of Galleys.

When any one of these Ichoglans is desirous to remove out of the Seraglio, or
if any one of the white Eunuchs has the same desire, he presents a Petition to
the Capi-Aga, who carries it to the Grand Seignor, he receives his dismission,
and is allowed a certain Pay, proportionably to the continuance and quality of
his Services. But there are others, whom the same Capi-Aga turns out of the
Seraglio against their wills, and that after they had weathered out the first
years, which are the most insupportable. And that is done sometimes upon this
score, that the Capi-Aga having had some contest with any one of those
Ichoglans, while they were Camerades in the time of their youth, and fearing
lest he should come one day to traverse his designs, he employs all his credit
and interest, to remove him out of the Seraglio, but withal procuring him a
Recompense and Salary, according to the number of years he has served.

The first of the four Chambers, into which the Ichoglans are distributed, has
the greatest number of them, because they are yet very young, and as it were
Novices, The Classes through which the Lads brought into the Seraglio are to
pass.
under the first Perula: and it is called the Couchouk-Oda, that is to say, the
little Chamber, though it be the largest of them all, in regard it is the
lowest in point of Dignity. There they are taught to read and write, and are
initiated in the first grounds of the Mohammedan Law. And after they have spent
six years in that Chamber, they are removed into the second, which they call
Quilar-Oda, wherein being grown more robust, they are instructed in the
Exercises of the Body, in shooting with the Bow, using the Lance and other
divertisements of that kind. They are more perfected in the speaking of the
Turkish Language, whereto they also add the Arabian, and the Persian, which
they shall have occasion to use, in the Governments whereto they may be sent.

There are four years spent in this second Chamber, out of which they are again
removed into the third, which they call Chasnadar-Oda, or the Chamber of the
Treasury. In this Chamber, they begin to do the Grand Seignor some service, and
to be employed in the Wardrobe, and the Baths, and there they are also taught
to ride, and to perfect themselves in the Exercises suitable to that Station,
wherein they ordinarily spend four years. Each of these three forementioned
Chambers has a white Eunuch for its chief Overseer. The Serai-Agasi has the
direction of the first; the Quilargi-bachi Commands in the second; and the
Chasnadar-bachi is the Governor of the third.

I shall have occasion to speak more at large of the two last, when I come to
the Chapters of the Cup-bearers Office, and the Treasury; and therefore I shall
only add here, concerning all the three in general, That the Ichoglans, who are
instructed therein, have not any commerce with those of the fourth Chamber, of
whom I shall give an account by and by, nor with any other person out of the
Seraglio, or in the other Courts, but with the particular permission of the
Capi-Aga, and in the presence of an Eunuch, who hears all that is said: That
they cannot converse amongst themselves, but at certain regulated hours; and
that conversation must be managed with a great observance of Modesty, as there
is an exact Obedience remarkable in all their deportments: And lastly, that
they are all clad in ordinary Cloth, even to the Beiczades; that is, the Sons
of Vizirs and Bassa's who are dead, while those of the fourth Chamber wear
Cloth of Gold and Silver, because they come into the Grand Seignor's presence,
and often approach his person. I shall give you an account anon of their
Dormitories, that is the places where they take their repose, as also of the
Functions of the Oda-bachi and the Deflergi-Aga, who act according to the
Orders they receive from the four Eunuchs.

The fourth Chamber, which is the Prince's Chamber, is called Haz-Oda, and I
shall speak of it, when I come to treat of the Cup-bearers Office, and the
Grand Seignor's secret Appartment. Here, the Ichoglans, who have endured
hardship so many years in the three first Chambers, begin to take breath, and
to be allowed more liberty. They are permitted to converse with all Persons
within the Seraglio, and they have the advantage of frequent approaches to the
Prince's Person, to whom they make themselves known, and from whom they ever
and anon receive favors.

Under the Gate of the third Court, where a certain number of Eunuchs are upon
The Quarters of the Four principal Eunuchs.
the Guard night and day, there is a passage on the left hand which leads into
a little Gallery, out of which there is an entrance into the Appartment of the
Capou-Agasi; and when the great Gate is open, it hides that passage, into which
a man cannot enter but with some difficulty.

A little further, and on the right hand of the Hall of the Audience, stands
the Appartment of the Serai-Agasi, who is to take care for the keeping of the
Seraglio clean and in good order; and a little farther yet, near a little
Mosquey, where the Ichoglans of the three first Chambers go to their Devotions,
lies the Quarter of the Seferlis, who are an hundred and fifty of the
Ichoglans, or thereabouts, particularly appointed for the washing of the Grand
Seignor's Linen. When he goes into the Country, the most ancient among them
are of his Retinue; and there must be comprehended in that number, such as play
on Timbrels, and the other Instrumental Musicians, who have the same
appointments with the rest.

Let us now enter into the Hall of Audience, which is a Quarter as 'twere
independent from others, and where the Grand Seignor receives Foreign
Ambassadors.

CHAP. VI. Of the Hall wherein the Grand Seignor gives Audience to Foreign
Ambassadors, and the manner how they are received.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The description of the Hall of Audience. The Grand Seignor's Throne. The
manner how Ambassadors are received. Remarks upon the number of Vestments which
the Grand Seignor orders to be bestowed on the Ambassadors of Christian
Princes. The form of the Oath of Allegiance, which the Cham of the Lesser
Tartary comes to take at the same place.

THe Third Court of the Seraglio, wherein we now are, is far from being The
Hall of Audience described.
so regular, as the precedent, and the Structures within sufficiently discover,
that the persons, by whom it was built, minded not the observance of any Order
in the doing of it. When you are at the Gate of this Court, you have just
opposite to you a little Appartment, not adjoining to the others, at the
entrance of which you find, on both sides, a Fountain issuing out of Wall, the
Water whereof is received into two Basins or Cisterns: And it is in this
Appartment that the Hall of Audience stands. It Is an arched Structure noble
enough in its kind, sustained by Marble Pillars, and there is yet to be seen in
the midst of it, a small spout of Water, which falls into a Basin. This Hall is
open of all sides, and at the lower end, opposite to the Gate, they place the
Grand Seignor's Throne.

This Throne, which is rich enough, is in the manner of an Altar, and it is
brought The Grand Seignor's Throne.
into that Hall only upon those days, whereon the Grand Seignor is willing to
give Audience to Ambassadots, and when the new Cham of the Lesser Tartary, whom
he has chosen to govern there, comes to receive the Investitute of his Kingdom,
and to take the accustomed Oath. The backside of the Throne, is set against a
partition erected for that purpose, which is not above half a foot higher than
it, and it is that keeps in the cushions which are behind the Grand Seignor.

There are in the Treasury-Chamber eight several very sumptuous Coverings
purposely made to cover the aforesaid Throne: and they are so large, that they
reach down to the ground on three sides of it, that is to say, before, on the
right hand, and on the left: for as to the back-part, it is, as I told you,
fastened to the partition. The most Magnificent of all those Coverings is of a
black Velvet, with an. Embroydery of great Pearls, whereof some are long, and
others round, and in the form of Buttons. There is another of white Velvet, set
out with an Embroydery of Rubies and Emeralds, most whereof are set in Beazils,
or Collets, the better to keep them in. There is a third, of a Violet-colour'd
Velvet, embroidered with Turqueses and Pearls. The three others, which are next
in esteem to these, are also of Velvets of different Colors, with a rich
Embroydery of Gold. And the two last are of a Gold-Brokado, which have also
their particular Beauty and sumptuoushess. The Throne is adorned with one of
these co^verings, according to the Grand Seignor's respect to the Sovereign,
whose Embassy he receives; and he levels his own Magnificence to that of the
Prince whom he would honor.

And this is the manner, how Ambassadors are received into that Hall. For, as
to The manner of receiving the Ambassadors.
the Order, and Ceremonies of their march from the Hotel, or great House of
Pera, to the Port of Constantinople, and from the Port, to the Seraglio, no
question but there have been Relations enough made already. After the
Ambassador has dined in the Hall of the Divan, with the Grand- Vizir, who there
expected him, while his Retinue are entertained under the Gallery, upon some
old Carpets of Leather, which they spread upon the ground, and upon which there
are a few Dishes of Meat set, he receives the Vests or Garments, which the
Grand Seignor sends him, as well for his own Person, as for those who accompany
him, and they put them on immediately, over all the Clothes they have about
them, as they would do a Morning-Gown.

In this Equipage the Ambassador is conducted to the Hall of Audience, by the
Capi-Aga, the Grand Master of the Ceremonies, who is assisted by several
Eunuchs: and when he is at the Door, two Vizirs stand ready to receive him, and
they go on each side of him, till he comes to the place, where he is to bow,
and to kiss the Grand Seignor's Garment. From the very Gate of the Court, kept
by the Eunuchs, quite to that of the Hall, they walk all along upon Carpets of
Silk; and the Floor of the Hall, though all paved with Marble, is also covered
with another Carpet of Gold, the Workmanship whereof somewhat resembles that of
our ordinary Straw-Mats, and much about the same thickness.

The Grand Seignor demeans himself with a great deal of gravity, while he is in
his Throne; and behind the little Wall or Partition, against which it is set,
you see, standing in order, the Kisler-Agasi, who is a Negro-Eunuch, and chief
Overseer of the Appartment of the Women; the Seligdar-Aga, who carries the
Grand Seignor's Sword; the Chokadar-Aga, who carries the Royal Robe, an Officer
whom in France, they call Porte-Mantean, the Riquabdar, who holds the Stirrup,
when the Prince gets on Horseback; and the Hazodabachi, chief of the Chamber,
which Office would be equivalent in France, to that of Grand Master of the
Wardrobe.

All these forementioned Officers do all deport themselves with a great
appearance of modesty, having their Arms cross their Breasts: And as to the
Capi-Aga, the Introductor to the Ambassadors, and Grand Master of the Seraglio,
he stands in the midst of the Hall, and in the same posture of humility. On the
left side of the Throne, there is a kind of a low Seat, covered with red
Velvet, with a Gold-fringe, on-which the Ambassadors go and sit down, after
they have kissed the Grand Seignor's Robe, till such time as those of their
Retinue, who have had Vests, the number whereof is limited, have performed the
same Ceremony. In the mean time, all the Bassa's are standing, in the presence
of their Prince; nay, the Cham of the Lesser Tartary is not excepted out of
that Law, when he comes to do homage. All this action is performed in great
silence, and the Grand Seignor making no answer at all at that time, leaves it
to the Grand Vizir, to make some short Complement, in order to the dismission
of the Ambassador, who withdraws with a profound reverence, without uncovering
his head, or turning his back, till he be out of the Hall.

The Ministers of Christian Princes and States who ordinarily reside at the
Porl, are the Ambassadors of England, France, and Venice, and the Resident of
the States General, who have all their respective Habitations in Pera. When
there come thither any Ambassadors or Residents from the Emperor, or from
Poland, or Muscovy, they oblige them to take up their abodes at Constantinople,
that they may be the more assu'd of their persons.

The Grand Seignor distinguishes the Quality of those Princes and States, and
the Remarks on the number of Vests, which the Grand Seignor orders to be given
the Ambassadors of Christian Princes.
esteem he has for them, by the number of Vests which he orders to be bestowed
on their Ambassadors when they come to Audience. The Ambassador of Fiance has
font and twenty allowed him; the Ambassador of England, sixteen; the Ambassador
or Agent of Venice receives twelve, and the Dutch Ambassador as many.

When Monsieur de Marcheville was Ambassador in Turkey, from his most Christian
Majesty of France, I had the honor to be one of those who accompanied him to
the Seraglio, where after Dinner with the Vizirs, in the Divan-Hall, while his
Retinue were treated under the Gallery, the Vests were brought according to the
custom. The Ambassador coming to distribute them to those whom he had a mind
to favor, and take along with him to the Audience, he was much surpised, to
find that he had got but sixteen. He immediately sent word to the Grand Vizir,
that he wanted eight Vests, and that he would not go to his Audience, till he
had the full number, which they had wont to present to the Ambassadors of
France. There was some contest about it, which retarded the Audience near an
hour's time; but at last Monsieur de Marcheville persisting in his resolution,
the Grand Vizir complied, and sent him eight other Vests.

What remains of this Chapter must represent the manner, how the Cham of the
The Form of the Oath of Allegiance made by the Cham of the Lesser Tartary to
the Grand Seignor.
Lesser Tartary comes into this Hall of Audience to take the Oath of Allegiance
to the Grand Seignor. The Reader will be pleased to remember, what Observation
I made at the beginning of this Work concerning the Family of that Tributary
Prince, whom the Ottoman Emperors keep under the Yoke. The Cham, who is to
Reign in his turn, and according to what disposal the Grand Seignor has made of
the Government, presents himself before him in the Hall of Audience, and after
he has kissed his Robe, retires some paces back, and stands. Then they bring in
the Alchoran, upon a great green Velvet Cushion, without any Embroydery, at the
four Corners whereof there are four Tassels of Gold and Silk, and they place it
on the Grand Seignor's right hand. Now whereas he sits on a Carpet
cross-legg'd, there must be great care taken; that the Culhion be not so high
as his knees; for the Turks would account that a great sin; and they bear so
great a respect to the Book of the Alchoran, that they cannot touch it, till
they have first washed themselves. Before they open it, they kiss it, and put
it upon their heads, and after they have read something in it, they kiss the
writing of it, and then they rub their faces with it, before they shut it. The
Prince, who is to take his Oath, is standing all this time, as I told you, with
his hands stretched out one against the other, and lifted up as high as his
shoulders, to receive the Book of the Alchoran out of those of the Capi-Aga,
who had been to take it off the Cushion, having kissed it, and touched his head
with it. The Oath which the Cham takes is in these Words: Bou quittab hak
juchun-seadetlu, padichaim, tare fin den her ne Emir, ve ferman 'bana keleurse
itaat ideym. That is say, By the Truth of this Book, I will cause to be
executed all the Orders and Commands which shall be brought unto me from my
Lord.

And now that I have given you the Oath of Allegiance made by the Vassal to his
Lord, I shall here also add the Form of that, which the Ottoman Emperor
requires of all the Christian Princes, who are subject to his Jurisdiction,
such as are the Princes of Moldavia and Walachia. It runs in these words: Hi
isa hac Juchum, seadetlu padichaim tare fin den her ne Emir, ve ferman bana
keleur se itaat Ideym. That is to say, By the Truth of Jesus Christ, I will
cause to be executed all the Orders and Commands, which shall be brought unto
me from the Emperor, My Lord.

The Grand Seignor requires also an Oath of Allegiance of all the Bassa's, whom
he sends to the Frontiers of the Empire, as the Bassa's of Grand Cairo,
Babylon, and Buda, which is more than he exacts of the other Governors of
Provinces, which are not upon the Confines of his Territories, and of whom he
has no ground to be afraid.

Let us now make our Entrance into the Quarter of the Eunuchs and the
Ichoglans, whereof the Baths make a great part.

CHAP. VII. Of the Baths of the Seraglio.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The prodigious strength of Body of a certain Ichoglan. The Mosquey belonging
to the Appartment of the Eunuchs. The Employments of the Dwarfs, and the Mutes.
The superstition of the Turks in the manner of paring their nails. The Colors
forbidden the Christians in whatever they wear about their heads. The
Description of the Baths. Certain abuses reformed. Why the Inhabitants of the
Eastern Parts do not make use of Paper upon an undecent account. The Persians
more scrupulous than the Turks. They are great lovers of cleanliness. Certain
Chambers very commodious and divertive. The strict prohibition of Mahomet for
any one to suffer himself to be seen stark naked. A certain Earth which takes
off the hair, and its dangerous effects.

THE Baths designed for the Grand Seignor's own Person, and his principal
Officers, take up a great space of the Quarter of the Eunuchs. The little
Ovens, whereby they are heated, called Kulkans, are adjoining to the Appartment
of the Sarai-houdasi, and fifteen Ichoglans, the most robust that can be found,
are employed in keeping the fire going. They have the denomination of
Kulkangis; and Five and twenty others, who are named Dellaks, are employed in
the Baths, to shave and rub the Body, as also in applying Cupping-Glasses to
those who stand in need thereof. Among the Kulkangis, he who is the most
ancient in that employment has a pre-eminence and superiority over the rest,
whom he many times commands to exercise themselves in wrestling, and lifting a
heavy Iron Bar with one hand.

There are three such Bars fastened upon great Cramp-Irons over the door that
goes The prodigious strength of Body of a certain Ichoglan.
into the Baths, and the middlemost of the three, as it is commonly reported,
weighs a hundred Okkas, which amount to Three hundred and fifty pounds, Paris
weight, an Okka weighing three pounds and a half, or thereabouts. There was
heretofore one of those Ichoglans, of so prodigious strength, that the Grand
Seignor himself would have the satisfaction of seeing a trial, whether he could
with one hand lift up and turn about that Iron-bar; which he did to the great
astonishment of the Prince, and presently after he entertained him with another
demonstration of the strength of his Arm. Over those three Iron-bars, there
hung two Head-pieces of Iron, whereof one was an inch in thickness, and the
other about the eighth part of an inch. The same Ichoglan did, in the Grand
Seignor's presence, at one blow of a Battle-Axe, cut through the headpiece of
an inch thick, and, at one blow with a Sabre, cleft the other to the middle of
it.

Opposite to those Ovens are the Cocks, whereby the Waters are distributed into
the The Mosquey belonging to the Appartment of the Eunuchs.
several Rooms of the Baths; and I forgot to tell you, That before you enter
into that place, you find a little Mosquey, adjoining to the Appartment of the
Saraiket-houdasi, where all the Ichoglans go to their devotions twice a day. If
they fail the doing of it, the Oda-bachi, who, in every Chamber, takes notice
of their demeanours, calls them to an account, and they are sure of the
bastinado, as they are also for any other fault they commit; and sometimes they
receive the said punishment on the soles of their feet, and, upon some
occasions to such a number of blows, that the nails of their toes come off;
and that is the punishment which is properly called Drubbing.

Out of that Mosquey you pass into a Gallery, adjoining to the Baths, and there
the The Employment of the Dwarfs and Mutes.
Dislis and the Geuges; that is to say, the Mutes and the Dwarfs are employed
in some work or other all day long. Some spend the time in learning to make up
Turbants, wherein there is more work and difficulty than is imagined,
especially in making up the Grand Seignior's own Turbant, when he goes to the
Divan. For then he takes an extraordinary large one, as do also all the
Officers of the same Divan when they go to Council: and I cannot make a better
representation of that kind of Turbant, then by the form of our largest sort of
Citrals, if they be made hollow in the middle, so as that the head might enter
into that hole.

Others are employed in shaving, paring the nails, and other things of that
kind. They do not make use of any Scizars for the nails, in Turkey, nor in any
part of Asia; it being a thing forbidden by Mahomet in his Law, and accordingly
they account the doing of it a great sin. But they make use of a little Steel
Instrument, somewhat like a Penknife, and the only cutting part is the end of
it, and they are dextrous enough in the performance of that Office. It is the
Custom all over the East, that the Barber, who trims you, should also make up
your Turbant, which is many times discomposed, pare the nails of your hands and
toes, and take away the filth out of your Ears: For the Turks and all the
Inhabitants of Asia are great lovers of cleanliness, and cannot endure the
least nastiness, either on themselves, or those who come near them, as I shall
give you an account anon.

And having spoken so much of the Turbant, it will not be unseasonable, for me
to Colors forbidden the Christians in their Coissure.
communicate this Remark to you here, That in the Ottoman Empire, and all over
Arabia, none but Mahumetans are permitted to make use of White, for the
covering of their heads; whereas in Persia, and all over the Great Mogul's
Empire, men may take what Colors they please themselves.

I come now to the Great Bath, which is adjoining to the Chamber of the
Hamangibachi, The description of the Baths.
who is the chief Overseer of it, and which makes part of the Appartment of the
Seferlis, or the Grand Seignor's Laundry-men. The place where they put off
their Clothes is a spacious Louver, or Banqueting House of Freestone, high
enough, and in one of the most eminent parts of the Seraglio. The Floor is
paved with a very delightful kind of Marble laid in square pieces; and it has
two large Windows jutting out upon the Gardens, somewhat like Balconies, from
which you have a Prospect of the two Seas. In the midst of that Domo or Louver,
you find a Fountain, the water whereof is received into two Basins, or
Cisterns: The former, which is the highest, and withal the least, is of one
piece of White Marble, having in it a little intermixture of Red and Black
Veins, and pierced through at six several places, for the reception of so many
small Pipes of Copper, through which the water falls down into the other Basin,
which is also of Marble, of several pieces, and several colors.

Within the Domo, there is a great number of Poles, which are disposed all
about it, Abuses reformed.
and supported by certain pieces of Iron coming out of the wall. Upon those
Poles they dry the Linen, which they had used in the Bath; and of that Linen
there are several sorts. Heretofore, the Pages were allowed only a long piece
of Linen Cloth, which came only twice about their wastes: but upon observation
made, that they abused them, and that handsome young Lads playing together,
snatched that piece of Linen one from the other, purposely to discover their
nakedness, they use in the Baths only such Garments of Linen as are sowed
close above, and reach from the waste down to the feet, much after the manner
of a Woman's Petti-coat. At their coming out of the Bath, they have two other
sorts of Linen to dry themselves withal, of the largeness of ordinary
Table-Cloaths, whereof the one is Red, with a bordure of Silk of three fingers
breadth, which covers them, as soon as they are out of the water, from the
waste downwards to the Ham; and the other is white, wherewith they rub
themselves. For these two sorts of Towels they have but one name, to wit,
Pechetamal.

On one side of the Fountain, which is in the midst of the Domo, there is an
entrance why the Levantines do not use Paper undecently.
into the bath, and near that is the Hall, where they uncloath themselves in
the Wintertime. A little Gallery which lies on the left hand, leads to the
places designed for the casing of nature, and every seat has a little Cock,
which supplies them with weter to wash themselves, after they have done. It is
accounted a heinous sin among them, to make use of Paper for that purpose; and
the reason they give for it is this, that, possibly, the Name of God might be
written upon it, or it might contain some Text of the Law, which would be a
profanation of it, and consequently ought to be avoided. Besides, they have
another opinion, That Paper is not so proper so well to make clean that part,
which the necessity of the Body does ordinarily so much defile, but that there
may be something of ordure left; and that being obliged to present themselves
before God with an absolute Purity of Body and Mind, their Prayers could not be
heard, if they should not be wholly clean.

The Persians are yet more scrupulous than the Turks upon this account. For
though The Persians more scrupulous than the Turks.
they both agree in this, That their Devotions are ineffectual, nay indeed that
they are not in a condition to perform them, without crime, if they be not
pure, as to Body and Mind; Yet the former are of a persuasion, That the least
ordure which, through negligence or inadvertency, might remain upon their
persons, or their garments, would render their Prayers fruitless and criminal,
which the Turks, somewhat less superstitious as to that particular, will not
acknowledge.

Certain it is also, That in Persia they are extraordinary Lovers of
cleanliness; insomuch They are great lovers of clean(...)
that I have observed, That at Ispahan, the Metropolis of that Country, where
the Streets are not paved, when there falls a little Snow or Rain, which must
occasion some dirt, few people will come out of their houses, unless they be
forced thereto by some Concern of great importance. And when they do go abroad
at such a time, at the house door into which they are to enter, they put off
their shoes, their upper-Garment, the Cap which covers their Turbants; and if
they have the least dirt or filth about them, they think themselves impure, and
that it would be a disrespect to the person whom they are to visit. Nay, a
Persian shall be very scrupulous, and make a great difficulty to receive a man
into his house in foul weather; and if any one presents himself into that
pleasure, he makes a sign to him with his hand to keep at a certain distance
from him, in the place wherein he is to enter into discourse with him. For if
by chance, as he comes out of the Street, where there is some dirt, and where
horses pass to and fro, and may cast some of it upon him, he has the least spot
of any daggling about him, and afterward touch the Person whom he comes to
visit, this latter would be nagis, that is to say, unclean, and thereupon be
obliged immediately to change his clothes; so great is the Superstition of the
Persians, as to that particular.

At the end of the Gallery, there is a door which gives you passage into three
Chambers, Chambers very divertive and Commodious.
which are so many Baths for the use of the Grand Seignor's Quarter. There is
adjoining to the last of those Chambers a spacious place paved Checquer-wise
with Marble of different colors, and there the Ichoglans are trimmed. This
place has a little eminency in the midst of it, from which there is a gentle
descent of all sides, that the Water wherewith the Barbers wash their Heads and
Beards may the more easily be carried off, and the place be always kept clean.
On both sides of the Wall, whereby it is enclosed, there is a great double
Cock, with two Keys belonging to it, which, at the same mouth, supplies them
alternately with either hot water, or cold, and that falls into a Basin or
Receptacle of White Marble, wherein three or four men may bathe themselves
without any inconvenience, or trouble one to the other. There is also at one of
the ends a little Room of Black and White Marble, and there the Barbers, who
have no knowledge of any other Profession, put up all their necessary Utensils
and Instruments, as Razors, Hones, Balls, and those Irons wherewith they pare
their Nails: for as for Linen, they do not use any; and those who are to be
shaved come in stark naked from the Waste upwards, and are covered from thence
downwards, only with a Cloth, which reaches to the Ankle. It Is a great Rarity
to meet with any one among those Barbers that knows how to let blood, and
their Lancets are much like the Fleams, wherewith our Farriers bleed Horses.

Opposite to the Chamber of the Barbers, there are three other Rooms arched
with Marble, the largest whereof much surpasses in Beauty those that are
adjoining to it. The Floor of it is of white and black Marble, and the Walls
are done about with square pieces, that are white and blew, and in every one of
them you find a Flower in embossed Work, done to the Life, and which a man
would take for enamell. Little Lamines or Plates of Gold cover the junctures of
those square pieces, and there cannot any thing be imagined more pleasant and
divertive than that Chamber is. In the Roof of it, there are several round
holes, of about half a foot diameter, over which there are little Glasses made
in the fashion of Bells, ordered as the Venice-Looking-Glasses are, lest any
one should have the curiosity, to get up to the Roof, and laying himself upon
his belly think to see what is done in the Bath. The place has no light but
what it receives by the means of those holes, and while some body is in the
Bath: But especially when they go out of it, the door is shut, the better to
keep in the heat, and to prevent their being seen; which might be, if instead
of those forementioned holes in the Roof, there were Windows below, according
to our Mode. All the other Baths have their Structures after the same manner,
and having no light but what comes at little glazed holes, there is not any
passage into it, but that of the door, to the end that being presently shut,
the heat might the better be kept within the Bath, and to prevent their being
seen who are in it.

The Second Chamber is another Bath, but as to Beauty, it is much inferior to
the other; And as for the third, there is something in it which is singularly
remarkable. The Floor of it is laid as with a sort of small stones, so as that
the foot cannot slip, though it be wetted at their departure out of the Bath:
And the whole Room is done all about with square pieces, having in them flowers
of embossed work, done to the Life, and covered with Gold and Azure. This is
the place into which the Grand Seignor enters, when he comes out of the Bath;
and he always goes into it alone, when he intends to shave himself in those
parts, which are not to be named without immodesty.

Mahomet pronounces a Curse upon those persons who suffer themselves to be
seen, Mahomet's Prohibition to be seen naked.
and upon all those who look on them: And the strict observance of his Law
requires, That both Men and Women ought to shave themselves, without using the
assistance of any other hand.

But most of the Inhabitants of the EASTERN Parts, the Arabians, Tartars, and
An Earth that takes off hair, and its dangerous Effects.
the Indians, make use of a more easy expedient then the Razor, to get off
hair. It is a certain Earth, which they mix with some Orpiment, or Arsenick,
and which becomes soft as butter. When they are in the Bath, and begin to
sweat, they take of that Earth, and therewith rub the parts, from which they
would have the hair to fall, and presently after they must be very careful to
see, whether it begins to fall, as one would observe a Fowl, whose feathers he
would take off, after it had been cast into scalding water. For if that Earth
be left too long upon the parts whereto it had been applied, it burns and makes
holes in the flesh, the marks whereof will remain, somewhat resembling those,
which the Small Pox sometimes leaves behind it. Besides, the skin of those
parts, whereto this application is made, becomes in time as hard and rough as
Leather; and those ungrateful inconveniences have diverted the Turks and
Persians from using that Expedient. Nor do the Christians of the Levantine
Countries make use of it, though they imitate the Mahumetanes in the Custom of
frequenting the Baths: But above all, in Persia, none make use of that remedy,
but the poorer sort of people. The Ladies, not regarding the prohibition of
Mahomet, employ their Female Slaves for the performance of that Office; and
with a small kind of Pincers and twitchers, such as those, wherewith we take
off the hair of the mustachoes, they do, with a little more trouble, but less
hazard, what that Earth does in less time, but with more danger. Our
Sultanesses are yet too delicate to imitate the Ladies of Persia; nay the men
themselves, in Turkey, are not very forward to have that twitch'd off with
pain, which the Razour can take off without any trouble.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Grand Seignor's Treasury.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
Noble Relics of Antiquity. The Turks cannot endure Figures representing
either Man or Beast. The Chambers of the Treasury, and their Wealth. The blood
of the Bassa's is one of the Rivers which enter into that Sea of the Treasury.
The use of Aloes Wood in Turkey. A sort of Basins of a more commodious form
than ours, for the washing of the hands. Books and Candles of a kind of wax of
great value. Coffers full of all sorts of precious stones. The precautions and
ceremonies which are observed at the opening of the Treasury. A magnificent
Piece of Tapistry, wherein the Emperor Charles the Fifth, is represented, in
embossed Work. A particular Relation of a Bassa named Rustan. The heroic
sentiment of a Turk. The principal sources of the Wealth of the Empire. How the
Revenues of Egypt are employed.

THE Treasury of the Seraglio and the Ottoman Empire, the vast Wealth therein
contained, and the excellent order wherewith it is governed, required my being
a little more large upon that subject. I shall discover all the Rivers, which
fall into that Sea, and may have some resemblance to those that enter into the
Caspian Sea, and are never seen to come out of it again.

Out of the Chamber, where the Grand Seignor shaves himself, you pass into a
Noble Relics of Antiquity.
Gallery, which is Thirty paces in length, and between Nine and ten in breadth.
There are, on the one side of it, Six great Marble-Pillars, of Fifteen foot in
height, and of different colors, among which there is one of a very delightful
Green, and that color makes the Turks have a great esteem for it. You have
under your feet in this Gallery a Walk of large square Pieces of Marble, and
the high-rais'd Fret-work thereof is a Relick of Antiquity, and there are in it
excellent Pieces of Painting after the Mosaic way, representing diverse
Persons, and which some conceive to have been made, for the reception and
entertainment of some great Prince, in the time of the Greek Emperors.

The Turks, who have not among them either Gravers or Painters, in order to the
The Turks have an aversion for Figures representing Man or Beast.
making of any representation of Man or Beast, for which they have an aversion,
have thought it much to endure those Figures, and not being able to refrain
from disfiguring the heads, there is nothing left but the bodies, which is much
to be regretted. It may easily be conjectured, That that Gallery was open on
both sides, as being so Hill to the Court-side, and it is in the midst of the
Wall, whereby it is enclosed on the other side, that the Door of the Treasury
stands.

The first Treasury consists in Four Chambers full of Riches and Rarities. The
first contains a vast quantity of Long-Bowes, Arrows, Cross-Bowes, Muskets,
Firelocks, The Chambers of the Treasury and their Wealth.
Sabres, Cymitars, and and other Arms of that kind, which are all so many
Masterpieces, that have been presented, from time to time to the Turkish
Emperors. All these Arms are either hung up at the Ceeling, or fastened against
the Wall; but in a pitiful condition, all overrun with rust, and covered with
dust; and the Grand Seignor suffers them to be so neglected, because there come
in daily Presents of Arms excellently wrought, the novelty whereof makes him
forget the old ones; as also for that it is the humor of the Turks, not to
make any great account of Curiosities, but at the very time they are presented
with them.

The Second Chamber is a very spacious Arched Structure, of the same height and
architecture as that of the Bath, of which I gave you an account in the
precedent Chapter, where they go and uncloath themselves in the Summer time:
And there is no difference between them, save only that this last has no
overtures in the Roof. That place contains Six great Chests, or Coffers, each
of them of Twelve foot in length, six in breadth, and six in depth; and if the
Covers were not broken to pieces, two men would find it a hard matter to lift
them, they are so weighty. These Coffers, which are called Ambars, are full of
all sorts of Clothes for the Grand Seignor's use, as Vests, rich Furs,
Magnificent Turbants, and Cushions embroidered with Pearls.

Besides the Six Coffers before mentioned, there are Eight others, which are
but eight foot in length, and four in breadth; and these are filled with Pieces
of Scarlet, English and Dutch Clothes, of the finest sorts, Pieces of Velvet,
Gold and Silver-Brokadoes, Embroidered Coverlets and Counterpanes for Beds, and
other Rich Commodities of that nature. As for the Bridles and Saddles covered
with Precious Stones, they are disposed upon supporters of Wood or Iron, coming
out of the Wall: and all this Chamber is generally very well kept, and all
things are neat, and in good order.

The Third Chamber is very spacious, and is more like a great Hall. The first
thing that entertains your Eye, is a great Coffer, the inside whereof is
divided into three parts, and makes as it were three other Coffers, one upon
the other: but they are opened all on the outside, so as that if there be any
thing looked for in the undermost, there is no necessity of stirring the
uppermost. The lowermost Coffer contains those sumptuous Coverings for the
Grand Seignor's Throne, of which I have spoken in the Description of the Hall
of Audience. In the middlemost are disposed the Housses, and Trappings,
enriched with Embroidery, and some of them with Pearls and Precious Stones,
which are used in great Solemnities. In the uppermost Coffer, are kept the
Bridles, Breast-Pieces, Cruppers, and Stirrups, which are recommendable upon
the score of the Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds, and other Precious Stones, whereby
they are enriched: but the greatest part of them is covered with
Turkish-Stones, which they have the art of setting excellently well.

It is a most astonishing sight, to behold the quantity of those precious
Harnesses: The Blood of the Bassa's one of the Rivers that fall into the Sea of
the Treasury.
but it is such only to those, who are ignorant, how the Grand Seignor
replenishes his Treasury with so much Wealth. It happens thus, That there being
a frequent mortality amongst the Bassa's, and others, who are Governors of
Provinces, whether it be by a natural death, or a violent, and all they have in
the World falling to the Grand Seignor, as I told you elsewhere, and being
brought into the Seraglio, there are ordinarily found, amongst their rich
Harnesses, some Bridles covered with precious Stones, and those Bridles are
brought into the Treasury. The Case is the same with the Gold and Silver ready
coined, and all the Jewels, and whatever else those Bassa's were possessed of.
But as to their Saddles, which ordinarily, are covered with Plates of Gold of
the thickness of a Ducat, they are put into the hands of the Imbrohor-bachi,
who is the Master of the Horse, and come not within the Seraglio.

There are besides, in the very same Chamber, several other Coffers, of
different Bulks, wherein there is contained abundance of most precious things.
Some of them are full of rich Swords, adorned with precious Stones, as also of
Sabres, which have the same Ornaments. For the Turks, when they are on
Horseback, make use of both Sabres and Swords, of a good length, and somewhat
broader than ours. They wear the Sabre on one side, and fasten the Sword, all
along by the Saddle, as they also do the Battle-Axe, yet so as that this last
passes under their Thighs, which cannot incommodate them much, because, when
they are mounted, they ride with very short Stirrups. The Sides, and the
Handles of the Battle-Axes which they carry in Triumph, are also covered with
precious Stones; and in all their Accoutremeuts, the Turks are Magnificent, and
do not spare for Money. When the Grand Seignor designs to honor a Bassa, he
sends him one of those Swords, or one of those Sabres, with a Vest of
Gold-Brockado, lined with some rich Fur. But these sumptuous Pieces do but pass
to and fro, in as much as that upon the death of the Bassa's, whose Estates
fall to the Grand Seignor, and consequently are brought into the Seraglio, they
are still found again in the Treasury, as in their Center.

There are yet other Coffers filled with Ambergris, Musk, the precious Wood
called The use of Aloes wood used in Turkey.
Lignum Aloes, and Sandal-wood. There is a certain sort of this Lignum Aloes,
which is worth a thousand Crowns the pound, according as it is fat, or Oily,
the most Oily being always the best, and the Turks are very expensive in this
Aloes Wood. When some persons come to visit them, and as soon as they are sat
down, it is their custom to present them with a Pipe of Tobacco, with some
Lignum Aloes in it, which is done after this manner. They take of that Wood,
according to the oyliness of it, and consequently its making a greater
fumagation, the quantity of a Pea, or a small Bean, and after they have
moistened it a little, they put it over a few Coals in a Chafing Dish, in a
kind of Perfuming-pot, which they present, one after another, to all the
Company. There comes out a thick Steam, or Exhalation, wherewith every one
perfumes his Head, and his Beard, and sometimes the inside of his Turbant,
after which he lifts up his hands on high, crying Elmendela, that is to say,
Thanks be to God. But before they present them with the Perfuming-pot, there is
some Rose Water brought in a Vessel of Gold, or Silver, according to the
Quality of those who make the Visit. This Vessel is commonly a foot in height,
the lower part of it being about the bigness of a man's fist, and from thence
growing gradually smaller and smaller to the top of it, which is about the
bigness of ones little finger. At the top of it there is a little hole, out of
which comes the Rose Water, wherewith they wash their hands and faces, and then
hold them over the suffumigation of the Lignum Aloes, which not only dries up
the water, but also sticks so much the closer to the hair of the Head and Beard.

There are also in those Coffers abundance of Aromatical Simples, and precious
Drugs, Bezoar-Sones, and stores of Mastick, wherewith the Sultanesses, and the
young Maids of the Seraglio pass away their time. They have of it perpetually
in their Mouths, and this Mastick sweetens the Breath, and cleanses the Teeth,
upon which score they are the better beloved.

There may be seen also in the same Chamber, and in other Coffers, abundance of
Plate, both Gold and Silver, which is never used, the Grand Seignor having
other pieces, for his ordinary use, in the Kilar, whatever is served up to his
own Table being altogether in Pourcelain.

There are, amongst other Pieces, several Basins and Ewers, whereof some are
enriched Basins of a more commodious fashion than ours.
with several sorts of precious Stones. Those Basins are of a fashion more
commodious than that of ours, and it is an evident Mark of the cleanliness of
the Levantines. They are round, and about half a foot in depth, and covered as
it were with a Plate or Server, full of little holes, which makes the concavity
of it of equal height with the sides, and so hides the dirtiness of the water
which lies at the bottom of it. They do not rise after their refection, in
Turkey, till they have washed their Mouths and their Hands, to do which they
bring you Soap and warm Water; and amongst Persons of Quality, they present
Rose Water, or some other sweet Water, into which you put the corner of your
Handkercher.

They have also in those Coffers great Tapers, or Wax-Candles of above two foot
Tapers of a kind of Wax of great value.
in length, made of a certain very dear composition, of a greyish color, which
has some resemblance to Wax, and is brought out of Ethiopia, every Taper
amounting to near a hundred Crowns. They are not used but only when the Grand
Seignor goes to visit the Sultanesses, and then there are two of those Tapers
lighted, and set in great golden Candlesticks, enriched with precious Stones.
When they are a little above half burnt out, the Negro-Eunuchs, who serve in
the Haran, light others, and, out of civility, make a Present of the
forementioned remainders to the principal Women attending on the Sultanesses.

There is moreover in one of those Coffers, abundance of Clocks and Watches,
German-work, as also of Knives and Ink-horns, after the Turkish Mode, all those
pieces being the choice Productions and Masterpieces of great Artists, and
adorned with precious Stones. There is to seen, in fine, all along the Walls,
but covered with a Scarlet Stuff, several Arms, after the Turkish-Mode, neatly
kept in order, as Bows, Arrows, Targets, Battle-Axes, excellently well
wrought, and most of these Pieces are of a considerable value.

But what is most precious in that Chamber and transcends all the rest, is a
strong Coffer all of Iron-work, which contains another, of about a foot and a
half square, An inestimable Coffer of all sorts of precious Stones.
wherein there is a vast Treasure. When this Goffer is opened, you see a kind
of Goldsmiths Jewel Box, wherein are ranked all sorts of Jewels of highest
value, as Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds, a huge number of excellent Topazes, and
four of those Gems, called Cats-eyes, which are so beautiful, that they are not
to be valued. Having satisfied your curiosity with the former, you come next to
certain little Drawers full of several Jewels, great Roses of Diamonds,
Pendants, other Roses of Rubies and Emeralds, Strings and Chains of Pearls and
Bracelets. There stands aside by it self a Cabinet, where are the Sorgouges, or
the things wherein are fastened the Heron-tops, which the Grand Seignor wears
in his Turbant. They are as it were little handles, made in the fashion of
Tulips, covered over with the most precious Stones of the Seraglio, and it is
into this that the Heron-top enters, that rich Plume of Feathers, whereof I
have elsewhere given the description. Of these Handles, some are higher and
more precious than others; and my Overseer of the Treasury assured me, That, of
all sorts of them, great and small, there are above a hundred and fifty. The
lesser ones serve only for the Campaign, and the great ones, which are the
richest, are reserved for the Pomps and Magnificences of the Court, and when
the Grand Seignor marches in Ceremony to Constantinople. If he has a desire to
satisfy his sight with the luster of his precious Jewels, he Orders the Coffer
to be brought into his own Chamber; but if he calls for some particular Piece
of the Treasury, he gives order to the Chasnadar-bachi, to fetch it, and that
Chief Officer of the Treasury cannot enter into it, without abundance of
mysterious precautions.

There are always Sixty Pages, more or less, belonging to the Chambers of the
Treasury. The number of them is not fixed, but the Credit of the Capi-Aga, and
the Precautions and Ceremonies observed at the opening of the Treasury.
Chasnadar-bachi, may augment or diminish it, according to their inclinations
and interests. Unless they fall into disgrace, as he had done from whom I have
some part of these Instructions, they never go out of the Seraglio, but upon
their advancement to some considerable Government, or the settlement of a
handsome Pension for their maintenance; and so, provided they do nothing amiss,
they are well enough accommodated for their lives. The Chief Officer of the
Treasury having received Orders from the Grand Seignor to bring the Piece he
would have, assembles all the Pages in their Chamber, and sends for the
Anakdar-Agasi, who has the Custody of the Keys. This last having given three
strokes with his hand upon the Drawer, wherein they are enclosed, takes them
out of it, and following the Chasnadar-Bachi, attended by the Sixty Pages, they
all make their appearance together at the door of the Treasury.

The first thing that is done is the untwisting of a Chain, which they had put
there, for the better securing of the Seal, which the Chief Officer of the
Treasury had set over the hole, and having found it entire, he orders it to be
broken by the keeper of the Keys, and commands him to open. As Soon as they are
got into the Chamber into which the Chasnadar-bachi knows they are to go, he
sets himself down upon a low Bench, and declares what Piece it is that the
Grand Seignor requires. They thereupon open the Coffer, wherein it ought to be,
then they present it to the Chasnadar-bachi, and, if he be desirous of that
honor, he has the privilege to be himself the Bearer of it to the Grand
Seignor. Then has he a fair Opportunity to secure something that is precious to
himself, if he has the dexterity to do it without any discovery. When he is in
the Treasury, he needs only say, That the Grand Seignor desires also the Piece,
which he has a mind to convert to his own use, and causing all to be
immediately carried to his own Chamber, he there leaves what he would keep, and
presents to the Prince only that which he had commanded to be brought him. Not
but that whatever is received into the Treasury, and whatever goes out of it,
is exactly set down and enrolled by the Haznaquatib, or Clerk, who keeps the
Registers; and the Cheat might be easily discovered, when at the quitting of
his Charge the Chasnadar-bachi gives an account of all things to his successor.
But it ordinarily happens, that they are friends, and that the Chasnadar-bachi,
who does not leave his Charge, but upon his advancement to that of the place of
the Capi-Aga, in case he should dye, or be exalted to a higher Dignity; or upon
his being made a Bassa and Governor of a Province, proposes him, among the
Pages, for whom he has the greatest affection, and who is his Confident, as a
Person qualified for the Charge of Principal Officer of the Treasury.
Accordingly, being his Benefactor, he gives in his Accounts as he pleases
himself, and delivering unto him an Inventory of what is in the Treasury, he
withal produces a Memorandum of the Pieces, which had been taken out thence,
during his Surintendency, by the Grand Seignor's Orders. The Clerk of the
Treasury, might, notwithstanding their intelligence and combination, discover
the intrigue; but being one of the eldest Pages of the Chamber, and in a
capacity of advancement to the Charge of Chasnadar-bachi, he shuts his eyes,
and so avoids the creation of Enemies, thinking it more prudence, to be
appeased, by the Presents he receives as well from him who enters into the
Charge, as from him who quits it. But these Thieveries are not very often
committed, and if there were but the least discovery made thereof, a severe
punishment would soon be inflicted both on the Author of them, and his
Accomplices.

As to the little Chest or Coffer, wherein the most precious Jewels are kept,
it is impossible to get any thing out thence: for when the Grand Seignor would
have any Piece taken out of it, he orders the Coffer it self to be brought into
his Presence, by the principal Officer of the Treasury, accompanied by the
Keeper of the Keys, and all the Pages; and before he opens it, he takes notice
whether the Seal be entire. After he has taken what he desired, the Coffer is
locked up in his Presence, the Seal is set upon it, and it is carried back into
the Treasury with the same Ceremony. Then do the Sixty Pages receive,
ordinarily, some demonstrations of the Grand Seignor's Liberality, which may
amount to ten or twelve Purses, to be divided amongst them.

We are not yet got out of the third Chamber of the Treasury, which may pass
for Rich Tapistry, wherein Charles the Fifth is represented.
one Spacious Hall, the middle part whereof is taken up by a Scaffold, of nine
or ten foot square, the height, the length, and the breadth being equal. This
Scaffold is covered and surrounded with a piece of Tapistry of Gold and Silk,
and, in the upper part of it, there is, in embossed Work, the Effigies of the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, seated on a Throne, having in one hand, a Globe,
and in the other, a Sword, surrounded by all the Grandees of the Empire, doing
him homage. At the bottom of the said Piece of Tapestry, there may be read
certain Verses in Gothic characters: And the upper part of the Scaffold is
full of Books in the Latin, French, Italian, high Germane, English, and other
European Languages. There are also some Treatises upon the subject of
Navigation, together with two Globes, the Celestial, and the Terrestrial, and
some Geographical Maps drawn upon Velom: whence it may be conjectured, that
they were all taken at Sea, by some Turkish Pirate, and sent as a Present to
the Grand Seignor. But not being carefully looked after, the dust has quite
spoiled both the Tapestry, and the Books, and so they remain there as a
Monument of some Victory gained over the Christians.

The Fourth Chamber of the Treasury is very dark, and has no other light than A
remarkable Story of the Bass a Rustan.
what it receives from a little Garret-Window, which looks into the Court, and
has three strong Iron-bars, one over the other. Over the Door, there are these
words engraved, in the Turkish Language; Money acquired by the diligence of
Rustan. Take here an account of what occasions this Monument, which they were
pleased to erect, to perpetuate the memory of a Grand Vizir, as I have been
told it, by several Persons in Constantinople. He was the Son of a Cow-keeper,
and had followed the same Employment himself: but he had a Genius that might
become a Person of the highest Extraction, and which raised him to the Charge
of Grand Vizir, and the honor of being Son-in-law to Solomon. He had many
traverses of fortune, and was for some time out of Favor: but in fine,
Solomon, who had great Affairs to manage, and was engaged in a War with Persia,
coming to a little indigency of Money, sent for Rustan, and bestowed on him the
Superintendency of his Revenues. He knew him to be a man of great Abilities,
and capable of putting them, in a short time, into a good posture; and
accordingly his pains and diligence in the management thereof proved so
successful, that he presently filled Solyman's Coffets, and reestablished the
Affairs of the Empire.

Upon which occasion I shall here set down a thing which is still fresh in the
remembrance of many Turks, who received it from their Fathers. The Turks have
so great a The Heroic Sentiment of a Turk.
zeal for the welfare of the State, that one of the Grandees of the Port, an
Enemy of Rustans, and one, who, upon other occasions, would gladly have ruined
him, protested to one of his Confidents, That, though it were in his power to
do him an ill turn, yet he would not do it then, because he had, by his
Industry and Labors, upheld the State, which he retriv'd from the Precipice of
destruction, and was in a fair way to make a considerable augmentation of its
Revenues. This generous and heroic Sentiment in the Soul of a Turk, who at his
first rise was but a simple Slave, would meet with but few Examples amongst
Christians.

But, to reassume our discourse concerning the Fourth Chamber of the Treasury.
It is full of Chests of two foot in length, and a breadth and depth
proportionable thereto, fortified with plates of Iron, and made fast, each of
them, with two Chains. The number of them is not always the same, because the
Money is coming in, and going out of that Chamber, and the Coffers are
transported thence according to the occurrent exigencies, for the payment of
the Janissaries, and the maintenance of the Armies.

All the Gold and Silver which is brought into the Treasury rises out of the
Revenues of the Empire, and out of the Sale of what Goods the Bassa's leave at
their departure The principal Sources of the Wealth of the Empire.
out of this World. As to what is raised out of the Empire, which dilates it
self so far into the three parts of our great Continent, and comprehends so
many Kingdoms, it may be easily imagined, that it must supply the Treasury with
vast Sums; but it is not so easy to ascertain them. Its Revenues consist
principally in the collection of the Tributes, and in the Customs: and the
three Tefterdars, or Treasurers-General, give an account to the Grand Vizir of
the Receipts of the Provinces. That Principal Minister has the custody of one
Key of that fourth Chamber of the Treasury, and the first Tefterdar has that of
another, and besides that, it is always sealed with the Grand Seignor's Seal.
It is not ordinarily opened, but upon those days, on which the Divan sits, that
is, on Council-days, either for the reception of Money into it, or for the
taking of any out, to defray the Charges of the Empire.

What is so received into it is for the most part in Silver; and as to the
Species of Gold Coins that are brought into that Chamber, they come from four
Sources, two whereof are upon a Foreign account, and the other two upon that of
the Country. One of the two former consists in the Commerce of the French,
English, Dutch, Italians, Moscovites, and Polanders, who bring in Ducats out of
those Provinces. The other is the annual Tribute, which the Cham of the Lesser
Tartary, the Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Walachia, the Republic of
Ragusa, and part of Mingrelia and Russia, are to pay the Grand Seignor in Gold,
which amounts to very great Sums. One of the two Sources of the Country
proceeds from what is found upon the removal of the Bassa's, whereof the very
coined Gold makes the best part; the other, from the Revenue of Egypt, where
there is an annual coinage of a certain number of Sequins, according to the
quantity of Gold, which is brought thither out of Ethiopia, and being coined
into Sequins, is all conveyed thence into the Treasury.

The Revenue of Egypt may amount yearly to twelve millions of Livers, [that is,
The Revenues of Egypt how employed.
about one million and two hundred thousand Pounds Sterling] which must be
divided into three parts. Five millions of the twelve, are brought into the
Grand Seignor's Treasury. Four millions of the foresaid Sum, are employed in
the maintenance of the Officers and Soldiers of that Kingdom: And the other
three are designed for the rich Present, which the Grand Seignor sends every
year to Mecha, for the Expenses which relate to Religious Worship, and to fill
the Cisterns of Arabia, which are supplied with Water, brought by Land, many
days Journeys.

Of the five Millions which are brought into the Seraglio, the greatest part is
in Sequins, according to the quantity of Gold, which the Abyssines bring into
Egypt, and the rest in Dutch Rix-Dollars. All is brought together into the
Coffers of the fourth Chamber of the Public Treasury. But as to the Sequins,
they are carried into the Secret Treasury, which it is time for us now to open,
and give the Reader an account of, according to the description which has been
made to me thereof, by two men, whom their Employments obliged to enter into it
often.

CHAP. IX. Of the Secret Treasury.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
A Vault under ground, into which few Persons have access. The great frugality
of the Emperor Amurat. Ibrahim, his Successor, charged with evil Conduct. The
Grand Seignor's precautions for the security of his Treasure. His Liberalities
to the Grandees of the Port.

WIthin the fourth Chamber of the Treasury, you find a door laid all A Vault
under ground, into which few have access.
about with good store of Iron-bars, which opens the first passage, to the
place that contains the Grand Seignor's Secret Treasure. It is never opened,
but when he himself has a mind to enter into it; and he does not enter into it,
but when the Grand Vizir advertises him, that it is time for him to do so, and
that there is a considerable Sum to be carried in. In the first place, by the
light of Torches they go down a Staircase of ten or twelve steps, at the
bottom of which, after an advancement of seven or eight paces further, they
find a second Door, fortified with Iron-work as the former, but much less, so
that a man is obliged to stoop ere he go into it. When it is opened, and that
they have made their entrance through it, as if they had passed through a
Wicket, they are under a great Vault, where they find a great many Coffers, of
the same largeness, as those of the Chamber we came last out of.

In those Coffers they have, for these many years, laid up all that was not
expended The great frugality of the Emperor Amurat.
upon the Public account, of the great Revenues of the Ottoman-Monarchs, and
so it may be called his Private Exchequer, into which there is nothing but Gold
has entrance, all the Silver being carried into the other Treasury, to be
thence taken out again and disposed of as occasion required. After the death of
Amurat, Ibrahim, his Successor in the Throne, found in that Treasury four
thousand Bags, which they call Kizes, and every Bag contains fifteen thousand
Ducats of Gold, which amount to thirty thousand Crowns, and those reduced to
our Pounds, come to thirty Millions Sterling. 'Twas the same Amurat (a prudent
and valiant Prince, a man of great Parsimony, and as great Conduct in Military
Affairs, of whom I have often had occasion to make mention) who entered into a
War against the King of Persia, and besieged Bagdet, or Babylon, which he took
on the 22th of December, 1638. I remember, that I was then but five days
Journey from that place, in the Deserts of Arabia, as having left Aleppo, in
order to my going to Balsara, and that of the Threescore and five days, which
the Caravan spent in that Journey, for nine of them, we were destitute of
Water, which must needs press very hard, both on the Men and the Camels.

Ibrahim, therefore, at his coming to the Crown, found, in the secret Treasury,
that Ibrahim charged with ill management of the Treasury.
prodigious quantity of Gold, whereto he could not make any augmentation; nay
some, on the contrary, are of opinion, That he was forced to use some part of
it, through his ill Conduct of the War of Candia. True it is, That the long
continuance of that War made a great hole in the Revenues of the Empire; but
there are Two great Reasons, which divert me from giving absolute credit, to
such as affirm, That those Exigencies reached the Secret Treasury. For, in
short, it is as 'twere a fundamental Law among them, That, before any thing is
taken out thence, it is requisite, the Empire should be in imminent danger of
ruin; And it is manifest, That though the Turks could not reduce Candia under
their Jurisdiction, yet their Empire was so far from being near its decadence,
that it still continued powerful. Besides, it is to be observed, That when the
Grand Seignor loses a Battle, it is a disadvantage to his Provinces, upon the
score of their being thereby depopulated, and so much the less cultivated; but
that it is an advantage to his Coffers, in regard there is so much the less
comes out of them. The reason of it is evident, because he pays the Veteranes,
or Soldiers of long standing, seven or eight Aspers a day, and that those of
the new-raised Forces do not stand him in above one and a half, or two at the
most; their pay augmenting with the time, answerably to their services, and the
Prince's good Pleasure. Whereto it is to be added, That when an Emperor dies,
his Successor augments the pay of the Janissaries, by an Asper, or two, per diem.

It must be acknowledged indeed, That there died a great number of Turks in the
War of Candia: but it is certain also, That if we consider the great number of
Kingdoms and Provinces, whereof the Empire consists, among which there are
some very fertile, and very well peopled, it is an easy matter to raise
numerous Armies, and to recruit them, when they have been weakened, by a Defeat,
or by some Sickness, which often happens among them. Upon these two grounds, I
cannot be induced to believe, that Ibrahim was obliged to make any diminution
of the Secret Treasury: but I am very apt to believe, that he made not any
great additions thereto, because he had not either the good Conduct, or good
Fortune of Amurat, and ordinarily, the one avails not much without the other.

All the Gold that lies interred under that Vault is in Leather-bags, every Bag
containing Fifteen thousand Ducats, that is Seven thousand five hundred pounds
sterling: and it is with his own hand that the Grand Seignor puts his Seal to
them, which is the same that his Predecessors had used before him, save only
the name, which must be that of the Prince then reigning. Amurat's Seal had
these words graven upon it, Nasrum min allahi abdihil melekil Mourath: Which
signifies, The assistance of God is upon his Servant the Emperor Amurath.

And this is the manner how the Bags of Gold are brought into the Secret
Treasury. All the Gold and Silver which come into the Seraglio, is first
carried into the Chamber The Grand Seignor's Precautions for the security of
his Treasury.
of the Treasury, and each of them is disposed into the Coffers designed for
them. When there is as much Gold as will amount to two hundred Kizes, the Grand
Vizir gives notice of it to the Grand Seignor, who appoints a day, for the
disposal of it into the Secret Treasury. The day being come, the Grand Seignor,
led under the Arm by the Chasnadar-bachi, who is on the left hand, which is
accounted the more honorable amongst the Turks, and by the Seligdar-Aga, who
is on the right, comes into the Chamber of the Treasury, where the Sixty Pages
expect him, ranked in order on both sides, with their hands cross their
Breasts. The Grand Seignor, having passed through the Chamber, and ordered the
first Door of the Secret Treasury to be opened, enters into it, by the light of
several Torches of white Wax, and is followed by the Pages, two by two, till
they are within the Vault, into which the Bags are brought, tied with a
Silk-string. Upon the string they put a piece of red soft Wax, whereto the
Grand Seignor sets his Seal himself, which is upon a Gold-Ring, wherein are
engraven the words beforementioned, with the name of the Prince then reigning,
after which they put the Bags into the Coffers, which are all double chained.

Before they come out of the Valut, the chief Officer of the Treasury, does
ordinarily His Liberalities to the Grandees of the Port.
make this Complement to the Grand Seignor; Seadetlu padichaim eumijd dur
quibou bendelerignus euzre ihsan cherijfgnus izhar idesis: That is to say, My
Emperor, we hope, that you will make a discovery of your Liberalities to your
Slaves. According to the humor the Grand Seignor is then in, he orders, That
there should be a distribution of Twenty or Thirty Purses, amongst all those
who have accompanied him, every Purse, as I told you before, amounting to Five
hundred Crowns. The Grand Vizir, and the other Grandees of the Port, are
permitted to enter into the Chambers of the Treasury, where the sumptuous
Harnesses and the Precious Stones are kept, when the Grand Seignor comes
thither himself; but they are not to go as far as the Secret Treasury. They
stay for him in the Fourth Chamber, when he is to come out of the Vault, and
then he orders the Coffer of his Jewels to be opened, to show them the most
precious things there are in it. And whereas there are always some Favorites
attending there, as also diverse other persons, whom the Prince looks upon
kindly upon the score of their merit, it seldom happens, but that they all
receive some Present or other from him, and he makes not any, but what is of
very considerable value. The Treasury being shut up, the Grand Seignor returns
to his own Quarter, and all the Grandees accompany him to the Gate of it.

CHAP. X. Of the Means, which the Grand Seignor makes use of, to augment his
Treasures, besides what is done, by the ordinary Revenues of the Empire.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Presents made by the Bassa's to the Grand Seignor, when they enter into
their Charges. The Trade driven by the Jews very hazardous to them. The
extraordinary Wealth of the Bassa's. The great Advantages of the
Chaznadar-Bachi, and the Pages of the Treasury. The prohibition of lending Money
upon interest. The Persians but poor Casuists. Formalities observed in Turkey
about Schedules.

BEsides what may be left every Year in the Treasury, or Exchequer, out of the
ordinary Revenues of the Empire, after all charges deducted, the Grand Seignor
has Two other Expedients very conducive to the augmentation of both the
Treasuries, to wit, the entrance of the Bassa's upon their Governments, and
their removal out of them, whether it be by some disgrace, or by their natural,
or violent deaths.

All the Bassa's, on whom the Grand Seignor bestows Governments, and generally
all those, who are removed out of the Seraglio, upon their advancement into
Charges, The Bassa's Presents to the Grand Seignor, upon their advancements.
are obliged, before they take possession of them, to make him some Presents,
every one, answerably to the benefit he has received from the Prince. For
example, the Bassa of Cairo, as soon as ever he is nominated to that Government,
knows, that two Millions of Livers, that is, reduced to the English account,
two hundred thousand pounds sterling, will hardly make good the Presents, which
are expected from him at the Port, that is, those due to the Grand Seignor
himself, and to the principal Sultanesses; as also to the Moufti, the Grand
Vizir, the Caimacan, and other Persons of Credit in the Court, to whom he is
engaged for his advancement to that Charge, and of whom he may stand in need
for the future. The Present he makes the Grand Seignor himself, amounts to Five
hundred thousand Crowns, and the rest will come to Two hundred thousand. Add
again to that, Five hundred thousand Crowns, which will be expended in the
Bassa's equipage, and so, before he sets his foot in Cairo, his own Purse, or
those of his Friends, will be drained of Three Millions and six hundred
thousand Livers.

When he comes out of the Seraglio, if he want much of the aforesaid Sum,
there is a necessity of borrowing; and if the purses of his Friends cannot do
it, those of the The hazardous Trade of the Jews.
Jews are readily opened for his supply. They run a great hazard, upon hopes
of the great profit of making Cent. per Cent. interest, which the Bassa does
promise them. And, to be the sooner reimburs'd of the Money they have so
hazarded, lest his Government be but a short one, they teach him a thousand
lewd ways, to suck out the People's blood, and particularly to harass the poor
Christians. If the Bassa's can but quietly enjoy their Governments, for one
year, nay for six Months, the Jews make a good hand of it, and recover the
Sums they had advanced. But, on the other side, they run a great hazard, in
regard that it happens, many times, the Grand Seignor sends for the head of a
Bassa, before he has had time enough to settle himself in his new Government,
and then, they who have lent him Money are not to hope ever to recover any part
of it.

From what has been said, it may easily be concluded, That the greatest part of
the Money of the whole Ottoman Empire, is in the Grand Seignor's hands, and
among the Jews; I mean the Jews of Constantinople. For as to those who live
in the Provinces, the world goes but ill with them, and they are in a much more
wretched condition, than the Christians; in regard they do not follow any thing
of Husbandry: and their inclinations being altogether bent for Traffic, and
the management of the public Taxes or the Customs, it is impossible there
should be employment for them all.

The Grand Seignor therefore receives very considerable Sums from the Bassa's
The extraordinary Wealth of the Bassa's.
and other persons, on whom he bestows Charges, even before they have taken
possession of them. But that amounts to little or nothing, in comparison of the
advantages which he makes, upon their removal out of them, and especially when
they have had a fair time to gather Treasures, by their insupportable exactions
from the people. Some of these Bassa's have come to that excessive Wealth and
Power, that their Revenues were equal to those of many great Princes. Such was
the fortune of one Machmut, Beglierbeg of Europe, under the Reign of Mahomet
the Second; and that, of the Grand Vizir, Nassuf, under Achmet the First. At
the death of the latter, there were extraordinary Riches found in his House, in
Silver, Gold, and Jewels, and all was brought to the Seraglio, along with his
head.

It may easily be conjectured, by the number of the greater and lesser
Governments, whereof the Empire consists, that there is a considerable
mortality amongst those, who derive their Charges and Fortunes from the pure
Munificence of the Grand Seignor, and whose acquisitions thereupon falling to
him, must of necessity make vast additionals to the Seraglio. But besides those
who are gently conveyed out of this World, by a natural death, there hardly
passes a year, but violent death comes and acts its part; and upon the least
jealousy, or any fantastic apprehension the Grand Seignor may have, a Bassa
receives a peremptory Order to stretch out his Neck, and he is immediately
strangled: In the next Chapter, I shall give the Reader an Account, of the
formality and ceremony, which is observed upon that occasion, where he will
find somewhat worth his remarking; and I think I may confidently affirm, That
they who know it is the custom, to strangle those, whose Lives the Grand
Seignor would take away, know not all the Particulars observable in that Action.

As Soon as a Bassa, or other Grandee of the Port is dead, however it came to
pass, The Bassa's Goods brought into the Seraglio.
and an Inventory of his Goods taken, of which by the Laws of the Country the
Prince is the only Heir, all is carried away into the Seraglio, and the
Baltagis bring it in Coffers to the Door of the Treasury. The Chasnadar-bachi,
having disposed them into one of the Chambers, Commands the Locks to be broke
open, and the Coffers to be emptied in his presence; and it is then, that as
well he himself, as the Pages of the Treasury endeavor to make their
advantages of that Rich Booty. For there being ordinarily, amongst the other
things, Jewels of great value, such as that wherein the Heron-tops are fastened
in their Turbants, or a Poniard enriched with precious Stones, or some Carcanet
of Pearls, if one or other of those Pages can make a dextrous and clean
conveyance of some Piece, it is his own, and he puts it to what else he has in
Stock, reflecting on what he has to do, at his departure out of the Seraglio,
in order to his establishment in some Charge, and the great Expenses he must be
at upon that account. The Chasnadar-bachi, who does his work first of all, and
with more liberty, does sometimes connive at what he sees done by the others,
remembering that he has been as they are, and was then glad, that he was not
reproved for so doing. Yet if he perceives that any one of them has secured to
himself a piece of great value, as soon as he is got to his Chamber, he secretly
sends for him, and makes him restore it, paying him one half of its worth, and
so keeps it himself.

There are yet other great advantages accrewing to the Chief Officer, and the
Pages, The great advantages of the Chasnadar-bachi, and the Pages of the
Treasury.
from those things which are brought into the Seraglio, upon the death of the
Bassa's. When the Chasnadar-bachi has advertised the Grand Seignor, that, in
the Coffers, which had been brought in, there were many things not fit for the
Service of his Highness, and that it were better to put them off, before they
were injured by the moisture or the dust; the Prince gives his permission for
the sale thereof, and thereupon they take out of the Treasury what they do not
account worthy of a place there. Immediately, they send for the Bazarcan-bachi,
or Chief of the Merchants, who is the best skilled in those things, and who, in
the presence of the Chasnadar-bachi, and the Pages of the Treasury, sets a
value on every piece, to their satisfaction; for he does not prize it at above
half the worth. All the Jewels that will bear a good price, and all the
precious stones are disposed into the Treasury, and they expose to sale only
things of less value, yet such as are worth much, as Trappings for Horses,
Ponyards Sabres, garnished with Gold, garments, rich Furs, Sasches, Turbants,
and other things of that nature; all the pieces being valued, the
Chasnadar-bachi sets aside the best of them, to be sent, together with the
value set upon them to the principal persons of the Seraglio, with whom he is
glad to hold a fair correspondence, and they pay for them the more willingly,
because they have them at an easy rate. The rest is distributed among the
Pages, according to the valuation, and they having made choice of such things
as they will keep themselves, send away what they do not like, to be sold in
Constantinople, by the Halvagis, wherein they also make a vast advantage,
considering the apprisement; not accounting what the same Halvagis may hedge in
for themselves, as a compensation for their trouble.

When there is such a sale made, the Jews are always waiting about the great
Gate of the Seraglio, not daring to come too near, for fear of a chastisement
of the Bastinado, from the Kapigis, which they are very free to give them. They
stand in expectation of these Halvagis, with their bags full of Ducats and
Ryals, and make the best bargains they can with them. These sales are seldom
made above once in two years, and the least of them does ordinarily exceed five
hundred thousand Crowns, nay some have amounted to eight hundred Thousand. The
Grand Seignor is soon advertised, what money has been raised by the sale, and
giving orders for the disposal of it into the Treasury, he at the same time
bestows ten or twenty Purses on the principal Officer, and the Pages of the
Treasury. He does not make them that Present out of any other design, then to
show his Grandeur, as being not ignorant of the advantages they have made by
the Sale: but he tolerates that custom, and knows well enough, that sooner or
later, all those profits will come again into the Treasury.

It Is upon the same consideration, that the Grand Seignor permits a manifest
breach The prohibition to lend at Interest.
of the Law of Mahomet, which prohibits the taking of any interest for money
lent; for he suffers the Pages and others, to lend considerable sumes, to the
Jews, at the rate of fifteen upon the hundred, interest. And the Persians have
found out a very pleasant evasion, to stave off the reproach which might be
made to them, of their transgressing against the same prohibition.

The evasion is this. When they lend out money to any one, they have a Bill or
Schedule made of the sum that is lent. Then they compute what the interest will
amount The Persians ill Casuists.
to, which is commonly after the rate of twelve in the Hundred. That done, they
take a handkerchief, or some old Sasche, and giving it to the Person whom they
lend the money to, they make him write a second Note, upon the score of the
interest, wherein it is expressed, that the debt is for commodities bought, and
duly received. And thus do they think to elude the reproaches of their own
Consciences, and imagine, that they do not offend against the prohibition of
Mahomet. The promise, which the Debtor makes, in writing, is not signed by him,
it being not the custom of the Country, but he puts his seal to it. And yet
that too is not sufficient, and it is further requisite, that they go before
the Cadi, or the Judge of the Law, who consummates the work, by putting his own
Seal to the writing.

I have made appear, in this Chapter, the Means and Expedients, which the Grand
Seignor makes use of, to augment his Revenues; we shall see in the next, the
ways he has to exercise his Liberalities, without any charge at all to himself.

CHAP. XI. A Subtle Expedient, whereby the Grand Seignor exercises great
Liberalities, and meddles not at all with his Revenues.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Commendable Policy of the Turks. The Ceremonies attending the Presents,
sent by the Grand Seignor, to those whom he would honor. The particular way
used by Mahomet the Fourth, to show himself liberal, without any charge to
himself. Formalities observed at the Death of the Bassa's, who are strangled by
the Prince's orders. When, and how they strike off the Head in Turkey. A
prohibition against shedding the blood of the Mahumetans, who are condemned to
death. The Inventories of the Goods of Bassa's deceased, not faithfully taken.
The causes inducing the Turks to defy Death with so much constancy. How
difficult it is to get out of Turkey. Presents made to the Sultanesses.

THE Two expedients which the Grand Seignor makes use of to augment his
Treasury, besides what comes in by the ordinary revenues of the Empire, are
much of the same nature, with those he uses, to bestow great largesses, without
disbursing any thing himself. He makes his advantages of all; the Bassa's are
as so many spunges, and he squeezes them, as well while they are living, as
when they are dead, and at their cost, assigns recompenses to those, who have
done him some acceptable service. Let us take things in order, one after
another, and show in the first place, how he manages his subtle design, while
the Bassa's are living, in getting out of them wherewithal to make ample
gratifications, without any diminution of his Revenues.

Amongst the Political maxims of the Ottoman Monarchs, this is one of the most
remarkable. They would have the Bassa's to be respected in their several
Governments, by the People, as much as if they were there themselves in Person:
and to make a greater, and more lively impression of that veneration in their
minds, they think it fitting, to honor them, from time to time, with some
Present, which is carried to them with much Ceremony. This Present, which is a
certain demonstration of the Esteem, which the Prince has for the Person to
whom he sends it, is commonly some rich Garment; and when he is willing to make
it complete, he adds the Sabre, and the Poniard, garnished and adorned with
precious stones. The Grand Seignor, upon the consideration beforementioned,
finding himself as it were obliged to make a Present to that Bassa, knows well
enough, that he will be sure, on the other side, to send him one which shall be
worth ten times as much, and to make another to his Envoy, which he must look
on as a recompense of his Services.

But it is not always the Grand Seignor's design, by such Presents, to honor
the Bassa, and keep the People the more in subjection to him. It happens many
times, that when he intends to ruin him, he makes him a Present, that he may
thence take occasion, in case he does not receive another from him, such as he
desires, to send another Messenger for his Head. The Present, upon that
occasion, is not a Vest, or Garment, but, a Sword, or a Battle-Axe, which are
very Ominous Presents, and Advertisements to the Bassa, that the Grand Seignor
has little kindness for him. To divert the Storm, which he sees likely to fall
upon him, he doubles the Present he should have made, in case he had sent him
but a Vest, which is a pledge of his affection. And if that Bassa be one of
those, who Commands in the greater Governments, the Present which he sends to
the Grand Seignor, ought not to amount to less than Two hundred Purses, that is
to say, a Hundred thousand Crowns, not comprehending what is particularly given
to the person who is sent by the Emperor.

The persons charged with this Commission are, for the most part, such as the
The Ceremonies attending the Presents sent by the Grand Seignor to those whom
he would honor.
Grand Seignor is willing to be Munificent to. So that, all things considered,
the Present is not so much designed for him who receives it, as for him who
sends it, and the person who carries it: And in this consists the artifice of
exercising great Liberalities without disbursing any thing. The Ceremony
performed at the delivery of this Present of the Grand Seignor, is this: He who
carries it being come to the place where the Bassa lives, to whom it is sent,
and having advertised him of it, this latter, with the noise of Drums,
Trumpets, and Hawboys, assembles the people together, some of whom mount
themselves on Horseback, to do him the greater honor. The Bassa himself
marches in the Head of all, and they who are not mounted follow afoot, together
with the Curtezans, or common Strumpets, of the place, who are obliged to
assist at this Ceremony, dancing after a Tabour, and putting themselves into a
thousand lascivious postures, according to the Custom of the Country.

The Messenger who brings the Present makes a halt, in expectation of this
Cavalcade, in some Garden near the City, or in the Fields under a Tent, which
he had got set up for that purpose. After mutual Salutations, he casts the Vest
over the Bassa's shoulders, puts the Sabre by his Side, and thrusts the Poniard
into his Sasche before his Breast, telling him, That the Emperor, their
Master, honors him with that Present, upon the good report which had been made
to him, that he has demeaned himself well, that he does not tyrannize over his
People, and that there is no complaint made, of his being defective in the
administration of Justice.

This Complement past, the Bassa, in the same order, and amidst the Joyful
Acclamations of the people, takes his way, and the Grand Seignor's Envoy along
with him, toward his House, where he entertains him at a great Treat, and,
after all is done, with a Present, which amounts to Ten thousand Crowns at the
least. For, as I told you before, if the Present be carried to one of the
Bassa's, who are in the greater Governments, as the Bassa's of Buda, Cairo, or
Babylon, they shall not escape under Thirty or Forty thousand Crowns, and the
Present which is sent to the Sultan, ought to amount to a hundred thousand. Nay
it many times happens, that the Grand Seignor appoints what he would have their
Present to his Envoy to amount to, and that especially, when he sends such as
he has a particular kindness for, and would amply gratify.

The Emperor Mahomet the Fourth, who now sits on the Throne, has a particular
inclination to exercise Liberality, and to bestow Rewards on those who serve
him; The particular way used by Mahomet IV. to show himself liberal, without
any Charge.
but he does it, so as that it costs him nothing, and consequently, there is no
occasion of taking ought out of the Treasury. When there is not an opportunity
to send the Person, whom he has a desire to gratify, into the Country, with
some Present, he has another Expedient, which will do the work. His
Darling-Divertisement is Hunting, and he takes but little pleasure in any other
Exercise. He thereupon orders the Person, whom he would recompense, to be one
at the Sport, and having killed a Stagg, or some other Beast, he orders him to
go and present it, from him, to one of the Grandees of the Port, whose abode is
either at Constantinople, or some place near it.

This Present is received with great demonstrations of joy, real, or apparent,
and the person, to whom it is brought, is immediately to take order for the
sending back of another, much exceeding it in value, to the Grand Seignor. And
that consists ordinarily in excellent Horses, good pieces of Gold-Brockado, or
rich Furrs. But his work is yet not half over; there must be much more done for
him, through whose hands he has received the Present, and he scapes very well,
when, not accounting what he sends to the Grand Seignor, the carriage of it
costs him but Ten thousand Crowns. Nay many times, he is forced to double the
Sum, when he has not been so liberal, as the Prince expected he should have
been; for he presently dispatches away an Officer, to reproach him with the
slender account he has made of his Present, and the small recompense he had
received, whom he had employed to bring it him. To these reproaches he sends
him an express Order, to make him an additional Reward of Twenty or thirty
Purses, which is immediately put in execution: and as to the Present, which the
Grand Seignor has received, he commonly makes a distribution of it, amongst
those, who are then about him.

And these are the Advantages which the Grand Seignor screws out of the
Bassa's, and other Grandees of the Port, whilst they are alive. Let us now
consider those which accrue to him by their death, in order to the recompensing
of those, whom he favors, without being obliged to take any thing out of his
Coffers. When the death of a Bassa is resolved upon, the Grand Seignor delivers
the Commission to him, whom he has designed to be kind to; and he finds it much
more advantageous, to bring him the Sentence of his death, than to bring him a
Present from the Prince.

If the Execution is to be done in Constantiuople, the ordinary Executioner is
the Formalities observed at the death of the Bassa's, who are strangled by the
Prince's Orders.
Bostangi-bachi, who is always about the Grand Seignor's Person, and he
himself does the Work. But if there be a necessity of going into some remote
Province, it is commonly either a Kapigi-bachi, or one of the principal
Bostangis, whom the Prince has a mind to show his kindness to, who is sent to
perform the Execution. He who carries the Order, accompanied by five or six
Capigis, sometimes manages his Affairs so, as to arrive at the place, while the
Council is sitting. But if that cannot be so ordered, he goes to the Bassa, and
commands him in the Grand Seignor's name, to call one immediately. That Council
consists of the Bassa's Lieutenant, the Mufti, the Cadi, the chief Commander of
the Janissaries belonging to that place, and some other persons concerned in the
administration of Justice, who are of the most considerable of the Province.

The Council being assembled, the Capigi-bachi enters, attended by his people
and presents the Bassa with the Grand Seignor's Letter. He receives it with
great respect, and having put it three several times to his forehead, he opens
it, reads it, and finds that the Prince demands his head. He makes no other
answer to that Order, then what he does in these few words; Let the Will, says
he, of my Emperor be done: only give me leave to say my Prayers; which is
granted him. His Prayers being ended, the Capigis seize him by the Arms, and
the chief of them presently takes off his Girdle or Sasche, and casts it about
his Neck. That Girdle consists of several small strings of Silk, with knots at
both ends, which two of the company immediately catch hold of, and one drawing
one way, and the other, t'other-way, they dispatch him in an instant.

If they are unwilling to make use of their Girdle, they take a handkerchief,
and with the Ring which they use, in the bending of their Bows, and which they
ordinarily wear on the right hand Thumb, they thrust the hand between the
handkerchief, which is tied very close, and the Throat, and so break the very
Throat-Bone. Thus they make a shift to strangle a man in an instant, suffering
him not to languish in pain, that he may dye a faithful Mahumetan, and not have
the time to enter into despair; the Turks thinking our way of hanging
Criminals, who are so long in torment upon the Gibbet, a strange kind of
Execution.

Though I have often used this expression, That the Grand Seignor sends to
demand When and how they strike of the Head in Turkey.
the Head of any person, whom he would rid out of the way; yet they never cut
it off, but when he expressly declares his desire to see it, and then it is
brought to him. If it be from some place at a great distance, they take out the
Bruins, and fill the empty place with Hay; and it was my fortune to see two
Heads so ordered, at the same time, which they carried in a Bag. They were the
Heads of the Bassa's of Kars, and Erzerom.

It is further to be observed, That when the Sentence of death is passed by the
Prince against any one, what quality soever he may be of, the Turks make no
further account of him; and when they speak of him, treat him no otherwise than
they would do a Dog. The Bostangi, who had been commissionated to bring those
two Heads to the Grand Seignor, finding himself weary and indisposed at a
Village in Armenia, where it was my chance to be at that time, and having
understood, that there was a Frenchman in the Inn, asked one of my Servants
whether I had any Wine, and would be content to let him have any, to cheer up
his spirits. I immediately sent him some in a large Flaggon; whereupon having
entreated me to come and take a Glass with him, which I thought it not fit to
deny, he would needs show me, whether I would or no, the Heads of those two
Bassa's; a sight I had no great curiosity to see.

When there is no order given for the bringing of the Head, they bury the Body
about Midnight, without any ceremony, and the memory of the Bassa, who had
made so much noise before, is soon extinguished and laid in the dust. But it is
moreover to be A Prohibition against shedding the blood of the Mahumetans who
are condemned to death.
noted, That it is the Custom in Turkey, not to cut off the Head of any one,
till after they have strangled him, and that the blood is quite cold; it being
against their Law, That the blood of a Mussulman (that is, one of the Faithful)
should be spilt, upon any occasion, but in War.

The execution being over, he who brought the Order for it, makes an immediate
Seizure of all that belonged to the deceased Bassa; and after he has set aside
what he The Inventories of the Goods of Bassa's deceased, not faithfully taken.
liked best for his own use, whether in Gold or Jewels, he brings the same
persons, who had been at the precedent Council, to proceed to the Inventory of
his Goods, which are afterward, as I have said elsewhere, transmitted to the
Chambers of the Treasury. They who are assistant at the taking of that
Inventory, know well enough, that many things, which belonged to the deceased,
are embezill'd, but they are so far from repining or murmuring at it, that they
sign and attest, that there was not any more found. They are afraid, if they
demeaned themselves otherwise, lest that Officer of the Seraglio, whom the
Grand Seignor has sent, and who possibly is in favor, should do them ill
offices at the Court, and spread some false report of them; whence, according
to the example they have then before their eyes, might happen, in like manner,
the loss of their Charges, and Lives.

They therefore think it prudence, to connive at what ever is done by that
Envoy, as being otherwise persuaded, that he will not be disowned by the Grand
Seignor, who is not ignorant of what is done upon those occasions. Nay, on the
contrary, whatever he may have dexterously secured to himself of the Bassa's
Goods, they make him some additional Presents of their own, at his departure
from them, engaging him thereby, to speak well of them to the Grand Seignor,
and to the Grand Vizir, at his return to the Port. And then also, not
accounting what he had taken beforehand, and what Custom tolerates, he
receives new marks of the Liberality of his Prince, who is satisfied that he
has so faithfully executed his Orders: and so he participates of what is set
down in the Inventory, when the Bassa's Goods are brought into the Seraglio.

Some, possibly, will be apt to imagine, that this Sentence of Death passed in
the Grand Seignor's Letter, should raise some disturbance and astonishment in
the Soul of The Causes inducing the Turks to defy Diath with so much constancy.
him who reads it, and who reading therein his own Condemnation, knows that it
must be immediately executed. Yet is it not apparent in his Countenance, that
he is much startled at it, he is not surpised therewith, he sees that few of
his Companions escape the same sat, and he has disposed himself for such an
end, as soon as he first took possession of his Charge. Besides, the Turks have
a strong persuasion, That the Decrees of Predestination are irrevocable, and
that it is impossible to avoid them; which makes them look Death in the face,
with such a degree of constancy and intrepidity, as renders them in a manner
insensible. To which reflection we may add this, That that ready and implicit
obedience and submission of the Turks, to the Orders of their Sovereign, is
rather a principle of Religion, than of State, which has been instilled into
them, by a most subtle piece of Politics; and they believe, That, if they dye
by the Command of their Prince, they go straight into Paradise.

As for the opportunity of making an escape out of Turkey, by any one who might
The Difficulties of making an Escape out of Turkey.
have some presentiment of his destruction, it is to no purpose to think of it.
All the Officers, and the Slaves, whom the Bassa's have in their Retinue, are
so many Spies, and observers of their Actions; and it is impossible for them,
to conceal what they do from them. 'Twere dangerous for a man to entrust a
Secret with any one of them; they are mean Souls, and incapable of any gallant
Action, besides that the Ports and Passages are equally shut up against both.
If there be the least discovery made thereof, the Governor of the Frontier
places would immediately have Orders from the Port, to take the Field; nay if
there were not any such, they are but over-diligent, in enquiring after, and
informing themselves of all those, who pass through the extent of their
Jurisdiction.

Besides, though there were some likelihood of compassing it, and that,
traveling only in the Night time, a man might get into some Neighboring
State; yet Turkey being in a manner quite surrounded by Nations who abhor the
Domination of the Ottomans; 'twere as much as to leap out of the Drying Pan
into the Fire, and to go and pass for a Spy, amongst a fort of people, who
would give no quarter. Whence it might be imagined, that there were less
difficulty in attempting an escape by Sea, than to hazard it by land: but the
former is the much more difficult, and the severe prohibitions made to the
Christians, upon pain of death, not to take any Turk or Slave, into their
Ships, which are exactly searched, before they weigh Anchor, shut up all the
Ports of Turkey, against those of the Country, who might be desirous to get out
of it.

True it is, however, that few years pass, but that a considerable number of
Slaves are conveyed away, by the charity and contrivances of the Christian
Consuls, and Merchants. They are secretly kept at the Houses of some Christian
Inhabitants of the Country, whose secrecy and silence are bought with Money; and
the same receipt stops the mouths of those, who have the oversight of the
Ports, and are warmly entertained with drinking, while they cunningly get the
Slaves aboard the Vessel, which has been visited, and is then ready to set
sail. They would be loath to run themselves into that danger for natural Turks:
there would be some ground to fear, that it might be some Plot on their side,
to surprise and try the Christians; and it seldom happens that they have a
thought of making any escape. They know well enough, that, whether it be by
Sea, or Land, (excepting only the Kingdom of Persia, where they are hated upon
the account of the difference of Sects) they cannot make their escape any where
but into Christendom, where they would not be permitted the exercise of their
Mahumetan Religion, which they would not renounce for a thousand lives.

E're we close up the Discourse concerning the Liberality of the Ottoman
Monarchs, it is to be observed, That sometimes they make very considerable
Presents, which they Presents made to the Sultanesses.
take out of the Grand Treasury, and which are paid in Silver only, if they are
ordered for the Grandees of the Port, whether in the Seraglio, or out of it.
Those Presents consists ordinarily of a Purse of Gold, which amounts to Fifteen
thousand Ducats, or Thirty thousand Crowns; and when there are any such made to
the Sultanesses, they receive all in Gold. To do that, there is no occasion of
going to the Secret Treasury, there is gold enough in the Fourth Chamber, into
which they at first bring in all the Gold and Silver of all the Revenues of the
Empire; and that Sum, which makes no great hole in the great heap, returns
again into the same place, by several ways.

CHAP. XII. Of the Present, which the Grand Seignor sends, every Year, to Mecha.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The third part of the Revenue of Egypt, how employed. The great Wealth of the
Sheck of Mecha. Ceremonies observed at Mahomet's Tomb. The Caravan of Cairo.
The Present sent from Mecha to the Great Mogul. The Opinion of the Mahumetans,
concerning Mecha and Medina.

THat I make here a particular Chapter of the Present, which the Grand Seignor
sends every Year to Mecha, is occasioned by this third part of the Revenue of
Egypt, which is peculiarly designed for it; and upon this Consideration
withal, That I have singular Remarks to make upon that subject.

Three Millions of Livers, of Twelve, of annual Revenue, which the Kingdom of
Egypt pays the Grand Seignor, are partly expended in the Rich Carpet, and the
Sumptuous The third part of the Revenue of Egypt, how employed.
Tent, which he sends to the Sheck, every year, in honor to Mahomet's Tomb.
Another part goes to the payment of those who serve in the Mosqueys; As for
instance, the Imans, who are their Priests; the Cheuchs, who are their
Preachers; the Muezims, who, by their noise on the Towers of the Mosqueys, call
the people to their Devotions; and the Kaijms of Mecha and Medina, who look to,
and keep clean the Mosqueys, and light the Lamps. We must also put into the
Account of these Three Millions, the Sustenance of all the Pilgrims for the
space of Seventeen days, the Grand Seignor sending, for that end, a sufficient
Sum to the Sheck. This Sheck, who is, as 'twere, the Supreme Person upon the
score of the Law, and the High Priest of all the Mahumetans, what Country and
Sect soever they be of, makes the poor ignorant people believe, that there come
every year to Mecha, Seventy thousand Pilgrims, Men and Women; and if that
number were not complete, the Angels would come in humane forms, to make it up.

This Prince, whom we call the Sheck, for whom all the Mahumetans have a great
Veneration, is very Rich, and very powerful, and that may be easily
conjectured, by The great Wealth of the Sheck of Mecha.
the Presents, which he receives every year from the Grand Seignor, and the
other Mahumetan Princes. These Presents are all his own, to be disposed of as
he pleases, at the end of the Year, when new ones are sent to him. He makes his
advantage also of all the Presents that are made by the Pilgrims, and of the
Sums of Money, which those very Princes send him, to be distributed in Alms,
which he also disposes of as he pleases; and all these Presents put together,
make him such a Revenue as is hardly imaginable. For Mahumetisme spreads very
much into Europe, Asia, and Africa, and that much more then is commonly
believed, as I shall more distinctly make it appear, at the end of my Relation,
in a particular Chapter, which I design for the handling of that matter.

From several Parts of the World, there come Caravans to Mecha, and when the
Devotion is to begin, the High Priest, assisted by all the people belonging to
the Law, Ceremonies observed at Mahomet's Tomb.
spends night and day, in saying of Prayers, and performing the necessary
Ceremonies. On the Seventh day, all the Pilgrims are assembled together before
the Sheck's Tent, who appears at the entrance of it, and standing upon a low
Stool, that he may be seen by those who are at the greatest distance from him,
Prays, and gives his Benediction to all the people, putting a period to the
Devotion, with these words, That God would enable them to return in Peace, as
they came thither.

From that minute, every one must bethink himself, that he is to be at his own
charge; the Sheck gives no more, and it is then that he begins to make great
advantages to himself. For whatever is sold for the Sustenance of the Pilgrims,
comes from him; and besides, he holds a correspondence with the Masters of the
Caravans, of whom the Pilgrims are forced to buy conveniences for their riding
back again, at more then three times the rate they are worth, when the Beasts
they had brought out of their own Countries have failed them by the way.

The Caravan of Cairo is the most numerous, and the most considerable of all
the The Caravan of Cairo.
Caravans, that come to Mecha. The Caravan-bachi, who is the Captain and
Conductor of it, makes his gains by it, at his return, worth him Two hundred
thousand Crowns; and there is a great competition about his place, which is at
the disposal of the Bassa of Cairo, and commonly carried by the highest bidder
for it. The Captain of this Caravan is also Master of the Waters, which are
carried into the Cisterns, and it is according to his Orders that they are
distributed; and whereas that distribution is equal, as well in relation to the
Poor, as to the Rich, if the latter would have any beyond the quantity allowed
them, they must pay dearly for it; and the Captain, who sets what imposition he
pleases upon it, makes a considerable advantage thereby.

But let us return to the Grand Seignor's Present. The Tent, and the Carpet,
which The Present sent from Mecha to the Great Mogul.
he sends, are two Pieces equally precious, as well for the excellency of the
Stuff, as the additional embellishments hereof. The Carpet is designed for the
covering of Mahomet's Tomb; and the Tent, which is erected hard by the Mosquey,
is for the Sheck, who does not stir out of it, during the Seventeen days of
Devotion. This High Priest of the Mahumetan Law, has found out the secret
knack, of extracting inexpressible Sums of Money, out of that Carpet and Tent,
which are renewed every year: and when the new Present is arrived from the
Grand Seignor, he sends, as 'twere out of a singular favor, certain pieces of
the Curtain of the old Tent, to several Mahumetan Princes, of whom he receives
Magnificent Presents in requital. This Curtain, which is set up on the outside
of the Tent, quite round it, to hinder the people from seeing those that are
under it, consists of several pieces, six foot high, and of a great length: and
the Sheck endeavors to persuade those Princes, That if they fasten one of
those pieces to their Tents, when they are going to engage in a War, against
those whom they account Infidels, good fortune will be sure to attend them, and
it will not be long e're they gain the Victory. But if he sends either the
whole Curtain, or the Tent, or Carpet entire, it must be to a great Monarch
indeed, such as the Great Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogul: and that he
does, once in ten, or twelve years; one while to the one, and another, to the
other.

Of this we have a late instance, in Aureng-zeb, who at the present is King of
the Indies, and whom we otherwise call the Great Mogul. For upon his
establishment in his Throne, the Sheck sent him the whole Curtain belonging to
the Tent; and great joy there was at his Court, that the King had received so
Magnificent a Present, from the Holy Place, as they call it. The Sheck was soon
after made sensible of the Royal Liberality of that Great Monarch, one of the
Richest and most Powerful of the Universe; and thus does that Spiritual Head of
the Mahumetan Religion, who has a kind of Superintendency over all the Members,
know how to make his advantage of them, and has found out the way, to enrich
himself, at the cost of all the Princes and Nations, who submit themselves to
the Mahumetan Law.

I question not, but that they who have writ of the Religion of the Turks, have
given some account of the Pilgrimage of Mecha, which is one of the most
essential parts thereof; and therefore, as well for that reason, as also for
that I should digress too much from my subject, I ought not to prosecute that
matter any farther. I shall take occasion here, to make three Remarks, which I
have originally learnt, of one of the most learned in the Rubricks of the
Mahumetan Law.

The first is, that the Turks, by an ancient Tradition, believe, That Mecha is
the place, where God commanded Abraham to build him a house; and that while he
was there, all Nations came thronging to visit him: and that it is also the
same place, where Mahomet received the Alcoran, from Heaven.

The second relates to the Commandment imposed upon all the Mahumetans, to be,
once in their lives, concerned in the Pilgrimage of Mecha. For it is to be
observed, That the obligation does not extend to the poorer sort of people, who
have hardly wherewithal to live upon, and would bring great misery on their
Families, by their absence, as being not able to leave them what is requisite
for their sustenance.

The third Remark is concerning the preference of the two Cities of Mecha, and
Medina. The former is the place of Mahomet's birth, which it was his design to
honor, and make known, by that famous Pilgrimage, whereto he obliges all those
of his Law. The latter is the place of his Burial, of which there is abundance
of fabulous relations. Mahomet, in his Alcoran, does only enjoin their going to
Mecha, where there are no other Relics of that false Prophet, then one of his
Sandalls: And the Doctors of the Law are also of opinion, that there is no
obligation of going to Medina, and that without seeing that City, a man
satisfies the Command of Mahomet. I shall treat at large of the Pilgrimage of
Mecha, in the last Chapter of this Relation of my Travels, and of the different
Roads by which the Mahumetans of Europe, Asia, and Africa, are conducted to the
Tomb of their Prophet.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Cup-Bearer's Quarter, and of diverse other Appartments.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The ancient Custom practiced, when the Grand Seignor is presented with any
thing to drink, between meals. A way to quench thirst at meals, wholly
particular to the Levantines. The composition of Treacle. A stately service of
Gold-Plate. Beds according to the Turkish mode. Ways to satisfy the
necessities of Nature different from ours. The Causes of the abominable Sin
committed by the Turks, who are confined within the Seraglio.

I Have discovered many things particularly observable, concerning the Treasury
of the Ottoman Monarchs, and there are yet some very Remarkable passages to be
The Ancient Custom practiced when the Grand Seignor drinks between Meals.
communicated, relating to the other Quarters of the inner part of the Seraglio.

Between the Treasury, and an obscure Vaulted Gallery, in length between
Fifteen and Twenty paces, which conducts you to an Iron-Door, by which there is
a passage into the Gardens, you find, on the left hand, the Appartment of the
Pages of the Kilar, or the Cup-Bearer's Office. That is the place where they
prepare the Sherbets, and other Liquors, for the Grand Seignor's own drinking,
and where they keep the Wine, if it happens, that he drinks any, as Sultan
Amurath did, of whom I have often had occasion to speak. It Is an ancient
Custom, That when the Grand Seignor calls for Water, to drink between meals,
every time he so calls costs him ten Sequins, or Chequins. The Ceremony
observed therein is this: In the Chamber called the Haz-Oda, which is the
Appartment of the Forty-Pages, who are always near the Grand Selgnor's Person,
there is perpetually one of them standing Sentinel at the Entrance, which leads
to the Cup-Bearer's Office, where two Pages of the same Quarter are in like
manner upon the Sentry. When the Grand Seignor is thirsty, and calls for water,
the Page of the Haz-Oda immediately makes a sign to the two Pages of the Kilar,
of whom one advances up to the Kilar-bachi, or Cup Bearer himself, crying out
Sou, which signifies Water, to advertise him, that the Prince would drink; and
the other runs to the door of the Haz-Oda, where the most ancient of the Forty
Pages gives him Ten Sequins. That Page is the Treasurer of the said Chamber,
and he pays the small Sums which the Grand Seignor gives order for, an Office
which might be called in English, The Treasurer of the petty Enjoyments. The
Water is sometimes brought in a Cup of Gold, sometimes in a Vessel of
Pourcelain, placed upon a large Server of Gold, about two foot diameter, and
enriched with Precious Stones within and without. That is looked on, as one of
the richest pieces of Plate belonging to the Seraglio. The principal
Cup Bearer, who is a white Eunuch, carries it with great Ceremony, attended by
a hundred Pages of the Kilar, whom he ordinarily has under his Charge, and
upheld under the Arms by two of them, who walk on both sides of him. For it is
required, That he should carry it lifted up above his head, and so he cannot
see his way but by looking under it. When he is come to the Door of the
Haz-Oda, the Pages of the Kilar, who have accompanied him so far, pass no
further, save only the two who uphold his Arms, and the Pages of the Chamber go
along with him quite into the Grand Seignor's Presence. But when they come to
the door of the Chamber, two of the more ancient among them, take the places of
the two Pages of the Kilar, and complete the conducting of the Kilargi-Bachi,
under the Arms, to offer the Cup to the Prince. When he has not any thing to
say to him, he carries it back again into the Kilar; but if he will take his
opportunity to entertain him with some Affair, he delivers the Cup and the
Server into the hands of one of the Pages, who led him under the Arms, and he
delivers it to those, who, belonging to the Cup-Bearer's Office, waited there
in expectation of his return.

It Is in the same place, to wit, that under the oversight of the Cup Bearer,
they keep A way to quench thirst at meals, wholly particular to the Levantines.
all sorts of refreshing and cooling Waters, as that of Peaches, Cherries,
Raspices, and such other fruits. The Turks do not drink during their refection,
that is, not till they have given over eating; and because it is possible they
may be dry, whilst they eat; take here the manner how they quench that thirst.
They are served at Table with these Waters, in great Cups of Pourcelaine, which
hold about two Quarts, and the better to distinguish them, they put into every
one of those Cups, some of the same fruit, from which the Water that is therein
had been extracted, and which they had preserved for that purpose. Every one
has lying by him a Wooden spoon, which holds three or four times as much as any
of our ordinary ones, and whereof the handle is of a length proportionable: for
as to Gold or Silver spoons, it is not their custom to use any. With those
spoons, they can take out what is in the Cups, according to the Water which
they most fancy, and so they suspend thirst, taking ever and anon some
spoonfuls of it.

It is also in the Cup-bearers Appartment that the Treacle is made, which the
Turks The Composition of Treacle.
call Tiriak-Farik, and there is a great quantity of it made, because they use
it as an Universal remedy, and charitably bestow it on all sorts of people, as
well in City as Country, who are desirous of it. The Vipers which are used in
this composition are brought out of Egypt, and they make no account of those
which other Countries afford, or they are of opinion at least, that the former
are much the better for that purpose.

Before the Appartment of the Kilar, there is a Gallery whereof the floor is
paved A stately service of Gold Plate.
with square pieces of Black and White Marble, and sustained by eight fair
Pillars of White Marble, and at the end of it is a little Quarter, where the
principal Cup Bearer has his residence. There also are the Lodgings of his
Substitute, the Kilarquet-houdasi, who is not an Eunuch, as the Kilargi-bachi
is, and who, at his removal out of the Seraglio, is ordinarily advanced to the
charge of a Bassa. The Kilargi-bachi has in his custody all the Gold and
Silver-plate, the Basins, the Ewers, the Bowls, the Cups, the Servers, and the
Candlesticks, the greatest part of that service being garnished with Diamonds,
Rubies and Emeralds, and other precious Stones of value. As for golden Dishes
and Candlesticks, without any additional embellishments of precious Stone,
there are some so large, and so massy, that there must be two men to carry one
of them. These Candlesticks are made after a fashion quite different from ours.
They are ordinarily two or three Foot high, upon a Base of above twelve inches
Diameter, and the upper part thereof is as twere a Box, or kind of Lamp, with
its beak, and it may contain above a pound of suet. It Is to prevent the fall of
any thing upon the Carpet, that they make the foot of the Candlestick so large
as I told you; and besides, it is requisite, that it should bear some
proportion to the height. The match, or wieke, which they put into the Suet,
beaten into small bits, is about the bigness of a Man's thumb, and consequently
must needs make a great light in the Room. As to the Kilarquet-houdast, he is
the Superior over the Halvagis, and the Akegis, who are the Cooks and the
Confectioners, of whom not one can enter into service, but by his Orders.

In my discourse of the Treasury, I made no mention of the Quarter of those
Officers, who serve there, because my design was to follow the order of the
Structures of the Seraglio, and to conduct the Reader, by little and little,
out of one Court into another, and out of one Quarter into another. That of the
Pages of the Treasury, is hard by the Kilar, and begins with a Gallery, paved
with square pieces of Marble, of different colors, sustained by eight Pillars,
of the same material, and whereof the sides and the roof are painted with all
sorts of flowers, in Gold and Azure. That Gallery is open on the one side, and
on the other you find in the midst of it, the Door leading into the Appartment
of the Pages, with three great Windows on the right hand, and as many on the
left: And it is there that the six most elderly Pages of the Treasury have their
residence night and day. From that door, along a walk paved with white Marble
stones, very large ones, about fifteen paces in length, and five in breadth,
you come to another Portal, of the same material, sustained by two Pillars of
black Marble; over the said Portal, there may be read these words, which are
ordinary enough in the mouths of the Turks, and which I have explicated
elsewhere;

La Illahe Illa Alla, Muhammed Resoul Alla.

It gives entrance into a long Hall, where there may be seen on both sides a
kind of Beds according to the Turkish mode.
Seat, or Scoffold, a foot and a half in height, and between seven and eight in
breadth. Every Page has but four foot in breadth for his reposing place, as
well by day, as by night: And for their Beds, they are permitted to have under
them, only a Woollen Coverlet, four times doubled, which serves them for a
Quilt, and over that they ordinarily have one of Gold or Silver-Brockado, or
some other sumptuous Silk-stuff; and in the Winter time, they are permitted to
have three of them. They are not to have their Coverlets all of Wool, which
would be so much the warmer, because it would not be a decent sight for the
Grand Seignor, when he comes ever and anon, in the night time, pretending
indeed as if he would surprise them, and see how they demean themselves, but in
effect, sometimes to cover lewd designs. It Is between those Coverlets that the
Pages take their repose, having their Wast-coat and Drawers on; for there is no
talk of any other kind of Linen, either in Turkey, or any part of the East;
and whether it be Winter or Summer, they always lay themselves down to sleep,
half clad, without any great Ceremony.

Over the Beds of the Pages, there is a Gallery, which goes quite round the
Hall, Ways to satisfy the necessities of Nature different from ours.
and is sustained by Pillars of Wood, painted all over with red varnish, and
there they have their Coffers, wherein their Clothes are kept. Every one has a
Coffer to himself, but the twelve Senior Pages have each of them two Coffers,
and one of those twelve has the Key of the Gallery in his custody. It is
ordinarily opened but one day in the Week, which is answerable to our
Wednesday, and then, every Page goes, and takes out of his Coffer, what he
stands in need of. If any one of them must of necessity look for some thing
there upon any other day, he gets five or six Pages together, and they all go
to the principal Officer of the Treasury, and he commands the Rafgi, who has
the Key of the Gallery in his custody, to open it for them, and to have a care
that they meddle not with the Coffers of their Companions.

At one of the ends of the Hall, there is a Door, which conducts you to the
Fountains, where those that have their dependence on the Treasury go and wash,
when they are called to their Devotions. There are seven Copper Cocks for that
convenience, and as well the pavement, as the Walls, of that place are of white
Marble.

The places appointed for the easing of Nature are on the right hand, divided
into four little Rooms, which are always kept very clean, and paved with
square pieces of white Marble, as the Room of the Fountain is. The Turks do not
sit down, as we do, when they are in those places, but they squat down over the
hole, which is not half a foot, or little more above the ground. That hole is
covered with an Iron plate, which rises and falls by a Spring, and turning one
way or other, at the falling of the least weight upon it, it comes to the
station it was in before, as soon as the ordure is fallen from it. I have
observed elsewhere, that the Turks, and generally all the Mahumatanes, do not
use paper in such cases, or upon any undecent occasion, and when they go to
those kinds of places, they carry along with them a Pot of water, to wash
themselves withal, and the Iron-plate is also made clean at the same time. And
so the hole being always covered, and the Iron plate always kept clean, there
can be no ill smell in the place, and that the rather, for that a small current
of water, which passes under that place, carries away all the Ordure.

But it were to be wished, that they would not so much concern themselves in
keeping The Causes of the abominable Sin committed by the Turks who are
confined within the Seraglio.
those places so clean, provided they could forbear polluting them with those
detestable impurities, which I should gladly have left unmention'd, did I not
fear the reproach might be made to me, of my having been defective in point of
exactness. I have already said something of it, in the Second Chapter of this
Relation, and it is a subject, which is to be slightly past over, that so there
may be but imperfect Idaea's left of it. It is therefore in those places, that
the Pages make their nocturnal assignations, in order to the committing of the
worst of all crimes, which yet they find it very difficult to put in execution,
because they are so narrowly watched; and if they are taken in the very act,
they are punished with so great severity, that sometimes they are even drubb'd
to death; of which chastisement, I have elsewhere given an account. In like
manner, to prevent the committing of that infamous act, in the places where
they take their repose, there are two Torches lighted, which last all the
Night, and three Eunuchs are ever and anon going their Rounds, by which means
the Pages are deprived of the opportunities, which otherwise they night have,
to offend.

But we need not go far, to find out the Source of this Evil: the strictness of
the restraint they are in, and their being deprived of the sight of Women,
induce those Young Men to practice such defilements, and hurry the Turks into a
Gulf, to which they, by an execrable passion, are, naturally but too much
inclinable. The Ichoglans, who are brought very young into the Seraglio, know
not what a Woman is but by the instinct of Nature; and there are some of them,
who, for one day's sight and enjoyment of a Woman, would be content to dye the
next. All those Nations generally have so great a bent to lubricity, that it
seems impossible they should quit it, but with their lives: what they cannot do
one way, they endeavor to do another; and they of the Seraglio do all they can
to elude the inspection of their Overseers. The Reader may call to mind the
Action of the two Pages, who hid themselves in the Mosquey, and that single
Example is enough, to show, how they seek out all the ways imaginable, to
satisfy their brutish passion.

The Quarter of the Kasnadar-bachi, as also that of his Companion, or
Substitute, is adjoining to that of the Pages of the Treasury, and from their
Chambers, they have a Prospect into a little Flower-Garden, which belongs to
them. We have yet some other Chambers to view, before we come to that, which
they call the Haz-Oda, which is the Appartment of the Forty Pages of the
Chamber, and the entrance to that of the Grand Seignor.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Quarter of the Dogangi-bachi, or Grand Faulconer, and of
some other Officers.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
Magnificent Chambers. The ordinary Revenues of the Grand Faulconers. The
Magnificence of the Ottoman Princes, in what relates to Hunting. Birds
supplying the places of Dogs, in running down a Deer, or a Hare. The delicate
Chamber of the Selidgar-Agi, who carries the Grand Seignor's Sword. The
excellent order observed in the Seraglio.

THe Dogangi-bachi, or Grand Faulconer, and the Pages, whom he has under
Magnificent Chambers.
his Charge, have their Quarter, between that of the Pages of the Treasury, and
that of the Pages of the Chamber. The place appointed for the Pages of the
Falconry, has nothing in it extraordinary, and a man cannot make a discovery of
any thing of beauty therein: but on the other side, the two Chambers, where the
Grand Falconer Lodges, have something that is Magnificent, and are as
sumptuously furnished, as any other Room of the Seraglio. The first, which
serves for an Antichamber, is lesser, and they are both of them paved with a
Checquer-work of black and white Marble, having the Roof beautified with
Flowers, painted, and guilt. But that of the second Chamber is the more
sumptuous by much, as having large Flowers, in embossed Work, every Flower in
its square piece, and the Junctures all covered with Gold. The Walls are
excellently wainscoted, wherein also they have not spared for Gold, and on both
sides, there are cross-barr'd Windows, whereby the Chamber receives much light.
The Marble Checquer-work of the Floor is not seen, as being covered with a
silken Carpet, upon which there are laid, in several parts of the Chamber, a
certain number of Quilts, two or three foot in breadth, and about four Inches
thick. Some of them are covered with Velvet, or Satin, of different Colors;
others, with Gold-Brockadoes, and every one has its Cushion, of the same Stuff,
between three and four foot in length, and about two foot in height. These
Cushions are laid behind their backs, when they are sitting, after their Mode,
cross-legg'd, and those little Quilts are, to them, instead of Chairs, and
Couches, in a Chamber.

If the Grand Falconer be removed out of the Seraglio, it is upon his
advancement The ordinary Revenues of the Grand Falconer.
to the Charge of one of the principal Bassa's, and to one of the greater
Governments, as that of Cairo, or Babylon; and while he continues in the
Seraglio, besides his Table, which is all at the Prince's charge, he is allowed
an annual Revenue, of ten or twelve thousand Crowns. The Pages of the Falconry,
carry Hawks on their Fists, and feed them: they have the liberty to go and
exercise them in the Gardens and they all attend the Grand Seignor, when he
goes a Hawking, or Hunting. They wear the same Stuffs, as the Pages of the
Treasury, and may also put on Vests of Cloth, but made after such a fashion,
as makes them easily distinguishable from the Ichoglans, of the first and
second Chamber, who are always clad in Woollen-cloath. For the Pages of the
Falconry have their Sleeves made narrower and narrower, from the Shoulder to
the Wrist, and they are there fastened close with Buttons; but the Sleeves of
the Pages of the Treasury, are as wide below, as they are above, and that makes
the difference between them. The twelve Senior Pages of the Falconry have the
same slaveries and advantages, as the Pages of the Treasury, and are their
Fellow-Commoners; but the other Companions of the former, are treated after the
same rate as the Pages of the Seferlis, who wash the Grand Seignor's Linen,
and they all common at the same Table.

Besides the forementioned Pages, the Grand Faulconer has under his command
near eight hundred other persons, as well in Constantinople as the parts
adjacent thereto, The Magnificence of the Ottoman Princes in relation to
Hunting and Hawking.
perpetually employed in the ordering and training up of all sorts of Birds for
the Game, and there come none into the Seraglio, but what are so ordered, and
taught. Though there may be a very great number of such, yet does not the Grand
Seignor make use of any, but what have some stone of value about the neck, nay
sometimes such as may be valued at ten thousand Crowns. All the Mahumetane
Princes are very sumptuous, in all things relating to their Game, and
particularly the King of Persia. Nothing can be imagined more Glorious, or
Magnificent, then the long Train of the Grandees of his Court, when they return
from their Sports. They all march in an excellent order, every one with the
Hawke on his Fist, and every Hawke having about the neck, either a Diamond, or
some other precious stone, of great value, with the hood all embroidered with
Pearls; which must needs make a most delightful show.

The Turks, and other inhabitants of the Levant, breed up, in order to their
divertisements, several sorts of Birds, which the Europaeans make no use of at
all, and they Birds supplying the place of Dogs, in running down a Deer, or
Hare.
are of a larger size, and stronger, then ours. With those, instead of Dogs,
will they run down a Hare, or a Stagge; and they have also the diversion of
hunting the Wild Boar, and other savage Beasts. But what makes that Sport the
more delightful is this, that in Persia, the Country is all open and champion,
and there are no Woods, into which the Hawke, or other Bird, might get out of
their sight. He discovers the Beast at a great distance, fastens of a sudden
upon it, so as that it cannot get loose from him, and, sticking close to the
Head, picks out the Eyes of it, vexes, and torments it, and retards the
swiftness of its course, by which means, the Huntsmen come up the sooner to it,
and dispatch it. But they do not give the fatal blow, till the Prince has
ordered them to do it, or till he has shot off an Arrow, or discharged his
Fire-lock: upon which signal, they who are about him are permitted to exercise
their courage and dexterity.

Next adjoining to the Appartment of the Pages, belonging to the Falconary,
there is a long Gallery, which is open but of one side, and in the floor of
it, there is a little ascent. It is sustained by ten Pillars of Marble, of
several colors, and paved with a square-piec'd work of the same material; with
a Wainscotage, wherein there are some flowers painted, but very meanly.

From the end of the foresaid Gallery, turning on the right hand, you come to
the Chamber of the Selidgar-Agi, who carries the Sword before the Grand
Seignor. Some The Seligdar-Aga's Chamber, who carries the Grand Seignor 's word.
part of that Chamber is covered with Carpets, the other has a Seat or
Scaffold, raised three foot high, but of a considerable breadth, to which they
ascend by so many steps of white Marble, of four foot in length, the remainder
of which Seat, being divided from the Chamber by a Ballister'd work, partly
gilt with Gold, and partly Green. All within that enclosure of Ballisters is
covered with rich silken Carpets, and all about, as well to the Wall side, as
to that of the Ballisters, there are sumptuous Cushions of all sorts, of Gold
and Silver-Brokadoes. The Walls of the Chamber are all gilt, and at equal
distances, there are flower-pots painted, rarely well diversified, and
affording a most delightful prospect. The place where the Selidgar-Agi sits, is
at the corner of that part of the Chamber which is enclosed with the
Ballisters, on the right hand, and over his Head hang the Swords and Sabres,
which he carries before the Grand Seignor, within the Seraglio; and after him,
when his Highness goes out of the Seraglio.

As Soon as a Prince is come to the Crown, whatever he ordinarily wears, is
never returned The excellent order observed in the Seraglio.
into the Treasury, till after his death: And the Chasnadar-bachi, who is the
Overseer of it, finds by his Registries, whether all the things that were taken
out of the Treasury, during the Grand Seignor's life, are brought into it
again, at his death. Whenever any piece is taken out, the Seligdar-Agi, to whom
it is delivered, gives the principal Officer of the Treasury an acknowledgment,
under his hand, of his having received it; and by that means nothing can be
embezill'd, good order being strictly observed in all things, relating to the
Seraglio. In some other parts of the Chamber you find hanging up Ponyards and
Knives, all rich Pieces, and beset with precious stones, which, as all the
rest, are exactly Registered in the Books of the Treasury. On each side of the
said Chamber, there are two little Rooms, for four Pages of the Seferlis, who
wait on the Seligdar-Aga, and are always about his person. It Is now time that
we pass into the Grand Seignor's Quarter.

CHAP. XV. Of the Grand Seignor's Appartment.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Chamber of the Forty Pages. A noble Monument of the Valor of Amurath. The
situation of the Mosqueys in Turkey. The Ceremonies of their Devotions. A
Magnificent Winter-Chamber. The mysterious Seal of Mahomet. The great
Superstitions of the Turks. A fantastic, and covetous knack of Devotion. The
Relics of Omar. A ridiculous Sect. The Grand Seignor's Quarter. The Emperor
Amurath's Belvedere, or place of Prospect. The Excellent Wines of the Oil of
Tenedos. A perfidious Act justly punished. The Fortune of a beautiful Sicilian
Virgin. The Grand Seignor's Bedchamber. The ancient veneration of the Turks
for Mahomet's Banner. A word farther of the Prince's Appartment.

THough the inner part of the Seraglio ought properly to be divided into but
two great Quarters, which are the Grand Seignor's own Quarter, and the Quarter
of the Sultanesses; yet have I thought it more convenient, for the Reader's
better remembrance of things, to distinguish to him the different parts, of
which the former consists, answerably to its several uses: and after a large
account, given of the Baths, the Treasury, the Cup-Bearer's Office, and the
Falconry, I come now to the particular Appartment of the Grand Seignor's Person.

The Haz-Oda is the first Structure that offers it self to your view, and it is
by that name the Turks call the fourth and highest Class of the Ichoglans,
which is the Chamber The Chamber of the Forty Pages.
of the Forty Pages, who are hourly employed in the Grand Seignor's Service.
This Chamber is of the same largeness, as that of the Pages of the Treasury,
and furnished much after the same rate; but it is not near so lightsome, or
rather, it wants light. As there is not so great a number of them, so have they
accordingly more place to sit, or lie down; and in the midst of the Chamber,
you find a little square place, raised up somewhat higher than the Beds of the
Pages, whence the Haz-Oda-bachi, their Governor, may observe all their
actions, and see how they demean themselves. He has order to give the Grand
Seignor notice of it, Rewards being the consequences of good actions, as
chastisements are, of bad ones; and it is also incumbent upon him, to make
speedy provision of all the things they stand in need of. Over the Door of that
Chamber, these words, La Illa He Illa, etc. whereof I have often made mention,
are engraved in large golden Letters; and at the four corners, are the Names of
Mahomet's four Companions, Ebou-beker, Omar, Osman, and Ali, engraved in like
manner in black Marble. When the Grand Seignor has made a Bassa, and that he is
to take his leave of his Highness, to go to his Government, he comes out at
that Door, where all those names are engraved, and as soon as he is come out,
he turns his face again to the Door, and kisses the Threshold of it, with great
humility.

As soon as you are come into the Chamber, you find on the right hand several
words of the Law, written, and enchac'd, in guilt squares, and one of these
Writings is, of Sultan Achmet's, the Father of Amurath. On the left hand, you
find, fastened to the Wall, a Coat of Mail, a Headpiece, and a great Buckler;
it is one of A noble Monument of Amurath's Valor.
the Monuments of Amurath's Valor. During the Siege of Bagdet, or Babylon, a
Persian coming out of the City, and challenging any one of the Besiegers to
meet him, that Prince, one of the most courageous and strongest men of his age,
would needs receive him himself, without any other Arms, than a Sabre in his
hand, though the Persian was armed from head to foot. Amurath who was not only
a prodigious Person as to strength, and valor, but also well skilled in the
use of a Weapon, afforded him not the time to consider whom he had to deal
withal, but immediately gave him such a furious blow with the Sabre, over the
right shoulder, that he cut his coat of Mail quite to the Middle of his Body,
and left him dead upon the place.

Opposite to the Haz-Oda, or the Chamber of the forty Pages, there is a Gallery
of a considerable length, and particularly remarkable for its Structure. It is
open on both sides, and has, of each, a row of white Marble-Pillars; but it is
built after the Serpentine fashion, and they who walk in it are, every six
paces, out of sight one of the other. There are, under this Gallery four great
Presses, to put up the accoutrements of the four Officers, who are always about
the Grand Seignor's Person, to wit, the Seligdar-Aga, the Chokadar-Aga, the
Requabdar-Aga, and the Hazoda-bachi, of whom I have spoken at the beginning of
this Relation, when I gave a List of the Grandees of the Port.

This Gallery, of so fantastic and so extraordinary a Structure, is not far
from that The situation of the Mosques in Turkey.
other, which is a continued ascent, and whereof I made mention in the
precedent Chapter. Opposite to this last, there is a Mosquey, of the middle
sort, as to the largeness, the length of it somewhat exceeding its breadth, and
it stands North and South, a situation the Turks observe in all their Mosqueys,
which are always turned toward Mecha, which place is Meridional to all the
Provinces of the Empire. There is in the Wall, opposite to the South, a kind of
Neech, which they call Mihrab, into which the Iman, who is their Priest, gets
up, to say Prayers at the accustomed hours, and the Grand Seignor is present
thereat, with the forty Pages of the Haz-Oda, in a little Room, the Window
whereof is opposite to the Neech. On both sides of the said Neech, there is a
Gallery sustained by five Pillars, some whereof are of green Marble, and the
rest of Porphyry. And in the Mosquey, and in the Chamber, or Room, into which
the Grand Seignor comes to do his Devotions, and in the two Galleries, there is
no going but upon rich Carpets. You are not to look for ought of painting
there; nor have the Walls any other Ornament, than that of the whiteness of the
Marble, whereof they are built. But there are a great many Writings, in large
Arabic Characters, enchac'd in gilt Borders, hanging up in several places, and
those Writings contain only things taken out of the Law of Mahomet.

The Window of the Chamber, into which the Grand Seignor comes to do his
Devotions, is six foot in length, and three foot high, and has a Lattice, with
a Curtain behind it, as it is in several Chapels, which our Christian Princes
have in their Palaces. There is also opposite to the same Neech,
beforementioned, such another Window, and such another Chamber, for the
Sultanesses, and when the Muezim, whose station is of one side of the Iman, and
who is as it were his Clerk, hears the drawing of the Curtains, he immediately
rings a small Bell, which is the signal, that the Grand Seignor and the
Sultanesses are come into their several Rooms.

Upon their arrival, the foresaid Muezim begins to sing these two words, Allabu
Ekber, The Ceremonies of their Devotions.
which signifies, God is Great, repeating them four times: and afterward,
having added thereto some words, speaking as 'twere to himself, the Iman in his
turn, sings these following; Elhamdu lillahi Rabbil alemijn, that is to say,
The Grace of God is the Master of all things. He thus continues the Prayer,
prostrating himself several times to the ground, and all the people present do
also prostrate themselves as he does.

In the midst of the Domo of the Mosquey, there is a Hoop of Iron, all about
which there hangs a great number of Lamps, of Venice-Crystal, and there are
also some disposed along the Galleries, of the same Metal, they being not
permitted to have in their Mosqueys, either Gold or Silver. They do not light
those Lamps, but only for the Prayers at night, and the fire casting a
reflection on those Crystals, creates a most delightful Object to the sight.

The Chamber of the Sarai-Agasi, one of the four principal Eunuchs, is
adjoining to that Mosquey, and the least of all the Chambers, of the Officers,
belonging to the Inner-part of the Seraglio. He has but little place more than
is requisite for him to sleep in, and he is waited on by two Pages of the
Couchouk-Oda, or the little Chamber.

Adjoining to the Door of the Haz-Oda, there is a Hall paved with a
Checquer-work, of black and white Marble, in the midst whereof there is a Basin
of the same material, but of several colors, out of which there is an ascent
of water four or five foot high. That water is received into a second Basin,
made in the form of a Scallop-shell, out of which it falls again into a third,
much larger than the two precedent ones. The upper part of the Hall is built
Domo-wise, having therein some Windows, which give it light, and a certain
piece of dull painting is all the Ornament of its Walls. At your entrance into
this Hall, you see two Doors, one on the right hand, the other, on the left.
That on the left hand conducts to a Flower-Garden; and the other is the door of
a Chamber, into which the Grand Seignor comes, sometimes, in the Winter-season.

This Chamber is one of the most sumptuous of any in the Seraglio. It Is arched
A magnificent Winter-Chamber.
Roof is divided into a great number of little Cells, Triangle-wise,
distinguished by two little filets of Gold, with a green streak in the midst,
and rout of every Angle, there juts somewhat like the bottom of a Lamp,
excellently well gilt. Though the Walls are of a curious white Marble, yet is
there a delicate piece of Wainscotage, of about the height of a man's waste,
carried quite round the Room, and the rich Carpets, upon which you walk,
deprive your sight of the large squares of Marble, of several colors,
wherewith the Floor is embellished. Of a great number of Cushions, which are
placed along the Walls, some are embroidered with Pearls, and precious Stones,
and set there only for ostentation; the others, which are for service, are
covered with Gold, or Silver-Brokadoes, and other costly Stuffs. At one of the
corners of the Chamber, there is a little Field-bed, about two foot in height,
embroidered all over, the Counterpane, the Cushions, and the Quilt; and that
Embroidery is all of Pearls, Rubies, and Emeralds. But when the Grand Seignor
is to come into that Chamber, they take away the Counterpane and Cushions,
which are less fit for Service than for Ornament, and they bring in others of
quilted or tufted Velvet, or Satin, upon which the Grand Seignor may more
conveniently repose himself.

Toward the feet of the said Bed, there is a kind of Neech made within the
very Mahomet's Mysterious Seal.
Wall, in which there is a little Ebony Box, about half a foot square, and in
that is locked up Mahomet's Seal. It is enchac'd in a Crystal, with a Bordure
of Ivory, and taking all together, it may be four inches in length, and three
in breadth. I have seen the Impression of it upon a piece of Paper; but he who
showed it me, would not suffer me to touch it, only upon this score, that he
looked on it as a great Relick. Once in three months this Chamber is made
clean, and the Carpets are changed, the Pages of the Treasury being employed in
that Office. And then it is, that the Chasnadar-bachi opens the Box, and having
in his hands an embroidered Hand-kerchief, he takes out the Seal, with great
respect and reverence, whilst the Senior of the Pages holds a golden Cup,
garnished with Diamonds and blue Saphirs, on the top of which there is a kind
of Perfuming-Pot, out of which there comes an exhalation of all sorts of sweet
Scents, whereby the whole Room is in a manner embalmed. The Page holds that Cup
in both his hands joy'nd together, and lifting it up higher than his Head, all
those that are present immediately prostrate themselves to the ground, as an
acknowledgment of their veneration. As soon as they are up again, the Page
brings down the Cup, lower than his chin, and the principal Officer of the
Treasury, holding the Seal over the smoke, all those who are in the Room, come
and kiss the Crystal which covers one of the most precious Relics, that they
have of their Prophet. I have used all the endeavors I could, to get out of my
two Officers of the Treasury, who had often kissed that Crystal, what
Observations they might have made, as to the material whereof the Seal was
made, and what Letters were engraved upon it; but they told me, and by reason
of the smoke and the Crystal, which covers the Seal, not to insist on the
small time they have to observe it, during the act of kissing it, it is not
possible that any one can give a certain judgment of either the Stuff, or the
Engraving of it.

Upon the fourteenth day of the Ramazan, that is to say, the Lent of the Turks,
the Grand Seignor comes in person into that Chamber, accompanied only by the
Seligdar-Aga, and taking off the Crystal, which lies over the Seal, he
delivers it into his hands, ordering him to make the Impression of it upon
fifty little bits of Paper, which are not much bigger than the Seal it self.
This Impression is taken off with a certain gummy Ink, which is prepared in a
Pourcelain Dish, whereinto he thrusts his finger, and rubs the Seal with it,
and keeps all those Printed Papers, for the use, to which his Highness designs
them, as we shall see, e're we come to the end of this Chapter.

Within the same Chamber, and adjoining to the place, where the Seal is kept,
The great Superstition of the Turks.
there is another Box or Coffer, of a larger size, covered with a Carpet of
green Velvet, with a great fringe of Gold and Silver, wherein is kept Mahomet's
Hirka. It is a Garment with large sleeves, of a white Camelet, made of Goat's
hair, which the Turks do also look upon as a great Relick. The Grand Seignor
having taken it out of the Coffer, kisses it with much respect and puts it into
the hands of the Capi-Aga, who is come into the Room by his Order, after they
had taken the Impressions of the Seal. The Officer sends to the Overseer of the
Treasury, for a large golden Cauldron, which is brought in thither by some of
the Senior-Pages. It is so capacious, according to the description which they
gave me of it, as to contain the sixth part of a Tun, and the outside of it is
garnished, in some places, with Emeralds, and Turquezes. This Vessel is filled
with water within six fingers breadth of the brink, and the Capi-Aga, having
put Mahomet's Garment into it, and left it to soak a little while, takes it out
again, and wrings it hard, to get out the water it had imbibed, which falls
into the Cauldron, taking great care, that there falls not any of it to the
ground. That done, with the said water he fills a great number of
Venice-Chrystal Bottles, containing about half a pint, and when he has stopped
them, he Seals them with the Grand Seignor's Seal. They afterward set the
Garment a drying, till the twentieth day of the Ramazan, and then his Highness
comes to see them put up again in the Coffer.

The next day after that Ceremony, which is the fifteenth after their grand
Fast, A ridiculous and covetous knack of Devotion.
the Sultan sends to the Sultanesses, and the Grandees of Constantinople, as
also to most of the considerable Bassa's of the Empire, to each of them, an
Impression of the Seal, in a little scrip of Paper rolled up, and well fastened
with Silk, and with that, one of those Bottles full of water, which is looked
upon as a great favor. But it proves a very dear favor to those who receive
it, and for a scrip of Paper, and a Glass of water, they must send back again
to the Grand Seignor very considerable Presents, not accounting what they
bestow on those persons, who bring, from him, those testimonies and marks of
his Affection.

It is to be observed also, That the Capi-Aga is allowed to multiply the said
Water, as far as he thinks requisite, and answerably to his desire of
multiplying the Presents. All he has to do, is only to fill up the Cauldron, as
it is emptied, and that additional water is as good as 'twas before, since it
is intermixed with that wherein Mahomet's Garment had been soaked. For there
are many persons, to whom he sends those Bottles, without the impression of the
Seal, upon the little piece of paper, and he has a snack out of all that is
bestowed on the Bearers of those Presents. But he is not permitted to make that
multiplication of the Water, any longer than for the space of three days; that
is to say, till the Seventeenth of the Ramazan, after which time, the
additional intermixture of it would not have the Virtue, which they imagine it
has.

As soon as this Present is received by those to whom it is sent, they take the
paper, which has the impression of Mahomet's Seal, and, after they have left it
to soake a little while in the Water of the little Crystal bottle, they take
off the water and the paper, swallowing down both together with great devotion.
But it is to be noted, That no body must be so presumptuous as to open that
paper; for they swallow it down as it is brought to them, after a little
soaking in the water, they being not permitted to see the impression of the
sacred Seal: And they, who receive only the bottle, without the paper, send for
one of their Imans, who are as 'twere their Priests, and get him to write down
these words in another piece of paper, La he Illa, Alla hul, vahidul gebbar,
That is to say, There is no other God then God, the punisher of Crimes. There
are others, who order these words to be writ down; La Illa he Illa, Allahul
meliquid vehhab; which signifies, There is no other God then God alone, the
Liberal Emperor, and Pardoner of Offenses. The paper, having these words
written upon it, is put into the water of the little Bottle, and so they
swallow down both together, with a strong persuasion, that those words have the
same virtue, as the impression of the Seal.

There is also to be seen, in the same Chamber, a very homely kind of Cuttelas,
hanging The Relics of Omar.
by the Wall, near the place where the Prophet's Seal and Garment are kept. The
Scabbard is covered with Green cloth, and they have it by Tradition, that it
had been the Cuttelas of Omar, one of Mahomet's four Companions, who governed
after him, though Ebou-Bequer was the elder of the two, and Father-in-law to
Mahomet. The Arabians affirm, That Ebou-Bequer was a Jew, by extraction, and
one of the most learned of his time; and that, having renounced the Mosaic
Law, he taught at Mecha, in the Schools, after which he beset himself to
compose some part of the Alcoran.

Near the Cuttelas, there is also to be seen a kind of short Sword, for which
they have, in like manner, a great veneration, upon a persuasion, that it some
time was the Sword of a certain person named Ebou-Nislum, with which he cut to
pieces, those, who had spread a Heresy in the Law of Mahomet. He came not into
the World till Four hundred years after the death of the Prophet, and at length
destroyed that Sect, which during the space of two Ages before, had given much
trouble to the true Mahumetans, and gained several Battles against them.

The said Sect was grown very powerful under the denomination of Muharriguu,
and I have met with some remainders of it in the Mountains of Churdistan, which
is the A ridiculous Sect.
ancient Chaldea. Those people are very remarkable for their superstition, and
much more for their ignorance; and a man must have a great care of striking a
black Dog, in their presence, or cutting an Onion with a Knife; for their way,
when they are to eat an Onion, is to crush it between two stones. The cause of
that gross ignorance, is their not having any person among them, to instruct
them; and a man may travel five or six days Journey in their Country, and not
meet with either a Mollah, or a Mosquey. The same reason may also be given for
their being, for the most part, uncircumsised, and that they who have received
Circumcision, had it not till they were Twelve or fifteen years of age, and
that accidentally, by going to some place at a great distance, to find out a
Mollah, and defraying the charges of their Friends and Relations, who must
accompany them to that ceremony.

Between the Chamber, where these noble Relics are to be seen, and that of the
The Grand Seignor's Quarter.
Forty Pages, of which I have given an account at the beginning of this
Chapter, you have the Prospect of a treble portal of Porphyry, that is, three
doors at a small distance one from the other, whereof that in the middle gives
entrance into the Grand Seignor's Appartment. The two others lead to the
Lodgings of the Chokadar-Aga, and the Biquabdar-Aga, and those Lodgings are
very dark, because they are not in a place where light can be brought into
them, and that at the first building thereof, they could afford each of them
but one little Window. But, abating that inconvenience, they are well enough
furnished, according to the mode of the Country, you tread on nothing but
Silken Carpets; there is no want of Brokado-Cushions, and emboyder'd ones, and
the Walls, which are all of White Marble, entertain the Eye with pots of
Flowers plainly painted, at certain equal distances, about which there has been
an ingenious application of Gold and Azure.

The Grand Seignor's Quarter begins with a Hall, which is spacious enough, and
the embellishments of the inside of it are correspondent to those of the
outside. It is an incrustation of Marble, of several colors, and the Floor of
it is covered only with the large Woollen Carpets, which are brought out of
Persia, but such as are more sumptuous, and much more highly esteemed, than
those which are made of Silk. All about the Hall, for the space of Five foot,
there are spread Coverlets of Silk, of a light color, some Tufted, some
Embroidered, and upon the Coverlets there are several sorts of Rich Cushions,
four foot in length, and between two and three, in breadth.

Of the two Doors, which are within the Hall, one goes to the Appartment of the
Pages, the other to the Quarter of the Sultanesses, and as you go out by this
last Amurath's Belvedere.
mentioned, you enter into a Flower-Garden, in the midst whereof there is a
Basin with its water-work. From one of the ends of the Garden you pass to the
Revan-Kouchki, that is to say, a Chamber supported by Pillars. It is a
Belvedere, or spacious Room, having a delightful Prospect of all sides, which
the Sultan Amurath caused to be built, at his return from the Persian War,
after he had taken the City of Babylon from Shach-Sefi, the King of that
Kingdom, ruined the Province of Tauris, and added that of Erivan to his
Conquests, by the perfidiousness of the Governor. I shall give you an account
anon, how he was justly punished, for that act of Treachery, and I reserve the
complete history of his baseness, for the Relations of my Travels.

This Room, or Arbor, which we call the Belvedere, from the delightfulness of
its Prospect, is built in an Eminent place, upon a steepy Rock. It is a noble
Arched Roof, and the Walls, which are raised no higher then that a man may rest
his Elbow on them, are all of White Marble, with some Arabian Verses thereon,
cut, and gilt. It is open of all sides, and the Lattices, all about it, hinder
those that are within it from being seen by such as are on the outside, and
afford them withal one of the most delicate Prospects in the World. For, from
that Room, they have the sight of all Galata and Pera, all that pleasant
Landscape of Asia, about Scutaret, and Chalcedon, the Port of Constantinople,
one of the noblest of all Europe, and the Channel of the Black Sea, which, at
the point of the Seraglio, is intermixed with the Waters of the Mediterranean,
where there is observable in the midst, as it were, a white foamy streak, which
seems naturally to denote the Confines of Europe and Asia.

'Twas in this pleasant Arbor, that Amurath was often wont to divert himself,
with The Excellent Wines of Tenedos.
that Governor of Erivan, who had taught him to drink Wine, whereto he had so
easily accustomed himself, that, many times, he spent three days together, in a
continued debauch. The only Wine he drunk was that of the Island of Tenedos,
the most excellent of any of the Islands of the Archiphelago, and the least
intoxicating; and he soon became as good a proficient in the drinking of it, as
the Master, who had taught him to do it. This Persian Governor was a man
extremely inclined to debauchery, insomuch that before his perfidious delivery
of the place to Amurath, as I passed through Erivan, in one of my Voyages to
Persia, he entreated me to make my abode there for the space of fifteen days,
and, to humor him, there was a necessity of spending whole nights in drinking,
so that I saw him not all the day long, which I question not but he employed in
the management of his affairs, and taking his repose.

But, at the long run, lewd actions meet with the punishment they justly
deserve. Persidiousness punished.
Shach-Sefi, King of Persia, would not entertain any proposition of Peace, no
nor so much as give audience to an Ambassador from the Grand Seignor, whom I
saw sent back from Ispahan, where I then was, unless Amurath would deliver up
the Traitor, in order to his punishment. Whereupon, they being both one day at
their ordinary debauch, in the Belvedere, the Grand Seignor, without any
formality, ordered him to be Strangled, in his presence.

It was sometimes also Amurath's custom, to bring into that pleasant place,
the The Fortune of a beautiful Sicilian Lady.
Principal Sultanesses, as, his Mothers, his Sisters, and such others as he had
the greatest kindness for. But his most frequent assignations there, was with a
Sicilian Lady, for whom he had a great affection, and who, being extremely
handsome, and of a mild disposition, obtained of him whatere she desired. She
was taken at Sea, by the Pirates of Barbary, as she was upon her Voyage into
Spain, in order to her intermarriage with one of the Grandees of that Country:
And the Bassa of Algiers sent her, a Present, to the Grand Seignor, who took a
particular fancy for her, and made her as happy, as a Woman can be, who must
endure the restraint of the Seraglio.

From that door of the Hall, which gives entrance into the Flower-garden, you
pass, The Grand Seignor's Bedchamber.
on the right hand, into a kind of Gallery, about fifty paces in length, and
twelve in breadth, the pavement whereof is a Chequer-work of Black and White
Marble. At the end of it, there is a great Structure, which is wholly of
Marble, and what first entertains the Eye is a pretty large Door, over which
there is a kind of a flat arched Roof. And both the Roof, and the Door, are
adorned with flowers, in embossed work; and amongst those flowers, there are
certain impresses cut in the Marble, and all curiously Gilt.

About five or six paces from that Door, you come to another, not inferior to
it, as to beauty, which is that of the Grand Seignor's own Chamber. Its
Cieling, or arched Roof, is according to the model of the Winter-room, whereof
I have given you a Description at the beginning of this Chapter. The only
difference between them is, in what issues out of the Augles of the little
Arches; and whereas in the other Room, they represent the bottoms of Lamps,
gilt with Gold; in this, they are balls of Rock-Crystall, cut Facet-wise, with
an inter-mixture of precious stones, of different colors, which must needs
give a very divertive entertainment to the Eye. The floor of it is covered with
Carpets, which, as to beauty, and excellency of Workmanship, exceed those of
the other Chambers; and the same thing is to be said, as to the Quilts, the
Counterpanes, and the Cushions; the most part of this furniture being adorned
with an embroidery of Pearls, and the whole Room, which is very spacious,
having, in all parts, several other sumptuous embellishments. And whereas this
Room was Originally designed for the Grand Seignor's Summer-Divertisement, it
is accordingly the more lightsome, and has large Windows on three sides of it.
As to the Sultan's Lodging, he complies with the custom of the Country, or
rather that of all the Eastern parts. There is no Bed-stead set up, but toward
the Evening, the Pages spread three Quilts one upon the other, at one of the
corners of the Chamber, and place over it a Canopy of Cloth of Gold, garnished
with an embroidery of Pearls.

On the right hand, as you come into this Room, there is a Cup-board, or Press,
The ancient Veneration for Mahomet's Standard.
wrought within the very Wall, where they keep the Bajarac, that is to say, the
Standard of Mahomet, which has these words for its Impress, or Motto, Nasrum
min Allah, that is, in our Language, The assistance is from God. This Standard
was heretofore in so great veneration amongst the Turks, that when there
happened any Sedition, either at Constantinople, or in the Armies, there was no
safer or more expeditious remedy to appease it, then to expose that Standard to
the sight of the Rebels. And that very Expedient has many times proved very
fortunate to the Ottoman Princes, when they have been reduced to their great
extremities, by the secret Combinations of some Factious persons. Then does the
Grand Seignor send some of the Mollahs, who are in the nature of Priests,
amongst the Turks, with the Standard, and being come up to the first ranks of
the Rebellious Forces, they speak to them, in their Language, to this effect:
This Banner is the Standard of the Prophet; all they who are faithful, and
obedient, ought to come to submit themselves at the Foot of this Standard; and
they who will not come to it, are Unbelievers, and they ought to be destroyed.
But some years since, the Turks made it appear, that they made but little
account of that Standard; for Hassan, one of the Bassa's, who gave the Grand
Seignor so much trouble in the year 1658. turned his back on Mahomet's Banner,
and, followed by his own party, compassed the design he was engaged in.

Out of the Grand Seignor's Chamber, there is a passage into a great Hall, the
place appointed for the reception of the Pages who approach his Person; and
there is adjoining A word further of the Prince's Appartment.
to it a Bath, which is filled by three Cocks, where they wash themselves, when
they go to their Devotions. Out of the same Hall, there is an ascent of some
steps, which brings you to a small Closet, only Wainscoted about, but well
Painted, and well Gilt. That Staircase is always covered with a red Cloth,
the Room is open of all sides, having fair Windows, wherein Talc is used,
instead of Glass; and from thence you have, in a manner, the same Prospect, as
from the Belvedere, built by the Emperor Amurath.

CHAP. XVI. Of the ordinary employments of the Grand Seignor; The particular
inclinations of the Emperour-Regent, Mahomet IV. And the present State of the
Ottoman Family.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
Some inclinations common to all the Monarchs of the Eastern-parts. The Life of
the Seraglio, delicious to one single person, and incommodious to many. The
Mahumetanes zealous observers of their Law. The regulated times of their
public Devotions. The ordinary Employments of the Grand Seignor. How his Table
is served. The Sultan, when obliged to go, in Ceremony, to the Mosquey. The
wicked contrivances of the Moufti, to get money. The present State of the
Ottoman Family. An extraordinary example of a Father and Son, who were
successively Grand Vizirs. The pourtraiture of the Sultan-Regent, Mahomet. The
ancient Custom of the Turkish Emperors, to live by their labor. The Grand
Seignor's subtilty, in revenging himself of the Moufti.

THE Ottoman Monarchs, and generally all the Princes of Asia, what reputation
soever they may have gained, for their valor, have always been guilty
Inclinations common to the Eastern Monarchs.
of a bent to voluptuousness, and effeminacy, and found great charms in a
slothful kind of life. They come out of their Seraglio's as seldom as they
can, and that only, when an indispensable necessity forces them to show
themselves in public, whether it be at the head of their Armies, or in those
Ceremonies, wherein the Law, or common Civilities, require their presence. True
it is, that some of them were not so great lovers of retirement as others, and
preferred the hardships of War, the divertisements of Hunting, before the
blandishments of ease, and the conversation of Women: But those may be reduced
into a very small number, and the greatest part of them being more addicted to
mind their quiet, and to lead a life void of disturbance, have transferred all
their concerns, Civil and Military, to the management of the principal Minister
of State, thinking it enough, to content themselves with the account he was
pleased to give him thereof.

It may be said of the Seraglio, That it is a delicious, but withal a solitary
place of The Seraglio, a place delicious to one single person, and incommodious
to many.
abode: but as to the observations I have made of things, it is delicious only
to a single person, and solitary to all the rest. Of the many Thousands, of the
Male Sex, who are there as 'twere in Prison, and have a dependence, one upon
the other, none but the Prince himself has the sight of Women; for the
Negro-Eunuchs, whom their deformity of body and countenance has, in a manner,
transformed into Monsters, are not to be admitted into the number of men.

But though the Ottoman Monarchs, and generally all that may be comprehended
The Mahumetans zealous observers of the Law.
under the denomination of Turcisme, are involved in voluptuousness, as not
having any tincture of ought relating to polite Literature, yet this is
particularly recommendable in them, that their great pursuance of pleasures
does not ever make them neglect the Divine Worship, and that, setting all
things aside, they are careful to perform what the Law requires of them, upon
that account. They are exact and punctual, even to superstition, in all their
exercises of Piety, in their ways of washing themselves, in their Prayers, in
their Fasts, in their Alms, and in their Pilgrimages; which are the Five
principal Articles of the Mahumetan Religion.

It is a thing sufficiently well known to all people, that the Turks go to
their Prayers, or Devotions, five times a day, that is, in the space of a
natural Day, which The regulated times of their Devotions.
amounts to four and twenty hours. For the performance of this work, there are
no certain hours appointed, and it is according to the Sun's being above their
Horizon. Upon which account, there is a greater interval between their several
Offices, in the Summertime, than there is in the Winter, and they place the
principal part of their Devotion upon observations of that nature. The first
Exercise is to be performed at the break of day, before Sunrising; the second
at Noon; the third, between that time and Sunset; the fourth, immediately
after his setting; and the last, about an hour and a half after Night: in all
which, unless sickness intervene, they are very punctual, so that nothing of
business, how important soever, shall divert them.

Nay, on the contrary, some are so zealous, and their fervor is so remarkable,
that Their servour in acts of Devotion.
being once fixed in their Prayers, they could not be put out of them, though
'twere to force back an Enemy, who were entering into the City, or that word
should be brought them, that the house wherein they are, was on fire. They are
moreover of a persuasion, that it is a great sin, for them to put their hand to
any part of the body, to scratch themselves, if there should be occasion; and
they would have the external part to be answerable to the internal, and
correspondent to that abjection, which ought to be the state of the Soul, in
the presence of God, during their Exercises of Devotion.

Nor does the Grand Seignor himself desire to be dispensed from the obligation
of The Grand Seignor's ordinary Employments.
performing these acts of Devotion, any more than the meanest of his Subjects;
but, on the contrary, he is very religious in that observance of their Law, and
he always begins the day with the Offices appointed for that part of it. We
need say no more, than that he rises at the break of day, nay sometimes he is
up before, and goes into the Bath to wash himself, especially when he has lain
with one of his Wives, or Concubines. Having finished his Prayers, he diverts
himself in shooting with the Bow, or, more commonly in looking after his
Horses, and riding some of them: and sometimes he seats himself in a Gallery,
where he cannot be seen by any, and contents himself with the diversion of
seeing some exercises performed by his Pages. If any one of them does something
that he is much pleased withal, he sends him a Vest, or some other thing of
value, as an encouragement for his doing better another time, and to raise an
emulation in his Companions. Upon Council-days, he comes through the close
Gallery, to the Window, which looks into the Divan Hall, to see what they are
doing there; and upon the rising of the Council, he returns to his own Quarter,
where his Dinner is brought up to him.

In the Services of his Table, there is not any great variety, or delicacy, the
Dishes that are served up, being answerable to the Bill of fare, which I have
given you in The Services of his Table.
the Chapter, where I treat of the Kitchins. He takes his refection, sitting,
cross-legg'd, as Tailors do amongst us, being surrounded with sumptuous
Brocado-cushions, which keep from him the dampness of the Walls, and upon the
Carpets which cover the Scaffold, or Balcony, where he is seated, they spread
others of Spanish-Leather, lest the former should be prejudiced by any thing of
greasiness, which might fall on the Table-cloath, and soak through it. This
Cloth, which is laid over the Spanish-Leather-Carpet, is of those sumptuous
painted Clothes, which are made in the Indies, and embroidered all about: and
as for Napkins, there are not any used amongst the Turks, who are neat, and
cleanly at their Meals; and if sometimes there be any occasion of wiping, it is
done with a little handkerchief. At their refections, they use the right hand
only, and when they have done, there is a Basin of warm water and soap brought
up, for them to wash, and every one takes out his Handkerchief from under his
Sasch, or Girdle, to wipe his hands and mouth. Nor must you expect in Turkey to
find Knives and Forks laid on the Table, but every one has his Knife lodged in
his Sasch, and makes use of, when occasion requires: but they have no great use
for them, inasmuch as their Bread, being made thin, as 'twere into Cakes, and
eaten in a manner as soon as it is out of the Oven, they break it with their
fingers, and all the meat, which is served up to them, is cut into small
pieces, which is also the custom in Persia. But the Spoons they use, in taking
their Pottages, and whatever is liquid upon the Table, are much larger than
ours; and they are wooden ones. The Pages of the Kilar, that is the Cup-bearers
Office, bring up the Bread, and the Sherbets, and the Pages of the Chamber go
and take the Meat, at the Prince's Appartment, out of the hands of the Officers
belonging to the Kitchen, who bring it in Dishes covered with Pourcelain, the
Grand Seignor not using any Gold Vessels at his own Table.

After Dinner, the Grand Seignor says his Noon-Prayer, and sometimes, on
Sundays and Tuesdays, which are the principal Council-days, he comes into the
Hall of Audience, to discourse with his Ministers of State, concerning his
Affairs. On the other days, he walks in the Gardens of the Seraglio, sometimes
with his Eunuchs, sometimes with the Sultanesses, or with his Dwarfs and Mutes,
who show a thousand apish tricks, to divert him: and sometimes he goes a
hunting, or a fishing, according to his inclination. But neither his Affairs,
nor his Recreations, do ever divert him from performing the five Exercises of
Devotion, at the times appointed by the Alcoran; and it is the general
Persuasion of all the Turks, that if they neglect them, they bring down God's
curse upon themselves, and that they cannot avoid the ill consequences thereof.

I have said elsewhere, that Friday is to the Mahumetans, what the Saturday is
to the The Sultan, when obliged to go, in Ceremony, to the Mosquey.
Jews, and the Sunday to the Christians, in regard it was upon the said day,
that Mahomet took his flight from Mecha; and I have also given this further
intimation, that the Turks count their Months only by the number of the Moons.
There is an ancient Custom, whereby the Grand Seignor is obliged upon all the
first Fridays of the several Moons, to go to the new Mosquey, in regard that S.
Sophia is too near the Seraglio, and besides that there is not, between those
places, room enough for so great a Train, as that of the Sultan, the people of
Constantinople would not have the satisfaction of seeing him.

His Devotion is so great, that he seldom misses that Ceremony, and when there
passes a first Friday of the month, without his appearance in it, the people is
presently of opinion, that he is sick, and thereupon turbulent spirits are
mutining their factious designs. On those days do they, who have any
complaints to make, of some injustice that has been done them, take their
opportunity, and plant themselves in the way, through which he is to pass, with
Petitions in their hands, which upon a sign made by the Sultan, are received by
the Eunuchs. If the injustice be very great and the person who presents the
Petition be extremely oppressed and injured, he holds a lighted Torch over his
head, which is ordinarily practiced in Turkey, upon the like occasions, and by
that mysterious comportment, intimates to the Prince, That if he does not do
him justice, his Soul shall burn in the other World, as that Torch does in this.

Upon the Emperor's going out of the Seraglio, the principal Sultanesses, his
Mother, his dearest Confort, or his Sisters, are in a Room over the great Gate
of that Palace, with Bags full of Aspers, which they fling among the people,
that they may pray, That God would graciously hearken to the Devotions, which
the Grand Seignor is going to perform. His March is after the same Order, and
with an observance of the Pomp, as that of the ancient Greek Emperors, and I
question not, but that those Authors, who have written of the Ottoman Empire in
general, or particularly of the City of Constantinople, have made sufficient
descriptions of that Ceremony, and therefore I shall think my self dispensed
from the obligation of giving a new one of it. I shall only say this of it,
That it is very Magnificent, and that there is not any Monarch in the World,
who makes so great an exposal of Gold and precious Stones together, wherewith
the Harnesses and Trappings of most of the Horses, as well of the Grand
Seignor, as those of the Bassa's are all covered.

At their return from the Mosquey, the Moufti, on Horseback, and at the head
of a The wicked contrivances of the Moufti, to get Money.
wretched Crew of Greek Christians, of the meanest sort of people (for there
are very few Armenians among them) expect the Grand Seignor, at the Gates of
the Seraglio, and telling his Highness, That those people were Mis-believers,
who had embraced the good Law, entreat him to relieve them, and to make some
provision for their livelihood. Upon this exhortation, the Sultan orders twenty
or thirty Purses to be distributed amongst them; nay sometimes his Charity is
so great, as to amount to twenty thousand Crowns, which are received by the
Moufti, and the distribution thereof is made, as he pleases. But the greater
part of it he converts to his own use, and holds an infamous correspondence
with most of that wretched Crew, who though they often present themselves for
that Benevolence, he pretends not to have any knowledge of at all. By this
Imposture, which is so palpable, and suits well enough with the followers of
Mahomet, does that High Priest of the Mahumetan Law, put yearly into his Purse,
a considerable Sum of Money, which is no small augmentation to his Revenue. But
the case is the same with him as with the Bassa's: that is, he is not exempted
from refunding, and we shall, by and by produce a very late Example of it.

And this may serve for a general account of the ordinary lives of the Ottoman
Monarchs, while they are within the Seraglio. In their Armies, they have other
Employments, especially they, who have Military Souls, as there have been some
among them, of whom Histories have given us a very noble Character.

I come now to the present state of the Ottoman Family, and to the particular
inclinations The present State of the Ottoman Family.
of the Grand Seignor, who now Reigns. Mahomet, the Fourth of that Name, the
Son of Ibrahim, and a Circassian Lady, was born in the Year 1643. and he is, by
that account, got into the Thirty fourth year of his Age, and the Twenty fourth
of his Reign. He has two Brothers, Bajazet, and Orchan, but they are by another
Mother, who is still living, and is perpetually studying how to preserve them.
He has also a third Brother, named Solomon, who is the second of the Sons of
Ibrahim, according to the order of their Nativities. But the Mother of the last
mentioned Son is dead; and thence it comes, that the Soldiery, who conceive
greater hopes of that Prince, than of either Bajazet, or Orchan, his Brethren,
pity him the more, and have the greater affection for him, upon that very score
of his having lost the support, which he might have expected from a Mother.

Ever since the time of Bajazet the Second, who first introduced that inhumane
and cruel Custom, of securing the Throne of the Sultan-Regent, by the death of
his Brethren, few of those unfortunate Princes have escaped the Barbarism of
their Elder-Brother, and they, amongst them, who have been treated with
somewhat less of inhumanity, have pined away their lives, in a strict and
doleful Imprisonment, being not permitted to see any body. This was the
Treatment of Ibrahim, the Father of Mahomet, during the Reign of Amurath, his
Brother, the Son of Achmet, by Kiosem, a Woman of Excellent parts, and well
versed in the management of Affairs. Mahomet's Brothers are now treated after
the same rate, and the Mother of Bajazet and Orchan, uses all the endeavors
she can, to secure to them the affections of the great Officers of the Port,
and the Janissaries, who are somewhat disgusted with the capricious humor, and
extraordinary covetousness of Mahomet. This Prince was advanced to the Throne
in the Year 1650. after the death of Ibrahim, his Father, who was strangled by
the Janissaries, in a Sedition. He being then but Seven years of age, the
Regency was bestowed, during his minority, on the Old Sultaness, Mother to
Ibrahim, who soon after abused her authority, and raised a dangerous Faction
against her Grandchild, Mahomet, wherein she lost her life.

The present Grand Seignor, who is a Person much addicted to his Pleasures, and
An extraordinary Example of a Father and Son successively Grand Vizirs.
takes a particular diversion, in Hunting, leaves the management of Affairs to
his Grand Vizir, Achmet, who has succeeded Coprogli, his own Father, in that
principal Charge of the Empire. It Is a thing which may well pass for a Prodigy,
amongst the Turks, and such as that there has not yet been any example of it
seen, as perhaps there will not be any other hereafter. I have shown, that it
is a thing absolutely contrary to their Politics; and therefore, had it not
been for the great and particular obligations, which the Empire had to
Coprogli, who, on the other side, cunningly represented to the Grand Seignor,
that he never durst trust any but his own Son, with the Secret of Affairs,
whereof he only had the Key, this very Achmet, who, next to the Sultan, is the
Principal Person of the Empire, would have been, at present, but a simple Bey,
or Captain of a Galley.

The Grand Seignor Mahomet is handsome enough as to his Person, his Stature
somewhat The Pourtraiture of Mahomet IV. the present Prince.
exceeding that of the middle sort of persons; he has not too much corpulency,
and his health is in an uncertain state. He is very much troubled with a Fall,
which he received, in the violence of his Game, some years since, by leaping
his Horse over a broad Ditch: And whereas that passion is still predominant in
him, this inconvenience attends it, That, when he is not somewhat favorable
and indulgent to himself, in that violent Exercise, he is sometimes taken off
his Horse in a miserable condition, the Remedies which might be applied to that
indisposition, taking no effect, by reason of the little care he takes to
preserve himself. He is a person of an unconstant and unquiet disposition,
which creates the greater trouble to those who wait on him; and though they
study his humors, yet is it a hard matter to satisfy him. He has a Son, who
has been circumcised with great solemnity, at the age, wherein that Ceremony is
to be performed. The Sultaness, his Mother, a Woman of a Magnificent humor, to
augment the Pomp and Splendor of that Action, to the eyes as well of the
Turks, as Forreiners, would have the Garment, which the Young Prince wore that
day, to be all covered with Diamonds, and, to that end, caused several Rich
Pieces of the Treasury to be broken; but after the Solemnity, all the Precious
Stones were carried back into it again.

I said erewhile, that the present Sultan- Mahomet is extremely addicted to
Hunting, and makes it so much his Darling Divertisement, that he makes less
account of the lives of Men, than he does of his Dogs; and withal, that he is
of a very covetous humor. I shall, in one single Example make a sufficient
discovery of both those inclinations in him, and that will also further make it
appear, how well he was skilled, in that Knack of exercising great
Liberalities, without any deduction out of his Revenues.

When the Grand Seignor goes a Hunting, there are Orders sent to a great number
of people, for the space of four or five Leagues about the place where he
intends to Hunt, in order to the surrounding of a certain quantity of Ground,
and for the enclosing of it so well, as that nothing can escape thence. It Is
not to be imagined, this can be done, without great destruction to the Country,
and much inconvenience to the poor people, who are forced to leave their work,
to carry on an Exercise which is much more toilsome then it, in which they many
times come off with the loss of Limb, or Life, or some other disastrous
Accident. These continual impositions of trouble and toil put many people into
the repining humor, insomuch that an Eunuch, who was in favor, having, one
day, taken the freedom to represent to the Grand Seignor the prejudice his
Subjects underwent, by those courses which occasioned the spoiling of their
Grounds, and the loss of their Lives, he grew very angry, and after some days
imprisonment, he gave him a shameful ejection out of the Seraglio.

But, in process of time, the mischievous Inconveniences occasioned by this
insatiable pursuance of his Pleasures in Hunting, increasing more and more, the
Grand Vizir, and the other Bassa's, resolved to entreat the Moufti, to make a
Remonstrance to him, of the ill consequence thereof, he being the only person,
who might presume to speak any more of it to the Grand Seignor. The Moufti
would by no means hearken to it at first, imagining, as he might well, that his
harangue would not be pleasing to the Sultan: But, at last, being
over-perswaded to do that good office to the Public, he took courage, and his
opportunity, to speak to him, with all the insinuation he could.

He could not bethink himself of a better Expedient, to remove that predominant
The ancient Custom of the Greek Emperors, to live by their handiwork.
passion out of his mind, then to represent to him, the Custom of his
Predecessors, who took their diversion in some handiwork, when the War, or
the Concerns of State gave them any remission: That, according to their
Example, their Subjects applied themselves to things that were beneficial, and
made all Arts and Professions to flourish in the Empire, to the great advantage
of the Public: That Sultan- Amurath, his Uncle, delighted in making those
Horn-Rings, which are used in shooting with the Long-Bowe: That Ibrahim, his
Father, was an Excellent Artist, in the making of Tooth-picks, and other small
Instruments of Tortoise-shell: And that it were requisite that so Laudable a
Custom should not be lost, since it gave the people occasion to do the like,
and so to avoid idleness.

He further Remonstrated to his Highness, That it was much more commendable in
the sight of men, and more acceptable to God, for him to live by the labor of
his hands, then by the sweat of the people, and the Money arising by
Impositions, which were forbidden by the Law: and that what was allotted for
the peculiar Diet of his Predecessors, was the product of their own handiwork:
That true it was indeed, they were not obliged to any assiduity in the
Employments they had fancied, but that what they did was as much for their own
diversion, as to satisfy the Precept of the Law; and when they had finished
some piece of Work, they sent it to some Bassa, for whom they had a particular
kindness, and he received it with extraordinary respect, and abundance of joy:
That he, who was the Bearer of it, when he came to present it, said, That Piece
of Work, was made by the Grand Seignor himself, who had sent him to sell it, in
order to his own sustenance: And that the Bassa, or other person, to whom it
was directed, to express how highly he was pleased therewith, gave him a
certain number of Purses for it; not accounting the Present which was to be
made to the Bearer: That what Money came in that way, was designed to bear the
Charges of the Prince's own Table, and by that means, he could not be charged
with living by the labor of his Subjects.

To this effect was the Moufti's harangue; and I shall tell you by the way,
That the Kings of Persia have the same Custom, or rather, the same
Superstition. In the Reign of Shach-Abas, there were built, at Ispahan, certain
places called Caravanseras, which are public houses, where the Merchants are
lodged, the Rents whereof are set aside for the maintenance of the King's own
Table; the Money which is raised by the Customs, and other Impositions, being
accounted, as to that score, for Haram, that is to say, for unjust and
forbidden, and reserved to be employed in the Exigencies of State, and not for
the Sustenance of the Prince.

The Grand Seignor dissembling and smothering the vexation, into which the
Moufti's The Sultan is cunningly revenged of the Moufti.
Remonstrance had put him, pretended to take his Advertisements very kindly,
and disposed himself to satisfy him, in a short time, how well he could make
his advantage of the Lecture he had read him. He acknowledged, that he had
often thought of what he had represented to him, and that he had a way of
livelihood in his head, which he hoped would take very well. Some days passed
away, ere the Grand Seignor made the least mention of Hunting; but at last, he
grows impatient, he leaves the Seraglio, and had the good fortune to kill a
Hare with a Gun, the first he had ever destroyed that way. He immediately sends
it to the Moufti, with order to tell him, That he has followed his advice, and
that having learnt the Prosession of a Huntsman, he has commanded that first
piece of his Game should be brought to him, which he was willing to sell, that
he might subsist by the Money it should produce: That he fail not to give Twenty
Purses to him who brings it; and that as to his own Person, he knew well enough
what he ought to send him.

The Moufti concealed his surprizal as well as he could, and received the Hare
with great testimonies of his resentments and joy, of the honor, which his
Highness had done him; and having bestowed, according to his own order, Twenty
Purses upon the Bearer of the Hare, sends Sixty more to the Grand Seignor
himself; learning, at his own cost, and that to the value of Fourscore thousand
Crowns, that men should not be over-forward to give their Sovereigns those
advertisements, which they desire not of them.

To finish the Pourtraiture of Sultan- Mahomet, he is further chargeable with a
defect of constancy, in his humor, and a roughness of deportment toward his
people, who are thereupon apt to have the less affection for him. And whereas
he is indefatigable in his Hunting-Exercises, and spends whole days therein,
even in the severest part of the Winter-Season, it happened, one day, as he was
returning home, from the Sport of running down a Stag, that his Grand Falconer
took the boldness to represent to him the inconvenience of exposing his Slaves
so much in the Ice and Snow, by which means there had died about Thirty of them
the Night before, and the rest were in a fair way to follow them. The Prince,
not moved at all with that Remonstrance, made this Reply to the grand Falconer,
That, if the Weather proved very hard, they should have a care of his Dogs, and
allow them clothing, and other accommodations, lest the rigor of the Season
might take off any one of them; making not the least mention of, or provision
for the men, whom he sacrificed to his Divertisement. That rough repartee
having been spread among the people, has begot such animosity in them against
this Prince, that there is no question made of his being sensible thereof, and
that it is, in some measure, the cause of his keeping so much at a distance,
from the Metropolis of his Empire, where he does not think himself secure.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Women's Appartment.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The impossibility of having a full knowledge of the Women's Appartment, in the
Seraglio. The Commerce between the Jewesses and the Sultanesses. The doleful
Story of Two Famous Wrestlers. The great Severity of the Sultan-Amurath. How to
distinguish between what is true, and what fabulous, in reference to the
Sultanesses. A strange Story of an old Woman. Polygamy prejudicial to the
propagation of Children. The great Secrecy of the Grand Seignor's Amors.

IMake a Chapter by it self of the Appartment of the Women, only to entertain
The impossibility of having an exact account of the Women's Appartment,
the Reader, with the impossibility there is, of having a perfect knowledge of
it, or getting any exact account, either what the accommodations of it are; or
how the Persons, who are confined therein, behave themselves. There is not in
all Christendom any Monastery of Religious Virgins, how regular and austere
soever it may be, the entrance whereof is more strictly forbidden to men, than
is that of this Appartment of the Women: insomuch that my white Eunuch, who has
supplied me with so particular a description of the inner part of the Seraglio,
could give me no certain information of this Quarter of it, where the Women are
lodged. All I could get out of him, was, That the Doors of it are kept by
Negro-Eunuchs, and that, besides the Grand Seignor himself, and sometimes, the
Physician, in case of great necessity, there never enters any man into it, no
nor Woman, besides those who live in it, and they are never permitted to go out
of it, unless it be in order to their confinement in the Old Seraglio. But we
must except, out of that number, the Sultanesses, and their Maids, or Ladies of
Honor, whom the Grand Seignor allows, when he pleases, to come into the
Gardens of the Seraglio, and whom he sometimes takes abroad with him, into the
Country; yet so as that they cannot be seen by any person whatsoever. Four
Negro-Eunuchs carry a kind of Pavilion, under which is the Sultaness, and the
Horse upon which she is mounted, all save only the head of the horse, which is
seen on the outside of the Pavilion, the two fore-pieces of which, taking him
about the Neck, are close fastened, above, and below.

And as to the Physician, he is never admitted, as I said, but in case of
extreme hecessity, into the Appartment of the Women, and with such precautions,
that he can neither see the person who is indisposed, nor be seen by her, but
to feel her Pulse through a piece of Lawn, all the other Women having retired
from her Bedside, and the Negro-Eunuchs having taken their places. Thus you
see what precautions they use, to deprive the Women, of the Seraglio, of all
means of having any access to Men, or indeed so much as a sight of them: And if
it happen that some Jewess has entrance into their Quarter, to Trade with them,
and to sell them some little Rarities, they are strictly searched by the
Negro-Eunuchs, lest there should happen to thrust in some Man, disguised in
Woman's Clothes, in which case immediate death would ensue. And when the
Couriosity of some Christian Ladies has inclined them to see the Sultanesses,
they seldom escaped without the receiving of some affront; and I could produce
some examples of it, did I think it convenient.

It might be imagined, that, by the relation of the Jewesses, it were possible
to have The Commerce between the Jewesses and the Sultanesses.
some account, of the embellishments of the Halls and Chambers of the
Appartment of the government of that Female Republic. But it is to be noted,
That these Jewesses are not permitted to go far into it; for there is a Chamber
appointed for the management of their Traffic, and the Negro-Eunuchs are the
Brokers between them, and the Sultanesses. They take cognizance of all, and
what the Princesses have a mind to buy, passing through their hands, they make
them pay double and treble what the things are worth, and so heap up Wealth,
though they have but little occasion or opportunity to make use of it.

But I do not expect, any one should wonder at that great exactness, of not
permiting any man; no not even a White Eunuch, to approach the Appartment of
the Women, The doleful Story of Two Famous Wrestlers.
after an Accident, which happened at Adrianople, in the Year of our Lord M.
DC. XXXIX. and which I shall here insert in few words. Amurath, at his return,
after the taking of Bagdet, came and made his abode, for some time, at
Adrianople. He had a Page, belonging to the Treasury, who was a Native of
Tocat, in Natolia, and, from the place of his birth, they gave him the name of
Tocateli. He was a well-set Young man, robust, skilful in Wrestling, and, upon
that account, the Grand Seignor had made Chief of the Wrestlers.

It happened, that one of the most Famous, for that Exercise, came about that
time to Adrianople, out of the Confines of Muscovy, and in all the Cities,
through which he traveled, he had always been too hard for those who had
presented themselves to Wrestle with him. His Reputation was spread all over
the Empire, where he had not met with any Wrestler, who acknowledged not
himself inferior to him; Which Report coming to the Page of the Treasury, he
conceived so great an emulation at the Fame of that Man, whom all the World so
highly celebrated, that he sent one of the Halvagis, to carry him a Civil
Challenge from him, and to acquaint him, That he was desirous to have a Trial
of Skill with him, in the Grand Seignor's Presence. He sent him word withal,
That, before his Highness had any notice of it, 'twere convenient, they made
some trial of their strength; And that no body might know any thing of it, he
would send him a Bostangi's Garment and Cap, by which means he might come into
the Seraglio.

When the Grand Seignor is not within the Seraglio, where ever it be, the
Bostangis are permitted to come into, and to go out of it, by the Garden-Gate;
and there being a great number of them, it is no hard matter to get a man in
under their accoutrements. By this contrivance did the Muscovian Wrestler get
into the Seraglio, the next day, upon the solicitation of the Page, who sent
him what was requisite; the Grand Seignor being, that day, gone a Hunting. They
both put on Drawers of Leather, well liquor'd with some fat or oily stuff, all
the rest of the body being stark naked, and liquor'd in like manner: and after
a long dispute, the Page had the better, whether he got it fairly by his own
strength, and skill, or that the other yielded the victory, out of complaisance.

This Action passed in the midst of the place which is before the Garden, in
the presence of the Mutes, and all the Pages of the Seraglio; and the Grand
Seignor being returned from Hunting, the Superintendent of the Treasury told
him, That there was come into the City, a Pehlivan, a Muscovite by Country,
robust, and of a good mien, of great strength, and well experienced in
Wrestling, and that if his Highness pleased, he should have the satisfaction to
see him engaged in that Exercise. The Grand Seignor commanded he should be
brought into the Seraglio, the next day, and that Torcateli should have notice,
to be ready to entertain him.

Being both come to the place, and in a condition ready to close, the Grand
Seignor came into a Gallery, attended by all the Grandees of the Seraglio, to
be Spectators of that Trial of Skill in Wrestling. The Victory having stood as
'twere in the balance a good while, and all the Spectators, being somewhat
impatient, to see which side it would turn to, a Mute expressed himself by
signs, to one of his Companions, to this effect, That he wondered the Page, who
should have derived new strength and courage, from the Grand Seignor's
presence, found it so difficult to get the better of the Muscovite, whom he had
so easily worsted the day before.

The language of the Mutes, by signs, is as intelligible in the Seraglio, as if
they had the liberty of speaking, and the Grand Seignor, who understands it as
well as any of them, as having been accustomed thereto from his Infancy, and
commonly discoursing with them, was strangely surpised, to understand that the
Muscovite had been, the day before, in the same place. His indignation
immediately flushed into his face; he commanded the Wrestlers to give over
their Exercise, and, calling the Page to him, he asked him, How he had
contrived that man's entrance into the Seraglio. The unfortunate Tocateli, who
could not deny a thing, which so many others were ready to testify, acquainted
his Highness with what had passed; whereupon, the Sultan, incensed at the
greatness of his confidence, prevented his making an end of the Story, by
commanding the Bostangi-bachi to be presently sent for, whom he ordered to
seize on the Muscovian Wrestler, and see him receive Five hundred blows on the
soles of the Feet, with a Wand or Cudgel; which no doubt was enough to make him
incapable of exercising himself, for a good while after. The Overseer had
Orders, to see the same punishment inflicted upon the Page Tocateli; which was
immediately put in execution: the Grand Seignor having, in the mean time,
retired into the Appartment of the Women.

It was the Opinion of most about the Seraglio, that those two unfortunate
wretches would have escaped, with the punishment of Five hundred blows, each
of them, upon the soles of their feet. But the Grand Seignor, who was resolved
to have their lives, and had retired, purposely, into the Lodgings of the
Women, to prevent all mediation for their pardon, sent away presently a second
Order, to the Bostangi-Bachi, whereby he was commanded to see the Page hanged
up, in the Evening, on a Tree, which is at the Corner of the place, where they
had Wrestled, and the Muscovite on another Tree, which is without the Gate of
the Seraglio.

Some would be apt to think, that these two Executions were enough to appease
the Amurath's great Severity.
Prince's indignation: But it proved otherwise. The next morning, the Sultan-
Amurath sent for the Capi-Aga, the chiefest amongst the Eunuchs, and the Grand
Master and Comptroller, of the Seraglio, and commanded, That the Gellad, who is
the common Executioner, should also give his attendance. Upon the passing of
these Orders, all those, that were present, cast themselves at his Highnesse's
feet, beseeching him to consider, That the Capi-Aga was innocent, that he had
not the least notice of the confidence of the Page, and that, if it had come to
his knowledge, he would have severely punished it. The Grand Seignor continuing
still extremely incensed, could not be appeased by all the entreaties and
submissions they made to him, and would have the Capi-Aga, as Grand Master of
the Seraglio, to be answerable for all those that come into it; when, for the
good fortune of that principal Officer of the Sultan's Palace, there came in
the Moufti, and the Seligdar, or Chief of the Pages of the Chamber, who with
much ado made a shift to beg his pardon. Yet was not that granted but in part;
for all they could obtain, extended only to the saving of his life; and so the
Grand Seignor ordered him to be immediately thrust out of the Seraglio, with a
charge never to enter again into it, while he lived; and instead of the Dignity
of Bassa, whereto he should have been advanced, to be reduced to a small
Pension of Three hundred Aspers a day.

I thought it pertinent to my design, to bring in this Story of the Two
Wrestlers, in order to the greater confirmation of what I have affirmed at the
beginning of this Chapter, concerning the impossibility there is, for any
person whatsoever, Man, or Woman, to get into the Appartment of the
Sultanesses, when they punish, with so much severity, a Stranger, who, without
express order, presumes but to set his foot within any Court of the Seraglio.

Take it then for granted, that this is all that can be known, with certainty,
of the How to distinguish what is true, and what fabulous, as to the Sultanesies.
Appartment of the Women, who are subservient to the pleasures of the Ottoman
Monarchs; whatever is scattered abroad, beyond this account thereof, being
grounded only upon imaginations and conjectures, which happily are at a great
distance from the truth. Certain it is, that this Quarter of the Seraglio, as
to some part of it, has a fair Prospect upon that of the Grand Seignor, and
that the Doors of it are kept night and day, by a certain number of
Negro-Eunuchs, the most deformed, and the most dreadful to look upon, that can
be found. It is certain also, that it is well furnished with abundance of most
beautiful Women, of several Countries, who, by the chance of War, or otherwise,
are fallen into the hands of the Bassa's, and Governors of Provinces, who send
them up, as Presents, to the Grand Seignor. It is known also, That, of that
variety of Women, the Prince does not appropriate to himself above two or
three, whom he has the greatest affection for; nay some of those Princes have
confined themselves to the embraces of one only, after intermarriage. And this
is affirmed, at Constantinople, of Solomon the Great, after he had plighted his
faith to Roxulana, contrary to the ordinary Policy of the Turks, after the
affront, done by Temur-leng, to the Wife of Bajazet. The white Eunuchs, who
wait in the Grand Seignor's Lodgings, are able, in some measure, to give an
account of these things, in regard that the Woman, who is to participate of the
Grand Seignor's Bed, is conducted into his own Chamber; and, if it be a new
Amor, the noise of it is spread, the next day, all over the Seraglio.

It is also known, That the first of those Women, who is delivered of a
Male-child, and, by that means, becomes Mother to the presumptive Heir of the
Ottoman-Empire, is considered as the principal Sultaness, and treated according
to her dignity: and the others, who afterward have Sons or Daughters, have
also the quality and denomination of Sultanesses; but the number of the Women,
who are to wait on them, is much inferior, to that of those, who are to attend
the principal Sultaness. It is known, in fine, That those young Princes are
brought up under the tutelage of their Mothers, till they are so many years of
age; and when they are strong enough to be put upon certain Exercises, they
have Governors and Masters appointed over them, in a distinct Quarter by
themselves.

Besides these things, which may be positively known, concerning the Appartment
of the Women, in the Seraglio, it may well be imagined, that the embellishments
of their Lodgings are answerable to those of the Grand Seignor, since it is the
place, where he passes away the most divertive part of his time. It is also not
to be questioned, but that it has its Infirmary, its Baths, and the other
accommodations, and conveniences, that can be wished for. It may also be
conjectured, That there is, in this Quarter, an observance of the same
regulations, as there are in the Chambers of the Ichoglans: That some of the
more ancient Maids are Mistresses over the Younger ones, and are, night and day
employed in observing their actions; and that their unvoluntary restraint
forces them to the same unseemly actions amongst themselves, as the brutish
Passions of those Young Men engages them in, whenever they can find the
opportunities to commit them. And this presumption has no doubt given occasion
to the Fabulous Story, which is related of their being served up with Cucumbers
cut into pieces, and not entire, out of a ridiculous fear lest they should put
them to undecent uses: they who have forged the Story not knowing, that it is
the custom in the Levant, to cut the Fruit across, into great thick slices,
as I shall make it appear in the Chapter, where I treat of their Gardens. But
it is not only in the Seraglio, that that abominable Vice reigns, but it is
predominant also in the City of Constantinople, and in all the Provinces of the
Empire, and the wicked Example of the Men, who, slighting the natural use of
Womankind, are mutually enflamed with a detestable love for one another,
unfortunately enclines the Women to imitate them.

Of this, there was a strange instance in the time of Solomon the Magnificent.
An A strange Story of an old Woman.
old Woman was guilty of such an excess of extravagance, as to put on Man's
Clothes, and to give out, that she had bought a Chiaoux's place, the better to
compass her design, of obtaining the only Daughter of a Tradesman of
Constantinople, with whom she was desperately fallen in love, having made
fruitless attempts, by other ways, to satisfy her infamous inclinations. The
Father, not suspecting any thing of her wicked intentions, and being withal
poor, grants her his Daughter, the Marriage is solemnized in the presence of
the Cadi, and the imposture having been discovered the very Wedding-night, the
old woman was condemned the next day to be thrown into the Sea, there to quench
the Gomorrhean Inflammations of her lewd desires. This Story is to this day
related in Constantinople, and I have had it from several good hands.

These insatiable salaciousness amongst the Women, are the effects and
consequences Polygamy prejudicial to propagation.
of the same inclinations in the Men; and the Turks are so much the more
execrable and abominable as to this particular, the more they are permitted a
plurality of Wives. But, whether it happens through a just punishment from
Heaven, or proceed from their Sorceries, which are common and allowed in
Turkey, and ordinarily practiced by the Women, in opposition one to another, to
appropriate the affections of their Husbands, it has always been observed, That
the Turks who keep many Women, are not so well stored with Children, as they,
who observe Conjugal Chastity, and confine themselves to one. I question not
but those Authors, who have written of the Mahumetan Religion, have given a
sufficient account of that plurality of Wives, and of the Ceremonies of
Matrimony, amongst the Turks.

As to the manner, how the Grand Seignor demeans himself in the prosecution of
The Secrecy of the Grand Seignor's Amors.
his Amors, it is a Secret, which I shall not enquire into; I have not much
endeavored to make any discoveries of it, and it is a hard matter to give any
account thereof, without some hazard of travesting History into Romance. They
are Intrigues, which do not admit of any Confident, by whom they may be
disclosed, and all that is commonly related thereof, is happily at a great
distance from the true state of things: not to press this, That we ought to
have a respect for all Princes, and to forbear divulging what informations we
may possibly have received, of their secret Amors.

CHAP. XVIII. The Entrance into Constantinople of the Sultaness, Mother to the
Grand Seignor, whom they honor with the Title of la Valide, on the Second of
July, 1668.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The order of the March. The Wealth of the Grand Seignor's Favorite. The
Sultanesse's Coaches. The prohibitions to look on her.

ON the Second of July, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand, six Hundred,
Sixty and Eight, the Sultaness, Mother to the Grand Seignor Regent, at her
return from Adrianople, made her Entrance into Constantinople, where I then
was, of which Entrance take the eusuing Description.

About Six in the Morning, some numbers of Janissaries, not observing any order,
The Order of the March.
took their way toward the Seraglio, sometimes ten, or more, sometimes twenty,
in little detachments, which lasted for some time.

After them came two hundred men on Horseback, belonging to the House of the
Cologlou, that is to say, the Grand Seignor's Favorite, with short Guns
resting on the Bow of their Saddles, and all very meanly clad, as also the
Officers of his Kitchen, who coming in the Rear of the others, were, in like
manner, poorly habited, and ill mounted. After them appeared in somewhat a
better order, the menial Retinue of the Caimacan, his Officers, as well those
belonging to the Chamber, as those of the Stables, were very handsomely
mounted, and all in their yellow Garments.

The next appearance was that of the Spahis, who are the Sultaness-Mother's
Lifeguard. Of those there were four hundred, which made a handsome Show, being
all well mounted, and well clad. They had all their Coats of Mail, with their
Vests of red Taffeta, and had on the right side a Quiver of Crimson-Velvet,
embroidered with Flowers of Gold; and on the left, a Bow in a cover of red
Velvet, embroidered as the other. They had all of them Helmets on their Heads,
and over them white Turbants, and from the Helmets there hung small Chains of
Mail, resembling Locks of Hair, which they use when occasion requires, to ward
off a blow from the neck and face. Every one of them had also a Lance in his
hand, and the Trappings of their Horses were of one of these three Colors,
yellow, violet, and red, of a rich Stuff, with an embroidery of Silver.

The Spahi-Bachi came in the Rear of them, having a Plume of Heron-tops in his
Turbant, three foot in height, which made him remarkable, and distinguished him
from all the other Spahis. On the Breast-piece of his Horse, were fastened a
dozen little Scarffs, which hung down negligently, and he was attended by six
Pages, who had Caps on, after the Slavonian Mode, red Vests tucked up about the
waste, and yellow Hose, or Drawers.

After the Spahis, there passed several Janissaries, but not marching in any
order, followed by two hundred men on Horseback, and in the Rear of them, came
the Janizary-Aga, a Person of a very goodly presence. He had for his immediate
Attendants six gentile young Persons, who had each of them, hanging over his
shoulder, a kind of Quiver, full of small Wands, which are a sort of Arrows,
without any Ironwork at the ends.

After the forementioned, there came up twelve men, who are as it were the
Masters of the Ceremonies, in very ridiculous Accoutrements. They had Silver
Wands resting on their Shoulders, their Vestments were garnished with small
Bells, and they had Caps on, which had somewhat hanging down of each side,
resembling Asses Ears.

The next appearance after that extravagant Party, was that of an hundred
Capigis, all well mounted, every one with a Lance in his hand, with a Flag
fastened thereto, reaching from the top to the bottom, which made a very noble
Show. In the Rear of the Troop came the Capigi-bachi, distinguished from the
rest by a high and large Plume of Heron-tops, which added much to the
gracefulness of his looks, and Person.

After them, came a hundred Chiaoux's, well clad, and well mounted, having
their great Caps on their Heads; and in the Rear of them came the Caimacan,
having a Cap of the same fashion, attended by twenty Pages, very neatly clad.

The next appearance was that of five or six hundred Bostangis, with their Caps
like Sugar-loaves, their Habits of a red linen Cloth, and Muskets on their
Shoulders. The Bostangi-bachi came after them, sumptuously clad, and mounted,
with a Chiaoux-cap upon his head, and a great number of people about him.

There appeared next, two hundred Cadis, making a most noble Show, all modestly
clad, with their Busquins of black Spanish-Leather, and white Turbants, like
great Balls of Wool, or Silk.

They were followed by the Scherifs, who affirm themselves to be of the kindred
of Mahomet, and made up a Troop of sixty Persons. As they were the Relations of
the Prophet, they wore green Turbants of an extraordinary bigness.

After the Scherifs, came the two principal Officers of the Moufti (for he
never appears in person in these sorts of Ceremonies) and they were clad in
white, having a very demure and religious Countenance.

The Cologlou, or Grand Seignor's Favorite, appeared next mounted on a gallant
The wealth of the Favorite.
Horse, whose Harness and Trappings were of the richest. The Stirrups were of
Gold, and the Housse was embellished with an embroydery of Gold and Pearls. His
Vest was of a red Brokado, and his Cap like those of the Chiaouxes. Two men
held the reins of his Bridle, and his Horse curvetted all along, as if he had
been sensible of the goodly presence of his Master, and how well it became him.
He was a person of a good stature, and of a graceful countenance, having withal
a mild and sprightly look, and every one saluted him, as he advanced still
toward the Seraglio. The Servants belonging to his Stable marched after him,
and fifty Grooms led each of them a Horse in his hand, and those horses were
all high-priz'd, and their Harnesses as sumptuous as could be made. It Is
commonly reported, That this Favorite, who is a person of very great merit,
has acquired vast Riches, and that his Train, whether as to the number of
Servants, or as to that of Horses, surpasses that of many great Princes.

There came up next a small Troop of Negro-Eunuchs, marching confusedly, before
The Sultanesses Coaches.
the Coaches of the Sultaness, Mother to the present. Grand Seignor, all well
mounted, and Magnificently clad, in different colors,

There appeared afterward Six Capigis, about the first Coach, drawn by six
Excellent Horses. They had each of them a Lance in his hand; and, in the Rear
of them, there appeared a Horse-tail-Banner, of a pale-red color, whereby it
was known, that some Bassa's were coming up, as indeed there were, and they
were a Convoy to the second Coach, drawn by six white horses, in which was the
Sultaness-Mother, and another Sultaness. Two Black Eunuchs marched on each side
of it, the Boots, or Doors being latic'd, that the Princesses might see, and
not be seen. Which hindered not, however, but that, as the Coach of the
Sultaness came forwards, some were still crying out to the people, and
commanding them to look the other way; which Command it concerns them exactly
to obey, and that especially in Perfia, where they must get away as far as they
can, to avoid the hazard of receiving a good blow with a Sable.

After the asoresaid Coach, there passed by Twelve other Coaches with four
horses apiece, wherein were the Female-Slaves belonging to the Sultanesses,
having two Negro-Eunuchs, at the Doors of each Coach, which were latic'd, as
the former: After which there followed several Litters, and four great Wagons,
full of Snow, for the use of the Sultanesses, and their Retinue.

All this Cavalcade, consisting of between five and six thousand men, took up
almost three hours in its passage, and having made its Procession through
Constantinople, lodged it self in the Seraglio, according to the description I
have given you of it.

Of the French Nation, there were several Persons of Quality, who had the
Curiosity to see that Entrance; and among others, Monsieur Ribier, de
Ville-neuve, a Counselor of the Parliament of Paris; Monsieur Le Mairat, a
Counselor of the Grand Council: The Abbot of Champhuon, de la Saulsaye, all
Parisians; and Monsieur Aubert, a Native of New-France, and, by Extraction, a
Norman, Son to the Governor of Guardaloupe.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Gardens of the Seraglio.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
The Revenues of the Gardens employed for the Grand Seignor's Table. Cucumbers,
a fruit of much delicacy amongst the Levantines, and how they eat them. A noble
Pyramid, resembling Trajan's Pillar. Fountains. The number of the Gardiners.

IT is an ancient Custom, or rather, a Law, established by the Ottoman
Princes, The Revenues of the Gardens, how employed.
that the profits made out of their Gardens, should be contributary to the
keeping of their own Tables, and they have several of them, in the
Neighborhood of Constantinople, as well on the Europaean side, as the Asian,
all along the Seashore. But I shall give an account, only of the Gardens of the
Seraglio, that so I may not exceed the limits I have prescribed to my self in
this Relation.

There are in the Seraglio several Gardens, wherein there are only Flowers, in
diverse Appartments, and particularly in that of the Grand Seignor, and, no
question, but the same thing may be said of the Quarter of the Sultanesses. Yet
is there not any thing extraordinary, which might oblige me to give this
description thereof. The great Garden, whereof the Bostangi-bachi has the
oversight, as he has also of all the others belonging to the Grand Seignor,
takes up the greatest part of the Seraglio, and consists of a great number of
Walks, planted, of each side, with Cypress. Those Walks are much neglected, so
that in several places, they are not cleared of Briars and Thorns. When it is
known, that the Grand Seignor is to come and take his divertisement there, a
great number of Bostangis are immediately commanded out, to make clean the
Walks, which he uses to frequent, and the spaces between those Walks are so
many Kitchin-Gardens, or Orchards, which are very well furnished with
Fruit Trees, of several excellent kinds. Of Strawberries and Raspices there is
great store, and they have large beds of Melons, and Cucumbers; but most of
these last, which are accounted a great delicacy amongst the Levantines.

As to the Cucumbers, they commonly eat them without taking off any thing of
the Cucumbers a great delicacy amongst the Levantines.
tinde, after which they go and drink a glass of Water. In all Asia, it is the
ordinary sustenance of the meaner sort of people, for the space of three or
four months; the whole Family lives upon them, and when a Child asks for
something to eat, whereas in our Europaean Countries, they would give him
bread, in the Levant, they bring him only a Cucumber, which he eats raw, as it
comes out of the Garrison. Laborious persons, and such as are in a manner tired
with working, such as Camel-drivers, and those who are entrusted with the care
of the Horses, and Mules, in the Caravans, make a kind of Sallad of their
Cucumbers, not much unlike the Mash, which we would give our Horses. When they
are come to the Lodging place, where the Caravan is to make a stay, they take a
large Basin, which they almost fill with water, and having put some sour milk
into it, they cut a great number of Cucumbers, into great slices, and so make a
kind of mash of them. It Is a pleasant sight to see them at the confounding of
it. Amongst ten, or twelve, who all stand round the said Basin, there is but
one wooden Spoon, which every one takes in his turn, till they have made a
shift to empty the Basin. That done, they fall a drinking of water, and those
who have wherewithal, go and take a dish of Coffee, or smoke a Pipe of Tobacco.

But to do them all the right they deserve, the Cucumbers in the Levant are
excellently good, and, though eaten raw, they never do a man any hurt. The
Story of the Cucumbers which occasioned the cruel death of Seven Pages of the
Grand Seignor's Chamber, is not, happily, known to all people; or at least, all
know not the reason, why the Pages of the Chamber are not now permitted to go
into the Gardens.

Sultan Mahomet, the second of that name, taking a turn in the Gardens of the
Seraglio, attended by his Pages, was much surpised to see a bed of Cucumbers,
which looked very fair to the eye, and were extremely forward, considering the
Season. Being a great lovet of that fruit, he recommended them to the
Bostangi-bachi, who told them over every day, and, with some impatience,
expected their maturity, that he might present them to the Grand Seignor. Some
days after, going to Visit the bed, he found his number of Cucumbers shorter,
than it should have been, by three or four, and that they who had taken those
that were missing, had made choice of the ripest, and thereupon making a strict
enquiry, to find out who have been guilty of that presumption, he found that
the Pages of the Chamber were the only persons who had been, that day, in the
Gardens.

Upon that discovery, he went and gave an account of the whole matter to the
Grand Seignor, who was so highly incensed thereat, that, not prevailing with
any one of the Pages to acknowledge the Theft, he, out of a cruelty as much
above all credit, as beyond all example, caused the Bellies of seven of them to
be ripp'd up. The Theft was found in the Belly of the seventh of those
unfortunate Young Men, who, after the execution done on the other six, would
not acknowledge his guilt, out of hopes, that the Prince's indignation would
not have extended so far. From that very time, and in commemoration of so
strange an action, the Pages of the Chamber are not permitted to go into the
Gardens of the Seraglio; what one Prince has established, as I have hinted
elsewhere, being never revoked by his Successors, who bear a certain respect to
the enactions of their Ancestors.

In the midst of the Great Walk, which goes from the Seraglio, to the Sea-Gate
A Pyramid; much resembling Trajan's Pillar.
which looks toward Scudaret, there is a Pyramid, erected upon a square
Pedestal, and which four men would have much ado to fathom. About the Pedestal
they have suffered some briars and thorns to grow, and it seems to have been
done out of design, to hinder peoples coming close to it. The Pyramid, from the
top to the bottom, is full of Figures, whereof the heads are struck off; and it
may be conjectured by some remainders, that there was a very noble head on the
top of it, as being the Masterpiece of the work. This Pyramid somewhat
resembles Trajan's Pillar at Rome; and some, who have seen both, imagine, they
were the work of the same Master.

All the Fountains of the Gardens have their Basins of Marble, of different
colors. Fountains,
Near each of them, there is a little Scafsold, surrounded with Ballisters,
which they spread with rich Carpets, and Brocado-Cushions, when the Sultan
comes to take his walk there: and it is only at that time, the Waters play;
which Diversion he frequently gives the Princesses, who bear him company.

There are appointed for the culture of these Gardens two thousand Bostangis;
and The Gardiners
yet, though there be so vast a number to keep them, they come far short of the
Neat Contrivances, and Imbellishments of ours.

CHAP. XX. Of the Princes who follow the Mahumetan Religion, in Europe, Asia,
and Africa.
THE PRINCIPAL HEADS.
General Laws for all the Mahumetan Sects. A Curious Remark, concerning the
Emperor of Java's Son. Kings, who follow the Doctrine of Hali. The Royal
Present from the great Mogul to Mecha. The several ways, by which the
Mahumetans come to their Prophet's Tomb. Trouble some Deserts to be passed
through in their way to the Sepulcher of Hali. A Miraculous Channel of Water,
of the continuance of Eighteen days Journey. The Burnt-Offering of a Weather.

I Have so often had occasion, in the present Relation I have made of the Grand
General Laws for all the Mahumetan Sects.
Seignor's Seraglio, to speak of the Mahumetan Religion, that I am content,
before I put a period to this Work, to make it appear, how far it extends into
the three parts of our great Continent: Mahumetisme having not yet set footing
into that which has been discovered but two Ages since. I meddle not at all
with the Doctrine of it, of which I am sufficiently assured that many persons
have written: and I shall only entertain the Reader with a Geographical Chart
of all the Countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa, which are under the dominion
of the followers of Mahomet.

Though the Opinions of their Doctors be different, as to what concerns the
Explication of the Law, and that there are principally two great Sects, that of
Mahomet, which is the Stock; and that of Hali, one of his principal Successors:
Yet those two general Sects, and the particular ones, which are derivable
thence, are all concordant in the fundamental Points, which every Mahumetan is
obliged, in Conscience, to observe and practice. Of those I gave an account,
when I made mention of the Prayers or Devotions, which the Turks are bound to
perform five times a day, and the Pilgrimage of Mecha is one of those principal
Articles. I have also said something of them, in the Chapters treating of the
Present, which the Grand Seignor sends thither every Year; and in this last, I
shall endeavor to express my self fully as to that matter.

In Europe, we have no Mahumetan Princes but the Emperor of the Turks, and the
Cham of the Lesser Tartary: But in Asia there are many of them, who are
powerful, and possessed of great Dominions. The Grand Seignor extends his
Jurisdiction, in this part, beyond the Sources of the River Tigris, and beyond
the mouths, by which it falls into the Sea, and toward the North, as far as
the Territories of the Mengrelians. To go thence from the West to the East,
next the Grand Seignor, we must count the Princes of the Three Arabia's, with
several of whom I have often spoken, in Two of my Voyages, wherein I have been
obliged to pass through the Deserts. The King of Persia, the Great Mogul, the
King of Visapour, the King of Golconda, the Kings on the Coast of Malabar, of
whom the most considerable is that of Comorin; the Great Cham of Tartary, and
the Kings of the Mountains, to the North side of the same Tartary, who are got
into China; All these Kings, I say, follow the Mahumetan Religion.

Since I have mentioned the Emperor of Java, I shall, by the way, insert here
an observation, which I made at the time of my being in that Island, which was,
A curious Remark of the Emperor of Java's Son.
That the eldest Son of that Emperor, who reigned in the year 1648. had six
fingers on each of his hands, and six toes on each foot, and all of equal
length.

The Kings of Persia, Visapour, and Golconda follow the Sect of Hali; and the
Kings Kings following the Doctrine of Hali.
of the Mountains of Tartary, with some others, have also their particular
Sects. Besides, it is to observed, that, if we except the Grand Seignor, the
King of Persia, the Arabian Princes, and the Cham of Great Tartary, all the
other Kings, whom I have named, have only Idolaters to their Subjects, and all
the meaner sort of people is involved in the darkness of Paganism. But as to
the Grand Seignor's, with all his Militia, they follow the Law of Mahomet.

In Africa, there is a Mahumetan King, whose Territories lie all along the
Coast of Abex, which is toward Arabia Felix, as far as the Cape of Guardafu,
and his Jurisdiction extends over the Red Sea, and the Ocean. The Governors,
whom the Grand Seignor employs in Egypt, and in the Islands of the Red Sea, and
those others, whom he has established all along the Coast of Barbary, at
Tripoli, Tunis, and Argiers, who assume the Title of Kings, are also
Mahumetans; and, in fine, the King of Fez and Morocco follows the same Law.

All these Kings and Princes, are principally unanimous in this Point, That
they acknowledge themselves obliged to send every year some Present to Mecha,
which ordinarily consists in rich Carpets, to be put upon Mahomet's Sepulcher.
Sometimes these The Great Mogul's Royal sent to Mecha.
Presents are made upon a particular Vow; and it happened in one of my Voyages
to Agra, that the Great Mogul, by way of thankfulness to the Prophet, for the
recovery of his health, sent to Mecha, an Alcoran, valued at four hundred
thousand Crowns, which had, in the midst of the Cover, a Diamond, of three
hundred Carats; the rest of it being garnished with several precious Stones on
both sides The occasion of this Present was, the fright which a certain Bramere
put him into, upon his telling him, That he should die before the year was
expired, which happened not accordingly. But the King being extremely incensed
at that direful Prediction, and, upon the smart Interrogatory he put to the
Bramere, to wit, whether he knew also the time of his own death, having
received this Answer, That it should be within three days; which really
happened upon the third day, there was a sufficient ground for him to be
frightened, and to conceive an apprehension, that the like accident might happen
to himself, before the time limited. 'Twas that induced him to send a Present
of so great value, to Mahomet's Sepulcher, to acknowledge the favor he had
done him, in not suffering the Prediction of the Bramere to take effect, the
King having not had as much as any indisposition, during all that time.

When I gave an account of the Pilgrimage of Mecha, upon occasion of the Tent
The several ways whereby the Mahumetans come to the Sepulcher of their Prophet.
and Carpet, which the Grand Seignor sends thither every year, I made no
mention of the several ways which the Caravans take, according to the several
parts of the World, from whence great multitudes of Mahumetans do every year
take their progress thither.

In the first place, the Ambassadors, whom the Kings of the Islands, whereof I
have given you the names, and the Kings of the Indies, on this side the Ganges,
send to the Sheck of Mecha, with their Presents come by Sea, to Mocha, a
Maritime City of Arabia Felix, and from thence they travel to Mecha by Land, by
the convenience of Camels.

The Persians, who inhabit all along the Seaside make their descent from
Ormus, or to Bandar, and having passed over the Gulf, which, at that place, is
not above twelve or thirteen Leagues in breadth, are forced to cross Arabia ere
they can get to the Prophet's City. But the Inhabitants of the upper-parts of
Persia, toward the Caspian Sea, and all the Tartars, come to Tauris, and from
Tauris to Aleppo, from which place, the great Caravans, which take their
progress through the Deserts, set forth, and bring the Pilgrims to Mecha. Some
take the way of Babylon, but very seldom, because the Bassa exacts a Tribute of
them, and particularly of the Persians, whom they account Heretics; and that
consideration has obliged the King of Persia, to forbid his Subjects to take
that Rode, thinking himself not inferior to the Turk.

Some of the Devouter sort of Persians, and such as are most zealous for their
own Troublesome Iresarts in the way to Hali's Sepulcher.
Sect, take the way of Babylon, upon this score, that it brings them at the
same time to the Sepulcher of their Prophet Hali, which is but eight days
Journey distant from it. This is the most wretched place, of all the places
upon earth, and affords no water but the most corrupted water, which is drawn
out of certain Pits, and that of a Canal, which Schach-Abas caused to be
brought thither from the Euphrates, but which is now quite out of repair.
Whoever expects to drink good water there, must bring it along with him, from
other places, from other places, five or six days Journey distant from the
other: And yet that false Prophet imposes on those, who have such a Devotion
for him, not only the inconveniences of coming so far off; but also those of
being in a fair way to perish by thirst, and hardship of lodging.

The last time it was my fortune to pass through the Deserts, I came to that
detestable place upon this occasion, that meeting with a Courrier, who was come
from Babylon, with two Arabians, whom he had in his Company, he gave us
intelligence, that the Grand Seignor's Forces, which had then newly taken
Babylon, were upon their march back, in little Detachments, and that there was
no question to be made, but they would seize on our Camels and Baggage. Which
advertisements obliged us to take our course more to the South, and to get
further into the Desert, where we spent sixty and five days in the crossing of
it, to avoid meeting with those Forces.

As for the Princes of Arabia, they have no great Journey to make, because they
are the next neighbors to Mahomet's Sepulcher.

The Mahumetans of Europe come to Aleppo, and there join the Caravan; and those
of Africa pass to Grand Cairo, and meet in the Deserts, with the same Caravan
of A Miraculous Canal of water of the length of 18 days journey.
Aleppo at eighteen days journey from Medina, where there is a water, which
goes by a Canal, quite to that City, all the way of those eighteen days
journey. They have it by Tradition, That that water was found by their Prophet
Mahomet, as he crossed the Desert with his Army, ready to die for thirst, and
that going to drink of it first of any, there issued a Voice to him out of the
Water, which said to him, Prophet, thou will find it bitter: That he made the
Voice this Answer, Let us all drink of it, for I know it is sweet, and I would
to God, that we could always find as good. That thereupon the Voice replying
the second time, said to him, Prophet, Command, and I will follow thee: And
that as soon as he had spoken, the Water made a Canal under ground, and
followed him quite to Medina.

From Damas, Jerusalem, and Cairo, they account forty days Journey to Medina,
and it is at the two and twentieth day's journey that they find that water.
It Is partly to see that miraculous Water, which had been sweetened by the
Prophet, that there goes into those places so great a concourse of People, of
so many different Nations, from all parts of the World: in as much as there is
no Mahumetan, let him be at ever so great a distance, and but tolerably in a
condition of health, and supplied with the external accommodations of fortune,
who does not think himself obliged to go once in his life to Mecha, in person,
or to send some other in his stead.

After the Pilgrims have continued certain days at Medina, they go to
Gebel-Araffa, that is to say, the place, where Adam found Eve, his Wife, five
hundred years, after God had created her. It is a City in the Mountains, at the
distance of Two Days Journey from Medina, and at one from Emena, another City,
which is half way between both. As Soon as the Pilgrims are come thither, all
those who are so well furnished, buy a Weather to make a Holocaust of it, and
to distribute it amongst the poor, they being not allowed to keep above two
pounds of it, for themselves. If they do not punctually observe that, and that
some discovery should be made thereof, they are made incapable, ever after,
while they live, of shaving their Heads, or paring their Nails.

From Gebel-Araffa, they return to Medina, where they keep an account of the
time, when the Caravan arrived there; in regard that all the Pilgrims, who came
by Land, are, as I said elsewhere, maintained with sustenance for the space of
Seventeen days; but they who come by Sea are sustained, as long as they
continue there, even though they should make it the place of their abode, as
long as they live.

FINIS.
A SHORT DESCRIPTION Of all the KINGDOMS Which Encompass the Euxine and Caspian
Seas, DELIVERED By the AUTHOR after above Twenty Years Travel.

Together with a PREFACE CONTAINING Several Remarkable Observations concerning
diverse of the forementioned COUNTRIES.

LONDON, Printed for R. L. and Moses Pytt.

1677.

The Publisher unto the Reader.
THE ensuing Narration was put into my hands Five or Six Years ago, by a very
Intelligent Worthy Person, who long resided in the same Family with our Author,
and did assure me, that the Discourse here published, was written with his own
hand, and presented unto that Honorable Person who redeemed him out of
Captivity. The Gentleman who bestowed these Papers upon me, will not be
responsible for the Truth of all therein contained; but I having compared his
Account of several Countries with that of Olearius and other more Ancient and
Modern Writers, have found them very Consonant unto each other, and therefore
do charitably believe him no less Faithful in his Description of those
Countries and People concerning whom little has been said by any besides. By
reason of his long absence from his Native Country, and dis-use of his
Mother Tongue, his style was so rough, odd, and unpleasant, that I was forced
to make therein great Alterations both as to Method and Expression, yet keeping
strictly unto his sense: I have also much abbreviated his Discourse, many
things being often repeated, and he having stuffed it with diverse
impertinencies, which would have been void of all Instruction and Delight. He
would never own his true Name or Pedigree, for Reasons mentioned in his Paper,
which I thought altogether unnecessary to be rehearsed; that of Astracan,
wherewith he concludes his NARRATIVE, being fictitious, and I suppose assumed,
because of his long Residence in a City of that name, from which he made most
of his Excursions: And which with the Adjacent Country he has above all others
most particularly described, giving us the names of several Neighboring Places
and Rivers mentioned by no other Writer. I was highly pleased with the Account
he gives us of Czarofsgorod, which he also sometimes calls Seraichan and
Seraichena; the former of which is the Muscovitish, the latter the Tartarian
Appellation, and interpreted, both signify the Habitation of the Emperor or
Cham, it being formerly the Metropolis of a great Empire. As also with his
mention of a place on the West Side of the Volga, where he says Astracan was
formerly situated. Concerning both which Cities, I shall declare diverse things
I have Collected out of several European and Arabian Writers, which either are
not commonly known, or little regarded. But I must necessarily premise somewhat
concerning the Ancient Inhabitants of the Country wherein these Cities are
situated.

The first Nation (of whom I find any mention) who made any fixed habitation in
these Quarters were the Chazari, so named by the Latins and Greeks, but by the
Mahumetans, Alchozar, and Gorjani. This Nation during the Reign of the Emperor
Justine, like a Torrent Overflowed all that Vast Continent which lies between
China and the Boristhenes, Conquered part of India, All Bactria, Sogdiana, and
made the Persians Tributary, by whom they are always called Turks, and their
Prince, Chacan, a Title formerly common unto all great Turkish Emperors. This
Mighty Monarch having conquered the Igors or Jugurs, Avares, Chuni or Huns,
Abtelites or White Huns, and all other Tribes of Turks and Tartars, together
with the Alani (whose Dominion then extended, as appears by Marcellinus, from
the Boristhenes far beyond the most North-East part of the Caspian Sea) entered
into a League with Justine, and styles himself in his Letters, Lord of the
Seven Climates of the World. His Acts may be read at large in Theophilactus
Simocatta; Excerptis de Legationibus: and diverse others of the Bizantine
Historians. This Nation Assisted the Emperor Heraclius in his Wars against the
great Cosroes, whom by their Assistance he overcame. These Chazari were also
possessed of all that part of Taurica Chersonesus which is plain and fit for
feeding Cattle, they being addicted, after the manner of all other Scythian
Nomades, unto a Pastoral life; which Peninsula from them was until the Famous
Irruption of the Tartars in the Thirteenth Century, called Cassaria, or
Cazaria, and afterward more corruptly by the Genoeses, Venetians, and other
Latins, Gazaria. I find mention of these Chazari or Chozars in diverse Persian
and Arabian Historians and Geographers. Abulpharagius acquaints us with an
Expedition they made into Persia the 183. Year of the Hegira, which was after
our Account in 799, from whence they returned with great Spoil, and above
100000 Captives: and afterward, in the 514th Year of the Mahumetan Epoch,
being A. C. 1120. they made another Inroad, accompanied by the Comanians, (whom
the Arabians call Kaphjaks;) Frequent mention is made of them by that
Deservedly Celebrated Arabian Geographer Al Edrisi, who flourished in the 548th
year of the Hegira; of Christ, 1153. He always calls the Caspian Sea, Mare
Chozar: And all that Country on the North and to the West of the Caspian Sea,
Terra Chozar. He acquaints us, that the Residence of the Prince of Chozar was
not far above the Mouth of the Volga, which the Tartars call Athel; which name
I suppose it derived from Attila, that Renowned King of the Hunns, being so
called in the Relation of the Ambassadors who were sent by the Emperor
Justine, unto the Great Chacan of the Turks residing in the East. Al Edrisi and
his Epitomizer, commonly known by the Name of Geographus Nubiensis intimate,
That these Chozars inhabited diverse other Cities, but that this was the
Metropolis; he suppresses the Name, styling it only from the River, the City of
Athel; and declares, it was divided by the River, the chief and greatest part
being on the West Side; and that the other less considerable on the East Side,
was inhabited only by the meaner sort of People and Merchants, it being a place
of great Trade; that which made it more considerable, was the liberty allowed
unto all of the Public Profession, and Exercise of their respective Religious
Persuasions, Jews, Christians, Mahumetans, and Idolaters being there equally
countenanced, which I suppose might occasion that Dialogue published out of an
Ancient Hebrew Manuscript, by L'Empereur, between the Author a Jewish Rabbi,
and the King of Chozar. This City is said to have been extended along the River
three miles in length, and it is breadth proportionable; the Western part well
fortified; adorned with the Emperors Palace, and several other eminent
Structures. Nassir Eddin, who wrote at the latter end of the 13th Century,
calls this City in his Geographical Tables, Balanjar, and from him Abulfeda;
they place it in 46 degrees 30 minutes of Northern Latitude; where within six
or eight minutes our best Geographers seat Astracan. And questionless this was
that City which our Author and Olearius call Old Astracan. These Chazari, did,
I suppose, conserve their vast Dominion without any great Interruption, at
least until A. C. 900. For Alferganus who lived about that Time, places no
other Nation in his Table of Climes, between China and the Boristhenes; And
Eutichius, who wrote about 30 or 40 years after, makes mention of them as a
mighty Nation, and many amongst them converted unto the Christian Belief. About
the middle of the 10th Century these Chazari gave place unto the Cumanians or
Comanians, who were also a Turkish Nation known unto the Turks, Persians, and
Arabians, under the Name of Kaphjack; whether they expelled the Chazari, or
that the former becoming the more Eminent Tribe, gave Law and Name unto these
latter (as has since frequently happened among the Tartars) I will not here
undertake to determine: but this is certain, that suddenly the Name of Chazari
was extinct, and all that Tract of Land from the Nepper unto Turkestan 1500
miles beyond the Volga, was inhabited by these Cumanians, who were often
troublesome unto the Russes, Lithuanians, Hungarians and other
Neighbour-Nations. But this People was almost totally destroyed by the Tartars
in that great Inundation which happened at the beginning of the 12th Century,
soon after the death of Jingiz Chan; whose Son Hocota being chosen Emperor,
sent his Nephew Batu, or Bathy, the Son of Tussy Jingiz Chan his Eldest Son,
with 400000 Men, to invade the Northem Parts of Asia. The Cumani for diverse
years valiantly resisted, and made the greatest opposition the Tartars met with
in all their Conquests; repulsed them in two pitched Battles; but then growing
secure, and dispersing upon the Tartars retreat, they were unexpectedly
surprised, the whole Country overrun, above 200000 killed, their King Kuthen
hardly escaping with 40000 into Hungary, where he met with a kind reception,
had land allotted him, and his Company; which Region is called Campus Cumanus
unto this day. This Country was so miserably wasted by the Tartars, that in
the Years 1253, and 1254, when Rubriquis passed through it, going unto and
returning from his Embassage to Mangu Chan, there was no fixed habitation,
excepting a few Cottages in the Island where Astracan is now situated.

But Bathy having destroyed the Comanians, ruinated their Cities, and
established his own Dominion, began to think of a fixed abode, which after long
observation he chose near the River Volga, on the East Side, and immediately
beneath the River Actabon, a great Arm of the Volga, and the first it
dismisses, which empties it self into the Caspian-Sea (having run a course of
near 400 miles, and received several other Branches from the foresaid River)
about 7 Leagues East off the main River. He had newly began this City at the
return of Rubriquis from his Embassage unto Mangu Chan, in the year 1246, and
called it Serai; Which City was enlarged and beautified by all his Successors,
unto the time of its destruction by Tamerlane, which was almost 150 years.
Bathy was succeeded by Barcah, who was the first professed Mahumetan Emperor;
he by Hocola, or Hoctay, Contemporary with Hayton the Armenian, who has in his
History largely discoursed concerning him: I should here mention all the other
Emperors interceeding between Hocota and Tucktamisch (who was dispossessed by
Tamerlane) together with their Acts, but that I hasten unto that which most
immediately concerns our present Design, and give some account of this City,
which (as I said) was first named Serai, which interpreted signifies only a
Dwelling or Habitation; the beginning of it being a Palace built for Bathy. You
may see what our Traveller says concerning it, Page 112. Besides him I find two
Authors who make particular mention thereof; the first is in the History of
Arabshiade, published by Golius. This Author represents it as one of the
greatest and most populous Cities in the Universe, agrees with our Traveller in
the situation, only he calls that Branch which runs out of the Volga and passes
to the South-East, Sencle. The other is Michovius, who wrote his History of the
Tartars in the year 1515. He afaffirms, That in his time there remained the
ruins of 300 Temples, besides the Walls of the City, and several other
Magnificent Structures. The Tartars have several times attempted to re-edifie'
it, but divisions amongst themselves, Wars with the Muscovites, and attempts of
the Cossacks caused them to retire unto places of greater security. But because
little mention is made of this great Revolution by any European Writer, I shall
here present the Reader with an account thereof out of the most Authentic
Turkish, Arabian, and Persian Writers. For Calcondilas is greatly mistaken, who
seems to have received by his confident way of writing, most particular
information, when as nothing can be more remote from the truth than what he
affirms, viz, That Tamerlane after several attempts, and two or three Battles
was forced to retire, and glad to secure his Retreat by a Peace, he first made
with Tuckthamisch, which was by both afterward kept inviolably; which is
contrary to the Reports of much more Authentic Historians. The Origin,
Progress and, Event of this War was after the ensuing manner.

Tamerlane being in effect Prince, but in name only Courachan (the Greeks call
it Kurgan) that is, Viceroy or General over all those Countries which are
comprehended between the Oxus and Juxartes, wherein Bochara, Samarchand, and
several other famous Cities were contained, extended his Conquests toward
Balch and Chorasan, (the Aria of the Ancients;) which progress of his filled
Thuetamisch Emperor of Serai (the City we have before mentioned) with
jealousies of his growing Greatness; whereupon gathering a numerous Army, he
resolved to invade him, using no formality, or so much as pretense, he thought
to have surprised his Enemy; but Tamerlane, one of whose Masterpieces was to
gain early Intelligence of whatsoever was designed, or transacted by
neighboring Princes, having timely notice of his intention, gathering all his
own Forces, together with considerable assistance from his Confederates marched
directly toward his Enemy, and passing the Jaxartes, met him to his no small
astonishment, on the Borders of his own Country; for the Jaxartes only divided
their Territories. After a most obstinate bloody fight, Tamerlane gained the
Victory, yet neither absolute, nor without great loss, but it was sufficient
that he had secured his own Dominion. After this Success he did for diverse
years attend other Conquests, and having subdued a great part of India, all
Persia, Media, Armenia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, and Syria, he resolved
to requite the Invasion of Thuctamish: whereupon having drawn together an Army
of 500000 men, he marched through Media Atropatia, then and still called
Shervan; passed the Portae Caucasiae, which the Persians name Derbent; thence
through Dabestan, and the great Desert between that and Astracan (then named
Gitturchan) and having wasted all that spacious Country on the West Side of
the Volga, depopulated and dismantled diverse fair Cities (the ruins of several
being yet visible to those who Navigate the Volga, as we are informed by
Olearius) he passed the Volga, and on the East Side encountered Thuctamisch, who
had collected a mighty Force, having besides his own Hords, the assistance of
the Tartars of Cassan, Tumen, Kalmuke, and Dabestan: and his Army by this
accession was more numerous than that of his Enemy. The Battle was long
doubtful, and exceeding all that happened in that Age for carnage and cruelty,
both Parties being full of hatred unto their Adversaries; and knowing that this
Fight would lose or gain them a mighty Empire. They fought three days with
little intermission, and it could not be discerned which had the advantage. But
that which is thought chiefly to have occasioned Tamerlane's Victory, was the
departure of a great Tribe from Thuctamisch, whose Prince Ectave pretended he
had received some great injury or affront, but 'twas indeed thought he was
corrupted: For retreating unto Amurath the Turkish Emperor, he after the same
manner betrayed Bajazet, who soon after succeeded; revolting at the beginning
of the fight unto Tamerlane. Thuctamisch being defeated, with great difficulty
made his escape, leaving his Country exposed unto the sury of the Zagataians,
whom so great a slaughter of their own Friends had highly exasperated. They
spared nothing that was capable of being spoiled; demolished Serai, together
with Seraichick upon the Jaick, and Gitturchan, which were the only
considerable Cities on the East Side of the Volga, and leaving the Country a
mere Desert, killing, or captivating the Inhabitants, driving away the Cattle,
they returned into Persia with great Booty. This happened in the 791 year of
the Hegira. A. C. 1388. Serai, and Saraichick never regained their former
splendor; but (Giturcan now Astracan) did by degrees recover, but never
arrived to that height it attained unto during the Empire of the Chazari and
Zavolgensian Tartars.

For Josaphat Barbaro, and Ambrosio Contarini, who were both Ambassadors from
the Venetians unto Usun Cassan Emperor of Persia, and well acquainted with
those Parts; Barbaro living sixteen years at the City Tana on the mouth of the
River Tanais; and Contarini being forced in his return from Persia to reside
there some months: They, I say, both tell us, That this City before its
destruction by Tamerlane, was a very famous Emporium; all the Silks, most of
the Spices and other Commodities, which were afterward brought down to Syria,
were then carried by Shipping to Astracan (which they both name Citrachan) and
thence by Land in a few days to Tana, whether the Venetians sent every year
sixteen great Galleys. But after its subversion by Tamerlane, this Commerce
ceased, and the Galleys received their Lading in Syria, and at Alexandria of
Egypt. In the time of the forementioned Writers, which was from the year 1436,
when Barbaro first went to Tana, until his return out of Persia in 1488. And
Contarini, who returned not long before him, Citrachan was a mean Town,
consisting chiefly of Tartarian Huts, and encompassed with a pitiful mud-Wall,
a place of no considerable Traffic, only the Muscovites fetched thence Fish
and Salt. But Juan Vassilowich having reduced it in the year 1554 under his
Dominion, it has been by succeeding Emperors both fortified and enlarged: I
shall say no more concerning it, Olearius a most diligent and judicious Writer,
having left us so particular a Description thereof. I shall only add, That I
suppose the cause of so different names, as Gitterchan, Citrachan, and
Astrachan, were occasioned by the Princes, who successively praesided, as is
very obvious to any who are acquainted with the Customs of the Arabians,
Persians, Turks, and other Eastern People.

But to return unto our Zavolgentian Tartars, so called by the Neighboring
Slavonick Nations, because the Seat of their Empire, and their chiefest places
of Residence were on, or near the Volga (which River did also almost equally
divide their Territory) Za being only an Expletive Particle, as I could
manifest by Induction of several Russian, Polish, and Lithuanian Names of Men
and Countries. After the devastation of their Country they would
notwithstanding have soon recovered their former Grandeur, had not Divisions
and Intestine Wars long kept them low; and at length after diverse wonderful and
great Revolutions given the Russes leisure first to breath, and then invite
them to deprive them of the best part of their Dominion. They not able to
resist, being broken, as I said, by Discord and Division into diverse petty
Principalities. And on the other side, the Crim Tartar, assisted by the Turk,
subdued the remainder, whereby that Tribe which before was comparatively
inconsiderable, became Supreme, and is at this day a terror unto all the
North-East Countries of Christendom. To show in what manner, and by what
degrees all this was transacted, is rather matter of a just History, than of a
Preface; the decorum whereof I have already transgressed, in making a Porch
almost as large as the main Building, to which it should serve only for an
Entrance.

I shall therefore conclude with some short and slight Remarks on diverse
Passages in our Authors Relation. His account of the Periplus of the Euxine
Sea, (leaving out what he allows for the Teine Sea, or Palus Maeotis) differs
little in number of Miles from that of Arrian, though they disagree somewhat in
particular distances; and is wonderfully consonant to that calculation of
Eratosthones, Hecataeus, Ptolomy, and Ammianus Marcellinus, who reckon it to
amount unto 23000 Stadia, or 2875 Miles, which wants but 15 of our Travelers
Computation.

He is also more particular, and I believe, more exact than any I have hitherto
met with, in his Description of Crim or Taurica Chersonesus, whose length and
breadth he gives us in several places directly, or by consequence. What he
tells us concerning Arbotka and the great Field without it, surrounded by the
Sea he calls The Ratten Sea, is scarcely mentioned by any Modern Geographer,
but wonderfully consonant to what is delivered by Strabo. Arbotka seems to be
Taphre, the Ratten Sea, he calls (...), or Lacus putris, and affirms to be part
of the Palus Maeotis: in compass 4000 furlongs, with diverse other particulars,
confirming our Travelers Discourse, as may be read at large in his seventh
Book. And I find in a Discourse published by Mr. Thevenot concerning the
Tartars, written lately by a Religious Missionary who long resided in those
parts, a Description of this place very suitable unto our Author. His words are
these, speaking of the most remarkable places in Crim. Arbotec est un Chasteau
avec une tour scituee sur la col d'une Peninsule que est enfermee enter la Mer
de Limen, and Tineka Woda cette gorge n'a plus d'un quart de lieue, elle est
traversee d'une Pallisade qui s'ende d'une Mer a l'autre: la Peninsule est
appellee par nos Cosaques Cosa, a cause q'elle a la form d'une faulx, c'est on
ce lieu ou le Chan tient son Haras qui est bien de septante mill Chevaux. Et
il est un destroit enter la terre ferme e Cosa 200 pas de large qui est gayable
quand il est calm, le Cossaques le passent quand ils vont derober le Chevaux
de haras de Cham.

What our Author tells us of the Communication between the Tanais and Volga at
Camusshanka, is particularly described by Olearius, who wrote many years after
him; who also agrees with us in his account of the Rivers of Circassia, and
Comukes Country; only our Writer is more punctual in his Description of their
Sourses and Course, and mentions two or three omitted by Olearius, or unknown
to him. A frequent mention is made by Procopius, Agathias, and others of the
Bizantine Historians, of that strait passage between Georgia and Anadoule, or
as they word it, between Colchis and Asia Minor, or Armenia.

Our Author having given an account of the Course of the Volga, and of the most
remarkable places lying upon, or near it; at last assures us, That it empties
it self into the Caspian Sea only by 22 Mouths, whose names he there
rehearses: whereas other Writers ascribe unto it 70 Entrances, though as
Olearius judiciously observes, most of them are rather passages made by the Sea
between Islands and broken Ground, than proper distinct Arms or Branches of the
forementioned Rivers.

What is said concerning the Cossacks retiring unto, and nesting in an Island
of the Caspian Sea, is confirmed by a late French Writer, who long resided in
Persia, He largely acquaints us with the great spoil these Outlaws made on the
Coast of Mesanderon, that they took Asterabath one of the Emperors Royal
Seats, and having continued several days in possession, retired with great
Booty and little loss.

I could render some probable account of those Thieves our Writer calls
Sigakes, of what Nation they are, when they began, and how they live; but shall
for brevity-sake wave this and diverse other Remarks; and that I may manifest
how impartial my sentiments are in reference unto the Treatise I have here
published, I shall first acknowledge, That I never met with any Writer who
calls that vast Plain between the Rivers Boristhenes and Tanais the Desert of
Ingel and Vngul, although I have seen diverse Journals both Ancient and Modern,
of Persons who have frequently traversed that vast Region: and have read most
Histories, and perused Geographical Books or Tables that relate unto the
Tartars, or their Country. Secondly, I must declare my distrust of his
computation concerning the compass of the Caspian Sea; which he makes less than
in truth it is as I could largely demonstrate; though he has pretty well
salved the mistake, by his allowance of a thousand Miles for Bays, broken
Ground, and Promontories. Lastly, Our Author is greatly mistaken, when he
affirms, There is no Nation of Tartars between those of Bochara and China;
whereas indeed several very Potent Kingdoms intervene. And yet he has luckily
Andabatorum more, hit upon the Truth, where he assures us, there are no
Catayans between the Usbeg Tartars and China. For indeed there is at present no
Catayne besides China, which is so called by all Tartars, Persians, Arabians,
and other Mahumetans, as also by the Muscovites and other Nations who travel
thither by Land, either in the Quality of Ambassadors, or Merchants. Though
formerly there was a mighty People, either Turks or Tartars (they being both
Originally the same, as to Extract, Language, Manners, Religion, and
Government) who lay directly in the way between Persia and China, and were
certainly the Chatae of Ptolomy, but almost extirpated by Jingiz Chan, whom
they vigorously resisted. And the remainder have ever since gone under the more
general Names of Mogulls and Tartars, as I shall hereafter more clearly and
fully demonstrate in a Discourse which I have long ago written, and may
speedily publish, concerning the Beginnings and Progress of the Turkish and
Tartarian Nations and Empires.

Right Honorable and my most Worthy Lord,
BEing given to understand, That I have been represented unto your Lordship, by
several who bear me no good will, as a Person possessed with that Vanity, which
ordinarily prevails among Travelers, of affirming I was well acquainted with
diverse Countries and Languages, whereunto I am utterly a stranger: And
perceiving that none of my Discourses have more exposed me unto this Censure,
than a pretended monstrous rash Assertion (but indeed a real Truth) That I knew
and had visited all the Countries surrounding the Black and Caspian Seas: I
thought my self necessarily obliged in order unto my Vindication, to draw up a
short Account of all those Countries, which do incompass the forementioned
Seas, most of which Places I have personally surveyed, and fear not any
Reprehension or Confutation, being resolved to declare nothing but what I saw,
or received from such who were best able to give me full and faithful
Information. And I am well assured, That the more strict and judicious Enquiry
is made into this my Report, the more favor and credit I shall gain with your
Lordship, and all other considering impartial Persons.

I shall first begin with the Black Sea, as being that wherewith I was first
acquainted, and near unto this most famous City of Constantinople, where your
Lordship may easily learn, whether I am guilty of either falsehood or mistake;
and if I am found upon due Enquiry to declare any manifest Untruth, I deserve
not only unparalleld Reproaches, but the most severe and exemplary Punishments
which I should justly merit, when owing Life and Liberty unto your Lordships
Bounty and Compassion, I should instead of a grateful Acknowledgment, present
your Honor with a heap of impudent Falsities.

I will begin my Relation or Peregrination, from that side of the Black Sea on
which Constantinople is situated, and round the said Sea, until I return to
Scodra, which is in Asia opposite thereunto.

The first Province is Romella; the second Wallakie; the third Ackremen; the
fourth Crim; the fifth the great Desert of Ingul and Ungule, which is between
Crim and Asshowa; the sixth is the Little Nagoy; the seventh Circassia; the
eighth Abassa; the ninth is Mingrellia; then Georgia; and lastly Anatolia. All
which Countries are subjected unto the Turk; besides the great Desert, the
Little Nagoy and Circassia.

I shall now mention the most noted Places which I know from Fennara, which is
about the entrance into the Black Sea, unto the River of the Danaw, so to the
Neistre, from thence unto the Nepper, so round about Crim, unto the Gulf that
goes from the Black Sea into the Teine Sea, and thence unto Asshowa.

As I said, near the Entrance into the Black Sea is Fennara, then Innatada,
Missewra, Warna, Balshick, Mangalley, Constancha, Karaharman, Keelley,
Ackremen, Osshackowa, upon the mouth of the River of the Neppre.

Now I shall declare the Distances of these Places from each other; the number
of miles being the space betwixt what forgoes and immediately ensues. From
Finnara to Inatada 80 miles; to Missewra 90; to Warna 100; to Balshick 16; to
Mangalley 40; to Constancha 40; to Caraharman 40; to Kelley 80; to Ackremen or
Beallohorda 100; to Osshakowa 80; in all 666 miles; and from Osshakowa, which
is in the mouth of the Nepper, unto the River Don (or Tanais) is 500 miles; the
Voyage by Sea and journeying by Land being much at one, viz. 1186 miles, unless
you go by Land unto Precop, about Crim, and so unto Asshowa, where the Don
falls into the Teine Sea (Palus Maeotis) and then it amounts unto at the least
1500 miles. Were it not for the forementioned great Rivers of the Danaw
(Danubius) and the Nepper (Boristhenes) there would be almost continual Wars
between the Turks and Tartars, and the Poles, Lithuanians and Muscovites; for
the Danaw is one of the greatest Rivers in the World arising in Dutchland,
whence it passes through Hungary, Wallachy, and at the Town of Kelley falls
into the Black Sea. It has four Mouths or Entrances into the said Sea, which
the Turks call Bohasses, Boctegen Bohasse, Edreleisse Bohasse, Sullena Bohasse,
and Kelley Bohasse. It abounds with Fish, as Sturgeon, Morone, and Sheveroke,
besides diverse sorts of smaller Fish. The Neistre is a River that comes from
Lithuania, and runs into the Black Sea under Bealohorda. The Nepper comes from
Lithuania and Russland, runs by Smolensko and Kiovia to the Porrocks or Falls,
thence to Aslamgorode, and falls into the Black Sea at Osshakowa. It abounds
with many sorts of good Fish, and all along its Banks feed innumerable wild
Beasts of diverse kinds. The Town of Aslamgorod stands upon the Nepper; and in
former times there dwelt in it two Brothers, Ingul and Ungul, who fell first at
variance, which ended in cruel Wars, by reason whereof the adjacent Country
became, though otherwise pleasant and fruitful, a very Wilderness. And besides,
the Cossacks increasing on both sides the Nepper and upon the Don, would never
since suffer that Country to be quietly possessed by these, or any other Hords
of Tartars; so that now it lies waste, being a vast Desert 500 miles over, and
1000 miles long, from the shallow Waters near Precop, unto the Country of
Muscovy. About 1625 the Grand Seignior sent an Army from Constantinople to
rebuild Aslamgorod, with Orders to inhabit the Country, and invite such
thereunto as would become subject unto the Turkish Government. But they who
arrived, finding the Town of great Compass, built only a Castle on the Bank of
the Nepper, and left 300 Men in Garrison. At the same time Shaugary Prince of
Crim, being beat out of his Country by his General Chan Timur Myrsa, retired
unto the Cossacks upon the Nepper, and having contracted a Friendship with them
and the bordering Russes, by their assistance he gathered an Army of 40000 Men,
and marched toward Crim, leaving behind him a revolted Ottoman, with a Brigade
of 3 or 4000 Men, who immediately after the departure of Sultan Shaugary,
marched directly toward Aslamgorod, and early in a Morning surprised the
Castle, then in the possession of the Turks, put every Man in Garrison to the
Sword, slighted the Walls and other Fortifications, retired with the Spoil, and
marched to join Sultan Shaugary, who in the interim arrived near Precop, where
he was met by Chan Timur, and totally defeated, but by good fortune escaped,
and by the way of Astracan got to Persia.

From the Nepper we will pass unto Crim, with which Country I am well
acquainted, having against my will resided there some years. Crim is a small
Land, so near as I can conjecture 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad, but is
wonderfully populous, and exceedingly fruitful, abounding with Corn and Grass;
the only scarcity they have is Wood, which grows no where but upon the
Seacoast, from Bakessey Seray unto the Town of Crim, which in former times was
the chief City: All the rest of the Land is a Plain, where they have no Wood to
burn, nor any sort of Fuel, but Fissheke, Fusshane, Curay, and Stroa. The Land
is enclosed with the Sea, excepting at two places, Precop, and Arbotka. By
Precop there is a narrow passage, through which you may go to the Nepper,
Lithuania, or Muscovy, through the Deserts of Ingul and Ungul; and there is a
Water comes from the Teine Sea, called the shallow Water, and goes along the
Desert, until it comes to Precop, upon West Side of Crim and by North, where it
turns back on the North-side of Crim is almost surrounded with Water; for the
Black Sea is on the one side, and the Ratten Sea on the other, which latter
produces nothing but Salt, for it is so salt, that no Fish can live therein; I
have reason to know it, because I lived in a Village which was called Seekely
Otta Mamutachy. The Towns round about Crim on the Seaside are these, Precop,
Cuslowa, Crim, Caffa, Kerse and Arbotka; and within the Land, Carasu, Ackenesh,
Messheite, and Bakessy Seray. The Town of Arbotka lies on the North-East side
of Crim, between the Black and Ratten Seas, which there come so near together,
that there is no more Land between them, than that whereon the Town of Arbotka
stands; and without Arbotka is a great Field 50 miles long enclosed with Water,
where the Tartars in Winter do keep their Hergels or Horses, which Field goes
to the shallow Waters, where I ran away from the Tartars. I shall here take my
leave of Crim, and pass unto the Little Nagoy, to Asshowa, on the River Don,
which runs down from Bealla Ossharra, through the Country of Russia, between
Russia and Lithuania, until it comes to Peilesboy, not far from the Wolga; for
from Peilesboy to the River Camusshanka, is not above 20 miles all level, which
is called Perewolog, where the Cossacks do draw their Strukes or Boats upon
Wheels, to the River of Camusshanka, by which they pass into the Volga;
whereupon this Place is called Perewolog. The Don runs down between the Little
Nagoy and the Deserts of Ingel and Ungule, so to Asshowa, right under the Town,
and there falls into the Tein Sea. This River is full of Fish, especially
Sturgeons; well inhabited by Cossacks, for there are seldom less than 10000
upon it, besides those that go on Freebooting. There are also 16 Gorodkees, or
strong Skonces, well manned, and with store of great Guns, they being in
continual fear of the Turks and Tartars, and sometimes also of the Muscovites.
The Little Nagoy lies between the Tein and Caspian Seas, the former on the
West, the latter on the East, Shercassen to South, and the Volga on the North;
and there is never a Town in all this Country excepting Asshowa. It is
inhabited by Tartars, who go altogether in Hords; their Prince in my Time was
Cassay Myrsa, whom the Tartars call also Sultan Ulugh, or the Great Prince.
They sow no Corn but Pross, which they sow upon the Seaside up unto Asshowa;
and after sowing they depart with their Hords, and graze up and down the
Deserts to the Don, to Capbane, Shurpoha, Yedecul, Comma and Curray, to
Masshargorodoke, and to Shercassen Land, under the Rivers Terigke, and Balke,
and almost to Pettigor, and by the River of Cupba, and back again unto the
Black Sea. Thus they ramble all the Summer, until their Harvest be ripe, and
their Pross gathered, and put into Yams under ground; after which they settle
from Asshowa, all along the Seaside, amongst the Reeds, and leave their Horses
to winter in the Deserts. So I shall leave the Little Nagoy, and pass unto
Temerassa, in Shercassen Land, which is 500 miles from Asshowa.

Now in all Circassia are but two Towns, Temerossa on the Black Sea, upon the
Gulf that goes from the Black Sea into the Tein Sea, right over against
Arbotka. The other is Tumein, upon the Caspian Sea, the distance between them
being 1100 miles; and all the rest of the inhabited Places are only Cubbacks
made in the Woods, piled round with Timber. Their Houses are very high, in the
midst whereof they make the Fire. Their Men are proper Men, very like the Irish
both for person and garb; for they go in Trowses, with short Mantles, wear long
Hair on both sides of their Heads, with a shorn Crown between. Their Women are
very beautiful, and loving to Strangers; for if a Stranger come unto their
Houses, their young Women and Maidens will look Lice in their Shirts, and all
about them, the most private parts not excepted, and will allow them the
liberty to examine and handle all parts of their Bodies besides their Breasts.
The Circassians are excellent Horsemen, and very courageous, but withal
exceedingly ignorant and superstitious; for when they kill a Goat or Kid, they
cut off the privy parts, and cast it against a Wall, if it stick, they pray to
it; if otherwise, they cast it away, and spread the Skin upon Stakes, place it
in their, Cornfieldsd, and worship it. They have no Writing among them, yet
pretend to be good Christians. Do strangely bewail the Dead, making great
Cries, scratch their Hands and Faces, until they draw much Blood, knock their
Foreheads against the ground, until Knobs arise bigger than Plums. The Men are
notorious Thieves, stealing from each other, and he that steals most is
accounted the bravest Fellow. Their Country is very fruitful, abounding with
most sorts of Grain; and they have store of excellent Grass. They have also
much Fruit growing wild; many sorts of Beasts, as Hearts, Hinds, Kine,
Eissubrass, Hogs and great Adders.

The considerable Rivers which I know are Cubba, which runs from Pettigor,
between Shercassen Land and the Little Nagoy, betwixt Termerossa and Asshowa,
20 miles from Temerossa it falls into the Jein Sea, and has a Course of 500
miles. The next is the River of Balke, which comes out from Cabardy, and falls
into the River of Terigke, 200 miles from its Source; which River of Terigke
descends from the Mountains between Shollohofe Knasse and Mundarawa Knasse,
runs through the Country almost due East, passes by Goracho Colloda, thence to
the Shussa, and the Shunsa, so on to the Weistra; and 6 miles from Tumein,
between Tumein and the Commocks Country, it falls into the Caspian Sea, having
a Course of 600 miles. There is another River called Tumenka, which is a branch
of Terigke, runs through Tumeine Town, and 3 miles beyond it enters the Caspian
Sea. There is also another River which they call Keeslar, which falls out of
Terigke, and 60 miles from Tumeine is received by the Caspian Sea.

Having formerly mentioned Pettigor, I shall give you some Account thereof.
Pettigor being interpreted, is in English 5 Hills. They are five very great and
high Mountains, distant about 500 miles from the Black Sea, and 700 from the
Caspian beyond Cabardy. I came thus to know them:

In the year 1618. I was sent with Shiedake Myrsa, from Astracan to the Little
Nagoy, to seize upon Orrake Myrsa, who being informed of our coming, fled up to
Pettigor; yet he made not such have but we overtook him, and having fought,
overcame him, and took away his Hords, by which means I became acquainted with
Pettigor. Nevertheless there are higher Hills than Pettigor, as Sneesnagore in
Cabardy, which is incredibly high, which is in English, the Hill of Snow; for
upon that and Shadgore, which signifies a wonderful high Hill, and overtops the
former, and so along for 100 miles, from Cabardy to Shollohofe, prodigious
quantities of Snow are lodged, which it is thought were never dissolved since
the Creation. I asked a Circassian, Whether ever any Man arrived at the top of
Shadgore, which to me seemed much elevated above the rest; who answered me,
They had a Tradition among them, that formerly a Bohatteere, whose Name was
Hroda, attempted to climb it, and after two or three days hard labor, arrived
not unto the middle; but after a few days, being better accommodated, he
returned, with a resolution, if it were possible, to see the top, but was never
afterward heard of; and added, That it was to that day customary for the
neighboring Circasstans, at a certain season of the year, with diverse
Ceremonies and great Lamentations to bewail his loss.

The next Country to Sheercassen Land is Abassa, which is situated between
Circassia and Mingrellia, and the Inhabitants are a kind of Circassians.
Mingrellia is under the Dominion of the Turks, and lies on the Black Sea. Of
these two Countries I have no great knowledge, having only coasted them three
or four times in Boats, when I was among the Cossacks, where also we landed
diverse times, taking store of Kine and Sheep, but no Prisoners, because they
affirmed themselves to be Christians. They are a proper handsome People, but
very poor, and notorious Thieves, for they steal not only Goods, but even Women
and Children from each other, and sell them unto the Turks and Tartars chiefly
for Salt, which is there very scarce.

Next unto Mingrellia is Georgia, whose Inhabitants are little better than the
former, only they have a kind of Scripture; for they worship Idols or Images,
yet have Cloisters, and a sort of Monks, with some Priests of the Greek Belief.
I once landed in Georgia with an Army of 5000 Men, we marched up into the
Country, until we came within a days journey of Deimur Capou, or the Iron
Gate, which is a narrow passage between Georgia and Anatolia, with Rocks on
each side, and a strong Town built in the midst: We stayed ten days ravaging
the Country; they told us, this Town and Castle belonged to the King of
Persia, and there is no other passage out of Georgia into Persia but through it.

The next Country unto Georgia is Anatolia, where our Traveller resided
several years, having been sold by the Precopensian Tartars, unto a Turkish
Spahi or Timariot; of which Country, and the Manners of the Inhabitants, he
gives a large Description: But we being sufficiently informed thereof by diverse
intelligent Europeans, who dwelt long in those Parts, shall with our Traveller
pass on to those Countries which are less known. But first we will take his
Account of the Periplus of the Euxine or Black Sea.

From Fennara, which is at the head of the Strait or Gulf that enters the Black
Sea to Precop, is 700 miles; from thence to Caffa, a noted City and Port in
Crim 300 miles; to Asshowa 500 miles; to Temerossa 500 miles; to Mingrellia 400
miles; to Trebezond 400 miles; and from thence unto Constantinople 1000 miles;
in all 3800 miles. Thus much I know of the Black Sea, which I have three times
coasted by Sea, and traced above half by Land; so that now it is time to speak
concerning the Caspian Sea, and show all the Kingdoms and Countries which lie
upon it, beginning at Astracan, and proceeding thence Eastwards, until I return
unto the same City from the South.

Astracan is placed on a rising ground, not far from the mouth of the Volga,
from which it is not distant above 50 miles; it is in an Island on the Great
Nagoy side, made by the River Volga, and a branch thereof, having the Caspian
Sea on the South. The Town or City is secured by a strong Castle, furnished
with store of great Ordnance, and in the midst of the Castle is a Roskade,
which commands both Castle, Town, and the Fields round about for above a mile.
The Tartar's Town is adjoining, placed near unto Cutuma, which is a River
naturally derived from the Volga, or one of its many branches; so that the Town
is encompassed with Waters, having the main body of the Volga on the West, and
Cutuma on the East. Now if you would know whence the Volga comes, I will
acquaint you with what I have learned from the Muscovites. Its utmost Source is
said to be at the foot of a great Tree, whence it runs unto Jerislave 1000
miles; whence it proceeds to Neisna 500 miles, and thence unto Cassan 300
miles; from Cassan to Samara 500; to Saratoft 350 miles; to Saraichena 350, and
thence unto Astracan 500 miles; from whence it is, as we said before, unto the
Caspian Sea 50 miles; in all 3550 miles.

The Volga is a wonderful great River, abounding with diverse sorts of great
Fish, as Sturgeon, Bellouke, Severuke, Shelren, Sterleke, Some, Sassan, Suke,
Soudake, Konnee, Sablee, Lessee, Wobla, Tarane, and many others both great and
small, which I cannot readily call unto remembrance, notwithstanding that I
dwelt there ten years. The Volga enters the Caspian Sea by 22 mouths, and upon
each of them is an Oughsuke or Fish-wear, for to take Sturgeon, every one of
which Oughsukes is called by the name of the Water, as Soellova, Dertullee,
Bosserigee and Ruslowa upon the main Wolga. Cokelou, Beerullee, Ewansuke,
Mansor, Argeessan, Keessan, Camusshuke, Naowara, Tussockly, Collobery, Malla
Collobery, Yamansuke, Eirichsha, Surka, Libessha, Bussan, Carabussan, Bealla
Wolloskee. In all which Oughsukes or Wears, they take no Fish besides Sturgeon.
They are made of Shigenas, or long Poles made sharp at one end, and beaten into
the ground under Water, and a pleiting made of Rods, somewhat resembling Osier,
after the manner of our Matts, which are fastened to the Poles, and hinder the
Fish from passing up the River. And Houses are built near the Wears for the
Convenience of the Fishers, 40, 50, more or less, according unto the greatness
of the Water, or resort of Fish, and twice every day, usually in the morning
and evening, they set about their Fishery. They employ only long slender Poles,
with an iron Hook or Cruke in the end baited, and do ordinarily take 400 every
day in the smaller, and 600 in the larger Streams. The Sturgeon they take is
all salted, excepting that wherewith they serve the Town of Astracan, where a
whole fair Sturgeon may be bought for ten pence English; and when the great
Caravan comes from Russia, it takes off most of their Fish, which is conveyed
into diverse parts of Muscovy, but chiefly unto the great City of Mosco. They
return also with great quantities of Caviar and Salt, there being not far from
the Volga, on the Little Nagoy side, great Salt Pits, which yield an immense
quantity of Salt, prepared yearly by the heat of the Sun, without any further
trouble, than taking it off the superficies of the Water where it daily kerns.

The Volga, a little above Seraichena, 500 miles from Astrachan, dismisses a
great Branch named Actabon, which passing through the Deserts of the Great
Nagoy through Bussane, enters the Caspian Sea. The remainder of the Volga,
after having parted with several smaller Branches, most of which join with the
forementioned River, divides the Little and Great Nagoy, passes under the Town
of Astrachan, whence it proceeds unto Ruslowa, on the South-west side of Crosna
Boggar, then falls into the Caspian. And the distance between the East Side of
the Volga near Astrachan, and the River Actabon, is about 20 miles, which is
mostly Water and Islands.

And that the Course of the Volga from its first Source, until it does
dis-embogue it self into the Caspian Sea, can be no less than what we have
asserted, is hence confirmed, That the Snow which falls abundantly in Russia,
and begins to be dissolved about the latter end of April, and do mightily
increase the Waters of the Volga, come not unto Astrachan until Midsummer, when
it so raises the Volga, that overflowing the Banks, it covers with his Waters
all the Islands near Astrachan; so that from the Little Nagoy, unto Actabon in
the Great Nagoy, all the Country seems, excepting a Hillock or two, one
continued Lake, or a great Gulf of the Sea. Wherefore they who go in the Spring
from Astrachan to fetch Wood, having cut it, make great Floats, which are
lifted up when the River overflows, and guided each by a few Men, until they
are brought unto Astrachan, or those other places for which they are designed.

The most remarkable Towns and Habitations upon the Volga, between Seraichena
and Astrachan, (which are 500 miles distant from each other) are Camena,
Rokegowa, Osshenofka, Chornoyar, Borisse, Offatalka, Poollowoy, Collmakof
Satone, Cossoyar, Crosnoyar, Nassonoyar, Satone, Yanatavy, Daneelofka, Perre
Ousshake, Eillansuke, Eiskyborro, Crukla, Bussan, Balsheeke, Tollotonygorod,
Dolgoa, Goradocha (which was old Astrachan) Sharina, Bogor, which is near
Astrachan, besides many other Places, with whose Names I have not charged my
memory. We will now pass over the Volga through Astrachan into the Great Nagoy.

The Great Nagoy may be properly enough divided into Islands and Continent; the
former are made by the Volga, and several Rivers which fall out of it,
variously mixed with each other, and are all at length emptied into the Caspian
Sea. Those Rivers or Branches have their several Names; those which I remember
are Cuttoma, Boulda, Malla, Guellusa, Creewantya, Busane, Actabon and Bereket.
The Kingdom of the Great Nagoy is all plain and desert; 1200 miles in length
between Astrachan and Samara; 500 miles in breadth from the said Astrachan unto
the River of the Yeike or Jaick. There is no Wood in all this Country, except
what grows near the Rivers. It has no Towns or fixed Habitations, though it
had formerly diverse, and some among them very considerable, as Czarofsgorod, or
Czarofs Pollate, in English, the Emperor's Town, which formerly must needs have
been as its Name imports, an Imperial or Capital City. I have often viewed it
with admiration, and cannot compute it to have been less than 20 miles in
Circuit; I have told fourscore great eminent Buildings, which must have been
either Moschees, Palaces, or Caravanseraies, and some of them 6 miles distant
from the other. The Muscovites are of diverse Opinions concerning its
Destruction: Some say it was ruined by the Cossacks; but the Cossacks, who are
ready enough to brag of their Achievements, know nothing thereof, only that
they have often dispossessed the Russes, when they endeavored to rebuild part
of it. For indeed the Situation is very excellent, having the Volga on one
side, the Actabon on the other: The Country very beautiful, healthful and
fertile; and yet notwithstanding all these encouragements, it is not yet
inhabited, not by the Russes, because it standing on the main Land, they would
be continually exposed unto the Inroads of the Tartars; nor by the Tartars,
because its nearness unto the Rivers, would render them obnoxious to the
Russes, every time the great Caravan passes that way, which is at least twice
each year. Yet the Muscovites do frequently fetch Brick and Stones from this
ruined City, wherewith they have built a great part of Astrachan, and the
neighboring Forts or Towns, where such solid Materials are employed. But
besides this Serai, (for so the Tartars call any fixed Habitation) there were
in ancient times five or six more down along the Rivers side, in each of which
formerly dwelt a Chan; but Time and Wars have almost entirely ruined them.
There is also another Serai upon the River Jaick named Seraichika, where is
said formerly to have been the Residence of a great Myrsa or Chan; but it is now
quite ruinated.

The Tartars who inhabit the Great Nagoy, both Men and Women, are very proper,
at least of much taller Stature than many other Tartars, but have ill-favored
Countenances, broad Faces, flat little Noses, small Eyes sunk in their Heads;
all which are common to most of the Eastern Tartars. But the Tartars of Crim
are more comely, which, I suppose, may partly proceed from their Wives, who are
many of them Captive Circassians, Russes, Poles, Hungars, and of diverse other
Nations. The Nagoy Tartars are also Black or rather Tawny; which I Conjecture
is not so much natural, as proceeding from the heat of the Sun, which is in
these Parts some Months of the Year much more Excessive than one would expect
from the Climate. And besides, their Children go stark naked during the great
heats in Summer. It is also remarkable, That the Cold in Winter in the same
Country is exceeding severe, and one would think to them who have such mean
accommodation, intolerable. These Nagoy Tartars have great store of Cattle, as
Kine, Sheep, Horses and Camels, and yet notwithstanding they are very ill clad,
most of their Clothing being Sheepskins, and those but scurvily dressed. They
have no sort of Corn or Grain, mightily scorning the Europeans and Persians,
whose chief Diet, they say, is the top of a pitiful weed. Polygamy is not only
allowed, but altogether in fashion among them, most having diverse Wives, more
or fewer according unto their Quality and Ability; who unless they are
Captivated by War, are such as they buy of their Parents or Kindred for Cattle.
If one Brother dye, the other takes all his Wives, who are usually 5. or 6. But
if all the Brothers die, either in War or by Diseases, then they are devolved
like other Goods and Chattels unto the Elder Brother's Son, they never
suffering any married Woman, during life, to go out of the Kindred.

Here our Author has inserted a Discourse concerning diverse odd, and some
barbarous Customs which have long prevailed among the Nagoy Tartars, and
wherewith they will not easily Dispense. But they giving little light unto
History or Geography, I have not thought them worthy the trouble of
transcribing; ner do I apprehend they would afford any considerable instruction
or divertisement unto the Reader.

These Tartars of the Great Nagoy when they remove their habitation, transport
their Houses from place to place in Wagons with 4 Wheels, which are drawn
usually by Camels; thoy pass up and down the Country in great Hordes, their
ordinary march is from the Volga unto Buskowshake; thence to Voroslane, Samara,
Eirgeesse, Eishene, Ougogura, Reimpeska, and all along under the Calmukes
Country, until they arrive at the Jaick or Yeike: Sometimes they pass by
Cassoone, Aurrow, Camoyes Samar, and so to Saraichika: This is ordinarily their
Summer Progress. Against Winter they return unto those parts of the Country
which border upon the Caspian Sea. As Baksake upon the Caspian Sea; Beallnssa,
Kitgach, Sheennamara, Coudake, Caradowan, Actabon; and higher upon the Volga,
scattering themselves upon the Seashore and Banks of the Rivers among the
Reeds and VVoods, or wheresoever they find the Climate most mild and best
Defense against the Cold, which in the VVinter is in those Parts extremely
severe; so that it is hard to determine whether they suffer more from the Heat
in Summer, or Cold in Winter. During which latter Season they leave their
Hergels or Horses, and most of their greater Cattle to shift for themselves in
the Deserts.

Having had often occasion to mention the River Jaicke or Yeike, I shall here
give a short account of what I have observed and learnt concerning its Rise and
Course. It comes from the Calmukes Land, where it is thought to spring; though
some of the Russes affirm it, Fountains are more Remote in Siberia, the
Southern parts of which is also inhabited if not possessed by the Kalmukes,
some of whose Ulusses or Hords are subject unto the Muscovites; others in
League with them: but they have sometimes cruel Wars, and did formerly destroy
Tumen with some other Towns and Castles of the Russes, who they apprehended did
incroach too fast upon them. But to return unto the Course of the Yeik, after
it has passed through the Calmukes Country, it divides the Great Nagoy from
Cassachy Horda, and after it has passed in all a Thousand miles, throws it
self into the Caspian Sea a little below Seraichika. This is a very large
River, and the Land on each side well clothed with Wood, Grass, diverse sorts
of Herbs and wild Fruits, and the Water full of good Fish; which Conveniences
do oft-times invite the Cossacks to make their abode there, and from thence
they make Incursions on diverse parts bordering on the Caspian Sea. This River,
among diverse other Fish, does so wonderfully abound with Sturgeon, that a man
may stand upon the Pank side with a Pole in hand armed at the end with an Iron
Crook, make choice of what Sturgeon best pleases him, which he shall rarely
fail of taking though never so inexpert in Fishing, if he have but strength or
help to draw it on Land. Not far from the Mouth of the Jaick in the Caspian Sea
near the Shore, are many Coves and Corners which they call Lapateens and
Cultukes, which are always full of Swans usually swimming on the Sea, which
are so numerous, that it is impossible to make any reasonable Computation
thereof. These Swans after Midsummer every Year cast their Feathers, a little
before which time there parts from Astracan many Boats which are manned by
Russes, and most of them are their Youth; after a passage of 500 miles they
arrive at these places which the Swans mostly haunt, and having filled their
Boats with Swans Skins and Feathers, they return unto Astracan, where a great
Trade is driven with the Persians who give ordinarily a Dollar apiece for these
Skins.

The next Country unto the Great Nagoy toward the East is Cassachy Horda,
which has, as I said, on the West the Jaick, by which it is divided from the
Great Nagoy. On the North the Kalmukes, North East the Yurgeach, or Jurgench.
Tartars, and to the South the Caspian Sea and Caragans, who inhabit on the
North East side of the Caspian Sea. These Cassachy Tartars march up and down
the Country much after the manner of the Nagoys. They have frequent Wars with
the Kalmukes and Yurgeachians; but seldom with either Nagoys or Caragans. Only
after the manner of most other Tartars they will clandestinely steal even from
those Neighbors with whom they have the most uninterrupted and profound Peace.

Cassachy Horda is altogether Desert, excepting some Woods Northward, bordering
upon the Kalmucks, where there are diverse small Rivers which empty themselves
into the Jaick; which River is also in most places bordered with Woods unto its
Entrance into the Caspian Sea. And therefore the Inhabitants may well be named
Cassachy Horda, or Wild people, as the name imports: They sow no sort of Corn,
their chief Food being Horseflesh and Mares milk; which is also common to
diverse other Nations of the Tartars.

On the North of Cassachy Horda dwell the Kalmuke Tartars, if such a life as
they lead may be called dwelling. The Country they inhabit deserves a better
People, the Land abounding with all things necessary for a Comfortable
subsistence. This Country has store of Sables, Marterns, Black Foxes,
Squerrils, and several other sorts of Furs, which they Exchange with the Russes
for Aqua-vitae, Mead, Tobacco, and other Commodities. This Country has some
Towns, as Siberia, the Head of a Province of the same name, and Tumen, both
which the Russes have gained from them: Ouffha, Wadle, Sellona, Lucomoria,
which latter place, they say, is situated upon a Cold Sea. But Ouffha is a
midland Town, 500 miles from Cassan which is near the Volga. The Kalmukes are
accounted good Soldiers, being kept in continual Exercise by the Muscovites on
the one side, the Nagoyans and Cassachy-Horda on the other. Their unmarried
Women do not only accompany the Men unto the Wars, but are said to be little
inferior unto the Men in Skill and Valor, shooting almost as strongly and
dexterously as the men, from whom they cannot be distinguished by their Garb,
being apparelled and riding much after the same manner: Both Men and Women in
all their Expeditions seldom carry along with them fewer than 5 or 6 Horses
apiece. I cannot precisely determine what their Religion is, but I do perceive
by Converse with them, that they have a more favorable opinion of the
Christians than of the Mahumetans, or of some of their fellow Ethnicks; for if
I mistake not, they are Heathens, I not being able to discern among them any
Religious Worship, excepting some kind of Adoration which they pay unto the Sun
and Moon. They have a very peculiar kind of Diet; for besides Horseflesh,
which is a great Dainty, they scruple not to eat Snakes, Adders, Foxes, and
indeed even Carrion of diverse sorts of Creatures, such Food as to Europeans
would be intolerable, even in the greatest Famine. They wear a kind of Caps or
Hatts which are called by the Muscovites, Coulpackes, open before and behind,
with broad Brims on each side. And thereupon they are called by the other
Tartars, Calmukes.

Eastward from these Calmukes, inclining unto the South toward China, live the
Yurgeachians, so named from their chief Town, which some call Yurgeach, others
Jurgench: Of which Country I cannot say so much as concerning the former,
having never been therein but once; for in the Year 1620. there being great
Wars in Jurgeach, between the Chan or King, and the Myrsa his Son; some of the
Nagoy Tartars hearing thereof, invaded the Country, who whilst they were
united, durst not peep out of their own Borders, the Jurgeachians being a
numerous and warlike People. These Nagoys were all Volunteers, who went without
any Command from their own Prince, or Allowance from the Muscovites, without
whose consent by mutual Agreement they are not permitted to war. The news of
their Expedition being brought unto Astracan, the Voyvod, who had not long
before made a League with the Jurgeachians, sent out Allye (I suppose his true
Name was Ali or Hali) Myrsa a Tartarian Prince, with a 1000 of his own
Subjects, and 500 Russes, all Horse. We were 20 days marching, before we came
unto the Borders of Jurgeach from Astracan; whence we proceeded 10 days
journey, the Country through which we passed being miserably ravaged by the
aforesaid Nagoys. At the end of which 30 days by a reasonable Computation,
'twas judged we were distant from Astracan at least a 1000 miles; about which
time we overtook them in the Valley of Ougogura, having got from the
Jurgeachians an innumerable company of Cattle of diverse sorts, as Horse, Kine,
Camels and Sheep. We took all their Booty from them; and as a further
punishment for their Riot, took away their own supernumerary Horses, leaving
them only a Horse a Man for to convey them home. Then Ally Myrsa divided the
Spoil, half he bestowed upon those who did accompany him, and sent the
remainder for a Present unto the Voyvod, returning nothing unto the
Jurgeachians because they were taken from Thieves. In the mean while the Prince
of Jurgeach in a pitched Battle overthrew his Father, took him Prisoner, put out
both his Eyes, and caused himself to be Crowned King. He had a younger Brother,
whom fearing that in time he might occasion some insurrection, he gave Command
unto some of his Creatures, that they should strangle him, and bring his Head:
But diverse of the Nobles, by whose means he obtained the Sovereignty, gaining
intelligence thereof, would not permit his Order to be put in execution; but
seizing on the Child, sent him unto the Emperor of Muscovy, with whom he
re-mained when I was last at Astracan.

But I must return from the Jurgeachians unto the Caragans, whom I have left
behind, and they do more immediately refer unto my promise, which was to give
an Account of all the Nations and Countries incompassing the Caspian Sea.

The Country of the Caragans occupies most of that vast space, which
intercedes between the River Yeike and the Dominions of the Ousbegs, or Tartars
of Bouchara, and their Territory surrounds the North-East corner of the Caspian
Sea, proceeding Southwards unto the River Jaxartes; and some Hords of the said
People do inhabit between the said River and the Oxus, which divides the
Tartars of Bochara and the Caragans, from the Persians and the Tartars of Balk.
This Country of the Caragans is very desert and barren; the People miserably
poor; their Houses are wretched Huts, the greatest part under ground; they are
very tawny and ill-favored; their Habitations are scatt'red, scarcely
deserving the Name of Villages: And they have no Town, as I have been informed,
besides Preesslannes, which is situated on the South Side of the Jaxartes, near
the Caspian Sea; which whilst I dwelt in Astracan, was by surprise taken by the
Cossacks; but they had little cause to brag of their Victory, finding little
booty therein; and the Caragans gathering together, beat them out with great
loss of Men, forcing them to retire into an Island 2 or 3 leagues from the Land
which they possess unto this day, no Nation being able, or else not caring to
un-nest them, although Tartars, Persians and Muscovites, do continually suffer
by their Depredations.

Toward the East and by South of the Caragans, dwell the Tartars of Bochara,
who are by diverse called Yusbegs. The Country which they possess is better
watered, and more fertile than most of the preceding, and there is great resort
of Merchants from diverse Parts unto them, especially Persians, Muscovites, and
several Nations of Indians, as Moguls, Boutans, with many others, whose Names I
cannot recollect. I have been also told, That the Chinese do sometimes trade
with them. I am persuaded, that this is the famed Kingdom of Cataye; for the
Catayans are a sort of Tartars, and I know no other Tartars between this
Country and China. Caragan lies from them to the North-West; Urgenshe due
North; China to the East; the Tartars of Balk to the South; and the Persians
South and by West; and the Caspian Sea duly West. They are almost continually
in Wars with the Persians.

The next Country I am to describe is Persia, in which Land I was never,
excepting once, in that part thereof which borders upon the Comukes; but I have
conversed with several Persian Merchants at Astracan, who came by Shipping from
Gilan, which when the Wind is very fair and good, they sail in 2 or 3 days and
nights. They wear Turbants like the Turks, and so do the Bouchars. Therefore
not having seen much of Persia, nor having sufficiently informed my self
concerning it, I shall pass through it unto the Comukes Land, of which I have
obtained more perfect knowledge both by War and Traffic. This Country is
bounded on the South by Persia; on the East by the Caspian Sea; Westward by
Circassia; and on the North by the River of Tumeine; on which stands a Town of
the same Name, from which unto Chahamate, the most Northerly Habitation of
Persia, is 600 miles. A great part of this Country, especially Westward, is
very mountainous; I could never learn where it does exactly terminate. I have
been in four of their Towns: The first is Tarkee, where Gildar, whom they own
for their Prince, does ordinarily reside. The second is Derbeine, in the
Mountains. The third Derevena, in the same mountainous Tract. The fourth Kossa,
upon a River of the same Name, not far from the place where it empties it self
into the Caspian Sea. These Comukes are proper Men and very courageous; and
that which makes them more daring and adventurous than most Tartars, is the
goodness of their Horses, and the advantage of their Arms, both offensive and
defensive; for they seldom engage in Wars without Helmets, Jacks of Steel,
Shirts of Mail, and Targets, which excepting those times wherein they fight,
hang behind their backs, being very light, and not very large, and therefore
not cumbersome. They have, as other Tartars, both Bows and Cymetars, and withal
never go without Lances, which they use with great strength and dexterity. In
their Apparel they differ little from the Circassians; but as for Religion,
they are generally Mahumetans, and their Language is in substance the same with
other Tartars, their vicinity unto the Persians, Muscovites and Sheercasses,
having somewhat disguised it. The Country they inhabit abounds with Wood; part
of it is hilly, with small pleasant Valleys between the Hillocks; and in some
places, especially toward Persia, and thence into the Land, it has many great
and almost inaccessible Mountains, by reason of their height and steepness.
This Land was reduced under the Government of the Russes many years ago, after
the ensuing manner: Evan Vassillywich being Czar or Emperor of Russia, after
he had taken Cassan and Astracan, sent part of his Army into Circassia, where
they took in Tumeine. Another Body entered the Comukes Country, and possessed
themselves of Derevena, Derbeine, Tarkee and Kossa. The Russe Emperor
constituted a Voyvod, whom he ordered to reside in Tarkee, and left with him
10000 Men; he ordered also at the same time another considerable Brigade to
stay at Coisa, where he left a great number of Boats and other Vessels, who had
brought supplies of Men and Provisions from Mosco, and other Parts of his
Dominions. And having, as he apprehended, secured his new Conquests, he
returned unto Mosco: Immediately after his retreat, the Comukes gathered their
whole Force, and set down before the Town of Tarkee, which after a vigorous
resistance they took, and in it with the Voyvod, several Officers of diverse
Nations, whom with the common Soldiers they sold unto the Circassians,
Tartars, and other neighboring Nations, so that few were ever afterward
recovered. From Tarkee they marched unto Koisa, which by the instruction of
Captives, they did pretty regularly besiege and assault, and after some
repulses took it by storm, killing all the Russes, excepting such as escaped in
the Ships and Boats which lay before the Town. The Russe Emperor being
speedily informed of these Successes, immediately raised a great Army, with
which he ordered all the Cossacks between the Don and Volga, unto the River of
Tumeine, to join his Forces, and assist them, in order unto the recovery of
what he had lost, and utter extirpation of the Comukes: Who hearing how highly
the Czar was exasperated, and how great a Force was ready to invade them, they
began to be solicitous about the Event; and having consulted together, agreed
to make some kind of submission, and sue for pardon and peace. Whereupon they
sent Ambassadors unto Tumeine, where the Russe Army was encamped; and after a
Treaty with the Czar's Plenipotentiaries, they agreed upon these Articles, That
the Comukes should restore the Towns they had taken, and aid the Emperor with
such a number of Soldiers, as he should require, against any Enemy whatsoever;
whereunto their Heads being sworn, they have inviolably observed the Agreement
unto this day. But it is time we take our leave of Gildar, Prince of Terki, and
his Comukes, and proceed into Shercassen Land, part of which, as I hinted
before, lies upon the Black Sea, and extends it self unto the Caspian.

This side of Circassia which borders upon the Caspian Sea, is a very plentiful
Country; and as for Fish, it is so wonderfully plentiful, that in Tumeine you
may ordinarily purchase a good Sturgeon for two pence, and sometimes for a
penny; a most prodigious quantity of Fish being taken in the River of the
Weestra; and about the Island of Chekeine, which is off at Sea not far from
Tumeine. On the main Land, over against this Fishery, 4 miles above the River
of Terike, there is a great Well, made by a Spring, which falls from a Rock, on
the side of a great Hill, and immediately fills this little Lake, which whether
it is Natural or Artificial, I know not. The Water of this Lake is so scalding
hot, that the Fishers flinging in their Sturgeon or other Fish, it is in a
short time boiled, as if over a fire, the heat being so intense, that no Man
can detain his Hand in it for a moment; from which strange Quality it derives
its Name, being called by the Russes, Goracha Colloda, or the Scalding Well.

I shall conclude my Discourse with a short Account of the Little Nagoy, or of
that part thereof which confines upon the Caspian; for all that space between
Tumeine and Astracan, is by many ascribed unto the Nagoy Tartars. I did before
declare, That the Little Nagoy is for the most part a wide waste Desert, the
worst of which is all that Tract which lies between Tumeine and Astracan.
These Tartars have no Town but only Asshowa, which is not properly theirs,
though lying in their Country, being possessed by the Turks.

There is a sort of People in this Country, whom the Tartars call Sigakes; I
could never learn what their Language is, or from what Place or Nation they
proceed; nor could I understand after what manner they live, whether they have
any Religion, or Civil Government. Their chief Subsistence is what they gain
from the Tartars; for they gather sometimes 2 or 3000, and rob the smaller
Hords of the Tartars, and those which are most remote from help. But sometimes
the Tartars discovering the place of their Retreat or Rendevous, surround them
with their Carts, and then fall in, cut them all off, never giving Quarter unto
any; no Crime being so severely punished amongst the Tartars as Thievery; which
makes me apprehend, that these Sigakes are some of their own People, who
formerly deserted them upon some extraordinary occasion: But whatsoever is the
reason, they do most irreconcileably hate each the other.

The most noted Places on that side the Little Nagoy, which regards the Caspian
Sea, and lie all along the Coast from Tumeine to Astracan, are Sheerlona Year
(where I was first taken Prisoner by the Tartars) Peremetka, Arsi Bash,
Moyackee, Bealla Oshera Bashmachake, Kaboylly Machakofska, Chostoway, and so
over the Volga unto Astracan.

And to conclude all, I shall here enumerate all the Places on the Coast near
Astracan, which have Names that are considerable for Havens, Trade, Fishing, or
any other remarkable Circumstance. Soteeza Bockgra, Ueuslowa Cossa, Beerulska
Cossa, Ewanshoska Cossa, Seamme Bogoroffe, Tussocleoff Lapateene, Chaska Cossa,
Crosna Bogore, Cocklouska Cossa, Owarska Cossa, Comashaska Cossa, Colloberinska
Cossa, Cocktabow, Bussanska Lapaten, Kara Bussan; which last place is not far
from Sheene Mare, which I have formerly mentioned.

I cannot so exactly tell the Circumference of the Caspian, as of the Black
Sea, having been only on the North and West side; but howsoever I shall from
what I have seen and learnt from Experienced persons, be enabled to approach
very near unto the Truth.

The Distance between Astracan and the Jaick, is 500 miles; from thence unto
the Confines of Bochara 500 miles: From Jaxartes to Persia, and thence unto
Gilan is, according unto my Information, 1100 miles. From Gilan unto Koisa 500
miles: From thence unto Astracan as much; in all, 3100 miles. But if any person
should endeavor by Land to Travel round this Sea, or in a Voyage by Sea follow
the Coast, he would make at least a Thousand miles more: for this Sea is full
of great Gulphs, Bays, and broken ground; so that the Calculation I make, is
upon a direct passage by Sea, suppose from Astracan to Gilan, from thence to
the Oxus, from the Oxus to the great North-East Bay, into which the River Jem
falls, which is full of Islands and broken Grounds, Shelves, Sand and Shallow
Water; and from thence back to Astracan.

Having presented your Lordship with a short but true Account of those
Countries encompassing and lying between the two forementioned Mediterranean
Seas, I shall no less briefly and faithfully declare by what Accidents I came
unto this Knowledge: which cost me so dear, that I suppose the most inquisitive
person would not purchase the gratification of his Curiosity at a far less
Expense of time and trouble, than I have employed (though often against my
will) in my Travels and Enquiries.

I was born in Ireland, yet of English Extract: My Family Noble, but my Estate
not corresponding with my Quality, being ambitious, and withal naturally
inclined to fee Foreign Countries, I hoped to Raise my Fortune by my Sword.
After I left Ireland, before I had been long in England, an opportunity
presenting it self, I engaged in the Service of the King of Sweden, who had
then Wars with the Muscovite; having given some Considerable proofs of my
Courage, I was gradually raised unto a Considerable Command; but being engaged
too far in a Body of the Enemies, I was unhappily taken Prisoner by the Russes,
and carried Prisoner unto Plescow, then in their possession, having at the same
time Arrears due unto me from the Swede above 5000 Dollars. The Swedes taking
no care for my Enlargement, being willing, I suppose, to save so great a Sum
of Money, as at my Return I should have challenged: after Three years close
Imprisonment, I was proffered Liberty by the Muscovite, upon condition I would
faithfully serve him against all his Enemies; whereunto assenting, I was sent
unto Moscow, and there before the Chancellor sworn a Tolmack, and preferred
unto a Command little inferior unto what I enjoyed before. And the Poles
advancing toward Moscow with a great Army, fearing lest I should go over unto
them, I was sent unto Astracan, where I remained 10 years, being continually
Employed against the Tartars and Circassians. By which means I came to know
Pettigor, Sneesnagor, Shadgore, Cabardye, and the Great and Little Nagoy, the
Comukes, the Tartars of Cassan, the Kalmukes, Cassachy Horda, Caragans, Ungensh
and Usbeg, Tartars. During which Wars, I conflicted with great difficulties and
hardship; In making long Journies, faring hardly: Nor was it a small labor to
make floates in order unto our passing over the great Rivers I have mentioned,
to say nothing of the Danger. Besides, we run great hazards in our Journeying
over those waste wide howling Deserts, which on every side surrounded us;
frequently wanting provisions, and sometimes Guides; so that had we failed
never so little in our Conjectures, we had all perished. After Ten years hard
Service, in my Return frrom Convoying Shollohofe Knez into Shercassen Land, I
was taken Prisoner by the Tartars of the Little Nagoy, and by them carried unto
Assowa upon the Mouth of the Tana or Don. There I was sold unto a Precopensian
Tartar, who carried me along with him toward Crim: But upon the shallow Waters
I very happily made my Escape. I had little Knowledge of the Country, but
having formerly understood by our Cossacks at Astracan, that great Bodies of
the same name, mortal Enemies unto the Tartars, dwelt upon the Nepper not far
beyond Crim; by the help of the Sun and Stars, I journeyed due West many days
without any disastrous Adventure, until I found them; who gave me a very kind
reception: In this escape I traversed almost the whole Desert of Ingile and
Ungule. Dorosensko who then Commanded all the Cossacks upon the Nepper,
immediately made me a Poskofneke, from which time for the space of almost two
years, I did accompany them in diverse Expeditions, in which we visited most of
those Countries which lie upon the Black Sea, to the no small vexation and loss
of the Inhabitants. We kept a Correspondence with the Cossacks upon the Don,
and frequently assisted each other. And being all Foot, and the Country exactly
level, we traveled surrounded with Wagons (which they call a Tabor) for fear
of the Tartars who often set upon us, but were as often repulsed, we being well
accommodated with Firearms and small Fieldpieces, which the Tartars do
exceedingly fear, and will not ordinarily attempt closely, unless they have
greatly the Odds in Number. But at length it was my ill Fortune between the
Nepper and the Don to be again taken by the Tartars, and by them carried into
Crim, where I lived long in great misery, and was at length sold unto a
Timariot Spahi living in Anadoule, (Anatolia, or Asia minor) with whom I lived
5 years, but in more easy servitude than among the Tartars. And to make my
service less irksome, my Master bestowed on me a Wallachian Woman, whom I
received for my Wife, though without the usual Solemnities of Marriage, which
are practiced among Christians: Understanding at length that a Lord Ambassador
was resident at Constantinople in behalf of the King of Great Britain, and to
manage the Affairs of the English Nation in Turkey, I prevailed with my Master,
whose Favor I had gained to grant me my freedom, together with my Wives, if I
should procure an hundred Dollars. Whereupon he dismissed me in the company of
a Turk his Friend, who upon my humble supplication unto your Lordship receiving
the forementioned Sum, did in the behalf of his Friend before the Cady make me
free, and leave the Woman also at my Disposal. At the same time I very happily
met with some Vallachian Gentlemen, who were sent on a Message from their
Vayvod unto the Grand Signior, They gladly received my Woman, and took her
along with them, promising upon their Return into their own Country, to Restore
her unto her Parents.

Now that I may fully satisfy your Lordship, that I had really visited all
those Countries which I have mentioned I beseech your Lordship let your
Interpreter try me in those Languages wherein he is skilled; and as for others
wherewith he is not acquainted, I am ready to converse with any of those
Nations whom I pretend to know. For although I have never conversed much with
Books, yet my great Travels accompanied with a pretty good Memory, will
sufficiently Qualify me to pass through the Countries I shall hereafter
mention.

To begin my Progress from Constantinople, I can pass over from Scutery, and
thence by the help of my Turkish Language pass through all Anatolia; Thence
leaving Armenia on my right hand, and having the Black Sea on the left, go
through Georgia, Mingrellia, Abassa, and Shercassen Land with the same Tongue,
and another, which with little variation is common unto them all. Thence into
the Comukes Country, who are a sort of Tartars, and do agree with others of the
same name in speech, as indeed most Tartars do; only they who are Mahumetans,
and converse much with the Turks, use diverse Arabic and Turkish words
whereunto the Heathen Tartars are strangers: From Comukes Land I can pass into
Persia, but I am not so well acquainted with their Country and Language, as I
have elsewhere acknowledged. Therefore to return unto Constantinople, I can
proceed from thence unto Romella, or Romania, through Wallachy, Bealla Horda,
Crim, the Great Desert I have so often mentioned of Ingell and Ungull, the
Little Nagoy, so over the Volga unto Astracan; thence through the Great Nagoy,
and leaving the Caspian on my Right hand into the Caragans Country, and so
through Boghar into Persia. I can also by my knowledge of the Languages peculiar
unto the following Countries traverse all Ireland, England, Norway, Sweden,
Finland, Leifland, Poland, Russia, Mordwa, Sheremessa, Cassan, Kalmukes Land,
Cassachy Horda, Yurgench, and leaving China on the left hand through Bochara
into Persia.

And now, Sir, nothing remains, But that I make most humble and hearty
acknowledgment of your great Generosity and Christian Charity, in delivering a
Stranger out of a Captivity, wherein I had Otherwise continued without hope of
seeing my Friends or Country. And were I as expert at my Pen, as I have
heretofore been at managing a Sword, I would by Consigning my Travels to
Writing, leave behind me a lasting Monument of your Fame: But being for want of
Learning and by long Disuse of my Mother Tongue rendered unfit for such a Work,
I shall wheresoever I come proclaim your Worthiness, and continually pray unto
the Omnipotent GOD to return your Kindness into your Bosom a Thousand fold.
And shall ever remain, during Life,

Your Faithful Slave, Astracan.

FINIS.
Books sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
Folio.
THeses Theologicae variis Temporibus in Academia Sedanensi editae, and ad
disputandum propositae. Authore Ludovico de Blanc verbi Divini Ministro and
Theologiae professore. In qua exponitur sententia Doctorum Ecclesiae Romanae,
and Protestantium. 1675. Price 20 s. Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675. A Table
of Ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell, D. D. stitcht, 1 s. 6 d. Tuba
Sentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trumpet; being an Instrument of Excellent Use
both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1 s. of the
Instrument 2 l. 5 s. Articles and Rules for the Government of His Majesty's
Forces by Land, during this present War, 1673. 1 s. 6 d. Bailii opus Hist.
Chronol. vet. and Nov. Test. 1663. Becmanni Exercitationes Theol. Contra
Socinianos. 1643. An History of the Church, by Alex. Petrey. 1662, Catalogus
Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Editorum. The History of Don Quixote.
1675. 10 s. The Commentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, Containing his Wars in
Gallia, and the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey; with the Notes of Clement
Edmonds. 1677. 16 s.
Quarto.
Thesaurus Numismatum Antiquorum cum Commentariis Jac. Oiselii. 1677. 20 s.
Joannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theologica. 1677. 16 s. Georg. Hicks Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, on 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1677. 6 d. Dr. Pell's Introduction to
Algebra. 7 s. Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi
Logarithmos, 1668. and Jac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. 2 s.
Love only for Love sake, a Dramatick Romance, by Sir Richard Fanshaw. 3 s. 6 d.
Mori Enchiridion Metaphysicum, 1671. 10 s. Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg. Bat.
1624. 5 s. Petrus Paaw de Ossibus, Amst. 1633. 5 s. Dr. Thomas Jacomb, on the
Eighth Chapter of the Romans. 8 s. A Letter from a Gentleman of the Lord
Howard's Retinue, to his Friend in London, dated at Fez. Nov. 1. 1670. 6 d. Dr.
Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22 s. Hieronymi Mercurialis de Art Gymnastica Libri
sex cum figuris, 1672. Pignorii Mensa Isaica, 1669. Pharmacopeia Hagiensis,
1659. Augustana, 1672.
J. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica and Christiana, 16 s. Joan. Binchii Mellificium
Theologicum, 16 s. Theod. Kerkringii D. M. Spicilegium Anatomicum, Continens
Observationum Anatomicarum rariorum centuriam unam nec non Osteogeniam foetuum
in qua quid cuique ossiculo singulis accedat Mensibus, quidve decedat and in eo
per varia immutetur tempora, accuratissime oculis subjiciuntur, 1670. Fortunius
Licetus de Monstris ex recensione Gerardi Blasii, qui Monstra quaedam Nova and
Rariora ex recentiorum Scriptis addidit. Editio novissima Iconibus illustrata.
1665. Complete Clark, Containing the best Presidents, 1677. 12 s. Holy Fast of
Lent defended, 1667. 6 d. A Looking-Glass for all New Converts, 1667. 1 s.
There is newly published two Recantation-Sermons, (Preached at the
French-Church in the Savoy) by two Converted Romanists, Mr. De la Motte, late
Preacher of the Order of the Carmelites; and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licentiate in
Divinity; wherein the Corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and
confuted. Both Printed in French and English. Also two other Sermons, one
Preached before the King at White Hall, Jan. 30. 1676. by Henry Bagshaw, D. D.
the other before the Lord Mayor, December. 19. 1675. by John Cook. A Modest
Survey of the most material things in a Discourse, called the Naked Truth, 6 d.
A New Dictionary, French and English, by Guy Miege. 1677. Marshal Turenne's
Funeral Sermon. 1677. Jer. Horrocii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673. An Historical
Vindication of the Church of England in Point of Schism, by Sir To. Twisden.
The last Siege of Mastricht, Sept. 5. 1676. Dr. Tillotson s Sermon before the
King, Apr. 18. 1675. Dr. Wilkins's Three Sermons before the King, March 7.
1669. and Feb. 7. 1670. Dr. Jo. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. 1676.
Octavo.
Rhetores saelecti, Demetrius Phalerius, Tiberius Rhetor, Anonymus Sophista,
Severus Alexandrinus Greece et Lat. per Tho. Gale. Soc. Coll. M. 1676. A
Scriptural Catechism, according to the Method observed by the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man, 1676. How, of delighting in God; of the Blessedness of the
Righteous, Two Vol. Art of Speaking, by M. du Port Royal. 1676. A Discourse of
Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion, and withal to
prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on this Subject he
has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s. The History of the late
Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a description of the
Country, in two Volumes. 7 s. The History of the Conquest of the Empire of
China by the Tartars, 1671. 4 s. Mystery of Iniquity unvailed in a Discourse,
wherein is held forth the opposition of the Doctrine, Worship, and Practices of
the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian
Faith, by Gilbert Burnet. 1 s. A Collection of Popish Miracles wrought by
Popish Saints, both during their lives, and after their death; collected out of
their own Authors, 1 s. Treatise of the Holy Communion, 1677. 2 s. 6 d. Theod.
Turqueti, De Mayerne, De Arthritide, Accesserunt ejusdem Consilia aliquot
Medicinalia, 1 s. A new way of curing the Gout, and Observations and Practices
of relating to Women in Travel, 3 s. Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars
tertia, sive Motus Compositi. Ubi G. Monchii e Scotia progressus, nec non Aug.
Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus; ejusdemque Regiae Majest. per Decennium
gesta fideliter enarrantur, 1676. Gualteri Needham Disputatio Anatomica de
Formato Foetu. 1677. 3 s. 6 d. Buxtorfius's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar
Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1 s. 6 d. The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of
Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2 s. The Adventures of Mr. T. S. an
English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turks of Argiers, with a description of
that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places thereabouts, 1670. 1 s. 6 d.
Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s. A Discourse written to a Learned Friar,
by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and
particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes, does contain nothing dangerous; and
that all he has written of both, seems to have been taken out of the First
Chapter of Genesis: To which is annexed the Systeme General of the Cartesian
Philosophy, 1 s. The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland
Frejus of Marseilles, by the French King's Order, 1666, to Muley Arxid King of
Taffaletta, etc. with a Letter in Answer to diverse Questions concerning their
Religion, Manners, etc. 1671. 1 s. 6 d. A Genuine Explication of the Visions in
the Book of Revelation, by A. B. Peganius. 1671. 2 s. Prodromus to a
Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within Solids, laying a
foundation for the rendering a rational account, both of the Frame and the
several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various Productions of
the same. By Nich. Steno, 1671. 1 s. 3 d. Basileus Valentinus, of Natural and
Supernatural things, also of the first Tincture, Root, and Spirits of Metals
and Minerals, how the same are Conceived, Generated, Brought forth, Changed and
Augmented: Whereunto is added Friar Bacon of the Medicine or Tincture of
Antimony, Mr. John Isaac Holland his Works of Saturn, and Alexander Van
Suchten, of the Secrets of Antimony, out of Dutch, 1671. 2 s. The Poetical
Histories, being a complete Collection of all the Stories necessary for a
perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other Ancient Authors,
written Originally in French, by the Learned Jesuit P. Galtruchius. Now
Englished and Enriched with Observations concerning the Gods worshipped by our
Ancestors in this Island, by the Phoenecians and Syrians in Asia; with many
useful Notes and occasional Proverbs, gathered out of the best Authors: Unto
which are added two Treatises; One of the Curiosities of Old Rome, and of the
difficult Names relating the Affairs of that City; The other containing the
most remarkable Hieroglyphics of Egypt. The Third Edition, with Additions. By
Marius D' Assigny, B. D. 3 s. 6 d. An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of
Gems, by the Honorable Robert Boil. 1 s. 6 d. Idem Lat. twelves, 1 s. Sir
Samuel Morland's Arithmetic, with several useful Tables, and a Perpetual
Almanac, 1673. 3 s. A Complete Treatise of Chyrurgery, containing Barbetts
Surgery. Mindererus of Diseases Incident to Camps and Fleets: With a
Chyrurgeon's Chest of Medicines and Instruments, etc. 6 s. Dr. Lower de cord.
Amster. 1671. 3 s. Dr. Grews Anatomy of Vegetables, 1672. 2 s. Crowei Elenchi
Script. in Scripturam. 3 s. 6 d. Eugelenus de Scorbuto. Fred. Deckeri
Exercitationes Medicae. Grotii via ad Pacem. Alb. Gentilis de Armis Romany. De
Imperio. De Legationibus. De Nuptiis.
Hammond de Confirmatione. Hugenii momenta Desultoria. Paraei Chronologia
Sacra. Thruston de Respiratione. Mr. Boil of Hidden Qualities of the Air
against Hobs, and of Attraction by Suction, 2 s. 6 d. Mr. Boil of Effluviums
of fire and flame, and of the previousness of Glass. 3 s. Memoires of Mr.
Des-Ecotais, formerly styled in the Church of Rome, The most Venerable Father
Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher of the Order of the Capucins; or the
Motives of his Conversion. In English 2 s. In French 2 s. In French and English
4 s. All Printed 1677. Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, and Mr. Burnet Conference,
about Religion, at London, Apr. 3d. 1676. with some Gentlemen of the Church of
Rome. As also a Letter to a Deist in Answer to several Objections against the
Truth and Authority of Scripture. 1677. Les Memoires De Madame la Princess
Marie Mancini Colonne G. Connetable du Royaume de Naples. 1677. La vie et les
Actions Memorables de Lieut. Amiral Michel de Ruyter, 1677. 5 s.
Duodecimo.
Compendium Biblicum continens, Ex 23202. versiculis totius veteris Testamenti,
Tantum versiculos 2289. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes universi veteris
E. voces, tam primitivae quam derivativae, tam Hebraicae quam Chaldaicae
Authore Jo. Leusden, 1673. 4 s. A Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir of
Comforts offered to Believers, in two Discourses, the first on Heb. 6. 17, 18.
the second on Romans 8. 32. By Robert Wine. 1 s. Grotii Sophompaneas. Gronovius
in Livium. Primrose Ars Pharmaceutica. Scbook de Pace. Suetonius. Swalve
Alcali. Severini Synopsis Chyrurgiae. Terentii Flores. Trelcatii loci Communes.
Balduinus de Calceo and Nigronius de Caliga Veterum. Accesserunt ex Q. Sept.
Fl. Tertulliani, Cl. Salmasii and Alb. Rubenii Scriptis plurima ejusdem
Argumenti, 1667. Pauli Barbetti opera Chirurgica Anatomica, 1672. Praxis
Barbettiana Cum notis Fred. Deckeri, 1669. Ottonis Tachenii Hippocrates
Chymicus, 1671. Theodori Kerckringii D. M. Commentarius in Currum Triumphalem
Antimonii Basilii Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671. Jo. Pincieri M. D.
Aenignatum Libri Tres cum solutionibus, 1655. Francisci Redi Experimenta circa
res diversos naturales, speciatim illas quae ex Indiis adferuntur, 1675. Aulus
Gellius. Besterfeldus Redivivus. Herls Wisdoms Tripos. Wilkins Beauty of
Providence.
FINIS.

