A True and Perfect RELATION Of Three Inhumane MURDERS, Committed By William
Bliss alias Watts, of the Parish of Mims in the County of Middlesex, upon the
Bodies of Will. Johnson his near Kinsman, and Robert Porter Servant to Mr.
Nichols.

ALSO The manner how he killed, robbed and striped a Drovers Boy, as he was
going to Market-street.

With the wonderful discovery of the Murderer.

LIKEWISE The Sentence of Death pronounced against him at the Sessions House in
the Old Bailey, London, Feb. 28. 1672. and the manner of his Execution, which is
to be at the Round-about-house near Kicksend.

LONDON Printed in the Year 1672.

A True and perfect Relation of three Bloody MURDERS, committed by William
Bliss, upon the Body of William Johnson his Kinsman, and Robert Porter a
Servant to of Mr. Nichols, etc.
IF we look back upon former ages and turn over the variety of ancient and
modern Histories, we shall find that Revenge and Murder have ever proved fatal
crimes to their undertakers, for let them be never so secretly contrived, or
the shedding of innocent Blood never so wretchedly perpetrated; yet as our
Conscience is to us a thousand Witnesses, so God is to us a thousand
Consciences; first to bring it to light, and then their Authors to deserved
punishments for the same, when they least dream or think thereof. For as there
is no peace to the wicked, so they shall find no Peace or Tranquillity here on
Earth, either with God or his Creatures; because if they would conceal it, the
very Fowls of the Air, or Beasts of the Field, yea, the very stones and timber
of their Chamber would detect it, a powerful example and president whereof, we
may behold in this ensuing History; where a wretched Creature making himself
guilty of these bloody Crimes, by the providence of God is discovered; and
receives exemplary and condign punishment for the

WIlliam Bliss commonly known by the name of Watts of Kicksend, in the County
of Middlesex Butcher, being about the Age of one or two and twenty years,
committed an inhumane Murder upon one William Johnson his Kinsman, Robbing him
of six pound in money, and then threw the body into a Pond, which was in some
days after found by the Neighbors: And this William Bliss being observed to be
last in his company, was upon suspicion of the Murder apprehended and carried
before a Justice of the Peace, who committed him to Newgate; where he lay till
the Sessions, but no positive evidence coming against him, he was cleared of
this Fact: yet notwithstanding the eyes and judgment of men could not discover
this, the Justice of God began to be exemplary upon him, striking him from head
to foet, with a loathsome Leprous disease, who before was clear skind and well
shaped, and comely in all his parts! yet did not this deter this wicked Villain
from a farther progress in his bloody and wicked practices; for where a heart
is given to covetousness and cruelty, there is little sign of Grace; and
therefore less hope of prosperity either in this life or the next: for those
are sins which so much ecclips the Judgments, and darkens the Understandings,
that the Man thereby runs blindfolded and headlong to all misery and confusion:
and makes his estate so desperate, that he deserves not to be pittyed by any,
because he would not pity or compassionate others.

Thus lived this wretch for ten or twelve months endeavoring to justify
himself, and get credit and reputation, paying some debts with the money he took
from the person Murdered, and now he again treads the tragic stage of blood,
for being hired to conduct a young man (servant to Mr. Nichols, in the Parish
of Mims) through Ensield-Chase, discovering by some discourse that the young
man had money about him, watching his opportunity, killed him with a Hedg-Bill in
the Chase; robbed him of his money, and took a Bill of four pound out of his
pocket, which he afterward carried to the Master of the murdered, demanding
the money with threats; pretending that his Servant was his Brother, and was not
well, and could not stay for his money; notwithstanding his threats the money
was not paid. This was evidenced by the said Master at his Trial, but the
manner of the discovery was strange and miraculous, for some Hounds being kept
hard by the place where the murdered person was buried, senting the dead Corpse
that was but shallowly buried in the ground, with their paws and noses tears up
the Earth and drags up the body: eating part of his bowels, and leaving several
of his bones above-ground, which this Villain observing before any one else,
buries it again, and covers it with Green Sods, and sticks bushes about it to
keep off the hounds, which was one means of his discovery; for he was observed
to cut such bushes in the Chase, which being applied to the places where he had
cut them, they did exactly fit.

But on the 24th of day February, 1672. the hounds being carried out by their
Master, and some gentlemen to hunt, coming near to this place left the sent of
their Game, and rushed through these bushes, and again tore up the body,
miserably torn about the bowels and breast, but as God would have it, they had
not torn his Face; upon this the Gentlemen retired with their dogs and
acquainted the neighbors with the discovery, upon which many flock to the
place, and among the rest the Murderer, who being desired by one John Hardyman
a Butcher (a neighbor thereabouts) to touch the body, he refused it with an
Oath, whereupon the person replied, I am afraid you have had a hand in this
man's death: But the Villain then made answer, have a care that I have not a
hand in yours: upon which he was apprehended, and upon several circumstances
proving the fact, at the Coroners Inquest was Committed to Newgate, which at
the Sessions in the Old-Bayly, Feb. 28th. was most clearly proved against him,
and he sentenced to be Executed at Tybourn; but upon the Countries request, the
Bench was pleased to order his Execution to be at the place where he committeed
the Bloody Murder: where he is to hang in Chains, as a memorable example of
Gods Justice, in discovering and punishing such Crimes, and to deter others
from doing the like, and the charge of this Execution the Country thereabout
voluntarily offered to defray.

Since his Imprisonment, another suspicious sign of a Murder of his has been
discovered, viz. There is found some Clothes hid in a Hay-Mow, at the Checker
in Kicksend, near to this Murderers Fathers house. The Circumstances giving
the cause of this suspicion are these. A Drovers Boy coming from London, was
buying a Pie at this Murderers Fathers house, and was observed by the
Murderer to pull money out of his shoe to pay for it, who examined the Boy,
why he carried money in his shoes, the Boy replies, I have that about me, for
which many a man loses his Life; upon which he was observed to walk along with
the Boy toward Market-Street, but the Boy was never seen since that time; And
the Clothes are known to be the same he wore when he bought the Pie.

Now from this dreadful and bloody story, the Reader may learn how God in his
due time and providence does asuredly detect and punish Murder, let this
exemplary punishment be a caveat for all persons not only to detest these foul
sins of Coveteousness and Murder in others, but to hate and abhor them in
themselves, for if to the rest of our sins we once consent to add that scarlet
and crying sin of Murder, that blood which we untimely send to Earth, will in
Gods time draw down vengeance on our heads from Heaven.

A summary account of the Murderers Actions.
WIlliam Bliss alias Watts, was in Newgate about two years since, for the
Murdering of one William Johnson, the son of William Johnson a Dyer in
Southwark. The case this, Bliss and one John Clay (who dyed in Goal) were
committed for the Murder of the said Boy upon suspicion. Bliss knowing that he
had money to pay to one Nichols, from his Master, which was his Uncle, Richard
Johnson a Butcher at Kiksend near Hadley, on Barnet Common.

WIlliam Bliss committed by Francis Croyley Esquire upon suspicion of Murdering one
Robert Porter, the 24th of Feb. 1672. The person was murdered about Michaelmas
last, and his body was found buried near the Round about-House at Kicksend by a
pack of Dogs Hunting, who left the Hare in view to scrape over the place where
the body was buried, (the Hogs having much torn the Carcass) the clothes was
seen and known by several marks to be the clothes of Porter, who was never
seen since he was in Blisses company. The Witnesses proved that this Bliss had
been two nights with him, and had been some days in his company, and also knew
that he had money about him. Bliss denied all this. Whereupon he was convicted,
and is to be Hanged in Chains near the Roundabout House at Kicksend.

FINIS

