A True and Perfect NARRATIVE OF The Great and Signal Success of a Part Of His
MAJESTY'S FLEET Under His Highness Prince Rupert, and His Grace the Duke of
Albemarle, Burning One hundred and Sixty Dutch Ships within the Ulie:

As also the Town of Brandaris upon the Island of Schelling, by some Commanded
Men under the Conduct of Sir ROBERT HOLMES, the Eighth and Ninth of this
instant August.

Published by especial Command.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb living over against Baynard's Castle in
Thames-strees. 1666.

A true and perfect Narrative of the great and signal Success of a Part of His
Majesty's Fleet under his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Grace the Duke of
Albemarle, burning One hundred and Sixty Dutch Ships within the Vlie: As also
the Town of Brandaris upon the Island of Schelling, by some commanded Men under
the Conduct of Sir Robert Holmes, the 8 and 9 of this Instant August.
ON the 29 of July, His Majesty's Fleet under his Highness Prince Rupert, and
his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, weighed Anchor from within sight of Zealand,
and steered their Course for the Vlie; but the winds being contrary, they did
not make the Island till the 7 of August, in which time several rich ships
happened to get in, which otherwise had fallen into their hands. Being come to
an Anchor, the Generals were informed, That the Islands of Vlie and Schelling
were very ill guarded, notwithstanding there were Storehouses both for the
States, and the East India Fleet, and Riches to a good value, and what did
weigh most, a considerable number of good Merchants ships usually riding there;
upon which it was resolved by the Generals, That there should be a speedy
Attempt made. A Council of Flag-Officers was called, and it was determined
there, that it should be carried on in the manner following, viz. That 300 Men
should be drawn out of each Squadron, consisting of two parts Landmen, and the
third Seamen; these to be Commanded by Nine Captains, viz. Sir Robert Holmes,
Rere-Admiral of the Red, to Command in chief. Sir Philip Howard to Command 120
Volunteers. Captain John Bellasis, Captain Haman, Captain Wiltshire, Captain
Haddocke, Captain Guy, Captain Silver, Captain Healing, Captain Butler, Capt.
John Holmes, each to Command a Company. Sir William Jennings was also Ordered,
That in case they had attaqued both Islands at one time, he should have
Commanded one Division of the whole. The ships appointed for this Expedition,
were the Advice, Hampshire, Tiger, Dragon, and Assurance, Fourth-Rates. The
Garland, Pembrooke, Sweepstakes, Fifth-Rates. Five Fireships, and seven
Ketches; Which being in a readiness, on Wednesday the 8 instant, about Eight in
the morning weighed from the rest of the Fleet, and came to Anchor about a
League from the Buoyes, where they met the Princes Pleasure-Boat, called the
Fanfan, who had discovered within a considerable Fleet of ships near the Vlie;
which proved to be 170 Merchant men, the least of which was not less than 200
Tuns burden, with two men of War, who had lately Convoyed near 100 of the
aforesaid ships from the Northward, homeward bound; some from the Streights,
some from Guinny, some from Russia, some from the East Countries; the rest were
outward bound, ships all likewise richly Laden.

Sir Robert Holmes considering, That if he should proceed, as his Design was,
first to attempt the Land, that numerous Fleet might possibly pour in such
numbers of Men, as might render the Success hazardous, resolved to begin with
the ships; and accordingly, having ordered the Advice and Hampshire to lie
without the Buoyes, he weighed with the rest of his Fleet; and the wind being
contrary, he turned with much ado into Schelling Road, where the Tiger came to
an Anchor; and immediately Sir Robert went on aboard the Fanfan, and put out
his Flag; upon which the Officers came on board him, where it was ordered, That
the Pemb^ooke, which drew the least water, with the five Fireships, should fall
in amongst the Enemies Fleet with what speed they could: Capt* Brown with his
Fireship chose very bravely to lie the biggest man of War on board, and burnt
him downright. Another Fireship running up at the same time to the other man
of War, he backing his Sails, escaped the present execution of the Fireship;
but so, as to run himself by it on ground, where he was presently taken by some
of the Long boats, and fired. The other three Fireships clapped the three great
Merchantmen on board, which carried Flags in (...) Main Tops, and burned them.
This put all then Fleet in a great Confusion, which Sir Robert Ho^mes
perceiving, made sign for all the Officers to come on board again, and
presently gave order that Sir W^^li^m J^nnings, with all the Boats that could
be spared, should take the advantage, and fall in and burn, and destroy all
they could; but with a strict Command they should not Plunder The Execution was
so followed, each Captain effecting his share, some 12, some 15 apiece, that of
the whole Fleet there escaped not above 8 or 9 ships, one of which a Guinny Man
of 24 Guns, and three small Privateers, who being driven up into a narrow
corner of the Stream, served to protect four or five Merchantmen that were a
head of them; where it was not possible for our Boats to come at them; though
even these few were much damaged. This work took up most part of that day,
being the 9 of August, so that we had not day enough to fall upon the Island of
the Vlie; Sir Robert Holmes being also informed by some Prisoners, that the
place was not so considerable as it had been represented; and Night coming on,
and perceiving two of our Fregats, viz. the Dragon and Garlamd aground, it was
thought most convenient for all hands first to go to work to get them off;
Which being done, he continued in his intention of attempting the Vlie the next
morning, as soon as the high Water would permit the motion of his Vessels, but
his design was then likewise prevented; for so great a Gust and Rain happened
that night, that the Arms and Ammunition in the Boats, Hoys, and Ketches,
having received much damage, he thought it best to weigh, and as the wind
stood, to attempt something upon the Island of Schelling, which the Morning
proving moderate weather, he accordingly prosecuted, landing by the help of his
Long Boats, Eleven Companies on shore, where he discovered only some few
scattering fellows, but met with little or no opposition. Leaving therefore one
Company to secure his Boats, himself with Ten Companies marched up three miles
to the Capital Town called Brandaris, a very fair Town or Dorp of above 1000
Houses; where keeping five Companies upon the skirts of the Town to prevent any
surprise of the Enemy, he sent the other five to fire and burn the Town; but
finding them (as his vigilance was to secure a safe retreat) somewhat slow to
execute that order, and fearing they might be tempted to forget themselves in
the pillage, he himself was forced to set fire to some Houses on the windward,
the sooner to perfect the Work, and hasten his Men away; which burnt with that
violence, that in half an hours time, the most part of the Town was in a flame.
The Town was reported by those that were found in it, to have been very rich,
and so it appeared by some of the Soldiers Pockets; but very few people were to
be seen in it, having had time to run away from the danger, except some old Men
and Women, who were used with all gentleness and humanity.

The remaining Villages of that Island, which are two or three, had certainly
run the same fortune, but considering it was near high Water, Sir Robert
thought it not fit to lose that opportunity of getting off to Sea, which he
thought more considerable then to stay 24 hours for the destruction of them,
remembering likewise that the channels between the Buoys were very narrow, and
not bold without a frank wind. By high Water he got off all his men, and set
sail out of that place, retaining still his first intentions of falling upon
the Ulie; but as he was going on board, he received Orders from the Generals to
return to the Fleet with all speed, which accordingly he did that Evening,
being the Tenth of August, leaving behind him the marks of a singular conduct
and most vigorous execution, and bringing off, besides a considerable Booty to
the private Soldiers and Seamen, the States Pleasure-Boat of Twelve Guns,
without other loss then of six men killed, and about as many wounded.

FINIS.

