A True and Perfect JOURNAL OF THE Affairs in Ireland SINCE His MAJESTY'S
Arrival In that KINGDOM.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1690.

THE Irish Journal.
Dublin, July 17. 1690.
WE received here the certain News of the King's Landing about Friday the 13th.
of June. Before this a Camp had been laid out by the Irish about Atherdee, and
King James had ordered his Army to rendezvous there from several Parts of the
Kingdom. On Monday the 16th. King James marched out of this Town to join them
with about 6000 French Foot, most old Soldiers, excellently well armed and
clad; one Regiment of these were Dutch, and Protestants, and were observed
carefully for fear of Deserting. The whole Irish Army encamped, made about
36000, all well clad and in good heart, both Horse and Foot, besides 15000 more
which remained in Garrisons. The same day King James left this Town, there
marched in 6000 of the Country Militia, and Colonels Luttrel and Mac
Gillicuddy, as his Assistant, were left Governors.

We expected the Irish would have been much cast down upon King James's leaving
this Town, and the certain News of King William's arrival, but we found the
contrary, they triumphed and rejoiced as if they had got King William in a
Pound, and the Day were their own. They were assured either that the French
Fleet would cut off King William from England, or that an Insurrection would be
made there; for we were told that 100000 Men were ready to rise, under the
notion of Declaring for a Commonwealth: The Protestants here knew not what to
think of these things; for they were kept as Prisoners of War, and suffered to
know no more, nor enjoy any more than what the others pleased. But this the
Protestants feared most, (because the Irish spoke least of it) that some
desperate Persons had undertaken to destroy King William, as soon as he came
into this Country: For we could not impute the great assurance of the Irish to
any other ground than this. Some were so open, as to tell their Protestant
Friends very lately, That they would be glad to go to Mass within this Twelve
Month, with several other Expressions of like nature.

The Protestants have had always an exceeding slender opinion of the Irish
Army, however numerous or well appointed: And the Irish themselves, tho better
persuaded of them, could not (we thought) raise their great assurance from
their confidence in them only. Some other thing we believed they knew which we
knew not: However, we persuaded our selves, had Schomberg managed this
Campaign, there would have been no other issue of it, than of the last. But
when we heard the King was come, and that with a powerful Army, we doubted not
of the issue, if no other unexpected thing did prevent it; tho it since appears
by some Letters of the Duke Tyrconnels to the Queen in France, found at
Dundalk, that the Irish had no full Account of the strength of the English Army.

Our great concern in this place was, how we should be preserved from being
plundered and burnt, in case of the Defeat of the Irish Army; this we thought
could be done only by the English pursuing the Victory close, (for by a
particular Providence, the Irish had neglected all this time to fortify this
place) or else by sending a Party by Sea, to Land here at the time of the
Engagement; neither of which, as it afterward happened, was done: But God alone
preserved us by an extraordinary Deliverance.

On Thursday the 19th. after King James was gone to encamp, about Twelve at
Noon, the Governor ordered all Persons walking the Streets without Swords or
Bayonets, which was the Badge of Protestants, to be taken up and secured in
several Parades. At Night he picked out whom he thought fit, and sent them to
several Prisons, where they were considerably incommoded.

After this followed a Proclamation, That not above Five Protestants should
meet in any place above the Family, on pain of Death; by which we were from
that time shut out from our Churches, which by an extraordinary Providence we
had enjoyed all these times (except Christ-Church.) Most of them were
frequented twice every day at Prayers. The Churchmen, who remained with us,
tho they had lost all their Subsistence by the Irish Parliament, except what
People voluntarily contributed, acquitted themselves with a great deal of Zeal
and Diligence, being particularly influenced by the Bishop of Mead, and Dr.
King, Dean of S. Patricks, who have been the Bulwark of the Protestants in
these sad times.

On Tuesday the 24th. Dr. King was clapped up in the Castle, and many other of
the principal Protestants in the College (which was now a Garrison) and other
public Places. The Galway Protestants being about 200, (these were they of Sir
Thomas Southwell's Party lately brought up hither, in order to be exchanged)
were removed from White Friars to the Round Church, and all the Newgate
Prisoners were put to them, where they were near stifled. The Prisoners of War
were brought from Kilmainham to S. John's Church: Our public Contributions,
which hitherto had been very liberal every Lord's Day, to their Relief, were
now intercepted, and the Poor began to suffer much; few Protestants daring to
walk the Streets.

On Saturday the 21st. we heard the Irish Army retreated, and the English were
come toward Droghedah; we knew King James's design was to avoid a Battle as
much as he could, and to have walked the English Army along the Boyn River, and
so cross the Country to Limerick; but this day we were told from the Camp, that
the Enemy seemed to press toward Dublin, and King James was resolved to defend
it, and that therefore they thought he could not be able to keep off a Battle
above Ten Days.

On Sunday the Irish came on this side the Boyne; and King James, as it should
seem, distrusting the issue, Sir Pat. Trant, First Commissioner of the Revenue,
and another Gentleman, were ordered to go from hence on Monday Morning to
Waterford to prepare Ships.

On Monday the last of June, the English Army having had very little Rest or
Victuals, drew to the Boyne; Lieutenant General Dowglas's Horse were ordered to
post themselves at a Ford near Droghedah, upon a rising Ground, over against a
Battery of the Irish of Six Guns, guarded by a Party of their Horse. Here the
English stood the shot of the Enemy, every Man on foot by his Horse several
hours, while there passed 200 Shot, the King in the mean time having rid
between them and the Ford, where he received his Hurt on his Shoulder by a
Canon Shot, which disabled him the next day from holding his Sword. At last,
when the King had said, Now I see my Men will stand, some Guns were sent to
them, upon the first discharge of which among the Irish Horse, they retreated
from their Battery, and stood farther off. The next day early, being Tuesday
the 1st. of July, ever-memorable to this Country, General Douglas was sent with
12000 Foot and 5000 Horse to a Ford further up the River by Slane, where had
been a Battery of the Irish, but they were drawn off, and only 800 Dragoons
guarded the Ford. The English were to go down a steep Hill to the Ford, and an
uneven way, yet the Irish Dragoons only once fired and retreated to the Body of
their Army, which lay toward Duleek; mean time the King, with the rest of the
English Army came to the Ford where Douglas was posted the Day before, near
Drogheda (which at this time had a Garrison of 800 Irish.) Duke Schomberg headed
the Dutch Foot-Guards, and the King the Eniskillen Horse, telling them, They
should be his Guards that day. Some of the Irish Horse opposed the Dutch Foot,
who fought up to the middle in water, and were almost born down, before some
Horse (which they long called for) could come up to their relief: In passing
this Ford Mr. Walker of Derry was killed. Being past the Ford, they met still a
vigorous Opposition; and here Duke Schomberg advancing too far among the
thickest of the Enemy, was killed, and now lies in S. Patricks Church, in order
to be carried to Westminster. The King with the Horse (himself engaging in the
thickest) met the like opposition. The Danish Horse once gave way, but the King
went himself, and brought them up again. Of the Irish, King James's Horse and
Foot-Guards principally maintained this Opposition, and suffered much; King
James himself not engaging, but standing on a rising Ground.

When the English had fully gained the Ford, the Irish retreated to the rest of
their Army by Duleek; and the English drew up on the other side the Ford. It must
be noted, that on Dublin side of the River, between the two Fords, viz.
Douglas's Ford, and the King's Ford, there was a Hill three Miles long,
reaching from the River toward Dublin, at the end of which, next Dublin stands
Duleek, where the Body of the Irish was posted; so that the Hill was between
the two Lines of the English Army; while the King was passing his Ford, Douglas
marched toward the Irish Army; a Line of the Irish marching all the way even
with them; at last, he received Orders to engage them at a place where he could
come in only with his Horse, which alone, put the whole Irish Army to flight,
so that before the King's Line could get up to them, they had little to do but
pursue. However, the Irish made a very orderly retreat, managed chiefly by the
Irish Horse, and the French Foot, the English pursuing them till they came to a
Pass, where their weariness, and the Night made them willing to leave them, and
retreat to their Camp at Duleek, where the King and they, lay that Night
without Tents.

Now as to us in this place, we were wakened very early this Tuesday Morning by
an Alarm, and the News that there would be a Battle: The Gates were kept
strictly guarded, and the Protestants kept their Houses: The Issue we expected
with the greatest apprehensions. Several reports were spread abroad every hour;
one while that the French Fleet was in our Bay; another, that a French Express
was come from Waterford, with the News of taking the Isle of Wight by the
French, and of their being gone to Dover; then, that the English Right Wing was
quite routed; then, that the Prince of Orange was taken Prisoner; but at Five
that Afternoon, some that had made their escape on tired Horses, told us, the
Irish were much worsted; and others at Six, that they were totally defeated;
from hence, till one that Night, all the Entries of the Town were filled with
dusty, wounded, and tired Soldiers, and Carriages perpetually coming in. We see
several of King James's Horse Guards coming in straggling, without Pistols, or
Swords, and could not tell what was become of himself.

Near 10 that Night, he came in, with about 200 Horse, all in disorder: We
concluded now, that it was a total rout, and that the Enemy were just ready to
come into Town; but were greatly surprised, when an hour or two after, we heard
the whole Body of the Irish Horse coming in, in very good order, with Kettle
Drums, Haut-boys, and Trumpets; and early the next Morning, the French, and a
great Party of Irish Foot. These being a little, rested, Marched out again to
meet the Enemy, which were supposed to draw nigh.

At Five this Morning, being Wednesday the 2d. of July, King James having sent
for the Irish Lord Mayor, and some Principal Persons to the Castle; told them,
that he found all things against him; that in England he had an Army which
would have fought, but they proved false and deserted him; that here he had an
Army which was Loyal enough, but would not stand by him: He was now
necessitated to provide for his safety, and that they should make the best
terms for themselves that they could. He told his menial Servants, that he
should have now no further occasion to keep such a Court as he had done, and
that therefore they were at liberty to dispose of themselves: He desired them
all to be kind to the Protestants, and not to injure them or this City; for tho
he quitted it, he did not quit his Interest in it; and so with two or three in
Company, he went to Bray, and along by the Sea to Waterford; having appointed
his Carriages to meet him another way. We hear he did not sleep till he got on
Shipboard; and having been once driven in again, is since clear gone off.

All this day, being Wednesday, we see nothing in this Town, but Officers and
Carriages; and the Principal Persons of the Town, their Wives and Families
going away; others coming in dusty and weary, and getting away as fast as they
could; the Gates were still kept by the Militia, and the Castle by 250 of the
Governors Foot Soldiers, who still threatened that before they left the Town,
they would burn and plunder us. This of a long time had been their talk, tho
King James said, it was a Report raised by the Protestants, to make him odious:
Yet some Irish Persons of note, advised their Protestant Friends a few days
before this, to leave this Town, because they would not be safe here.

We knew not what to think of our selves, but hoped the English were so near as
to prevent this mischief; but about four in the Afternoon, instead of them, we
perceived the Irish Horse, which were drawn out in the Morning, and which we
hoped had been quite gone, entering into Town, followed by the French and Irish
Foot in a full Body; presently a buz ran through the Town, that it was going to
be burnt; and the Roman Catholics, who had fled for retreat into Protestants
Houses, began now to look briskly on those that had harbored them; for all
this time we knew nothing of what King James had said in the Morning. But it
pleased God to deliver us soon from these fears; for all these Forces marched
through the Town, without doing any injury, and were drawn up by Lord Tyrconnel
on the other Side of it, in order to March further; the Militia followed them;
only the Governor remained: At last he resolved to March also, and to drive 2
or 300 of the Principal Prisoners before him; but while they were preparing for
this, a false Alarm was spread, that a Party of English being Landed at the
Harbor, were just at the Towns end; it was too dusky to disprove this by view,
and they had not leisure to send a Messenger, but in have shifted for
themselves.

The Protestants now began to look out, not knowing well in what condition they
were; but venturing to the Castle, they found Captain Farlow, who had been a
Prisoner there, keeping Garrison alone. Upon this, Captain Fitzgerald, and
several others who had been Prisoners, went and stayed there all Night. Still
we were very unsecure, and had no Arms. Early next Morning being Thursday, the
Protestants run about to Roman Catholics Houses, demanding their Arms, who
being quite dispirited, delivered them without dispute; but the Galway
Prisoners and some other Rabble, committed Outrages in taking Arms.

By Six in the Morning the Bishop of Mead, Dr. King, and other Principal
Protestants formed a Committee in the Castle, and sent out Proclamations by
beat of Drum, for regulating these disorders, and forming a Protestant Militia;
and sent away an Express to the King, of this Towns being at Liberty. This
Express found him Marching up to Dublin in two Lines, expecting to meet the
Irish at Swords; and at the same time the News came of the Surrender of
Drogheda, which he had left a Party to besiege, and in which they had pinnion'd
all the Protestants and Prisoners, and placed them under that part of the Wall
which was to be battered; but this was not known till after the Surrender.

Till afternoon this Thursday, we did not hear a word of the English Army; mean
time we had Reports, that the Irish and French were coming back, and very near
us, which gave a damp to our briskness; but this blowing over, and the certain
account of the English Army being come, we now perceived our selves at Liberty.
The Protestants ran about, saluting and embracing one another; and blessing God
for this wonderful deliverance, as if they had been alive from the dead; the
Streets were filled with Crowds and Shouts, and the poor Roman Catholics now
lay in the same terrors as we had done some few days before.

At Eight that Night one Troop of Dragoons came as a Guard to an Officer, that
came to take charge of the Stores. It was impossible, the King himself coming
after this, could be welcomed with equal joy as this one Troop; the Protestants
hung about the Horses, and were ready to pull the Men off them, as they marched
up to the Castle.

Next Morning being Friday, the Duke of Ormond came in with a Party of Horse;
and the King being Encamped by Finglas, came on Sunday to St. Patricks Church,
and heard a Sermon Preached by Dr. King, concerning the Power of God; of which,
that which seemed to us greatest upon Earth, mighty Armies was a faint Shadow.
The King went back to his Camp to Dinner, not suffering any Soldiers to come
into this Town, except a few for Guard. This last Week the Town has been filled
with Officers from the Army, and Inhabitants returning from England.

I am told by one that viewed the Dead, that there was not above 1000 killed on
both Sides, tho perhaps you may hear of greater Numbers, which is a wonderful
thing, that so small a loss should disperse the whole Irish Army, who seemed to
be blown away only by a Wind from God; the main Body of them is supposed to be
about Limerick, but the opposition they will give, will depend very much on the
success of the Fleets.

Yesterday being the 10th, the King set out from Cromlin to Kilkenny; General
Douglas toward Athlone, and a small Party along the Sea toward Wexford. The
Irish have ravaged the Country all the way in their Retreat; and God knows what
Miseries the poor Protestants, that are yet under their Power do endure. Some
part of the Army it is said will be sent to be put aboard the English Fleet; and
another part to Flanders. Great inquisition is made after Roman Catholics
Goods, to reprize the loss the English have sustained: But the Protestants who
have suffered all this time among them, seem to be much better tempered, and
more kindly inclined to their Enemies, then those that come from your Side.

I should have noted, that King James had Coined in this Country about two
Millions in Brass money; the Half Crowns of which, are now cried down to pence;
yet this did not grate so heavily upon the People, as his late taking away all
the Protestants Staple Goods, Wool, Hides and Tallow, to send to France in
exchange for Wine and Linen for his Army. As for tanned Leather, he took that
away too, but it was for the use of his Army here, there being but very little
in the Kingdom. The Revenue he raised otherwise, was chiefly by Subsidy granted
by Parliament; and a Contribution imposed by Council, and the Rents of
Absentees Estates. The Customs were remitted, and the other Branches of the
Revenue much neglected, the Collectors being fully taken up in making of Stores
and Provisions for the Army.

On Friday the 11th. The King Marched from Crumlin toward Kilkenny, with a
part of his Army; another part went toward Athlone, and a third by way of Bray
toward Wexford; the Kings Horse by this time (17th) are at Kilkenny, which its
supposed will make but small resistance; most believe he will then take in
Waterford before he goes further. We hear from Limerick, that the Enemy are
together in those parts about 25000 strong, and Lord Tyrconnel with them.
Brigadier Trelawny is Governor of this Town; Captain Fitzgerald Constable of
the Castle: Bishop of Mead, Lord Longford and seven others, are Commissioners
for securing of Rebels Goods and Estates, and leasing them for one Year.
Longford is quite burnt and Lord Longford's House, by the Irish Garrison when
they quitted it: But Lord Granard having Arms, defended his own House. People
begin to come over from England apace, but the Embargo and fear of the French
will it is supposed now somewhat stop them. Our Protestants that have suffered
here all the time, are generally much better tempered toward their Enemies,
than those that come over; and especially the Army is very furious. I doubt the
poor Protestants, which are in the Enemies Quarters will suffer severely. What
the French may be yet able to do, or what issue God may put to the miseries of
this Country he only knows. Provision was very scarce here while the Army lay
about us; but now begins to be more plentiful; but that Stock is almost all
destroyed; great quantities having been now at last driven away by the Irish.

FINIS.

