The True and Wonderful Relation OF THE DREADFUL FIGHTING And Groans that were
Heard and Seen IN THE AIR, On the Fifteenth of this Instant January, in
Carmarthen, in South Wales, BY Mr. Henry Lewys, And his whole Family; And by
many hundreds more the Night following.

The Truth of this Relation will be Attested by Me, William Sanders, Lodging at
one Mr. Jones his House, in Princes-Street, near Clare-Market; And other
credible Witnesses, if need require.

Printed for W.T. and J.C. in Duck-Lane, 1681.

A True and Wonderful Relation of the Dreadful Fighting that was seen in the
Air, etc.
THe strangeness of my story might indeed challenge an Apology to introduce the
Reader to a belief, especially in such a time as this, when it is free for every
Hackney Writer, to crowd into the Press, and therefore I cannot expect to be
Credited till it comes from better hands then mine.

On the 20th. of this Month, I had a Letter from an intimate Friend of mine in
Wales, (a Person of such Repute and Reputation, that nothing yet ever came from
him, which could by the most censorious be thought less than becomeing a
Gentleman,) which Letter brought me this astonIshing News, as follows.

THat on the 15th. Day of January, about Five at Night, Mr. Lewys a Gentleman
living near Carmarthen in South Wales, coming home heard an unusual noise,
sometimes of Drumms, then Guns, intermixed with doleful cries as of Men put upon
the Rack, or used with some such severe torment: You may imagine this kind of
surprise discomposed him extremely, and put him out of his way, and his reason
directed him but little; but he examining round about with his eyes, where he
thought there was a probability of finding it out, could not at all satisfy
himself with the reason of the thing, or where it was, so fear kindling a zeal
in the Gentleman, he fell on his knees to Prayers, and turning up his Eyes to
Heaven, saw most dreadful Apparitions in the Air, thus pausing a little he made
shift to get home (which was not far off) and signified to his Family, what
'twas that discomposed him so; they all then saw the Visions, as they have
testified since; Armies fighting, Groans and Cries heard, among which they took
notice of this, Oh my Son is killed, killed, killed! another, I am glad I have
took my Brother Captive; so hot the Battle seemed to be, that the whole Air
looked thick as it were with a bloody smoke; after this the Drums and Trumpets
sounded and put an Interval to their so hot service; then the Air cleared up
extremely, not but that the Armies were plainly seen still, one retired toward
the North, and the other Southward, but withal Guns were discerned to be
Discharged from each side.

Thus after about the space of half an hour, the Heaven seemed to open, and
immediately followed such a Clap. of Thunder, as if it had struck at the
dissolution of Natures frame, the Armies then rallied up again, and the Pike
men were plainly discerned from them that had Muskets; they fell to it hotter
('it was judged) then before, and greater destruction was made, such were the
sparkles that came from their clattering Swords, that you would have thought
Heaven had a new supply of Stars.

In the interim of this came up 2 armies of Horsemen, powd'ring, and they met
with as great destruction as the former, then the noise of Men and Horses were
heard anew, sometimes the Rider and his Horse came tumbling down, another's Arm
dropped off, which so frighted the spectators, that they often shrunck their
heads for fear of the fall: In this sort the War lasted till Nine, and then a
kind of Fog rose from the earth, and put an end to it, as 'twas supposed.

Here Mr. Lewys and his Family went into his house ill satisfied with their
spectacle; the next Day Carmarthen Rung with this unexpected News, surveying
the Heaven with careful eyes, but about 5 a clock the whole Town observed this
Mr. Lewys's spectacle, and more too, for there appeared 2 Fleets of Ships, one
from the North, and 'tother from the South, which sailed up with such speed as
if they had had the benefit of 2 winds to drive them; they soon met, and their
salutation was in Cannon language: immediately the Mainmast fell there, the
Sails rent here, another Ship sunk, another split, now several Men were seen
thrown overboard, and by and by half the ships on fire; then the Heaven was
seen to open again, and a Thunderclap followed, so the Air cleared, and the
South Ships hastened back, but the North pursued them, and were seen to bring
back some of them (as 'twas judged) for Captives; so the North Fleet retired,
and shouts were heard signifying triumph, and giving glory to God; then another
shout was heard above all the rest, Babylon is fallen, and lies in Dust; then
followed a consort of sweet Music, and the Visions Vanished away.

The Verity of this I do not at all doubt, (though the Reader may) because I had
it from such persons as I dare not suspect, and the chief reason why I appeared
in Print, is this, because I had a mind it should be known to the maturer
Judgments of the Nations, that they may discuss upon it, and if any ill is
signified to us, we may all to prayers that God may avert is; but if good, we
may return thanks to Providence for it.

FINIS.

