A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY, At
a Sessions there held; Which began on Wednesday the 13th of this Instant
December. and ended on Saturday the 16th, 1676.

Setting forth the several Facts and Trials of several Malefactors.

With the Trial of the Maid that set her Master's Barns on fire at Harrow on
the Hill, at Michaelmas last.

With an Account how many are Condemned, Burned in the Hand, to be Whipped, and
Transported.

With Allowance. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1676.

A Narrative of the Proceedings at the Sessions begun the 13th of December
1676, at the Oly Bailey.
THe first person tried, was for making away her Bastard-childe; but upon
hearing the Evidence, and examination both of the Midwife and Coroner, it
appeared to be only a Miscarriage; and by several circumstances there was
reason to judge that she had not gone above sixteen weeks, and had never been
quick, the abortive Infant being not above eight inches long, and no symptoms
of Wounds or Bruises being to be seen on the body to argue any violence used to
it, the Jury thereupon thought fit to bring her in not guilty.

A young man was arraigned for Murder, killing an old man in St. James's Park:
Two fellows being running together in the evening the poor ancient man unlukily
happened to be in their way, and one of them tumbled him down and bruised him,
of which bruise the next day he died; but the Evidence testifying that it was
done merely by accident, without any grudge or quarrel precedent, and that the
Prisoner as food as he perceived he had done an injury, went immediately and
called a Chair to carry him home, etc. There was no reason for finding the
Indictment, so that he was discharged.

A Servant maid was found guilty of stealing a silver Tankard of the value of
Five pounds: She living at a public house in the Old Jury, took an opportunity
to take it away; and having knocked off the Lid, brought it to a Goldsmith to
sell, who perceiving the Cover lately broke off, would not buy it, unless she
would show it him; which after much importunity she did, and upon that was
engraven the name of the Owner, whose wife she then pretended to be, and had
the Goldsmith to a Confederates house, who seemed to say as much: but at last
being trapp'd in their words by him, she confessed the Felony to him, and
afterward on her examination before the Justice, and acknowledged in effect as
much now at the bar, only said that the Tankard was delivered her to sell by a
fellow servant; but there being neither proof nor probability of any such
things, she was convicted.

A woman was indicted for burning her Master's Barns at Harrow on the Hill, in
which a considerable parcel of Wheat and other Corn was consumed on Michaelmas
day last. Her Master and his wife gave evidence, but nothing of their own
knowledge, only that she had confessed the Fact, that in their absence in the
evening she took a Firebrand, and carrying it out of the house put it in at a
hole in the Barn amongst a Mow of unthrash'd Oats, whereby that Barn, and
another adjoining were burned down, and the Dwelling house with much difficulty
preserved. And this likewise appeared on reading her Examination; for which
mischievous act she could allege no other provocation but that her Master
would not lend her money to go to a Wedding. However the Justice that committed
her, assuring the Court from his personal knowledge, that the Prisoners Father
was a very m^lanch^ly and dist^mper'd man, and that she her self had a defect
in her understanding, and many times at least not the use of common Reason or
Sense, and the Evidence against her in effect acknowledging as much, which was
confirmed by her present stupid carriage at the B^r. The Jury looking upon her
as Non Compos Mentis at the time of the Fact committed, could not find her
guilty in the eye of the Law, of the Crime for which she stood indicted.

Two Legerdemain Ladies of profound experience in the mysteries of Shop
lifting; one of them having been whipped at the Carts tail but the very last
Sessions, were convicted for stealing two pieces of Callicoe, under pretense of
buying ^o^kerum. The Goods were taken before they got out of sight in one of
their aprons, who alleged a very civil excuse, assuring the Court that she
was drunk with Brandy, and knew not what she did; but that Plea was overrul'd,
and both of them found guilty.

A French Gentleman, came in voluntarily to take a trial for killing a
Marshal's man's follower, in April last was two years, at the end of St.
Martins-lane. The Marshals man himself was gone another way, and the party
killed, and three or four more seized the Prisoner (as they subpose it was) but
without having any Warrant at that instant with them; and besides, the Warrant
their Master had was wrong in the Christian name. Upon their taking the party,
diverse of his Companions drew their Swords, and one of the Bailiffs lost his
life in the fray; but the Evidence could not say who killed him, nor positively
that the Prisoner at Bar was the person they had arrested: so that he was
acquitted both of Murder and Manslaughter.

The next was a tedious trial of a young fellow for breaking open the house of
a worthy Gentleman his late Master, and stealing thence a Spanish Gun, and
other Goods, to the value of Forty pound. There appeared several violent
presumptions of Guilt, and a person where the Gun was found had sworn directly
before the Justice, that the Prisoner was the man that sold it; and another,
that he verily believed him to be the man; but now neither of them would say
further, than that he was somewhat like him. The Prisoner had a great number to
speak in his behalf, but few couln say any thing to the purpose; and the Court
declared themselves sensible of much practice used on the Prisoner's behalf, to
conceal the truth, yet on a full hearing, for want of direct Evidence, the Jury
brought him in not guilty.

A Flemming born in the City of Antwerp, was indicted on the Statute for
exercising the Trade of a Gold-beater here, not having served seven years an
Apprentice; but it being proved by several witnesses that he served the said
term to his Father of the same Trade in the said City of Antwerp, and that he
was an excellent Artist. The Court considering the intent of the said Statute,
which is only to prevent unskilful and insufficient Workmen; and that the Art
it self prohibi^s only Those that have been Apprentices, or not served as
Apprentices: And though he were not Apprentice in England, yet he had served as
an Apprentice abroad; which they concluded to be within the intent of the
Statute: For otherwise it would be too great a discouragement to Foreigners to
instruct us in the usual Inventions; and therefore the Jury found him not
guilty.

An old Offender was convicted for stealing a bay Gelding of Six pound price, a
quarter of grownd Malt and two Sacks: the Horse was taken out of the stable on
the 28th of Nov. and the two sacks of Malt with it. The very next day the
Owner coming to London met the Prisoner driving his Horse along St. Gileses's,
with one of the Sacks empty on his arm, and there seized him, who now pretended
that the Sack was given him by two strangers, he knew not who, for his pains to
drive the Horse along Tyburn road, but he knew not whether; and therefore
seeming only a forged excuse, without any proof to confirm it, he was found
guilty, it being avert'd in Court that he had three times already been burnt in
the hand and convicted.

Two persons, one by his own Confession, and the other by Verdidict, were
Convicted for stealing a silver Tankard in the Woolstaple Westminster, from a
public house, whence at once they stole away themselves, the Plate and the
Reckoning, but were discovered by a Female Crony, upon a disgust, that she was
not allowed Snips in the prize, etc.

A Woman as principal, and a Man as accessory, were Conviicted for stealing
Plate, and other rich goods, to the value of 200 pound from a Frenchman at
Westminster; whose servant the woman being, to^k the opportun^^y of his
absence, and ransackt several of his Rooms, and stole the said goods, After
which the said other prisoner took her a Lodging, disposed of a Watch, and some
of the Plate; for which both were found Guilty.

A Lighterman and his wife were Arraigned, for stealing of about 40 pieces of
Serge, out of a Lighter on the Thomes; The Prosecuter produced several
witnesses, and one very roundly swore, that she saw two of the pieces of Serge
in the Prisoners house in the Cradle, and that his wife seemed much afraid of a
search; and threatened to fling them into the house or office, etc. But upon a
full examination, it appearing that there had been several suits and brangles
between the parties, that the Prisoner was sick at the time of the Robbery,
that it was two years ago, and no prosecution all this while, that the husband
prisoner was a person of good Fame, etc. They were both acquitted by the Jury.

There was great exbectation of the Trial of one Lodowick Muggleton, for
spreading detestable opinions, and publishing several impious Books; But the
same was put off, till witnesses might be ready for a full discovery of his
Villainies, and therefore the reader is to take notice, that any Pamphlets
published concerning his Trial, are feigned stories.

There were t^nn burnt in the hand, seven allowed Transportation, ten to be
whipped, and one to stand in the Pillory.

FINIS.

