A True NARRATIVE Concerning Sir Arthur Haslerigs Possessing of
Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILBURNES ESTATE In the County of DURHAM.

Imprinted at LONDON. 1653.

To the Members of Parliament, and all others that have bowels of pity toward
cruelly oppressed Tenants, etc.
YOu must not expect high Language from us, who are low-borne Tennants; We
shall speak plain Truths, And first, we are bold to tell you, That our
Fore-Elders were Ancient Tennants to the Dean and Chapter of Durham* who
thought they had left unto us that large Birthright which could not legally
have been taken from us; but we find it otherwise, for we are now become
(unless God help us) miserable slaves to Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne; for
the Parliament having given unto the said Mr. Lilburne three thousand pounds,
and afterward committed him to the Tower for high Treason; and being acquitted
by his Jury at Guild Hall, he presently affirmed, that there was remaining and
not paid, fifteen hundred pounds of the said 3000 l. gift. The Lord General
then coming out of Ireland, moved the Parliament to give Mr. Lilburne the said
fifteen hundred pounds so owing unto him, out of Deanes and Chapters Lands;
Which the Parliament immediately granted, and therein begun our miseries; for
we being poor People far remote and distant from London, and all, or most of
us ignorant of our own business, wanting friends to advise or help us, within
the small time of pre-emption the Act allowed us, the said Lieutenant Collonell
John Lilburne stepped in before us, and made choice of several Farms and
Cottages which we held lying in the County of Durham, being the whole
livelihood and subsistence of fourteen Families. And before the Act passed,
the said Mr. Lilburne made large promises of kind usage to us the Tenants,
saying in the presence of several witnesses, That we should have our Lands
again, paying him the Rates of his purchase (namely) the money he paid; but
since, we have so far tasted his kindness, as now we have cause to say, The
Lord deliver us from such a Landlord. There are of us fourteen Families, and
when the Act passed, but two of our Farms were out of Lease, William
Huntington had the one, and George Clifton, a poor Prisoner in the Goal, had
the other. I, the said William Huntington Married a Widow, that was Tennant to
the Deane and Chapter, she had a House, Farm, Goods and Houshold-stufie, two
Cows and four Children; I, the said William Huntington after marriage with her,
was forced to borrow moneys to Plow and Sow the said Farm, and God gave me a
Child by her, that made our number five; so soon as our Houses, and Lands were
settled by Authority of Parliament in the said Mr. Lilburne, he immediately came
into the County of Durham, and stripped me the said William Huntington, of
House, Farm, Cropp, Housholdstuffe, Goods, Hay, and Straw, and two Cowes; he
took from me Goods to the value of one hundred and thirty pounds at the least;
he thrust us all out of doors, my Wife with her five small Children, leaves us
not one Cow, I may truly say, scarcely one bit of bread; and for my self, I
could expect no other, but to lie and rot in Prison for the Debt which I
borrowed as aforesaid. Next, he fell upon me George Clifton, a poor Prisoner in
the Goal of Durham for debt; he likewise cast my poor Children out of my House
and Farm, exposing them to perish in the streets; took from me House, and
Farm, Housholdstuff, and all that I had; and my Children being put by him upon
the Parish, he was so far from allowing them subsistence out of my own
Estate, that he refused to contribute with the Parish toward their
maintenance. And thus he dealt with the two Tennants of the two Farms out of
Lease. And the said Mr. Lilburne also threatened me Gascoyne Eden, because I
would not deliver up my Estate to him, then having seven years in Lease: He
writ a Letter to me, wherein he tells me, That he was the Deane and Chapters
Successor, and did therein command me to send in a Man and Horse, according to
my Lease, in complete Arms, to serve under his Brother Collonell Robert
Lilburne in Scotland; and further said in his said Letter, That if I did not
give up my Lease to him, (having seven years then in being) he would extend all
the several Forfeitures and Breaches of my Lease against me, to make it void,
whereby he might weary me out of my Right and Due of years therein. Next after,
he fell upon me Robert Christ ofer another of the poor Tennants, who was
always constant and faithful to the Parliament, and voluntarily set forth
Horses and Arms in the Parliament Service, far beyond my Estate; I never
offended him in all my life, but in a most humble manner tendering my Rent to
him about a week after the day* he refused to receive it, and told me, My Lease
was forfeited, by my failing the just day of payment, and he would take
advantage of it accordingly: Yea, after many humble addresses made unto the
said Mr. Lilburne by the poor Cottagers and Leasers, diverse of them following
him to London, and there craving pity and compassion from him upon their poor
Wives and Children, offering him his money with advantage for the said Lands;
he (in a great passion) denied, bid them go home again like as Fools they
came, saying, He would out them every man as their Leases expired. Need then
made me poor William Huntington to run from Justice to Justice, complaining
of the wrong done unto me by Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne; I went to the
public Sessions at Durham, where Sir Arthur Haslerigge was upon the Bench;
after the Reading of my Petition there, he told me, It was not in the power of
the Sessions to help me. I then not knowing what else to do, went immediately
to London upon my naked Feet to the Parliament, and Printed my sad case and
condition, and delivered it to the Members as they came into the House; at
which Lieutenant Collonell Lilburne was a little moved, and then said, the
business should be referred to my Lord General, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, and
Collonell Martin; which made me exceedingly to rejoice: and in pursuance
thereof, I attended Collonell Martin from place to place according to his
appointment, so long, that weariness and poverty drove me back again into the
Country, having nothing to relieve me, but the Charity of such as pitied my
condition. I then being not able to abide in the Country for fear of
Imprisonment, came again to London on foot, begging my Bread by the way, it
being about two hundred Miles. And having no better success at the Parliament
door, after a long attendance, and many being wearied of me, and my self
almost of my life; I returned again to hide my self a while in the Country,
hoping God might help at the last. Then when I heard that Lieutenant Collonell
John Lilburne was banished, and that there was a Fine to be paid to Sir Arthur
Haslerigge, I forthwith took me to my Feet, and again to London I went, and
told Sir Arthur, that it was now in his power to do both my self, Wife and
Children good, and that we would pray for him all our days, if he would but
help us as God had put it into his hands. Sir Arthur was pleased to speak to
Collonell Martin, and a time was appointed at Sir Arthurs Chamber at
White Hall, where Collonell Martin, Mrs. Lilburne, Mr. Richardson, Mr.
Williams, and some others of Mrs. Lilburnes Friends met: I had only my self
to lay open my miserable case; which when the aforesaid Gentlemen heard they
lifted up their hands, wondering that Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne should
deal so cruelly with a poor miserable man, his Wife, and five small Children.
Sir Arthur moved, that whereas the Rent of that Farm had for a long time been
but three pounds per Annum; And that the Parliament had sold it to Lieutenant
Collonell Lilburne, upon improvement, at eighteen pounds, that therefore I
should give eighteen pounds per Annum to Mrs. Lilburne, which was the rack
Rent valued to her Husband. Mrs. Lilburnes Friends that came with her, pittyed
my case so much, that they thought it fit I should have also the one hundred
and thirty pound Goods restored, which Mr. Lilburne had taken from me. Mrs.
Lilburne then replied, that she had no money, but I might have one of my Cowes
again: some of her Friends then said, It was fit I should have satisfaction
out of the Rent. And Sir Arthur said, Care must be taken that the poor man
have a livelihood from his hard labor, so that he may preserve his Wife and
Children from starving; And also to help Mrs. Lilburn and her children. And
further said, That he was sensible, that John Lilburn ought not to have taken
those Goods from me: for if any Arrears were due, they belonged to the State,
and not to the Purchaser. But said, that now Mrs. Lilburn, and her children,
being in as sad a condition as my self and mine; that therefore I should pay
unto her, for her self and children, the full improvement, which was Eighteen
pounds a year; and that if I did not carefully pay my Rent. Mrs. Lilburn should
enter upon the Farm. This, though heavy on my side, to lose all my Goods, and
to be raised up to so high a Rent, as from Three pounds to Eighteen pound, per
annum, the Agreement being figned by Mrs. Lilburn, Colonel Martin, and Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, I joyfully took it, resolving to labor hard, and to pay my
Rent honestly; and made haste into the Country, and showed the Agreement under
the aforesaid hands to Mr. Richard Lilburn. Mr. John Lilburn's father, and
desired him to deliver me Possession accordingly: which he absolutely refused.
Then some Women, my wives Neighbors, desirous to see her in her house again,
thrust out the said Mr. Richard Lilburn from amongst them: which no sooner
being done, but the said Mr. Richard Lilburn, by his great importunity with the
Sheriff of the County, and by color of an old Warrant, as I understand,
procured the said Sheriff to come to my house, and thrust us out of possession,
and gave it to Mr. Richard Lilburn. Then I forthwith went again to London to
Sir Arthur Haslerigge, and told him how little Mr. Richard Lilburn valued the
Agreement made in his Chamber. He told me, he could do no more but get it under
Mrs. Lilburn's hand, and Colonel Martin's, and that he knew not what to do or
say to Mr. Richard Lilburn. But I pressed him most earnestly, and said, I never
durst return into the Country, if I had not help from him; and that it was in
his power. And really, I had rotted in Prison, and my Wife and her children had
gone a Begging all their days, who was descended of honest Parents, such as had
lived in good credit amongst their Neighbors, had I not found pity and
compassion in Sir Arthur's breast, necessity inciting me strongly to importune
him daily for his assistance: for when he would have put me off, I told him I
must continue to trouble him. And in truth, my condition was so miserable and
desperate, having gone upon my bare feet two thousand miles, back and again, or
thereabouts, in seeking releife, that I thought to hang upon his door would
bring me rest. Sir Arthur then acquainted Collonell Martin what Master Richard
Lilburne had done, and desired him to speak to Mrs. Lilburne, that order might
be taken for the performance of the said Agreement, which she and her Friends
had made and signed; he promised a speedy account, and the next day he told Sir
Arthur, that she had received Letters from her Husband, wherein he commanded,
that nothing should be done by her; and thereupon, Sir Arthur desired Collonell
Martin to tell her from him. That if she would not perform her Agreement, which
he apprehended to be just and reasonable, and for her advantage, he thought he
was bound in Conscience to preserve the poor man, his Wife and Children, by
laying his extent upon the Lands. Collonell Martin immediately replied, That he
would do very well in so doing; and if it was his case he would do the like.
Collonell Martin then acquainted Mrs. Lilburne with Sir Arthurs resolution, and
returned this answer, That she was John Lilburnes Wife, and that he could not
prevail in the least with her, and therefore bad Sir Arthur not to expect
further. Then we, the rest of the Tennants, hoping there was an opportunity for
us and ours, made choice of one Captain Farrer to be our Solicitor, and sent
him to London to Sir Arthur Haslerigge, to entreat, That according to
Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburnes Promise before he bought our Lands, that we
might yet have it as he paid: Thereupon, the said Captain Farrer applied
himself to Sir Arthur Haslerigge at White Hall, acquainting him with the
Tennants humble and earnest desires; and as it happened upon some complaints that
Mrs. Lilburne had made to Collonell Joyce, against Sir Arthur Haslerigge, there
was a meeting appointed at Mr. Peter's Chamber in White Hall, and thither came
Mrs. Lilburne, and her own Father; and there were present Mr. Peter's, and
Collonell Joyce; and Sir Arthur Haslerigge took the said Captain Farrer along
with him. Then did Sir Arthur Declare in the presence of all before mentioned,
That he never had a thought of getting one penny out of John Lilburnes Estate,
and that Mrs. Lilburne had compelled him to lay his extent upon the Land,
because she would not perform the Agreement under her own hand, whereby
Huntington, his Wife and Children might live. He then declared the great
complaints of the Tennants. And this offer was made by Sir Arthur to Mrs.
Lilburne, That the Tennants should pay the sum of money, for which the
Parliament gave him that Land, being nine hundred and forty pounds, with
consideration from the time of passing the Act, she deducting what Rents they
had received. Afterward Sir Arthur told her, the Tennants should give her a
thousand pound at one entire payment; that the present Rent was but three and
fifty pound per annum: And when all Leases were out, it would not come to above
one hundred five and twenty pounds per annum. And then Mr. Peter's offered her
to help her to a hundred pound per annum for ever, and in present possession
for that thousand pound. Sir Arthur told her that if she was his own Sister, he
would advise her to take it; for if she did, she was then certain of good
maintenance for her self and her Chrildren, and that no Act her Husband either
had done, or should do, could take it from them, for she should have it upon
this Extent; and for his part, he did not expect or desire thanks. Then Mr.
Peter's and Collonell Joyce, much approved the motion, but Mrs. Lilburne would
not consent. Then Sir Arthur said, He would do the Tennants what good he could,
and never take one penny for his own advantage from Mrs. Lilburne or her
Children. All which the said Captain Farrer is ready to aver and attest,
upon his own Knowledge: And further, that Sir Arthur Haslerigge has been at
great trouble and charge out of his own Purse; but never received one penny out
of Mr. Lilburnes Estate. Nay, when we the Tennants desired the said Captain
Farrer to present him with a Breeding Mare, as a small token of our
thankfulness, in answer to his great trouble and charge; Sir Arthur replied.
No, he would not gain the Hair of a Horse by Lieutenant Collonell Lilburnes
Estate; notwithstanding he bought the said Mare of M. Thomas Davison. at the
Rate of forty pounds. And all we the Tennants do witness. That Sir Arthur
Haslerigge never received one penny of our Rents; but the same or most part
thereof has been paid to Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne, or to his Father
Mr. Richard Lilburne, for his use, since the time of his Grant, until of late,
that the said Mr. Richard Lilburne refuses to receive any more Rents of us,
saying, That he would not be ordered by Sir Arthur Haslerigge to receive any
Rents at his appointment, meaning this Order here under written made and signed
by Sir Arthur Haslerigge.

I Do hereby appoint the several Tennants that hold and Possess; any of the
Farms and Cottages within the Manor of Billingham in the County of Durham,
lately extended by virtue of an Act of Parliament, to and in my Name; That they
forthwith pay unto Richard Lilburne Gent. for the Wife and Children of
Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne, all the several and respective Rents,
according to the Inquisition returned upon the said Extent, being the same with
his purchase, that were due at Whitsuntide last past, and payable unto me;
taking acquittance under the said Richard Lilburnes Hand, upon the Payment
thereof in manner aforesaid.

Dated the 21 of June, 1653. Arthur Haslerigge.

Thus we have declared the truth of Sir Arthur Haslerigges disposing of all
Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburnes Estate to his own use; and the World may
see, that Sir Arthur Haslerigge is as much wronged by Lieutenant Collonell John
Lilburnes publishing the taking away of his Estate, as he was in setting forth
an Hue and Cry, (when he was imprisoned by the Parliament for treason as
aforesaid) to all persons to assist him for the knocking of Sir Arthur
Haslerigge on the head, as they would do a Fox or a Poulcat, because he had
robbed him of this fifteen hundred pounds, which the Lord General procured, as
aforesaid; when in truth he never touched or took from him one halfepenny or
farthing in all his life, as honest men that are able to make it good, do and
will affirm and prove. Now we humbly beseech all Parliament Men and others
whom it may any way concern, to preserve us poor Tenants from the cruelty,
oppression, and tyranny of Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne. Amen.

Gascoyne Eden. Robt. Christopher. Jo. Maddison. Will. Huntington of Billingham.
George Clifton. Rob. Wilson. John Salter. Matthew Gray. William Busby. Jo.
Mason. Geo. Huntington. Rob. Shepperd. Will. Huntington of Coopen.


FINIS.

