THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE EXECUTION Of John Marketman, Chyrurgian, of Westham
in Essex, for Committing a Horrible A Bloody Murder Upon the Body of his Wife,
that was big with Child when he Stabbed her. Printed 21. April. 1680.
TOo frequently do we hear of such Bloody Murders acted by such Miscreants as
have no regard to Gods Glory, nor the comfort of their own Souls; as may appear
by this person whose Name was John Marketman a Sea Chyrurgian by Profession, a
Ministers Son by Descent; and worse than a Tyrant for this his Bloody inhumane
act, as by the sequel I will give you to understand, It happened not long since
that this Marketman took to Wife one Mary Snerlin, with whom he lived some time
in Content and Peace, but not long after suggesting to himself strange conceits
of his Wife, begun to be possessed with Jealousy, whether with or without just
Cause, I refer it to those who were better acquainted with her than my self but
yet I hope all rational people will allow that where Jealousy once finds
entertainment in the heart of any Man or Woman, there is little hopes of any
quiet life, and often begets ardent desires of secret Revenge, which oftentimes
launches forth into such extremes, whose productions are miserable and ends in
Shame and Reproach as you may see by the above named Marketman, who not long
since being restless in his Mind, and fearing lest every time she was out of
his Sight that she was in the Company of him whom he believed she respected far
beyond himself, at least was too familiar with, which Report says was a Bay
liff living not very far from them, grew extremely disconsolate, and that which
more grieved this already discontented Soul, was, that he oftentimes was
affronted and jeered about the aforesaid Bailiff, which he so evilly resented
that he gave way to the Temptation of Satan, who presently infused into his
heart desire of Revenge, and did strongly animate him to this prodigious
Cruelty, which too soon he barbarously acted in manner following.

It happened one day that he came home very much debauched and distempered in
Drink, which his Wife taking notice of, persuaded him to ly down on the bed,
which he accordingly did, and sleep soon taking possession of his drousy Brain
quickly became Master of his Senses: In the mean time his Wife not doubting but
that he was secure for some considerable space, went out and locked the door,
intending to return e're his nap had been ended; but in the interim he awaked,
and hearing no noise in the house, began presently to make a bad Construction
of her absence, and starting up, looked about for her who was not there to be
found, which so perplexed his Jealous mind, That he violently broke open the
Door and went upon the search for her whom he feared was accompanied with her
friend, but not finding her there, he returned, where he found her at a
Neighbors House: Now began Satan to prompt him on to the execution of that he
had predetermined in his mind, This poor woman who was big of her first Child,
not dreaming that his passion was so violent that nothing could assuage it but
the loss of her own and her poor Babes life, and the letting out of her
immortal Soul for the expiation of her supposed Crime, She I say when she see
her Husband abroad whom she left locked up in the House was somewhat amazed,
but not fearing any harm went to him, who took her about the neck Judas like as
if he intended to kiss her, a and all on a sudden thrust his accursed Knife
into, if not through her poor Heart, so that she fell down dead upon the spot,
and that Soul wounding blow proved fatal to both Husband Wife and Child, for
which Bloody and execrable Murder he was committed to the County Goal at
Chelmsford, and there at the last Assizes received a just Judgment of
Condemnation, and was ordered to be Hanged at the common place of Execution;
but he on his bended Knees did beg as his last request of the Judge, that he
might be brought to the Town where he did perpetrate this wicked Act, there to
be Executed according to his Sentence, which was Granted, and on the 17th. day
of this present Month of April 1680, after a Sermon was Preached before him in
the presence of some Thousands of sorrowful-Spectators, was lead to the place
of Execution by his own Mother, who poor Soul drowned in Sorrow when she came
to the Gibbet fell in a Swoon, hardly to be recovered, and when he was upon the
Ladder made a very long Speech to this purpose, That he had been very
disobedient to his too indulgent Parents, and that he had spent his Youthful
days in Profanation of the Sabbath and licentious evils of Debaucheries beyond
expression, and that he had been over penutious in his narrow observance of his
Wives ways, desirous that all should pray to the Eternal God for His
everlasting welfare, and with many pious expressions ended this mortal life.
That being ended, he recommended his Soul to the Almighty, and the Executioner
did his Work.

FINIS,

