A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY, On
the 3, and 4, days of July, 1678. Containing The Trials of several Persons for
Murder; many for Robberies. One young Fellow found Guilty of a Rape. Also the
Trial of a Female-Muggleton for Blasphemy. And all other the Malefactors that
for any considerable Crimes were there Arraigned. With the number of those that
are Condemned, Burned in the Hand, and to be Whipped, etc.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1678.

A Narrative of the Proceedings at the Session for London and Middlesex, holden
at the Old Bailey, on the Third and Fourth days of July, 1678.
THe first brought to a Trial was a young man charged with Stealing a Silver
Tankard of the value of 5 l. 10 s. out of a Gentleman's House in the Parish of
St. Brides; The Prisoner appeared to be of an idle loose Conversation, but no
proof being made directly of his taking the Plate, nor its being found with, or
disposed of by him, (for indeed it never was heard of) he was thereupon brought
in not Guilty.

An elderly comely Woman was Convicted of Stealing a Green Silk Petticoat on
the first of July, from a Shop keeper near Paul's, whither she came on pretense
of buying, but it being missed before she was out of sight, she was brought
back, and at the end of the Shop, droped the Petticoat, but the Jury were so
favorable, as to value it but at 10 d. so that her Back is like to pay the
wages due to the activity of her Fingers.

The next was a young fellow for a filthy brutish offense being Arrained on
the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 7. for having the Carnal knowledge of a Maiden
Child, under the Age of Ten years, The case was thus, (as far as it is necessary
or fit with modesty to be related) On the twenty fifth of May last, a poor
woman-sent her Child being between Eight and Nine years old to a Masters house
of hers for six pence, which she had before earned; This Gentleman happened
then to be abroad, and the Prisoner (a lusty Lad of about 17 or 18 years old)
being his Prentice, invited the Girl in, but she refusing, he plucked her in and
carried her into a back room, telling her he would give her the six pence anon,
but having shut the door, laid her on the Chairs, and fell to practice his
Brutality, the consequence of which is, That the Child to this day has a
Disease, as was attested by a Surgeon belonging to the Hospital where she is
in Cure; The Child fearing the Mother would have beat her, did not presently
declare the matter, though she came home Crying, but there was little notice
taken then, nor indeed till on the Wednesday following, some unusual symptoms
caused the Mother to inquire into it, and then had a full discovery; nor did
the Prisoner when soon after she taxed him much deny it, but seemed to make
some Overtures of paying 12 d. a week toward her Cure; so that the matter of
fact was proved as was possible in such a Case by the Testimony of a Midwife,
and other Matrons, and the Child's own Relation who declared it very plainly in
Court, upon all which he was found Guilty, and being by the Statute excluded
from benefit of Clergy was Condemned to Dye.

Another young fellow was Convicted for stealing a Silver Tankard valued at
Five pound ten shillings at Stepney, on the thirteeth of May, it was taken with
him before he was far gone, viz. in the house of Office, being seen by one who
told the Master of the house to take it out of the Room, where he and another
Companion of his were a drinking; he now pretended that fearing his Associate
might be naught, he took the Tankard with him to the necessary house, only to
secure it, and meant to have presently brought it in, having no thoughts of
stealing it, but the Jury had little reason to believe him, and therefore
brought him in Guilty.

A Woman was Indicted for Stealing a very great quantity of Apparel, and rich
Linen, diverse pieces of Gold, and three l. in Silver, To which she resolutely
pleaded Guilty, and was afterward tried for another Felony, but upon that
acquitted being an old Offender, she was for the first Condemned, but by a Jury
of Women was found quick with Child.

There were several Indictments brought against a fellow, one for stealing a
Wheelbarrow and Shovel, another for Horses Harness at Maribone, etc. but he
pleaded Guilty to them, all within benefit, which yet was like to be no benefit
to him, for it was said he had been burnt in the hand at Kingston, and tied up
at Maidston before, however that not appearing, he was now for surety sake
burnt foundly.

After this succeeded Indictments of Murder against four several persons. The
first, a young fellow, who on the 4 th of June at Pancrass, going to drink in a
Nine-pin-yard with a man that wrought together with him; the other was trying
his skill to tip the four Corner-pins, and the Prisoner to interrupt him flung
his hat at them: whereupon the other person now dead took his Hat, and carried
it over a Bank, and there flung it into water, and stamped on it; but still in
a way of merriment, which the now Prisoner thought to answer by taking up one
of the Pins, and with both hands heaving or tossing it toward him, intending,
as he alleged, and some of the Witnesses believed, only to dash up the water
upon him: But the Pin unhappily hit him on the left part of the Head nigh the
Ear, and so fatally, that it knocked him down for the present; and though he got
up and went home, seeming pretty well, yet the next day he died. However, there
appearing no malice preceding, the Prisoner was only found guilty of
Manslaughter, and burnt in the hand.

The second, was a person charged with killing his Wife. The matter of fact was
thus: On the 21 of May, about eleven a clock at night a noise, and, as some
said, a crying out was heard; and Neighbors coming out, found this woman lying
at her own door almost dead; but no body near her: they carried her into an
house, and using means brought her to life, so as to speak, desiring to be put
to bed; but though asked, she did not declare any body had wronged her. However
there was a suspicion her Husband had beaten her; and some asking him about it,
he at first denied it; but afterward said, if he did, it was only with his
Hands and Feet, as one Witness alleged. The woman died about two hours after,
and there was no bruise found about her that could be judged mortal: Besides,
it was proved she had most part of her life been troubled with Fits, and
especially of late; and likewise had a little before received some hurt by a
Cows kicking. Upon the whole matter, there appeared no reason for judging him
the means of her death; and therefore he was acquitted.

The third, was a Carpenters man, who getting up on a strange Horse to ride him
to water, as soon as he was on his back the Horse run away with him, and in
Fanchurch-street flung down a deaf and dumb lad of about 15 years old, so
violently, that he soon after died; but it being evident that the prisoner
could not rule the Horse, but had his own life at the same time endangered by a
fall, he was likewise discharged.

The fourth was more black and fatal, which was of a foot Soldier, who on the
18th of June, marching toward Brainford, had it seems drank too much, and lay
asleep in a field in Chiswick parish, where a Countryman was cutting pease, who
observing that he had neither Sword nor Belt, concluded somebody in that
condition might have stolen them from him; and therefore seeing afterward three
other Soldiers come along, desired them to wake him, and take him with them,
which they, though strangers, were willing to do. They found him lying on his
Musket, and that cockt, which one of them uncockt, and with much difficulty
awaked him, desiring him very civilly to go along with them, and not lie there,
lest he should lose his Arms; withal asking him if his Musket were laden, who
answered swearing, that it was both with powder and ball; but instead of going
with them turned back toward London; whereupon the person killed, very
courteously and with kind words, took him by the arm and turned him the other
way, telling him that was the way they were to march, and he would help him
along; but the prisoner tumbling down, and as they were standing at a small
distance, rising up again upon his knees, cocks his Musket again, and presents
it at them, and giving fire, shot one of the three Soldiers into the right
part of the belly, just below the Sash, making a wound of two Inches broad and
ten deep, of which he instantly died without speaking a word, and his Comrade
and the rest seized the Prisoner, who had now nothing to say for himself, save
only that he was in drink, but that was an insufficient Excuse in Law, it
appeared he knew his Musket, to be charged with a Bullet, and that he
voluntarily cockt it again, when they out of their care had uncockt it, so that
he was necessarily found guilty of Murder, and received Sentance of Death.

A notable Shop-Jilt, was Tried for stealing of 134 yards of Taffata Ribbon, on
the tenth of June, out of a Shop in Cornhill, the Gentlewoman that prosecuted
being alone in her Shop, and finding her Customer so nice and hard to be
pleased suspected her, and turning up her Scarf, saw the piece of Ribbon under
her Arm, which thereupon she dropped; All that she had now to allege was, That
it was her way, to put her hands under her Scarf, but she had no intention
good-woman to steal the Ribbon; However, she is like to be led and drove both
at once another way, being sentenced to be whipped at the Carts tail, the Jury
finding it but of the value of ten pence.

A Country fellow was Indicted for having two Wives, Married to the first about
six years ago in Cheshire, to the second about two years ago at Dukes Place,
the last he owned, but denied the first, though he had formerly confessed it
before a Magistrate, yet there being no other proof, for the Woman her self
could be none, he was acquitted.

A Soldier was Convicted of Felony, for departing from his Colors without
leave, contrary to the form of the Statute, it was proved that he had been
mustered and received Pay, and had absented himself, and torn the Lace off his
Hat, and changed his Habit, that he might not be known, for which offense he
was Condemned.

A Man and his Wife having been Lodgers at a Butchers, were Indicted, together
with another Woman for Stealing of two hundred and ten pound out of one of his
Rooms, when all the Family were at their Shop in Newgate Market, which 'twas
supposed was done by counterfeiting a Key to the door; There were diverse
witnesses examined, but none that could directly or expressly fasten it on the
Prisoners, so that they came off not guilty.

The last tried were a woman for stealing a Silver Tankard, worth seven pound
ten, about three years ago, and a Man for stealing another Silver Tankard, 24
Sept. last from an Alehouse in St. Martins in the fields, who were both found
Guilty, the Man having been burnt in the hand before was set by for
Transportation, and the Woman having been an old Offender, received Sentance of
death.

In all there were Five Condemned, Three Men, and Two Women, Six burnt in the
hand, and Five ordered to be whipped, several that were in Goal on suspicion of
Robberies on the Highway, and Burglaries in the Country, were ordered to be
carried the respective Circuits, and in calling over the Goal, the Maid
formerly committed for Blasphemy was brought to the Bar, and asked several
questions, to which she modestly answered, seeming to confess her having taken
upon her to be God, and yet declaring that she went to Church, and being
demanded the reasons why she went thither, replied, To hear the Word of God, so
that the Court having gravely advised her to Repent, asked if she could procure
good Bail, and who would do so much for her, she said, she did not doubt but
some of her Masters that she had lived with would be her Sureties, having as
she declared, lived in London twenty years; in the mean time till she could
provide such Bail, she was sent back to Prison.

FINIS.

