A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Seffions-house IN THE OLD-BAYLY,
December 12, 13, 14, and 15. 1677. Containing The Trial of the woman for
Coining, who is Condemned to be Burnt. With an Account of the Highway-men. ALSO
The Trials and Condemnation of several other notorious Malefactors. And also
the number of those that are Condemned, Burned in the hand, Transported, and to
be Whipped.

With Permission.

To. L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1677.

The Proceedings at the Sessions for London and Middlesex.
AMongst such a multitude of various Crimes, the story of every petty Felony
with its trivial Circumstances here examined or punished, cannot reasonably be
expected to be published; such an undertaking would be no less tedious than
unuseful, and in some cases unfit: but as to whatever was transacted
considerable or remarkable, this Sheet dares promise you a brief, yet
sufficient, Account both of the manner of Fact, and what became of the Prisoner
charged therewith.

The first Relation we are to make, is of a very sad and unhappy accident. A
Gentleman was indicted (according to form in such cases) for Murder; but upon
Evidence the business appeared only thus: A Burglary about four or five a
clock in the morning being made, or at least attempted, and discovered by the
noise, and the people crying out Thieves, the person now tried, generously came
forth of his Bed with his Sword in his hand to help his Friends and seize the
Robbers, but casually meets three or four Journymen- Shoomakers, who working
hard by and taking the Alarm, came likewise running out with the like honest
intentions: but in that hurry and passion, mutually mistaking each other for
some of the Malefactors (who in truth were all escaped before) and the
Gentleman demanding of the person deceased who they were? and he, under that
misapprehension, roughly replying, You shall know by our Actions, or to that
effect, and withal striking him; the now Prisoner concluding him one of the
Thieves, unfortunately gave him a wound which occasioned his death: So that it
appearing to be done partly by Misadventure and partly se Defendendo, he was
wholly acquitted.

Another person was arraigned for a Murder committed about three years ago near
Islington, and for which his own Brother, being above a twelvemonth since
Convicted of Manslaughter, and not able to read when he had prayed the benefit
of Clergy, was executed: But though this man was in his company when the fact
was done, and some Circumstances seemed to lie heavy upon him, yet for want of
clear Evidence he was discharged: As likewise were two more concerning killing
of a man near Holborn, it not appearing that he received any blow or wound from
either of them that might occasion his Death.

But one for killing his Comrade by Tower hill, upon a Quarrel arising between
them about a Reckoning at an Alehouse, was found guilty of Manslaughter.

A poor Charewoman entrusted sometimes to sweep the Hall of one of the
City-Companies, and scour their Pewter when need required, made bold at several
times to exchange a considerable quantity thereof for Silver. She very
penitently confessed the Fact, and had endeavored restitution as far as she
could, begging mercy of the honorable Bench, which was afforded her.

Another coming with three or four other Confederates to an Alehouse, some of
them got up stairs, and breaking open a Chest of Drawers took away twenty
Guinnies, five Rings, and several other things of value. The Prisoner being
proved to be one of the Company, and that she paid the Reckoning, was Convicted.

A notorious Criminal after many fair warnings and not a few Convictions,
having some time since obtained the mercy of Transportation, finding, it seems,
the place not to agree so well with her as that of Newgate, whereunto she had
been so often accustomed, or at least that the Customs of the Country were not
fit for her Trade, Sugars and Tobacco not being so conveniently stolen,
harbored, or put off there, as Watches, Rings, Plate, Silks, etc. are here;
thought fit to come back and follow her old Profession of Shoplifting, being
lately taken with a Scarf, which she alleged stuck to her clothes when she
went out of a shop at the Exchange, though the Jury were of opinion that she
stole it: Which, together with her too early Return, it is verily believed, may
cause her to take a surer Transportation by a turn at Tyburn; which, no doubt,
will be much lamented as an untimely End, because it happened no sooner.

The next considerable, was an Indictment against a man and a woman, pretended
to be intermarried, for Coining. The woman had been an old Offender, and now no
less than nine or ten Indictments found against her for Felonies; being so
frugal and industrious, as first to steal Plate, and afterward make Money of
it, to save the trouble of Exchange and the charge of Coynage. Yet as cunning
as she was, she became accessory to her own Discovery: For upon promise of
Secrecy, she tells an acquaintance that she knew some persons that had store of
Cash, and were resolved to set up a private Mint; and she would order it so,
that he should surprise them at work, and then get a good sum for concealment,
wherein she was to go snips. He seemingly consents, but honestly imparts it to
a Gentleman to whose care and office it belongs to inspect such offenses.
Several times she came to him, and sometimes brought him new-coyn'd
Counterfeit-money to put off; but still on pretenses the business was not ripe,
and perhaps then somewhat distrusting him, delayed the Discovery; so that at
last having learnt that she had taken a house about Hounslow for carrying on
the Intrigue, he with a Warrant and Officers went down, and found her blowing
the fire in a Room where there were several sorts of Metals, diverse pieces of
stolen Plate, a Coyning-Press, and some other Tools, now produced in Court; but
her Husband was in another Room in bed. She did not much deny the Fact, but
wholly cleared him (to whom not above a fortnight before she had been married)
protesting that he was not privy to any of her actions of that kind. The
Court asking the man upon his Trial whether he were content to part with his
Wife, he, like a kind Husband, replied, I am very willing the Law should have
its course: Better one than both. So that, he was acquitted, and she convicted
of High Treason, and by Law to be Burnt.

The Court had much trouble given them by a fellow and his wife, the man being
indicted for two Facts, stealing of a Mare, and of Linen; the woman for a
Smock: both refused to plead, insomuch that the terrible Sentence of Pein fort
and dure (or pressing) past, but not being recorded, and they on view of the
Press, and Mr. Ordinary's pressing and pious Exhortations not at once to cast
away their lives and their souls, submitting themselves, were admitted to
Trial, and for want of exact proof acquitted on both Indictments.

Another remarkable thing was of a lusty young wench, who coming to an Office
of Intelligence to inquire for a Service, was by them directed to one at
Westminster, and entertained, pretending her self to be a Quaker, on which
account her Master and Mistress the more freely trusted her; but the second day
in the evening she robbed them of several pieces of Plate, Clothes, etc. above
the value of Fifty pound, and putting her self in man's apparel went off with
the Prize, but was soon pursued and (notwithstanding her disguise) discovered,
and in her masculine habit carried to Newgate; but now appeared in a female
dress. Before the Justice she accused one for taking the Goods by her
Invitation or consent, and afterward denied that he knew any thing of it, and
charged another; but still acknowledging 'twas done by her privity, was found
guilty of the Felony.

Several persons were found guilty of Felony and burnt in the hand for stealing
of Silver Tankards, etc. out of Victualing-houses: wherein there was little
observable besides this, That people after so many Examples should be so far
infatuated as to run the hazard of forfeiting their Licenses, and losing their
Plate, by exposing it in common use, merely to gratify their Pride, or a worse
humor of Covetousness, which abateth the quantity of the Liquor,
proportionably to the tempting quality of the Cups they vend it in.

A woman in the Strand coming to buy one pair of Silk Stockings which she paid
for, fearing (it seems) she might have a hard bargain, had been so kind to her
self as to take about Seven and twenty pair more privately into her Apron
without the useless Ceremony of asking the price; but being discovered by a
By-stander, was forced to make legal satisfaction, and take an Acquittance for
the same in her hand; to which Squire Ketch vouchsafed to be a Witness, and
subscribe his Mark.

A lusty fellow arraigned for stealing a Horse, absolutely denied any knowledge
of the business; but being suddenly asked what boot he had when he swapt him
away, affirmed, But five and thirty shillings* which amounting to a plain
Confession, he was brought in Guilty.

Another for stealing of Goods* pleaded the general Pardon he had lately
obtained for another Robbery; but the words thereof being read, and not
extending to this Case, he was likewise Convicted, it serving rather to
aggravate than extenuate his Fact.

After this a woman was tried for the most unnatural Crime of Murdering her
Bastard-child, and a man for the prodigious Trick of killing almost Threescore
Sheep only to steal Fourscore pounds of Tallow; a piece of Villainy never till
within these few years practiced: He pleaded guilty, and was Burnt in the hand.

There were three Bargemen arraigned for Murder, drowning a boy in a
Fisher-boat on the Thames. It was endeavored to be proved that they did it
wilfully; but they alleged, that by the violent current of the Tide they
could not help it. The Jury sound the matter of Fact specially, and left it to
Judges to determine the Crime in point of Law.

Several persons in custody for Robberies on the Highways were not tried,
there being no Prosecution in Middlesex against them; but are to be sent to the
respective Counties where they did the Facts, to take their Trials at the
Assizes.

There were in all Five persons Condemned to die: Two men and two women (old
notorious and incorrigible Thieves) to be Hanged, and one woman to be Burnt:
Four set by, before Judgment, for Transportation; Fourteen Burnt in the hand;
and Six for Petty Larceny to be Whipped.

FINIS.

