A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the seven Prisoners AT
TYBURN, On Friday the 19th of this Instant December 1679.
Viz. John Parker to be Drawn and Hanged for High Treason, Benjamin Pennery for
Robbing on the Highway, Francis Adkins for picking of Pockets, John Dell and
Richard Dean For stealing a Mare, and Susan White and Deborah Rogers for
Felony. With the manner of their Facts by them Committed.
AT the Sessions holden at the Old-Bayly, on Wednesday the 10th of this instant
December, and ended on Saturday the 13th. There were 11 miserable Offenders
that Received Sentence of Death, but the never failing mercies of a Gracious
Prince out of his tender Compassion to his miserable Subjects, Graciously
Reprieved 17 of them, the rest being 7. suffered on Friday the 19th. following

The first in this fatal Catastrophy was John Parker a Watchmaker formerly
living in Redlion-Court in Fleet Street, who being Indicted for High Treason,
was Arraigned and found Guilty of the same, it being proved against him, that
he had for many years counterfeited the Current and lawful Coin of England,
stamping Adulterated Metals, as Brass, Block Tin, Copper and the like, and
after Guilding, put it off to the full vallue of the true and lawful Coin,
bearing the proportionable, as Milled half-Crowns Crowns, Brummijum Groats,
Broad Gold and Guinnies but that which was most admirable, was his taking out
the C's from between the Bars of Milled Shillings, and engraving Scepters in
the Room of them, that when double Gilded, they might well deceive a skilful
Mony-Monger, with these he used to ride into the Country, and there put them
away, especially into Buckingham-shire, where it was proved he did distribute
many, he also did extend his Art to the making several sorts of Foreign Coins
as Ducatoons, pieces of Eight, and the like, these several false moneys with a
basket of his Tools, viz. his flask refining pots and Stamps, being showed in
open Court the Felony and Treason being proved against him he received the
dreadful Sentence To return from whence he came, and thence to be drawn upon a
Hurdle to the place of Execution, there to be half strangled, his Privities Cut
off, his Bowels to be burnt his Head severed from his Body, and his Quarters to
be disposed of as his Majesty pleased, on this day the same was put in
Execution, his Repentance was well as beseemed a Christian, behaving himself
meekly and submissive, as well in Prison, as at the place of Execution, showing
by many Emblems a hearty sorrow for his Crimes, and much bewailing his
misspent time, advising all, even to the last moment of his Life, to be
cautious in their ways, and not to be tempted with Desires of such unlawful
Gain, lest they like him, should bring themselves to the like painful and
shameful end.

The next was Benjamin Pennery, a notorious High-way-man, having for a long
time followed those unlawful Enterprises, at last entangled in the Snares of
Justice, was justly brought to suffer for his Crimes, for he in the Company of
three more setting upon a Coach upon Bagshot-Heath, in Bark-shire, wherein was
one Captain Palmer and three or four Gentlewomen, at their first coming up they
fired into the Coach, and shot the said Captain through the Arm, after rifling
him and his Company, yet got no greater Booty, than two or three half-shirts,
some other necessary Linen; a Pistol, and forty Shillings in money, the Shirts
and Pistol being sometime after offered by Penneries wife to Sail, were known,
and she apprehended, who bringing out her Husband, he alleged he had them of
one French, who was hanged the last Sessions, but there being farther Testimony
given against him, by one Hix, that had been formerly of the same Gang, that he
had been in his Company in several Robberies, at the Robbing several Carriers
near Barnet of several parcels of goods and moneys and whas was more, that they
once cheated him of his Snack and therefore left their Company, and had since
impeached many of the Gang, for these Enormities, he received Sentence of
Death, his Behavior was resolute, little regarding the Admonitions of the
Court as to a Preparation to Eternity, nor yet in Prison, to such as gave him
good Instructions; But when the fatal moment was at hand, that he unavoidably
must appear before the dreadful Throne of an Almighty Judge to Answer for his
Actions here below, his Conscience was awakened, and he declared a hearty
sorrow for his Sins, casting up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven and uttering many
admonishing words, unto the multitude, so continuing till he changed for
Immortallity.

The next were those notorious cruel Companions in Iniquity, viz. John Dell of
Edger, and Richard Dean, they having no less than three Indictments laid
against them, the first for Murdering Dells Wife, the second for murdering
Daniel Ball his Father in Law, the third for stealing a Mare, but by reason
there could be nothing proved positively against them on the two first, they
were brought in not Guilty. But to see how just Heaven is, notwithstanding they
had escaped for committing those barbarous crimes, yet both he and his
confederate were Condemned for stealing a Mare, sold by Dean, and justified by
Dell.

After the fatal sound of Death had made Impression on their Souls, and their
Consciences awakened from the drowsy Lethergy or seared hardness that the many
dreadful Crimes by them committed had inured them to, and they began to gaze
upon a vast Eternity and inward feelings of the mighty Guilts, seeing
themselves plunged into the depth of Misery, began most seriously to Repent;
they being kept assunder that they might the better unburthen their
Censciences, to those Ministers that came to exhort them for the good of their
immortal Souls, they both showed abundance of sorrow and contrition for the
manifold and grievous Sins they had committed, Dell declaring that his crying
Sins had provoked the Almighty God to give him over to himself, and therefore
he had run into such distructive ways, for that he had for the most part
defrauded or cheated whomsoever he had any thing to do withal, the Minister
desired him to confess if he were conscious of the horrid Murders he stood
charged withal, to which he answered very doubtfully, saying he had many great
and grievous Sins, which like lead pressed down his Soul, and stopping there
let fall some Tears, desiring all to Pray for mercy to his Soul, and farther,
that he hoped God would not lay to his Charge the Cruelty he used toward his
Wife, and in a dubious manner did confess the Crime. Dean likewise was
exceeding penitent, saying that Dell had brought him to this shameful End, so
they continued at the place of Execution, desiring the Great God of Heaven and
Earth, to pardon their great Offenses, and that all would take warning by their
fatal Ends.

The next was Francis Adkins, a notorious Pickpocket, who was commonly used to
commit that villainous Act in Churches, and other public resorts, and when he
observed the People did not Watch as well as Pray, he would be sure to dive
into their Pockets; But having picked the Pocket of one Mr; Stephens of about
eight or nine shillings in Bow-Church, but he was apprehended ere he could
dispose of the moneys, and several remarkable pieces found about him, at the
same time another having his pocket picked of six or seven shillings, who
coming in where he found some of his moneys likewise, so that in Court it being
proved that he had been in Newgate several times, and an old offender, was
found Guilty, and received Sentence of Death.

During the respit for preparing himself for another World he greatly bewailed
his misspent time, and desired the Charitable Prayers of all good Christians,
and exhorted all to a timely Repentance, and to desire the Mercy of a never
failing God before they came to stand upon the Brink of Eternity, etc.

The next were Susanna White, and Deborah Rogers, for stealing a Silver Tankard
from one Mr. Sparkle of St. Martins in the Fields, the former had been a
notorious Shoplift, and was thought to bring the latter into this preminire,
the Tankard was found in her Basket, the Felony was plain, and they received
Sentence, after which, they infinitely bewailed themselves, desiring Mercy from
above, and Pardon for all their Sins, and so they all departed this Life, to
Answer for their particular Offenses, before the Tribunal of the great God.

PINIS.

