A true, exact, and perfect Relation of the famous and renowned Victory,
gained by the most redoubted Army of the mighty and victorious Monarch
PHILIP, of that name the fourth King of Spain, etc. the seventh of September,
being upon the Eve of the Nativitie of our Lady: Against the forces of LEWIS,
of that name the 13. French King, then straightly beleaguering both with Navall
and Land Powers the frontier City of FUENTERAVIA.

Written by by a Gentleman that was an eyewitness of the same.

Royal coat of arms or blazon.

Printed at London, for Samuel Broune. 1641.

A true, exact, and perfect Relation of the famous and renowned Victory,
gained by the most redoubted Army of the mighty and victorious Monarch
PHILIP, of that name the fourth King of Spain, etc. the seventh of September,
being upon the Eve of the Nativitie of our Lady: Against the forces of LEWIS,
of that name the 13. French King, then straightly beleaguering both with Navall
and Land Powers the frontier City of FUENTERAVIA.
WHich City, by the said overthrow of the French was happily succored and
relieved: And that this Relation may bear the greater color of truth, and
gain the greater belief in the imaginations of men: it is not amiss (by the
way) to intimate, that it is no partial Gazet, or Slanderous tale or Ballad,
which upon such occasions are ever prompt to be taken hold of, in the wavering
conceits of the giddy multitude. But it is the real knowledge, and painful,
and dangerous experience of one that was Actor in that Tragi-Comedy, as he can
show good materials for. But my desire (who am bold to term my self the
Relator of this exployt) is not to name my self, but to warrant the certainty
of this true Pamphlet: And to proceed.

The said City of Fuenteravia, being (according as the natural situation
thereof could afford conveniencie of in incamping and lying in road to the
Besiegers) beleagured both by sea and land, and all passages, access, and
conveyances of succor or relief to the besieged, shut up and strongly barred
with sundry many Trenches, Redouts, Cortadura's, Barriers, and all sorts of
Millitarie lets, and engines to hinder and prevent any designs of the feared
(by them) Spanish powers: So that only excepted, the care of the Almighty of
his servants, there remained no manner of hope of any earthly help to the
besieged.

But as it is seen by daily experience, that where any manly courage, or
valorous Roman resolution is inhabiting, that there it begins to show it self
most, where its help is most requisite and available. So now the undaunted and
courageous Spaniards, though little in number, by reason of their daily losses,
effected by the over-greedy desire of glory, and gayning of the Fort of their
adversaries, and by their high resolution on the other side to withstand their
enemies intent. The Alcald, or Governor of the Town, seeing to what a
straight they were brought, by this hard pounding of them up by their enemies,
like a discreet and careful overseer of his task, laborious, and sedulous
Pastor of his entrusted flock: he began in time (seeing this cloud of War
hanging over his head, and thereupon a great tempest of Arms threatened to
prevent this storm therefore, and to seek shelter before the said storm for
himself, and the rest of his war, and weather-beaten company, being as
aforesaid daily diminished, and the enemies on the other side every day more
and more increasing, still by new fresh and daily reliefes and succors from
their neighbor home, to their great comfort and encouragement. The Alcald, as
is said, perceiving things as they stood, with all speed assembled the prime of
his retinue, and told them the state of the business as it stood in his
conceit, which accordingly was conceived of by the most understanding of them,
to be as he conceived: whereupon by general consent of all the Commanders then
there, a speedy advertisement of all the several particularities touching the
state of the Town, the besiegers and the distressed, (if not out of hand
relieved) besieged, was dispatched to his Catholic Majesty, which dispatch was
sundry and very oftentimes confirmed, by the coming still of new
advertisements and solicitations of present succors both to his said sacred
Majesty of Spain, and to the Almirant of Castile, a man of a most ancient and
noble family, eminent in the Commonwealth by his well-deserved office, and in
his nature and virtuous qualities, not easily paralleled, but scarcely
imitable: And to conclude, though not with the twentieth part of his goodness;
yet in few words to comprehend much, a man that in spite of envy (be it
spoken) may deservedly be termed, the Mirror of complete Nobility,
magnanimity, and courage, and a true delineated pattern, and effigies of all
those rare parts which ought to be comprehended in a true-hearted Nobleman,
great states man, grave Counselor, and warlike director of a Commonwealth as
he was then, being high General of the Spanish Army: who having received
these several advertisements, therein plainly manifested to the world his
honest heart, clear conscience, loving nature, and stout resolution, by
commiserating like a good Patriot, the hard case of his afflicted countrymen;
for presently and out of hand he called a Council of war, of the best and
most approved Leaders in his army, representing unto them the grievances and
request of the Governor, and his Garrison, commanding them, that after serious
consultation thereof had that night: that the next morning, they should render
him an account of their resolution therein, for the best prevention of the
enemies designs, and most convenient means of succouring their dangerously
engaged friends. But by reason of the scarsity of experienced old soldiers
there was a co^fused diversity of opinions touching the matter in question
among them, for lack, as is said, of fit experienced persons or instruments in
that case, either for offense or defense. But at length considering that much
profitable time for the purpose, may be spent in little available discussions,
and also timely considering the impossibility of any resistance left to the
defendants, against so great, and so resolutely bent forces as were the French
against them. This Chaos of confused opinions was broke in sunder, and all
improfitable matters therein set aside, leaving nothing behind, but the pure
real substance of the necessary present help: whereof was framed a a settled
and generally agreed upon resolution: which was to send away three Spanish
Captains, and four Irish, which Irish Captains were Daniel o Cahan, David
Barrie, Oliver fitz Gerald, and Captain Terentio o Gallighowe, and with the
Auidante Pedro Geraldine, they went on with a crew of brave and stout stomackt
men, resolved, rather than that they should fail of succouring their friends
in their extremity to make their enemies dig up their graves, and them
according to the heathen custom, to sprinkle with the blo^d of their said
enemies, and so to offer a humane sacrifice for the expiation of their offenses
on earth: But as God would have it, there was no such need; for without let or
molestation, they entered into the endangered City with desired, and long
expected succor, to the extreme joy and hearty comfort of the besieged.

The Irish Captains with their Auidants and Companies, were no sooner enclosed
within the narrow precinct of the City walls, but that like fire, being
removed from a vast and large place, where its exhalations had free scope of
passing through the air whereby the heat is not so forceable, nor extreme, as
it is when the fire is removed into a narrow or straight room or compass,
where those fiery bodies are restrained of their former liberty, and are kept
within the fire, whereby the heat of the fire is increased, by reason of the
restraint of the said fiery bodies: Even so the courageous and valiant Irish,
being but a small handful of men, in respect of their numerous enemies, being
in the broad fields, though they lacked no courage or will to set upon their
enemies: Yet were they not so fiery, nor so incensed, yet being ignorant of
the poor case their friends and Comrades were in within the Town* but coming
in, and seeing in what state things stood there, then took they and kept to
themselves all their unmercifull and raging bloody humors, and restrained them
of their former liberties, which they had in the vast fields of their ignorance
of their friends ill-fare, and sought license presently to execute their angry
mood upon their insulting enemies, pretending that their haughty and stout
stomachs could not brook nor digest their enemies so near neighborhood.
Whereupon license upon great and importunate entreatie being granted by the
Governor, the Spaniards and the Irish began to give order for the sally, and
began to encourage their soldiers, and to whet and set their lusty and lofty
resolutions on edge in putting them in mind of their former famous acts. Now
all things being in order for the sally, by the incorporating and Marshalling
of the Companies as the narrowness of the place could afford means to do:
this being done, they issued bravely on the sudden, with such fury and
eagerness to fight, as if it had been a mountains flood, which bears, and
forcibly carries before it, men and beasts, trees and stones, by the force of
the riotous Current: Even so went on these brave Warriers, till they fell upon
the enemies trench, where they did bloody execution and revenge upon enemies,
with some loss to themselves; in which skirmish, and many more hot and bloody
encounters and conflicts I leave to the judicious French, the censure of the
courage, and Lion-like magnanimity and resolution of the brave and Heroic
Irish men, in their bold and Chivalrous attempts, to the no small glory of
their most renowned King and Country; and not only in that place, but also in
several other places where their memorable and never dying acts are to their
immortal fame, and reputation registered and remain as examples and patterns
to noble and honour-thirsty minds, and stirring knightly motives to posterity,
as namely, in Polonia, Germany, Flanders, and Spain.

Almirante de Castilla, the thrice noble, and brave worthy aforementioned,
prime General of the Spanish Armies, after his arrival at St. Sebastian, he
dispatched like a prudent Chiefetaine many spies to discover the passages,
sallidas, fortifications, the number of their enemies watches, with the order
of the same, and their vigilancie in setting their watches, with all the
possible advantages that might be had of their said watches, fortifications,
and strongest works, as also to discover the state of the besieged: of which
being advertised by the Governor, and of the danger they were in, if not
presently succored, as also the great forwardness of their enemies
proceedings, if not speedily interrupted. Upon which notice the Almirant
resolved out of hand to attempt the relieving of the City both by sea and
land, which his brave intent, as God would have it, happily took desired
effect, twice by the arrival of Spanish and Irish succors to the beleaguered:
Notwithstanding all these succors arrived in the Town, and the flying rumors
daily of the Spaniards maine armies approach, the French obstinately bent,
either to take the town, or to lose themselves in the pursuit thereof, daily
made their approaches with Trenches, Galleries, and other warlike ground-works,
and so well plied themselves to the Spade and Mattock, that in short time they
came to the Town ditch and wall, and there blew up their Mines in three
several places: by means whereof, the walls on that side were so sore shaken
and broken, that they were even levelled with the earth: so that by this, and
the daily skirmishes, and continual alarums given to them of the Town by the
enemies keeping them still awake, by their multitudes, whereas the beleaguered
had but few hands, so that they could not change, but that the same men were
still upon the Walls, by which, and the terrible roaring of the French Canon,
freely bestowing its murdering bullets amongst the unthankful, but not
ungrateful besieged receivers: the one half almost of the besieged were
slaughtered, and the rest sore wounded, and tired quite with continual
watchings and allarums: but in this extremity the noble Matrons and young
maidens of the City, mightily revived the drooping (for want of strength, not
of courage) soldiers; for still they would be at hand with powder, Bullets,
Guns, swords, Pikes; meat and drink to the hungry and thirsty, cure to the
wounded, and their hands were as forward in the groundworkes, and
Counterscarfes of the City, as any soldiers in the Garrison, and those that
were hurt they carried home to their houses, and there cherished them, and
cured them as if they had been their own Fathers, or Husbands, or Brethren:
which Amazonian behavior and resolution so animated the abated strengths, and
tired vigorous spirits of the undaunted Spaniards, and Irish, that even then as
they thought (being in the jaws of death) being sure they should be slain, for
yield they would not to save a thousand lives to each one; so careful were
they of their honor, and the reputation of their nation. Even then, I say,
being in this extremity, they reassumed to themselves new courages, and out of
a mere debilitie, and forced weakness, they squeezed to themselves new
strength and courageous resolution: for it is known by tried experience, ever
since it is known what man and woman are, what power the force of love of the
one Sex has, to kindle in the generous breast of the other, an invincible
mind and boldness, of which, Ages, and Authors, both ancient and modern
afford multiplicitie of presidents and examples, which more fully to express
is not my present intent: but my purpose is to declare, according to my
conscience, and experience in that war to set forth fully, and not defraud
either side of their worthily achieved glories: for by the women's encouraging,
and rowsing up of (the almost dejected strengths of) the Garrison soldiers,
the reanimated Spaniards and Irish were so dreadful to their besieging
enemies, that they durst no more approach them than raging and hungry mawed
Lions. Yet notwithstanding this, as is said, by the continual bloody broils,
and toylsome labors, half the soldiers beleaguered were slain, and many more
of the French, and on both sides great numbers of Crepples, and maimed limlesse
men escaped to preserve the memory of these cruel frayes of Mars, by the
direful losses, and borne, and accompanying examples of their mangled members.

The Prince de Conde, General of the most Christian Kings Army, imagining
wisely with the rest of the Council of war, by the great loss sustained by
those of the Town: and also by the breaking down of their walls by his Mines,
as is before related, that then he may build a firm ground of giving an
assault to the Town, upon those great advantages he supposed himself to have
over those of the Town, for their lack as well of men, as of defensible Walls.
As also by the great numbers on the other side he was himself furnished of, of
valiant and brave French Cavaliers, and all kind of warlike Engines for to
distress the besieged. Upon which sure foundations settling himself for to
give the assault, he presently gave command, which was accordingly worthily
executed by the resolute French men, on the right hand of the breach, where
they proceeded with such heat, fury, and valor, as if every one of them
carried lightning in their arms and weapons, till they were confronted upon
the ruins of the decayed and battered walls, by the valorous Spanish and Irish
soldiers, where both parties proceeded one against another. Just like as in a
stormy and tempestuous day, the troubled and raging waves of the shipwreck
threatening sea, we see do run with conjoined and strongly knitted force,
intending to carry all before them, minding no resistance, but on the sudden
we see they are met by the maine and impenetrable front of some high reared
stony Cliffe, where contrary to their presumptuous and overweening
expectations, all their hopes are dashed, and their powers dis-joynted and
beaten back in dismembered parcells into the maine body of their insulting
seconding mother. Even so were the fiery stomachs of the hasty French cooled
and quenched by the pure and precious waters of the unconquerable Spanish and
Irish courages, and given repulses: where the French, after their forced
retire, in memory of their valor, left the breach full of their dead
carcasses.

The French Commanders seeing no hope, or any possibility of carrying the
place by force of assault, propounded to the besieged certain overtures of
peace (because they were loath to expect the wearing them out by hunger, and
siege: which in Martial brunts they could not do with greatest advantages) in
which Overtures they propounded the difficulty, if not impossibility of any
succor: which indeed to my own knowledge was very true. Secondly they
proposed any quarter they would desire. Which propositions after consideration
thereof had by the besieged (as by men who did not half so much fear the
imminent danger, nay apparent loss of their lives, as by all presumption it
was like as their loyalty and good example to their King and Country) were
utterly rejected.

The Illustrious Almirante de Castillia being advertised of the peril the
beleaguered were in, did not so highly in words commend their courage, and
fidelity, but that he as inwardly dreaded and feared their danger: wherefore
convocating a general Council of war, of the most and best experienced
soldiers about him, he imparted the importance, and consequence of the
business to them, with the difficulties and dangers thereof arising, if speedy
remedy were not applied; and therefore commanded their opinions therein, to the
best avail of his Majesty's service, and discharge of their own conscience and
duty, being entrusted in it.

In the neck of which consultation, there arrived a Post from his Catholic
Majesty, and his great private and prudent, and worthy Counselor Conde Duke,
confirming as it were aforehand the ensuing resolution of the Council, which
unanimously was to divide the Army in three parts: the one of which to be
employed about the busying and diverting the enemies forces from the Town. And
the other two to attend all opportunities and advantages that may be taken or
offered, either by the negligence of the enemy, or by the commodity or
situation of the place, to charge him to his greatest annoy; and to endeavor
by all means to relieve the begirt City of Fuenteravia.

Upon this resolution taken, and all things readily appointed, order was given,
that the Army should march at a set and appointed hour: Marquis de Mortara
one of the Spanish Commanders, seeing those under the leading of the Almirante
himself to approach near, commanded the vanguard of his own Troops to march
on toward the Enemy.

Then fell on with speed, and unspeakable courage the incorporated vanguard of
the Corolenia of Conde Duke, and of the two Irish Regiments of the Earls of
Tirone, and Tirconell: the Conductors and soldiers of which seemed for haste
and hunger to fight to prevent desire it self: so forward they were to do
their Prince service, and his enemies damage, and detriment: which their
desire took speedy execution, by their eager and furious falling upon their
enemies: so that in less than an hour they took in the two next adjoining
Calina's with eleven appointed posts in them, which the French did possess.

After this, Sergeant Major Barrie, an Irish man of long tried and approved
experience in the wars of the Low Countries and of Germany; and one who gave
good tokens of his great skill, and ability in warlike and martial affairs,
and Discipline, as well in this exploit, as in other precedent important
services, as it is well known to many, having the leading and conduct of the
said incorporated vanguard of the Spanish army, he marched on directly
without stay with incredible wariness and resolution with his vanguard to the
maine great Trench of his enemy, taking as he marched all the advantages and
commodities which the situation of the place would suffer, or any way afford,
till he came within Pistol shot of the enemies great and strongest Trench;
when on both sides there began a bloody skirmish, with which there arose a
great noise of Drums and Trumpets in the French Camp, when their Artillery
began to roar, and fly bountifully to the Spanish side, with which Barrie
skirmishing all this while upon the brinks of the enemies great and mainest
trench, and prying narrowly to the enemies doing, omitting nothing that might
become a skilful and prudent Leader to his soldiers, and a dangerous and
advantageous enemy to his enemies, going from place to place, still
encouraging with comfortable words, where he found any coldness of courage,
which he found in very few; and putting them in the most forward hope of
reward, reforming and settling the ranks in complete and perfect order, and
putting them in general in memory of their former and famous attchievements,
to the renown and perpetual credit of their Nations both of Spain and
Ireland. So that by these, and other his expert sedulous and skillful
encouragements, he made of the multitude, as if it had been but one complete
and well composed body, and made them so ready and willing to observe his
commands, that he could scarce command, but it was so readily obeyed, that
scarce any difference could be discerned betwixt the command, and the obedience
thereunto: he made them so ready and dexterous to perform his will, as if
they had been the body, and he the head: the body could not obey the will of
the head sooner than they did his, which was a thing worthy of note to be done
in so short a time, and which under God was the chief means of gaining the
victory.

Now being thus busy, as is said, he might perceive that the enemies horse
made preparation to give a charge upon him: which perceiving, he approached
nearer unto them, and powered among them a whole* volley of shot, and then
prepared himself for the fight, giving present instructions to that effect, as
one who knew well the valor and resolution of the French Horse: then presently
did he call into the vanguard all the Officers reformed and Cavaliers of the
two Irish Regiments, who like valiant and brave Cavaliers made no stay* but
appeared presently with all diligent Obedience at his beck: Of them did Barrie
frame the front of the pikes, to resist the fury of the enemies horse, the
shot being severally divided into all possible advantages, to be taken
according to the natural situation of the place.

Thus all things being in perfect order according to the time, to offend the
enemy, and to defend themselves, if he should attempt any thing against them:
Barrie dispatched five Officers, Vivo's and Reformed, with present
advertisements to Mortara; and for other helps, as powder, Matches, and such
like other necessities, of which he was not so plentifully provided as he
would, which his request, Mortara, like a brave, provident, and wise Commander
presently granted.

Then Barrie seeing that all things were duly and decently ordered for the
fight, and that the soldiers were provided to their content, began to
encourage them a new with the most comfortable words he could devise, calling
upon the common soldiers by name those which he knew, the rest he took by the
hands and promised them great rewards, speaking severally to each Captain,
Commander and Officer under his charge, encouraging them apart; and then in
general showing them where new reliefes were, in all haste marching to them:
and after those reliefes, the Reeregard marching in order to their assistance:
Then Barrie the second time sent two Reformed Irish Officers, advertising
Marquis de Mortara, that if he did send succor to charge on the right hand of
the great Trench, to busy that side, he with the vanguard would with
resolution fall upon the rest of the enemies fortifications upon his peril,
and that he hoped to give good account of his proceedings therein. Mortara for
his own discharge, and being mighty glad, and joyful of the hope he
conceived what noble effect the worthy attempt of such a courageous crew as
Barrie, and his followers were, would bring forth, if it were well seconded,
dispatched a message out of hand to the Almirante, signifying unto him the
sum of Barries honorable requests, and Chivalrous intent, and resolution,
who taking consideration of the business, and being discussed among some of
the chiefest Commanders, Marquis de Torrecusa offered himself to be employed
according to Barries request, who being licensed, departed; and having
imbattailed his men, and encouraged them, as the shortness of time gave
leisure, he went manfully and resolutely, and led his men to give charge upon
the right hand of the enemies great Trench, as Barrie demanded: but Torrecusa
was twice repulst. Yet the third time he gained that side of the Trench, which
he assaulted, and came at last to his appointed place of Execution with great
courage and discretion, where gaining the redout that was on the right hand,
he and his Spaniards, and Neapolitans, fought with such vigor and might, that
it was strange to behold, but that it was known they were all chosen and
approved men, led by so valiant and wise a Leader as Torrecusa was: And there
was another thing that made these doings of Torracusa, and his train to seem
the less strange, which was to see, with what violence and force Barrie and
the Vanguard of the Irish and Spanish under his conduct and command, set upon
the rest of the enemies great Trench, which they took and drove back the
enemies with such fury, that it was wonderful to behold: and where Torrecusa
fought with his Neapolitans and Spaniards, was the cruel effect of Ire and
courage to be seen upon the miserable mangled bodies of the killed and
slain; the heavy groans of the wounded, the loud shrieks of the distressed
dying soldiers; the neighing of hor^es, the clattering of Armor, the clashing
of swords and weapons together, where a man may see revenge quench her thirst
with humane blood. There was slaughter in her royalty, crowned with Majesty,
carried, and treading upon dead and wounded bodies, and to conclude, there was
such a death-breeding confusion and terrible deadly dreadful noise of the
dying and wounded, and of Drums, Trumpets, and other Military instruments, as
if half the world were assembled together, and had conspired with full intent
to destroy all mankind in the other half, and were assisted by all the
several Elements, such a Confusion there was: for where the Spaniards and
Irish fought, there was no resistance to be made against them: for they made
such a bloody Massacre and havoc of their enemies, that by pure force and dint
of sword they drove them out of their strongest fortification. Which Barrie
perceiving, and that Torrecusa and he had the victory on both sides of the
field, by the forcing of their enemies out of that Trench, he commanded, (his
thirst of honor being not yet quenched) the vanguard to advance further
toward the enemy, which they obeying, immediately, the first troops of
Musketeers advancing into, gave way to the rest to follow them to execute
their Commanders will. The French seeing their last refuge to consist in their
valorous carriage, with stout courages their Cavallerie gave a brave charge
upon the fore-most troops of Barries soldiers, and made them retire back into
the Trench they had formerly taken. Then immediately again came fresh succors
of Torracusa and Mortara, and then the second time did Torracusa and Barrie
advance with the vanguard, and made also a distance of, till the Rereguard
arrived, and fell with united forces on the enemy with such fury, that they
were forced to make a virtue of necessity, which was to retire: which if they
had not timely and providently done, they had incurred great and most imminent
danger. For if a thousand Musketeers of Don Pedro Siron, and Don Joseph
desanta Maria, had come upon their backs on the other side in a narrow passage,
hardly could they have retired, or escaped, but with great hazard and loss.

Now the slaughter was the greatest when they came to the Sea side; where
Barrie showed himself a man that could use his victory with moderation, and
mercy to the vanquished, which was a virtue so much commended in ancient and
famous Captains, and that deservedly in my conceit: for after that the French
were past hope of escape, and that they submitted themselves, and held up their
hands for mercy, it was not the part of a man endued with natural reason, and
touched with any tenderness of Conscience or generositie of mind to kill and
murder them so crawling at their feet, and void of all power to defend
themselves, but rather it became a brutish insulting beast; and as we hear,
there are some beasts that never insult so, nor exercise any cruel power upon
the conquered: but seeing them void of defense, leave them so, as namely the
King of Beasts, the royal Lion.

Which noble virtue of the Lion Barrie notably imitated here: for he suffered
not one man of all the French, that submitted themselves and came out of the
Sea, to receive the least hurt or damage, but preserved the lives of great
multitudes, who by all likelihood had been all put to the sword, by those that
neither regarded their honor, nor the fear of God, but followed and were
guided by their own unmercifull savage humor, and could away with no reason,
but their unreasonable and brutish will: which presumption and madness Barrie
wisely restrained, by appoynting certain lusty soldiers of his Retinue, to
guard the vanquished French: giving them in charge, to use them as enemies,
that offered any injury to the French: which was the means as before is said,
that great numbers of lives were saved, as the French can testify; As also
with what kindness and courtesy the Irish favored them, being their
protectors ever since the fury was past.

Now the French thus defeated and routed, and all their great forces and
hopeful preparations broken, destroyed, and brought to nothing, the spoils
that were taken were presented to the Almirante of Castilia: Where Barrie for
his part of the spoils presented the General with five Ensigns of the
French, as a token of his pains taken in that Medley, and Captain Daniel
Mac-Curthy, another Irish Captain, presented one Ensign to the Almirante.
Torrecusa and Barrie at the taking in of the great Trench of the enemies by
them, found therein four Pieces of Brass Ordnance, and afterward in the
Battery they found twenty eight, in all thirty two French Brass pieces of
Artillery.

Almirante de Castilia of whom we spoke pretty well before, gained himself,
his King and Country, this day eternal fame and renown.

As did Marquis de Torrecusa, revive and increase the glory of his flourishing
Country of Italy, by his rare and exquisite skill showed in his prudent
conduct, as well in this as other happy encounters.

The Noble Marquis de Mortara likewise showed himself like a politic and
valiant Captain, as was expected of him, which to his perpetual fame, he with
glory discharged.

The deadly and ghastly wounds of the followers of the Conde de Agilare,
likewise made known their worthy acts, and eager forwardness.

The brave soldiers likewise of Mr. del Campdan, Joseph de santa Maria, and
Mr. del Campden Pedro de Siron did no less worthy service: as did also
Sergeant Major Barrie, with his courageous and magnanimous Irish soldiers, and
not only the Common soldiers, but also the Reformed Officers of the two
Regiments of the Earls of Tirone, and Tirconell, being all Irish, as also the
Captains, etc. with their divisions constantly seconding, (as appears by the
Certificates of Barrie, under whose conduct they served) still with such
dexterity and obedience, that at no necessity their presence was wanting,
till all was ended as before is mentioned, and at large expressed, to the
everlasting renown of their King and Country.

And no less did appear the noble mind of Mr. Del Camp Carlo Varsa, by his
glorious and brave attempts in this onset. And to conclude with them all in
general, both Spaniards and Irish, and Neapolitans, both Commanders and
soldiers, such were their brave on-sets, glorious attempts, and courageous
resolutions in this battle, and famous (by their achievements) victory
obtained against their valorous enemies; that all things considered according
to the numbers and warlike Equipage, and Martial accoutrements on both sides.
The brave and noble minded triumphing Romans; as namely, Camillus, Publicola,
Fabius, Emilius, Cato, Scipio, and the rest that attained by their
well-imployed Consulships to their deserved, and most glorious and pompous
triumphs over their conquered enemies. Or the redoubted* and undaunted Greek
Heroes, as were the great Macedonian Alexander, the furious spirit Pirrhus, and
the brave Spartan Agesilaus, the noble and worthy Athenians, Pericles,
Themistocles, and Alcibiades, or the high minded Thebans, Pelopidas, and
Epaminondas, etc. Many more as worthy every way of the Grecian blood and
nation, which to their mortal reputation and honor have left infinite volumes
full of their most glorious acts, as memorials to all worldly eternity. These
two Nations considered, and each several person by himself considered, with
his power, and feats done upon their enemies for so short a time, and
unexpected execution. Never did he of the one side deserve his insulting
gorgeous triumphs, and sumptuous sacrifices and ceremonies, according to the
customs of his Country; nor they on the other part, better deserve to have
their acts graved, and carved in Gold, Copper, or Brass: Nor to have their
Altars, Statues, and precious Images to preserve and record to future and
ensuing ages, their famous and victorious Conquests, than did these renowned
Warriers, Spaniards and Irish, serving under the royal Standards and Banners
of his most sacred Catholic Majesty, deserve to have the most exquisite, and
ready, and skillful Quills in Europe, to indent and bear record of this their
most glorious, and never dying victory.

Here follows a List of as many Officers and Cavaliers of the Irish as
suffered by death and maiming in this bloody fray, by their eager pursuit of
the victory, in being still the foremost in the execution.
Here follows the names of the hurt Officers.
FIrst, Captain Teig O Kelly, Reformed. Tuohill O Haghan, a Reformed Alferis.
Randall Mac-Donell, a Reformed Alferis. John O Naghtin, a Reformed Alferis.
John O Magher, a Reformed Sergeant. Farill Duff O Connor, a Reformed Sergeant.
Daniel O Begly, a Corporal. James O Mloghlin, a Corporal. Garret O Brin, a
Corporal.
These ensuing are the names of the slain Irish Officers.
Peter Roch, a Reformed Alferis. Nicholas Cusack, a Reformed Alferis. William O
Hanglin, a Reformed Sergeant. Teig O Bradegave, a Reformed Sergeant. Patrick
Fitz Gerald, a Sergeant. Cavalier Dermod Mac-Carthy. John Purcell, a Reformed
Corporal. Thomas Rulgh, a Corporal. Robert O Fwellane, a Corporal. Cavalier
James Barrie. Mlaghlin O Dowgane, a Corporal. Edmond O Dij, a Corporal.
Of which, those that were wounded, and maimed, those scarres and wounds, they
bear as brave and noble badges of their never-yeelding minds, and loyalties,
and those that were slain, left their bodies as the more ignoble parts, and
Cabinets (to give their mother earth its natural due) wherein were contained
and kept those haughty and heroical dispositions, and courages, which were
the stirrers and movers of the said bodies, to such noble attempts as wherewith
they attained to the glorious Laurel of victory, for their earthly parts, and
also which courages were the precious jemmes, lanthornes, and efficients of
their own quiet repose in the high bed of Fame, where the loud and shrill
Trumpet of their worthiness shall perpetually sound out with ecchoing noise
their deserved praises.

Now Gentlemen, and Courteous, and impartial perusers of this, as impartial
and true, but short relation; I would not have you think, that what things I
set down here, are but heare-sayes, and relations of gagling old Gossips in
their merry carrowsings: but that which I desire of you, and which I expect as
sole reward for the small pains I took in penning this small Pamphlet, is, to
conceive, (and as the very and real truth is) that what I set down here, and
offer to your views in every particular, I was eye and hand-witnesse of, and
of all the passages specified in the precedent relation, and was also a
partaker of the greatest hazzards happened in that enterprise, which I hope in
your equal ballancing, the truth shall be a help and mover of belief in your
imaginations to my equal distributing of a Relatorie reward to each particular
deserver in this great exployt: And also, though I tell you I was partaker in
the perils; yet to name my self, I think it not meet: which also I hope may
be a motive in you to my advantage in that way, I desire it, which is still
desiring your belief to my Relation, and impartialitie of each ones good
deserts in this service, which in the faith of a good Christian, and soldier,
in no point I did fail, according to the retention of my shallow memory, and
small experience it matters of that nature. So in this, as in your favorable
Censure, and construction of this my course, rude, and souldierly penning, and
style;

I bid you farewell.
FINIS.

