A TRUE NARRATIVE Of the Present State of Affairs in SCOTLAND, Respecting the
REBELLION: Sent in a Letter to a Person of Quality.
SIR,
I Know an Account of our present condition must be acceptable to you, though
the Distempers we now lie under may give you grief and trouble. The news of the
Commotions that infest this our Country (I question not) has gone far, and
people receive the impressions of it according to the different passions that
govern them. You have heard the occasion that first contributed to this unhappy
Rebellion, and therefore I shall offer nothing as to that, but only give you a
short Account of the great core our Magistrates take to put a stop to this
formidable evil; which take in a few words.

The Council omits nothing that may contribute to our safety; they sit close,
and have issued forth their Orders for the summoning of the Militia, and all
the Heritors of the next adjacent Counties to come in and attend the Kings
Host, which is to March against the Rebels; and their Orders are so readily and
cheerfully obeyed, that it is not doubted but they will be Eight or Ten
thousand before Friday next, besides the standing Forces, which with the
Addition that will be made by them, will be more Considerable. The Militia and
Gentry of the remoter Counties from the North are likewise on their March to
Sterling, and may contribute greatly to the advantage of the Kings affairs
there.

My Lord Chancellor is gone over to Fife, to hasten out the Militia Regiments,
and the Nobility and Gentry of that Shire, all of whom seem to be very resolute
and forward for the suppressing the Rebellion.

The Militia-Regiment of Edinburgh have very unanimously taken an Oath to be
faithful to the King, and to serve him with their Lives and Fortunes in this
Expedition, against those who are the disturbers of our Peace.

One piece of News more I must likewise inform you of, which is very
considerable:

The Privy Council hearing that there were some that rose in Tyvindale, with a
resolution to join with the Rebels in the West, and by that means to make them
the more formidable, (which doubtless they would have been by the Addition of
their Forces) sent the Master of Ross to Selkerk with Forty Horse and an
Hundred Dragoons to skirmish with, and if they could, to dissipate them; and he
behaved himself bravely; for discovering Three hundred Horse and Foot, he
Advanced toward them in good Order: The Gallantry of which Action consternated
the Rebels, who thereupon began to run. Upon which, the Master Commanded out
Twenty of his best Horse to charge them in their Rear; which effected what he
designed, which was, to make them dispute the point with him; for it obliged
them to Halt and Draw up. Then the Master Attacqued them so briskly with his
whole Party, that he killed Threescore upon the place, and took Ten of them
Prisoners.

As to the Number of these Rebels, we can as yet get no certain Account of
them; but this we hear, and take it for a good Omen, That there are great
debates and divisions among them for the Command; and no wonder, for when
Government is forsaken, and the Obligations to it denied, if every one that
can, aspires to it; and the only way to decide it, is the Swords-point; for
every one may upon the same parity of reason, claim as much right to have the
management of the new Government, as to endeavor the destruction rf the old.
As to their Number, they are variously reported, because some go to them, and
others leave them. And my thoughts are, as they don't increase, so they don't
decrease.

I pray God (if it be his Will) put a stop to this Rebellion; and incline the
hearts of the people to be obedient and loyal to His Majesty and his
Government, that there may no more Christian blood be spilt.

In a short time (Sir) I hope, through the Blessing of God, to give a further
account of our success against these distubers of our Peace.

June 10, 1679
FINIS.

