A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY,
May 16, 17, and 18. 1678.

Setting forth The Trial and Condemnation of Charl. Pamplin, for killing
Lieutenant Charles Dalison, near Covent Garden.

With a particular Account of the Trials and Condemnation of Three men for
Robbing on the Highway: And Two others for Horse-stealing.

And likewise the Trial and Conviction of a yound Lad for stealing One hundred
and forty pounds out of a Goldsmiths Shop in Lumbard street.

And an exact Relation of all other remarkable Proceedings.

With the number of those that are Condemned, Burned in the Hand, and to be
Whipped, etc.

These are to give notice, That the Book of the Sessions, that came out first,
printed for Benj. Harris, is false, imperfect, and without Order.

With Allowance. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Proceedings at the Sessions holden for London and Middlesex.
THe first that came to hi^ trial, was a little boy, pretending not to be above
ten years of age, for stealing a silver S^lt of the value of ten pounds, out of
a Goldsmiths shop. There were two other greater Thieves concerned with him, who
having several Indictments against them, pleaded guilty to this and all other
within the benefit of Clergy: They gave aim and directions, and this little
Mercury did the Feat; for which he was found guilty, but in pity to his age, he
was only burnt in the Hand.

A man and a woman were indicted for stealing a bay Mare, taken out of a stable
in Essex on the 4th of March last, and brought by the woman at the Ba^ into an
Inn in Aldersgate Street. Against the m^n there was no Evidence, and the woman
alleged that she was only a Messenger hired by a person executed last
Sessions, to remove the Mare from one In^e to another; and thereupon were both
acquitted.

A man, his wife, and another woman were indicted for stealing four Demicasters
the 17th of April last, about London bridge. The man confessed it, the woman
who sold them in Longlane one justified her self as being his wife, the other
as coming by them by his delivery; and so got off.

A wench coming to Service by Newgate street, after she had been there a
fortnight, takes her opportunity in her Masters and Mistrisses absence to steal
a silver Tankard valued at 3 l. 10 s. and a very considerable quantity of
Linen and wearing Apparel; with which she flies to Oxford, and there upon the
notice given in the Gazette, was taken with part of the Goods, and now found
guilty of Felony, alleging she was instigated to it by a Sweetheart of hers
that came from Portsmouth.

A man and a woman indicted for stealing 3l 6d. in money and a great quantity
of Linen and Clothes out of an Alehouse in Beech lane; where four of them came
to drink one pair of stairs, and so it is thought picklockt the door two pair of
stairs, no body else being that way between the time the things were seen and
missed; yet there being no positive proof, nor any thing taken upon them, they
were found not guilty.

Another fellow for stealing a silver Beaker out of a public house in the same
Parish, had not such good suck: for his Companion exposing it to sale, and
offering him as a voucher, the first fled, and he was taken, and partly by his
own words was found guilty.

A Country man was arraigned for taking away 23. pieces of broad Gold on the
22th of Nov. last out of a Victualing house in St. Dunstans in the West. He and
another came thi^her to dine in a Room where was a Closet; which the woman
occasionally opening, left the key in the d^or, and the Prison^^ bring old
Acquaintance in the house, pulled open the door and looked into the Closet;
which the other in a jesting way told the woman of, and bid her lo^k if she
missed any thing: who seeing all things in order, and particularly her Purse,
where she left it, concluded her Gold safe, and said she missed nothing at
present, but if she did afterward, he should answer it. Three weeks after, she
misses her Gold, and speaks to the said other Gentleman to tell the now
Prisoner of it, being in the Country, who resolutely denies it. But that which
seemed to have most weight, was, that amongst this Gentlewomans Gold there was
one ^iece that was of Olivers Coin, and remarkable for several tokens as she
declared, and it appeared the Prisoner had lately sold just such a piece to a
person of Honor; which being produced, had exactly such marks as she had
before declared, and now upon her Oath affirmed it to be the same to her best
belief and knowledge. However, the Case appearing dubious, and the Prisoner
(who was proved by a multitude of persons of worth to be both a very honest and
very able and substantial man) alleging, and the beforementioned ^onourable
person declaring to the best of his remembrance, that he sold him that piece at
Michaelmas last, whereas she lost not here till 2^ Nov. and for that one piece
might be like another, and she not missing them till so long after, some other
body might in the mean time take them: The Jury there ore thought fit to acquit
the person charg^d, from the Crime pretended against him.

The note was the eminent Trial of Charles Pampliu for Murdering Lieutenant
Charles Dalison, in which a great number of Witnesses were examined. First it
was proved, that on Sunday the 28th of April last, about ten a clock at night
Mr. Dalison near his Lodging over against the Rose-T^vern in Covent garden, was
mortally wounded being run in under the left Pap six inches deep: Who it was
did it none saw, but two swore Mr. Dalison said it was Pamplin, and died within
a quarter of an hour. A s^^ck was taken up on the place, which 'twas proved the
Prisoner had borrowed that morning. 'Twas proved the day before he coming into
a man's Chamber while he was asleep, took away a very long Sword and left his
own in the room of it; which long Sword compared now with Mr. Dalisons,
exceeded it a quarter of a yard in length. 'Twas also proved, the Prisoner had
declared, Mr. Dalison had affronted him, and that he would be revenged; and
that very morning he told one, he resolved to cudgel one that had abused him,
and about ten or eleven a clock at night (just about the time Dalison was
killed) he past by the same person in have, and looking amazedly, said only,
He had met with him. That he was thereabou^s till it was late walking up and
down, did appear; nay, one woman swore that he confessed he killed the
Lieutenant, and at his taking in Jewen street he endeavored to fly, and said,
He was a dead man. Upon all which, and diverse other most violent Circumstances,
being able to allege very little for himself, but rather what made against
him, as that he was sure Mr. Dalison was killed af^^r ten a clock, etc. he was
found guilty of the Murder, and received Sentence of Death.

Then three lusty young fellows were tried for two several Robberies on the
Highway, but of that baser kind called the Foot pad. One was on a person
passing on foot through King Harries Walk, whom they set upon, beat, took from
him about five smillings, all that he had about him, and then flung him into a
Ditch and bound him. The other was on a Butcher on horseback, who riding home
with his Wise behind him, in the evening spied these three men lurking under a
Tree, and endeavored to turn his horse, but before he could get back, was
beset; whereupon he alighted and run for it, and they after: In the mean time
the Wife rides away to get help; but they overtaking him, take from him three
pounds, bind him, and get away, but were all taken, one at London, and two at
Newington, the next morning: and now both the persons swore directly and
positively against them all three; whereupon they were Condemned. It Is
observable these Robberies were done the last Execution-day at night, and it
was proved these Prisoners were that day at Tyburn in a Coach; so little did
the sad sight of their Fellow-Criminals wretched end affect them, that in
defiance to Justi^^ they went immediately from that Spectacle to act the same
or like Crimes as had brought the others thereunto.

A young Lad that was in but the last Sessions, was now arraigned for stealing
140 l. on the 27th of April last out of a Goldsmiths shop in Lumbard street. He
watched his opportunity when there was no body in the shop but a Maidservant,
and stepping behind the Counter, snatches up two bags of money: The Maid
seeing him go out with them, concluded him some Merchants man that came for
some Money he had left there; but when they came to count over their Cash, they
one bag of 80 l. and another of 60 l. missing. Upon further inquiry there was a
Porter saw him go forth also with the bags: so that being able to give a
description, one of the Marshals men took him the next day; but the Money was
not to be found. The Gentleman that lost it, to draw him to a discovery, put 20
l. more into his hands, which he was to have if he would help him to it again.
The boy pretended 'twas buried in a Field, etc. but spent between 20 and 30 s.
of the 20 l. and now denied he knew any thing of the said Robbery, much less
what was become of the 140 l. However, on the aforesaid Evidence, knowing him
again, he was Convicted and burnt in the hand.

The little boy first mentioned, was next day tried again, and found guilty of
stealing from a Goldsmith in Holborn eight silver Spoons valued at 4 l. six
silver Forks silver Tumblers; of which, part b^ing taken upon him, were
produced in Court.

Two notorious Horse st^alers were Convicted on several Indictments, being both
jointly found guilty of stealing two Horses from Bednal green; one of which was
taken at Westminster, the other sold into Sussex. They were likewise found
guilty together of stealing a dun Guelding on the 10 ^h of Apr. and one of them
likewise by himself, Convicted on two several Indictments on the like kind: For
which they received Sentence of Death.

A woman was Convicted of stealing a silver Trencher-plate of his Excellencies
the Portugal Ambassadors, whose Arms she had scratcht out; but bringing it to
sell, the honest Goldsmith stop: it on suspicion, and after wards by patting it
in the fire, or some such Art he used, as did notwithstanding make most part of
the Arms conspicuous, he thereby discovered the Owner, and seized the Thief;
who was now Convicted, but reprieved before Judgment.

Two persons were here in question about false and counterfeit Guinnies. One of
them not long since was Convicted at Salisbury, as he now confessed in Court,
forth: Cheat of putting off such false Guinnies; and now it was proved he had
put off no less than three, one at a Tavern in Moore-fields, which was produced
in Court; another at Hackney, where he was apprehended, and offered 10 l. to
evade Prosecution, but the party was a better friend to Justice than to accept
it; a third at another place. There was an Indictment against themfor High
Treason; but there was not sufficient Evidence to prove that they counterfeited
them: But on the other Indictment for misdemeanour in cheating and defrauding
the Kings Subjects, 'twas apparent they were guilty.

There were in all Ten persons that received Sentence of Death, viz. Seven men,
one for Murder, three notorious Highway-men for several Robberies, two upon
five several Indictments for Horse-stealing, a young man for a Felony, having
been before burnt in the hand since Christmas last; and Three women, one for
robbing her Master o^ goods to a great value, the other two (whereof one was an
old notorious off^nder) for several Felonies committed under pretense of taking
Lodgings, thereby having ruined diverse honest poor people.

Besides these, there were Fourteen burnt in the hand, ^our ordered to be
whipped, Seven women sent from Newga^^ to Bridewel, and Twenty nine persons
attainted or convicted heretofore of diverse Crimes, that now all at once on
their knees in Court pleaded his Majesty's gracious Pardon.

FINIS.

