The True Interest of the Legal English PROTESTANTS, STATED IN A LETTER TO A
Present Member of the House of Commons Concerning the TEST.
SIR,
IF you look round about you; you will find the greatest part of the Nation to
have been your Bloody Devouring Enemies: The visible Reasons, have been the
Actings of the Bishops in Scotland, and the High Commission-Court in England:
But the chief Reason of taking this pretense, was the Avarice of your Enemies
to Usurp Church Lands: Which Interest (as it has ever continued their
Conspiracies since) must always make them remain your Solemnly Leagued, and
unalterable Enemies; though perhaps your present Flatterers. And you have no
Revertionary prospect to comfort you; for the next Heir now living, is
Environed with Presbyterian Instructers.

But the present King, (mindful of your past Loyalty,) has Promised, and
Performed the Protection of you, for two years together, without withdrawing so
much as His Family-Chappel at Whitehall from you: And His Clemency and
Compassion no loss perseveres, in Protecting and Cherishing those Contenders
with Kings, the French Hugonots: So that His Protestant Friends can have no
motive to doubt Him, whom they can only Trust, if they Disoblige him not.

But if the Coersive Power must be continued over the Sectaries, though it
begun all our Miseries; and the Penal Laws, with the Tests, must remain, to
drive all sorts of Non-conformists to Hypocrisy; you will find that those whom
you would still be Threatening without Power, will take new measures to destroy
your future Power. I say not this, that I would have all sorts of Rebellious
Sectaries have Liberty to meet in what Numbers and Places they please; but
would have new Acts (if there be not enough) to give the Civil Magistrate a
sufficient preventing Power of such Temptations to Rebellion. But I would have
the Protestant Church freed from the blemish of being Tyrants over Men's Souls;
their Churches, Revenues, and such a Pastoral Power as Christ and his Apostles
Exercised, being continued upon them. I mean a Power to Preach, Teach, and
Excommunicate all Church-Disturbers.

And now since the Test-Acts have made a great noise in the World; I shall
presume to offer some Proofs out of an Allowed Protestant Bible of the
Unlawfulness of them.

And to begin with the Act of the 25th. of King Charles the Second, the words
of the Engagement are these.

I A. B. do declare, that I do Believe that there is not any Transubstantiation
in the Lord's Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at, or after the
Consecration thereof, by any person whatsoever.

And in the second Act of the 30th. of King Charles the Second, there is added,
The renouncing the Invocation of the Virgin Mary, or any of the Saints, as
Idolatrous; as also the Mass as it is now used by the Church of Rome, is
declared Idolatrous.

But the Protestant Bible is positive in these Words, St. Matthew Chap. 26.
ver. 26.

And as they were Eating, Jesus took Bread, and Blessed it, and Brake it, and
gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, Eat, this is my Body.

And in St. Mark Chap. 14. ver. 22. And as they did Eat, Jesus took Bread, and
Blessed it, and Brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, Eat, this is my
Body.

And in St. Luke Chap. 22. ver. 19. And he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and
Brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you,
this do in Remembrance of me.

And in the Verses immediately following these three Texts, Christ calls the
Cup of Wine, His Blood, shed for his Followers: But I omitted them for Brevity
sake.

Now I would ask you, whether the plain Words in the Test-Acts, are not
expressly that I believe not one of these Texts of Christ?

And to give you yet a plainer Text out of St. John Chap. 6. ver. 51. You will
find these words in your own Bible.

I am the Living Bread, which came down from Heaven, if any Man Eat this Bread
he shall live for ever.

And the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of
the World.

Consider now Sir, Whether the Engagements in these Test-Acts, are not a Solemn
League against the Word of God, so plain in four Texts; and a confounding Snare
to those that cannot Read and Understand, as well as to those that can; for
they engage to they know not what: Nor do I know one contrary Text.

As for the Miracle of Transubstantiation, which the Test-takers think so hard,
God has Empowered Man and Beast to demonmonstrate it daily to them: For the
chief sorts of Beasts do daily Transubstantiate Grass and Water into their own
Flesh and Blood: And Man does Transubstantiate the very Elements of Bread and
Wine into his own Flesh and Blood: This undeniable Truth then should induce the
Test-League to allow God a little more Power: And since he shows them the
multiplication of all growing Bodies in their Seed, they cannot deny him a
Fertile Power over his own Body: For since the Holy Ghost Breathed Christ's Body
into the Womb of a Virgin, Christ being God and Man, cannot be denied the same
Power to Breath the Breath of Life into Bread, by his own or his Delegates
Words. And for Flesh to lie hid under the outward Figure of Bread, is no more
impossible, then for the hidden Flesh of all Birds with their entire Forms, to
be concealed under the Shape, Taste and Complexion of Eggs. We must then
believe God of such Infinite Power, as to Create all things out of nothing by
his Word; which is the greatest and most visible of all Miracles: For (besides
the proofs in Genesis) we daily view the Universe, which could never make it
self in such Beauty and Order, without an Infinitely Powerful Designer.

And that Christ did Delegate his Power in the Sacrament to his Disciples, is
plain in the Text abovementioned of St. Luke Chap. 22. ver. 9. This do in
remembrance of me.

If then we have so many Texts for Transubstantiation, and none against it: And
the second Council of Nice with others, declaring for it, and none against it:
These are not Authorities to be opposed by an Ancient Father or too, as our
Adversaries say, or a little late grown Reformed Church or two.

For the opposers of Gods Word condemn their own Principle of Reformation; and
Contradictors of General Councels, are underminers of all Christian Authority
or Unity; for they are the chosen Representatives of the Generality of
Christians. Amongst whom, Peaceably called by the chief Power for many hundreds
of years, the Church of God must be: To which Christ Promised to continue with,
St. Matthew Chap. 28. ver. 20. in these words, Lo I am with you always, even
unto the end of the World. And if so, all Peaceable General Councels must be of
like Authority: And they who will not hear them, must incur the Penalty
denounced in St. Matthew Chap. 18. ver. 17, 18. And if he neglect to hear thee,
tell it unto the Church; and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen, man and a Publican.

Verse 18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven. And whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven.

And the Church that we must hear, must be always Visible (if Christ be always
with them) or else it can neither command, nor we hear them to Obey.

And without an Umpire Church we can never agree about the Sacrament; nor any
other of the many Controverted Texts, and Sects growing from them.

And now I believe this may be enough, though you still doubt
Transubstantiation, to make you think it your Duty to endeavor to Repeal these
Test-Acts; to remove such a Bait for Division between His Majesty and People.

As for the Declaration in the second Test-Act, Of Idolatry for Invoking the
Virgin Mary or Saints, or Adoring Christ in the Elevated Bread of the Mass,
Where they suppose he is not: I shall, in brief, only say, That the seeking of
Christ either by or without his mediating Favorites, though it should be,
where he is supposed not to be,) can be no Idolatry. Since Christ is every
where, as he is God; and that no Pagan Gods are in the Hearts of any Christians.

And now having proved the unlawfulness, I shall proceed to the Inconveniences
of the Test-Acts.

And what can be more improper, then depriving the Government, not only of the
use of the Roman Catholics in all Chargeable, Troublesome, or Dangerous
Offices, either Civil or Military; but even of all other Subjects, who may
avoid such Employments, by saying, I cannot take the Engagements in the
Test-Acts, and therefore must not obey you.

How ridiculous were any Government, that should not have a Power to suspend
such Laws?

As for the Penal Laws against Non-conformists, they were made to wear out the
Opposers of Queen Elizabeth's Title to the Crown; But that Cause being removed
long since, it is certain that they have been contrary to the Primitive
Doctrine and Practice of Christians, Oppressive of men's Consciences and
Families, the Causers of Conspiracies and Rebellions, and drivers of men to
Hypocrisy.

If these then are their undeniable Attributes, your Compassion, Justice and
true Protestant Interest, will Engage you to endeavor when you Sit again, to
get the start of all your Enemies, in obliging His most Illustrious Majesty, by
taking off altogether the worst of Slaveries, at least from the most Loyal of
His Oppressed Subjects.

They are but a Contemptible Handful of People. And therefore when God shall
remove His glorious Majesty; if you shall then find them worse then other
Subjects, you will be numerous enough to make what new Laws you please against
them: For they are not the twentieth man, and have grown no faster here in this
short time of Liberty, than a great Body of them has done amongst the Wise
United Netherlanders with a hundred years Liberty; where they are in Peace,
with a continued Fidelity to their Government, when Invaded by the French of
their own Religion.

But let what will happen, it is the True Interest of the Church of England to
stand or fall with its Duty: Their King (if he were a Heathen) is the Lords
Anointed; as Cyrus was called in Isaia chap. 45. v. 1. and he is the Legal Head
of the English Church, by which he can model them to their Duty without force.

And now I have said enough, to one so Wise as to know, that God and the King
must be Trusted with something. For I should Apologize for so tedious a Letter
from

Your very Affectionate and most Humble Servant.


