A TRVE NARRATIVE CONCERNING THE ARmies preservation of the Kings Majesty's
Person.

BY WHICH IT DOES APPEAR that the Army does intend the Good, Life, Propriety,
and Liberty of all the Commons of England, and not the destruction of them.

Printed by order from the Army, for the taking off those aspertions which has
been cast upon them for that action.

LONDON, Printed for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery
Lain, near the Rowles, 1647.

A true impartial Narration, conceruing the Armies preservation of the King;
by which it does appear, that the Army does intend the Good, Life, Property,
and Liberty, of all the Commons of England.
FEllow Commoners, considering with our selves how variously those men will
report, that endeavor to carry on their designs, though it be to the ruin
and the destruction of others, who are their Fellow-Commoners, and have as just
a right and propriety to the liberties and freedoms of the Nation as
themselves and considering also how misinformation may seduce you, and draw you
away from the knowing of things in their true unmixt nature; and consequently
from acting and walking accordingly; so that not only our selves may be drawn
by such misrepresentations of things into unexpressible extraordinary
sadnesses, miseries and calamities, but also you, into perpetual irrecoverable
servitude and bondage, even in a moment of time, before you, or we are aware
of: And also considering that certain of the House of Commons have sold the
record of Magna Charta, (which does demonstrate the Subjects rights, liberties
and proprieties) for 100000, l. so that it might never be used again, as we can
(we hope) evidently prove; so that by it you may see their design. Therefore,
we (who have fought for you in the sight of the Sun, and for your liberties and
proprieties, as well as our own; and have been faithful to you in the
apprehensions of all rational men, and those that will not lie against their
own souls, or walk contrary to the Testimony of their own Consciences) cannot
choose but with reciprocal tenderness present unto you truly, briefly, and
clearly, without partiality the nature of the business concerning the Kings
Majesty, and us at Holdenby, June the 4. 1647.

On Wednesday, Coronet Joyce, went to the bowling green where his Majesty was
at bowls within a mile of Holdenby; the cause of the Coronets being there, was
to prevent the Kings being conveyed away in a secret manner, which was justly
suspected, to be done by some that were with his Majesty. Coronet Joyce, an
appointed agent by the Army, observing a sudden alteration in persuading the
King to go to my Lord Spencers to bowls, when the King had resolved before to
go two miles further; and at the Kings taking horse, Colonel Graves, and a
Scottish Lord whispered, and were more then ordinary earnest in their privacie,
which did occasion jealousy at that opportunity: After the King had been at
bowls one hour, Graves questioned a Soldier, and asked him from whence he
came; The Soldiers answer was, from Oxford, and that he had been lately with
the Army: Then Graves asked, if the Army was not contented with the Ordinanee
of Indempnitie, and the votes of Parliament? the Soldier answered, No, and that
it would in no way secure them, and gave Graves a reason, because many of their
fellow Soldiers, and those that acted for the Parliament, were molested
notwithstanding it: and what a sad thing will it be to consider, that the
Soldery shall taste of the Parliament Judges cruelty notwithstanding their good
services, and the preserving of the heads of some men in the Parliam. And
therefore judge how much below the light of nature these men live, and how much
they exercise themselves in tyranny, when they will not do good unto those that
do good unto them. Then Graves asked him more news, and said, he need not be
afraid; But he said, he was not afraid of him, or any man in the Kingdom, for
he had done nothing that he knew of to make him afraid; and he further said, he
would deal ingeniously with him, and tell him the truth in any thing he should
ask him. Then Graves asked, if he did not hear of a party of horse, he
answered, he did more then heart of a party, for he saw them the day before
within thirty miles of Holdendy: this made Graves tremble as if he had been
guilty of something he had done or intended to do, otherwise why should he
afterward, and the Scottish Lord his Confederate have run away, when no man
intended to do them the least hurt in the world. But the Scotsh Lord went to
London, and has notoriously wronged the King, and the party also that did
secure his Majesty's person for the peace and safety of the kingdom, as was
declared at large before a thousand witnesses; so that by it you may see the
design of a cunning Scot, and what such will do to get money end honor, even
against King and people.

Further for the security of the Kings person, the party marched toward
Holdenby, and when they came to the House the Commissioners sent one Cap.
Middleton to know of us what we came for, and what we would have, and who
commanded? answer was made him, All did command, and yet were under command.
Then Captain Middleton replied, if you have any thing to do here, the
Commissioners would know what it is, and desired that they would send into the
Commissioners; one or more, to certify what was the intent of coming thither.

Whereupon Cor. Joyce, by unanimous consent of the party, went in to the
Commissioners and told them the truth of their coming thither, which was to
secure his Maj. person, and to protect them, there being a secret design as
they were informed, to to convey or steal away the King, and to raise another
Army to suppress this under his Excellency S. Tho. Fairfax: Likewise, he said,
he knew no other way to keep this Kingdom from blood, or another war, but by
the present security of the Kings person, and that he may be no more misled;
and if he were, that the Kingdom were utterly undone for ever: If this be all
said the Commissioners, it is well done.

But after it, Coronet Joyce spoke more to the Commissioners, and told them, he
did humbly conceive, that there were some who did delay justice, and seek only
to disband the Army, who were raised for the defense of the just rights,
proprieties, and liberties of the Subject, and the bringing of all unjust men
to condign punishment; such who did endeavor to subvert the fundamental
laws of the Kingdom; and he said, he did believe that there were some who did
endeavor to pull down King and people, and to set up themselves, and who they
were the Commissioners and the world may judge and see by their actions.

Whereupon he took his leave of the Commissioners for a while lest the King
should be disturbed in his Bedchamber. Then Major Genesis Brown went to the King,
and did assure his Majesty of the truth of the business, and desired his
Majesty not to be troubled, for no hurt would come unto him, for they were all
civil Gentlemen, and that his Majesty should find it so. After this was done,
the Coronet went to the Commissioners again, and desired them to give him
Orders, he being willing to obey them, because they were appointed by the
Parliament to be there to that end: Then Mayor General Brown said, Come again
by and by and we will give you Orders, in the mean time set your Guard, and
place your Centinells, which directions of his we followed, and told him and
the rest of the Commissioners it they would give us orders I would obey them,
provided they were just, and for the security of the Kings person. All this
being done it grew toward noon: After that Coronet Joyce desired the soldiers
to mount to horse, and told them they should all go to quarters, at which word
of command all was done, and the said Coronet was to give in a relation to the
Commissioners of his coming, and the grounds in writing, and did; but because
of the multiplicity of business, could not give it in that form as otherwise he
might if he had h^d time.

All this being done, al was quiet in the said present security of his
Majesty, until tidings came that Graves was gone quite away, and thereupon it
was supposed he was (and thought himself also) guilty, or else he would have
stayed; but none could tell what was become of him: and some of his damming
blades did say and swear, they would fetch a party, which party could not be
from the Army, but must be from some other place; and therefore to prevent
disturbance and blood, and for the peace sake of the Kingdom, all declared
unanimously, that they thought it most convenient to secure the King in another
place, from such persons as should cunningly or desparately take him away
contrary to order, which was endeavored very earnestly (as we are informed) by
some that are enemies to the peace of the kingdom, and the prosperity of the
Army. But another cause of jealousy was, not knowing the resolutions of those
who quartered soldiers, and pretended for Ireland.

And further to give all satisfaction to the whole kingdom, and to the real
effecting of a business of such concernment, the soldiers sent Coronet Joyce to
the Commissioners at ten of the clock at night, who desired the Commissi. to
let the King know he would speak with him; some of the Commissioners being
unwilling, held the Coronet in discourse about half an hour, until the King
was asleep in his bed; yet notwithstanding the said Coronet could not be
contented till he had spoken with the King, it being the only way and means to
prevent trouble for the future, and blood that might come upon the face of the
Kingdom; and therefore the said Cor. judged it in his own conscience requisite
to speak with him at that opportunity, and therefore he offered the
Commissioners to go with them with as much gentleness and tenderness as he
could, to tell his Majesty something for his and the Kingdoms good; which was
to take him from thence, there being a secret design to steal and convey away
his Majesty's person, to side with some who pretend justice and deceive the
Kingdom, and obstruct the relief of poor distressed Ireland, intending to break
the Army in pieces now under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax our General,
and to raise another Army to carry on their design; and that all rational men
may see it by the actions of some men, (as Stapleton, Glinn, Green, Earl, and
others) who said, Its now come to that, that they must sink us, or we must sink
them. Much more was spoken by the said Coron. But this in brief: he was willing
to let all pass without giving a relation, until be heard that the Scottish
Lord had falsely told the Parliament of our proceedings with the King, who saw
or heard it not: for he was not within a mile of the Court when all these
forementioned passages were; for the Scottish Lord as we are informed,
reported, that the King was taken away against his will: For although the King
told Coronet Joyce before the Commissioners, he was unwilling to go with us;
yet he said, That such reasons might be produced that might prevail with him,
and then he did protest nothing should stay him but he would go, whether the
Commissioners would yea, or no. And reasons were given accordingly, which did
prevail with his Majesty to promise to go the next morning, and he gave a
confirmation of his willingness, by saying to the Coronet, He should be the
more willing to go if the Coronet would promise him some things which he should
propound; The Coronet said, He would, if they were just and warrantable in his
understanding, and desired his Majesty that he might hear the things. Then his
Majesty spoke before the Commissioners and said, Master Joyce, We have this to
propound unto you. May it please your Majesty we are willing to hear, said
Coronet Joyce; but are sorry we have disturbed you out of your sleep: but the
King said, No matter, no matter, if you mean us no hurt: and then spoke, viz.
If you will promise Us that We shall have no hurt; saying, You may take away Our
life if you will, having the sword in your hands. This answer the Coronet made,
That the Parliament had declared to preserve his Majesty's person, and that
they being the Parliaments Army, should not but endeavor the same; only they
did desire to secure him from being taken away, lest he should be set at the
head of another Army, and so this Kingdom involved into danger. And all this
was said in answer to his Majesty's first Proposition, The second was, That he
would not, be forced to any thing against his conscience by us. He answered,
that he would be unwilling to force any man against his conscience, much less
his Majesty; and also said, That he hoped he was sensible of those that did
endeavor to force men against their consciences, Observe, none will oppose
this Army, but guilty consciences, and they will fly in our fac^^, or raise an
Army against us.
and yet delayed to do justice or settle the kingdom, for which they were
sent; and did endeavor to disband or break this Army in pieces, who sought
nothing but justice, as will appear hereafter to all the world; Pray God it
may, said the King.

Thirdly, He demanded, whether yea or no he should have his servants with him,
and whether he should be provided for like a man in his place, and that he had
been courteously used by those Commissioners that were with him, as ever he was
by any. The Coronet answered, That he should endeavor as far as in him lay,
to show him all just and due respect; And that he might be no otherwise
attended on then before, the Coronet desired the Commissioners of Parliament to
go with the King and discharge that trust imposed on them; and the soldiery of
the Army would assist them so long as they were just and honest; Then said the
King, We will willingly go along with you, if the soldiers will confirm what you
have promised me; the King believing we had said nothing, but what we would
stand to; All this being spoken at ten or eleven at night; And when the King
had done propounding these questions to the Coronet, he gave his word to be
ready by six the next morning, to hear if the soldiers would confirm what he
had promised; and if they would, he would willingly go with us; for it was so
bad an air that he could never be so well as he had been, and if he were once
gone he would be unwilling to come back again to that place any more; many
other reasons he had which he gave not. According to his promise he came in the
morning at six of the clock; where he found all the soldiers ready mounted to
march with him; but before he would march, he desired to speak the same things
to the soldiers which he spoke over night to the Coronet, to see if they would
confirm what he said and had promised; which they did with one consent; and
before the soldiers, the King was pleased to ask the Coronet, What Commission
he had to secure his Person? then said the Coronet, If the Parliament had ever
made an order, that the army should not have secured the Kings Person, we
should not have dared to do what we had done; But we being informed his Majesty
was to be conveyed away, which if not prevented might have caused another
war, and involved the whole kingdom in blood again; this was the only cause
of our securing the Kings Person; This answer did not satisfy the King, but he
asked, What Commission he had for doing that he did? he told his Majesty, the
soldiery of the Army, or else he should not have dared to have done what he
had* and conceived it to be the only way to bring peace to England, and Justice
with Mercy, which is the thing which all honest men do desire, and none will
hinder but some guilty Consciences, who by their will seek to destroy both King
and people, to set up themselves. Yet the King was not satisfied with this, but
asked Whether we had nothing in writing from Sir Thomas Fairfax our General, to
do what we did: the Coronet desired the King he would not ask him such
Questions, for he did conceive he had sufficiently answered him before, then
said the King, I pray M. Joyce deal ingenuously with me, and tell me what
Commission you have. The Coronets answer was; Here, is my Commission. Where,
said the King? He answered, Here; his Majesty again asked, Where? He answered,
Behind me, and desired his Majesty that that might satisfy him; whereupon the
King smiled; and said, It is as fair a Commission, and as well written as he had
seen a Commission written in his life. A company of handsome proper Gentle men
as he had seen a great while. But what if we should yet refuse to go with you,
I hope you would not force me? I am your King, and you ought not to lay violent
hands on your King: for We do acknowledge none to be above Us here, but God:
Then said M. Joyce, Our desires are not to force your Majesty; but have humbly
increated your Majesty to go with us; and not only your self, but the
Commissioners: and to this end, that the Commissioners might discharge that
trust imposed on them as honest members of Parliament. Thou spoke one of the
Commissioners of Parliament and showed us a paper, what was therein we saw not;
they all spoke to us in order, the last that spoke, as we remember, was Major
General Brown; who said the Commissioners had an order of Parliament to look to
the King at Holdenby; and if he had strength we should have had his life before
we should have brought the King away; Indeed said the Coronet, you speak like a
faithful and gallant man, but he knew well enough he had not strength, and
therefore he spoke so boldly. Major G. Brown said further, But since it is so,
We must do what you will have us, being not able to resist you. Then spoke
Coronet Joyce further, We came not to have the blood of any man, but for peace;
and did hope should manifest it to all the world, for he sought peace with all
men as much as in him lies; and further he said, They were servants to the
Parliament and Kingdom, and had served them faithfully ever since the
beginning of this war; or else more heads had been cut off before this time;
and if the soldiers had been ordered, not to secure his Majesty, they would
not have dared to have done it, because they were servants to the State as well
as the Commissioners; they did what they did to keep the Kingdom from blood and
a second war, which if not prevented, might unhappily have come upon us
suddenly; as you may see is the endeavor of some men, who pretend to be the
Kings, and Kingdoms best friends. After this, the King was going away, but
turned and said, Now Gentlemen, for the place you intend to have me to?

M. Joyce answered, If it please your Majesty to Oxford.

The King replied, That is no good air.

M. Joyce said, Then to Cambridg.

The King did not like that, but said he liked New market. It was an air that
did very well agree with him.

And it was granted by M. Joyce he should go thither.

Then the King asked M. Joyce, How far he intended to ride that night*

And M. Joyce answered and said, As far as your Majesty can conveniently ride.

The King smiling said, We can ride as far as you, or any man there; but he
concluded to talk of that, and his accommodation privately; and so he
courteously took his leave of the company, and was going, and one whispered
him, and he turned back, and heard the Commissioners speak to the company thus
in order: First, my Lord Mountague spoke, and said: Gentlemen, we are entrusted
by both Houses (showing in his hand a paper, the authority they had) and desire
to know whether all the party do agree to what M. Joyce had said.

And they cried, All, All.

And he having spoke low, Sir John Cook seconded him with a loud voice, and
added, That as the Parliament, had entrusted them, had he but Forces to
withstand the party, he would have done it with his life; and M. Crew said the
same.

And Major G. Brown spoke last to the same purpose, but added something more
then the rest; saying, It was not the first time that he had been in the head
of a party, and that they knew not the Law; and he durst affirm, that scarce
two in the company, although they cried, All, All, knew what the Gentleman had
delivered to the King. And therefore he said with a loud voice, All that are
willing the King shall stay with us; the Commissioners of Parliament, let them
speak. And all the party cried None, None, then said he, we have done. Only the
soldiers said, We understand well enough what we do. Now let all the world
judge what is done, and who is in fault, and who they are that seek war, and
no peace nor justice.

FINIS.
One word more Fellow-Com^^^ers.
DEar Friends and Fellow-Commoners, We the Soldiery under his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, do desire to speak one word to you All; that so you may see and
know our very hearts so far as we know them our selves; And that our earnest
desires are for Peace, in this our Native Land and Kingdom, and being more
sensible then many thousands are; how destructive another War will be, if not
our utter ruin and undoing, The words we shall speak to you are to prevent
War, and to find out those that have of late sent that Scottish Lord, who went
from Holmby to London, and from thence into France, and another Scotch Lord
into Scotland; all this to bring another Army to England: and we shall be able
to make it appear to you hereafter, who are the chief Actors therein. Dear
Friends, and Fellow-Commoners, let us not be like those who have set their
hands to the Plough and look back; but let it appear to all the World we are
against another War, and for Peace, Mercy, and Justice, without delay. Now
look about you and be not deluded any longer, lest the Scot sell the King for
more money, and others oppress the Kingdom, and put the Kingdoms Treasure
into their own pockets; or send it out of our Kingdom, as if they were
preparing to go after, for fear they should be found out. This we speak that so
you may have a care of this Glorious Kingdom; your Shipping being now in those
men's hands who have done you most wrong; and if not looked after by you, may
suddenly let in a foreign Enemy to overrun you all, and ravish your Wives, and
roast your Children alive, as those bloody minded men in Ireland have done; and
this will be our case if you awake not suddenly. We have done, a word to the
wise is sufficient: and rest

Yours and the Kingdoms faithful servants till death, for Englands Liberty,
against Tyranny, etc.


