THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the eight Prisoners at
TYBURN, On Wednesday the 14th of this instant July, 1680 Viz. Thomas Sides,
James Care, Joseph Warner, alias Westwood, Sammuel Griffin, for Fellonies and
Burglaries. William Wilson for Robbing on the Highway. Mary Cla^k for
Murdering her Bastard-Child. Jane Pool, Susannah French, alias Hollis, for
shop-lifting.
HOw stupefied are these daring Wretche^ who headlong hurl themselves into the
snares of Death and ruin, regardless of theie future states, not minding what
shall happen nor the dire event that follows after such rash presumption, for
sure it is, did man but know death was the certain portion of his Crimes, he
would not without great caution and deliberate pause, rush forward on his
pointed dart but fearless of such ill or accident of chance as they term it the
sweet hopes of gain still prompts them on with thoughts of large security, and
to escape at last; Which often fa^l their expectations leaves them under the
pressure of offended Justice, whole dread Arm crushes them when least able to
defend themselves, and cha^ns their Lives as a just expiation for offenses done
against the Laws both Divine and humain, as may frequently be seen in these sad
examples which I shall rela^e, these most remarkable was a^ follows, Th^m^s
Sides a notorious offender received Sentance, for that he in the Company of one
John Moor had committed lately 3 notorious Robberies by breaking open the
several houses of the parties whole names we here recited, viz of one John
Baker a Barber, of the Parish of Great St Bartholomews, in June last, about 5
of the Clock in the Morning, they being supposed to watch the said Baker out,
who being no sooner gone, but they with Picklocks opened his shop, and took 3
Pereuks, a looking Glass^s, 5 R^z^rs, 3 pair of Scizers, 3 Napkins and se^eral
Cases of Silver-tipped instruments; all to the vallue of sixteen pounds which
they undiscovered conveyed away, on the 23d following, they broke open the
Warehouse of one Mr. Samuel Harris, in Bartholomew Close, Sides toking thence
11 pieces of stuff ^a ^lued at 40 pounds, and carried the same to the house of
one John Grain^er, living a^ three Roses in Cloth Fair, whither they being
pursued, were found with it, the Prisoner having hid himself under the Bed
feigning himself dead-drunk, the other was for Robbing one Charles Thomson a
Barber in the Parish of St. Brides, of Raz^rs, Scizers, Looking-Glasses, hair
and Pereuks to a considerable vallues which was found hid between the Tiles and
the Seiling, where they randesvoused, all these being proved Sides who had been
burnt in the hand not above 2 Sessions since. Received the dreadful Sentance of
Death, after which he seemed much to bewail his Folly repenting that he had
given up his youthful days unto such vanity, declaring that it was loose and
ext^avigant Company that had brought him to these ways, and his not regarding
the good education that his Parents had brou^ht him up in, desiring all young
Men to take warning by his sad example, and not for the sake of Idleness to
plunge th^mselves into such ways as might bring on them a shameful death; and
so ended his Life with great Penitency and contrition.

William W^lliams^n a Foot-pad and one of the great Gang that have so long
infested the neighboring Roads, his Crime was for Robbing Justice Northies
Coach a little beyond Bow, in November last, and taking from several persons
there in Goods and moneys to the vallue of one hundred and twelve pounds, viz a
Necklace of Pearl vallued at 105 pound. a Cravat, a silver hilted sword, a
Scarf, and about 5 or 6 shillings in money with other things considerable, after
this Robery was done they return to their randesvouse in White Chapel, and
there disposed of the aforesaid Goods, pawning the Scarf for their Reconing,
Phillips and Rumley two of the Gang being already Executed, and the Robery
proved against the Prisoner by one that with him in it; and he was cast and
received Sentance of death, after which he for a time seemed little concerned
flattering himself as it is thought with the hope of a Pardon, but that failing
he began to consider how he stood tottering upon the Brink of Eternity; and
that his hopes hang now but by the slender thread of Li^e the which had but a
few days more to spin its Co^rse upon which had but a few days more, to spin
its course, upon which he bewailed his m^sfortune and with a sad and heavy
Countenance continued till the utmost moment of Mortality, exhorting all to
repentance and for to beware of Crimes like his, etc.

In this Fa^al Scene of Death and ruin, followed Mary Clark of St Botolphs
without Algate Widow, for that inhum^in Act of Murdering her Bastard-Child
and to her shame, add sin to sin for being secretly delivered of a
Female-Infant, she with both her hands, strangled it, and kept it in her
Chamber two days or thereabout, before she could have opportunity to convey it
thence the which she after put into the Common Vault, where it was found and
after some enquiry certified to be her Child by reason of her illness she gave
suspicion to some of the Neighbors who searched her, and thereupon found she
had had a Child, which she could not deny, but her excuse was that it was born
dead, and that she cried out but could get no help, but upon the Statute of
King Jame^ she was found Guilty of wilful Murder, and S^ntance of Death, after
which she seemed so stupefied that it was thought she was not sensible of her
condition, yet in some manner she was observed to relent, especially after she
had heard the good exhortations of several pious Ministers who came to visit
her with the rest.

Samuel Gr^ffin for robing the house of a person of Quality, the goods being
found about him in a house in Shoo Lane and having been an old offender, and
once pardoned, he received Sentance, he was not much concerned at the near
approach of death during the resort in N^wgate, but seemed obstinate, and
endeavored vindicate himself, ye at the nearer approach of that ghastly King of
Terrors, he began to sigh and often with lifted up hands and eyes send up his
ejaculations, especially a little before his departure into the Regions of
boundless immortality.

James Care and Joseph Warner, alias Westwood, received Sentance of Death with
the rest, the former for breaking open a House near Hounslow, and most
barbarously using the people of the house, and taking thence several parcels of
Goods as pewter Brass and Linen, the latter being a notorious offender having
been burnt in the hand, and known to commit several Burglaries and was now
Sentanced for breaking open a House, and was this day executed with the rest.

Jane Pool and Susannah French alias Hollis, two notorious Shoplifts who were
Condemned in October last, were likewise executed, the former having her Son
Executed the last Sessions, and her Daughter now lies Condemned in Newgate.
They both were exceeding penitent, and so continued to the last.

FINIS.

