THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT THE ASSIZES Holden for the County of
Surry: Which began on Friday the 12th of this instant March 1679. and ended on
the Wednesday following, where a great number of Malefactors were Tried; the
most remarkable of which I shall give the Reader an impartial Account.
Viz. Jone Phillips, James Christian, for Murder, John Seamor, John Selby,
Richard Smith, all three notorious Highway-Men. William Phips, and William
Watson, for Horse-stealling, and Margaret Clark for setting her Masters house
on Fire in Southwark. being eight in number, which received Sentance of Death.
Eeight burned in the hand, three to be whipped, and two to be Transported. And so
this great Assize ended.

THE first notorious Offender that received her Trial was Rebeccah Sergeant,
against whom three several Bills of Indictments were preferred, all of them for
her Stealing Gold Rings, the first Indictment was, for that she the Prisoner
coming into the Shop of Jeremiah Pipit living in St. Mary Magdalins Bermondsy,
and there pretending to cheapen several Rings, conveyed the two specified in
the Indictment, and valued at 15 s. into her Bosom, and so departed
undiscovered. The next was for Stealing a Ring in the same manner from Richard
Gunter, living in St. Olaves Southwark valued 9 s. pretending there that her
Mother sent her to cheapen a Ring. The Third and last was for Stealing a Ring
from James Gunter of the said Parish: but being apprehended, she fairly
confessed the several Fellonies, as likewise upon her Trial.

William Phips was Arraigned, and Tried for stealing a Gelding, vallued at five
pounds out of the Grounds of Henery Laden, at Long Ditton in the County of
Surry, the 20th of September past, being taken upon the back of the said
Gelding in Kingston, he pretended, he bought him, but could produce no Witness
to confirm it, therefore was found Guilty of the Felony.

John Wood, alias Knight, was Arraigned and found Guilty; for stealing a
Tankard and a Riding-hood from Elizabeth Griffin in the Parish of Redriff.

Rogor Palmer, a Bargemans Servant was Tried for Robbing a Gentleman of his
Mare, valued at fifty s. he pleaded in Court that he bought her in Smithfield,
but being not able to prove the same, and a notorious Offender he was found
Guilty of the Fellonious Stealing of the said Mare.

The next were Margaret Clark and John Satterthwait, for that notorious Crime
of Firing Mt. Delanoy's House, in Montague Close in Southwark, on the first of
January last, ^he Circumstances sworn to were thus, that a Neighbor of Mr.
Delan^ys on the first of January aforesaid, smelling a strong scent of Fire,
was much surprised, and thereupon began to search about his own House, but not
finding any there, imagined that it must needs be at Mr. Delawnies, being the
more suspicious place, by reason he could diserne a Smoke issuing out from
between the Boards, and that all the Family except the aforesaid Margaret Clark
and one of the Apprentices, were in the Country; the said Delanoy being a Dyer.
Whereupon he went and knocked at the Door, calling to the aforesaid Margaret
Clark, who was a long time before she would Answer but when she did, seemed
loath to let him in, but did at last; who entering, told her there was Fire in
the House, at which, in great Amazement, she made strange of; but he
persisting, after much search, found it in a Buttery, where the Flames had
reached the Seiling. and asking her for the Aprentice she told him he was in
Bed, whereupon he running up Stairs, pulled him out, surprised with the Event,
and both of them after some time, quenched the raging Element, the which no
sooner done. but another Fire began in the Dyhouse, far distant from the
former, that being quenched, another began in the Garret, upon which they
suspecting some Treachery, questioned the said Margaret Clark; who for a while
faintly denied that she knew any thing of the Concern; but being hard pressed,
confessed that three Gentlemen getting her to an Alehouse hard by and proffered
her a Reward of two thousand pounds, if she would Fire her Masters House, or
let them in to do it in a convenient time, and that after it was done, (...)
should come to the Fleece Tavern in Holbourn, and there ask for the Number 9.
and by that find them, and receive her moneys, and in order thereunto she had
let the now Prisoner Mr. Satterthwait in, and that he did effect what was done,
and farther, that she understood by them that they were Papists, this
Confession she likewise confirmed upon her Trial, and Satterthwait being taken
upon suspicion for the hiring her, he being by her described, and found
drinking at the Bear-Tavern, was carried before the Justice, where she was, who
no sooner seeing him, but charged him to be the same that had hired her; but in
Court several Gentlemen and others, attesting where he was that day, and all
the time she charged him to be there, whereupon he was acquitted, but she was
found Guilty of the notorious Felony.

John Buttolph and William Savory, were Indicted, and Arraigned for Robing a
Vessel upon the River of Thames, for that they in the Company of four more, all
Armed, and with Plack Caps pulled over their Faces only peepholes left, did
come Aboard the said Vessel lying about Limehouse, in the River of Thames, and
binding one Harrison, who lay aboard, and conveyed thence in a Boat brought by
them, one Bail of Spanish-Cloth, four pieces of Hair Camblet, ten gross of
Silk-buttons, one dosen of Silk-hoods, fifty pair of Silk Stockins, several
pair of Shoos, Fring-Gloves, and Ribbons, in all to the vallue of two hundred
pounds, leaving the said Harris bound; between one and two in the morning they
brought a Boat with them to carry off the Goods, one Furr being Master of the
Vessel, who they swore desperately they would have killed, had they found him
on board. Upon search for these Goods, and great suspicion both the Prisoners
were apprehended, and upon search of Savories, house several of them were
found, as likewise 6 Pistols, 6 Swords and 3 Black Caps; Savories Wife
Confessing that Buttolph brought them thither, under the notion of uncustomed
Goods, in the name of one Mr. Mannering a Merchant, desiring her to secure
them, and the next day they should be sent for. All this was sworn in Court,
and her Examination produced, yet by reason she was fled, and not to be found,
the jury for want of Evidence, brought them in not Guilty.

The next were three notorious High way men, viz. John Seymour, alias Herring,
John Selby, Rechard Smith who were ^o less than 5 times Indicted for Robbing on
the High way, first for robbing Christopher Hunt of 7 pound of Women's Hair,
vallued at forty pounds upon Bagh^t Heath, the fifteenth of January, a second
for Robing Roger Pipit of his Sword, seven pou^^s in moneys, near Egham, as
likewise the Parson of Egham; taking from him a Watch, and moneys to a
considerable vallue; the next for Robing Mr. Addleson a Butcher of five or six
pounds, they had been notorious villains, Herring especially, and had taken the
name of Seamor as a Trophy ever since he Robbed Esquire Seamor, the Speaker of
the Parliament House, Captain Richardson did appear against them, and did
assert that they had been in twenty Robberies, and a fellow gave Evidence
against them, that had been their Companion in several, they were taken upon
suspicion of Felony and carried to Salisbury Goal, where when these
Indictments came against them they were brought to this Assize, the evidence
was all so plain and positive, that the jury found them Guilty of the several
Fellonies and Robberies, nor could they well deny them themselves, and so
received Sentance of Death.

William Watson, was indicted and took his Trial, together with William Gettern
for stealing a Gelding from Squire Curtis in the Parish of Moden, vallued at
five pounds, it was proved against them, that they were taken with the Horse in
their possession upon the Road; designed for London, but the latter upon
examination did affirm that he overtook the former upon the Road, desiring him
to let him ride behind him, who refusing to grant his request, told him if he
would accompany him he would ride softly by, so that they had not been
Associates long, ere they were both apprehended and committed to the Goal, and
likewise Watson confessing he was no ways concerned in the Robbery, the jury
aquitted him, but Watson being found Guilty of the Felony, received Sentance
of Death.

John Philips of the Parish of St. Georges Southwark was Indicted, for that she
with an Awl about 4 Inches long, did Murder James Philips her Son, a Child
about 9 weeks old, the Circumstances were as follows; She having as it is
credibly reported, a very cruel man to her Husband, who not only abused her,
but kept her from such necessaryes as were requisite Women, which made her grow
weary and desperate, not caring to prolong her Life, so that thinking the
Murder of her Child would be the only means to put a period to her own: She
with the aforesaid Awl in her Husbands absence run it into the Throat, and
leaving the Awl sticking there, went out of Doors, but one of the Neighbors
hearing the Child cry after an unusual manner, went to see what the matter was,
and when she came found it lying in the Cradle in the posture before recited,
whereat being affrighted she went and called some other Neighbors in, and
whilst they are dressing the Child, the Prisoner came back again, having been
as far as St. Paul's London, but as she said, her Conscience misgiving her
returned, and being demanded why she acted such an unnaturaral Cruelty, she
said that now her Grief was at an end, and she did it that she might likewise
dye: But upon Examination in Court she made a faint excuse, saying the Awl was
in the Cradle and so run into the Child; but that being false by her former
Confession, she was found Guilty of wilful Murder.

James Christian was Arraigned and Tried for killing Robert Bury a Water-man in
the Parish of Redriff, the manner thus: the said James Christian having a
former grudg again the Deceased for taking a Fare out of his Boat, had often
threatened, and once most grievously beaten him, but watching his Opportunity
one Night, when the said Bury reatched some Goods in his Boat, the Prisoner
came, and as it is supposed found him asleep, whereupon with a Staff he struck
him over the head and waked him, upon which some words passed between them, so
that the Prisoner taking up the Hook or Etcher of the Boat, gave him several
Mortal Wounds on the head with the same, of which the said Bury dyed in the
space of 7 or 8 Weeks, affirming to the last that the Prisoner had been the
cause of his Death. Whereupon the Jury after some Consult brought in Christian
abovesaid, Guilty of wilful Murder.

Francis Harwood, a notorious Offender was arraigned and tried for breaking
open the House of Th. Stanto in the Parish of St. Georges Southwark and
Feloniously bearing thence one Searge Petticoat with Silver Lace, one Scarf,
one Cloth Coat, and several other Goods to the value of 20 l. himself
confessing, That he knew where the Goods were, and that for 20 shillings he
would help him to them again, but denied that he either broke the House or
Stole them, but having been burnt in the hand before at Ailsbury, he was only
found Guilty of the Felony.

William Smith, and John Smith took their Trials for Stealing 7 Cows, the Goods
and Chattels of Tho. Bret of Kingston upon Thames, they being taken driving the
Cows toward London, but upon examination in Cou^^, one of them did viz.
William affirmed that he accidentally coming along the Road and overtaking the
other driving of them bought them of him, who affirmed that he found them in
the Forest, so that John Smith was found Guilty of the Felony and the other
acquitted.

Tho. Goff, a Rower in a Bumboat was tried for Stealing several Cables and
Hassers from on Board a Vessel lying in Redriff road upon the Thames making the
Boy that watched aboard first drunk which being proved plainly against him, he
was found Guilty of Felony.

Edward Billing was Indicted and Arraigned for Felony and Burglary, for that
he about two of the Clock on the 20. of Jan. did Felloniously break and enter
the Shop of Richard Bullien of Redriff, and taking thence wrought Iron to a
considerable value, but being pursued he ran into a house of Office standing
over the Thames and endeavored to thrust it down into the same; the Felony
being plain, the Jury found that, but could not find the Burglary by aeason
there was no proof of that.

FINIS.

