A TRUE NARRATIVE, OF THE ARRAIGNMENT Trial and Conviction, OF Thomas
Dangerfield FOR High-Misdemeanors Against His Present Majesty JAMES the Second,
at the King's-Bench-Barr at Westminster, On Saturday May the 30th. 1685.
THis day being the 30th. of May, 1685. The Villainies, Impostures and Perjuries
of Thomas Dangerfield, alias Willoughby, one of the Evangelists of the late
pretended Popish Plot, ( one, Second to none except Oats, in the most
flagitious Rogueries) were brought to light by unquestionable Evidences; the
Proceedings are as follow.

About Eight of the Clock in the Forenoon, my Lord Chief Justice Jefferies with
two more of his Brethren being on the Bench, the Jury was called, being all
persons of considerable Estates and Quality, against whom Dangerfield brought
no exceptions, and so it was quickly Impannelled: Then the Indictment was read,
the Sum of which was that he had given into the House of Lords a most
Dangerous, Seditious and False Accusation against his Royal Highness James D.
of York, (now our present King) and used all endeavors to bring hatred and
contempt upon him, and set him and his Brother at variance by falsely Swearing
that our present King gave him Twenty Guineys to Kill his Dear Brother of
Blessed Memory, and that he the said Dangerfield was Hired by several persons
of Quality to stifle the then Rampant Popish Plot, and to throw it upon the
Presbiterians; the Falsity of all which, was proved by undeniable Evidence. The
Indictment was in few words opened by Mr. Phips, and then Mr. Attorney General
began to manage the Evidence for the King. First, Mr. Samuel Clark and Mr.
Martin proved that, that Information was Dangerfields, and that he was the
Author of the forementioned Libellious Narrative: After this was proved, they
began to make direct Proofs. First, was called the Earl of Peterborough, who
gave a large and pertinent Evidence; the substance of which was, that
Dangerfield was recommended to him as a person that could discover great
matters, concerning the disaffected disloyal Party of England, commonly called
Presbiterians; after he not then knowing his Roguery, he was introduced by him
to his Royal Highness, pretending to make a full discovery of a horrid Plot
against the Government, and particularly his Royal Highness, then pretending
great poverty, and that he had pawned his Clothes for the service of the
Government, the DUKE out of Charity gave him some Ten Pounds (which after the
Rogue said was for killing the KING) and afterward he got Audience of the
KING, and told the KING the same Flam and got some Forty Pounds, but the KING
would not hear him privately alone by the DUKE's advice, least he might prove a
Rogue, as it after appeared he was so, that he never had Audience of the KING
or DUKE alone, as was proved by several Witnesses. My Lord Peterborrough said
that after he had come to Court twice or thrice he began to smell a Rat; he
likewise Swore in the presence of the Great God, that whereas Dangerfield had
charged him with contriving a Book that contained the substance of the after
pretended Sham Meal-Tub Plot, that all was false.

The next Evidence for the KING was Coll. Halsal, who backed my Lord
Peterborroughs Evidence by several Circumstances, and told the Court how that
being asked by the KING his Opinion of Dangerfield, he replied, That he looked
up on him to be a Pick-pocket Rogue; and that he looked upon all that he Swore
to be Roguery, because he could not produce the Commission he pretended he
should have had from Sir William Waller.

The next Evidence for the KING was Mr. Cellier; who gave Evidence that one
time Dangerfield came to his house Cursing and Swearing, and said that in Case
he was not better furnished with Money, he would tack about and go from the
Evidence he had given against the disaffected Party and become an Evidence for
them, saying, He was sure they would furnish him with Money enough, and
endeavor to prefer him, and procure him a Commission.

Then my Lady Powis attested that she never heard of Dangerfield, till he had
Accused her before the Council, and whereas he had formerly swore that he had
several Papers from her, all was False, and that he was not able to produce one.

My Lord Powis attested that he never saw Dangerfield so as to know him from
another man, and that all was False that he had spoke of Treason concerning his
Lordship, and that he never came to him with any such Treasonable Message as he
pretended; much what the same Evidence was given by one Sr. -- Harvey and Mrs.
Hill: After this the Kings Council to show how great a Rogue he was, and how
little credit he deserved, produced in Court several Records of former
Convictions in several Courts in England: First a Record was produced, for
breaking a House here in or about Lond^n, and that he was found Guilty of the
Felony, but not of the Burglary: Then another Record was produced for his
breaking a House in Essex: Then three or four Convictions for putting off False
Guineys, for which he had several times stood in the Pillory at New Sarum in
Wiltshire.

After this Evidence for the King had done, Dangerfield began to make his
Defense, which was just such another Cant, as his Brother Oats made in his
Trial, viz. That their Evidence was the Prop of the Protestant Religion (which
made great laughter in the Court) that the King was Judge and Plaintiff, and
began to make Saucy reflections upon several honest men, but was sharply
reproved by my Lord Chief Justice and kept within his bounds, which was
observed to put him a little out of his Newgate Rethorick, which was nothing
but some flourishes upon general matters of the late deceased Popish Plot; then
he was desired to make a particular defense, and he called several Witnesses
which all concluded with something against himself, as the Salamanca Doctor's
did.

First, One Mr. Cooper the Clerk of Newgate being asked by Dangerfield what
Evidence he could give, replied, He never saw him, and Mrs. Cellier together,
as Dangerfield said more That he believed him to be a Rogue, for he had been
three times in their Custody in Newgate. Capt. Richardson attested the same,
and that he knew nothing of an intreague betwixt Mrs. Cellier and Dangerfield.
Sir Thomas Doleman said he remembered little, for he had been since struck with
a Palsy. Sir John Nicols was called but a peared not; then Dangerfield called
Thomas Williams, William Scarlet, and Henry Sherbourn, but none of them
appeared, then one Mr. Blasdel an Apothecary, but he proved him to be a great
Rogue; then he called one William Tilbury, but he knew nothing of the Matter,
only that he Lodged sometimes at his House, and Dangerfield pretended
Acquaintance with my Lord Powis's Family, then were called several more but did
not appear. Mr. Chiffinch attested the same that my Lord Peterborrough and
Coll. Hallsal, and nothing to the Prisoners advantage. Last of all, was called
one Mr. Stretch by Dangerfield, who instead of doing him service, proved that
while he said Mr. Stretch was searching Coll. Mansels Chamber, that Dangerfield
pinned the Seditious Paper upon the Wall. The Prisoner having made what pitiful
defense he could, which as you have heard was nothing to the purpose, but to
prove himself the greater Rogue.

My Lord Chief Justice most Elegantly and Succinctly Sumed up the Evidence,
telling the Jury what a Monster of Wickedness the Prisoner was, and how the
Honor of the Nation was concerned. and in seeing such profligated Rogues
brought to Condign Punishment and how that the Evidence was beyond all
exceptions; so that without going from the Bar the Jury found him Guilty of the
Indictment: Here Is an end of the Evidence of the once admired Dangerfield, who
was abetted by the Whiggs to endeavor to Tarnish the Luster of the Glory of
the best and greatest of Princes.

LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


