THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTON Of the fifteen Prisoners AT
TYBURN, On Monday the 8th of this Instant March 1679.
Viz. Richard Hodgkinson, John Braford, Timothy Grady, Edward Grady Randol
Russel, William Harris, Joseph Phillips, Evan Wood, William West, William
Woodward, William Carter, John Anderson, Frances Lewis, Dorothy Clark, Dorothy
Hall, with a particular account of each persons Fact for which they suffered.
ALthough many and most frequent are the sad Examples of these much to be
deplored and miserable Offenders, yet it is plainly seen that warnings are in
vain, and no ways of sufficient force for to deter them from pursuing of their
own Destructions, as we shall in these Catastrophies as follow, demonstrate to
the World.

The first Example of offended Justice was upon one Robert Lewis, who was
Arraigned for entering the House of one Susanna, White, in the Ward of
Billingsgate, and Felloniously bearing thence one silver Tankard vallued at
four pounds, with several spoons, Porringers, and several Goods and Chattels to
a considerable vallue, but being pursued, he dropped them before he could be
taken, notwithstanding the Evidence being plain he was Convicted of the
Felony, and having been an old Offender, and once before burned in the hand,
the Sentance of Death passed upon him, after which being mindful of the
miserable State wherein he was, he much lamented his untimely and most shameful
End, desiring Mercy for his many Transgressions and Offenses and forgiveness of
whomsoever he had offended, being not only penitent in Newgate, but continued
so.

The next in this dread Scene of Woe, was Evans Wood, who was Arraigned for
Felony and Burglary, for that he broke open a Booksellers shop in Holbourn,
and taking thence several Books to the vallue of forty shillings or
thereabouts, of which there being public notice given, by exhibiting of
Printed Bills, and he offering to expose them to sail was apprehended. The
Evidence affirmed, that he saw the Prisoner with a Window-cafe upon his
Shoulders, that night the Burglary was committed, whereupon he was found
guilty; and having been burnt in the hand bofore for Robbing Esquire Hooker of
about 1500 pounds, he received Sentance, after which, as sensible of his most
wretched State, bewailing his stupidity, and much lamenting that no warning was
sufficient to restrain him from pursuing those dismal paths, that tended both
to mortal and immortal Death, unless the blessed Mercy of a Mediator interposed.

Randal Russel a notorious Picklock, and House-breaker, who having formerly
been burnt in the hand for a Felony, and being taken again upon suspicion for
breaking open Esquire Trouts Chamber in New-Imu, was double fettered, and put
into the Masters Chamber in Newgate, from whence he in the company of six more
notorious offenders, escaped, by first filing off their Fetters, and then with
Plough-coulters and other impliments, forcing the Stones and Iron Bars in the
Wall, on the 22th of February last, and the said Russel being retaken, was
found Guilty of the Felony, and received Sentance accordingly, and though he
had been an old Offender, (and there being taken about him when he was
apprehended, no less than thirty false Keys and Picklocks (yet Death the Ghastly
King of Terrors, so amazed his long exalted Spirit, that sunk like Lead, and he
bewailed his presumptuous folly, that had brought a Ruin on his head, and
caused him for to die an ignominious Death.

The next in order, were Joseph Phillips, William Harris, John Anderson, who
were Arraigned for Robing Justice Northies Coach near Bow, and taking from his
wife and Son, goods, and moneys to the vallue of one hundred and odd pounds, a
Scarf, the Gentleman's Cravat, several Rings, a Handkerchief, and about four or
five shillings, in moneys, the evidenee swore them to be the same Men, and
thereupon they were cast and Condemned, after whose Condemnations they were
much dejected and in vain beging Mercy from the Court, desiring Transportation,
the which could not be granted, so that during their resPite in Newgate, all of
them as it behoved dying Men, much lamented, though too late as to this World
their unlawful Designs and Actions one of them being by Birth a Sweed.

Dorothy Clark, was also Arraigned for stealing a Campaign Coat from one Mr.
Beacon in Eastcheaep, vallued at thirty five shillings; when she came into the
Shop she pretending to buy a Coat, conveyed away this for which she was
Indicted, whereupon being found Guilty and having been a notorious Shoplift,
formerly burnt in the Hand, and several times in Newgate, she was thought
incorrigable, and therefore received the fame Sentance as the former, pouring
forth her Tears, at such a lavish Rate as gained Commiseration from all the
Spectators, deploring much her hard Fate, that had pushed her forward to her
own Destruction. In Newgate she was very attentive to such Godly Ministers, and
others who came to visit her, etc.

The next in this dismal Tragedy were Timothy Grady and Edward Grady two
Footpads; who were arraigned for Felony and Robbery, for setting upon, and
Robbing one Mr. Holder and his Wife between Hays and Siuth-town. in
Vxbridg-Road, between nine and ten of the clock in the Evening of what moneys
he had about him, being about forty shillings, as likewise rifflng his wife of
her Ring and several other things, disarming Mr. Holder, and after the taking
away his Campaign Coat departed, vowing if he offered to follow or pursue them
they would Murder him, but this being on the Saturday, on the Monday following
several Warrants being ishued out for the apprehending of them, they were took
in St. Gileses in the Feilds, Timothy Grady having the self-same Coat on his
back he had taken from the Gentleman, upon their Trials they stoutly denied it,
but seeing the proof was plain, and positive, Timothy Grady confessed that he
was in the Robbery, but in vain endeavored to excuse the other, so that they
both being found Guilty, received the Sentance of Death, after which being
conveyed to Newgate they spent their time in preparation for their Eternity,
giving great attention unto Godly Exhortations, and so continued to the
Admiration of many that came to visit them, during the respit allowed for
preparation.

John Braford was Arraigned, found Guilty, and Condemned, for a notorious
Burglary breaking open a Widow woman's House near Tatnam Count and binding all
her Family; ransacked the House, taking thence Goods to the Vallue of nine or
ten pounds, and afterward being taken by Captain Richardsons Men was
challenged in Newgate, this being Proved against him he received Sentance of
Death, having been a notorious Offender, yet as it is commonly seen, when he
see no hope for Life, he was very Penitent, bewailing his misdeeds, etc.

Wllliam Carter was Arraigned, and upon full proof convicted of Felony and
Burglary, for breaking open the house of one How, of EIsham in Kent, and taking
thence, two Flitches of Bacon, Hoods, Scarfs, Stockings, and other Clothes, to
a considerable vallue; he and his Accomplices binding the Man of the House, and
the rest of the Family and so departed with their Booty, but going to take
water at Rederiff, they were suspected by some Watermen, and no sooner had they
crossed the water, but they perceiving themselves pursued, divided and fled, so
that only Carter was taken, who had one pair of the Stockings on, and a stick
in his hand, which he had taken out of the Chamber, with several other things,
of which Felony and Burglary being Convicted, he received Sentance of Death.
His Repentance was not so becoming, as to suit with a Man in his much to be
deplored Condition, yet when the time of his suffering drew near, he showed
much Contrition for his former evil Courses.

Sarah Good was found Guilty of two Indictments, one for stealing a Silver
Tankard, one silver Bole and a silver standing Cup, from Samuel Dod a Vintner,
without Bishopsgate, the other for stealing one silver Tankard, and one
Dram-Cup, from Roger Saunders, in St. Botelphs Bishapsgate, the Fellonies being
proved she received Sentance to dye according to the Law, the which was this
day put in Execution, before which she much bewailed her so untimely end,
advising the Spectators to beware how they yielded to the temptations of the
Enemy of Humane kind, lest he brought rhem to Destruction.

Dorothy Hall was found Guilty of two Fellonies and Burglaries committed by her
and one Ann Green, upon the House of one Mr-Sanders, and one Mr. Man, near
Brainford, for stealing thence Linen, Puter-Flaggons, Cocks and Hens, to a
considerable vallue, for which she received Sentance to dye, and her Partner by
reason of her simplicity, was allowed the favor of a transportation, she had
been an old Offender, and therefore was not mvch concerned at the approach of
her untimely Fate.

Frances Lewis an old Offender, who had long practiced the Trade of
Tankard-stealing, and had been very svccessful in her unlawful Enterprises, but
as the common Proverb notes- (the Pitcher goes not so often to the Well, but it
comes broaken home at last) so she at length was taken in the very Fact, for
coming into a certain Victualling House near Crooked Lane, she calling for a
Tankard of Drink, pretended to stay for some Gentlemen that would immediately
be there, but seeing the People busy, and neglectful of their Charge, she
fairly bid her Host Goodbuy not so much as asking what she had to pay, but
drinking some, and pouring out the rest, she carried off the empty Tankard
vallued at five pounds to serve her proper Use, but being pursued and taken,
was Committen, and it being on her Trial proved that she was notorious for
Offenses in that kind, she was Convicted and received Sentance, after which she
much bewails her dismal Fate that had hurried her on to an untimely and an
unavoided Death bedned with Tears, and serious remorse, she continued all the
intervening time allowed her to make Peace with Heaven for the blessed welfare
of her own immortal Soul.

Elizabeth Plummer a notorious Shoplift, whose many Crimes has spread her Name
throughout this great Metropolis, she was Aaraigned and found Guilty for
felloniously taking and bearing away 28 yards of Flowered Silk from one Edward
Rigby a Mercer, near the Exchange, and delivering it to one of her Consorts,
who sold it to one Mrs. Edwards the Felony being plainly proved, she was
found Guilty, nor could she her self deny the same, so that being formerly
pardoned yet would not take no warning, she received the Judgment of the Court,
after which the near approach of Death, startled her amazed Conscience, and she
seriously repented her of her many great and grievous Crimes, and so continued
till the fatal moment of Mortality expired and pusht her off into a vast
Eternity.

Richard Hodgkons a Highway Man, and most notorious padder, was severally
indicted for two Robberies by him committed, the one was near Bow, the other
near Hampsted, upon two Gentlemen, taking from one of them forty shillings, or
thereabouts, and from the other 14 shillings more or less, with several other
their Goods and Chattels, to both which Indictments he pleaded Guilty, and for
them was Condemned to dye, seeming but very little concerned at the near
approach of his most great and dreadful Change, but certain Death that bears an
awe upon the Spirits of the most resolute of Men, soon made his haughty Courage
fail, and at the last put him so far in mind of immortality, as to draw Tears
from his no doubt but Penitential) Eyes.

The Sunday before the Fxetution there was an excellent Sermon preached in the
Chapel of Newgate, not only to the Condemned, but to a numerous Auditory that
resorted thither from several parts of this City. The Text of Scripture, chosen
for that purpose being the 14th Chapter of the Proverbs and the 27th Verse, to
which the Reverend Divine most effectually applied, that the fear of God was
the only way to restrain all daring Sinners from their vicious enterprises, and
that the Fear of God is the means and ground to raise salvation on, and that
God is pleased with those that tremble at his Word, a God slow to Anger, of
great Mercy, and willing to pardon all that with sincere Repentance come unto
him and lay hold on him by Faith. And that none ought to despair of saving
Health, that cast themselves upon him, concluding with many sacred and
prevailing Exhortations, at which they all seemed much to lament their most
woeful State that they (must perhaps) unprovided, plunge into a vast Eternity:
desiring all that came to be Spectators of their Trajick Ends and Final
Dissolution as to this mortal State, to beware, lest they gave way to vile
Temptations, which like a Poisoned Arrow fix a fatal Ruin in the Soul, and
drive secure Offenders on till they unmindful of their ways are taken in the
Snares that justice lays for those that dare offend the Laws of Men, and so
invite untimely Fate to ruin them past all recovery, and so they continued
lifting up their hands to Heaven, and pouring forth their penitential Years, to
expiate and wash away those Crimes which long Custom and repeated Crimes had
so inured them to.

William West was Arraigned for that he in the Parish of Stepney did
Felloniously take and bear away thirteen Yards of Chamblet from one Robert
Adkins, and he being an old Offender and once burned in the hand before, was
found Guilty of the Felony, and after the dreadful Sentance had past upon him
he became very Penitent, and so continued all the time that he was in Newgate.

A little before the time of Execution, Robert Lewis, Sarah Good Elizabeth
Plummer received his Majesty's most gracious Reprieve.

FINIS.

