A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY,
April 11, 12, and 13. 1678.

Setting forth The Facts and Trials of several Prisoners for Felonies,
Burglaries, Treason, and other Crimes.

With a particular Account of the Trial and Condemnation of Two Women for High
Treason, Clipping the Kings Coin, who are Sentenced to be Burnt to Ashes.

And likewise the Trials and Condemnation of one for Robbing on the Highway;
and Two others for Horse-stealing and other Felonies.

And an exact Relation of all other remarkable Proceedings.

With the number of those that are Condemned, Burned in the Hand, and to be
Whipped.

With Allowance. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Proceedings at the Sessions holden for London and Middlesex.
THough the Sessions for the City of London and County of Middlesex be held
almost every month, yet so incorrigibly wicked are people, that no warning of
the untimely Ends or other punishments of their Fellow Criminals, can deter
them from the same Evil Courses: so that there scarce ever fails to be a great
number to receive Justice for their Demerits at every Jayl-delivery. Thus was
it now at this time: of the most notorious I shall here give you a particular
Account.

Two women were severally tried for and co^victed of Felony, for Shopli^ting
(as they c(...)) a practice become so frequent, that a Tradesm^n scarce dares
trust his Wares to Customers v^ew, they have so often been robbed under
pretense of buying. These two has ('it is said) long followed the same Trade, and
are no strangers to the formality of holding up their hands; but it is thought
they will scarce ev^r have liberty to practice their Villainy abroad again.

Two other several persons were indicted for stealing an Horse; but besides
that one was a person of competent Estate and Credit, he made it appear that he
bought him, though at a place where it seems there was no Toll-book kept, so
that the property was not altered; yet it not appearing he had reason to think
the Nag was unlawfully come by, they were both acquitted.

A Gentleman took a Trial for killing a man, but there was no sufficient
Evidence that the Prisoner was the party; only one young woman pr^ssed
somewhat largely diverse circumstances, to whose credit there were on the other
side several witnesses examined: so that on the whole matter the Prisoner was
brought in Not guilty.

A person was tried on two Indictments for several Felonies, one for stealing a
sorrel Guelding valued in the Bill at four pound, on the twelfth of January
last; the other for stealing a hundred fifty six yards of Say, valued at twelve
pound. The Facts were done at the Town of Bury in Suffolk, the Guelding taken
out of the stable in the night, but the Stuff was stolen some time before, and
the Prisoner partly charged with it, his house being searched, but nothing
found, At last a naughty woman that he kept company with, b^ing apprehended and
sent to Jayl, he fearing she might discover him, resolved to run the Country,
anct to that purpose stole the Guelding; which at the Ball in Leaden hall
street he truck^ away for fourteen shillings boot: but at last the horse being
found by the Hue and Cry, the party was likewise taken, and part of the Say
found upon the Hostler of the house. He having sold a whole piece in the Inn,
pretending he had been robbed as he came up, and wanted money: so that having
no color of excuse, he was Convicted and Condemned.

The next was a very considerable Trial, three women being tried for High
Treason, for Clipping eight Half-crowns of King Charles the first's Coin, and
ten other Half-crowns of King Jam^s's, and taking six pence off of each of
them. Notice was first taken of them thus: A Shoop-keeper without Temple Bar
has often observed a little Girl come to him to change five or ten shi^lings of
small money into greater, as six pences or shillings into half-crowns; and that
she would not take any Mill-money, nor money that was clipped: whereupon he
watching the Girl, in Fleet Street saw one of the Prisoners (her Mother)
waiting for her, who sent her into several shops in Fleet Street on the like
Errand. At last he dogged them into an house near Stonecutters-street in Sho
lane, very suspitiously situate; so that declaring the same, and going with an
Officer to search, they took one woman, and in her hand^ a basket, in which,
amongst several papers, there was one that had Clippings and Filings. The other
woman was abroad; but breaking open her door, they observed Filings on the
floor, found Clippings under a bed, a File and a pair of Sheers hid under the
board, to which part of the new-cut Silver still stuck, a Melting-pot not quite
cold, etc. The Chi^de being examined whither she used to carry her H^lf crowns,
said, To such an one, naming the third woman now indicted, living in
Golden-lane; but nothing being found in her house, she was acquitted. Of the
other two, one pleaded ignorance; the other, that she had these Tools of one
Benjamin Smith, executed two or three Sessions ago; but that appearing
frivolous, and the Crime evident, as pieces of Silver, and their Touch stones,
and old Gloves to smoothen and al^ay the color, etc. being produced in Court,
they were both found guilty of the Felony and Treason, and received Sentence to
be Burnt.

A poor Mechanic fellow was likewise tried for Clipping: Going to w^rk early,
he found a parcel of Clippings in Longlane, and carried them to a Goldsmith, to
know what they were: who saying it was course Silver, bought it of him for five
Shillings six Pence, but gave him a naughty Half crown; which coming several
times to have changed, they at last apprehended him; but no other proof coming
against him, he was acquitted.

A Young man was Convicted of a Misdemeanour, for offering to put off a naughty
Guinny at a Tavern in Cornhil, knowing it to be such* he al^eadged, he took it
for good of a Watch; maker, and it appeared he had it of him; but when he got
it, which was under a pretense of borrowing it, he said it was n^^ght, and that
he would keep it to have it (...), etc So that it is thought his design^ was to
de^raud the Watch-maker first, and the Vi^tner afterward, if not thus
discovered.

H^re was a lamentable Spectacle, almost a whole Family Confederates in
Villainy, being two Brothers* and their Sister, and one that pretended to be her
Husband: There were several Indictments against them respectively, the Husband
being found guilty of stealing a brown Mare in Kent, and upon another
Indictment for stealing four flitches of Bacon and a Fowling-piece, which were
taken with them; but the woman alleging her self his Wife, and consequently
what she did, was done by his coertion, could not be found guilty, though she
were taken upon the Mare. The three men were likewise found guilty of another
Felony discovered in Golden lane, for stealing the Goods of a person unknown;
they were only the Rubbish of some Burglary, the best Goods being disposed of
before they were seized; so that it was brought in under the value of ten
pence. Another Indictment against the the same w^man by four or five names, for
stealing a black Guelding valued at Eight pounds, and selling him in St.
Gileses; but it appearing that her pretended Husband brought him to the Inn,
she was for the reason before mentioned acquitted; hereby obtaining two happy
Certificates of her Marriage. (...) brief, 'twas declared by the Court that
this very Gang had lately stolen above forty horses: Nor did they deal
altogether in Horsefl^sh, but loved Mutten too, an Indictment being against
them for stealing Nine fat Sheep; for which being taken, they lately made an
Escape out of the Gatehouse; and the Prosecutor not knowing they were retaken,
was not ready with his witnesses.

A Fellow, with one Arm, was Convicted for Robbery on the Highway; He and 3 or
4 more of his Gang lurking on foot about Bunhil fields, knocked down an honest
man, and rifled him of several small things, for Money he had none: His crying
out brought the Constable and Watch, who seized the Prisoner on the place, the
rest made their Escape. He had been concerned on such Foot-pad Rogueries
before, and now received Sentence of Death.

There were in all Nine persons Condemned to Die, Seven men, viz. Two for
Horse-stealing and other Felonies, One for Burglary and stealing Goods to the
value of Seventy pounds, and Three others for several Felonies; having been all
burnt in the hand before; and One for the Foot-pad, or Robbing on the Highway.
And as for the Two women, they received Sentence to be drawn on a Hurdle to the
place of Execution, and there their Bodies to be Burnt.

Four men and Three women Burnt in the Hand, and Five ordered to be Whip.

FINIS.

