A TRUE NARRATIVE OF A Wonderful Accident, Which occurred upon the Execution of
a CHRISTIAN SLAVE AT Aleppo in Turkey.

BEING A Remarkable Instance of Divine Providence, attesting the acceptableness
of the Christian Religion, and the Virtue of Chastity to Almighty God.

Written at first for the Satisfaction of a Friend only; and since made public
for the strengthening of Virtue.

This may be Printed.

May 12. 1676. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1676.

A True Narrative of a Wonderful Accident, which occurred upon the Execution of
a Christian Slave at Aleppo in Turkey.
SIR,
THough I am none of those men of easy Faith, which (either through want of
Capacity to judge of, or want of due Industry to inquire into things) are apt to
credit all Reports: and though possibly there are few men have a greater
aversion to encourage Superstition than I have; Yet I confess I do not think my
self obliged to deny my assent to those things my senses inform me of; though I
cannot presently satisfy my self of the true causes which produce their
Phoenomina, or appearances: for I have learned to know thus much, That there
are many things we know not: And for my part, I look upon that man as a very
false conceited person, that dare deny matter of fact, only because he is
unacquainted with the causes from whence such or such an effect is produced.

Nay, I will go yet farther, and venture to say, That if I receive a relation
of a thing from a Person, or Persons, of whose Candor and Truth I have no
reason to doubt; and if I am fully satisfied (upon a wary inspection) that such
a worthy Person can have no interest to lead him to impose upon me: And if the
same thing, with the same Circumstances, be attested to me by many such free
and uninterested Persons, and that at several times, and unknowing to each
other, and all this without the least variation: I then conceive I have the
greatest humane probability imaginable for the giving an Historical Faith to
such a thing.

And this security any man may have (if he question the truth of the succeeding
Relation) by going to Elford's Coffee-House in George-yard in Lombard Street,
where he may meet with several Eminent and Worthy Gentlemen ( Turky-Merchants),
that can confirm the truth of the thing, they having been at the place where
this was acted, and at the same time when it was done.

I make this Apology, because the Reader may satisfy himself of the truth of
the ensuing Story, and not be apt to think he is imposed upon by the Authors of
the Island of Pines, or O Brazil.

Some few years since, there happened an Insurrection or Tumult of some of the
Turks which dwelt in the City of Aleppo; which being easily suppressed, the
Grand Seignior nevertheless sent thither a Bashaw to enquire out the
Malefactors, and see justice done upon them: in the Execution of which, the
Turks are very severe (the Constitution of their Government obliging them to be
so). Upon the approach of the Bashaw, all the Turks of quality in Aleppo went
out some Leagues or Miles to reverence the Bashaw, and conduct him in
triumphant manner to the City: And upon this occasion they were attended by the
greatest part of their Slaves, the better to express their Grandeur and Quality.

Upon this Affair it was, That the House of one of the most magnificent Turks
of that City, was left that day without any other Person in it, but only the
Turks Steward, and a handsome French Slave, a young man of eighteen years old:
This Turk's Steward, being much addicted to that horrid and unnatural sin (too
frequent with the Mahumetans) Sodomy; and having cast his lustful Eyes upon
this Youth, and considered the fitness of the time (the House being empty) to
act his Villainous design: He had in pursuance of his intent, got this Slave
into a Chamber; where having locked the Door upon him, to hinder his making an
Escape, He at first began to make promises, and to flatter the Slave, if by
that means possibly he might prevail with him to consent to his (more than
Brutish) Devilish desires: but finding the Slave of a settled and severe
Virtue, he quickly perceived there was no hopes of accomplishing his hellish
Desires that way, and therefore had took up a resolution to pollute the chaste
Youth by force; when the Slave perceived this, he begged, he prayed, he
demonstrated the impossibility of his assenting to such a Crime: But all this
made no other impressions upon the vile Turk, but to add passion and Fury to
his Lust: insomuch, that he swore deeply, he would give him immediate Death, if
he disputed any longer, and did not presently submit to his accursed Will. The
virtuous Slave abhorring this baseness with all his Soul, and finding himself
destitute of all other Remedies, nimbly seized upon a Cymeter which hung upon
the wall of the Chamber, and at one blow with it, smote off the Turks head.

It is not easy for any one who is unacquainted with the Cruel and Tyrannical
nature of the Turks, to make a true estimate of the miserable and deplorable
Condition this accident had put this Generous Slave into: Death was the least
thing he could expect (and I believe the least thing he feared): for it is very
usual with the Turks, upon much slighter faults (than this seemed to be in
their esteem) to devise long-lasting and inexpressive Torments to inflict upon
their Slaves: which being foreseen by this unfortunate Youth, he immediately
cast about by what means to make his escape; he had heard that threescore Miles
distance from Aleppo, there was another English Factory (of Turkey Merchants)
called Scanderoon; whither, if it were possible for him to get, he rationally
supposed that he might be secured; and by being put aboard an English Vessel,
be by that means carried out of the Turks Dominions.

To accomplish this, he went to his Master's Stable, where finding an Arabian
Horse, he presently mounted the back of him, and conveyed himself out of the
City: which was not difficult for him to do at that time, the place being empty
of people upon the foresaid occasion. But he being totally ignorant of the way
he was to take, (having never been permitted all the time of his abode there to
go out of the City) and not daring to enquire it for fear of betraying himself;
by a Caprise of ill Fortune, he happened to go the very same Road that his
Master and the other Citizens of Aleppo (attending upon the Bashaw) were
returning homeward by. His Master and he were both surprised at the sight of
each other: and the Turk hastily demanding the occasion of his coming thither
(whether it were the surprise, and fear he was in, or his modesty which might
make him loath to discover (before so much company) the truth of that shameful
attempt upon him, which caused him to make an escape I know not; so it was,
that) he answered his Master, That Thieves had broken into his House and killed
his Steward, and that he having got out of a Window, had run to the Stable, and
mounted that Horse to come and give him notice.

The Turk seemed to be satisfied with this account at present, and commanded
the Slave to join the Troop of those which were upon their return to the City:
which he was necessitated to do.

When they were come to Aleppo, the cunning Turk examined his House, and found
indeed his Steward killed, but when he perceived nothing was taken out of the
House, he presently concluded no Thieves had been there: and therefore charged
the French Slave with the death of his Steward, which he frankly confessed,
with a full account of what you have heard.

The Turk then carried this Slave before the Bashaw, desiring justice might be
done upon him for the death of his Steward: But when the Bashaw had carefully
examined the matter, he was convinced of the truth of the Slaves relation; and
being willing to deter the Turk^ from that base sin of Sodomy, he acquitted the
Youth of punishment. But the Turks being unsatisfied with this Sentence, apply
themselves again, and in a body, to the Bashaw, demonstrating the ill
consequences of his merciful Sentence, and the unsecure estate it would reduce
them all to, in giving encouragement to their Slaves to murder them: And
begging, That though it were true which the Slave alleged, (which yet they
denied, averring he murdered the Steward only that he might make his escape)
that the Slave might be executed for an Example to others, which upon their
importunity was at last granted them by the Bashaw; and his former merciful
Sentence revoked: but yet he would not suffer him to have any other death than
beheading.

The Slave then was brought to the place of Execution (which is a Field without
the City); where being come, he appeared, though very modest, yet undaunted,
and fearless of Death. And having prayed with much fervor and devotion, and
having particularly acknowledged his fault, and begg' Almighty Gods pardon for
telling his Master that passage (about robbing his House) when he met him upon
the Road; he was stripped stark naked (according to the custom of that place)
and discovered a lovely body, in which inhabited a more lovely Soul. And
immediately before his death he did aver, That he died a Christian, depending
wholly for his Salvation upon the merits of our Savior; and that he killed the
Steward for no other reason but to avoid being polluted by him; and that he
hoped God would show some sign upon his Body to attest his Innocence, and the
truth of what he said. After having said this, his Head was struck off by the
Executioner, and his Body and Head left in the Field unburied, according to the
custom of the place.

It happened that there were executed at the same time, and in the same place,
several rebellious Turks, whose Bodies were quickly torn in pieces, and
devoured by a certain sort of great Dogs, kept there at Aleppo, who are allowed
almost no other sustenance but the Carcasses of Malefactors. But it was
observed, that none of these Dogs would touch the Body or Head of this Martyr
of Chastity.

It may be here objected, That this was a mere Accident, and that the Dogs
bellies being filled, and satiated with eating the Carcasses of the other
Malefactors, they forbore to touch this Youth for that cause, and no other.

To which I answer, That it was observed, first, That the Body of this Young
man lay in the Field unburied, for the space of ten or twelve days, in all
which time there was no other Executions, and the Dogs were so extremely
pinched with hunger, that they were ready to devour living men, who had much
difficulty to keep themselves from being attacked by them; and yet would they
not touch this Carcass.

Secondly, It is remarkable, That the Body of this Young man remained all this
time exposed to the heat of the Sun, (which in that Climate is very
intemperate), and yet it did neither stink, corrupt, nor (which is somewhat
odd) did it change its color, but remained as fresh and vivid, as if he had
been but asleep.

Some may, to solve this, and take off the wonder, say, This proceeded from a
peculiar and Balsamic constitution of Body: But supposing this, The Youth was
plump, juicy, of a good habit of Body, and what then should hinder the Dogs to
feed upon him, when they were pressed by extreme hunger? And this Circumstance
is very well worth our Remark, That after ten days, there being another
Execution in the same place, That Carcass was immediately devoured in the sight
of the People.

I will not stiffly affirm all this is Miraculous; though I know Gods hand is
not shortened: and though he seldom stops or turns the course of Nature, yet he
can do it when he pleases: And upon this occasion, here was a considerable
Motive for God to exert His power, to illustrate the Innocence and Virtue of a
devout and Chaste Christian, and that in a place where the Enemies of Christ
Reign, and despise his Doctrine, and persecute the Professors of it. But
Preaching being none of my employment, I shall forbear, and leave every man to
abound in his own sense.

I will end this Discourse with only saying this, What Sentiments some
Christians may have upon reading this History, I know not; but this I am
assured of, That the sight of the thing was so convincive and operative upon
the Turks, That to bury their shame, they were necessitated at last to dig a
Grave, and intomb this Chaste Martyr.

I have now in compliance to your desires committed the true Narrative of this
History into your hands, which you are permitted to dispose of as you think
fit.

FINIS.

