A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION of several Notorious
Malefactors AT TYBURN, On Wednesday April the 16th. 1684.
Viz. Charles Close, B^rnerd Trevers Hugh Kelly, Katherine Smith. and Mary
Corbet, who was Burnt at Tyburn for High Treason.

THese Malefactors, with three more, were Tried and Condemned at the last
Sessions at the Old-B^ily, of which two of them, by his Majesty's great Favor
were Repreived, and the other, Jane Robinson, being found quick with Child by a
Jury of Women impannel'd for that Enquiry, was respited till her Delivery.

I shall first give you a True Account, of the several Crimes, for which each
person suffered, and then a Relation of the Behavior of them, from the time of
their Sentence, to that of Execution.

Charles Close was an old Offender, and one of those Rogues, who about two
years ago, Robbed Mr. Croom an Ale-house-keeper, near Soho Fields, which was
thus, he and two more of his Companions went in to drink, and after they had
stayed sometime, and found an Opportunity sit for their purpose; There being no
other Company in the house they sent down the Master for another Tankard of
Drink and one of them followed him down Stairs, and of a sudden knocked him
down; the other coming in to his Assistance, they used him very Barbarously,
and afterward robbed the house of a very considerable sum in Monys and Place,
and made their Escape. But Justice which never suffers such heinous crimes to
go unpunished, at last overtook this Offe^der in the Commissi^n of a second
Robbery, with Bernard Trevers and Hugh Ke^ly, who were all Indicted for Robbing
the house of John Shutleworth, an Innkeeper at Wood-Green in the Parish of
Tatenham, and taking away, in Plate and Money, to the value of two hundred and
fifty pounds, they laid their design with a great deal of cunning, by first
going to drink as of they had been passing forward toward Hornsey. The
Innkeeper seeing them in the habits of Gentlemen, ^^ok them for such, and made
much of them, thinking he had got good Guests, and offered them a Lodging if
they would stay all Night, when it was dark Bernard Trevers let in several
others, who a^sisted them to bind the Family and rob the house. Hugh Kelly was
taken at Portsmouth and part of the Plate found with him Bernard Trevers was
taken about Charing Cross, and either was, or went in the habit of a Granadeer.
These three confessed upon their Araignment that they were Guilty of Felony and
Robbery, but not of bre^king the house: however it being proved that Trevers
unbolted a back door to let in the rest of his Companions, they were all three
found Guilty of Felony and Burglary. Mary Kelly, the pretended Wife of Hugh
Kelly was Indicted as Accessory for comforting, aiding, and harboring them
after the Robbery was committed, and a Gold Ring which was part of the Goods
stole found upon her, but was acquitred

Katherine Smith, alias Sandimore was a person very well known amongst the
Pick-pockets by the Name of Yorkshire Kate, and was Indicted for stealing
handkerchief and other Linen, the Goods of Thomas Williams, and found Guilty of
Felony and Burglary, she had been and Incorri^^ble Offender, whom no Acts of
Clemency could oblige to an honest Life, she having formerly Six or Seven
times, received the mercy of the Bench.

Mary Corbet was formerly a Broker, and by her continual Crimes had rendered her
self Obnoxious to the Law, but Mercy still prevented that punishment which she
had so often deserved, she was now Indicted and Condemned for High Treason, for
that she had Made, Coined and Counterfeited twelve pieces of Copper, Tin, and
other Metals, into the likeness of Shillings, commonly called Queen Elizabeth's
Shillings, and twelve other pieces of like Counterfeit Metal called Queen
Elizabeth's Sixpences, which Fact was proved against her, by two Women, who had
often seen her make the said counterfeit Money, by melting Penter, Copper, and
the like, to a pound weight at a time, and pouring the same into Molds of Wood,
which fashioned it like the Shillings and Sixpences before mentioned. They also
confessed they had put off much of that counterfeit money for her, and several
pieces were produced in Court, upon which Evidence, she was found Guilty of
High Treason.

Having thus given the Reader an Account of the several heinous crimes for
which these Malefactors were condemned I shall now proceed to speak of the
Behavior of each person under so great a Trial, and how they spent those
precious Minutes which formerly were often tedious to them, but now grown so
valuable, that no good Christian, but would part with all the Pleasures and
Riches of the World to redeem his misspent time, or gain some few hours to pray
to God for Mercy upon his Soul, which before he had so often slighted. After
their Return to Prison. Charles Close, tho before he seemed so steeled in
wickedness and hardened in iniquity, that neither the danger of his Life, or the
Eternal Shipwreck of his Soul, affected him with any serious consideration,
yet coming into the condemned hole, he gave a great Sigh, and by some private
Ejaculations, discovered his heart was not so Obdurate and impenetrable, as to
be altogether unconcerned at his present condition. This happy change was soon
taken notice of, by that Vigilant and Worthy Person Mr. Ordinary, who took all
Opportunities to improve the least spark of Penitence or Contrition, to a true
sense of that miserable State he was in, a Confession of those manifold and
grievous Crimes he had been Guilty of, and an absolute Resignation of himself
to the Will of God, and the punishment of those Laws he had so often
Transgressed.

Bernard Trevers, and Hugh Kelly, as they had been his former Companions in sin
and wickedness, so now do they share with him in his present miseries and
distress: They now afresh Confessed with Sorrow that Guilt they had Publicly
owned at their Trials, and as persons whose Education was always loose, and
either encouraged by the Vicious Examples of others, or prompted by the pravity
of their own Wills and Affections, or both; have been often Guilty of breaking
the Sabbath, and spending the Lords Day in pursuit of Worldly business as too
many do, or else in gratifying the Lusts of the Flesh, unlawful Pleasures or
more wicked Deboches.

On Sunday they were at Chapel, both Morning and Afternoon, and behaved
themselves with that Reverence and Attention, as became persons who were so
suddenly to give an Account of every idle Thought or sinful Glance, as they had
so lately of their wicked Actions. The worthy Preacher, like a true Physician
of souls first applied Corrosives to make them sensible of themselves, and that
wretched State they were plunged into by that sinful Course of Life they had so
long Rioted in, he Terrified them with Gods Judgment on impeniten^ sinners, the
Eternal Damnation of soul and body, if they did not now, while it is Called to
Day, repent and turn to the living God. But on the other hand, he mercifully
poured Oil into their wounded Consciences; and as none ought to Presume on, so
not to despair of the Mercies of Everlasting Goodness.

Katherine Smith, and Mary Corbet, tho they had been both. Notorious Offenders,
yet by their humble and submissive Behavior, seemed truly Penitent, and I hope
the great Labors of those worthy Divines who visited them, wrought them into a
sincere Repentance, and that sweetness of Temper, as a good Christian would
rejoice to die in.

At ten of the clock they were put Into Carts; And Mary Corbet drawn on a
Sledge to Tyburn, where she was burned and the rest Hanged.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1684.


