A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY,
Begun the 28. of August, and ended the 31. 1678.

Containing The Trials of several for MURDER: And also, Of the High-way-men
that Robbed the Lace-man: One for a Rape. And all other Malefactors for any
considerable Crimes, that were there Arraigned.

The Trial of the Female Muggleton, which was at the last Sessions.

With the number of those that are Condemned, Burned in the Hand, Transported,
and to be Whipped.

With Allowance. R. L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for D. M. 1678.

A True Narrative of the Proceedings at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey:
begun the 28. and continued till the 31. of August 1678.
THe most remarkable Trial that happened the first Morning, was of two persons of
a different Sex, who were Indicted for Murdering a young Man in the Pall-mell
about Whitsuntide last: The Trial was very tedious there being much Evidence
produced on both sides; but it being made appear there was no premeditated
Malice on the Prisoners side* also that the Deceased, did (being in Drink)
first assault the Man-Prisoner, who forwarn'd him from doing so; Likewise that
the Woman did, (besides one little blow she hit him on the Calf of the Leg,)
all possibly she could to part them* and the Deceased disowning after he had
taken the Sacrament in order to his Dissolution, that he had received any Hurt
by them: They were both acquitted.

The next were two young Foot-Pads, Indicted for Robing a Lace-man of 113.
Yards of Bone-Lace; the manner thus. The Lace-Man in his way from Wickham to
London, was set upon by the Prisoners at the Bar, one laying hold of one of his
Legs, and the other of his Horses Bridle* and when they had unhorst him, and
plucked off the Bridle and Saddle for fear of Pursuit, they forced from him the
said Lace, and so departed; they on their way, and he for London; where he had
not been long, but a Woman out of Paternoster Row, comes to his Lodging or
Warehouse, pretending to buy some of the same sort, (but intending rather to
sell that she had,) she demanded the Price of it, which being resolved her; she
answered him, she could Sell himself as good, at a much lower Rate; he replied
then, he was sure she must Steal it, which she denied with an Oath: But in
short, when she had shown him her good Penniworth, he knew the Lace to be his
own; and so sending for a Constable to Seize her, she promised she would bring
him to the Persons she had it of, if he would quit her; and being as good as
his word, they were likewise Seized in their Lodging, and at this Sessions
found guilty of Felony; the Robery being Immaterial, since their Trial was out
of that County where the Fact was done.

A Servant Girl about 15 years of Age, was Arraigned next, for conveying
several sorts of Goods out of her Mistresses House; but that Morning she was to
go from her, the Mistress made bold to search her Trunck, where she found an
Apron and two Sleeves, marked with her own Name; she conclud,ed whatever else
she had lately lost, went the same way: She brought her to her Trial, where
because nothing else could be positively laid to her charge, and the Maid young
enough to be taught more Honesty; she was brought in Guilty, but the Goods
valued at 10 d* in order to have as many Flawgs.

A Gentleman who had formerly belonged to the Guard, was Indicted for lately
Murdering his Companion at a Tavern in Kings-street, the matter of Fact thus.
The Deceased meeting the Prisoner accidentally, desired him to take share of a
Pint of Wine, which the Prisoner would willingly have avoided; but in vain he
endeavored it, since the Deceased would not part till they had Drunk together*
which rather than give him any cause of Offense, the Prisoner consented to go
with him: Whereupon they went in, and when the one Pint was Drunk off, the
party now Dead called for another, and after that another; insomuch that the
Prisoner, who was then in have, told him, he would Drink no more, nor stay any
longer in his Company: Whereupon the other person Drew, and went to Assault the
Prisoner, who put by his Pass* and getting up to him, had forced him to sit
down in a Chair, and was holding by his Cravat with one hand, and his Sword in
the other, when the Drawer came up; and taking particular notice of the
Deceased, found his own Sword sticking about five Inches deep in the Deceaseds
side; but he being a Quarelsome person, and there being no sign of Malice proud
betwixt them, the Sword also in such a Posture, as if it fell so by Chance and
not by Accident, he was brought in not Guilty.

Another was Indicted for Murder, who by his Immoderate Correcting of his
Maidservant, was thought to be the Cause of her Death; but the Doctor and
Chyrurgion giving their Opinion that she Dyed of an Imposthumation; though the
Master had used her severely, he was brought in not Guilty.

A Carpenter was afterward Indicted for Murdering his Laborer, the manner
thus. The Carpenter having undertaken a Piece of Wo^k, wherein he had occasion
to employ Brick-layers and Masons, one of them wanted a Tray full of Mortar;
and the Carpenter finding the rest of his men busy, whilst this Laborer sat
Idling at an Ale house door, called him to Accommodate the Mason with the said
Mortar; but the Laborer instead of obeying him, gave him approbrious Language;
and at last threw a great Stone at him, and was going to second it with another
when the Carpenter taking up that which the Laborer first threw, and throwing
it at him again, was so unfortunate as to hit the Laborer on the side of the
Head, and break his Scull, whereof he presently dyed; but there being no Malice
found between them, (for the Laborer came to him but that day,) he was only
found guilty of Man slaughter.

The next was a person Indicted for Ravishing a Maid about a Month since in
Goswel-street; the Girl seemed to be a silly Country animal she came up to
London in expectation of a place; but being disappointed was sitting at a door
in the same Street, expecting the Waggoner to come by, that with him she might
return to her own Country: But in the interim it happened that the Prisoner
coming accidentally to the house where she sat, told her he wanted a Maid, and
if she was willing, would entertain her in his Service. Whereupon she went
along with him* who as he was showing her his Rooms above Stairs, and telling
her what business she must undergo, if she lived with him: His Wife unluckily
surpised them; and it is th^ught, suspecting some foul play, Beat the Country
Girl out of doors, who it seems wanted not Instigators enough to advise her to
revenge the disappointment: For when she came first out of this persons house,
and was examined by the Constable, she protested she had received no uncivil
usage from the Prisoner; but afterwardrs pretended a Rape: But the Fallacy
being unvizarded, the Prisoner was brought in not Guilty.

Two Gentlemen were Indicted for Murdering another Gentleman in
Red-Lyon-Fields, on Sunday the 18 th. of July last. The sum of the Evidence for
the King was, they both were seen in the Quarrel, one of them to give the
Deceased that Fatal Thrust in the Breast which killed him, whilst the other had
his Sword drawn in the Defense of him that did it. The Prisoner pleaded that
the Deceased gave the Affront; that he that killed him, retreated many steps
before he made a Pass at him. But the Evidence declaring as above, they were
both found guilty of Manslaughter.

There was another man Indicted for having Carnal knowledge with a Young Girl
about Nine years of Age; but none of the Evidence being able to prove the Fact;
also the Chyrurgion proving the Child's Body had non received so much wrong as
could make it a Rape, he was brought in not Guilty.

A Young man was Indicted for Murdering a Woman in St. Margaret Moses Parish
Friday street, it appeared the Prisoner had been Bail for her, who had
endeavored to leave him in the Lurch; but he accidentally hearing of her
Lodging, went with a Sergeant to apprehend her, but she to avoid them, ran up
to the Leads, and the Prisoner after her, which put her into such a Fright,
that she jumpt off the said Leads three Stories high into a Paved Yard, and
died with the Fall; But the Prisoner being not found to touch her, he was not
found Guilty.

Two Youths, the one about 18* the other about 13 years old, were Indicted for
Robbing a Hosier in St. Seulchers Parish of 15 l. the manner thus. These light
Fingered blades having for some time had a design on this person, watched their
opportunity; on the 16 th. of July last, when he was upon some urgent occasion
called out of his Shop, designing immediately to return; the Lesser of them ran
to his Till or Cashbox (which likewise happened to be unlockt) and took out of
it Fifteen Pounds in ready Money, part of which he presently disburst in
Apparel, and the Remainder kept to betray him; for as he was in an Alehouse
boasting of his Fortunate Adventures, it was his Misfortune to be over heard by
a Soldier, who caused him to be Seized by a Constable, and carried before a
Justice who Committed him: The same Soldier had the Fortune to know the Party
whom the had wronged, so that he and others who were then in his Company gave
so satisfactory Evidence for the King, that the Jury could not but bring him in
guilty of his Indictment.

Two other Youths, were after these Indicted for Felony, having in July last
Stolen two Hogs, valued at 40 s. the Evidence against them was Evident, the
Owner with some others having found them in the Prisoners Possession, who had
nothing to say in their Defense, but that they found them straggling in
Pickadillie; but it being proved likewise by Substantial Witnesses, that the
Prisoners took them out of the Hog man's Yard, the Malefactors were without more
ado pronounced Guilty.

The person who as before I told you, was Indicted for making a Rape on the
body of a small Child of about 9 years of Age; being not found Guilty of that
I^dictment, was notwithstanding Arraigned again for a Trespass: And though his
Misdemeanor could not reach the first Charge; yet it being found that he had
much damnifi'd the body of the said Child, he was therefore brought in Guilty
of the Latter.

The Maid who in July last was Arraigned for Preaching Blasphemy, was then on
her seeming Repentance, and Renouncing those Blaspemous Tenants that she was
God, etc. which before she foolishly affirmed; was on her bringing in Bale for
her good Behavior for the Future, restored to her Liberty: And as if she had
at the same time been Licensed to Blaspheme* fell to it a fresh, but not
without some Alteration; for now being again Arraigned for the same Crime, she
had the Impudence before the whole Court to say she was indeed the Third
personin the Trinity, and that her Father was that Christ, who was with God at
the Creation; for which Impious Expression, she is likely to be Whipped into
better Manners of Religion.

There was a yonug man Indicted for stealing part of the Queens Plate out of
her Dairy-house in S. James's Park* he He confessed the Fact before the Justice;
but in vain demed it here, for he had set his hand to it, and was deservedly
found Guilty.

In all were Condemned four men and six women, whereof one of the latter by a
Jury of Women was found quick with Child. Sixteen men and one woman Burnt in
the hand. Two women to be Whipped, and one to be Transported.

FINIS.

