A TRUE NARRATIVE Of THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of Ensign Flower, At READING
the 8th of this Instant March 1684.
Who was Tried and condemned at Reading, February the 28th. for Killing of
Capt. Powney at Windsor. With a full Account of his penitent behavior during
the time of his Imprisonment.
Mr. FLower, the unhappy Subject of this discourse, was a Gentleman of a good
Family, and one who wanted none of those Ornaments which a civil and generous
Education could accomplish him with: he after some time applied himself more
particularly to Arms which he had always a natural inclination too; and so well
improved himself in Martial Discipline that at length he received a Commission
from his present Majesty to be Ensign in one of the Companys of the Foot
Guards, in which Command he always behaved himself like a Gentleman, and a
Soldier sometime since Mr. Powney Purvior to his sacred Majesty, and a
Gentleman otherwise of a very considerable estate and quality bought a
Commission for a Captain in the same company where Mr. Flower was Ensign, and
being at Windsor in company with Captain Pots Deputy Governor under his Grace
the Duke of Norfolk; the present Constable of the Castle, and Mr. Flower, he
observed some little Annimosities passed between Capt. Pots and Mr. Flower,
which like a true Friend and good Christian, he endeavored to compose,
persuading Mr. Flower to abate of that heat and passionate temper which he too
much indulged, and upon those grounds which perhaps were false, however
uncertain, and that 'tvvould better become him to seal a perfect friendship and
amity with that worthy person Capt. Pots than suffer his Blood to ferment into
rage and disorder, which might be the occasion of future mischiefs which were
sooner committed than either repented of or redressed.

This sober advice from Capt. Powney made at present some impression on Mr.
Flower, considering the Captain both as his friend and that duty and respect he
stood more particularly obliged to render him, as his Superior Officer, so that
during their stay together the Storm which before had too violently raged in
his outward expressions seemed wholly allayed, at least confined to his own
Breast. After sometime they went out together from the three Tun Tavern into
the Street Capt. Pots and Mr. Flower being some paces before, on a sudden Capt.
Powney heard the clashing of Swords, and making haste after his company, saw
Capt Pots and Mr. Flower engaged with their Swords drawn and vigorously
passing at one another, when coming up to them he called to Mr. Flower and
desired him to put up his Sword, which he taking no Notice of, Capt Powney,
told him he must not see Murder committed in his company and by those he
esteemed his friends that he was his captain and commanded him to desist. Upon
which it is said Mr. Flower replied, be who you will, if you come within the
reach of my Sword I will run you through: the Captain more friendly than
cautiously throwing himself in betvveen them with a design to part them; Flower
ran him through the Body, which proving mortal he soon after died of it.

Mr. Flower had wounded Cap. Pots in several places, but upon the fall of Cap.
Powney, the people came in and apprehended Mr: Flower, who was committed to
Reading Goal, and on February the 28th at the Assizes there held, arraigned and
condemned.

Great intercession was made by Mr. Flower's Mother to obtain his Pardon, with
very great offers for saving his Life, or at least changing his Sentence of
Death into Transportation, but all endeavors proved unsuccessful, he having
formerly, as it is said, tasted of his Majestys gracious favor, and the whole
Action appearing at his Trial so much to his disadvantage he was this, Day
Executed at Auckland End near Reading.

During his Imprisonment he behaved himself with all the marks of Penitence and
Contrition, which gained him the favor of some few days respit, that he might
the better prepare himself for his latter end which was so fast approaching.
But the great God, who is often pleased to sanctify our greatest afflictions
to us, and by his infinite mercy sweeten that cup of sorrow which by our own
sins we have dashed with Gall, was pleased to give this Repentant Criminal a
true sight of all his misdeeds, and by the power of his Gracious Spirit an
utter abhorrence of those Evil ways, which the World, the Flesh, and the Devil
too often ensnare us with.

On the eighth of this Instant, atten in the Morning, he was conducted by the
Sheriff to Auckland End the place of his Execution, where after the singing of
a psalm he went to his Devotion, and taking solemn leave of his Friends, after
some short Ejaculatory prayers the sentence of Death was executed upon him.

Entered according to ORDER.
LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge.


