THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT Surry-ASSIZES, HOLDEN At Kingstone
upon Thames: Which began on Monday the 19th of this instant July, and ended on
Thursday the two and twentieth following.
Giving an Account of most of the remarkable Trials there, more particularly of
the Persons Condemned to die. viz, Thomas Smith alias Vavazar, for Robbing on
the Highway, Isaiah Trot, Mary Trot, David Searl for Fellonies and Burglaries.
Thomas Goodier, for the same; James Christian for Murdering Robert Burtil the
Waterman, Francis Stoker and William Gandy for Horstealing. with an account of
those burned in the hand, Transported and to be whipped.

MArk Smith, alias Vavazar, and Thomas Smith, were Indicted and Arraigned, for
that they, in the Company of seven more, did set upon three several persons, in
the Kings Highway, near a place called Peckham-Gap, between the
Half-way-house, and Kentstreet end; the first of which being one John Wakeman.
a Country Farmer, who when they had knocked him off his Horse, did beat and
abuse him most barbarously; rifl^ng him of what moneys he had about him, whilst
this was doing, came Riding up one Mr. Alderson, which they perceiving, so bold
they were, as to leave one of their Gang with a naked sword, to watch Wakenian
before mentioned; whilst the other eight went and set upon him, bidding him
stand and deliver, and by odds of number, soon overpowered him, while this was
doing, up came one John Carter, driving an empty Coach, whom they endeavored
likewise to surprise; But he with his Whip defended himself till he got clear
of them, the reason of which was, because the two beforementioned, made
resistance; so that the Thieves fearing to be overpowered, was forced to be
contented with what Plunder they had got, but the two Prisoners shortly after
being apprehended, were committed, and now upon their Trials Mr. Alderson swore
the former to be one of them that robed him; and that he hold him with one
hand, and searched his Pockets with the other, upon which he was found Guilty
of the Robery but there being no positive proof against the latter, he was
acquitted; yet notwithstanding he being a notorious Thief, and supposed to be
in this Robery, was continued in Prison till he could find Sureties for his
good B^haviour.

Isubel Ganding, alias Gurdian, a notorious Offender, was tried for stealing a
Diamond Ring valued at 14 pounds, a stone Ring, vallued at four pounds, another
Ring vallued at forty shillings; a silver Cup at fifty shillings, and other
good of Vallue, out of the Chamber of one Mrs. Pinchbeck in Covent Garden, the
Rings she pawned to a Br^aker in Kentstreet for three pound, saying that her
Husband was, a Surgeon living in the Park, and that he had them of his
Patients to borrow moneys on them, for his and their occasions, But not long
after, printed Bills coming out for the staying such Goods, The Broaker made
known the receiving of them to the next Justice of Peace, and in a short space
afterward found out the now Prisoner, and caused her to be apprehended, she
pleaded at the Bar that she only pawned them for a Gentlewoman, but the said
Woman not being to be found she was brought in Guilty to the Vallue of seven
and six pence.

Robert Hasel a Man about 60 years of Age, was tried for Barbarously murdering
one Charles Bragg, the circumstances thus, the deceased coming to untruss a
Point against the Prisoners Wall he came out and fell upon him after a most
inhuman manner; Beating and Kicking him when he was down and rubing his Ord^er
in his Face, so that the deceased being a sick weak Man, was no ways able to
defend himself; he being carrled home to his House in the Parish of St. Mary
Newington Buts, from the Prisoner, in less than three days space he died
Vomiting Blood extremely. To the Proof of this the Prisoner pleaded
provocation, but there being none testified or made out, nor the he deceased
gave the Prisoner so much as an ill Word, he was brought in Guilty of
Manslaughter only, the which by many was conjectured to be in respect of his
Age.

Nicholas Catman was likewise Tried for the Murder of his Brother Waterman,
the circumstances thus, a person of Quality coming to take Water at the New
Exchange Stairs, there arose a Contest between the deceased and the Prisoner,
about carrying him; which grew so hot, that as the Witnesses swore, he struck
the Prisoner over the head, and run his Bo^t-staff into his Mouth making it
bleed excessively; whereupon, the Prisoner enraged, took up his stretcher, and
with the same gave him such a blow on the forepart of the head as broke his
Scull, of which in a short time he died; but by reason of the feud that
happened between them the jury perceived it was no premeditated Malice, and so
brought him in Guilty of Manslaughter only.

Thomas Goodgier was Indicted for breaking open the House of Jane P^wel, in St.
Olives Southwark, and taking from thence one Silver Cup vallued at forty
shillings, and several other Goods to a considerable vallue, to which
Indictment he pleaded Guil^y, nor could be persuaded to do otherwise, the Goods
being delivered to one Elizabeth Terry to dispose of, she was likewise Indicted
for a cherisher of Thieves, and found Guilty of the same, though she pleaded
ignorance, and alleged she knew not in the least that they were st^len Goods.
but that he told her he had them of eminent persons to sell for them, by reason
they were ashamed to be seen selling of them themselves.

Isai^h Trot, Mary Trot, David, Searl, Roger M^den and Simon Hiat, alias Lee,
were Indicted for breaking open the Shop of one Mr. Collins in the Parish of
St. Olives Southwark, on the twenty third of March last, the circumstances as
follows, Mary Trot coming into the aforesaid Collins's Shop cheapened some
Sea Linen, but not agreeing for it, went out again, and as she went, out
ogain, and as she went was observed to mark the fastnings of the Door and with
Chaulk set A C^thereon, the next night after this; the Shop being Robbed of
Ribbon, Flannel, Call coes, Shf^ts. Holland, Doulas, and seveeal other goods to
the vallue of 30 pounds and upwards, upon search part or the Goods were found
where Mary Trot the Prisoner had sold them, who being apprehended confessed the
Fact, as likewise another part was found in the custody of Isaiah Trot a shirt
and pair of Drawers upon David Searl who was then in Newgate so that upon full
evidence and their former Confessions, they were found Guilty of the Felony
and Burglary, but Maden and ^^iat being only Indicted as Accessory, were
acquitted of that Indictment but Maden being known to be a notorious Offender
the Court ordered a second to be drawn up against him as for being a principle
in the Robery, of which there being no positive proof, he was likewise
acquitted.

James Christian who last Assizes received Sentance of Death, for murdering
one Robert Burril a waterman, in the Parish of Roderiff, by st^iking him over
the head and face with a Rope and a Boat-hook at the end of it, having got a
Pardon, was this Assixes appealed by the Wife of the deceased, and upon the
said Appeal tried again, and it was proved against him, that the deceased being
in his Boat asleep, upon some former grudg the Prisoner struck him over the
head with the aforesaid Boat hook, and giving him one mortal wound in the
forepart of the head of which after six weeks languishing he died, so that
there being many threatenings proved that the Prisoner had given the deceased,
before that time, and had often beat him, forethought Malice was adjudged, and
he was brought in guilty of the Murder upon the Appeal aforesaid.

Randal Basset, Mary Basset, John Basset, and Mary Harman were Indicted for the
murder of a certain person found drowned in a Horse pond in the yard of Randal
Basset of Farla Green, it was proved the man was drinking in the house somewhat
late, and that he was found dead in the water the same night or the next
morning, by John Basset, to which the Prisoners pleaded, that he went out from
thence, and that they did believe he being over powered with drink, might fall
in, and for want of help, there perish; so that there being no other Evidence
than bare suspicion, they were acquitted, and order given for the suppressing
their License --

Francis Stoaker received his Trial for stealing a Gelding vallued at 6 pounds
from one Nicholas Comes, the which he sold to one Hadlar at Croydon, who being
apprehended, brought out the now Prisoner; who pleaded that the Gelding was
none of his, but that he sold him for another man; but proof being brought,
that the Prisoner took the moneys for him, and was so curious as to throw back
one Brass shilling, he was found guilty.

William Gandy was likewise tried for stealing a Horse, which being found in
his possession, he could not deny the Theft, and

George Clark and Mary Clark of the Mint in Southwaok were Indicted for High
Treason, for that they had Clipped and Coined the King Coin, five pounds of
Cliped moneys being upon search found upon the Table, several pieces of melted
Silver, Crusibles and several other Coining Instruments, the which they denied
to be theirs, so that for want of a stronger Evidence they were acquitted.

Thomas Prick-Advance, was Indicted for stealing several goods and was brought
in Guilty to the Vallue of six pence. Sammuel Hurst was Indicted for picking
the Pocket of one Roger Eldrid at Faruham, and taking from him four shillings
and a Purse, which being proved upon him, he was found guilty.

There were in all eight Condemned to die, four burned in the hand, two to be
transported and five to be whipped.

FINIS.

