THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the three Prisoners AT
Kingstone upon Thames. IN THE County of Surrie. On Monday the 22th of March,
1679.
With the account of their particular Facts for which they suffered, as more
particularly the last Confession and Exhortation of Margaret Clark, who fired
her Masters House in SOVTHWARK. And James Christian for killing the Waterman,
John S^lby, John Seamor alias Herring, three, notorious Highway men. With the
names of the places where they committed the Facts for which they now suffer;
and many other remarkable Circumstances.
HOw dreadful is Justice in it self, when once offended, yet such are the
depraved faculties of erring Mortals, that they by their notorious Crimes
provoke and dare it, hurry Ruin on their heads, and by untimely Deaths dismiss
them from the World, e're half their course is run or in the Bloom of all their
days, as is most firmly testified, by the dismal ends these disasterous
Miscreants that have justly suffered for their heinous Offenses, receiving
Sentance of Corporal Death at the Assizes holden at Kingston upon Thames for
the County of Surry on the 16th of this Instant, and Executed at the Gallows of
the said Town accordingly on Monday the 22th of this instant March 1679.

The first of which in order, was Margaret Clark, who was Arraigned, and found
Guilty of that notorious and Fellonious Crime of Firing, Peter Dellanoys house,
late her Masters the said house being situate in Mountague Close in the Parish
of St. Mary Overies Southwark; the proof against her was upon her own
Confession, that three Gentlemen, supposed to be Agents in the Popish
Firing-Plot, seeing her stand at her Masters Door with a Child in her Arms,
came up to her, and demanded if she lived there, to which she answered she did,
upon which Asseveration, they desired her to go and drink with them, to which
she consented, but no sooner, being in the Victualling House but they fell to
treating with her about firing her Masters house, and in fine for two thousand
pounds to be paid her at the Fleece Tavern in Holbourn, when the wicked
enterprise had taken effect, she agrees with them, this being on the first of
January, on the Sunday following she with (as she affirmed) the Assistance of
one Satterwait, fired it in three places, which had it not been timely
prevented by the diligent care of Neighbors, had doubtless done much harm.
After her Condemnation, she much bewailed her so rashly being lead into so vile
and dangerous a wickndness upon the only promise of a Stranger whom she knew
not where to find, desiring forgiueness for her grievous Crimes, and vile
intentions, much lamenting her untimely End; bathing her self in Tears,
confessing to all that came to see her, in Prison, that the Devil had deluded
her and drawn her into this snare, desiring all to take warning by her downfall
and inevitable Ruin, and continuing so penitent to the last, that
notwithstanding the notorious Crime for which she was to suffer, she drew a
general compassion from all or most of the Spectators, and so concluded her
Life in a Flood of Tears.

The next in this dreadful Sceene of woe, was James Christian who was tried and
condemned for barbarously murdering one Robert Burrel a Waterman near Rederiff
Stairs; the Circumstances sworn to by the Evidence against him were as
follows; the Prisoner having formerly had a Quarrel with the deceased about
taking a Woman out of his Boat, and had upon the same, grievously beat and
wounded him before thiis last assault of which the deceased not only
complained, but also kept his Bed for several days after, he being abroad the
Prisoner again threatened him he would do his business for him; so that taking
the opportunity of his lying to watch the Boats one night, he Assaulted him,
and with a Staff first stunned him, and after he had recovered, and
endeavoring to fly, thereby to escape his Rage, he catching hold of him, not
only prevented him, but with the Rope and Hook that fastens the Boat, he struck
him so many mortal blows, that within seven weeks he dyed of the same,
affirming to the last, that Christian had been the cause of his death; upon
which Evidence after he was Conuictid of wilful Murder he received Senttnce,
the which was this day put in Execution, after which Sentance he began to have
a sensible feeling how much he stood in need of Eternal Life, seeing there
remained no hopes for the prologation of his mortal one here on Earth, and that
there were but a few moments between him and Eternity; so that he began to grow
in detestation with his passionate rashness that had caused him to commit the
horridest of Crimes, for Murder doubtless is so pondrous a weight unto the
Souls of those that Bath their cruel hands blood, that it compels them to
relent, and strive to wash away those Crimson stains with sighs and Tears, and
so was it to be seen in this to be deplored-Wretch, who strove to the utmost of
his power to admonish and desire all that were present that for Heavens sake
they would be cautious to give way to Rage, lest that overpowring their Reason,
should cause them to shed Innocent Blood, declaring that he never designed the
death of him whom he murdered, but that he knew he had in his Anger threatened
to destroy him; the which proved too fatally true, and so continued, but a
little before Execution he received a Gracious Reprieve.

The next was that notorious Highway Man, viz. John Seamor alias Herring,
famous for Robbing of the Speaker of the Parliament house, and ever since
usurping of his Name, he had no less than five Indictments laid against him,
and hadonce broke Goal, the chief of his Indictments were for Robbing one Mr.
Adkinson, of 3 or four pounds near Stains, and the Minister of Egham, of his
Watch and 5 or 6 Shillings in moneys, with several other Goods of a
considetable vallue, all of them being plain and positive, besides some twenty
more that he had robbed were there to swear against him if he escaped the
other, whereupon he received Sentance, and was this day Executed.

The next was John Selby, who being apprehended and committed upon suspicion to
Salisbury Goal, was there Challenged for Robbing one Christopher Hunt, of 7
pounds of women's Hair and a Portmantel vallued at forty Pounds, upon
Bagshot-Heath, on the 12th of September last, as likewise one Mr. Pepit of four
shillings, and several Goods to a considerable Vallue, so that being turned
over to take his Trial at this Assizes, he had no less than five several
Indictments against him, the Parties Robbed, swore positively, and his Ezcuses
slight and Frivilous the Court proceeded to Judgment and received Sentance
accordingly. At the place as Execution he exhhrted all to be forewarned by his
dismal End; so continuing, until the Harbinger of Death sealed up the Portals
of his Voice, and wafted them into a vast Eternity.

FINIS.

