A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY, At
a Sessions there held On Wednesday the 17 th of January 1676/7. Giving a full
Account of the true Trial and Sentence of LODOWICK MUGGLETON For Blasphemous
Words and Books. As also the Trials and Condemnation of a Woman for Killing
her Bastard-Child; and of a Man for personating another person in giving Bayl
before a Judge. With an Account how many are Condemned, Burned in the Hand, to
be Whipped, and Transported.

With Allowance.

Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1676/7.

The Proceedings at the Sessions in the Old bailey, on Wednesday the 17th of
this Instant January 1676/7.
NOt to trouble the Reader with a tedious Relation of things trivial or
impertinent, the most considederable or remarkable Transactions of this
Sessions were as follows.

First, the trial of that grand and notorious Impostor Lodowick Muggleton, of
whom to give the world a brief Account, we must acquaint you, that he was
originally a Journyman-Taylor, and (some say) afterward kept a Botchers stall;
but having a strange enthusiastic head, began about the year 1651, to enter
into Confederacy with one Reeves (another Brother of the Sheers) who resolve to
cut out a new Scheme or Fashion of Religion; and to that purpose declare
themselves, The two last VVitnesses of God that ever should be upon the Earth;
and that they had absolute and irrevocable power to save and damn whom they
pleased; to which end one called himself the Blessing, the other the Cursing
Prophet. And the said Reeves dying some years since, Muggleton pretends his
Spirit was left with him, and the whole power of Witnessing, Blessing, and
Cursing, devolved into his hands, which he as impiously practiced upon the
least affront or opposition; pronouncing persons damned by their particular
Names, blasphemously adding, That God, Angels, or Men could not afterward save
them. And as all Heretics covet to be Authors and Ringleaders to a Sect, so
by diverse printed Books and Corner conferences, he easily seduced diverse weak
and instable people (especially of the Female-Sex) to become his Proselytes,
who from him call themselves Muggletonians: So impossible it is for the wildest
and most senseless, as well as most impious Notions, when broached with
impudence among the Rabble, not to meet with some heads so irregular as to
embrace them for serious Truths, or divine Revelations.

This Muggleton's house being searched about August last, a great quantity of
his books were seized, some of which, it was now proved, he owned the writing
of, and that he had caused them to be printed; for which he was now indicted,
many wicked Passages out of them being recited in the Indictment, but so horrid
and blasphemous, that we think fit to spare the Christian modesty of each pious
ear, by not repeating the same here, where there is no necessity for it. The
Prisoner pleaded not guilty, but frustrated the general expectation, by saying
nothing further either to excuse or justice himself, but had a Counsel appeared
for him, who ingenuously declared himself ashamed to speak a word in favor of
such a Cause; only desired the Court to take notice, that the Books were dated
before the last Act of Grace; but it being usual to Antedate or Post-date
Titles of books, as best suits with the Publisher's interest, and that he had
since that Act owned and published the same, that Plea was overrul'd; and the
said Muggleton being found guilty by the Jury, was afterward sentenced by the
Court to stand three days in the Pillory at three the most eminent places of
the City, with Papers showing his Crime; and his Books so seized, divided into
three parts, to be burnt over his head upon the Pillory: And besides, to be
fined Five hundred pound, and to continue in Goal till the same be paid, and
afterward for his life, unless he procured good Bail, such as the Court should
accept of, and not of his own Gang, Faction, or Sect, for his being of the good
Behavior.

The next was a woman of about Forty years of age, and one that had six
Children by a Husband since dead, but was, it seems, still of too Youthful a
temper; for being lately delivered, by her self, of a Bastard-child on a
Wednesday-morning, she most barbarously murdered it by crushing the head, and
wounding it both in the scull and eyes (as is supposed) with a pair of Sizzars,
and then fairly puts it into a Platter and sets it upon a shelf, where it
continued till Saturday-morning, when a woman lodging above her in the same
house, coming down to visit her, and examining her more strictly, by reason of
some symptoms the observed, she now Prisoner confessed she had miscarried, and
looking for the Embryo they found a perfect Child murdered, as you have heard.
She pretended her self distracted when the fact was done; but it appearing that
she had sense enough to endeavor to conceal it, she was Convicted and Condemned

A man was likewise Condemned to die for a kind of unusual Crime, but such as
the Law, by reason of its bad example and mischievous tendency, has thought fit
to restrain with capital Punishment; which was, that there being a Suit at Law
depending between two persons, the Prisoner comes and personating another man,
is Bayl for one of the parties before a Judge; upon which afterward the man
whose name he had assumed knowing nothing of the business, was taken up, to his
great damage, etc. He begged heartily for Transportation, but it could not be
granted.

Four Bailiffs and Followers were arraigned by one they went to arrest, who
pretended to have lost some odd Trifles; but they were not found guilty.

Two persons were Condemned to die, two Burned in the hand, and two sentenced
to be Whipped: And so the Sessions ended with the day.

FINIS.

