A true NARRATIVE Of the PROCEEDINGS AT THE HERTFORD-ASSIZES, This Instant July
1676. SETTING FORTH The Trial of the person that attempted to Fire the Town of
HODSDON; with the Punishment inflicted on him. The Trial, Examination, and
Confession of two High-way-men, and one Pick-pocket, there Condemned to die.
And all other remarkable Occurrences.

Published for general satisfaction.

Licensed,

July 25. 1676. To. L'Estrange:



London: Printed for D. M. 1676.

A NARRATIVE Of the PROCEEDINGS at HERTFORD-ASSIZES.
WHereas Narratives of the chief Proceedings at several Assizes, have of late
been publish^d, and well received by diverse ingenious inquisitive men, as
tending not only to divertise Readers with the novelty of the Relations, but
likewise to forewarn innocent people of the subtle practices of Villains, that
they may be forearm'd against them; and especially to present Vice in its
natural destructive Colors, and create a just abhorrency against it in all
men's minds, seeing daily how i^ brings those that follow it, to sad, untimely,
and ignominious ends: I have therefore (pursuant to such laudible intentions)
thought it might prove a service neither improper nor unwelcome, to present the
world with the following Account or Abstract of the s^^eral notorious
Malefactors Trials, at the Assizes holden for the County of Hertford, July the
15th and 16th, 1676.

And first I may take notice of two young men here indicted and condemned for
robbing on the High way: One of them had been an old Practitioner in that kind,
said to be one of those that about a quarter of a year since, had the impudence
to rob a Traveller of Sevenscore pounds, or there abouts, in the daytime, just
at Hemsted Towns-end, and in the view of several people. The other was but a
fresh-man, lately listed in the Gang, living in London, by Trade a Last-maker,
and newly set up in that Employment with a Partner, being looked upon as a very
civil hopeful fellow, only a little too much given to Company, and especially
to the haunting of Fencing Schools, Prizes, and such robustious Exercises. That
day the Robbery was committed, going forth in the morning, he told his Partner
he was walking but to Islington, and should be back again about noon; but
meeting (whether by chance or appointment, I cannot say) with this other fatal
Companion, he enticed him to ride out with him upon the Pad, it being, as he
protests, the first time he was ever abroad on any such d^signe. When he
objected the want of Horse for that purpose, the other told him, he knew where
some fit for the work were to be let, and that two Housekeepers, (which he
named) should be security for them: All which was done accordingly, and they
m^unted to scower the Roads of Hertfordshire, but without success; for they met
with no prize till toward night, when they came up with an Innekeeper of
Bishops Strafford, who by chance had not above twelve shillings in his pocket;
so that they treated him very untowardly for not riding better furnished; which
perhaps might more provoke and invigorate his search and prosecution after
them, though no extraordinary diligence was required: For after they had robbed
him, they rode not above four miles, but took up their lodging as unconcernedly
as might be, at a public Inn at Ware, where they were the same night taken in
their b^ds upon the Hue and Cry sent after them; and thereupon sent to Hertford
Goal, and now condemned to die. It Is said, they were after Condemnation very
penitent (especially the Last maker) and that they have made a discovery of,
and impeached several persons in London that used to infest the Roads,
particularly the two persons that now sent them out, and engaged for their
Horses; who are privately retired thereupon, and do for the present abscond
themselves.

Another person was here Arraigned, convicted, and Condemned for picking a
pocket at Hemsted fair: He was taken in the very Act, and had very little to
say for himself, nor we of him.

But that which made the most Noise and Discourse at this Assizes, was the
Trial of a person for wilfully attempting to set the Town of Hodsdon on Fire,
that he and some thievish Confederates of his might thereby have the fitter
opportunity to steal and pilfer distressed peoples Goods, in that lamentable
distraction. The Prisoner was born and bred for the most part in St. Martins le
Grand, London; but by reason of an ill Education and bad Examples, became very
loose and extra vagant in his Conversation, and fit (it seems) for any
enterprise of mischief. Upon the 20 of June last past he came down to the said
Town of Hodsdon in this County, and took up his Quarters at the Black Lion Inn
there, where he continued likewise the next day, and eat and drank very
plentifully, waiting for, as it is believed, the arrival of his Associates; but
they not coming all day, it seems he was resolved to go about his wicked
design, although he were all alone. For the next Evening, June 21. taking up a
live Fire brand out of the Kitchen, under pretense of lighting his Pipe of
Tobacco, he went with it out into the back side, and so directly into the
Stable, and there put the Brand, fresh and burning as it was, into the Rack
full of Hay. But as he went through the Yard thither, a young Maid at the next
door saw him out at the window, and perceiving him to go with fire into the
Stable, called to him after he was in there, and asked what he did there: Who
answered, No harm, no harm. However the Maid, fearing the worst, presently
called her Father, who with another Neighbor went immediately into the Stable,
and there found part of the Firebrand burning in the Rack: But the Prisoner,
at the Alarm given by the Maid, and hearing them come, had endeavored to pull
the Firebrand out of the Rack again, and so had broken it, and what was left
had only burnt a little Hay; but not proceeded so far as to flame, when these
two men came in and prevented it, so that no part of the Stable was burnt, or
any further mischief done; which must be attributed to the wonderful Mercy of
Providence, directing so seasonable a discovery of it; which otherwise possibly
(nay very probably, considering the situation of this Inn, and the Wind and
Weather at that time) might have destroyed the greatest part of the Town.

Being thus taken in the Fact, he was carried and examined before two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, June the 22 th 1676. where he
confessed he did design to set the aforesaid Stable, and consequently as far as
in him lay, the whole Town on Fire: That he was hired for that purpose by two
idle persons, whose Names and Lodgings in London he declared, with description
of their Habits and Persons (of whom one is since taken, and at present in the
Gatehouse, but absolutely denies what is charged upon him; the other has been
strictly searched for, but cannot be found:) From these Fellows, he said, he
had received the sum of Thirty Shillings on Thursday, June the 15 on
condition to come down, and set this Town of Hodsdon on fire, that they (who
promised to follow) might have the advantage to Steal and plunder; and that
they had treated further about his going afterward to fire the Town of
Hertford, for which he was to have Five Pounds. At his Trial he pleaded, Not
Guilty, for forms sake, yet did not in reality disown the Fact; but when the
Firebrand and some Hay-ashes were produced in Court, he cried out with an
horrid Imprecation, What do you bring that for, do I deny it? And still
persisted to affirm all that he had declared before the Justice: However, it
being only an intention (though a most wicked and cruel one) and no part of the
House or Stable actually burnt, it could not be adjudged Felony within the
Statute, but a misdeameanour of the highest rate imaginable; and accordingly
for his punishment he received Sentence. To stand two several Market days in
the Pillory, and is fined Three Hundred Pounds, and never to be released out of
Prison till he has not only paid the same, but also given such good Security
as two Justices of Peace of this County of Hertford shall approve, to be of the
good behavior for the future, during the term of his life. In pursuance
whereof, as I am informed, he stood on Wednesday the 20th of July, in the
Pillory at Hodsdon, and on the Saturday following suffered the same punishment
at Hertford; and so was reconvey'd to the Goal, thereto lie till he can
discharge his Fine; of which there is no great probability.

FINIS.

