A true NARRATIVE OF THE RECEPTION OF THEIR Royal Highnesses AT THEIR ARRIVAL
in SCOTLAND.
Printed by Command of his Majesty's Privy Council. 24. Nov. 1680.

MOnday the 25th of October, Their Royal Highnesses arriving with the Evenings
Tide, in Kircaldy Road, about Ten of the clock at night, the Duke of Rothes
sent his Nephew Mr. France Montgomerie, to complement the Duke and Duchess:
And the next morning His Grace sent the Lord Justice Clerk for that same end,
and to receive his Highnesses commands concerning his, Landing. That same day
about Eleven a clock in the forenoon, their Royal Highnesses arrived at
Kircaldy Road; where having landed, they were met by His Grace the Duke of
Rothes Lord High-Chancellor, with many of the Privy Council, and most of the
Nobility and Centry of the Shires next adjacent, who kissed their Royal
Highnesses hands at their landing upon the Shore, which was crowded with a
multitude of People to congratulate their Royal Highnesses safe Arrival to this
his Majesty's ancient Kingdom. From Kircaldy, their Royal Highnesses set
forward to the Lord Chancellor's house of Lesly; whither they were attended
with a noble train of Coaches, and many of the Nobility and Gentry on
Horseback, and guarded by his Majesty's Troop of Guards. At Lesly their Royal
Highnesses were magnificently Entertained till Friday the 29. when (having
parted thence) they were attended to Bruntisland; their Royal Highnesses Train
still growing more numerous: At Bruntisland they were received with Shooting of
great Guns, Ringing of Bells, Acclamations of the People, and all other
Expressions of Joy imaginable; which continued till their Royal Highnesses were
aboard the Charlot Yaught, attended by His Grace the Lord Chancellor, and many
of the best of the Nobility: The other Yaughts, with several other Boats, and
all the Boats about Bruntisland, were filled with the Nobility and Gentry of
the Train.

In their passage to Leith, they were Saluted by the great Guns from his
Majesty's Castle of Edinburgh, with the Guns from the Bastions at Leith, from
the Men of War and other Ships, both in the Road and Harbor of Leith.

The Shore was so throng with Persons of all Ranks, that the noise of the
Cannon, Trumpets, Kettle-drums, and Drums, were almost drowned with the loud
and reiterated Acclamations of the People, for the safe Arrival of their Royal
Highnesses; which was about five in the Afternoon.

At their Landing at Leith, their Royal Highnesses were met by the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, ushered by their Macers; where several Ladies were
attending to wait on her Royal Highness. Here their Royal Highnesses were
received by the Earl of Linlithgow, Colonel of His Majesty's Regiment of
Guards, upon the head of several Companies of the Regiment, and were attended
by the Sheriffs, and most of the Gentlemen of the three Lothians and next
adjacent Shires; which made a Lane on both sides of the Street, through the
whole Town of Leith: After the Kings Troop of Guards, marched the Nobility and
Gentry that were on Horseback, and after them a great Train of Coaches filled
with the Council and Nobility: Their Royal Highnesses having made choice of the
Lord Justice Clerk his Coach.

From Leith to the Watergate, at the Abbay of Halyrud-house, their Royal
Highnesses were guarded by the Train-bands and Militia Regiment of this City,
consisting of forty four Companies, who made a lane for their Royal Highnesses
and their Train, to pass betwixt Leith and Edinburgh. All the while they were
upon the way, the great Guns from the Castle and other places, prepared on
purpose, saluted them; the whole body of the People universally shouting with
great joy and cheerfulness, Lord preserve His Majesty, and their Royal
Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Albany. Being come to the Watergate near
the Palace-Royal, they were met by the Lord Provost, Magistrates, and
Town-Council of Edinburgh. in their best Formalities; where the Lord Provost
kneeling, and having kissed His Royal Highness's hand, delivered to him the
silver Keys of the City, and heartily welcomed him, in Name of the whole
Citizens, to his Majesty's good Town of Edinburgh.

From this to the Palace, their Royal Highnesses were guarded by two or three
hundred of the best Citizens with gilded Partisans, and in the outer Court were
received by several other Companies of his Majesty's Guards: In the Guard-hall
they were received by their Graces the Lords Archbishops of St. Andrews and
Glasgow, and several others of the Lords of the Clergy, where his Grace the
Lord Primate complemented their Royal Highnesses in Name of the Orthodox
Clergy: where the Lieutenant-Governour of the Castle of Edinburgh, delivered to
his Royal Highness the Keys of the Castle.

All the Bells of the City continued ringing most of the night, and all the
Streets of the City were filled with great Bonefires, wither many of the
Citizens repaired to drink their Majesty's and Royal Highnesses Health: Nor was
any thing to be seen but an universal Joy in the Countenances of all here.

Saturday the 3. of October, the Lord Bishop of Edinburgh, with all the Clergy
in and about this City, in their Canonical Habits, kissed his Royal Highness
hand, where the Bishop of Edinburgh expressed the general Satisfaction of the
Orthodox Clergy for his Royal Highness safe Arrival; and assured his Highness
of their fervent Prayers for his Sacred Majesty and their Royal Line. Tuesday
the 2. of Nov. being the first day of Sessions, the Senators of the College of
Justice, with all the other Members thereof in a great Body, in their Gowns,
ushered by their Macers, went to the Palace, where having kissed his Royal
Highness hand, the Lord President of the Session, in Name of the Lawyers of
this Kingdom, complemented his Royal Highness upon his Arrival; as did the Lord
Justice Clerk, in Name of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Justiciary,
who in their Scarlet-Gowns, attended by the Members of their Court, and ushered
by the Macers, waited likewise upon his Royal Highness, and kissed his hand. Nor
indeed was there any thing wanting to express the general Joy of all here, for
the happy Arrival of so Excellent a Prince, and so Dear to this Kingdom.

FINIS.
EDINBVRGH: Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most
Sacred Majesty; and reprinted at London for Andrew Forrester in Kings-street,
Westminster. 1680.


