THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY.
OR THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION of six notorious Popish Priests and Jesuits, FOR
High Treason, Viz. William Russel, alias Napper, James Corker, Lionel Anderson,
alias. Munson, Charles Parry, and Alexander Lunsden, At a Commission of Oyer
and Terminer there held, on Saturday the 17th of this instant January 1679.

London Printed in the Year, 1679.

THE Trial and Condemnation Of the six notorious Traitors.
THe Kings Witnesses attending on the Court there were eight Romish Priests and
Jesuits brought to the Bar, to receive their Trials upon the account of
High Treason, viz. Joseph Kemish, William Russel, alias, Napper, Henry Starkie,
William Marshal, James Corker, Lionel Anderson, alias, Munson, Charles Parry,
and Alexander Lunsden; but the evidence not being prepared for the Trial of the
former, viz. Kemish, he was reserved till another time; but against the other
seven they proceeded as follows, according to their Indictments, that they
being Priests and English-born, after having received orders from the Sea of
Rome, came over and remained in England, the which by a Statute of the 27th of
Queen Elizabeth is made high Treason, Mr. Attorny-General and the Kings Council
laid open the Cause to the Jury and Evidence, and the jury being charged with
them, according to Law, Lionel Anderson was first brought to the Bar, where
Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedlo, Mr. Dangerfield, Mr. Prance, and Mr. Dugdale were sworn
for the King, Mr. Dangerfield first standing up, did give a fair and large
account, that the Prisoner was a Priest in orders.

And that he had not only confessed him, but had given him the Sacrament, and
in his Priestly Vestments celebrated Mass; not only at Wild-house, but also at
several other places, and that after he had confessed the Witness, he bid him
go and be drunk with such a Gentleman, for it was for the good and propagation
of the Romish Cause, that he was a Priest likewise Dr. Oats did affirm, and
that he had at several times repeated Mass and given the Sacrament to his
knowledge, with many other plain and possitive circumstances, to this he
Pleaded not guilty, with many horrible Execrations.

Afterward James Corker was brought to the Bar, his Plea was that he had been
once tried with Sr. George Wakeman, and that he ought not twice to be put in
danger of his Life: but the Court satisfied him in this point, whereas he
before was tried as a Conspirator, that he now was tried as a Popish-priest,
and then he pleaded not guilty, at which Mr. Attorney General laying open the
Indictment, the Evidence were sworn, viz. Dr. Oats and Mr. Prance who likewise
did against him as against the former, affirm that they had seen him Cellebrate
Mass, give the Sacrament, and in his priestly Robes at Somerset House, and
other places, and was to have been a Bishop: but he absolutely denied that ever
he had acquaintance with the Witnesses, or scarcely seen them before his last
Arraignment, and in a Jesuitical obstenancy, made many vows and execrations
endeavoring to scandalize the Evidence

The next was William Ma^shal who was likewise tried before with Corker, and
did plead the same, and made a long oration in his own defense, courting the
Acts of Parliaments and Statutes made and to be put in force on that account,
and did, to speak the truth, seem to be a learned and most proficient man, his
place of executing of his Priestly Function, was for the most part in the
Savoy, where Doctor Oats affirmed that he had heard him more then twelve times
say Mass in 1677. this he denied, and brought the woman that keept the house to
testify that Dr. Oats was never there, but she bogling in her Testimony did
confound her Evidence, saying that he might be there, but that she knew not she
had seen him there, Mr. Prance and Mr. Bedlo did affirm him likewise to have
taken orders, and that they had known him to have been a Plotter, and a most
notorious Priest, As likewise upon the same Indictments and Statute of the 27th
of Queen Elizabeth which makes it High Treason for any English born Subjects to
go and take Orders at Rome, and after come over into England, whereupon William
Russel alias Napper Henry Starky, Charles Parry, and Alexander Lunsdel were
brought to the Bar, who pleaded not Guilty, but the aforementioned Evidence
for the King, did so plainly make it appear, that they were not only Priests,
but had at several times administered according to their Priestly Function, the
Sacraments, and also confessed and absolved some of them, and that Mr. Prance
had received Chalices, Oyl-pots, and several other Trinkets belonging to the
Al^er, of them to mend, scour, and refine; upon this plain Evidence, six of
them were by the Jury brought in Guilty of High Treason, and sentenced by the
Court to be drawn, hanged and Quartered, viz. Russel, alias, Napper, Starky,
Marshal, Corker, Anderson, and Parry, but Lunsden being a Scotchman-born, was
not thought to come within the Verge of the said Act of Parliament, and
therefore reserved for a special Verdict in that Case.

Thus may we see, tho haughty Rome does bend her Frowns at this our English
Nation, nay and prompt our Native Subjects to conspire our Downfall and
immediate Ruin. Heaven stands most firmly on our side, and that pernicious
Snare that they had laid to catch the Innocent, themselves have fallen in; for
sure it is, Eternal Vengeance will not sleep for ever, when such dire
Contrivances hatched in the dark Shades of Night ascend and pierce the Blushing
Clouds, therefore let both Tirant Rome, and her thrice fatal Emissaries now
beware, least they incur the high displeasure of a dreadful God, and pull down
most deserved Ruin on their Heads, whilst that they think to dare Omnipotence,
by their endeavoring to destroy such as are protected by his Providence:

FINIS.

