A true Relation OF THE Horrid and Bloody Massacre IN SCOTLAND, By the Irish
Papists; who Landed Sixty Miles from Edinburgh, putting all to Fire and Sword,
in their way to that City.
Barwick December. 23, 1688. SIR,
YEster-night we had the sad and surprizeing News, by an Express of the Council
of Scotland to our Governor, that about 20000. Irish were Landed in Scotland,
about Sixty Miles from Edinburgh, putting all to Fire and Sword; to whom it is
said the Apostate Chancellor of that Kingdom, will join with the rest of the
Bloody Papists there. And truly, Sir, that Kingdom being un-arm'd, and
undisciplined, those Massacres will in short space run a great length. I desire
you may disperse this News abroad, if it be not in Town, before your Receipt of
this; for that Country, and the North of England, without speedy relief, is in
great danger of depopulation: And the Duke of Gordon has in his possession the
Castle of Edinburgh; whereby he can at pleasure level that City with the
Ground. At 12 of the Clock yester-night, our Governor, Lieutenant Colonel
Billingsley, dispatched an Express to the Lords Danby and Lumley, for drawing
their Forces to this Town. I received yours to day, which being Sabbath day, I
beg your Pardon for brevity.

I was told, they see some of the Fires and Burnings of those Rebels at
Edinburgh; this is the beginning of the Discovery of the Popish Intrigue. God
defend England from the French, and his Highness the Prince of Orange from
Bloody Popish attempts.

London, Published by J. Wells, in St. Paul's Alley in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1688.


