A LETTER TO THE Misrepresenter of Papists. BEING A Vindication of that part of
the Protestant Preface to the Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin, etc.
which concerns the Protestants Charity to Papists, and a Layman's writing it.

IN Answer to what is Objected against it in the 4th Chapter of the Second Part
of the Papist Misrepresented, etc.

By the same LAYMAN who translated the Wholesome Advices, etc. and made the
Preface to them.

IMPRIMATUR,

Guil. Needham.
Jan. 14. 1686.


London, Printed by J. D. for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and Thomas
Newborough at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1687.

A LETTER to the Misrepresenter of PAPISTS.
SIR,
I Find that the Translation of the Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin,
etc. which may have helped to settle the Minds of others, has something
discomposed yours. For tho you are not, I dare say, pleased with the Protestant
Preface to it, yet however you dissemble your pain. Wisemen say that you bite
that Preface for grief of the Translation. I cannot but admire the Art of you
Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, in running down Books with bold Contempt,
which you know not otherwise how to deal with. This Translation and Preface,
for some Reasons, is an Eyesore to you; and chiefly for helping to spoil the
new Fashion of maintaining Popery by Representing it. Something therefore must
be done with it; and so a little part of the Preface, which did not belong
neither to the main design of the Book, must be singled out and be made an
Example. As for all the rest, it is sufficiently answered by saying, Must I set
up for Reader of Anatomy upon all the Pamphlets that come into the World? I am
highly obliged to you for the Kindness; but I think the Scavenger has much the
better Office, who his nothing but Dirt and Sinks to deal with, much less
offensive, than to be always raking into filthy Calumnies, fulsome
Incongruities, and noysom Impertinencies. Which kind of Language one would
hardly use, but out of a great desire to be unanswerable one way or other.
After this touch upon the whole, you come to touch at some particulars which
seem to fall within your Province of Representing; or rather to touch at
something, which you were the better provided to touch, because you had in the
very same manner touch it before in your fourth Vindication of the First Part.
The particular is, That Papists allow no less a possibility of Salvation to
Protestants than Protestants do to Papists. Now although this is all that I am
concerned to oppose; yet I shall offer a few words to your Preparatory
Discourse, in which you pretend to show what good reason you have to pronounce
against the Possibility of Salvation amongst us; or rather in the new fashioned
Phrase, that we as Protestants are guilty of Sins inconsistent with Salvation,
inasmuch as we are separated from your Communion. The short of what you say is,
That after most serious considerations and the weighing of all reasons, the
Papist believes the Roman Church in which he is, to be that one only holy
Catholic Church, and therefore he does not question, but what is truly
affirmed of the Church of the Apostles and succeeding Ages, and those that fell
from it, is most true of the same Church now in being, of which he is a Member,
and of all those who separate from it, upon what pretext soever. Now it had
been much more to the purpose to have produced those serious Considerations,
than to have spent so much time as you did, to prove what none of us make the
least question of, viz. That Christ Established a Catholic Church; that he
committed the Care of it to the Apostles; that they were inspired with the
knowledge of Truth; that they left Pastors to govern and feed the Flock after
their decease; and that the Promise of Salvation is made to Believers,
exclusively to Unbelievers. This I say is all very true, but not to your
purpose, unless you had proved also, what you do but insinuate, That we have
separated our selves from the Doctrine and Government of the Church of Christ.
Which words I wonder that you were not afraid to use, when they lay so fair to
be turned upon your selves. For we are no less sure, that many of your
Doctrines are no parts of the Doctrine of that Church; and that Rome's being
the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, was not the Government of that Church
over which the Apostles were, etc. Overseers for their time, than we are that
such a Church was established in the World. And therefore if they who separate
themselves from the Doctrine and Government of the Church of Christ, as it was
first established, cannot hope for Salvation: Pray look to your selves as to
that Point, instead of contending that you are the only, Catholic Church, out
of which there is no hope of Salvation.

As to what you would insinuate, that there must be in the Church a Succession
of Pastors to the Worlds end, who should no more err in teaching, than the
Apostles themselves did, and that your Church has that Succession. I must tell
you as to the first, that it is by no means proved from John 14. v. 16. since
what is there promised to the Apostles, is not promised to the Church of all
Ages, so as it was to the Apostles. The Spirit of God abode with the Apostles
for ever, that is, so long as they lived, to guide them into the knowledge of
Truth, and by them to guide the Church in all after-Ages. There are many things
in this Discourse of our Savior to his Apostles, which cannot be applied to
any Age of the Church after theirs. And therefore what is, and what is not
limited to them, must be argued out from the Nature of the things themselves
which are said. And lastly, tho you will not have this Promise limited to the
Persons of the Apostles, but annexed to their Function, as in some sense I grant
it may be; yet you ought to have taken notice, that the Promise is however
limited by a Condition, even in the words foregoing and following the Promise;
If ye love me, keep my Commandments, and there the Condition is once expressed.
For it follows, And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth. And
now mark once again what follows, Whom the World cannot receive, because it
sees him not, neither knows him. Where, if by the World, be meant worldly
and wicked Men, as I believe you will grant; you see here is no absolute
promise of such a Guidance to a Succession of Pastors, as shall make it at any
time of the Church Heresy to contradict whatsoever they teach, or Schism to
withdraw from their Obedience. As to the last; If you had proved such a
Succession of Infallible Teachers as you speak of; yet I tell you once more,
that the hardest part of your Task would be still behind; which is to prove,
That you have had all along, and still have that Succession; which I desire you
to do in your next, if you can, if it be but for the Instruction of a Layman
that desires to be led into all Truth, necessary, or even profitable for his
Salvation. And because I would not have you lose your labor, I will open my
greatest Difficulty against this belief. I am sure you cannot go about this
Work without taking Scripture in to furnish out your Argument. Now I desire you
to bring me such Scriptures, which shall at least make it as evident, that your
Church was always to have a Succession of Infallible Teachers, as it is to me
from diverse other Scriptures evident, that your Pastors have most certainly
contradicted the Doctrine of the Scriptures. And when you have done this, you
shall hear farther from me. In the mean time, your loose Affirmations
concerning the Catholic Church have been so often answered, that you need not
wonder that a Layman of our Church can tell what to say to them.

But to come to that wherein I am particularly concerned. You are disturbed at
my saying, That the Worship, Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome are
so extremely dangerous, that nothing but Invincible Ignorance, of which God
only can judge, can give us any reasonable hopes of their Salvation who live and
die in that Communion. Now surely the uncharitableness of this does not lie in
supposing that Invincible Ignorance will be pleadable in this Case, for it is a
Plea which will go a great way amongst those of the Roman Communion: which, I
say, with the more confidence, because in the Romish Countries where I have
been, the People seem to me to have the fairest claim to the benefit of
Ignorance, that can be well imagined amongst Christians.

Now since at last you are brought in this Pamphlet of yours to agree with
Protestants, that Ignorance will save Men, and that we yield the greatest part
of the People have an indisputable right to it; are not the Protestants
charitable to a high degree? If this will not please you, I do not know what
will. Surely, Sir, you do not expect that Protestants should believe and say,
that you, with all your Errors about you, are in as safe a way to Salvation, as
they themselves who have renounced them? If this could be, what, I pray ye,
made our Forefathers suffer themselves to be separated from your Communion? or
makes us that we cannot join with you? Certainly this was, and is still nothing
but want of sound Faith, purity of Doctrines and Worship. And I know nothing
else can, or ever was pretended to justify our Separation. And this alone one
would think might be sufficient to vindicate my Assertion from being
uncharitable. But perhaps I may do it more by and by.

But you will tell me that nevertheless Protestants are as uncharitable as
Papists, and come not an Ace behind them. Indeed I should be very sorry this
were true. And tho it is, I know, an untoward Question to Papists, yet I must
ask, How do you prove this, Sir? Why thus. Protestants only allow Salvation to
Papists upon Invincible Ignorance, and Papists do the same to Protestants. I
must confess that in this Paper of yours, you grant Salvation to Protestants
who live piously, and repent sincerely of all offenses, and through invincible
Ignorance remain in that Communion. Now whatever Truth there is in the Saying
it self, yet from you we look upon this Concession as a piece of New Popery.
The Old Popery was, Protestancy unrepented of Damns. Neither Invincible
Ignorance, nor Piety, nor any Repentance that included not a leaving the
Protestants Communion, and joining with the Romish, could Save. But here we
take notice, that of this, as well as of all the other unreasonable pieces of
Old Popery, you begin at last to be ashamed, or at least to think it for the
Interest of your design on foot, to deny them, or disguise and soften them,
that so they may go the better down with those People who are not so well read
in your Controversies, and suspect no Snake in the Grass. But to go on with my
Point. Did not the Author of Charity Mistaken and Charity Maintained (which
produced that incomparable Book of Mr. Charity maintained. P. 1. c. 7. Sect. 6.
and in diverse other places of that, and Charity Mistaken.
Chillingworth) stiffly and boldly assert, That all Roman Catholics, not one
excepted, -- Do with unanimous consent believe and profess that Protestancy
unrepented destroys Salvation? Did not the Jesuit, in his Relation of Bp.
Laud's Conference* swear upon his Soul, That there was but one saving Faith,
and that is the Roman? And now in our Days, has not a Lucilla and Elizabeth.
Late Paper endeavored to make us as great Schismatics as the Donatists? And
according to you, can Schismatics, dying such, go to Heaven? And does not that
Author force St. Austin to tell us in plain terms, That whosoever is separated
from the Catholic Church (by which, against all Modesty and Truth, you always
mean your own particular Church) how laudably soever he thinks himself to live,
for this only Crime, that he is disjoined from the Unity of Christ (that is to
say, in your Language, the Pope) he shall not have Life, but the Wrath of God
abides on him. Pray, Sir, be so kind, if not to me, yet to your self, to
reconcile these Sayings with what you say, viz. That there is no Papists but
what will grant such Protestants hopes of Salvation, who living piously, and
repenting sincerely of all Offenses, and through invincible Ignorance remain in
that Communion. Where Is the Truth and Honesty now of your Assertion, That there
is No Papist, etc.? When I have already produced three, and perhaps if I
pleased, could name three hundred. What do you call this amongst you? We call
it contradicting one another. Well, however pray observe here is two sorts of
Popery. But which must a Man rely on for Orthodox? The Old, or the New Popery.
I must confess I am inclined to believe the New to be best, but certainly the
Old Popery is the true standing Doctrine of the Church of Rome. But suppose we
stood in need of the New, what should we be the better for it, unless the
Concession were stamped with the Fishers Seal? for you that deal it out to the
World, are but a private obscure Man, and your Church is no more bound to stand
to what you say, than mine is to what I say, unless it be Truth. This that you
grant, at best, is but a sign, that you have a better opinion of the Protestant
Religion than the Generality of your Writers. But to let this pass. I will now
prove this Truth beyond any possible Reply, viz. That Papists deny Salvation to
Protestants remaining such, and that Protestants grant a Possibility of it to
Papists remaining such: And therefore by Consequence, the first must needs be
on the uncharitable, and the last on the charitable side. And this I shall do
by showing, that our Charity is so great to the Papists, and their want of it
so apparent to us, that they have abused it into an Argument against us. And
this is so notoriously true, that the Papists are not ashamed to boast of it in
their Writings and Conversation; thinking thereby to draw weak Persons, that
cannot consider where the Ch^at of the Argument lies to be of their Church: And
with this deceitful Argument, which they have framed from our (...) of ^^^rity
to them, and their want of it to us, I have heard (...) make a great noise, and
tell of the mi^hty Feats it (...). But certainly it was amongst such (...) had
thrown away all their Reason and Sense; or else if (...) been no other thing to
recommend the Church of England, they would have thought that to be the best
and safest Church, which eminently has the very Beauty and Form of Christian
Religion, viz. Charity, which the Church of England so constantly and largely
maintains and practices. But the Argument is this, -- You Protestants confess
Salvation May be had in the Romish Church, but we Papists utterly deny it to
yours; therefore by the Confession of both sides, those that are in our Church
are safe; but there is great question concerning Protestants, remaining such,
for none but themselves say they can be saved. What think you now, Sir, of the
Protestants Charity, and the Papists want of it? Is here any provision made for
poor Protestants by Invincible Ignorance? If this does not prove that
Pretestants have some Charity for Papists, and they none at all for us
Protestants, I do not know what can. And that you could be ignorant of these
things, and this Argument so commonly used by your Men, when they would deceive
the well meaning People of our Church, you must excuse me if I cannot believe
it. With what Face then, Sir, could you tell the gaping multitude, as you think
fit to call the poor honest People, That Papists do not advance the Damnation
of Protestants one Ace farther against them, than the Protestants against
Papists; and that the Doctrine of Protestants in this affair is the same in
reference to each other; and the Protestants are as uncharitable Damers of the
Papists as they are made to be of the Protestants? And now the matter being
brought to this issue; Pray, Sir, tell me who are the uncharitable Damners,
thunderers of Hell and Damnation! who imposes upon the People? who are the
injurious Slanderers? And who is it that render the Papists black and odions
for their uncharitableness, but the Papists themselves? Certainly, Sir, if your
Eyesight had not been horribly indisposed with the malignant Influence of
Rome, you would have seen, that the unchristian Damners are the Papists only.
For shame learn, tho late, to maintain your Cause by Truth and Charity, or let
it perish.

But I foresee that you may take it a little ill, that our Charity extends not
to the Learned and Judicious, in the number of which I dare say you reckon your
self. Now for these Persons we are to consider, whether they know or believe
such and such things to be false, which yet for Worldly Ends they maintain for
Truths; or after an honest diligent search, cannot by any means discover them
to be Errors, hindered by prepossession, Education, etc. For these last Persons
I cannot see why Invincible Ignorance will not comprehend them as well as the
ordinary and unlearned People: For I cannot tell what Invincible Ignorance is,
unless it be this, That after all our best endeavors according to our utmost
ability and means, we yet cannot discern which is Error, and which is Truth.
But now for the first sort, who maintain known Errors for Truths, against their
Conscience, only for Secular Advantages (in the number of which I pray God you
be not) what would you have us believe or say of them? God Almighty Himself has
made no Provision, that we know of, for bold, wilful and impenitent Sinners. We
judge no Man that has a Master to stand and fall to. Charity hops all things.
And I must tell you my Mind freely, for I have vowed to follow Truth and
Charity wherever they lead me: That I think it had been better, and more like
Christians, if no Member of either Church had meddled with the Events of things,
and leapt into God's Judgment Seat, and pronounced final Sentence upon Souls.
That certainly being a Secret and Prerogative peculiar to God, who only is the
Searcher of Men's Hearts, knows all things, and has an absolute Dominion over
his Creatures, and can do all that his Justice, his Goodness, and his Mercy
Wills. Had the Pastors of each Church done no more, but barely and plainly
taught the Truths of God, or what they sincerely believed to be so, and left
the Judgment of Persons to him, that always judges right; they had doubtless
done their Duty. But it is evident the Men of your Church first used it to work
upon Men's Passions, and what they could not persuade their Understandings to
for want of Truth and Reason, they were resolved to do it by frighting of them.
For it is too apparent, that more are swayed by Fear than Love; more are drawn
by their Affections and Passions, than by their Reason; and some of our
Churchmen to countermine your Policy, found it expedient to imitate you, as
far as Truth and Christian Charity would permit them. And this may suffice also
to apologize for my using it in my Preface.

It now remains, Sir, that I speak to another thing which seemed to disturb
you; which is, Whether I am a Layman, or a Clergyman. For I find you wavering
about it; and therefore I Will endeavor to fix you, tho in a doubtful case; Why
should not Charity have inclined you that brag of so much, to believe me when I
profess my self a Layman? Well, but I speak so like a Clergyman, so almost in
the very Words and Phrases of a Doctor of my Church, and another Doctor
mentioned in your Last Reply, that you cannot but take what I say for
Church-Sence, dropping through a Lay-Pen. Sir, I must needs thank you for the
Honor you do me, in taking me to speak like such great Men; but I have not
Vanity enough to believe that I do. Yet thus much I Will confess, that I desire
to live no longer than I can, if not speak, yet love and admire the Church-of-
England Sense. But is it impossible for a Layman to speak like a Clergyman?
Does Holy Orders make such a difference? Or do you imagine I have never read
any of our Churches Writers? Why may not then my Mind be tinctured by them? And
so what I speak or write, bear some resemblance to them? Is there not many a
Son like his Father? And how do you know but I am the Son of a Clergyman? and
so by Blood derive something of their way of Writing. But to make an end; I
fancy, Sir, that you, or whoever was the Author of the First Part of the Papist
Misrepresented, etc. and some others of your Church, have found to your grief
and shame, that either of these Doctors you speak of, could if they had pleased
to have undertaken so mean a work, have writ another sort of a Preface, than I
have done, to the disadvantage of the French Popery now imitated in England.
Let the meanness of the performance prevail over you, to believe that neither
of them made it. But indeed you are Injurious to them, to fancy they would be
guilty of such indirect dealing. No, No, Sir, the Divines of the Church of
England have a better Cause, they need use no Arts, or Tricks, no feigned
Miracles, no bold Untruths, no malicious Whispers and Slanders to support and
defend it, nor put Shams upon the World. This practice is none of theirs; and
if you please that may be added, as a mark to prove ours a true Church: And
indeed I could easily persuade my self to believe, that your own practice, and
that of your Party was in your Thoughts, when this Fancy entered into your
Brain. But in a Word, and to put you out of pain about these two Doctors (for I
cannot blame you for dreading them) I do assure you that neither of them made
that Preface; and once more, that I who now write this Letter to you am a
Layman, and writ that Preface, such as it is. And if I could but be infallibly
certain, that the old Popery was altered in the point of Malice, Revenge, and
seeking occasion against those who never so little oppose or hinder the designs
of Rome, I would give you entire satisfaction in this Particular, and not only
tell you my Name, but where I live. But because I cannot get out of my Thoughts
some late Actions, and that hard usage of the brave Author of Wholesome Advices,
etc. I fear lest Old Popery may be practiced upon me too; and therefore think
it but common Prudence to conceal my self: For, to tell you true, I am not yet
weary of that little Happiness I enjoy.

But, Sir, you make your Misrepresenter tell the World, that I am dabling out
of my Element; by which one would think, that after all, you believed I am a
Layman. Well, but how out of my Element? May not a Layman tell Truth, and do
good to his Neighbor's Soul? Is God's Spirit, is all Knowledge limited to Holy
Orders? Because there are some Functions appropriated to Clergymen, such as
Administering the Sacraments, etc. does it therefore follow, that a Layman may
neither write nor discourse of any Matters of Religion? Pray, Sir, does that
Command, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, oblige Laymen as well as
Clergymen? If it does, and since I may edify my self, why, I beseech you, not
another? And can a Man express his Charity to his Neighbor in a higher manner
than in Spiritual Things? But the Arguments are infinite which might be used in
this Case. And therefore I shall only ask you whether Tertullian and Origin,
and many other of the Ancient Fathers, writ not about Religion when they were
Laymen? Nay, more; did not Pope Adrian and Pope Nicholas, admit Laymen into
Councils? And, pray, what was Picus Mirandula, but an Earl, and mere Layman?
and Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor of England? But above all, what was that
Prince who wrote against Luther, for which the Pope thought fit to bestow the
Title of Defender of the Faith upon him? But indeed why should it seem strange,
that you and your Church should find fault with Laymen's meddling in
Controversies of Religion, especially against you, when you dare totally bar
Laymens reading the Holy Scriptures, for which they have a Command from God,
Search the Scriptures; and persuade them to put out their Eyes, and throw away
their Reason, which God and Nature has given them to be their Guide through
this deceitful World. And yet I dare say, that if a Layman would undertake so
knotty a piece of Work, as to write in Defense of your Church, that you would
not tell him that he was d^^^ling out of his Element, tho he were no better
than a profligate Poet.

I pass over your unhandsom Language, and it is below me to return it. But I
cannot but stand amazed, to find a Member of the Church of Rome, and a
maintainer of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, make his Misrepresenter say,
That the Protestant Teachers know the People they have to deal with -- that
their discerning Faculties are stupefied -- that they will pass over fifty
Contradictions, without once stumbling; and that there is no fear of enquiring,
How can this be? No, Sir, the Teachers of the Church of England are not guilty
of this Tyranny. We are Members of a Church that invites all her Children to
the highest attainment of Knowledge, and teaches them that a reasonable Service
is the most acceptable to God; and imposes nothing upon them, that either
destroys or contradicts their Reason and Senses; that not only allows her
Children to read the Holy Scriptures, but beseeches them to do it, provided
they do it with a modest dependence on their lawful Teachers, for the sense of
some Texts; which may not be so clear to Persons who are unacquainted with the
Proprieties of the Languages in which the Holy Scriptures were writ, and the
Customs and Manners of the People and Countries where they were penned. In a
word, the Church of England allows a private Liberty of examining all things
she propounds, and does not expect that Men should follow her blindfold. She
requires indeed Obedience in those few Points which are absolutely necessary to
Salvation, because they are so plain, that it is impossible for an honest and
sound Mind to question them: But for things of an indifferent Nature, she only
desires that for the sake of Peace and Unity, Order and Decency, that her
Children would not dispute about them. In line, she is very sure, that they and
they only, are her true Children, her most sincere Members, who are the most
obedient to Scripture, and most ready to yield to the Evidence of them, and
Reason and Sense.

And thus, Sir, I have endeavored to restore Peace to your Mind, by showing
that Protestants are not at all uncharitable, but that Papists are; and that I
am a Layman, and yet may meddle in Divinity, and not be dabling out of my
Element. And now I hope you will be no longer in a fright of those two Doctors you
hinted; for, assure your self, that unless there be occasion to defend a poor
Layman of their Church, as far as the Truth and the Religion of it are
concerned (for you may possibly hear from me upon some other Point) these two
Doctors are better employed, than to trouble themselves with you.

But if against this plain Proof, that the Papists are the only uncharitable
Persons, you will yet rub your Forehead, and make Protestants as bad, What
Remedy? Truth will be Truth still. And however it fares with us, we have over
and above this Satisfaction; and you know the Testimony of an Enemy proves
much, that to give us our due, you say, we are the most gentile and courtly
Damners that can possibly be met with. Now for the Reward of this frank
Acknowledgment, I wish with all my Soul, Protestants could say so much of
Papists. But the continual sound of Pestilent Heretics, Damned Schismatics,
and such rude and unchristian Names every where heard, will not possibly permit
them.

To conclude all; I shall only desire you, for prevention of more trouble than
needs be, (and I have known a great Controversy to arise from a Matter less
liable to Mistake) to take notice, that the very Point in Difference, is not,
Whether the Religion of Protestants or Papists is the Truest or Safest? For he
that believes the second Commandment was given by God, and that it is not
lawful to worship any Being but only God, who gave being to all Things, need
not be to seek in that: Neither is it, whether the Protestants or Papists are
the most uncharitable? But, in Truth, the present Question is, Whether the
Papists are not the only uncharitable Persons? And I think I have fully proved
that that they are so, even from the Papists themselves.

Sir, I heartily wish you and your Party would, before it be too late, show so
much Charity to your selves and others, to leave off deceiving the poor Souls,
and disturbing the Peace of Mankind, tho by succeeding in your Enterprise, you
might arrive to the highest Temporal Felicities, and by desisting, suffer the
greatest of Humane Miseries.

And I am, Your very humble Servant.

A POSTSCRIPT by the Author of the Answer to the last Reply of the Representer.
HAving leave to fill up this place, I use it to rectify an Error in the 119th
Page of the last Answer to the Representer; where an etc. to Cochleus was
omitted without correction, and so he is brought in for the Reporter of those
Famous Fictions about Luther's Death; whereas his part in it is the least, the
rest being reported by others, particularly by Pontacus, Lindan, and our
Countryman W. Reinolds. Cochleus himself, with the Epistle concerning Luther's
latter-end, published by him fol. 298 of his History, tells the manner of his
Death otherwise. But Thyraeus a Jesuit was the Man whom I had in my mind, for
contradicting those with whom he agreed in the general Design of Defamation.
For he says, That day when Luther died, those possessed persons in a Town of
Brabant (where there were very many) who expected deliverance by the Patronage
of St. Dymna (of which for many years many had experience) were delivered from
the Devils, and a little after were again possessed. For the Case was this;
that the cruel Spirits again tormenting those miserable persons, being asked
where they had bestowed themselves the day before? answered, That by the
Command of their Chief they were called forth to the Funeral of the New
Prophet, and their faithful Fellow-worker, Luther, and had been present at it.
Which matter was confirmed by a Servant of Luther, who was with him while he
was dying miserably; For as he was looking out of the Casement for fresh Air,
he was greatly affrighted to see more than once I know not how many black ugly
Spirits skipping and dancing not far off. And this also was confirmed by the
Crows, which with a fearful noise accompanied the Body of Luther as it was
carried to Wittemberg. Which wise Tale ( De Demoniacis par. 1. n. 99.) is also
abetted by Flor. Rainundus de orig. Haeres. l. 3. p. 40. but does by no means
agree with what Reinolds reports in his Calvino-Turcismus, lib. 4. p. 957, that
Luther, after a merry Supper, was in the Night suddenly strangled by his Wife.
This Business, as they have severally reported it, is a very notable Instance
how early they began the Trade of Misrepresenting matters of Fact. But more of
this when there is more occasion.

I shall only add, that the Authority I have for saying that they spread such
like lewd Stories of Luther's Death before he was dead, is indeed the Authority
of Protestant Writers, and chiefly of Phil. Lonicerus in his Theatrum
Historicum, nor could it be expected that we should have any other.

FINIS.

