A TRUE RELATION OF THE Inhuman Cruelties Lately Acted by the REBELS IN
SCOTLAND.

WITH The manner of their taking of Glascough, Rifling the Lord Archbishops
House, Digging the Bishop of Argyles children out of their Graves: and many
other Barbarities.

Being the substance of a LETTER sent to a Person of Quality.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. 1679.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE CRUELTIES OF THE Rebels in SCOTLAND, etc.
SIR,
I Am very sorry I have so sad a Subject to ^reat of; and cannot but know, in
part, the trouble it will lay you under when you read it. The Crimes
perpetrated here are so great and foul in their own nature, that they admit not
of aggravation; and therefore I shall not spend time in Prefacing, but give you
the matter of fact, and leave the comment to your self.

When these Rebels had taken Glascough, they publicly made Proclamation. That
they fought against Supremacy, Prelacy and Popery. At the end of which
Proclamation, one called Belfour of Kinloch held up his hand and cried with a
loud voice, This is the hand that killed Sharp, (to wit, the Lord Archbishop of
St. Andrews; and no wonder the Miscreant robbed him of his Title, having before
bereaved him of his Life) This done, away they went to my Lord Archbishop of
Glascough's House, and having forcibly entered it, tore down all his Hangings,
and then tore them all to pieces. They broke open all his Trunks, tore his
Clothes, drained his Cellars; and in a word, made a miserable havoc of all
they found. Nothing escaped them save some few of the best of his Books, which
were before they could get to his House secured by some of the honest
Neighbors. And it may reasonably be presumed this Reverend Prelate had fell a
Sacrifice to their Devilish fury, had he been in their way.

But as if all this were not enough to make them eternally odious and loathsome
to all good and sober men; they added another piece of Villainy which is scarce
to be paralleld in any story; which is this: They entered into, and rifled the
Bishop of Argyle's House, destroying all they could find there; and that done,
went to the Grave where some time since two of the foresaid Bishop's Children
were buried; took up the Coffins, broke them open, and run their Swords through
them several times, and left the Bodies of the poor Infants above ground, as
Monuments of their Inhuman Villainy and Cruelty.

And as if they could not be satisfied unless to the sin of Rebellion, Murder,
and Rapine, they likewise added that of Sacriledg; they went to the High
Cathedral Church, and rifled that, took away the Linen used at the
Administration of the Blessed Sacrament; and had seized the Communion-Plate
too, had it not before their coming been conveyed away.

Thus far went these Rebels, and loath to stop here, Crowned all their Villainies
with one more, viz. They pulled down his Majesty's Picture, which was in the
great Hall of the Merchants Hospital, and then tore it to pieces, uttering
those treasonable and horrid speeches against His Sacred Majesty that are not
fit to be heard by any Christian man. One of them Preaching in Ruglin-Green, a
Village near Glascough, had this passage, viz. That the King had set up his
Banner; but told them, they had a Commission from Christ to set up his Banner,
and they might easily judge which would prevail.

The Magistrates of the foresaid Town, the Masters of the College, and Minister
of the place, all fled, some to Dunbertin Castle, some to Edinburgh, and some
to other places.

HAving given you this brief Account of their Barbarities, I shall now give you
in a few words the state of Affairs here in relation to them.

There were some of them got together in Fife, who begun to Plunder, and steal
Horses and Arms, with a resolution to reinforce the Rebels. But upon my Lord
Chancellors coming over to Fife to suppress these disorders, and to hasten out
the Militia and Heretors of that Shire, they vanished and fled toward
Sterling; where my Lord Elfingstoun, and the Earl of Murray's Deputy-Steward
for the Lordship of Down, happily met with them near the Pass, killed and took
almost the whole party, and brought in about a hundred Horsemen Prisoners to
Sterling; where they are now secured. Among these Prisoners they say there are
three (if not four) of my Lord St. Andrew's Murderers.

The Militia and the Heritors from the three Lowdens, Tivedale, and the Merff,
with those from Fife, are already come hither, who with the standing forces
make a considerable body, with which they intend to march toward the Enemy to
morrow or next day; and the Forces from the Shire of Perth and Sterling, are to
join them in their March. The Train of Artillery is ready, and all other
Necessaries provided for them. And every thing else is done that may tend to
the suppressing this Rebellion. All of them both Horse and Foot are brisk and
resolute, being animated by a good Cause; and for a Gracious Prince, their
Laws, Lives, and Liberties.

FINIS.

