THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY.
Which began on Wednesday the 21th of this instant April, 1680. and ended on
Friday the 23th following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. for
High Treason, Murders, Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular
Relation of their Names, and the places of their Committing their Facts, with
the number of those Condemned to die, burnt in the hand and to be whipped. With
the Condemnation of a notorious Jesuit, and of the three women to be burned,
and the proceedings with the Apprentices.
THe first that we shall give an Account of is an Irish Youth, who was
Arraigned and tried for Robbing his Master of aboout fifty pounds in Goods and
Moneys; the circumstances thus, That the Prisoner being taken into Service, and
brought up by the Gentleman now robbed, in Ireland, who coming over with him
into England, took a house in the Strand; the Youth observing the place where
he laid his Money, took an opportunity one Morning betimes to come into his
Chamber softly, and opening his Cabinet with a false Key, took thence forty
pounds in silver, and three twenty shilling pieces of Gold, and immediately
went to Bristol, and there under the name of a Servant to a person of Honor,
he endeavored to take Shipping for Ireland; but upon gross suspicions being
apprehended, the Robbery wss made plain, the Gold and most part of the Silver
being taken about him. His Plea was that he had the money by a Bill of Exchange
from his Father, but could not make it out, so that all Circumstances
considered, he was found Guilty of the Felony.

Henry Wether was Indicted for stealing a Mare from John Hall in the Parish of
S. Martins in the Fields, vallued at 7 pounds, the which he having sold to
another for 3 pounds down, and 3 at Midsummer, was seized in the custody of the
Buyer, so that he making immediate search for his Chapman, found him in a
Strongwater-Shop in Long-Acre, where apprehending him, he was committed, and
upon his Trial, it appeared that he had received the mercy of Transportation,
so that upon full Evidence he was Convicted of the Crime.

Edward Harrison was Inddicted and Arraigned for Felloniously murdering of one
John Jacob, on Shrove monday last ^n King Street Westminster (for now of late
that Scarlet Crime is grown so frequent, that it commonly concludes mutual
friendship in such a Trajeck Scene, that might far better befit Pagangs than
professors of Christianity;) the manner of this fatal mischief was according to
the Evidence produced in ^ourt as follows the deceased and the Prisoner
having had several fallings out in relation that the Prisoner was too familliar
with the wife of the deceased, whereupon he had often threatened to put a period
to his Life or loose his own, so that often having way laid him and fallen upon
him at unawares, not only with unlawful Staves, but with his sword endeavored
to surprise him but his designs not taking their wished for event, but hindered
by Providence for perpetrating such a Cruel Sin till the Saturday before this
Trajedy was completed, the aforementioned Harrison having sent for Jacobs
wife, after being strictly warned to the contrary, it so grieved him, that as
it is said vowed revenge, and waiting for the coming home of the Prisoner about
ten of the Clock, and no sooner having met him, but as the Prisoner pleaded, he
drew upon him, making many p^sses, which were put by and avoided by the
Prisoners retreating to his own house, but the other still pursuing him, he was
obliged to draw and stand upon his Guard, which with two mortal wounds on the
breast about four inches deep made him fall breathless at his feet but
notwithstanding the Jury upon weighing all circumstances thought fit to find
him guilty of Manslaughter.

Charles Sancy a Frenchman was tried likewise for robbing his Brother Mounsier
of twenty-eight French Pistols, 6 Meddals with Coats of Arms upon them, by
breaking open as he alleged, his Trunks in his absence, the party robbed could
speak no English, and so obliged to have an Interpreter, that the Court might
be sensible of his Evidence; the Felony was plain for Sancy confessed he had
taken twelve Pistols, but the Burglary being somewhat dubious, he was only
found guilty of the Felony.

William Harding was tried also for Ravishing one Sarah Southy a Girl about 7
or 8 years of Age, ticeing her down into a dark Cellar by the allurement of
Appels, and then accomplished his detestable Villainy, not only giving the Child
the foul Disease wherewith himself was infested, but likewise by forceable
penetrating her Body, so abused her secret parts, that the distressed wretch
remained in a most miserable condition, but long was it e're she would
complain, lest her Mother should beat her; but at last her extreme torment
enforced her to it, the which her mother no sooner understood, but she procured
a couple of Chirurgions that they might if possible retract the mischance; who
did conclude that she had been forced, which she her self confessed at large;
and he having been a very debauched fellow, for as the Witness swo^e in Court,
he was wont to Act carnally with his own mother; threatening when she refused to
permit his incestious desires, to Fire the house about her Ears, and when he
was searched, several Simptoms of the Venereal Distemper was seen to remain, so
that the Jury brotght him in guilty of the Rape.

Joseph Rumley and Matthew Smith received their Trials for Felony and
Burglary, committed upon the dwelling house of one Robert Baits near Milend
green breaking through the shutters of a Window, and after having entered,
conveyed thence, three pewter Dishes, several Brass Pans and Kettels,
Porringers, Linen, with many other things to a considerable vallue, being
pursued and apprehended they confessed the Felony, and the Burglary being
plainly proved, they were found Guilty of both.

Tho. Digs and Tho. Griste were Indicted and Arraigned for Felloniously bearing
away eighteen Yards of Broad cloth out of the Shop of one Mr. Gardne, living in
the Parish of St. Buttolph without Algate, coming in, they pretended to smoke a
Pipe of Tobacco, one of them held the maid in a Discourse, till the other
carried off the Purchase, but being Apprehended, one them, viz. the latter,
confessed where they had bestowed it, so upon search it was found, all but two
yards and a half, at an Alehouse hard by; upon the extenuation of the Evidence
joined to that of their own Confession they were both found Guilty.

Ann White received her Trial for a Felony and Burglary, for breaking open the
house of one Mr. Dodson in Holburn, but being surprised in the house e're she
could get her Pack together, she made her excuse to speak with the maid; but
the Gentlewoman of the house seeing her have a great bundle under her Arm,
called in some Neighbors to search her, which they no sooner did, but they
found three silk Coats, Amber Necklaces, Linen and the like; so that the
Theft, being plain, she was convicted of the Felony.

William Underwood and Elizabeth Cook were Indicted and Arraigned for high
Treason, for that they had contrary to the Laws of the Nation Counterfitted and
Clipped the lawful Coin of England, viz. milled half Crowns. Queen Elizabeth
shillings to the number of one hundred, as also Filed and washed; having taken
a Room in St. Martins Lane for that purpose, she being no better than a Harlot,
as it was plainly proved in Court, the first of their Discovery was by her
meeting with an old Companion of hers, whom she made sensible other new employ,
telling him she would now allow him a Guinny a week, whereupon he demanded how
she would come by it, to which she replied, she had got a Trade that would
allow far more, which was the Art of Coining, by which she could make of one
shilling worth of Mettle eight or nine half Crowns, telling him if he would put
in for a share and be secret, he should live beyond his expectation; the which
upon some falling out, he not only refused, but discovered it to a Constable,
who upon search found her and her Gallant in Bed; and breaking open the Door,
upon their refusal of Admittance; they no sooner enterred but Underwood ran to
the Closet, and took down a large piece of melted silver, which the Constable
requesting to see, he whispering him in the Ear, desired him to conceal it;
telling him he was undone if he should discover it, but he not minding that,
searched farther, and found several melting Pots, a pair of Shears, some
Clippings, and about 150 pieces of false Coin, representing King James's
shiilings, King Charles the first his half Crowns, Milled shillings, and other
pieces, with a Flask and all convenient Engines for that pernicious employ
which were hid in a hole under the Hearth with a board over it; which being
proved by three or four positive Evidences, they were both found Guilty of the
High Treason.

Edward Richardson, Jane Digby, and Elizabeth Richardson were likewise
Arraigned and tried for Treasonable practices in the nature of the former, for
that they living in St. Martins Lane, had for a considerable time used that
fraudulent and pernicious Art of Clipping his Majesty's lawful Coin, and
diminishing it three pence in every shilling, to the great damage of Traffic.
The first discovery of them was by a Cardmatch-wench, since poisoned) whom they
would have hired to Assist them in the intreague, who told it one Withers, and
he taking a Constable with him, went to search Elizabeth Richardsons Lodging,
where he no sooner entering, but she put her Head out of the Window and cried
out Murder, they are come for Clippings, the which gave notice to Edward
Richardson her Son, who lodged at the next house to convey thence his Tools and
Instruments, and to endeavor to fly; but being stopped and apprehended, upon
diligent search in his Lodging, there was nothing sound save a Receipt in his
Pocket how to wash Silver, but in his Mothers they found a pair of Shears,
several Rubbers, a Flask, Clippings, and other Instruments hid in the Ashes,
and in Mrs. Digbies Custody who owned the House, a Trunk hid beneath the stairs
in the Cellar, eight or nine pound clipped; and above all, one Brass
half-Crown, that answered to a piece of Clippings found in Elizabeth
Richardsons Custody, with a Dancing suit, supposed to be Edward Richardsons. so
that upon all these Circumstances the Jury brought in Edward Richardson and
Elizabeth Richardson Guilty of the Treason, and acquitted Jane Digby only.

Ralph Cook of St. Andrews Holbourn received his Trial for High Treason, for
that he unlawfully Coined several new Milled Half Crowns to the number of
seven, which were proved to be made out of Pewter Plate, part of which plate
was produced in Court, he being betrayed by his Wife, who declared it to her
Landlord, who caused him to be Apprehended, and his Room searched, in which
they found a Casting mould, a Flask, and several Ingraving Tools, and seven
Half Crowns, with some other Instruments. He had been formerly a Baker, and was
brought into that vicious practice as he said, by a certain person in
Staffordshire, so that the Treason being proved against him, not only by his
Wife, but his Landlord and the Constable, he received the Verdict against him,
as Guilty of High Treason.

John Ralphs and Clement Sells, Two notorious Offenders were likewise Indicted
for two Notorious Fellonies and Burglaries, the first upon the House of John
Bewing of Willsdon being eight in Company, they entered, and binding all the
Family except the Maid Servant, whom they compelled to light them from Room to
Room, until they had plundered Goods and Monys to the value of 200 pounds, viz.
3 Silver Tankards, 2 Caudle (ups, 29 pounds in Money, Linen, Silk and other
portable things, and after ordering the Maid to fetch them up some Victuals
departed with their prize. The next was upon the House of William Charles of
Tatnam Court, it being a Victualling House; They came in number six, and called
for Drink, and desiring to drink with their Landlord, asked him if he knew
Hine. telling him they were of his employment, and wanted Moneys, drawing a
Sword and holding it to his Breast till they had bound him and ransackt the
House; carrying away Sheets, Napkins, Pewter and Linen to considerable value,
so that being apprehended, one of them, viz. Ralphs confessed his being there,
so that upon full Evidence they were both Convicted of Felony.

Daniel Macarty an Irish man being indicted upon the Statute of 27 of Queen
Elizabeth, for having taken Orders from the S^e of Rome and coming over into
England being Impeached by one Alice Turner who had formerly been his
Profelyte. And upon Information, one Mr. Stiff a Constable in St Giles's, ^king
with him some other Neighbors went to apprehend him, and having entered the
house where he was said to Lodge, they found him confessing a Sick Woman who no
sooner seeing them begin roughly to handle her Priest, but cried out, O what
will you rob me of my Salvation: upon search of him they found about him a
Petition to an Envoy, it being written in French, denoting that Daniel Macarty
a Priest, being in want since his release out of the Gatehouse, desired his
Charity, and further a Purple Ribon with three Crosses upon it, with which all
Popish Priests do usually give the Sacrament with in private, wearing it about
his Neck with a large Crystal Crucifix: a Letter in Order to manage the more
efficacious carrying on the Plot, as likewise saying Mass and giving the
Sacrament was proved by the said Mary Turner not only at the Venetian
Ambassadors but at Wild House, and Confessing likewise to Dr. Oats, he was
found Guilty of the said High Treason as a Popish Priest or Jesuit.

The several Apprentices that were committed to the Gatehouse to the number of
14. or 15. being turned over to this Goal Delivery, the Court condescended to
take Bail for their good Behavior, and for their further answering their
Treasonable Intentions of moving a Combination to levy War against tht King.

There were in all 24 Condemned to dye, Edward Richardson, Martha Cook,
Elizabeth Richardson, Isabella Marsh, William Harvy, Clement Sells, John
Ralphs, William Harding Ann White, Dorothy Thomas, Joseph Rumley, Henry Wether,
Barthelomow Smith, Mary Ewen, Mary North, Ellenor Holland, Elizabeth Hicks,
Sarah Mason, Sarah Stiff, Jane Steward, Daniel Maccharty, William Underwood,
Mary Bestin, Ralph Cook.

14 burnd in the hand, one to stand in the Pillory, three to be transported,
and three to ^


