THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
which began on Wednesday the 18th of this Instant April and ended on Thursday
the 19th following; Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there,
viz. For Murder Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of
their Names and the places of their commiting their Facts, and the number of
those Condemned to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.
Entered according to ORDER.

AT the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer that began at the Old-Bayly on Wednesday
the 18th of April and ended the 19th of the same Instant. The proceedings were
these

Mary Smith was Indicted and Tried for stealing a Coat and wastcoat on the 22th
of February last from Allen Tuller of St. Anns Black Friars whereupon it was
Sworn against her that she had sold them and confessed that she took them from
the house of the prosecutor who was then her Master; to which she pleaded
Ignorance as to the theft, Saying she received them of a young man then Lodging
in the house with whom she had some Small acquaintance at Cambridge e're she
came to London and that he told her the clothes were his own and therefore
desired her to sell them for him, but no manner of proof appearing to confirm
what she Alleged the Jury found her Guilty, though only to the Value of 10 d.

Ralph Philips, was Indicted for killing John Hern on the first of March last,
the manner thus; the Prisoner, and the deceased drinking in a Tavern in the
Savoy with diverse other Gentlemen, the deceased being in drink, grossly abused
the Prisoner, and notwithstanding all the intreatys that could be used to
persuade him to the Contrary could not cause him to rest satisfied, but
following the Prisoner after his departure from the said- Tavern would oblige
to fight him, in which conflict Hern received a mortal vvound under his left
Pap of which he within an hours space died, but no premeditated Malice
appearing the Prisoner was found Guilty of Manslaughter.

Richard Thacrell being Indicted for stealing a Silver tankard upon his
Arraignment pleaded Guilty to that and all other Indictments under the benefit
of Clergy.

James Hull being Li^wise Indicted for Robing the Earl of Powis on the 15th of
February last of 15 Pounds pleaded Guilty to his Indictment.

William Hugds was in Indicted for picking the pocket of the wife of one
Frances Heming in leaden-Hall-Street who upon his Araignment pleading not
Guilty it was Sworn against him by the prosecutor that she took his hand in her
pocket but that being too strong for her he got away carrying with him a box
and other things valued at six shillings and that upon her crying, after him he
was Stopped though upon Search the said box was not found about him yet it was
conjectured (as usual it is) that he had his receivers at hand to whom he
delivered his prize and he having been an old Offender he was found Guilty.

Thomas Smith was indicted for stealing a copper pot, a kettle, Saucepan,
spoons peuter plates and the Like on the 7 of March last from Henry Buttler of
Steptny; the which upon his trial appearing only that one of the pots Lost was
found to be sold by him to a brazier; to counter balance which he brought
witnesses to prove that he bought the said pot of one Jones now prisoner in
newgate for the said Robery and that he gave a Market price for it being his
trade to buy things at second hand' whereupon he was acquitted of that
Indictment.

Mary Baly, was Indicted for stealing a Mantu Gown, a pair of Silk Stockings, a
Scarf, a pair of Holland-Sleeves, Porrengers, etc. on the 28th of February
last, out of the House of John Webly, of St. Giles's in the Fields. where she
lived in the nature of a Servant; to which upon her Arraignment she pleaded not
Guilty, but after the Fact by the Evidence was plainly proved, she confessed
that an Old Woman supposed now be her Confederate, and in whose custody part of
the Goods were found, took them by her Permission, in the absence of her Master
and Mistress; upon which the Jury brought her in Guilty of the Felony.

Elizabeth Cherry, was Indicted for that she on the 13th. of December last,
Robbed the House of one Mr. Quarles of St. Giles's in the Fields, of a
Pette-Cout, Sleves, and other Linen, to a considerable value, which being
proved against her, as found where she had disposed of them: and also in her
Examination before the Justice, who committed her, she had confessed the Fact:
and she now hardly denying it, was found Guilty.

William Sims, was Indicted for stealing a Silver Tankard valued at six pounds,
from Elizabeth Freeman, at the Crown in the Old Palace-Tard Westminster, to
which upon his Arraignment, he pleaded not Guilty whereupon the Woman's
Daughter, who lost the Tankard was sworn; who gave Evidence that such a manner
of man came in and called for a Tankard of Beer, and whilst she was busy below
stares slid down from the Balcony and Marched off with the tankard but a long
time bogled in her Evidence ere she would charge the prisoner to be the man
which made the court suspect that she had been tampered with and that she might
the better know him Caused his great Coat to be pulled off upon which she
knowing the suit of Clothes to be the same with those the person wore, when the
Tankard was lost swore him possitively to be the man, and he no way able to
give any account of himself, having been once before pardoned he now was found
Guilty.

Robert Savage a Soldier, was Indicted for shooting one Philip Russel his
fellow Soldier. The manner (as upon his Trial it appeared) thus, the Prisoner
being set Sentinel, the deceased and an other Soldier coming along, the
deceased in a jesting manner, said to the other here is the Rogue Savage lets
kill him; and not thinking further harm passed him, who Cocking his Piece swore
he would kill him first, and thereupon fired, so that the Bullet entering under
his Short-Ribs went out behind, of which within two hours he died. The Prisoner
being demanded what he could say for himself, alleged that he did but his
Duty, and that he prevented the other from killing him, and for ought he knew
he had a design to seize the Tower, with many such frivelous excuses, but it
appearing that he offered him no hurt, nor so much as took his Piece from off
his Shoulder, Savage was found Guilty of willful Murder.

Philip Johnson was likewise tried for killing John Mills a Child not abov^ half
a year old on the 14th of March last, the manner thus, he com^ng into the house
of the Mother of the Child living in St. Martins in the Fields, and calling for
Brandy, would have gone up Stairs with a Woman he pretended to be his Wife, but
the Woman of the house not permitting it he fell to raling and abusing her
after a gross rate, but in the end she got him out of the Doors: but not
satisfied (or as he said himself) fully revenged 3 days after he came again,
and fell to breaking the Windows, to prevent which the Woman with her Child in
her Arms Endeavoring he struck at her, and whether missing his blow, or that
he did it purposely is uncertain, hit the Child such a blow on the head, that
within a short time it died, but the Jury not imagining that he wilfully struck
the Child, brought him in Guilty of Manslaughter.

Samuel Lambert, was Indicted for stealing a Gelding twenty pounds price, from
a person in Hertford-shire, which he exposed to sail for the sum of fifty
Shillings, upon which he was apprehended (who upon his Trial pleaded that he
bought him of a man upon, or near, Hounslow-Heath for thirty four Shillings,
but neither able to produce the person, nor give any satisfactory account of
his own Life and Reputation he was found Guilty.

Elizabeth Clark, of St. Paul's Convent-Garden, was Tried of an Accessory to the
Death of Sir William Throckmorton, killed by one James Stanier in the 28th of
June last, the said Stanier being fled and outlawed for the same, the
Circumstances as they appeared upon Evidence were these house the deceased
coming to the Prisoners: somewhat in drink, and gave several abusive words to
Stanies who lodged there, for which the Prisoner rebuking him and he rufly
handling her, she said that Mr. Stanier or his brother, should take
satisfaction, when the next day a letter coming to the deceased, he met Stanier
at the Spring-Garden in Westminster, where fighting Sir William was slain, but
other Evidence in the behalf of the Prisoner Counterballancing what had been
said against her she was acquitted.

William Griffeth, and James Griffeth, were Tried for stealing, a Beaver-Hat,
valued at 40. s. from John Goodwin, of which the former being Convicted, the
latter confessed the Felony.

John Littleton, Alias Bants, was Tried for picking the pocket of Margret Haly,
on the 13th. of March last, in Cheap Side of six twenty-shilling pieces of
Broad Gold one 22 shillings piece a Barbary piece and 15. shillings in money but
not being taken in the fact nor any of the said Money found about him he was
acquitted.

Elizabeth whitehead of Dukes place was tried for cliping and coining Queen
Elizabeth shillings and King Charles the first his half Crowns some of either
sort of which being taken about her at the time of her being apprehended yet
the actual coining and cliping not being proved upon her she was acquitted,

Peter Matthew was tried for Robing Richard Brom on the 21 past of 4 Silver
Tankards 3. Rings 5. Silver spoones a set of Silver buttons, a Silver salt 16
pounds in money and other things the manner thus he and 5 more coming into the
house of the prosecutor to drink late watched their opportunity bound the
Master his servants and who ever else they laid hands of and then breaking
open the doors rifled the house and departed which being sworn in Court against
the prisoner was found Guilty both of the burglary and felony

Henry Conway was tried for killing John Grifith on the 3 of March last the
which upon Evidence appeared that the prisoner and the deceased being up
together all night and playing at dice the deceased lost and not having money
to answer his Losing the prisoner called him cheat at which the deceased being
offended told him he should answer it another time and so breaking up they went
into Lambs conduet-fields and there fought when after several passes Grifith
fell down dead being run into the body 6 Inches the prisoner being likewise run
through the body and wounded in several other places but but no prepence Malice
appearing he was found Guilty only of Manslaughter.

Henry Rosseston was Indicted for Killing Stephen Low on the 30th of March last
near the May pole in the Strand the quarrel arrising about the prisoners
taking the part of a woman that the deceased and some other of his companions
were abusing her in the Street upon which provocative words and blows passing
on both sides the prisoner wounded Low in the breast with his sword of which
wound he Instantly dyed but the meeting being accidental and the mischief done
in heat of blood it was found but manslaughter.

Frances Johnson was tried for stealing a crauat Silver buckles a hat and other
things from John Coply which being proved against him he was found Guilty.

Hugh Jones was tried for stealing 20 pare of Gloves for which upon proof that
he stole them and had disposed of them at under rates he was convicted of the
fellong:

At this Remarkable Sessions were 6 burn in the hands viz Henry Conway Hugh
Jones, Henry Rossinton, Ralph Phillips, Catharin, Stetl, and Mary Smith, 9th
orderd for transpoted viz Richard Mackvil, James Hull, willam Griffith, James
Griffiuth; william Simes, Phily Johnson, Thomas Danis Frances Johnson James
Thrner 6 received sentance of death viz. william Rigl, Peter Mathews Rober,
Savage Samnel Lambert Thomas Care and Elzabeth cherry and 5 Sentanced to be
whiped and so ended the Sessiion

London Printed for Langly Curtis, 1683.


