THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Wednesday the 8th of this Instant December, 1680 and ended on
Thursday the 9th. following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder,
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.

But more particularly of the Trial and Gondemnation of Elizabeth Owen for
firing her Masters house, and of Charles Sansin for Robing a French Marquess in
St. Jameses.

THe first was Charles Sansin, who was Indicted for Robbing a French Lord
living in the Palmal, the particulars sworn against him in Court were that he
in the company of three or four more not yet taken, having watched their
opportunities about two or three of the Clock on the second of this Instant,
got into the Lodging of the French Lord, and by opening the doors with
Picklocks, or some such kind of Instruments, had proceeded as far as his
Lodging Chamber, where they supposed to find him, but were mistaken, for his
Gentleman happened that Night to lie in his Bed, and the Lord by reason of some
indisposition, Lodged in a Chamber more warm and retire from noise. No sooner
had they entered, but with great knives of a strange fashion they Assaulted
him. But after some Wounds he awoke and strugled with them, wresting, Sansins
Knife out of his hand, and then crying out Murder and Thieves so long; that
not only the rest of the Family, but some Neighbors took the Alarm; whereupon
the Thieves, being as it is reported all Frenchmen fled, but the Prisoner for
have mistook the way out, and ran down into the Celler, where he was taken all
Bloody, and upon Examination, did confess they were five in number, and that
they came with a design to Rob the House, but upon his Trial denied it, yet the
Proof being plain he was found Guilty.

Simon Lee, Thomas Bolton Alias Le'mur, and Hannah Bolton of the Parish of St.
Bottolph without Aldersgate, were Arraigned and Tried for Robbing the House of
Bridget Serder in the Minoryes, the Circumstances thus, the three Prisoners
coming into her House to drink, went into a Room near the stare foot, and after
they had been there a while, Bolton asked for some Victuals when as the other
said, that his Dinner was ready for him at home and he must go, so pretending
to go home, he watched his Opportunity and slipped up stairs, where, with
Picklocks he opened a Trunk, and took out thence 4 Jacobusses, 2 Silver
Tankards, 17 Guinies, 3 Gold Rings, and about 27 Pounds in Silver, with a
Pettycoat and other wearing Apparel, with which he made his escape, being seen
by one of the Witnesses to come down Stairs, after he was gone, the other two
paid their Reckoning and departed. The Woman finding her self Robed, Applied
her self to a Thief-taker, who directed her to a Brokers, where Hannah Bolton
had Pauned them, upon which she was Apprehended, and in a short time after, the
other two, they all pleaded Ignorance of the Fact, saying, that an Irishman
brought the Coat to Boltons House, and desired his Wife to Paun it, which she
did, but they not being able to prove it, and the Evidence being possitive,
that the Prisoners were there when the Robbery was done, the two Men were
Convicted, and the Woman by reason of her Marriage acquitted, having been all
old Offenders, and severely Burnt in the Hand.

Elizabeth Owen was Indicted for Fireing her Masters House, being the sign of
the Hen and Chickens near St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, on the 8th, of
November past, having set Fire to several Trunks in the Garret which she had
opened and Robbed, she came down about 11 of the Clock of the said Evening and
sitting in the Bar, complained of a Smoke she smelt, saying, she believed the
House was on Fire, or words to that Effect, nor would she be persuaded
otherways, though her Master did assure her there had been no Company but what
he knew up Stairs that day, at her earnestness the Drawer went into the
back-yard to spy if he could see any, when observing a great light on the top
of the House, he ran up Stairs and found the Garrets all on Fire, which had
Burnt through the floor, the Prisoner seemed little concerned at, but was
observed to be more mindful of Plunder, then of extinguishing the Fire, so that
they began to suspect her, and after the Fire was over, found a bundle of
Clothes which she had taken out of the Trunks wraped up in her Apron and hurled
out into a Neighbors yard, upon these and many other shrewd Circumstances, she
was found Guilty.

Margaret Addams of the Parish of St. I^rides, was Indicted for the Murder of
her Male Infant, which she was delivered of on the 28th of November last it
being found hid in the Bed-cloaths smothered as it was supposed, her plea was,
that it was Born dead, and that upon promise of Marriage a fellow in the
Country had got her with Child, and appointed to meet her at London, and
complete the Ceremony, but had failed her, there being no Proof Testimony of
the Child's being Born dead, she was according to the Statute of King James
found Guilty.

John Fielder was Indicted for stealing a silver Tankard, valued at 4 Pounds to
which he Pleaded Guilty, without any further Trial.

Fransis Small was Tried for Robbing the House of Richard L^^k, on the 21 of
August last, between 10 and 11 of the Clock in the Evening, breaking through
the Wall, he and an other which he called Robin entered, there being none but a
Servant Maid in the House, whom they surprised in Bed, swearing that if she
would not tell them where the Plate and Money was they would cut her Throat,
which fear made her tell them it was in a Chest up one pair of Stairs higher,
whereupon the Prisoner watched her, and sent the other up to fetch it, who did
so, and bringing it down they together broke it open taking thence about 50
Shillings in Money, 1 Silver Spoon, a Curral and Chain, with several other
things departed. The Prisoner denied that he was the Man but the Evidence being
plain he was found Guilty.

Jane Lant was Indicted for stealing 16 yards of Persian Silk, and 8 Ounces of
Silver, the which she in the Company of an other conveyed away, but was taken
in disposing the same, and being known to be a Thief, she was Committed to
Newgate, upon her Trial she denied the Fact, and would have put it upon her
Partner, but the Evidence was so plain against her, that she was found Guilty
of the Felony.

Edward Townsend was Indicted for being Accessory to the killing of Isaac Smith
a Watchman in Ivy-Lane, For which Edward Whittaker and John Watson were
Condemned in the late Sessions. But there being no great Proof against the now
Prisoner, and he alleging that he was none of their Company, but that he came
by accident, he was discharged by the Jury.

Benjamin Wilkason was Indicted for stealing several parcels of Linen, as
Shifts Napkins and Tablecloths to a considerable vallue; to which he pleaded
not Guilty, as likewise to all others within the benefit of Clergy.

Hugh Jones a Boy not above twelve years of Age was Indicted for picking the
Pocket of Elizabeth Griffin upon London Bridge, of moneys to the vallue of two
shillings and three pence, she taking his hand before he could convey the
moneys out of it: but he being young, the Jury by the direction of the Court
brought him in Guilty but to the vallue of nine pence.

Perkins Woodruf of the Parish of Edmunton, was Indicted for stealing a Mare
from Edward Ball, vallued at 4 pounds, he being taken upon the back of her, he
alleged that he swaped with his Father-in-Law; and that he had a Horse of him
for her and that he had has said Father-in-Law in Bedford-Goal upon the same
account. This being testified the Court gave order for the prosecuting his
Father-in-Law, and Woodruf was acquitted.

Jane Locker was Indicted for Felony and Burglary for entering the house of one
Jeremiah Wotton in the day time, by opening the Locks with Picklock Keys, and
had another of her Companions standing perd^e; she was observed by some of the
Neighbors who apprehended her, upon which, she pretended to be a Lodger in the
House; and going back threw down the things she had stolen, yet at her Trial
she denied that ever she was in the house or near it, but only was passing by,
yet the Evidence being plain, she was found Guilty.

Nicholas Hoskins was Indicted for stealing two Gowns out of a Stuff-sellers
shop upon Tower hill, about eight in the Evening, he watching his opportunity
till the Man had turned his back, and then getting one went and hid it under a
Stall, and afterward came for another, which he had no sooner got, but an
opposite neighbor observing him laid hold on him. Upon his Trial he could not
deny the Theft, and so in short was found Guilty.

There were two Men and three Women that received Sentance of Death, viz
Francis Small, Charles Sansin. Elizabeth Owen, Jane Lant and Margaret Adams. 4
burned in the hand, 3 to be Transported, and 3 to be whipped.

London, Printed by D. Mallet. 1680.


