THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Wednesday the 13th of this Instant April and ended on Thursday
the 14th following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.

But more especially of the Trial and Condemnation of that notorious
Highway-man Randolph Poulson, and John Francis Dickison for High Treason, who
Received sentence to be Hanged Drawn and Quartered, and Ann Price for Murder

ANN Price was Arraigned and Tried for felloniously Murdering her Bastard
Male-Infant in the Parish of St. Margaret's Westminster; the circumstances
thus, She having lived in the nature of a Servant with a Gentlewoman; as she
confessed, was got with Child by a Man that was her fellow Servant; and carried
it so cuningly, that no Person in the house did in the least suspect her till
after she was delivered, which was without help, when wraping the Child in an
Apron. she locked it up in her Box; and rising betimes in the Morning, made a
Fire and went to Bed again; so that her Mistress finding her out of order, began
to examine the cause; whereupon supspecting what had happened, she got a
Midwife, who upon inquiry found she had been delivered; the which she stoutly
denied, but at last confessed she had, the Child being still Born, and that she
had locked it in her Box. where it was accordingly found, this being sworn by
the Witness; her Answer was, That she finding her pains come fast upon her:
knckked with her shoo, as loud as possible, but could make none hear her, by
reason she lay up three pair of stairs; but the concealing of the Child, being
a material Point of Evidence against her; upon the reciting the Statute, she
was found guilty of Murder.

Sibel Thomas was indicted for the Murder of one Mary Hut, a Maid of about
Eighteen Years of Age, living in White-Chappel; the manner thus, Some angry
words rising between the Mother of the Deceased, and the Prisoner, the
Deceased, in taking her Mothers part, gave the Prisoner such bad Language as
provoked her to strike her, and after having thrown her in the Kenel, to tread
upon her; who in a Fortnights time after died; but she being proved to be a
sickly Maid, and upon search no bruses being found about her, the Prisoner was
acquitted.

Ann Foster was Tried for stealing of wearing apparel, Lace, Puter, Silver
Spoons and other things to a very considerable value from a Gentleman, living
in the Parish of St. Clements Deans, on the Twenty-Fourth of March last,
several of the Goods being found where she had disposed of them; and the
Evidence being plain against her she was found guilty of the Felony.

Randol Polson, who had formerly kept a Lime-Wharf near the Horse-Ferry, was
Indicted for stealing a Mare, valued at Six Pounds, a Saddle, Bridle and Whip,
from one Mr. Mead; the Circumstances according to Evidence thus, the Prosecuter
coming from Dedford, met the Prisoner and another near the Halph-way-House, who
bid him stand and deliver; whereupon he turning his Mare about, made up to the
adjacent Houses; but they firing after him, caused him to dismount and stand to
their Mercy, who took about Seven Shillings in Money, a Pocketbook, and some
Ribon from him; and after that his Mare, the which was afterward found in an
Inn in Westminster, being brought thither by the Prisoner and a Boy, and
described to be kept private. So that upon this, and the Prisoners own
confession during his Imprisonment in the Gate House, he was found guilty of
stealing the Mare, etc.

Joseph Wood-all was Indicted for Murdering John Crafts, of the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields; according to Evidence thus, the Prisoner being Labourer
to the Deceased, who was a Brick-layer, and not minding his work, the Deceased
told him, if he neglected it, he must employ another, upon which the Prisoner
told him if he would pay him his Wages, he would be gone, but the Deceased
denying he owed him any; having passed his word to secure the House where he
Lodged; whereupon a quarrel arose, and the Prisoner beat the Deceased so
unmercifully, that he died in three Weeks afterward, and laid his Death to the
Prisoner, who thereupon was found guilty of Manslaughter.

Edward Richardson who had been formerly Condemned for Cliping and had got
Pardon for Transportation, was Indicted for several Roberys on the Highway, to
all which he pleaded guilty.

John Bully, who about three Sessions's since was Indicted upon the Statute of
the Twenty-fifth of Elizabeth, for that he having received Orders from the Sea
of Rome, came over into England and acted as a Priest, whose Trial was put off
once for his pretending want of Evidence, and last Sessions by reason of a
special Plea he brought, to which the Kings Attorney General made a demur, being
now called up and his Indictment read; he pleaded guilty desiring the Court to
Pardon him for the trouble he had put them to; saying, That he had been ill
advised in so doing, and that it was his full intent after his being cleared at
Lancaster to depart the Kindom* and that he had writtent a Book touching the
unlawfulness of Murdering or deposing Princes and had persuaded very many
Catholics to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, after which he
desired the Court would have a Favorable Opinion of him, and threw himself
wholly upon their Mercy.

Martha Du Boardas, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields being a French
Woman* and not able to speak English, was Indicted for Robing Stephen Beamont a
French Merchant, with whom she lived as a Servant or Housekeeper, on the Third
of this Instant, of a Silver Watch, a Diamond Ring valued at Four Pounds, Three
Gold Chains, Thirty Guinies, 125 Pounds worth of Plate* and in Moneys 50 l. the
which upon the Death of her Master, she had conveyed away; the Plate and Moneys
upon the Constables searching the House, being found in her Custody, she
aledged that her Master gave them to her in his Life time and brought Witness
to prove it, but notwithstanding she was found guilty of the Felony.

Richard Eaton, a Seaman was Arraigned for breaking open a Ship that lay in the
River of Thames over against Waping, and taking thence Sea-cloaths, Beds,
Blankets, Rugs, Shifts, a Pistol and several other things belonging to the
Captain, and other of the Ships Crew, the which he geting on Shore, called a
Porter to carry them away; but being pursued a great part of the Goods were
found, where he had laid them; being asked what he could plead for himself, his
Answer was, That he bought them of a Seaman; but to producing the Man, nor
proving the Buying of them, he was found guilty.

Sarah Star was Indicted for that she on the 4 of this Instant Robed one John
Weller, with whom she was a Servant; of Goods to the value of Fourteen
Shillings; being a Servant in his House; the things being Sheets, Table Clothes
and Napkins, which were found at an Old Woman's house, where she hod carried
them to have Shifts made of them; She pleaded a Lodger gave them to her, but
that excuse being groundless she was found guilty to the value of Three
Shilling.

John Francis Dickison, a notorious Popish Priest being taken in Newgate, as he
came to pervert on Martha Cook a Convict, his Indictment being grounded upon a
Statute made in the Third Year of King James, to prevent drawing away the
King's Subjects from their Allegiance; the manner thus, Martha Cook about Three
Quarters of a Year since being Condemned for Cliping and Coining, and remaining
in Newgate, Two Women that were her fellow Prisoners, persuaded her to embrace
the Rom^sh Religion, and after some yielding to their proposition; the Prisoner
was sent by the Priests into the Press-yard to visit her, who upon promise to
get her a Pardon, made her renounce the Protestant Religion gave her the
Sacrament, confessed her, etc. And to encourage her to perservere in what she
had Embraced, oftentimes brought her Money; the which she disclosing to on
Partridg a Presbyterian Minister, he discovered it to the Ordinary, who
acquainted Captain Richardson with the same* so that about the Twenty-first of
October last, the Prisoner coming to visit his Proselite, was seized in the
Hole, and after some time carried before Sir William Turner, where he owned
himself to be a Priest; and that he was Chaplain to the Portugal Ambassador;
whereupon he was committed, upon his Trial he likewise owned himself a Priest;
and but faintly denied the pervertion, Mr. Ordinary, Mr. Partridg, and Martha
Cook giving Evidence against him* after the Jury were satisfied of the Statute,
they brought him in guilty; and he was Sentenced to be Drawn, Hanged and
Quartered as a Traitor, etc.

An Indictment was preferred by one William Roman against Mary Snell and Sarah
Chapman, alias Wood, for stealing a Silver Taster' and a silver Tankard vallued
at seven pounds, which the former coming into his house to drink stole, and the
other disposed of them, but the Evidence not being positive against her, only
Mary Snell was found Guilty of this Felony. But a second Indictment was
preferred against Sarah Chapman, alias Wood, for stealing 6 Corrals, vallued at
7 pounds, from one Mr. Harding in the Parish of St. Mary Woolnoth, the which
she sold for about three pounds to a Goldsmith in Fleetstreet, which being
plainly proved, she was found Guilty.

Susanna Hern and Elizabeth Rycroft, were found Guilty, the former for stealing
a silver Tankard, the latter for Robing her Master of Linen Cloth.

There were 2 Men and 6 Women received Sentence of Death, viz. Randolph Poulson
for stealing a Mare and other things on the Highway, John Francis Dickason for
High Treason. Ann Price for Murdering her Bastard*Child, Martha Beardos,*
Susannah Hern, Sarah Chapman, Elizabeth Rycroft and Mary Snell for Fellonies
and Burglaries. 9 Burned in the hand, 1 to be Transported, and 3 to be whipped.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet. 1681.


