The TRUE PROCEEDINGS OF THE SESSIONS, Begun at the OLD-BAYLY, On Wednesday the
18th. of April, 1683.
Giving an Account of the several Trials (viz.) for High Treason, Murders,
Felonies, etc. with the Condemnation of those Convicted.
Printed by Authority.

THe First Arraigned was Richard Mackrel, for Stealing a Silver Tankard valued
at 3 l. from William Speed, to which he Pleaded Guilty.

One Hull was Arraigned for Stealing a Canvas Bag and 50 l. in Money from a
Goldsmiths in London; but upon his said Arraignment Pleaded Guilty to that, and
all other things within the Benefit of the Clergy.

William Riggs, Hugh Jones, and a Third Person were Indicted for picking the
Pocket of one Terry a Countryman, and taking out there between three and four
l. which being taken upon Riggs, he was found Guilty, but the other two
acquitted.

John Littleton alias Batts, known by the Title of Gransir to the Pick-Pockets,
(although a Boy of about Fourteen-years Old) Tried for picking the Pocket of a
Gentlewoman, as she passed through Cheapside, taking from her eight or ten
pieces of Gold, and also some Silver, but the Evidence not being clear, he was
Acquitted.

Elizabeth Whitehand, John Whitehand, and Andrew Whitehand, Indicted for High
Treason, viz. Coining and putting off Counterfeit Money, and also for Clipping
of other good Money which was of the Lawful Coin of this Kingdom: The two Men
fled upon some Alarm that they were to be seized, but the said Elizabeth was
Tried and Acquitted; for that the Evidence was not clear against her
paricularly.

William Hughes was Indicted for picking the Pocket of Frances the Wife of
Richard Hemming of a Silver Box, to the value of 6 s. as she was passing from
Leaden-hall-market near Cree-Church; she made Oath positively the Box was in
her Pocket when she came out, of the Market, and that she took his hand in her
Pocket, but snatching it out, and running away; upon her Outcry he was taken
before he came to the end of the street, yet no Box was found about him; but he
having been an old Offender of that sort, was found Guilty to the value of 10 d.

Mary Smith Single Woman, Indicted for Stealing a black Cloth Coat, and some
other things from Allin Culler of Black-fryars, was found Guilty thereof.

William Griffith, and James Griffith, two young Fellows (but yet well known at
Newgate) being Indicted for Stealing a Beaver Hat, etc. and Arraigned for the
same on Wednesday in the Afternoon, both refused to Plead positively, but in a
dilatory way, that they knew no more of it than the Child unborn, and the like;
persisting in that stubborn humor, the Executioner was called to tie them up,
and ordered that the Sentence for Pressing should be read to them; but there
being at that Instant no more Indictments ready in London to proceed upon, they
happened to be set by, and the Middlesex Jury called to try these following, who
were then Indicted, viz.

Elizabeth Clarke, the Wife of John Clarke, Indicted for abetting, procuring,
or Counsilling the Death of Sir William Frogmorton, (on or about the 29 of June
last) by encouraging or desiring Mr. David Stanyer to revenge some affront Sir
William had offered her, which Stanyer did soon after kill Sir William
Frogmorton, (viz. in June last) and being fled, stands Convicted by Out-lawry
of the said Felony and Murder, but upon the Trial, it appearing that whereas
about that time the said Sir William came to Mrs. Clerks House much in drink,
and upon some slight occasion pulled her Head-cloathes off; yet to avoid
difference, she withdrew to another Room, and that he also quarrelling with Mr.
Stanyer, some challenge happened between them without her contributing any thing
thereto; as also a full Testimony of the Neighborhood coming in, that she
lived peaceably and in good repute, she was thereof acquitted.

Philip Johnson, Indicted for the Murder of John Hill, an Infant of about half
a year Old, the manner thus: The Mother of Hill kept a public House in St.
Martins Parish, where of a Sunday night, at the beginning of the last Month,
Johnson came in to drink Brandy, and after one Quartern would have another, and
go drink it in a private Room with one he called his Wife, which the Landlady
refusing him, he threatened revenge before Saturday following, and on the
Wednesday after about eight at night, came in a very rude manner, and breaking
her Windows, with other abuses, saying he had not yet revenge enough, the Woman
running to strike him, or defend her Goods with the Child in her Arms, he
struck it on the Head with his stick, of which blow it dyed about seven hours
after. Yet the Jury being of Opinion that he had no premediated Malice to the
Child, but as it was accidentally in the Woman's Arms whom he might strike at,
they found it Man Slaughter.

Ralph Philips (or Capt. Philips) Indicted for killing Mr. John Herne in a Duel
at Katherine-street near Covent Garden; but it appearing by the Evidence and
Circumstances, that whereas Mr. Philips, and other Gentlemen were of a Company
drinking in a Tavern, that Mr. Herne being of another Company came into theirs,
and was very abusive: That Mr. Philips did all that was possible to avoid a
quarrel, and yet notwithstanding, when each Company were parted, Mr. Herne
privately followed Mr. Philips, and drew upon him; upon which and other great
likelyhoods, that Mr. Philips had endeavored to evade that Duel; it was
brought in Man Slaughter.

Robert Savage a Soldier, who was Sentinel at one of the Gates at the Tower,
was Tried upon an Indictment of Murder, the manner thus: When the said Savage
was Sentinel as aforesaid, one Philip Russel, and another Person, both likewise
Soldiers upon some other Duty coming by the Sentinel, each having a Musket on
his Shoulder, Russel as they past by said, how now Rogue, art thou here, lets
kill him, meaning the Sentinel, at which Savage replied, do you call me Rogue,
I Will kill you first; immediately Fired his Musket and shot him; the Bullet
passing quite through his Body, so that part of his Guts came out, and he dyed
in less than three hours. Savage in his defense said, he did nothing but his
Duty, and if he had not done it, he might have been killed himself. That he did
not know but Russel had a design to take the Tower, or such like excuses. But
the other Soldier who was passing with Russel, witnessed that Russel laughed
when he spoke of killing the Sentinel, it being only in Jest; that they never
pulled their Muskets from their Shoulders, or made any the least offer against
the Sentinel, but passed on in the common way, and were gone beyond the
Sentinel before he Fired upon them; the Jury therefore brought it in Willful
Murder.

Thomas Lental a Brazier, or such like Tradesman, Indicted for Stealing several
Brass Pots, Kettles, or Skillets, (or some of each) also several Pewter-dishes,
Plates, Spoons, a Drying Pan, etc. out of a House or Yard near the Artillery
Wall by Bun-hill-fields; but it appearing by the Evidence that he only had
bought part of the said Goods in his shop, and had endeavored to find, or found
out, the Thief being one Jones, against which Person he the said Lental was
ready to give Evidence, with other circumstances in his Vindication; he was by
the Jury acquitted, and an Indictment ordered to be against Jones for that Fact.

William Simms, Indicted for Stealing a Silver Tankard out of a public House
at Westminster, ( viz. from Mrs. Freeman) and albeit he produced another Person
to own the Stealing it and excuse him, and had used such Interest, that the
Evidence for a considerable time would not swear him to be the Man; yet upon a
strict Examination thereof, he was discovered to be the Person and found Guilty.

Elizabeth Cherry for Stealing two Silk Petticoats, and other things, was found
Guilty of Felony.

Mary Bailey, Indicted for Stealing a Mantua Gown, a Scarf, some Laces,
Forehead-cloaths, Ruffles, etc. was brought in Guilty to the value of 10 d.

Samuel Lambourne, Indicted for Stealing a Gelding out of a Marsh near
Hampton Court, valued to the worth 20 l. but by the Gentleman who owned him at
50 l. which Gelding Lambourne Sold at Tame in Oxfordshire for 50 s. pretending
he bought the said Gelding of one he met in the Road near Hounslow for 34 s.
but having no witness to prove how he lived, or of his said buying the Horse,
alleging he met the Seller by chance, having no knowledge whence, or who he
was; Lambourne was threfore found Guilty.

Mr. Conway, one of the two Ensigns, who lately fought the Duel behind
Southampton Buildings near Tatnam Court, and therein killed Mr. Griffith, was
Tried for the same, and found Guilty of Man Slaughter.

Mr. Rossington, who that Evening killed Stephen Know in the Strand, being
Tried, the Witnesses agreeing that the said Know did give the first
Provocation, that was also found Man Slaughter.

James Griffith, and William Griffith, who refused to Plead on Wednesday, being
again Araigned on Thursday, continued obstinate till the Sentence against a
Mute was read, and the Executioner ordered to tie them up, who beginning to
take hold of William Griffith, he yielded to Plead Not Guilty, and James
Griffith his Brother, Pleaded Guilty of that Indictment, and all other within
the Benefit of the Clergy.

After which William Griffith was Tried, and found Guilty of Stealing the
Beaver Hat.

William Williams, Thomas Piner, and William Scurvil, Indicted for conspiring
with John Arrowsmith to kill and murder Thomas Robinson, but were all Acquitted.

Thomas Carry or Cariff for Stealing a Silver Tankard, of which he confessed
himself Guilty.

Lewis Jones an old Man of above Fourscore years of Age, for Stealing 22 pair
of Gloves, was found Guilty.

Peter Matthews, for that he and five more coming into an Alehouse not far from
the Haymarket, about 9 at Night after they had drank about 13 d. and paid it,
called for some more, and the Landlord one Richard Groom going to draw it, they
tumbled his Wife and Servant after him down into the Cellar, using them
barbarously, and Robbing the House to the value of 100 l. he was found Guilty
of Felony and Burglary.

Francis Johnson, Thomas Walker, Katherine Steel, Roger Adams, and several
others which here is not room to insert, were likewise found Guilty of Felonies
to a small value; six or eight more not named, Tried for like Felonies and
Acquitted.

In Conclusion, 6 Received Sentence of Death, viz. W. Riggs, Tho. Carry or
Carriff, Peter Matthews, Sam. Lambourne, Robert Savage, and Eliz. Cherry.

As many Received the Benefit of the Clergy, viz. Mr. Conway, Mr. Philips, Mr.
Rossington, Mary Smith, Lewis Jones, Katherine Steel.

8 or more obtained to be Transported, Edw. Mackrel, James Hull, W. Griffith,
James Griffith, W. Simms, Philip Johnson, Francis Johnson, and Tho. Walker. And
5 Received Sentence to be Whipped.

Besides the Fellons, there was also Indicted at the Old Bailey, some Persons
for Writing and Printing of a Scandalous Pamphlet or Libel.

The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, were again tendered to Mr. Bampfield and
Mr. Griffith, two Dissenting Ministers, but by them refused.

Some Presentiments has been made by the Grand Jury of London, relating to the
putting the Laws in Execution against Popish Recusants, and unlawful
Conventicles.

We hear that the Quarter Sessions was also this Week held for the County of
Surrey, where Mr. Nathaniel Vincent was again brought up, and after Council
heard on both sides, his Case (as its reported) was referred to be desided at
the Kings-Bench-Bar.

London, Printed by George Croom, in Thames Street, over against Baynard's
Castle, 1693.


