A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE TRIALS OF Titus Oats FOR PERJURY AT THE
Kings-Bench-Barr AT WESTMINSTER, On Friday and Saturday the 8th and 9th Days
of this present May, 1685.
WHereas Titus Oats was Tried on Friday the 8th. of this Instant May for
Perjury and Convicted thereof: He likewise was brought to his second Trial for
Perjury on Saturday the 9th. of this Instant May, of which, I shall give the
Reader an exact Account as they were in Order, beginning with the Trial of
Friday first: The manner thus,

About Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon the Court Sat, where was the Right
Honorable Sir George Jefferies Knt. and Bar. Lord Chief Justice of England,
Judge Withens, Judge Holloway, etc. Being on the Bench and the Jury called,
Oats excepted against some of them, for being of the Grand Jury when the
Indictment was found and it was admitted for a just Bar; then the Indictment
was read in Latin and English, the substance of which was, that whereas Titus
Oats had Sworn and caused to be put to Death several Persons, namely the Five
Jesuits, Pick ring, Groves, and Ireland, etc. He Swore that he was at a Consult
at the White-Horse Tavern in the Strand, where he being present, and carrying
the Papers, in which the Death of King Charles the Second of Blessed Memory,
was signed from one Chamber to another, where he said they all unanimously
Signed the Kings Death on the 24th. of April, Anno Dom. 1678. The Falsitie of
which was proved by these following Evidence, etc. being all Persons of Quality
and Estates who happened to be Students at St. Omers at that time that Oats was
there. First, Mr. Hillsley deposed that he came from St. Omers the very day
that Mr. Oats pretended that the Consult was in the Strand, and that he left
Mr. Oats there; and whereas Oats had formerly Sworn that he came over with
Hilsley: Hillsley Swore he did not see him all the way: Then Mr. B^rnaby Swore
that he met Mr. Hillsley by the way, and he saw not Oats with him, and that
going on to St. Omers, and Arriving there, within two days after he had met Mr.
Hillsley in Kent, he found Mr. Oats at St. Omers, so that he possibly could not
be here in London; all the rest of the Witnesses for the King, Swore that Oats
coming to St. Omers about December 1677. never was to their knowledge out of
their Seminory till the Mid Summer 16^8. But one Night which was at VVatton, a
place about two Leagues from St. Omers, and they saw him every day either at
Meat or Play, and that he was so remarkable for his odd Carriage, that they
took particular notice of him, especially he sitting at a particular Table, and
not among the Boys, by reason of his Age. This was attested by above 20
Witnesses, viz. Lord Gerrard Bromely. -- Gerrard Esquire -- Haggerston Esquire --
Wright Esquire -- Price Esquire Mr. Arundel, -- Turbervil Esquire -- Thornton Esquire -- Pool
Esquire Mr. Dorrel and one Mr. Morgan, one that was then a Papist, but is now a
Church of England Minister, etc.

Mr. Oats's Questions put to them, was, what Religion they were of, and how
long they were there, and what they did there; and offered to ask some things,
which was, as my Lord Chief Justice told him, not proper nor fit for them to
answer, because of Penal Statutes against Papists: He behaved himself with his
wonted Confidence, and seemed to have more Brass in his Face than ever; but my
Lord Chief Justice kept him within his Bounds, and gave him all the fair play
immaginable; before he began his particular Defense; he made a long canting
Harangue how he had been believed by Parliaments, and how several Judges had
spoke formerly of him, and particularly my Lord Chief Justice; all which being
not admitted as Evidence, he was directed by the Court, to prove his being here
in April the 24th 78. he produced one Mrs. Cicely Majo; who Swore that about
that time she saw him in a Disguise at Sir Richard Barkers House: He having on
a Gray Hat, no Hair, a pitiful Gray Suit. Sir Robert's Coachman, swore he saw
him there in a black hat, a long Black Perriwig and a Cinnamon Suit; besides
they disagreed in several things, and so they being but otherwise despicable
People, their Evidence was looked upon as nothing worth; and they contradicted
Oats's own Testimony, for he swore he was back at St. Omers in the beginning of
May, and my Lord Chief Justice asked Oats where he Lodged when he pretended to
be here in April and the beginning of May, that he might produce the People of
the house to be Evidence for his being here; but he shuffled and would Assign
none, which was looked on by all as a clear Conviction. After this, Mr. Oats to
make a Noise caused to be called many great Names to show what Authority his
Evidence once had, viz. my Lord Devonshire, my Lord Clay, who said it was so
long since, that they could give small Account of it; my Lord Huntingdon said
it is true, he once believed something which he swore, but he did now on his
Conscience believe him to be an errant Rogue, and a spiller of Innocent Blood.

My Lord Barron Montague being called by Oats, he gave him a slender Character,
and that formerly he did not hear him.

Mr. Williams, Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir George Treby were called,
but said little or nothing.

After Mr. Oats had done with his Evidence, Mr. Attorney General brought in
more Evidence for the King, some to prove others to Coroberate. The Witnesses
to prove were first Sir George VVakeman, who was formerly quitted at the
Old-Bayly: After Sir George was sworn he was asked by Court with what Mr. Oats
had formerly sworn against him, viz. of taking 1500 l. to poison the King; and
he answered by Virtue of the Oath he had taken, it was all false. My Lord
Castlemain attested the same as to the Treason Oats had formerly Charged him
with: then one Mr. Smith, formerly Schoolmaster in Islington was produced, and
it was proved that he confessed himself Perjured in favor of Oats's Testimony
in the Trial of the five Jesuits being induced by Fear and Gain.

The same was proved upon one Mr. Clay, who was induced by threats and promises
of Oats and Sir William Waller, this was proved by one Davenport a Keeper of
the Goal who heard him threaten Clay with Death, unless he would second his
Evidence, and he being an Old Weak Man, was drawn in: After the Evidence on
both sides had made an end, My Lord Chief Justice told the Prisoner he had free
Liberty to make what Exceptions he pleased, Who then began a long and Malapart
harangue, the chief drift of which, was to prove the Papists ought not to be
Credited because they were Papists, and for this produced some Records and
Statutes.

And to this he was answered by my Lord Chief Justice, that by the same Reason
all the Dissenters from the Church of England ought to be excepted, and that it
was impossible at that Rate that any man should have Right done him.

Oats was for the most part all along his speech Impertinent and Saucy, so that
my Lord threatened to turn him out of the Court, and after he had spent
something more than half an hours time he withdrew of himself, and went out of
the Hall, with his Guards a long with him; as he came toward the middle of the
Hall, the People began to Shout, and so Shouted him quite out of the Hall.

After a little space of Silence, the Solicitor General began to sum up the
whole, and continued for three quarters of an hour. When he had done, My Lord
Chief Justice began a most Eloquent and Emphatical Speech.

Amongst other things, telling the Jury, that this was a Cause that the Honor
of the whole Nation was concerned in, not to let a person so publicly
infamous, escape Justice. That he was a person of an hardened impudence and
Conscience, and not worthy of the Name of the Church of England, that he was
Guilty of spilling Innocent Blood, and had fared no person though never so
nearly related to the Crown: And after he had exactly and prticularly Summed up
all the Witnesses on both sides: He concluded with these Words, That he was the
Blackest Villain upon the Face of the Earth.

As these Prodigious Crimes do plainly manifest to every unprejudiced Person.

The speech being ended, the Jury withdrew, and after a certain space of time
returned again, and brought him in Guilty of the Indictment.

The Second Trial of Titus Oats for Perjury, in the Pretended Popish Plot.
THe Quondam Salamanca Doctor, being on Friday the 8th. of May Convicted of
Perjury in Business relating to the pretended Consult at the White-horse-Tavern
in the Strand, was on Saturday the 9th. Convicted of most Infamously and
Maliciously forswearing himself in the Trial of Ireland the Jesuit: The manner
of the Proceedings was in this manner.

About Eight of the Clock on Saturday Morning, being the 9th. of this present
Month of May (Anno Dom. 1685.) the Court being sat, my Lord Chief Justice,
Judge Withens, Walcot, Holloway, etc. being on the Bench, the Jury was called
and none accepted against; Oats asking if any had been o^ the Grand Jury which
was admitted for a Bar yesterday; then they being Sworn, the Indictment (which
was very long) was read in English, only the Substance of it was, that Oats had
Sworn in the Trial of Ireland, that he was with him at a Treacherous Consult,
some day betwixt the 8th. and 12th. of August, Anno Dom. 1678. and that
afterward he said he was with him upon the same Account the 1st. or 2d. of
September, all which was notoriously false as appeared by the following
Evidence,

After the Indictment was read, Mr. Phips in short opened it, and then one Mr.
Waterhouse formerly a Jurior in Irelands Trial, and one Mr. Harriot a Jurior in
the Trial of the Five Jesuits were called to prove that Mr Oats had formerly
been positive to those days: After this the Kings Council began to manage the
Evidence for the King; first were sworn Mrs. Anne and Mrs. Elenor Ireland, the
one the Mother and the other the Sister of the abovenamed Mr. William Ireland,
and they swore positively they took their leave of him on the 3d. of August in
the year abovenamed at his Lodging in Russel Street, and that he went for
Staffordshire and did not come back till the 14th. of September following; this
was backed by the Oaths of Mrs Duddell and Mrs, Quino. who saw him Boo^d and
took leave of him for his Journey, being the 3d. of August; that Night he came
to my Lord Astons house at Standon in Hartford shire; this was attested by my
Lord Aston himself and Sir Edward Southcote who saw him there; this being
Saturday: On the Monday following in the Company of my Lord Aston and Sir
Edward Southcote and their Servants, etc. they went from St. Albans to
Northampton, and on the Tuesday to Coventry and Wednesday to Tixal, my Lord
Astons House in Staffordshire, where he stayed till 12th. of August, then he
went to Winfreds Well in Flintshire and came back in some of the same Company
to Pixal the 17th. of August as was proved by several Witnesses; one Mr.
Harrison brought a Note of every day, and Swore he Conducted him to his Lodging
in Russel Street the 14th. of September following; Mr. Hobson jumped with him
in every thing as to the Journey, and Swore he saw him at Tixal the 26th. of
August; the Journey down from St. Albans to Tixal, was likewise proved by one
Mr. Inglethorp, who was in their Company all the way, and is a good Protestant.

Mr. Andrew Wet, a Protestant likewise proved Mr. Irelands Journey to Holliwel:
Thomas Sawyer swore the same as to Mr. Ireland's going for Holliwel in
Flint-shire, a Protestant likewise.

Mrs. Allen swore Mr. Ireland came to Tixall the 8th. of August, and stayed
some Three days, she is likewise a Protestant.

Mrs. Jane Harwel swore she saw him at Woolverhampton the 17th. of August and
he lay there till the 26th. of the same month; this was backed by the Testemony
of Mr. Ruston: Mrs VVingfield swore she saw him in Staffordshire the 18th.
19th. 20th. 21st. and 22d. of August.

Mr. William Stanly swore he saw him the 18th. and 22d. of August. Mrs Dorothy
Purcel swore to the 8th. 19th. 20th. and 23d, of August; this was backed by the
Evidence of one Mr. Scot..

Mr. William Stamfield a Protestant saw him the 17th. of August: Mrs Cathrine
Fowler swore to the 17th that she saw him at VVolverhampton, and she saw him
there every day till the 26th. of August. Mrs. Eliz. Gifford swore much what
the same, as likewise Mrs. Keeling, but besides she saw him in Staffordshire
the 4th: of September. Mr. Richardson the same, a Protestant.

Mrs. Greaves saw him there the 20, 22, 23, and 25. and Supped with him; she
declared to the Court (being asked) that he was a Protestant.

Sr. Thomas VVhitgrade a Justice of Peace, swore he saw him on the
Bowling-Green at Tial the 29th. of August: Mr. Fowler saw him at a Horse Race
the 27th. of August. Mr. Ho^ swore to the 27 and 28. Mr. D^co^ to the 27 and 31
and the 1st. of September. Sr. Ja^ Simons swore to the 27 at the Horse Race,
where he saw him, as also the 29th. Mr. ^reen swore to the 27 29 and 31. Mr.
Follas a Protestant swore to the 29. Mr. Proctar a Protestant, swore he saw him
at Hildersham the 1st. of September. Mr. King swore he (...) him the 1st of
September at Hildersham, and the 2d. at Mrs. Cromptons (...) swore he was with
Ireland at London) this was backed by the Evidence of Mr. Lee. Mr Biddle or
Bedal swore to the 2d. of September, and Mrs. Crompton, Mr. Pal^ and Mr Holms
swore to the 1st. of September. Mr. Gifford to the 2d. of the ^ame mon^ where
he saw him at Pancradge Fayer. Mr. William Pendril swore he was at his house
the 4th. of September. Mrs. Mary Pendril swore to the 3d. and 4th of the same
month. Mr. John Southwell and several others, swore they came with him from
Tixal on the 9th. of September to a place in Surry belonging to Sr. --
Southcote and than they Arrived there the 13th. of September, never coming near
London all the Way, so that it was impossible he should have been in London in
Oats his time as he swore to, for he came not there till the 14th. all these
gave Circumstances to prove the days: The Question Oats put them was what
Religon and whether they had been formerly Winesses in former Trials; nothing
to the purpose: After the Kings Council had done (for they thought they had
enough and were ready if Occasion to call for more) Oats began his Defense,
which was much such another Cant as Yesterday, viz. He had formerly been
believed, and that the Witnesses were most of them Papists; then he began his
paricular Defense, and first called Sr. Edmond VVarcup, who could say nothing
to his advantage but disadvantage; then one who was called by the Name of Sarah
Pai^ and appeared, but she said she was not the Woman her Name was Ba^in, and
she knew nothing of the matter, neither had she formerly given Evidence, and
desired something for her Journey, Oats said he would take care of her since he
had subpaened her from Vxbridge: Then Oats called several other Witnesses, but
none appeared; then he complained that Mr. Jennerson was not there since he was
subpaened, and insisted much upon Mr. Bedlow's Dying Evidence and asked the
Court, why not these Proceedings against him before? After he had made what
pitiful Defense he could, Mr Sollicetor General sum'd up the Evidence and
answered every one of his trifling Objections, and told him the reason why this
was not done sooner, was because of the unequity of the times and the Packing
of Jurys and VVhigg Sheriffs. Then my Lord Chief Justice Jefferirs made a most
excellent warm Loyal speech, enlarging much upon what Mr. Sollicetor had, and
answered an Objection of Oats's about the nicity of time, in the example of
Susanna; after he had ended his speech and run over the heads of the Evidence,
the Jury went out and within a Quarter of an hour, brought him in Guilty of the
Indictment. Oats behaved himself with great Impudence, and abused my Lord Chief
Justice 's his Patience; he went away a great while (by leave of the Court)
before the Virdict, as he did yesterday, and met every where the same Welcome
he did yesterday, the hooting and hissing of the People: his Sentence will not
be given these 5 or 6 nays.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


