THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLX.
Which began on Wednesday the 26th of this instant April, 1680. and ended on
Friday the 28th following. Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials
there, viz. for High Treason, Murders, Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a
particular Relation of their Names, and the places of their Committing their
Facts, with the number of those Condemned to die, burnt in the hand and to be
whipped.
AT the Sefflons of Oyer and Terminer, holden at the Sessions house in the Old
Bailey: for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and Goal delivery of
Newgate, the proceedings were as follows.

William Cadman, was Arraigned and tried for Fellonioufly taking and bearing
away twenty yards of broad Cloth, being the Goods and Chattels nf one Mr.
Field, living in the Parish of St. Martains Ludgate, the surcumstances thus,
the Prisoner coming by the Shop of the aforesaid Mr. Field, and watching his
opertunity, snatched it off from the Stall, and running away with it, was
discovered by a stranger, who came accidentally by, and calling to the
Apprentice, biding him, Look if he had lost nothing, who immediately missing
the parcel, ran after the Prisoner, who seeing himself pursued droped it from
under his Arm, he pleaded not Guilty, and denied that he ever had it, but the
proof being very plain, he was Convicted of the Felony.

Richard Cooper, Thomas Wear, and M^nger Linsey were indicted for Murdering
one Thomas P^obe a Constable in the Hermitage, the circumstances thus, one
Richard Cooper being by profession a Waterman, having his Boat lying at the
Hermitage Stairs, left his Boy to look to it, whilst he went to wait on a
Gentleman whom he was to carry, he being then with several friends at a house
hard by, but in Coopers absence 7 Scotch men belonging to a Vessel which lay at
Anchor in the River came from drinking and having a Long boat to carry them on
Ship board, so that coming to the waterside, and halling their Boat to Shore,
they crus^ied Coopers Boat wherein was his Boy; at which the boy fell to
calling them Names, and as they reported struck one of them over the Arm with
the Boat staff, and then run to call his Master, who coming, found the
Scotchmen in his Boat, and desired them to come out, which they refusing,
several sharp words passed, they threatening to beat him, so that several people
that were upon the Key, fearing some hurt might be done, went and called the
deceased out of his Bed to keep the Peace, who after some time came with his
staff and commanded the Scotchmen to come out of the Boat which the two now
Prisoners did, but after some dispute, the other followed close upon the
Constable, and with the Oar of a Ship-boat koocked him down, and before he
could recover himself, he received another blow with a Boat-hook, which proved
so Mortal that within five days he died, but it being dark during the Skirmish,
it could not be justly determined who gave him the blows, yet a Man swore
positively against Co^per, but it being proved that he was of the Constables
Party, and that there was never any malice between them, the which the wife of
the deceased attested, so that the whole Evidence being doubtful, neither of
them were found Guilty.

Walter Gilman alias Fowler, was Arraigned and Indicted for Felloniously
breaking open the House of one M^. Jackson, and taking thence 190 pounds of
money, and a Gold-watch, He and as it supposed more of his Accomplices taking a
pain of Glass down on the backside of the house, came in and taking off the
the Bar from the Fore-dore, opened the Lock with a picklock-Key, and then
ransacing the House, went away with this and several other Goods, as Linen
Clothes and other things of vallue after this Robbery Mr. Jackson putting out
bills for the staying of such Goods, had notice from a Watchmaker that the
watch was brought to to be sold or pawned and that he had stopped the party, upon
which he was apprehended, at his Trial he pleaded that be bought it of one in
Bishopsgate-street, who was gone into France, so that qeiog found in many
stories, he was brought in Guilty.

William Hall was Indicted, for a Felony and Burglary, for breaking and
felloniously entering the dwelling house of Richard Harbourd in Spittle-field,
there being no person therein, Richard Harbourd coming home, and espying a
light in his House, and knowing himself had the Key; stood amazed but going
nearer found his door broak open, and a man standing upon the outward step, who
seeing him come up toward him, run fot it, and by running down an Ally, made
an escape, but searching farther, he found the now Prisoner just coming down
Stairs, who likewise endeavored to escape, but he laying hold of him secured
him, the Prisoners plea was that, He being afraid of Bailiffs supposed himself
pursued and finding that door open, ran in there for shelter, but such excuses
being weak and frivolous upon full Evidence, he was btought in guilty of
Burglary with an intent to steal, though no goods was taken away by reason of
the timely prevention.

Edward Bachelor, Matthew Barringer and Walter Gilbert; received their Trials
first for a Felony, in stealing two yards and a half of Cloth from one George
Groom living in Shadweil, coming into his House on a pretending errand, whilst
one of them, held the young man there present in talk, the rest conveyed away
Cloth, being vallued at about thirty shillings.

The next Indictment against them was, that after their having committed the
former Robbery, they went to the House of one Mr. Campion of the same Parish;
where calling for Wine; they continued Revelling and Singing a convenient time,
till watching a convenient opertunity, they broke open a Desk and a Trunk that
stood in the acjacient Rooms, and took from thence two Sures of Clothes, a
Campaign, Linen; and Monys to a considerable Vallue, and so paying their
Reckoning departed, but the people of the House, having some mistrust of them
went up stairs and found how they had Plundered: but pursuing them immediately
they were all taken in number five, two of which not yet ment^oned viz. Morris
Hunt and Cornelius Fullum, pleaded Guilty; upon their being apprehended, they
threw down all the Goods, they had taken, as well the Cloath^n the first
Indictment, as the rest, and upon search about forty picklock Keys were found
about them, thr former three pleaded that the two latter brought them into that
Premenire and that they were Innocent, but the Court and Jury, not thinking so,
they were found Guilty of both the Indictments.

Richard Speckman, was likewise Arraigned and tried for a Felony and Burglary
committt^d on the fourth of December last, upon the House of Mary Woodward on
Blackwall Marsh, the Circumstances thus, the Prisoner in the Company of three
or four more coming in to Drink, they stayed there till it began to grow late,
and the House standing somewhat distant from Neighbors, they seized the Maid,
and bound her, and then the Mistress Likewise, after which the Prisoner was set
to guard her, whilst the rest of the Gang Plundered the House taking from
thence one holland Apron, two cambrick laced Hancarchiefs vallued at twelve
shillings, one half-Guiny, five broad pieces of Gold, six pounds in Moneys, and
about 5 or 6 shilling, more the Prisoner took out of the aforesaid Mary
Woodwards Pocket, she telling she thought he would not have served her so, to
which he replied, he believed she did not; so that having got their Booty, they
departed, but the Prisoners being apprehended, the next day upon suspicion of
several Robberies, he was challenged for this in Newgate; and now upon his
Trial the woman and her Maid swearing positively that he was the Man that, held
them; he was found Guilty of the Felony and Robbery.

Thomas Nevil was Indicted for a Felony and Burglary committed upon the Shop
of William Phillips in Watling street, and stealing thence 82 Muffs, vallued at
^0 pounds as likewise another Indictment for stealing 2 Horses, and also for
breaking the Goal of Newgate, to all which, he voluntarily pleaded Guilty, nor
could he be persuaded to do otherwise, his reason was, because he knew it would
be proved against him, and that he had no hopes of Life, etc.

John Bigs, Tho Purdie, and John Ekius were Indicted for two notorious
Fellonies and a Burglary, the first was, for that they in the Company of John
Ralphs and Clement Suel atr^^^cy executed, broke open the house of John Benning
in the Parish of Wilsden and after having bound all the Family except the Maid,
they ransacked the House, and carried away in Plate moneys and other Goods to
the vallue of 200 pounds, The next Felony was committed in the house of one
William Charles living in the Parish of Pancridg, taking away three silver
spoons (...) Holland Pinners and several other parcels of Goods and moneys, all
which Bigs confessed, and pleaded Guilty to, and the rest not denying but they
were in both the Robberies, they were Convicted.

William S^vage was Indicted for a Felony and Burglary, for that he comeing to
a house in Coleman street, and there taking a Lodging for some considerable
time, gave as he declared six pence in earnest, but taking his opportunity the
first night to pack up several pair of Sheets, 2 pair of Curtains and Vallains,
Rugs, Blankets and other things to the Vallue of seven or eight pounds, and
going down stairs about two or three of the Clock in the Morning, carried them
away, but shortly after being apprehended, in White-Chappel, he would have
compounded the Felony, the which not taking effect, he was Committed, and upon
his Trial found guilty of the Fel^ony only.

Elleone^ Davis and Ann Rye, two notorious Shoplifts the latter of which being
burnt in the hand, were tried for stealing three pieces of silk from Alderman
Lewis in Cornwall, they coming three of them into the Shop pretending to
cheapen Silks and Diaper, the former watching her opportunity, put three pieces
of Silk into her Coat, but going out hastily dropped one of them in the street;
which several persons called after her to take it up, she refused, and thinking
she was pursued, not far from thence threw the rest upon the Ground, which
raised a suspicion in some that they were stolen Goods, whereupon she and the
other Prisoner were apprehended, and being brought back, it was found to be so,
it being proved against them that they were confederates, they were brought in
Guilty.

John Anderson took his Trial for killing of Edmund Harvy, the circumstances
were, that a sudden quarrel by reason of words arising between them, they went
to cuffing, and after that they went into the Fields beyond Arrundel House, and
there drew upon each other, and before any one could come to part them (though
several that had notice of it followed them) Harvy was run into the right Pap 4
inches deep, of which wound he immediately died, but there being no former
Malice proved, the Jury found it Manslaughter.

Samuel Johnson being Arraigned for High Treason, for that he had put away
several false pieces of Coin, and being taken in the house of Elizabeth Marsh
convicted last Seffons, it was objected in his Indictment, that he had Coined
ten Elizabeth and ten of King Charles the first shillings, but there being no
positive proof thereof he was acquiteed.

G^orgs Dugdale a Bailiff, was indicted for the Murdering of Alice Green in
St. Giles's in the Fields, for he having Arrested the Father of the deceased,
who was but a Child, and as it is supposed, her Eather striving with the
Prisoner, the deceased came about her Father drying, and laying hold of the
Prisoner, with his stick knocked her down, and beating her so unmercifully,
that of the bruises and wounds she in a short time died, so that upon full
Evidence of the barbarous Cruelty, he was found Guilty.

Mary Bird of St. Giles's- Cripple-Gate, was likewise Indicted for the
Murdering of one Sarah Roberts, it being proved against the Prisoner that she
did strike and beat the deceased, of which blows she fell into a Feavour, of
which and the bruises (she being delivered before her time, of a dead Child
which had several bru^ses upon the head and Breast) as likewise the woman dying
in a day or two afterward, laying the cause of her death to the Prisoner; who
upon plain proof of her beati^g her, was found Guilty of Murder.

There were in all fifteen Condemned to dye, ten Men and five women, vix. John
Bigs, Tho. Purdie, John Ekins, George Dugdale, Tho. Shaw, Walter Gilman Richard
Spekma, Robert Gale, Thomas Newel, William Hall, Mary Bird, Ann Rye, Elio^
Davis, Elizabeth Brown, Elizabeth Oliver. 10 burned in the hand, 1 to be
Transported ^ to be whipped.

FINIS.

