PISIS TELEI^TIK. A DISCOURSE OF Confirmation. For the use of the Clergy and
Instruction of the People of Ireland. By Jeremy Lord Bishop of Down.

Published by Order of Convocation. AND Dedicated to His Grace James Duke,
Marquess and Earl of Ormonde, etc. Lord Lieutenant General, and General
Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland,

DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer next door to the Bear and Ragged-staffe in
Castle-street, 1663.

To His Grace, James Duke, Marquess and Earl of Ormonde, Earl of Ossory and
Brecknock, Viscount Thurles, Lord Baron of Arclo and Lanthony, Lord of the
Regalities and Liberties of the County of Tipperary, Chancellor of the
University of Dublin, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Sommerset, one
of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councils of His Majesty's
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Lord Steward of His Majesty's
Household, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber, and Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter.
May it please Your Grace,
IT is not any Confidence that I have Dexterously performed this charge, that
gives me the boldness to present it to Your Grace. I have done it, as well as
(...) For I took not this task upon my self, but was entreated to it by them,
who have power to Command me. But yet it is very necessary that it should be
addressed to Your Grace, who are, as Sozomen said of Theodosius, Certaminum
Magister, and orationum Judex constitutus, You are appointed the great Master
of our arguings, and are most fit to be the Judge of our Discourses, especially
when they do relate and pretend to public Influence and Advantages to the
Church. We all are Witnesses of Your Zeal to promote true Religion; and every
day find You to be a Great Patron to this very poor Church, which groans under
the Calamities and permanent effects of a War acted by Intervals for above 400.
years; such which the Intermedial Sun-shines of Peace could but very weakly
repair: our Churches are still demolished, much of the Revenues irrecoverably
swallowed by Sacrilege, and digested by an unavoidable impunity; Religion
infinitely divided, and parted into formidable Sects, the People extremely
ignorant, and wilful by inheritance; superstitiously irreligious, and incapable
of reproof, and amidst these, and very many more inconveniences, it was greatly
necessary that God should send us such a KING, and he send us such a Viceroy,
who wedds the Interests of Religion, and joins them to his heart.

For we do not look upon your Grace, only as a favourer of the Churches
Temporal interest, though even for that, the Souls of the relieved Clergy do
daily bless you; neither are You our Patron only as the Cretans were to Homer,
or the Alenadae to Simonides, Philip to Theopompus, or Severus to Oppianus; but
as Constantine and Theodosius were to Christians; that is, desirous that true
Religion should be promoted, that the interest of Souls should be advanced;
that Truth should flourish, and wise Principles (...) In order to which
excellent purposes it is hoped, that the reduction of the Holy Rite of
Confirmation into use and Holy practice may contribute some very great moments.
For besides that the great usefulness of this Ministry will greatly endear the
Episcopal order, to which (that I may use S. Hierom's words) if there be not
attributed a more than common Power and Authority, there will be as many
Schisms as Priests; it will also be a means of endearing the Persons of the
Prelates to their Flocks, when the People shall be convinced, that there is, or
may be, if they please, a perpetual intercourse of Blessings and Love between
them, when God by their Holy hands refuses not to give to the People, the
earnest of an eternal inheritance; when by them, he blesses, and that the grace
of our Lord Jesus, and the Love of God, and the Communication of his Spirit, is
conveyed to all Persons capable of the grace, by the Conduct, and on the hands
and prayers of their Bishops.

And indeed not only very many single Persons, but even the whole Church of
Ireland has need of Confirmation. We have most of us contended for false
Religions and un-Christian propositions; and now that by Gods mercy, and the
prosperity and piety of his Sacred Majesty the Church is broken from her cloud,
and many are reduced to the true Religion, and righteous worship of God; we
cannot but call to mind, how the Holy Fathers of the Primitive Church, often
have declared themselves in Councils, and by a perpetual Discipline, that such
Persons, who are returned from Sects and Heresies into the Bosom of the Church,
should not be rebaptiz'd; but that the Bishops should impose hands on them in
Confirmation. It is true, that this was designed to supply the defect of those
Schismatical Conventicles, who did not use this Holy rite; For this Rite of
Confirmation has had the fate to be opposed only by the Schismatical and
Puritan Parties of old; the Novatians or Cathari, and the Donatists; and of
late by the Jesuits, and new Cathari, the Puritans, and Presbyterians; the same
evil spirit of contradictions keeping its course in the same channel, and
descending regularly amongst Men of the same principles. But therefore in the
restitution of a Man or company of Men, or a Church, the Holy Primitives, in
the Council of C. P. Laodicea, and Orange, thought that to confirm such persons
was the most agreeable Discipline; not only because such persons did not in
their little and dark assemblies use this rite, but because they always
greatly wanted it: For it is a sure Rule in our Religion, and is of an eternal
truth, that they, who keep not the Unity of the Church, have not the Spirit of
God; and therefore it is most fit should receive the ministry of the spirit,
when they return to the bosom of the Church, that so indeed they may keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. And therefore Asterius Bishop of
Amasia compares Confirmation to the ring, with which the Father of the Prodigal
adorned his returning Son; Datur nempe prodigo post stolam, and annulus, nempe
Symbolum intelligibilis signaculi spiritus, And as the Spirit of God, the Holy
Dove extended his mighty wings over the Creation, and hatched the newborn
World, from its seminal powers, to Light and Operation, and Life, and Motion,
so in the Regeneration of the souls of Men, he gives a new being, and heat and
life, Procedure and Perfection, Wisdom and Strength, and because, that this was
ministered by the Bishops hands in Confirmation, was so firmly believed by all
the Primitive Church, therefore it became a Law, and an Universal practice in
all those ages, in which Men desired to be saved by all means. The Latin
Church, and the Greek always did use it, and the Blessings of it, which they
believed consequent to it, they expressed in a holy prayer, which in the Greek
Euchologion they have very anciently and constantly used. (...).
Thou O Lord, the most compassionate and Great King of all, graciously impart
to this Person the seal of the gift of thy Holy, Almighty, and adorable spirit.
For as an Ancient Greek said truly and wisely. (...).
The Father is reconciled, and the Son is the Reconciler; but to them who are
by Baptism and Repentance made friends of God, the Holy Spirit is collated as a
gift. They well knew what they received in this ministration, and therefore
wisely laid hold of it and would not let it go.

This was anciently ministered by Apostles, and ever after by the Bishops, and
Religiously received by Kings, and greatest Princes; and I have read that St.
Sylvester confirmed Constantine the Emperor, and when they made their children
servants of the Holy Jesus, and Soldiers under his banner, and bonds-men of
his Institution, then they sent them to the Bishop to be confirmed, who did it
sometimes by such Ceremonies, that the solemnity of the ministry might with
greatest Religion addict them to the service of their Great Lord. We read in
Adrovaldus, that Charles Martel, De miraculis. St. Benedict. l 1. c. 1. 14.
entering into a League with Bishop Luitprandus, sent his Son Pipin to him, ut
more Christianorum fidelium, capillum ejus primus attonderet, ac Pater illi
Spiritualis existeret, that he might after the manner of Christians, first cut
his hair (in token of service to Christ) and [in confirming him] he should be
his spiritual Father. And something like this we find concerning William Earl
of Warren and Surrey, who when he had Dedicated the Church of St. Pancratius,
and the Priorie of Jews; received Confirmation, and gave seizure per capillos
capitis mei (says he in the Charter) and fratris mei Radulphi de Warrena, quas
abscidit cum cultello de capitibus nostris Henricus Episcopus Wintoniensis; by
the hairs of my head and of my Brothers, which Henry Bishop of Winchester cut
off before the Altar; meaning (according to the Ancient custom) in
confirmation; when they by that solemnity addicted themselves to the free
servitude of the Lord Jesus. The ceremony is obsolete and changed, but the
mystery can never; and indeed that is one of the advantages in which we can
rejoice concerning the ministration of this Rite in the Church of England and
Ireland; that whereas it was sometimes clouded, sometimes hindered, and
sometimes hurt, by the appendage of needless, and useless ceremonies; it is now
reduced to the Primitive and first simplicity amongst us; and the excrescencies
used in the Church of Rome are wholly pared away; and by holy Prayers and the
Apostolical Ceremony of imposition of the Bishops hands it is worthily and
zealously administered. The Latins used to send Chrism to the Greeks, when they
had usurped some jurisdiction over them, and the Popes Chaplains went with a
quantity of it to C. P. where the Russians usually met them for it; for that
was then the ceremony of this ministration; But when the Latins demanded
fourscore pounds of Gold besides other gifts, they went away, and changed their
custom rather than pay an unlawful and ungodly Tribute. Non quaerimus vestra
sed vos; we require nothing but leave to impart Gods blessings with pure
Intentions, and a spiritual ministry. And as the Bishops of our Churches
receive nothing from the People, for the Ministration of this Rite, so they
desire nothing but Love, and just Obedience in spiritual, and Ecclesiastical
duties; and we offer our Flocks spiritual things without mixture of Temporal
advantages from them; we minister the rituals of the Gospel, without the
inventions of Men, Riligion without superstition, and only desire to be
believed in such things which we prove from Scripture expounded by the
Catholic practice of the Church of God.

Concerning the Subject of this Discourse, the Rite of Confirmation; It were
easy to recount many great and glorious expressions which we find in the
Sermons of the Holy Fathers of the Primitive Ages; so certain it is, that in
this thing we ought to be zealous, as being desirous to persuade our People to
give us leave to do them great good: But the following Pages will do it, I
hope, competently: only we shall remark; that when they had gotten a custom
anciently, that in cases of necessity, they did permit Deacons and Laymen
sometimes to baptize, yet they never did confide in it much; but with much
caution and curiosity commanded that such Persons should, when that necessity
was over, be carried to the Bishop to be confirmed, so to supply all precedent
defects relating to the past imperfect ministry, and future necessity and
danger, as appears in the Council of Eliberis. And the Ancients had so great
estimate and veneration to this Holy rite, that as in Heraldry, they
distinguish the same thing by several names, when they relate to Persons of
greater Eminency, and they blazon the Arms of the Gentry by Metals, of the
Nobtlity by precious stones, but of Kings and Princes by Planets, so when they
would signify the Unction which was used in confirmation, they gave it a
special word, and of more distinction and remark, and therefore the oil used in
baptism, they called (...). but that of confirmation was (...), and they who
spoke properly kept this difference of words, until by incaution, and ignorant
carelessness the names fell into confusion, and the thing into disuse and
dis-respect. But it is no small addition to the Honor of this ministration,
that some wise and good men, have piously believed, that when baptized
Christians are confirmed, and solemnly blessed by the Bishop, that then it is
that a special Angel Guardian is appointed to keep their souls from the
assaults of the spirits of darkness. Concerning which, though I shall not
interpose mine own opinion, yet this I say, that the Pretty of that supposition
is not disagreeable to the intention of this Rite; for since by this, the Holy
Spirit of God (the Father of Spirits) is given, it is not unreasonably thought
by them, that the other good Spirits of God, the Angels who are ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister to the good of them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation, should pay their kind offices in subordination to their Prince and
fountain; that the first in every kind, might be the measure of all the rest;
But there are greater and stranger things than this that God does for the souls
of his Servants, and for the honor of the ministeries which himself has
appointed.

We shall only add that this was ancient, and long before Popery entered into
the World, and that this rite has been more abused by Popery, than by any
thing: and to this Day the Bigots of the Roman Church are the greatest Enemies
to it; and from them the Presbyterians; but besides that the Church of England
and Ireland does religiously retain it, and has appointed a solemn officer,
for the Ministry, the Lutheran and Bohemian Churches do observe it carefully,
and it is recommended and established in the harmony of the Protestant
Confessions.

And now, may it please Your Grace to give me leave to implore Your Aid and
Countenance for the propagating this so religious, and useful a Ministry,
which, as it is a peculiar of the Bishops office, is also a great enlarger of
Gods gifts to the People; it is a great instrument of Union of hearts, and will
prove an effective deletory to Schism; and an endearment to the other parts of
Religion: it is the consummation of Baptism, and a preparation to the Lords
Supper; it is the virtue from on high, and the solemnity of our spiritual
adoption. But there will be no need to use many arguments to inflame Your zeal
in this affair, when Your Grace shall find, that to promote it will be a great
service to God; that this alone will conclude Your Grace, who are so ready, by
Laws, and Executions, by word, and by example, to promote the Religion of
Christ, as it is taught in these Churches. I am not confident enough to desire
Your Grace, for the reading this Discourse, to lay aside any one hour of Your
greater Employments, which consume so much of Your Days and Nights. But I say,
that the Subject is greatly Worthy of Consideration. Nihil enim inter manus
habui, cui majorem sollicitudinem praestare deberem; and for the book it self,
I can only say what Secundus did, to the wise Lupercus, Quoties ad fastidium
legentium, deliciasque respicio, intelligo nobis commendationem ex ipsa
mediocritate libri petendam, I can Commend it because it is little, and so, not
very troublesome; and if it could have been written according to the worthiness
of the thing Treated in it, it would deserve so great a Patronage; but because
it is not, it will therefore greatly need it, but it can hope for it on no
other account, but because it is laid at the feet of a Princely Person, who is
Great and Good; and one who not only is bound by Duty, but by choice has
Obliged Himself to do advantages to any Worthy instrument of Religion. But I
have detained Your Grace so long in my address, that Your Pardon will be all
the Favor, which ought to be hoped for by

Your Grace's most Humble and Obliged Servant. Jer. Dunensis.

A DISCOURSE OF CONFIRMATION.
The Introduction.
NExt to the Incarnation of the Son of God and the whole Economy of our
Redemption wrought by him in an admirable order and Conjugation of glorious
mercies, the greatest thing that ever God did to the World, is the giving to us
the Holy Ghost: and possibly, this is the consummation and perfection of the
other. For in the work of Redemption Christ indeed made a new World; we are
wholly a new Creation, and we must be so: and therefore when S. John began the
Narrative of the Gospel, he began in a manner and style very like to Moses in
his History of the first Creation. In the beginning was the word, etc. All
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made.
But as in the Creation the matter was first: there were indeed Heavens, and
Earth and Waters; but all this was rude and without form, till the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters: So it is in the new Creation. We are a
new Mass, redeemed with the blood of Christ, rescued from an evil portion; and
made Candidates of Heaven and Immortality; but we are but an Embryo in the
regeneration, until the Spirit of God enlivens us and moves again upon the
waters: and then every subsequent motion and operation is from the Spirit of
God. We cannot say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. By him we
live, in him we walk, by his aids we pray, by his emotions we desire: we
breath and sigh, and groan by him: he helps us in all our infirmities, and he
gives us all our strengths; he reveals mysteries to us, and teaches us all our
duties: he stirs us up to holy desires, and he actuates those desires; he makes
us to will and to do of his good pleasure.

For the Spirit of God is that in our spiritual life, that a Man's soul is in
his Natural: without it, we are but a dead and liveless trunk. But then, as a
Man's soul in proportion to the several operations of life obtains several
appellatives; it is Vegetative, and Nutritive, Sensitive, and Intellective,
according as it operates: So is the Spirit of God. He is the spirit of
Regeneration in Baptism, of renovation in Repentance: the spirit of love, and
the spirit of holy fear, the searcher of the hearts, and the spirit of
discerning: the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of prayer. In one mystery he
illuminates; and in another he feeds us: he begins in one and finishes and
perfects in another. It is the same spirit working diverse operations. For he is
all this now reckoned, and he is every thing else that is the principle of good
unto us; he is the beginning, and the progression, the consummation and
perfection of us all; and yet every work of his is perfect in it is kind, and in
order to his own designation; and from the beginning to the end is perfection
all the way. Justifying and sanctifying grace is the proper Entitative product
in all; but it has diverse appellatives and connotations in the several rites:
and yet even then also, because of the identity of the principle, the
similitude and general consonancy in the effect, the same appellative is given,
and the same effect imputed to more that one; and yet none of them can be
omitted, when the great Master of the family has blessed it, and given it
institution. Thus S. Dionys calls Baptism. (...) the perfection of the Divine
birth; and yet the baptized person must receive other mysteries which are more
signally perfective: (...); Confirmation is yet more perfective, and is
properly the perfection of Baptism.

By Baptism we are Heirs, and are adopted to the inheritance of sons, admitted
to the Covenant of repentance, and engaged to live a good life; yet this is but
the solemnity of the Covenant which must pass into after-acts by other
influences of the same Divine principle. Until we receive the spirit of
obsignation or Confirmation, we are but babes in Christ in the meanest sense,
Infants that can do nothing, that cannot speak, that cannot resist any
violence, exposed to every rudeness, and perishing by every temptation.

But therefore as God at first appointed us a ministry of a new birth; so also
has he given to his Church the consequent Ministry of a new strength. The
spirit moov'd a little upon the waters of Baptism, and gave us the principles
of life, but in Confirmation he makes us able to move our selves. In the first,
he is the spirit of life; but in this he is the spirit of strength and motion.
Baptisma est nativitas, unguentum vero est nobis actionis instar and motus said
Cabasilas. In Baptism we are entitled to the inheritance; but because we are in
our infancy and minority, the Father gives unto his Sons a Tutor, a Guardian
and a Teacher in Confirmation, said Rupertus: De divin. offic. l. 5. c. 17.
that as we are baptized into the death and resurrection of Christ: So in
Confirmation we may be renewed in the inner man, and strengthened in all our
Holy vows and purposes by the Holy Ghost ministered according to Gods ordinance.

The Holy Rite of Confirmation is a Divine ordinance, and it produces Divine
effects, and is ministered by Divine persons, that is, by those whom God has
sanctified and separated to this ministration. At first, all that were baptized
were also confirmed: and ever since, all good people that have understood it,
have been very zealous for it; and time was in England, even since the first
beginnings of the reformation, when Confirmation had been less carefully
ministered for about six years, when the people had their first opportunities of
it restored; they ran to it in so great numbers; that Churches and Churchyards
would not hold them; insomuch that I have read Vindic. Ecclesiast. hierarch.
per Franc. Hallier.
that the Bishop of Chester was forced to impose hands on the people in the
Fields, and was so oppressed with multitudes, that he had almost been trod to
death by the people, and had dyed with the throng, if he had not been rescued
by the Civil power.

But Men have too much neglected all the ministeries of grace; and this most
especially, and have not given themselves to a right understanding of it, and
so neglected it yet more: But because the prejudice which these parts of the
Christian Church have suffered for want of it, is very great (as will appear by
enumeration of the many and great blessings consequent to it) I am not without
hope that it may be a service acceptable to God, and an useful ministry to the
souls of my charges, if by instructing them that know not, and exhorting them
that know, I set forward the practice of this Holy rite, and give reasons why
the people ought to love it, and to desire it, and how they are to understand
and practice it, and consequently, with what duteous affections they are to
relate to those persons, whom God has in so special and signal manner made to
be for their good and eternal benefit, the Ministers of the Spirit and
salvation.

S. Bernard in the life S. Malachias my Predecessor in the Sea of Down and
Connor, reports that it was the care of that good Prelate to renew the rite of
Confirmation in his Diocese, where it had been long neglected and gone into
desuetude. It being too much our case in Ireland, I find the same necessity,
and am obliged to the same procedure, for the same reason, and in pursuance of
so excellent an example, Hoc enim est Evangelizare Christum (said S. Austin)
non tantum docere quae suut dicenda de Christo, Cap. 9. de fide and operib.
sed etiam quae observanda ei qui accedit ad compagem corporis Christi. For
this is to preach the Gospel, not only to teach those things which are to be
said of Christ; but those also which are to be observed by every one who
desires to be confederated into the Society of the body of Christ, which is his
Church: that is, not only the doctrines of good life, but the mysteries of
godliness; and the Rituals of Religion, which issue from a Divine fountain, are
to be declared by him who would fully preach the Gospel.

In order to which performance I shall declare

1. The Divine Original, Warranty and Institution of the Holy Rite of
Confirmation.

2. That this Rite was to be perpetual, and never ceasing ministration.

3. That it was actually continued, and practiced by all the succeeding Ages of
the purest and Primitive Churches.

4. That this Rite was appropriate to the Ministry of Bishops.

5. That prayer and imposition of the Bishops hands did make the whole Ritual;
and though other things were added, yet they were not necessary, or any thing
of the institution.

6. That many great Graces and blessings were consequent to the worthy
reception and due ministration of it.

7. I shall add something of the manner of praeparation to it, and reception of
it.

SECT. I.
Of the Divine Original, warranty and institution of the Holy Rite of
Confirmation.
IN the Church of Rome they have determined Confirmation to be a Sacrament
proprii nominis, properly and really, and yet their Doctors have, some of them
at least, been paulo iniquiores a little unequal and unjust to their
proposition, in so much that from themselves we have had the greatest
opposition in this article, Bonacina and Henriquez allow the proposition, De
sacram. disp. 3. qu. Vnic. punct. 3.
but make the Sacrament to be so unnecessary, that a little excuse may justify
the omission and almost neglect of it. 2. Lib. 3. de sacram.
And Loemelius, and Daniel a Jesu, and generally the English Jesuits have, to
serve some ends of their own family and order, disputed it almost into
contempt, that by representing it as unnecessary, they might do all the
ministeries Ecclesiastical in England without the assistance of Bishops their
Superiors, whom they therefore love not, because they are so. But the
Theological faculty of Paris have condemned their doctrine as temerarious and
savouring of Heresy: and in the later Schools, have approov'd rather the
Doctrine of Gamachaeus, Estius, Kellison, and Bellarmine; who indeed do follow
the Doctrine of the most eminent persons in the Ancient School; Richard of
Armagh, Scotus, Hugo, Cavalli, and Gerson the Learned Chancellor of Paris, who
following the Old Roman order, Amalarius and Albinus, do all teach
Confirmation to be of great and pious use, of Divine original, and to many
purposes necessary according to the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and the
primitive Church.

Whether Confirmation be a Sacrament or no, is of no use to dispute; and if it
be disputed, it can never be proov'd to be so as Baptism and the Lords Supper,
that is, as generally necessary to Salvation: but though it be no Sacrament, it
cannot follow that it is not of very great use and holiness; and as a Man is
never the less tied to Repentance, though it be no Sacrament; so neither is he
ever the less obliged to receive Confirmation, though it be (as it ought)
acknowledged to be of an use and Nature inferior to the two Sacraments of
Divine, direct and immediate institution. It is certain that the Fathers in a
large Symbolical and general sense call it a Sacrament; but mean not the same
thing by that word, when they apply it to Confirmation, as they do, when they
apply it to Baptism and the Lords Supper. That it is an Excellent and Divine
ordinance to purposes spiritual; that it comes from God, and ministers in our
way to God, that is all we are concerned to inquire after: and this I shall
endeavor to prove not only against the Jesuits, but against all opponents of
what side soever.

My first argument from Scripture is what I learn from Optatus, and S. Cyril.
Optatus writing against the Donatists has these words. Christ descended into
the water, not that in him, who is God, was any thing that could be made
cleaner, but that the water was to precede the future Unction, for the
initiating and ordaining, and fulfilling the mysteries of Baptism. He was
washed, when he was in the hands of John, then followed the order of the
mystery, and the Father finished what the Son did ask, and what the Holy Ghost
declared, The Heavens were opened, God the Father anointed him, the spiritual
Unction presently descended in the likeness of a Dove, and sat upon his head,
and was spread all over him, and he was called the Christ, when he was the
anointed of the Father. To whom also, least imposition of hands should seem to
be wanting, the voice of God was heard from the could, saying. This is my Son
in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. That which Optatus says is this; that
upon and in Christ's person, Baptism, Confirmation, and Ordination were
consecrated and first appointed. He was baptized by S. John; he was confirmed
by the Holy Spirit and anointed with spiritual Unction in order to that great
work of obedience to his Fathers will; and he was Consecrated by the voice of
God from Heaven. In all things Christ is the head, and the first fruits: and in
these things was the Fountain of the Sacraments and spiritual grace, and the
great exemplar of the Economy of the Church. For Christ was nullius
poenitentiae debtor; Baptism of Repentance was not necessary to him who never
sinned, but so it became him to fulfill all righteousness, and to be a pattern
to us all. But we have need of these things, though he had not; and in the same
way in which Salvation was wrought by him for himself and for us all, in the
same way he intended we should walk. Joh. 2. 6.
He was baptized because his Father appointed it so: we must be baptized
because Christ has appointed it, and we have need of it too. He was
Consecrated to be the great Prophet, and the great Priest, because no man takes
on him this honor, but he that was called of God, as was Aaron: and all they,
who are to minister in his prophetical office under him, must be consecrated
and solemnly set apart for that ministration, and after his glorious example.
He was anointed with a spiritual Unction from above after his baptism; for
after Jesus was baptized, he ascended up from the waters, and then the Holy
Ghost descended upon him; it is true, he received the fullness of the spirit;
but we receive him by measure; but of his fullness we all receive, grace for
grace; that is, all that he received in order to his great work, all that in
kind, one for another, grace for grace, we are to receive according to our
measures, and our necessities. And as all these he received by external
ministrations; so must we; God the Father appointed his way, and he, by his
example first, has appointed the same to us; that we also may follow him in
the regeneration; and work out our salvation by the same graces in the like
solemnities. For if he needed them for himself, then we need them much more. If
he did not need them for himself, he needed them for us, and for our example,
that we might follow his steps, who by receiving these exterior solemnities
and inward graces, became the Author and finisher of our Salvation, and the
great example of his Church. I shall not need to make use of the fancy of the
Murcosians and Colabarsians, who turning all mysteries into numbers, reckoned
the numeral letters of (...) and made them co-incident to the (...) and (...)
but they intended to say, that Christ, receiving the Holy Dove after his
Baptism, became all in all to us; the beginning and the perfection of our
Salvation; here he was confirmed, and received the (...) to his (...) the
consummation to his initiation, the completion of his baptism, and of his
headship in the Gospel. But that which I shall rather and is what S. Cyril from
hence argues. Cateches. 3. (...).
When he truly was baptized in the River of Jordan, he ascended out of the
waters, and the Holy Ghost substantially descended upon him, like resting upon
like. And to you also in like manner, after ye have ascended from the waters of
baptism, the Unction is given, which bears the image or similitude of him by
whom Christ was anointed -- that as Christ after baptism, and the coming of the
Holy Spirit upon him, went forth to battle (in the Wilderness) and overcame the
adversary: so ye also after holy baptism, and the mystical Unction (or
confirmation) being vested with the Armor of the holy Spirit are enabled to
stand against the opposite powers. Here then is the first great ground of our
solemn receiving the Holy spirit, or the Unction from above after Baptism,
which we understand and represent by the word Confirmation, denoting the
principle effect of this Unction, spiritual strength: Christ, who is the head
of the Church, entered this way upon his duty and work; and he who was the first
of all the Church, the head and great example, is the measure of all the rest,
for we can go to Heaven no way, but in that way in which he went before us.

There are some who from this story would infer the descent of the Holy Ghost
after Christ's Baptism, not to signify that Confirmation was to be a distinct
rite from baptism, but a part of it, yet such a part as gives fullness and
consummation to it. S. Hierom, Chrysostom, Euthymius and Theophylact go not so
far; but would have us by this to understand that the Holy Ghost is given to
them that are baptized. But reason and the context are both against it. 1.
Because the Holy Ghost was not given by John's baptism; that was reserved to be
one of Christ's glories; who also, when by his Disciples he baptized many, did
not give them the Holy Ghost; and when he commanded his Apostles to baptize all
Nations, did not at that time so much as promise the Holy Ghost: he was
promised distinctly, and given by another ministration. 2. The descent of the
Holy Spirit was a distinct ministry from the baptism; it was not only after
Jesus ascended from the waters of baptism; but there was something intervening,
and by a new office or ministration. For there was prayer joined in the
ministry. So S. Iuke observes; while Jesus was praying, the Heavens were
opened, and the Holy spirit descended, for so Jesus was pleased to consign the
whole office and ritual of Confirmation, prayer for invocating the Holy Spirit,
and giving him by personal application, which as the Father did immediately, so
the Bishops do by imposition of hands 3. S. Austin observes that the
apparition of the Holy Spirit like a Dove was the visible or ritual part; and
the voice of God was the word to make it to be Sacramental, Tract. 80. in Johan.
accedit verbum ad elementum, and fit Sacramentum: for so the ministration was
not only performed on Christ, but consigned to the Church by similitude, and
exemplar institution. I shall only add, that the force of this argument is
established to us by more of the Fathers. S. Hilary upon this place has these
words. S. Hilar. can. 4. in ^ine.
The Fathers voice was heard, that from those things, which were consummated in
Christ, we might know that after the baptism of water the Holy Spirit from the
gates of Heaven flies unto us and that we are to be anointed with the Unction
of a celestial glory, and be made the Sons of God by the adoption of the voice
of God, the Truth by the very effects of things prefigur'd unto us the
similitude of a Sacrament. So S. Chrysostom. In Matthaeum.
In the beginnings always appears the sensible visions of spiritual things for
their sakes, who cannot receive the understanding of an incorporeal nature;
that if afterward they be not so done (that is, after the same visible manner)
they may be believed by those things which were already done. Ibid.
But more plain is that of Theophylact. The Lord had not need of the descent of
the Holy Spirit, but he did all things for our sakes, and himself is become the
first fruits of all things which we afterward were to receive, that he might
become the first fruits among many Brethren. The consequent is this, which I
express in the words of S. Austin, affirming, Christi in baptismucolombam
unctionem nostram praefigurasse. The Dove in Christ's Baptism did represent and
prefigure our Unction from above, that is, the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
us in the rite of Confirmation. Christ was baptized, and so must we. But after
Baptism; he had a new ministration for the reception of the Holy Ghost; and
because this was done for our sakes, we also must follow that example: and this
being done immediately before his entrance into the Wilderness to be tempted of
the Devil, it plainly describes to us the order of this ministry, and the
blessing designed to us; after we are baptized, we need to be strengthened and
confirmed propter pugnam spiritualem; we are to fight against the flesh, the
World and the Devil, and therefore must receive the ministration of the Holy
spirit of God; which is the design and proper work of Confirmation. For (they
are the words of the Excellent Author of the imperfect work upon S. Matthew
imputed to S. Chrysostom) The Baptism of Water profits us, Homil. 4.
because it washes away the sins we have formerly committed; if we repent of
them. But it does not sanctify the soul; nor precedes the concupiscences of
the heart and our evil thoughts, nor drives them back, nor represses our carnal
desires. But he therefore, who is (only) so baptized, that he does not also
receive the Holy Spirit, is baptized in his body, and his sins are pardoned,
but in his mind he is yet but a Catechumen; for so it is written; he that has
not the Spirit of Christ is none of his: and therefore afterward out of his
flesh will germinate worse sins, because he has not received the Holy Spirit
conserving him (in his baptismal grace) but the house of his body is empty;
wherefore that wicked spirit finding it swept with the Doctrines of Faith, as
with besomes, enters in, and in a seven fold manner dwells there. Which words,
besides that they will explicate this mystery, do also declare the necessity of
Confirmation, or receiving the Holy Ghost after baptism in imitation of the
Divine precedent of our Blessed Savior.

2. After the example of Christ, my next Argument is from his words, spoken to
Nicodemus in explication of the prime mysteries Evangelical; John 3. 5.
Unless a man be born of Water and of the Holy Spirit, he shall not enter into
the Kingdom of God. These words are the great Argument which the Church uses
for the indispensable necessity of Baptism, and having in them so great effort,
and not being rightly understood, have suffered many Convulsions (shall I call
them) or Interpretations: Some serve their own Hypothesis by saying that Water
is the Symbol, and the Spirit is the Baptismal Grace: Others, that it is a
(...) one is only meant, though here be two Signatures. But others conclude,
that water is only necessary, but the Spirit is super-added as being
afterward to supervene and move upon these Waters: And others yet affirm, that
by Water is only meant a Spiritual ablution, or the effect produced by the
Spirit; and still they have entangled the words, so that they have been made
useless to the Christian Church, and the meaning too many things, makes nothing
to be understood. But truth is easy, intelligible and clear, and without
objection, and is plainly this.

Unless a man be Baptized into Christ, and confirmed by the Spirit of Christ,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Christ; that is, he is not perfectly
adopted into the Christian Religion, or fitted for the Christian Warfare; and
if this plain and natural sense be admitted the place is not only easy and
intelligible, but consonant to the whole Design of Christ and Analogy of the
New Testament.

For first, Our blessed Savior was Catechizing of Nicodemus, and teaching him
the first Rudiments of the Gospel, and like a wise Master Builder first lays
the foundation, The Doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of Hands, which
afterward St. Paul put into the Christian Catechism, as I shall show in the
sequel. Now these also are the first principles of the Christian Religion
taught by Christ himself, and things which at least to the Doctors might have
been so well known, that our blessed Savior upbraids the not knowing them, as
a shame to Nicodemus. St. Chrysostom and Theophylact, Euthymius and Rupertus
affirm that this Generation by Water and the Holy Spirit might have been
understood by the Old Testament, in which Nicodemus was so well skilled.
Certain it is, the Doctrine of Baptismes was well enough known to the Jews, and
the (...), the illumination and irradiations of the Spirit of God was not new
to them, who believed the Visions and Dreams, the Daughter of a Voice, and the
influences from Heaven upon the Sons of the Prophets, and therefore although
Christ intended to teach him more than what he had distinct notice of, yet the
things themselves had foundation in the Law and the Prophets, but although they
were high mysteries and scarce discerned by them, who either were ignorant or
incurious of such things, yet to the Christians they were the very Rudiments of
their Religion, and are best expounded by observation of what St. Paul placed
in the very foundation. But,

2. Baptism is the first mystery, that is certain; but that this of being born
of the Spirit is also the next, is plain in the very order of the words, and
that it does mean a mystery distinct from Baptism will be easily assented to by
them, who consider, that although Christ Baptized and made many Disciples by
the Ministry of his Apostles, yet they who were so Baptized into Christ's
Religion did not receive this Baptism of the Spirit till after Christ's
Ascension.

3. The Baptism of Water was not peculiar to John the Baptist, for it was also
of Christ, and ministered by his command; it was common to both, and therefore
the Baptism of Water is the less principal here. Something distinct from it is
here intended. Now if we add to these words, That St. John tells of another
Baptism, which was Christ's peculiar; He shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost,
and with Fire; That these words were literally verified upon the Apostles in
Pentecost, and afterward upon all the Baptized in Spiritual effect (who
besides the Baptism of Water, distinctly had the Baptism of the Spirit in
Confirmation) it will follow that of necessity this must be the meaning and the
verification of these words of our B. Savior to Nicodemus, which must mean a
double Baptism: Transivimus per aquam and ignem, antequam veniemus in
refrigerium, we must pass through Water and Fire before we enter into rest,
that is, We must first be Baptized with Water, and then with the Holy Ghost,
who first descended in Fire; that is, the only way to enter into Christ's
Kingdom is by these two Doors of the Tabernacle, which God has pitched, and
not Man, first by Baptism, and then by Confirmation; First by Water, and then
by the Spirit.

The Primitive Church had this notion so fully amongst them, that the Author of
the Apostolical constitutions attributed to St. Clement, who was St. Paul's
Scholar, affirms, That a man is made a perfect Christian (meaning Ritually and
Sacramentally, S. Clem. Ep. 4.
and by all exterior solemnity) by the Water of Baptism and Confirmation of the
Bishop, Constit. Apost.
and from these words of Christ now alleged, derives the use and institution
of the Rite of Confirmation. The same sense of these words is given to us by
St. Cyprian, Ad Stephanum.
who intending to prove the insufficiency of one without the other, says, tunc
enim plene Sanctificari and esse Dei filii possunt, si Sacramento utroque
nascantur, cum Scriptum sit, nisi quis natus fuerit ex aqua and Spiritu, non
potest intrare regnum Dei. Then they may be fully Sanctified and become the
Sons of God, if they be born with both the Sacraments, or Rites; for it is
written, Unless a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. The same also is the Commentary of Eusebius Emissenus Homil. in
Dominic. prim. post. ascens.
; and St. Austin Epist. 108. ad Seleucianum.
tells, That although some understand these words only of Baptism, and others
of the Spirit only, viz. in Confirmation, yet others (and certainly much
better) understand utrunque Sacramentum, both the mysteries of Confirmation as
well as Baptism: Amalarius Fortunatus C l. c. 2^.
brings this very Text to reprove them that neglect the Episcopal imposition of
Hands [Concerning them who by negligence lose the Bishops presence, and receive
not the imposition of his Hands, it is to be considered, least in justice they
be condemned, in which they exercize Justice negligently, because they ought to
make haste to the imposition of Hands; because Christ said, Unless a Man be
born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God:
And as he said this, so also he said, Unless your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.]

To this I foresee two Objections may be made: First, That Christ did not
institute Confirmation in this place, because Confirmation being for the gift
of the Holy Ghost, who was to come upon none of the Apostles till Jesus was
glorified: These words seem too early for the consigning an effect that was to
be so long after, and a Rite that could not be practiced till many intermedial
events should happen. So said the Evangelist, The Holy Ghost was come upon none
of them, John. 7. 39.
because Jesus was not yet glorified, intimating that this great effect was to
be in after-time, and it is not likely that the Ceremony should be ordained
before the Effect it self was ordered and provided for; that the solemnity
should be appointed before provisions were made for the mystery, and that the
outward, which was wholly for the inward, should be instituted before the inward
and principal had its abode amongst us.

chap. of St. John is of the blessed Eucharist: It was designativa, not
ordinativa, it was in design, not in present command; here it was preached, but
not reducible to practice till its proper season. 4. It was like the Peter:
When thou art converted confirm thy Brethren. Here the command was given, but
that Confirmation of his Brethren was to be performed in a time relative to a
succeeding accident. 5. It is certain that long before the event and grace was
given, Christ did speak of the Spirit of Confirmation, that Spirit which was to
descend in Pentecost, which all they were to receive who should believe on him,
which whosoever did receive, Cap. 7. v. 39.
out of his Belly should flow Rivers of Living Waters, as is to be read in that
place of St. John now quoted. 6. This praedesignation of the Holy donariola, or
little givings of the Spirit; for our blessed Savior gave the Holy Ghost three
several times. First, (...) obscurely, and by intimation and secret virtue,
then, when he sent them to heal the sick, and anoint them with Oil in the Name
of the Lord. Second, (...) more expressly and signally after the Resurrection,
when he took his leave of them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: And this
was to give them a power of ministering remission of sins, and therefore related
to Baptism and the ministeries of Repentance. But, 3. He gave it (...) more
perfectly, and this was the Spirit of Confirmation; for he was not at all until
now (...), says the Text; The Holy Ghost was not yet: So almost all the Greek
Copies Printed and Manuscript; and so St. Chrysostom, Athanasius, Cyril,
Ammonius in the Catena of the Greeks, Leontius, Theophylact, Euthymius, and all
the Greek Fathers read it: So St. Hierom Qu. 9. ad Heditiam.
and St. In Joan. tract. 22.
Austin among the Latins, and some Latin Translations read it: Our
Translations read it, The Holy Ghost was not yet given, was not (...) in them,
as some few Greek copies read it; but the meaning is alike, Confirmation was
not yet actual, the Holy spirit, viz. of Confirmation was not yet come upon the
Church, but it follows not but he was long before promised, designed and
appointed, spoken of and declared.* The first of these collations had the
Ceremony of Chrisme or Anointing joined with it, which the Church in process of
time transferred into her use and ministry, yet it is the last only that
Christ passed into an Ordinance for ever; It is this only which is the
Sacramental consummation of our Regeneration in Christ; for in this the Holy
spirit is not only (...) present by his power, but present (...) as St.
Gregory Nazianzen expresses it, to dwell with us, to converse with us, and to
abide for ever, (...). So St. Paul describes this Spirit of Confirmation, the
Spirit which he has poured forth upon us, richly or plentifully, that is, in
great measures, and to the full consummation of the first mysteries of our
Regeneration. Now because Christ is the great Fountain of this blessing to us,
and he it was who sent his Fathers spirit upon the Church, himself best knew
his own intentions, and the great blessings he intended to communicate to his
Church, and therefore it was most agreeable that from his Sermons we should
learn his purposes and his blessing, and our duty: Here Christ declared re^
Sacramenti, the spiritual Grace which he would afterward impart to his Church
by exterior ministry, in this as in all other Graces, Mysteries, and Rituals
Evangelical: Nisi quis, Unless a Man be born both of Water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

But the next objection is yet more material. 2. For if this be the meaning of
our Blessed Savior, then Confirmation is as necessary as Baptism, and without
it ordinarily no man can be saved. The solution of this will answer a case of
conscience, concerning the necessity of confirmation; and in what degree of
duty and diligence we are bound to take care that we receive this Holy rite. I
answer therefore, that, entering into the Kingdom of God, is, being admitted
into the Christian Church and warefare, to become Sons of God, and Soldiers of
Jesus Christ; and though this be the outward door, and the first entrance into
life, and consequently the Kings high way, and the ordinary means of Salvation,
yet we are to distinguish the external ceremony from the internal mystery, The
Nisi quis is for this, not for that; and yet that also is the ordinary way.
Unless a Man be baptized; that is, unless he be indeed regenerate, he cannot be
saved; and yet baptism, or the outward washing is the solemnity, and Ceremony
of its ordinary ministration; and he that neglects this, when it may be had, is
not indeed regenerate; he is not renewed in the spirit of his mind, because he
neglects Gods way, and therefore can as little be saved, as he, who having
received the external Sacrament, puts a bar to the intromission of the inward
grace. Both cannot always be had; but when they can, although they are not
equally valuable in the Nature of the thing, yet they are made equally
necessary by the Divine Commandment. And in this there is a great but general
mistake in the doctrine of the Schools disputing concerning what Sacraments are
necessary necessitate medii, that is, as necessary means, and what are
necessary by the necessity of praecept, or Divine Commandment. For although a
less reason will excuse from the actual susception of some than of others, and
a less diligence for the obtaining of one will serve than in obtaining of
another, and a supply in one is easier obtained than in another, yet no
Sacrament has in it any other necessity than what is made merely by the Divine
Commandment. But the grace of every sacrament, or rite or mystery which is of
Divine ordinance is necessary indispensably, so as without it no man can be
saved: And this difference is highly remarkable in the words of Christ recorded
by S. Mark. Mark 16. 16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: but he that believes not
shall be damned. Baptism it self, as to the external part, is not necessary
necessitate medii, or indispensably; but baptismal Faith for the remission of
sins in person capable, that indeed is necessary; for Christ does not say that
the want of baptism damns as the want of Faith does: and yet both Baptism and
Faith are the ordinary way of Salvation; and both necessary; baptism, because
it is so by the Divine Commandment, and faith as a necessary means of
salvation, in the very Economy and dispensation of the Gospel. Thus it is also
in the other Sacrament. John 6.
Unless we eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood we have no life
in us; and yet God forbid that every Man that is not communicated, should dye
eternally. But it means plainly, that without receiving Christ, as he is by
Gods intention intended we should receive him in the Communion, we have no life
in us. Plainly thus, without the internal grace we cannot live; and the
external ministry is the usual and appointed means of conveying to us the
internal; and therefore although without the external it is possible to be
saved, when it is impossible to be had; yet with the wilful neglect of it, we
cannot. Thus therefore we are to understand the words of Christ declaring the
necessity of both these Ceremonies: they are both necessary, because they are
the means of spiritual advantages and graces, and both minister to the proper
ends of their appointment, and both derive from a Divine Original: But the
ritual or ceremonial part in rare emergencies is dispensable; but the Grace is
indispensable. Without the grace of Baptism we shall dye in our sins; and
without the grace or internal part of Confirmation we shall never be able to
resist the Devil, but shall be taken captive by him at his will: Now the
external or ritual part is the means, the season and opportunity of this grace;
and therefore is at no hand to be neglected, least we be accounted despisers of
the grace, and tempters of God to ways and provisions extraordinary. For
although when without our fault we receive not the sacramental part, God can
and will supply it to us out of his own stores; because no man can perish
without his own fault; and God can permit to himself what he please, as being
Lord of the Grace and of the Sacrament; yet to us he has given a law and a
rule; and that is the way of his Church in which all Christians ought to walk.
In short: The use of it is greatly profitable; the neglect is inexcusable; but
the contempt is damnable. Tenentur non negligere si pateat opportunitas, said
the Bishops in a Synod at Paris: If there be an opportunity, it must not be
neglected. Obligantur suscipere, aut saltem non contemnere, said the Synod at
Sens. They are bound to receive it, or at least not to despise it. Now he
despises it that refuses it when he is invited to it, or when it is offered; or
that neglects it without cause. For, causelessly and contemptuously are all one.
But these answers were made by gentle Casuists; he only values the Grace that
desires it, that longs for it, that makes use of all the means of Grace, that
seeks out for the means, that refuses no labor, that goes after them as the
Merchant goes after Gain; and therefore the Old Ordo Romanus admonishes more
strictly; Omnino praecavendum esse ut hoc Sacramentum confirmationis non
negligatur, In offic. Sab. Pasch. post orat. quae dicitur Data confirm.
quia tunc omne Baptisma legitimum Christianitatis nomine confirmatur. We must
by all means take heed that the Rite of Confirmation be not neglected, because
in that every true Baptism is ratified and confirmed, De offic. divin. in Sabb.
S. Pasche.
which words are also to the same purpose made use of by Albinus Flaccus. No
man can tell to what degrees of diligence and labor, to what sufferings or
journeyings he is obliged for the procuring of this ministry; there must be
debita sollicitudo; a real providential zealou scare, to be where it is to be
had, is the duty of every Christian according to his own circumstances, but
they who will not receive it unless it be brought to their doors, may live in
such places and in such times where they shall be sure to miss it, and pay the
price of their neglect of so great a ministry of salvation, Seneca.
Turpissima est jactura quae per negligentiam, sit, He is a Fool that loses his
good by carelessness: But no man is zealous for his Soul, but he who not only
omits no opportunity of doing it advantage when it is ready for him, but makes
and seeks and contrives opportunities. Si non necessitate, sed incuria and
voluntate remanserit, as St. Clements expression is, If a man wants it by
necessity, it may by the overflowings of the Divine Grace be supplied, but not
so if negligence or choice causes the omission.

3. Our way being made plain, we may proceed to other places of Scripture to
prove the Divine Original of Confirmation. It was a Plant of our Heavenly
Fathers planting, it was a Branch of the Vine, and how it springs from the Root
Christ Jesus we have seen; it is yet more visible as it was dressed and
cultivated by the Apostles. Now as soon as the Apostles had received the Holy
spirit, they preached and baptized, and the inferior Ministers did the same,
and St. Philip particularly did so at Samaria, the Converts of which place
received all the Fruits of Baptism, but Christians though they were, they
wanted a (...) something to make them perfect. The other part of the Narrative
I shall set down in the words of St. Luke: Acts 8. v. 14, 15, 16, 17.
Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received
the Word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, who, when they were come
down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, for as yet he was
fallen upon none of them, only they were Baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus; Then laid they their hands on them and they received the Holy Ghost. If
it had not been necessary to have added a new solemnity and ministration, it is
not to be supposed the Apostles Peter and John would have gone from Jerusalem
to impose hands on the Baptized at Samaria. Id quod deerat a Petro and Johanne
factum est, ut Oratione pro eis habita and manu imposita invocaretur and
infunderetur super eos spiritus sanctus, said St. Cyprian: Ad Jubaian.
It was not necessary that they should be Baptized again, only that which was
wanting was performed by Peter and John, that by prayer and imposition of hands
the Holy Ghost should be invocated and poured upon them. The same also is from
this place affirmed by P. Innocentius the First, Epist. 1. c. 3. Adv.
Luciferian.
St. Hierom, and many others; and in the Acts of the Apostles we find another
instance of the celebration of this Ritual and Mystery, for it is signally
expressed of the Baptized Christians at Ephesus, that St. Paul first Baptized
them, and then laid his hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost; and
these Testimonies are the great warranty for this Holy Rite. Quod nunc in
confirmandis Neophytis manus impositio tribuit singulis, hoc tunc Spiritus
sancti descensio in credentium populo donavit universis, said Eucherius
Lugdunensis, in his Homily of Pentecost. The same thing that is done now in
imposition of hands or single persons, is no other than that which was done
upon all Believers in the descent of the Holy Ghost; it is the same Ministry,
and all deriving from the same Authority.

Confirmation or imposition of hands for the collation of the Holy spirit we
see was actually practiced by the Apostles, and that even before and after they
preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, and therefore Amalarius, who entered not
much into the secret of it, reckons this Ritual as derived from the Apostles
per consuetudinem, by Catholic custom, which although it is not perfectly
spoken as to the whole (...) or Authority of it, yet he places it in the
Apostles, and is a witness of the Catholic succeeding custom and practice of
the Church of God; which thing also Zanchius observing, though he followed the
sentiment of Amalarius, and seemed to understand no more of it, yet says well:
Interim (says he) exempla Apostolorum and veteris Ecclesiae vellem pluris
aestimari. I wish that the example of the Apostles and the primitive Church
were of more value amongst Christians, it were very well indeed they were so,
but there is more in it than mere example. These examples of such solemnities
productive of such spiritual effects are, as St. Cyprian calls them, Apostolica
Magisteria, the Apostles are our Masters in them, and have given Rules and
Precedents for the Church to follow. This is a Christian Law, and written as
all Scriptures are, for our instruction: But this I shall expressly prove in the
next Paragraph.

4. We have seen the Original from Christ, the practice and exercise of it in
the Apostles, and the first Converts in Christianity; that which I shall now
remark is, that this is established and passed into a Christian Doctrine. The
warranty for what I say is the words of St. Paul, Hebr. 6. 1. 2.
where the Holy Rite of Confirmation, so called from the effect of this
ministration, and expressed by the Ritual part of it, Imposition of Hands, is
reckoned a Fundamental point (...), Not laying again the foundation of
Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of
Baptismes and of laying on of Hands, of Resurrection from the Dead and Eternal
judgment. Here are six Fundamental points of St. Paul's Catechism, which he
laid as the foundation or the beginning of the institution of the Christian
church, and amongst these imposition of hands is reckoned as a part of the
foundation, and therefore they who deny it, dig up foundations: Now that this
imposition of hands is that which the Apostles used in confirming the Baptized,
and invocating the Holy Ghost upon them, remains to be proved.

For it is true that imposition of hands signifies all Christian Rites except
Baptism and the Lords Supper; not the Sacraments, but all the Sacramentals of
the Church: It signifies Confirmation, Ordination, Absolution, Visitation of
the Sick, blessing single persons, (as Christ did the Children brought to him)
and blessing Marriages, all these were usually ministered by imposition of
hands. Now the three last are not pretended to be any part of this foundation,
neither Reason, Authority, nor the Nature of the thing, suffer any such
pretension: The Question then is between the first three. First, Absolution of
Penitents cannot be meant here, not only because we never read that the
Apostles did use that ceremony in their Absolutions; but because the Apostle
speaking of the foundation in which Baptism is, and is reckoned one of the
principal parts in the foundation, there needed no Absolution but Baptismal,
for they and we believing one Baptism for the Remission of Sins, this is all
the absolution that can be at first and in the foundation. The other was
secunda post naufragium tabula, Symbol. Nicaen. and C. P.
it came in after, when men had made a shipwreck of their good conscience, and
were as St. Peter says (...) forgetful of the former cleansing and purification
and washing of their old sins. 2 Pet. 1. 9.


2. It cannot be meant of Ordination, and this is also evident. 1. Because the
Apostle says he would thenceforth leave to speak of the foundation, and go on
to perfection, that is, to higher mysteries. Now in Rituals, of which he
speaks, there is none higher than Ordination. 2. The Apostle saying he would
speak no more of Imposition of Hands, goes presently to discourse of the
mysteriousness of the Evangelical Priesthood, and the honor of that vocation,
by which it is evident he spoke nothing of Ordination in the Catechism or
Narrative of Fundamentals. 3. This also appears from the context, not only
because laying on of hands is immediately set after Baptism, but also because
in the very next words of his Discourse he does enumerate and apportion to
Baptism and Confirmation their proper and proportioned effects: To Baptism,
illumination, according to the perpetual style of the Church of God, calling
Baptism (...) an enlightening, and to confirmation he reckons, tasting the
Heavenly gift, and being made partakers of the Holy Ghost; by the thing
signified declaring the Sign, and by the mystery the Rite. Upon these words St.
Chysostom discoursing, says, That all these are Fundamental Articles; that is,
that we ought to repent from dead works, to be Baptized into the Faith of
Christ, and be made worthy of the gift of the Spirit, who is given by
Imposition of Hands, and we are to be taught the mysteries of the Resurrection
and Eternal Judgment. This Catechism (says he) is perfect; so that if any man
have Faith in God, and being baptized is also confirmed, and so tastes the
Heavenly gift and partakes of the Holy Ghost, and by hope of the Resurrection
tastes of the good things of the World to come, if he falls away from this
state, and turn Apostate from this whole Dispensation, digging down and turning
up these Foundations, he shall never be built again; he can never be Baptized
again, and never be Confirmed any more, God will not begin again, and go over
with him again, he cannot be made a Christian twice; if he remains upon these
Foundations, though he sins, he may be renewed (...) by Repentance and by a
Resuscitation of the Spirit, if he have not wholly quenched him: But if he
renounces the whole Covenant, disown and cancel these Foundations, he is
desperate, he can never be renewed (...) to the Title and Economy of
Repentance. This is the full explication of this excellent place, and any other
ways it cannot reasonably be explicated, but therefore into this place any
notice of Ordination cannot come; no Sense, no Mystery can be made of it or
drawn from it, but by the interposition of Confirmation the whole context is
clear, rational, and intelligible.

This then is that imposition of hands of which the Apostles speaks. Vnus hic
locus abunde testatur, etc. says Calvin: This one place does abundantly
witness that the Original of this Rite or Ceremony was from the Apostles, In
hunc locu^.
(...), says S. Chrysostom; for by this rite of imposition of hands they
received the Holy Ghost. For though the spirit of God was given
extra-regularly, and at all times, as God was pleased to do great things; yet
this imposition of hands was (...), this was the Minstery of the Spirit. For so
we receive Christ when we hear and obey his word: we eat Christ by Faith, and
we live by his Spirit; and yet the Blessed Eucharist is (...), the ministry of
the body and blood of Christ. Now as the Lords Supper is appointed ritually to
convey Christ's body and blood to us: So is Confirmation ordained ritually to
give unto us the Spirit of God. And though by accident and by the overflowings
of the spirit it may come to pass that a man does receive perfective graces
alone, and without Ministeries external: yet such a Man without a miracle is
not a perfect Christian ex statuum vitae dispositione; but, in the ordinary
ways and appointment of God, and until he receive this imposition of hands,
and be confirmed, is to be accounted an imperfect Christian. But of this
afterward.

I shall observe one thing more out of this testimony of S. Paul. He calls it,
the Doctrine of Baptismes and laying on of hands; by which it does not only
appear to be a lasting ministry, because no part of the Christian Doctrine
could change, or be abolished; but hence also it appears to be of Divine
institution. For if it were not; S. Paul had been guilty of that which our
Blessed Savior reproves in the Scribes and Pharisees, and should have taught
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Which because it cannot be supposed; it
must follow, that this Doctrine of Confirmation, or imposition of hands is
Apostolical and Divine. The argument is clear, and not easy to be reproov'd.

SECT. II.
The Rite of Confirmation is a perpetual and never ceasing Ministry.
YEa, but what is this to us? It belonged to the days of wonder and
extraordinary: The holy Ghost breathed upon the Apostles and Apostolical men;
but then he breathed his last: recedente gratia, recessit disciplina: when the
Grace departed we had no further use of the Ceremony. In answer to this I shall
(...), by diverse particulars evince plainly, that this ministry of
confirmation was not temporary and relative only to the Acts of the Apostles,
but was to descend to the Church for ever. This indeed is done already in the
preceding Sect. In which it is clearly manifested; that Christ himself made the
Baptism of the Spirit, John 3. 5.
to be necessary to the Church; he declared the fruits of this Baptism; and did
particularly relate it to the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Church at and
after that glorious Pentecost. He sanctified it, and commended it by his
example; just as in order to baptism, he sanctified the Flood Jordan, and all
other waters to the mystical washing away of sin; viz. by his great example,
and fulfilling this righteousness also: This Doctrine the Apostles first found
in their own persons and experience, and practiced to all their Converts after
Baptism by a solemn and external Rite, and all this passed into an Evangelical
Doctrine, the whole mystery being signified by the external Rite in the words
of the Apostle, as before it was by Christ, expressing only the internal; so
that there needs no more strength to this Argument: But that there may be
wanting no moments to this truth, which the Holy Scripture affords, I shall add
more weight to it; And,

1. The perpetuity of this Holy Rite appears, because this great gift of the
Holy Ghost was promised to abide with the Church for ever. And when the Jews
heard the Apostles speak with Tongues at the first and miraculous descent of
the Spirit in Pentecost, to take off the strangeness of the wonder and the envy
of the power; St. Peter at that very time tells them plainly, Repent and be
Baptized every one of you, -- and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost
(...) Not the meanest person amongst you all but shall receive this great
thing, Acts 2. 38, 39.
which ye observe us to have received; and not only you, but your Children
too; not your Children of this Generation only, sed Nati natorum, and qui
nascentur ab illis, but your Children for ever: For the promise is to you and
to your children, and to all that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our
God shall call. Now then let it be considered.

1. This gift is by promise, by a promise not made to the Apostles alone, but
to all; to all for ever.

2. Consider here at the very first as there is a verbum, a word of promise, so
there is sacramentum too: (I use the word as I have already premonished in a
large sense only, and according to the style of the Primitive Church) it is a
Rite partly Moral, partly Ceremonial, the first is Prayer, and the other is
laying on of the hands, and to an effect that is but transient and
extraordinary, and of a little abode, it is not easy to be supposed that such
a solemnity should be appointed. I say, such a solemnity, that is, it is not
imaginable that a solemn Rite annexed to a perpetual Promise should be
transient and temporary, for by the nature of Relatives they must be of equal
abode. The promise is of a thing for ever, the Ceremony or Rite was annexed to
the Promise, and therefore this also must be for ever.

3. This is attested by St. Paul, who reduces this Argument to this Mystery,
saying; In whom after that ye believed signati estis spiritu sancto
promissionis, ye were sealed by that holy spirit of promise. He spoke it to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 1. 13.
who well understood his meaning by remembering what was done to themselves by
the Apostles Acts 19. 6.
but a while before, who after they had Baptized them did lay their hands upon
them, and so they were sealed, and so they received the Holy spirit of promise;
for here the very matter of Fact is the clearest Commentary on St. Paul's words:
The spirit which was promised to all Christians they then received, when they
were consigned, or had the Ritual seal of Confirmation by Imposition of hands.
One thing I shall remark here, and that is, that this and some other words of
Scripture relating to the Sacraments or other Rituals of Religion do
principally mean the Internal Grace, and our consignation is by a secret power,
and the work is within, but it does not therefore follow that the External Rite
is not also intended; for the Rite is so wholly for the Mystery, and the
outward for the inward, and yet by the outward God so usually and regularly
gives the inward, that as no man is to rely upon the External Ministry, as if
the opus operatum would do the whole Duty; so no man is to neglect the
External, because the Internal is the more principal. The mistake in this
particular has caused great contempt of the Sacraments and Rituals of the
Church, and is the ground of the Socinian errors in these Questions.

But 4. what hinders any man from a quick consent at the first representation
of these plain reasonings and authorities? Is it because there were
extraordinary effects accompanying this ministration, and because now there are
not, that we will suppose the whole Economy must cease; if this be it, and
indeed this is all that can be supposed in opposition to it, it is infinitely
vain.

Irenaeus says they did continue even to his time; even the greatest instance
of miraculous power, Lib. 2. cap 57.
and in fraternitate, saepissime propter aliquid necessarium ea quae est in
quoquo loco Vniversa Ecclesia postulante per jejunium and supplicationem
multam, reversus est spiritus, etc. When God saw it necessary, and the Church
prayed and fasted much, they did miraculous things, even of reducing the Spirit
to a dead man.

Are all workers of Miracles? Do all speak with Tongues? 1 Cor. 12. 29.
Do all interpret? Can all heal? No, the Spirit blows where he lists, and
as he lists; he gives gifts to all, but to some after this manner, and to
some after that.

effusion of the Spirit of God, it run over, it was for themselves and others,
it wet the very ground they trod upon, and made it fruitful; but it was not to
all in like manner, but there was also then, and since then, a diffusion of the
Spirit, tanquam in pleno. St. Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 6. 8*
he was full of faith and power: The Holy Ghost was given to him to fulfill his
Faith principally, the working miracles was but collateral and incident: But
there is also an infusion of the Holy Ghost, and that is to all, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
and that is for ever, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal, says the Apostle; and therefore if the Grace be given to all,
there is no reason that the Ritual ministration of that Grace should cease,
upon pretense that the Spirit is not given extraordinarily.

4. These extraordinary gifts were indeed at first necessary: In the beginnings
always appears the sensible visions of spiritual things for their sakes, who
cannot receive the understanding of an incorporeal Nature; that if afterward
they be not so done, they may be believed by those things which were already
done, In Matthaeum.
said St. Chysostom in the place before quoted. That is, these visible
appearances were given at first by reason of the imperfection of the state of
the Church, but the greater gifts were to abide for ever; and therefore it is
observable that St. Paul says, That the gift of Tongues is one of the least
and most useless things; a mere sign, and not so much as a sign to Believers,
but to Infidels and Unbelievers; and before this he greatly prefers the gift of
Prophesying or Preaching, which, yet all Christians know, does abide with the
Church for ever.

5. To every ordinary and perpetual ministry at first, Preaching of S. Peter;
and five thousand at another Sermon: and Persons were miraculously cured by the
prayer of the Bishop in his visitation of a sick Christian; and Devils cast out
in the conversion of a sinner; and blindness cured at the Baptism of S. Paul,
and Aeneas was healed of a Palsy at the same time, he was cured of his
infidelity; and Eutychus was restored to life at the Preaching of S. Paul: and
yet that now we see no such extraordinaries, it follows not, that the
visitation of the sick, and Preaching Sermons, and absolving penitents are not
ordinary and perpetual ministrations: and therefore to fancy that invocation of
the Holy Spirit, and imposition of hands is to cease when the extraordinary and
temporary contingencies of it are gone, is too trifling a fancy to be put in
balance against so sacred an institution relying upon so many Scriptures.

With this Objection some vain persons would have troubled the Church in S.
Austins time; but he considered it with much indignation, writing against the
Donatists. His words are these. Tract. 6. in Canonicam. Johan. circa med. and
lib. 3. contr. Donatist. 16.
At the first times the Holy Spirit fell upon the Believers, and they spoke
with tongues which they had not learned, according as the Spirit gave them
utterance. They were signs fitted for the season; for so the Holy Ghost ought
to have signified in all tongues, because the Gospel of God was to run thorough
all the Nations and Languages of the World: so it was signified, and so it
passed thorough. But is it therefore expected that they, upon whom there is
imposition of hands that they might receive the Holy Ghost, that they should
speak with tongues? Or when we lay hands on Infants, does every one of you
attend to hear them speak with Tongues? And when he sees that they do not speak
with Tongues, is any of you of so perverse a heart as to say, They have not
received the Holy Ghost; for if they had received him, they would speak with
Tongues, as it was done at first? But if by these Miracles there is not now
given any testimony of the presence of the holy Spirit, how does any one know
that he has received the Holy Ghost? Interroget cor suum, si diligit fratrem,
manet spiritus Dei in illo. It is true the gift of Tongues does not remain, but
all the greater gifts of the holy Spirit remain with the Church for ever;
Sanctification and Power, Fortitude and Hope, Faith and Love: Let every man
search his Heart, and see if he belongs to God; whether the love of God be not
spread in his heart by the spirit of God: Let him see if he be not patient in
Troubles, comforted in his Afflictions, bold to Confess the Faith of Christ
crucified, zealous of good works: These are the miracles of Grace, and the
mighty powers of the Spirit, according to that saying of Christ; These signs
shall follow them that believe: Marc. 16. 17.
In my Name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues, they
shall tread on Serpents, they shall drink poison, and it shall not hurt them;
and they shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. That which
we call the miraculous part is the less power; but to cast out the Devil of
Lust, to throw down the pride of Lucifer, to tread on the great Dragon, and to
triumph over our spiritual enemies, to cure a diseased Soul, to be unharmed by
the poison of Temptation, of evil Examples and evil Company: These are the true
signs that shall follow them that truly and rightly believe on the Name of the
Lord Jesus; this is to live in the spirit, and to walk in the spirit; this is
more than to receive the spirit to a power of miracles, and supernatural
products in a natural matter: For this is from a supernatural principle to
receive supernatural aids to a supernatural end in the Diviner spirit of a
man; and this being more miraclous than the other, it ought not to be pretended
that the discontinuance of extraordinary miracles should cause the
discontinuance of an ordinary ministration; and this is that which I was to
prove.

Simon Magus offered to buy this power of the Apostles, that he also by laying
on of hands might thus minister the spirit. Now he began this sin in the
Christian Church, and it is too frequent at this day, but if all this power be
gone, then nothing of that sin can remain; if the subject matter be removed,
then the appendant crime cannot abide, and there can be no Simony, so much as
by participation; and whatever is or can be done in this kind, is no more of
this Crime, than Drunkenness is of Adultery; it relates to it, or may be
introductive of it, or be something like it: But certainly since the Church is
not so happy as to be entirely free from the Crime of Simony, it will be hard
to say, that the power (the buying of which was the principle of this sin, and
therefore the Rule of all the rest) should be removed, and the house stand
without a foundation, the relative without the correspondent, the accessory
without the principal, and the accident without the subject. This is
impossible, and therefore it remains that still there abides in the Church this
power, that by Imposition of the Hands of sit persons, the Holy Ghost is
ministered: But this will be further cleared in the next Section.

SECT. III.
The Holy Rite of Imposition of Hands for the giving the Holy Spirit, or
Confirmation, was actually continued and practiced by all the succeeding Ages
of the purest and Primitive Church.
NExt to the plain words of Scripture, the traditive interpretation and
practice of the Church of God is the best Argument in the World for Rituals and
Mystical ministrations; for the tradition is universal, and all the way
acknowledged to be derived from Scripture: And although in Rituals the
tradition it self, if it be universal and primitive, as this is, were alone
sufficient, and is so esteemed in the Baptism of Infants, in the Priests
consecrating the Holy Eucharist, in public Liturgies, in Absolution of
Penitents, the Lords Day, Communicating of Women, and the like; yet this Rite
of Confirmation being all that, and evidently derived from the practice
Apostolical, and so often recorded in the New Testament, both in the Ritual and
Mysterious part, both in the Ceremony and Spiritual effect, is a point of as
great certainty, as it is of usefulness and holy designation.

Theophilus Antiochenus lived not long after the death A. D. 170.
of S. John, and he derives the name of Christian, which was first given to the
Disciples in his City from this Chrisme or spiritual Unction, this Confirmation
of baptized persons (...), We are therefore called Christians because we are
anointed with the Unction of God. These words will be best understood by the
subsequent testimonies, by which it will appear that confirmation (for reasons
hereafter mentioned) was for many Ages called Chrisme or Unction. But he adds
the usefulness of it. For who is there that enters into the World, or that
enters into contention, or Athletick combats, but is anointed with oil? By
which words he intimates both the Unction anciently used in Baptism, and in
confirmation both: for in the first we have our new birth; in the second, we
are prepared for spiritual combat.

Tertullian having spoken of the Rites of Baptism, A. D. 200.
proceeds. Dehinc (says he) manus imponitur, per Benedictionem advocans and
invitans Spiritum Sanctum: De baptismo. c. 6.
Tunc ille sanctissimus Spiritus super emundata and benedicta corpora libens a
patre descendit. After baptism, the hand is imposed, by blessing, calling and
inviting the Holy Spirit. Then that most holy spirit willingly descends from
the Father upon the Bodies that are cleans'd and blessed; that is, first
baptized, then confirmed; and again. Caro signatur, De resur. carn. cap. 8.
ut anima muniatur. Caro manus impositione adumbratur, ut anima spiritu
illuminetur. The flesh is consigned, or sealed (that also is one of the known
primitive words for Confirmation) that the soul may be guarded or defended: and
the body is overshadowed by the imposition of hands, that the soul may be
enlightened by the Holy Ghost. Vbi supra de bapt.
Nay, further yet. If any Man objects that Baptism is sufficient; he answers;
It is true, it is sufficient to them that are to dye presently, but it is not
enough for them that are still to live and to fight against their spiritual
Enemies. For in baptism we do not receive the Holy Ghost (for although the
Apostles had been baptized, yet the Holy Ghost was come upon none of them
until Jesus was glorified) sed in aqua emundati, sub Angelo Spiritui Sancto
praeparamur; but being cleans'd by Baptismal water, we are disposed for the
Holy Spirit under the hand of the Angel of the Church, under the Bishops hand.
And a little after he expostulates the article. Non licebit Deo in suo Organo
per manus sanctas sublimitatem modulari spiritalem? Is it not lawful for God,
by an instrument of his own, under Holy hands to accord the heights and
sublimity of the spirit. For indeed this is the Divine Order; and therefore
Tertullian reckoning the happiness and excellency of the Church of Rome at that
time, says, she believes in God, she signs with water, she cloths with the
spirit (viz. in Confirmation) she feeds with the Eucharist, De Praescript. cap.
36.
she exhorts to Martyrdom; and against this order or institution she receives
no Man.

S. Cyprian, A. D. 250. Epist. 73.
in his Epistle to Jubajanus, having urged that of the Apostles going to
Samaria to impose hands on those whom S. Philip had baptized, adds: Quod nunc
quoque apud nos geritur, ut qui in Ecclesia baptizantur, per praepositos
Ecclesiae offerantur, and per nostram orationem ac manus impositionem, spiritum
sanctum consequantur, and signaculo dominico consummentur. Which custom is also
descended to us, that they, who are baptized might be brought by the Rulers of
the Church, and by our prayer and the imposition of hands (said the Martyr
Bishop) may obtain the Holy Ghost, Epist. 70. and 73.
and be consummated with the Lords signature. And again, Vngi necesse est eum
qui baptizatus est, etc. Et super eos qui in Ecclesia baptizati erant, and
Ecclesiasticum and legitimum baptismum consecuti fuerant, oratione pro iis
habita, manu imposita invocaretur and infunderetur Spiritus Sanctus. It is
necessary that every one who is baptized should receive the Unction that he may
be Christ's anointed one, and may have in him the grace of Christ. They who
have received lawful and Ecclesiastical Baptism, it is not necessary they
should be baptized again; but that which is wanting must be supplied, viz. that
prayer being made for them, and hands imposed, the Holy Ghost be invocated and
poured upon them.

S. Clement of Alexandria, A. D. 200.
a Man of Venerable Antiquity and admirable Learning, tells that a certain
young Man was by S. John delivered to the care of a Bishop, Apud Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 17.
who having baptized him: postea vero sigillo Domini tanquam perfecta tutaque
ejus custodia (...).
eum obsignavit. Afterward he sealed him with the Lords signature (the Church
word for Confirmation) as with a safe and perfect guard.

Origin in his seventh Homily upon Ezekiel expounding certain mystical words of
the Prophet; A. D. 210.
says, Oleum est quo vir sanctus Vngitur, oleum Christi, oleum Sanctae
Doctrinae. Cum ergo aliquis accepit hoc oleum quo Vngitur Sanctus, id est,
Scripturam sanctam instituentem quomodo oporteat baptizari, in nomine Patris,
and filii, and Spiritus sancti, and pauca commutans unxerit quempiam, and
quodammodo dixerit, jam non es Catechumenus, consecutus es lavacrum secundae
generationis; talis homo accipit oleum Dei, etc. The Unction of Christ, of holy
Doctrine is the Oil by which the Holy Man is anointed; having been instructed
in the Scriptures, and taught how to be baptized; then changing a few things he
says to him, now you are no longer a Catechumen, now you are regenerated in
baptism; such a Man receives the Unction of God. viz. He then is to be
confirmed.

S. Dionys commonly called the Areopagite in his excellent book of
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy speaks most fully of the Holy rite of Confirmation or
Chrism. De Eccles. Hier. c. 2.
Having described at large the office and manner of baptizing the Catechumens,
the trine immersion, the vesting them in white Garments; adds; Then they bring
them again to the Bishop, and he consignes him (who had been so baptized)
(...), with the most Divinely operating Unction, and then gives him the most
Holy Eucharist. And afterward he says. Et cap. 4.
But even to him, who is consecrated in the most holy mystery of regeneration,
(...), the perfective Unction of Chrism gives to him the advent of the Holy
Spirit. And this rite of Confirmation, then called Chrism, from the spiritual
Unction then effected and consigned also and signified by the Ceremony of
anointing externally, which was then the ceremony of the Church; he calls it
(...) the holy consummation of our baptismal regeneration; meaning that without
this, there is something wanting to the baptized persons.

And this appears fully in that famous censure of Novatus by Cornelius Bishop
of Rome reported by Lib. 6. Hist. Eccles. c. 43.
Eusebius. A. D. 260.
Novatus had been baptized in his bed being very sick and like to dye: but when
he recovered he did not receive those other things which by the rule of the
Church he ought to have received: neque Domini sigillo ab Episcopo consignatus
est; he was not consigned with the Lords signature by the hands of the Bishop;
he was not confirmed: Quo non impetrato, quomodo spiritum sanctum obtinuisse
putandus est? Which having not obtained, how can he be supposed to have
received the Holy Spirit? The same also is something more fully related by
Nicephorus, Lib. 6. cap. 3.
but wholly to the same purpose.

Melchiades in his Epistle to the Bishops of Spain argues excellently about the
necessity and usefulness of the Holy Rite of Confirmation. A. D. 320.
[What does the mystery of Confirmation profit me after the mystery of Baptism?
Certainly we did not receive all in our Baptism, if after that lavatory we want
something of another kind. Let your charity attend. As the Military order
requires, that when the General enters a Soldier into his list, he does not
only mark him, but furnishes him with arms for the Battle. So in him that is
baptized, this blessing is his Ammunition. You have given (Christ) a Soldier,
give him also Weapons. And what will it profit him if a Father gives a great
Estate to his Son, if he does not take care to provide a Tutor for him.
Therefore the Holy Spirit is the Guardian of our regeneration in Christ, he is
the Comforter, and he is the Defender.]

I have already alleged the plain Testimonies of Optatus and S. Cyril in the
first Section. A. D. 370.
I add to them the words of S. Gregory Nazianzen speaking of Confirmation or
the Christian signature; Adhort. ad S. lavacrum.
Hoc and viventi tibi maximum est tutamentum. Ovis enim quae sigillo insignita
est non facile patet insidiis; quae vero signata non est, facile a furibus
capitur. This signature is your greatest guard while you live. For a sheep,
when it is marked with the Masters sign, is not so soon stolen by Thieves; but
easily if she be not. The same manner of speaking is also used by S. Basil, who
was himself together with Eubulus confirmed by Bishop Maximinus. Quomodo curam
geret tanquam ad se pertinentis Angelus? Quomodo eripiat ex hostibus si non
agnoverit signaculum? How shall the Angel know what sheep belong unto his
charge? How shall he snatch them from the Enemy; if he does not see their mark
and signature? In cap. 1. ad Ephesians.
Theodoret also and Theophylact speak the like words: and so far as I can
perceive; these and the like sayings are most made use of by the Schoolmen to
be their warranty for an indelible Character imprinted in Confirmation. I do
not interest my self in the question; but only recite the Doctrine of these
Fathers in behalf of the practice and usefulness of Confirmation.

I shall not need to transcribe hither those clear testimonies which are cited
from the Epistles of S. Clement, Urban the first, Fabianus and Cornelius; the
sum of them is in those plainest words of Urban the First. Omnes fideles per
manus impositionem Episcoporum Spiritum Sanctum post baptismum accipere debent.
All faithful People ought to receive the Holy spirit by imposition of the
Bishops hands after Baptism. Much more to the same purpose is to be read,
collected by Gratian de consecrat. did 4. Presbyt. and de consecrat did. 5.
Omnes fideles and ibid. Spiritus Sanctus.

S. Hierom brings in a Luciferian asking: Dial. adv. Lucifer.
why he that is baptized in the Church does not receive the Holy Ghost, but by
imposition of the Bishops hands? The answer is, hanc observationem ex
Scripturae authoritate ad Sacordotii honorem descendere. This observation for
the honor of the Priesthood did descend from the authority of the Scriptures;
adding withal, it was for the prevention of Schisms, and that the safety of
the Church did depend upon it. Exigis ubi scriptum est? If you ask where it is
written; it is answered, in Actibus Apostolorum. It is written in the Acts of
the Apostles. But if there were no authority of Scripture for it, totius orbis
in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret; the consent of the whole
Christian World in this article ought to prevail as a commandment. But here is
a twofold Chord, Scripture and Universal Tradition: or rather Scripture
expounded by an Universal traditive interpretation. Homil 18. in Act.
The same observation is made from Scripture by S. Chrysostom: The words are
very like those now recited from S. Hierom's Dialogue, and therefore need not
be repeated.

S. Ambrose calls Confirmation, Spiritale signaculum, Lib. 3. de sacram. c. 2.
quod post fontem superest, ut perfectio fiat. A spiritual seal remaining after
Baptism, that perfection be had. Oecumenius calls it (...), In Hebr. 6.
perfection, Lavacro peccata purgantur, Chrismate Spiritus sanctus
superfunditur,; Vtraque vero ista manu and ore Antistitis impetramus, said
Pacianus Bishop of Barcinona. In Baptism our sins are cleans'd; in Confirmation
the holy Spirit is poured upon us; and both these we obtain by the hands and
mouth of the Bishop]: and again; vestrae plebi unde spiritus; quam non
consignat unctus Sacerdos? The same with that of Cornelius in the case of
Novatus before cited.

I shall add no more least, Lib. 3. contr. Novat.
I overset the article, and make it suspicious by too laborious a defense: only
after these numerous testimonies of the Fathers, I think it may be useful to
represent that this Holy rite of Confirmation has been decreed by many
Councils.

The Council of Eliberis, Can. 38.
celebrated in the time of P. Sylvester the first, decreed, that whosoever is
baptized in his sickness, if he recover, ad Episcopum eum perducat, ut per
manus impositionem perfici possit; let him be brought to the Bishop, that he
may be perfected by the imposition of hands. To the same purpose is the 77th.
Can. Episcopus eos per bendictionem perficere debebit. The Bishop must perfect
those, whom the Minister baptized, by his benediction.

The Council of Laodicea decreed (...). Can. 38.
All that are baptized, must be anointed with the celestial Unction, and [so]
be partakers of the Kingdom of Christ. All that are so, that is, are confirmed;
for this celestial Unction, is done by holy prayers, and the invocation of the
Holy Spirit, so Zonarus upon this Canon: all such who have this Unction shall
reign with Christ, unless by their wickedness they praeclude their own
possessions. This Canon was put into the Code of the Catholic Church; and
makes the 152. Canon.

The Council of Orleans affirms expressly; Habetur apud Gratian. de Consecrat.
did. 5. cap. jejun.
that he who is baptized cannot be a Christian (meaning according to the usual
style of the Church; a full, and perfect Christian) nisi confirmatione
Episcopali fuerit Chrismatus; unless he have the Unction of Episcopal
confirmation.

But when the Church had long disputed concerning the re-baptizing of Heretics
and made Canons for and against it, according as the Heresies were, and all
agreed that if the first baptism had been once good, it could never be
repeated; yet they thought it sit that such persons should be confirmed by the
Bishop, all supposing Confirmation to be the perfection and consummation of the
less perfect baptism. Cap. 8.
Thus the first Council of Arles decreed concerning the Arrians, that if they
had been baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, they should
not be rebaptized. Manus tantum eis imponatur ut accipiant Spiritum Sanctum;
That is, let them be confirmed; let there be imposition of hands that they may
receive the Holy Ghost. The same is decreed by the second Council of Arles in
the case of the Bonasiaci. Cap. 17.
But I also find it in a greater record; Can. 7.
in the General Council of Constantinople; where Heretics are commanded upon
their conversion to be received, secundum constitutum Officium, there was an
Office appointed for it; and it is in the Greeks Euchologion, sigillatos, primo
scil. Vnctos Vnguento Chrismatis, etc. and signantes eos dicimus, Sigillum doni
spiritus sancti, It is the form of Confirmation used to this day in the Greek
Church.

So many Fathers testifying the practice of the Church, and teaching this
Doctrine, and so many more Fathers as were assembled in six Councils, all
giving witness to this holy Rite, and that in pursuance also of Scripture, are
too great a Cloud of Witnesses to be despised by any Man that calls himself a
Christian.

SECT. IV.
The BISHOPS were always, and the only Ministers of Confirmation.
SAint Chrysostom asking the reason why the Samaritans, Homil. 18. in Acta.
who were Baptized by Philip, could not from him and by his ministry receive
the Holy Ghost? answers, Perhaps this was done for the honor of the Apostles,
to distinguish the supereminent dignity which they bore in the Church, from all
inferior Ministrations; but this answer not satisfying, he adds, hoc donum non
habebat, erat enim ex septem illis, id quod magis videtur dicendum. Vnde mea
sententia hic Philippus unus ex septem erat secundus a Stephano, Ideo and
Baptizans, spiritum sanctum non dabat, neque enim facultatem habebat, hoc enim
donum solorum Apostolorum erat. This gift they had not who Baptized the
Samaritans, which thing is rather to be said than the other; for Philip was one
of the seven, and in my opinion next to St. Stephen; therefore though he
baptized, yet he gave not the Holy Ghost; for he had no power so to do, for
this gift was proper only to the Apostles, Nam virtutem quidem acceperant
(Diaconi) faciendi signa, non autem dandi aliis spiritum sanctum, igitur hoc
erat in Apostolis singular, unde and praecipuos, and non alios videmus hoc
facere, The Ministers that Baptized had a power of doing Signs and working
Miracles, but not of giving the holy spirit; therefore this gift was peculiar
to the Apostles, whence it comes to pass that we see the cheifs (...).
in the Church, and no other to do this.

St. Dionys says, (...), There is need of a Bishop to confirm the baptized,
Cap. 5. Eccles. Hier.
(...) for this was the ancient custom of the Church, and this was wont to be
done by the Bishops for conservation of Unity in the Church of Christ, said St.
Ambrose: In Hebr. 6. Qu. 44. in N. T.
A solis Episcopis, By Bishops only, said St. Austin; For the Bishops
succeeded in the place and ordinary Office of the Apostles, said St. Hierom:
And therefore in his Dialogue against the Luciferians it is said [That this
observation for the honor of the Priesthood did descend, that the Bishops
only might by Imposition of Hands confer the Holy Ghost; that it comes from
Scripture, that it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, that it is done for
the prevention of Schisms, that the safety of the Church depends upon it.]

But the words of P. Innocentius I. in his first Epistle and third Chapter, and
published in the first Tome of the Councils, are very full to this particular,
De consignandis infantibus, manifestum est non ab alio quam ab Episcopo fieri
licere, Nam Presbyteri, licet sint sacerdotes, pontificatus tamen apicem non
habent, haec autem pontificibus solis deberi, ut vel consignent, vel paracletum
spiritum tradant, non solum consuetudo Ecclesiastica demonstrat, verum and illa
lectio Actuum Apostolorum, quae asserit Petrum and Johannem esse directos, qui
jam Baptizatis traderent spiritum sanctum; Concerning Confirmation of Infants,
it is manifest, it is not Lawful to be done by any other than by the Bishop;
for although the Presbyters be Priests, yet they have not the Summity of
Episcopacy: But that these things are only due to Bishops, is not only
demonstrated by the custom of the Church, but by that of the Acts of the
Apostles, where Peter and John were sent to minister the Holy Ghost to them
that were Baptized. Contr. Parmen. lib. 7.
Optatus proves Macharius to be no Bishop, because he was not conversant in the
Episcopal Office, and imposed hands on none that were Baptized. Hoc unum a
majoribus fit, id est, a summis Pontificibus, quod a minoribus perfici non
potest, said P. Melchiades: Epist. ad Episc. Hispan.
This (of Confirmation) is only done by the greater Ministers; that is, by the
Bishops, and cannot be done by the lesser. This was the constant practice and
Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and derived from the practice and tradition
of the Apostles, Voluit Deus dona illa admiranda non contingere Baptizatis,
nisi per manus Apostolorum, ut Authoritatem testibus suis conciliaret quam
maximam; quod ipsum simul ad retinendam Ecclesiae unitatem p^rtinebat. Grotius.
and recorded in their Acts, written by St. Luke. For this is our great Rule in
this case, what they did in Rituals, and consigned to Posterity is our example
and our warranty: Videtur ergo fuisse peculiare Apostolorum munus dare Spiritum
s^nctum. Isidor. Clarius in 8. Actuum Apostolorum.
we see it done thus, and by these men, and by no others, and no otherwise, and
we have no other authority, and we have no reason to go another way. The (...)
in St. Luke, the (...) in St. Chrysostom, the (...) in Philo, and the (...),
the chief Governor in Ecclesiasticals, his Office is (...) to teach such
things as are not set down in Books; their practice is a Sermon, their example
in these things must be our rule, or else we must walk irregularly, and have no
rule, but chance and humor, Empire and Usurpation, and therefore much rather,
when it is recorded in Holy writ, must this Observation be esteemed sacred and
inviolable.

But how if a Bishop be not to be had, or not ready? St. Ambrose In Ephesians. 4.
is pretended to have answered, Apud Egyptum Presbyteri consignant, De offic.
Ecles. Cap. 27.
si praesens non sit Episcopus: A Presbyter may consign, if the Bishop be not
present; and Amalarius affirms, Sylvestrum Papam praevidentem quantum
periculosum iter arriperet, qui sine confirmatione maneret, quantum potuit
subvenisse, and propter absentiam Episcoporum, necessitate addidisse, ut a
Presbytero Vngerentur, That Pope Sylvester foreseeing how dangerous a Journey
he takes, who abides without Confirmation, brought remedy as far as he could,
and commanded that in the absence of Bishops they should be anointed by the
Priest; and therefore it is by some supposed, that factum valet, fieri non
debuit. The thing ought not to be done but in the proper and appointed way; but
when it is done, it is valid, just as in the case of Baptism by a Layman or
Woman: Nay, though some Canons say it is actio irrita, the act is null, yet for
this there is a salvo pretended; for sometimes an action is said to be irrita
in Law, which yet nevertheless is of secret and permanent value, and ought not
to be done again. Thus if a Priest be promoted by Simony, it is said, 1 Qu. 1.
cap. qui vult 1. and 2.
sacerdos non est, sed inaniter tantum dicitur; he is but vainly called a
Priest, for he is no Priest. So Sixtus II. said, Epist 2. de Episc. ordinante.
That if a Bishop Ordain in another Diocese, the Ordination is void; and in
the Law it is said, 1 Qu. 2. C. in multis. Clement. de elect cap. in plerisque
that if a Bishop be consecrated without his Clergy and the Congregation, the
Consecration is null; and yet these later and fiercer constitutions do not
determine concerning the natural event of things, but of the legal and
Canonical approbation.

To these things I answer, That St. Ambrose his saying that in Egypt the
Presbyters consign in the Bishops absence, does not prove that they ever did
confirm or impose hands on the Baptized for the ministry of the holy spirit,
Qu. v. and N. T. Qu. 101.
because that very passage being related by St. Austin, the more general word
of consign is rendered by the plainer and more particular, consecrant, they
consecrate, meaning the blessed Eucharist; which was not permitted primitively
to a simple Priest to do in the Bishops absence without leave, only in Egypt
it seems they had a general leave, and the Bishops absence was an
interpretative consent: But besides this, consignant is best interpreted by the
practice of the Church, of which I shall presently give an account, they might
in the absence of the Bishop consign with Oil upon the top of the head, but not
in the forehead, much less impose hands, or confirm, or minister the holy
Spirit, for the case was this.

It was very early in the Church, that to represent the grace which was
ministered in Confirmation, the Unction from above, they used Oil and Balsom;
and so constantly used this in their Confirmations, that from the ceremony it
had the appellation; Sacramentum Chrismatis; S. Austin Lib. 2. contr. liter.
Petiliani. c. 104.
calls it; (...) so Dionysius. Now because at the Baptism of the adult
Christians, and (by imitation of that) of Infants, Confirmation and Baptism
were usually ministered at the same time; the Unction was not only used to
persons newly baptized; but another Unction was added as a ceremony in Baptism
it self; and was used immediately before Baptism; and the oil was put on the
top of the head, and three times was the party signed; so it was then, as we
find in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. But besides this Unction with oil in
baptismal preparations; and pouring oil into the baptismal water; we find
another Unction after the baptism was finished. For they bring the baptized
person again to the Bishop, Eccles. hier. cap 2.
says S. Dionys; who signing the man with hallowed Chrisme, gives him the Holy
Eucharist. This they called (...) the perfective or consummating Unction; this
was that which was used when the Bishop confirmed the baptized person: For to
him who is initiated by the most holy initiation of the Divine generation (that
is, to him who has been baptized, says Pachimeres the Paraphrast of
Dionysius) the perfective Unction of Chrisme, gives the gift of the Holy Ghost.
This is that which the Laodicean Council calls (...) to be anointed after
baptism. Can. 48.
Both these Unctions were intimated by Theophilus Antiochenus, (...), Every man
that is borne into the World, and every man that is a Champion is anointed with
oil. That to baptism, this alluding to Confirmation.

Now this Chrisme was frequently ministered immediately after Baptism; in the
Cities where the Bishop was present. But in Villages and little Towns where the
Bishop was not present, it could not be. But Bishops were forced at their
opportunities to go abroad and perfect what was wanting, as it was in the
example of Peter and John to the Samaritans. Non quidem abnuo hanc esse
Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, ut ad eos qui long in minoribus Vrbibus per
Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad invocationem Sancti
Spiritus manum impositurus excurrat. C. Hieron adv. Lucifer. ante med.
It is the custom of the Church that when persons are in lesser Cities baptized
by Priests and Deacons, the Bishops uses to travel far, that he may lay hands
on them, for the invocation of the Holy Spirit. But because this could not
always be done, and because many baptized persons dyed before such an
opportunity could be had; the Church took up a custom, that the Bishop should
consecrate the Chrisme, and send it to the Villages and little Cities distant
from the Metropolis, and that the Priests should anoint the baptized with it.
But still they kept this part of it sacred and peculiar to the Bishop. 1. That
no Chrisme should be used but what the Bishop consecrated. 2. That the Priests
should anoint the head of the baptized; but at no hand, the forehead, for that
was still reserved for the Bishop to do when he confirmed them. And this is
evident in the Epistle of P. Innocent the first, above quoted. Nam Presbyteris,
seu extra Episcopum, seu praesente Episcopo baptizant, Chrismate baptizatos
Vngere licet, sed quod ab Episcopo fuerit consecratum. Non tamen frontem ex
eodem oleo signare, quod solis debetur Episcopis cum tradunt Spiritum
Paracletum. Now this the Bishops did, not only to satisfy the desire of the
baptized, but by this ceremony to excite the votum confirmationis, that they,
who could not actually be confirmed, might at least have it in voto in desire,
and in Ecclesiastical representation. This (as some think) was first introduced
by Pope Sylvester: and this is the consignation, which the Priests of Egypt
used in the absence of the Bishop; and this became afterward, the practice in
other Churches.

But this was no part of the Holy Rite of Confirmation; but a ceremony annexed
to it ordinarily; from thence transmitted to baptism, first by imitation,
afterward by way of supply and in defect of the opportunities of Confirmation
Episcopal. And therefore we find in the first Arausican Council in the time of
Leo the first and Theodosius junior, Cap. 1.
it was decreed, That in baptism every one should receive Chrism: de eo autem
qui in baptismate, qua cunque necessitate faciente Chrismatus non fuerit, in
confirmatione sacerdos commonebitur. If the baptized by any intervening
accident or necessity was not anointed, the Bishop should be advertised of it
in Confirmation, meaning that then it must be done. For the Chrisme was but a
ceremony annexed; no part of either rite essential to it; but yet thy thought
it necessary; by reason of some opinions then prevailing in the Church. But
here the rites themselves are clearly distinguished; and this of Confirmation
was never permitted to mere Presbyters. Innocentius III, a great Canonist and
of great authority, gives a full evidence in this particular. Per frontis
Chrismationem manus impositio designatur, quia per eam Spiritus Sanctus per
augmentum datur and robur. Vnde cum caeteras unctiones simplex sacerdos vel
Presbyter valeat exhibere, hanc non nisi summus Sacerdos vel Presbyter valeat
exhibere, id est, Episcopus confer. By anointing of the forehead, the
imposition of hands is designed, because by that the Holy Ghost is given for
increase and strength; therefore when a single Priest may give the other
Unctions, yet this cannot be done but by the chief Priest, that is, the Bishop:
And therefore to the Question, what shall be done if a Bishop may not be had?
The same Innocentius answers [It is safer and without danger wholly to omit it,
than to have it rashly and without authority ministered by any other, cum umbra
quaedam ostendatur in opere, veritas autem non subeat in effectu; for it is a
mere shadow without truth, or real effect, when any one else does it but the
person whom God has appointed to this ministration; and no approved man of the
Church did ever say the contrary, till Richard Primate of Ardmagh commenced a
new Opinion, from whence (Thomas of Walden says that) Wicl^f borrowed his
Doctrine to trouble the Church in this particular.

What the Doctrine of the ancient Church was in the purest times, I have
already (I hope) sufficiently declared; what it was afterward, when the
Ceremony of Chrisme was as much remarked, as the Rite to which it ministered, De
instit. Cleric. l. 1. c. 30.
we find fully declared by Rabanus Maurus. Signatur Baptizatus cum Chrismate
per sacerdotem in capitis summitate, per Pontificem vero in front, ut priori
Unction significetur, spiritus sancti super ipsum descensio ad habitationem
Deo consecrandam, in secunda quoque ut ejus spiritus sancti septiformis gratia,
cum omni plenitudine sanctitatis and scientiae and virtutis, venire in hominem
declaretur: Tunc enim ipse spiritus sanctus post mundata and benedicta corpora
atque animas libere a patre descendit, ut una cum sua visitatione sanctificaret
and illustraret, and nunc in hominem ad hoc venit, ut signaculum fidei, quod in
front suscepit, faciat cum donis coelestibus repletum, and sua gratia
confortatum intrepide, and audacter coram Regibus and Potestatibus hujus
saeculi portare, ac nomen Christi libera voce praedicare. In Baptism the
baptized was anointed on the top of the head, in Confirmation on the forehead,
by that was signified that the Holy Ghost was preparing a habitation for
himself; by this was declared the descent of the Holy Spirit, with his
sevenfold gifts, with all fullness of knowledge and spiritual understanding.
These things were signified by the appendant Ceremony, but the Rites were ever
distinguished, and did not only signify and declare, but effect these Graces
by the ministry of Prayer and Imposition of Hands.

The ceremony the Church instituted and used as she pleased, and gave in what
circumstances they would choose; and new propositions entered, and customs
changed, and deputations were made; and the Bishops, in whom by Christ was
placed the fullness of Ecclesiastical power, concredited to the Priests and
Deacons so much as their occasions and necessities permitted; and because in
those ages and places where the external ceremony was regarded (it may be) more
than the inward mystery, or the Rite of Divine appointment, they were apt to
believe that the Chrism, or exterior Unction delegated to the Priests
Ministry after the Episcopal consecration of it, might supply the want of
Episcopal confirmation; it came to pass that new opinions were entertained; and
the Regulars, the Friars and the Jesuits, who were always too little friends
to the Episcopal power, from which they would fain have been wholly exempted,
publicly taught (in England especially) that chrisme ministered by them with
leave from the Pope did do all that which ordinarily was to be done in
Episcopal confirmation. For as Tertullian complained in his time, Quibus fuit
propositum aliter docendi, eos necessitas coegit aliter disponendi instrumenta
Doctrinae. They who had purposes of teaching new Doctrines, were constrained
otherwise to dispose of the Instruments and Rituals appertaining to their
Doctrines. These men to serve ends, destroyed the article, and overthrew the
Ancient Discipline and Unity of the Primitive Church. But they were justly
censured by the Theological faculty at Paris; and the censure well defended by
Hallier, one of the Doctors of the Sorbon; whether I refer the Reader that is
curious in little things.

But for the main: It was ever called Confirmatio Episcopalis, and impositio
manuum Episcoporum, which our English word well expresses, and perfectly
retains the use; we know it by the common name of Bishopping of Children. I
shall no farther insist upon it, only I shall observe that there is a vain
distinction brought into the Schools and Glosses of the Canon Law, of a
Minister ordinary, and extraordinary; all allowing that the Bishop is appointed
the ordinary Minister of Confirmation; but they would fain innovate and pretend
that in some cases others may be Ministers extraordinary. This device is of
infinite danger to the destruction of the whole Sacred order of the Ministry,
and disparks the enclosures, and lays all in common, and makes men supreme
controulers of the Orders of God, and relies upon a false principle; for in
true Divinity and by the Economy of the spirit of God, there can be no
Minister of any Divine Ordinance, but he that is of Divine appointment, there
can be none but the ordinary Minister. I do not say that God is tied to this
way, he cannot be tied, but by himself; and therefore Christ gave a special
Commission to Ananias to baptize and to confirm St. Paul, and he gave the
Spirit to Cornelius even before he was baptized, and he ordained St. Paul to be
an Apostle without the ministry of man: But this I say, That though God can
make Ministers extraordinary, yet Man cannot, and they that go about to do so,
usurp the power of Christ, and snatch from his hand what he never intended to
part with. The Apostles admitted others into a part of their care, and of their
power, but when they intended to employ them in any ministry, they gave them so
much of their Order as would enable them, but a person of a lower order could
never be deputed Minister of actions appropriate to the higher, which is the
case of Confirmation, by the practice and tradition of the Apostles, and by the
Universal practice and Doctrine of the Primitive Catholic Church, by which,
Bishops only, the successors of the Apostles, were alone the Ministers of
Confirmation, and therefore if any man else usurp it, let them answer it; they
do hurt indeed to themselves, but no benefit to others, to whom they minister
shadows instead of substances.

SECT. V.
The whole procedure, or Ritual of Confirmation, is by Prayer and Imposition of
Hands.
THE Heart and the Eye are lift up to God to bring Blessings from him, and so
is the Hand too; but this also falls upon the People, and rests there, to apply
the descending blessing to the proper and prepared suscipient. God governed the
People of Israel by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Et calidae fecere silentia
turbae Majestate manus, and both under Moses and under Christ, when ever the
President of Religion did bless the People, he lifted up his hand over the
Congregation; and when he blessed a single person he laid his hand upon him.
This was the Rite used by Jacob and the Patriarchs, by Kings and Prophets, by
all the eminently Religious in the Synagogue, and by Christ himself when he
blessed the Children which were brought to him; and by the Apostles when they
blessed and confirmed the baptized Converts; and whom else can the Church
follow? The Apostles did so to the Christians of Samaria, to them of Ephesus;
and St. Paul describes this whole mystery by the Ritual part of it, Hebr. 6. 2.
calling it the foundation of imposition of hands. It is the solemnity of
blessing, and the solemnity and application of Paternal prayer. (...); said
Clement of Alexandria; Paedag. l. 3. c. 11.
Upon whom shall he lay his hands? Whom shall he bless? Quid enim aliud est
impositio manuum, nisi Oration super hominem? said St. Austine. The Bishop's
laying his hands on the People, what is it but the solemnity of Prayer for
them? that is, a prayer made by those sacred persons, who by Christ are
appointed to pray for them, and to bless in his Name; and so indeed are all the
ministeries of the Church, Baptism, Consecration of the B. Eucharist,
Absolution, Ordination, Visitation of the Sick; they are all in genere
orationis; they are nothing but solemn and appointed Prayer by an entrusted and
a gracious Person, specificated by a proper order to the end of the blessing
then designed; and therefore when Saint James commanded that the sick Persons
should send for the Elders of the Church, he adds, and let them pray over them;
that is, lay their hands on the sick, and pray for them; that is, praying over
them: It is adumbratio dextrae, (as Tertullian calls it) the right hand of him
that ministers over-shadows the person for whom the solemn Prayer is to be made.

This is the Office of the Rulers of the Church; for they in the Divine Eutaxy
are made your Superiors; they are indeed your servants for Jesus sake; but
they are over you in the Lord, and therefore are from the Lord appointed to
bless the People; for without contradiction, Hebr. 7. 7.
says the Apostle, the less is blessed of the greater, that is, God has
appointed the Superiors in Religion to be the great Ministers of Prayer, he
has made them the gracious Persons, them he will hear, those he has commanded
to convey your needs to God, and Gods blessings to you, and to ask a blessing,
is to desire them to pray for you; Hooker. Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. ^. 66.
them, I say, whom God most respects for their piety and zeal that way, or
else regards, for that their place and calling binds them above others to
do this duty; such as are Natural and Spiritual Fathers.

It is easy for profane persons to deride these things, as they do all
Religion, which is not conveyed to them by sense, or natural demonstrations;
but the Economy of the spirit, and the things of God are spiritually
discerned; the spirit blows where it lists, and no Man knows whence it
comes, and whether it goes; and the Operations are discerned by Faith, and
received by Love and by Obedience, Date mihi Christianum, and intelligit quod
dico: None but true Christians understand and feel these things; but of this we
are sure, that in all the times of Moses Law, while the Synagogue was standing,
and in all the days of Christianity, so long as men loved Religion, and walked
in the Spirit, and minded the affairs of their Souls, to have the prayers and
the blessing of the Fathers of the Synagogue, and the Fathers of the Church,
was esteemed no small part of their Religion, and so they went to Heaven: But
that which I intend to say is this, That Prayer and Imposition of Hands was the
whole procedure in the Christian Rites; and because this ministry was most
signally performed by this ceremony, and was also by St. Paul called and noted
by the name of the Ceremony, imposition of hands; this name was retained in the
Christian Church, and this manner of ministering Confirmation was all that was
in the commandment or institution.

But because in Confirmation we receive the Unction from above, that is, then
we are most signally made Kings and Priests unto God, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, and to enable us to seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness
of it, and that the giving the holy spirit is in Scripture called the Unction
from above, the Church of God in early Ages made use of this Allegory, and
passed it into an External ceremony and representation of the mystery, Prudent.
in (...).
to signify the inward Grace. Post inscripta oleo frontis signacula, perque
Vnguentum Regale datum est, and Chrisma perenne.


We are consigned on the forehead with Oil, A. D. 400.
and a Royal Unction, and an Eternal Chrisme is given to us; so Prudentius
gives testimony of the ministry of Confirmation in his time, Catech. Mystag. 3.
(...), said S. Cyril. Preserve this Unction pure and spotless, for it teaches
you all things, as you have heard the blessed S. John speaking and
philosophying many things of this holy Chrism. Upon this account the H. Fathers
used to bless and consecrate Oil and Balsome, that by an external signature
they might signify the inward Unction effected in Confirmation. (...). This
Chrism is not simple or common when it is blessed, but the gift of Christ, and
the presence of his H. Spirit, as it were effecting the Divinity it self; the
body is indeed anointed with visible Ointment, but is also sanctified by the
holy and quickening Spirit; so St. Cyril, I find in him, Synodus Bituricensis,
apud Bochel. l. 1. decret. Eccl. Gal. lit. 5.
and in some late Synods, other pretty significations and allusions made by
this Ceremony of Chrisms, Nos autem pro igne visibili, qui die Pentecostes
super Apostolos apparuit, oleum sanctum, materiam nempe ignis ex Apostolorum
traditione ad confirmandum adhibemus, This using of Oil was instead of the
Baptism with Fire, which Christ baptized his Apostles with in Pentecost; and
Oil being the most proper matter of Fire, is therefore used in Confirmation.

That this was the ancient Ceremony is without doubt, and that the Church had
power to do so has no question, and I add, it was not unreasonable; for if
ever the Scripture expresses the mysteriousness of a Grace conferred by an
exterior ministry, (as this is, by imposition of hands) and represents it
besides in the Expression and Analogy of any sensible thing, that expression
drawn into a ceremony will not improperly signify the Grace, since the Holy
Ghost did choose that for his own expression and representment. In baptism we
are said to be buried with Christ. The Church does according to the Analogy of
that expression, when she immerges the Catechumen in the Font; for then she
represents the same thing which the Holy Ghost would have to be represented in
that Sacrament, the Church did but the same thing when she used Chrism in this
ministration. This I speak in justification of that ancient practice, but
because there was no command for it, (...) said St. Basil, Lib. de Spir. S.
cap. 17.
concerning Chrisme there is no written word, that is, of the Ceremony there is
not, he said it not of the whole Rite of Confirmation; therefore though to this
we are all bound, yet as to the anointing the Church is at liberty, and has
with sufficient authority omitted it in our ministrations.

In the Liturgy of King Edward the VI. the Bishops used the sign of the Cross
upon the foreheads of them that were to be confirmed. I do not find it since
forbidden, or revoked by any expression or intimation, saving only that it is
omitted in our later Offices; and therefore it may seem to be permitted to the
discretion of the Bishops, but yet not to be used, unless where it may be for
Edification, and where it may be by the consent of the Church, at least by
interpretation, concerning which, I have nothing else to interpose, but that
neither this, nor any thing else, which is not of the nature and institution of
the Rite, ought to be done by private Authority, nor ever at all but according
to the Apostles Rule, (...), whatsoever is decent, and whatsoever is according
to Order, that is to be done, and nothing else; for prayer and imposition of
hands for the invocating and giving the holy spirit, is all that is in the
foundation and institution.

SECT VI.
Many great Graces and Blessings are consequent to the Worthy reception and due
ministry of Confirmation.
IT is of it self enough, when it is fully understood, what is said in the Acts
of the Apostles at the first ministration of this Rite. They received the Holy
Ghost, that is, according to the expression of our Blessed Savior himself to
the Apostles, when he commanded them in Jerusalem to expect the verification of
his glorious promise: they were endued with virtue from on high; that is, with
strength to perform their duty, which although it is not to be understood
exclusively to the other Rites and Ministeries of the Church of Divine
appointment, yet it is properly and most signally true, and as it were in some
sense, Part. 3. qu. 72. art. 6. ad prim.
appropriate to this. For as Aquinas well discourses; the grace of Christ is
not tied to the Sacraments; but even this Spiritual strength and virtue from on
high can be had without Confirmation: as without Baptism remission of sins may
be had: and yet we believe one Baptism for the remission of sins; and one
Confirmation for the obtaining this virtue from on high, this strength of the
spirit. But it is so appropriate to it by promise and peculiarity of
ministration, that as without the desire of baptism our sins are not pardoned,
so without, at least, the desire of Confirmation, we cannot receive this virtue
from on high, which is appointed to descend in the ministry of the spirit. It
is true, the ministry of the Holy Eucharist is greatly effective to this
purpose; and therefore in the ages of Martyrs the Bishops were careful to give
the people the Holy Communion frequently, Epist. 54.
ut quos tutos esse contra adversarium volebant, munimento Dominicae
Saturitatis armarent; as S. Cyprian with his Colleagues wrote to Cornelius; that
those whom they would have to be safe against the contentions of their
adversaries, they should arm them with the guards and defenses of the Lords
fullness. But it is to be remembered, that the Lords Supper is for the more
perfect Christians, and it is for the increase of the graces received formerly,
and therefore it is for remission of sins, and yet is no prejudice to the
necessity of baptism, whose proper work is remission of sins; and therefore
neither does it make Confirmation unnecessary, for it renews the work of both
the precedent Rites; and repairs the breaches, and adds new Energy, and
proceeds in the same dispensations; and is renewed often, whereas the others
are but once.

Excellent therefore are the words of John Gerson the Famous Chancellor of
Paris, In opusc. art. de Confirmat.
to this purpose. It may be said that in one way of speaking Confirmation is
necessary, and in another it is not. Confirmation is not necessary as Baptism
and Repentance, for without these, Salvation cannot be had. This necessity is
absolute but there is a conditional necessity. Thus if a Man would not become
weak, it is necessary that he eat his meat well. And so Confirmation is
necessary, that the spiritual life, and the health gotten in Baptism may be
preserved in strength against our spiritual enemies. For this is given for
strength. Hence is that saying of Hugo de S. Victore. What does it profit that
thou art raised up by Baptism, if thou art not able to stand by Confirmation?
Not that Baptism is not of value unto Salvation without confirmation; but
because he who is not confirmed will easily fall, and too readily perish. The
spirit of God comes which way he please, but we are tied to use his own
Economy, and expect the blessings appointed by his own ministeries: And
because to prayer is promised we shall receive whatever we ask, we may as well
omit the receiving the holy Eucharist, pretending that prayer alone will
procure the blessings expected in the other, as well I say, as omit
confirmation, because we hope to be strengthened and receive virtue from on high
by the use of the Supper of the Lord: Let us use all the ministeries of Grace
in their season; for we know not which shall prosper, this or that, or whether
they shall be both alike good; this only we know, that the Ministeries, which
God appoints, are the proper seasons and opportunities of Grace.

This power from on high, which is the proper blessing of Confirmation, was
expressed, not only in speaking with Tongues and doing Miracles, for much of
this they had before they received the Holy Ghost, but it was effected in
spiritual and internal strengths; they were not only enabled for the service
of the Church, but were endued with courage and wisdom, and Christian
fortitude, and boldness, to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and unity of
heart and mind, singleness of heart, and joy in God, when it was for the
edification of the Church, miracles were done in confirmations; and St. Bernard
in the life of St. Malachias tells, that St. Malchus, Bishop of Lismore in
Ireland, confirmed a Lunatic child, and at the same time cured him: but such
things as these are extraregular and contingent. This which we speak of is a
regular ministry, and must have a regular effect.

St. Austin said, That the holy spirit in confirmation was given ad dilatanda
Ecclesiae primordia, for the propogating Christianity in the beginnings of the
Church. St. Hierom says, it was propter honorem sacerdotii; for the honor of
the Priesthood; St. Ambrose says, it was ad confirmationem Vnitatis in
Ecclesia Christi, for the confirmation of Unity in the Church of Christ, and
they all say true: But the first was by the miraculous consignations, which did
accompany this ministry, and the other two were by reason that the mysteries
were (...), they were appropriated to the ministry of the Bishop, who is caput
unitatis, the head, the last resort, the Firmament of Unity in the Church.
These effects were regular indeed, but they were incident and accidental: There
are effects yet more proper, and of greater excellency.

Now if we will understand in general what excellent fruits are consequent to
this Dispensation, we may best receive the notice of them from the Fountain it
self, our blessed Savior. John 7. 38.
He that believes, out of his Belly (as the Scripture says) shall flow Rivers
of Living waters. But this he spoke of the spirit, which they that believe on
him should receive. This is evidently spoken of the spirit, which came down in
Pentecost, which was promised to all that should believe in Christ, and which
the Apostles ministered by imposition of hands, the Holy Ghost himself being the
expositor; and it can signify no less, but that a spring of life should be put
into the heart of the confirmed, to water the Plants of God; that they should
become Trees, not only planted by the water side (for so it was in David's
time, and in all the ministry of the Old Testament) but having a River of
living water within them to make them fruitful of good works, and bringing
their fruit in due season, fruits worthy of amendment of life.

1. But the principal thing is this. Confirmation is the consummation and
perfection, the corroboration and strength of baptism, and baptismal Grace; for
in baptism we undertake to do our duty, but in confirmation we receive strength
to do it: In baptism others promise for us, in confirmation we undertake for
our selves, we ease our Godfathers and Godmothers of their burden, and take
it upon our own shoulders, together with the advantage of the Prayers of the
Bishop and all the Church made then on our behalf. In baptism we give up our
names to Christ, but in confirmation we put our seal to the profession, and God
puts his seal to the promise. It is very remarkable what St. Paul says of the
beginnings of our being Christians, (...), the word of the beginning of Christ:
Christ begins with us, he gives us his word, and admits us, and we by others
hands are brought in, Romans 6. 17.
(...), it is the form of Doctrine unto which ye were delivered. Cajetan
observes right, That this is a new and Emphatical way of speaking: we are
wholly immerged in our fundamentals; other things are delivered to us, but we
are delivered up unto these. This is done in Baptism and Catechism, V. 18.
and what was the event of it? Being then made free from sin, ye became the
Servants of Righteousness. Your baptism was for the remission of sins there,
and then ye were made free from that bondage, and what then? Why then in the
next place, when ye came to consummate this procedure, when the baptized was
confirmed, then he became a servant of righteousness, that is, then the Holy
Ghost descended upon you, and enabled you to walk in the spirit; then the seed
of God was first thrown into your hearts by a celestial influence. Spiritus
sanctus in Baptisterio plenitudinem tribuit ad innocentiam, sed in
confirmatione augmentum praestat ad gratiam, Sermon de Pentecoste.
said Eusebius Emissenus. In baptism we are made innocent, in confirmation we
receive the increase of the spirit of grace; in that we are regenerated unto
life, in this we are strengthened unto battle, Dono sapientiae illuminamur,
aedisicamur, erudimur, insiruimur, confirmamur, ut illam sancti spiritus vocem
audire possimus, Habetur ap^d Gratian. de consecrat. did. 5. c. spiritus S.
intellectum tibi dabo, and instruam te in h^c vita, qua gradieris, said P.
Melchiades; We are enlightened by the gift of wisdom, we are built up, taught,
instructed and confirmed; so that we may hear that voice of the holy spirit, I
will give unto thee an understanding heart, and teach thee in the way wherein
thou shall walk: For so, Signari populos effuso pignore sancto
Mirandae virtutis opus, Tertull ad^^^. (...). l. 1. ca^. c. 3.
--


It is a work of great and wonderful powers when the holy pledge of God is
poured forth upon the people: This is that power from on high which first
descended in Pentecost, and afterward was ministered by prayer and imposition of
the Apostolical and Episcopal hands, and comes after the other gift of
remission of sins. Vides quod non simpliciter hoc fit, sed multa opus est
virtute, Homil. 18. in Acta.
ut detur spiritus sanctus. Non enim idem est assequi remissionem peccatorum,
and accipere virtutem illam, said St. Chrysostom. You see that this is not
easily done, but there is need of much power from on high to give the holy
spirit; for it is not all one to obtain remission of sins, and to have received
this virtue or power from above. Quamvis enim continuo transituris sufficiant
regenerationis beneficia, victuris tamen necessaria sunt confirmationis
auxilia, said Melchiades; Although to them that die presently the benefits of
regeneration (baptismal) are sufficient, yet to them that live the Auxiliaries
of confirmation are necessary; for according to the saying of St. Leo in his
Epistle to Nicetas the Bishop of Aquileja, commanding that Heretics returning
to the Church should be confirmed with invocation of the holy spirit and
imposition of hands, they have only received the form of baptism sine
sanctificationis virtute, without the virtue of sanctification, meaning that
this is the proper effect of Confirmation: For, in short, Although the newly
listed Soldiers in humane warfare are enrolled in the number of them that are
to sight, yet they are not brought to battle till they be more trained and
exercised: So although by baptism every one is ascribed into the catalogue of
believers, yet he receives more strength and grace for the sustaining and
overcoming the temptations of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, only by
imposition of the Bishops hands. They are words which I borrowed from a late
Synod at Rhemes; that is the first remark of blessing; in confirmation we
receive strength to do all that which was for us undertaken in baptism: For the
Apostles themselves (as the H. Fathers observe) were timorous in the Faith,
until they were confirmed in Pentecost, but after the reception of the Holy
Ghost, they waxed valiant in the Faith, and in all their spiritual combats.

2. In Confirmation we receive the Holy Ghost, as the earnest of our
inheritance, as the seal of our salvation, (...), says Gregory Nazianzen: we
therefore call it a seal or signature, as being a guard and custody to us, and
a sign of the Lords dominion over us. The confirmed person is, (...), a sheep
that is marked, which Thieves do not so easily steal and carry away. To the
same purpose are those words of Theodoret, (...). Remember that holy mystogogy,
Comment. in Cantic. c. 1. 2.
in which they, who were initiated after the renouncing that Tyrant (the Devil
and all his works) and the confession of the true King (Jesus Christ) have
received the Chrism of spiritual Unction, like a Royal signature, by that
Unction as in shadow, perceiving the invisible grace of the most holy Spirit.
That is, in Confirmation we are sealed for the service of God, and unto the day
of Redemption; then it is, that the seal of God is had by us, The Lord knows
who are his. Quomodo vero dices, In adhort. ad baptis.
Dei sum, si notas non produxeris, said S. Basil. How can any man say, I am
Gods sheep, unless he produce the marks. Signati estis Spiritu promissionis per
Sanctissimum Divinum Spiritum, Domini grex effecti sumus said Theophylact. When
we are thus sealed by the most Holy and Divine spirit of promise: then we are
truly of the Lords Flock, and marked with his seal: that is, when we are ritely
confirmed, then he descends into our souls, and though he does not operate (it
may be) presently; but as the reasonable soul works in its due time and by the
order of Nature, by opportunities and new fermentations and actualities, so
does the spirit of God; when he is brought into use, when he is prayed for with
love and assiduity, when he is caressed tenderly, when he is used lovingly,
when we obey his motions readily, when we delight in his words greatly; then we
find it true, that the soul had a new life put into her, a principle of
perpetual actions; but the tree planted by the waters side, does not presently
bear fruit; but in its due season. By this spirit we are then sealed; that
whereas God has laid up an inheritance for us in the Kingdom of Heaven, and in
the faith of that we must live and labor, to confirm this faith, God has
given us this pledge: the spirit of God is a witness to us, and tells us by his
holy comforts, by the peace of God, and the quietness and refreshments of a
good Conscience, that God is our Father, that we are his Sons and Daughters,
and shall be coheirs with Jesus in his eternal Kingdom. In baptism we are made
the Sons of God, but we receive the witness and testimony of it in
Confirmation. This is, (...) the Holy Ghost the Comforter, this is he whom
Christ promised and did send in Pentecost, and was afterward ministered and
conveyed by prayer and imposition of hands: and by this Spirit he makes the
Confessors bold, and the Martyrs valiant, and the tempted strong, and the
Virgins to perfevere, and Widows to sing his praises and his glories. And this
is that excellency which the Church of God called the Lords seal, and teaches
to be imprinted in Confirmation: (...) a perfect Phylactery or Guard, even the
Lords seal, so Eusebius calls it. Apud. Eusebius.


I will not be so curious as to enter into a discourse of the Philosophy of
this. But I shall say, that they who are Curious in the secrets of Nature, and
observe external signatures in Stones, Plants, Fruits and Shells, of which
Naturalists make many observations, and observe strange effects; and the more
internal signatures in minerals and living bodies, of which Chemists discourse
strange secrets; may easily, if they please, consider that is infinitely
credible that in higher essences, even in Spirits; there may be signatures
proportionable, wrought more immediately, and to greater purposes by a Divine
hand. I only point at this, and so pass it over, as (it may be) not fit for
every man's consideration.

And now, if any Man shall say, we see no such things as you talk of; and find
the confirmed people the same after, as before, no better, and no wiser; not
richer in gifts, not more adorned with graces, nothing more zealous for Christ's
Kingdom; not more comforted with hope, or established by faith, or built up
with charity; they neither speak better, nor live better. And what then? Does
it therefore follow that the Holy Ghost is not given in Confirmation? Nothing
less. For is not Christ given us in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Do not
we receive his body and his blood? Are we not made all one with Christ, and he
with us? And and yet it is too true, that when we arise from that holy feast,
thousands there are that find no change. But there are in this, two things to
be considered.

One is, that the changes which are wrought upon our souls are not after the
manner of Nature, visible, and sensible, and with observation. The Kingdom of
God comes not with Observation: for it is within you, and is only discerned
spiritually, and produces its effects by the method of Heaven, and is first
apprehended by faith, and is endeared by charity, and at last is understood by
holy and kind experiences. And in this there is no more objection against
Confirmation than against Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or any other ministry
Evangelical.

The other thing is this. If we do not find the effects of the spirit in
Confirmation, it is our faults. For he is received by moral instruments; and is
intended only as a help to our endeavors, to our labors, and our prayers, to
our contentions and our mortifications, to our faith and to our hope, to our
patience and to our charity. Non adjuvari dicitur, qui nihil facit. He that
does nothing, cannot be said to be helped. Unless we in these instances do our
part of the work, it will be no wonder if we loose his part of the cooperation
and supervening blessing. He that comes under the Bishops hands to receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost, will come with holy desires, and a longing soul, with
an open hand and a prepared heart: he will purify the house of the spirit for
the entertainment of so Divine a guest: he will receive him with humility and
follow him with obedience, and delight him with purities: and he that does
thus, let him make the objection if he can, and tell me; Does he say that Jesus
is the Lord? He cannot say this, but by the Holy Ghost. Does he love his
Brother? If he does, then the Spirit of God abides in him. Is Jesus Christ
formed in him? Does he live by the laws of the spirit? Does he obey his
commands? Does he attend his motions? Has he no earnest desires to serve God?
If he have not, then in vain has he received either Baptism or Confirmation.
But if he have, it is certain that of himself he cannot do these things: he
cannot of himself think a good thought. Does he therefore think well? That is
from the Holy Spirit of God.

To conclude this inquiry: 1 Cor. 12. 7.
The Holy Ghost is promised to all Men to profit withal. That Is plain in
Scripture. Confirmation, or prayer and Imposition of the Bishops hand is the
Solemnity and Rite used in Scripture for the conveying of that promise, and the
effect is felt in all the Sanctifications and changes of the Soul, and he that
denies these things has not faith, nor the true notices of Religion, or the
spirit of Christianity. Hea^ what the Scriptures yet further say in this
mystery. Now he which confirms or stablisheth us with you in Christ, 2 Cor.
1. 21.
and has anointed us is God: who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of
the Spirit in our hearts. Here is a description of the whole mysterious part of
this rite. God is the Author of the grace: The Apostles and all Christians are
the suscipients and receive this grace: by this grace we are adopted and
incorporated into Christ: God has anointed us; that is, he has given us this
Unction from above, he has sealed us by his Spirit, made us his own, bored our
ears thorough, made us free by his perpetual service, and has done all these
things in token of a greater; he has given us his Spirit to testify to us
that he will give us of his glory. These words of S. Paul, besides that they
evidently contain in them the spiritual part of this Ritual, are also expounded
of the Rite and Sacramental it self, by S. Chrysostom, Theodoret and
Theophylact; that I may name no more. For in this mystery, Christos nos
efficit, and misericordiam Dei nobis annunciat per Spiritum Sanctum, said S.
John Damascen; Lib. 4. de fide cap 10.
he makes us his anointed ones, and by the Holy Spirit he declares his eternal
mercy toward us. Nolite tangere Christos meos. Touch not mine anointed ones.
For when we have this signature of the Lord upon us, the Devils cannot come
near to hurt us, unless we consent to their temptations, and drive the Holy
Spirit of the Lord from us.

SECT. VII.
Of preparation to Confirmation, and the circumstances of receiving it.
IF Confirmation have such gracious effects, why do we confirm little
children, whom in all reason we cannot suppose to be capable and receptive of
such Graces? It will be no answer to this, if we say, that this very question
is asked concerning the baptism of Infants, to which as great effects are
consequent, even pardon of all our sins, and the new birth and regeneration of
the soul unto Christ: For in these things the soul is wholly passive, and
nothing is required of the suscipient but that he put in no bar against the
grace, which because Infants cannot do, they are capable of baptism; but it
follows not that therefore they are capable of confirmation, because this does
suppose them such as to need new assistances, and is a new profession, and a
personal undertaking, and therefore requires personal abilities, and cannot be
done by others, as in the case of baptism. The aids given in Confirmation are
in order to our contention and our danger, our temptation and spiritual
warfare, and therefore it will not seem equally reasonable to confirm children
as to baptize them.

To this I answer, That in the Primitive Church Confirmation was usually
administered at the same time with baptism, for we find many Records that when
the Office of baptism was finished, and the baptized person divested of the
white Robe, the person was carried again to the Bishop to be confirmed, as I
have already shown out of Dionysius, Cap. 4. part 3. De Eccles Hier. Melchiad.
Epist. ad episc. Hispan. Ordo Romans cap. de die Sabbathi. S. Pasch. Alcuin. De
divin. offic. c. 19.
and diverse others. The reasons why anciently they were ministered immediately
after one another, is, not only because the most of them that were baptized
were of years to choose their Religion, and did so; and therefore were capable
of all that could be consequent to baptism, or annexed to it, or ministered with
it, and therefore were also at the same time communicated as well as confirmed;
but also because the solemn baptismes were at solemn times of the year, at
Easter only and Whitsontide, and only in the Cathedral or Bishops Church in
the chief City; whither when the Catechumens came, and had the opportunity of
the Bishops presence, they took the advantage ut sacramento utroque
renascantur, as St. Cyprian's expression is, that they might be regenerated by
both the mysteries, and they also had the third added, viz. the Holy Eucharist.

This simultaneous ministration has occasioned some few of late to mistake
confirmation for a part of baptism, but no distinct Rite, or of distinct
effect, save only that it gave ornament and complement, or perfection to the
other: But this is infinitely confuted by the very first ministry of
Confirmation in the World; for there was a great interval between St. Philip's
baptizing and the Apostles confirming the Samaritans, where also the difference
is made wider by the distinction of the Minister; a Deacon did one; none but an
Apostle, and his successor a Bishop could do the other; and this being of so
universal a Practice and Doctrine in the Primitive Church, it is a great wonder
that any learned men could suffer an error in so apparent a case. It is also
clear in two other great remarks of the practice of the Primitive Church, the
one is of them who were baptized in their sickness, the (...), when they
recovered they were commanded to address themselves to the Bishop, to be
confirmed, which appears in the XXXVIII. Canon of the council of Eliberis, and
the XLVI. Canon of the council of Laodicea, which I have before cited upon
other occasions; the other is, that of Heretics returning to the Church, who
were confirmed not only long after baptism, but after their apostasy and their
conversion.

For although Episcopal confirmation was the enlargement of Baptismal grace,
and commonly administered the same day, yet it was done by interposition of
distinct ceremonies, Vide Cassandrum Schol. ad Him. Eccl.
and not immediately in time. Honorius Augustodunensis tells, That when the
baptized on the Eighth day had laid aside their Mitres, or proper habit used in
baptism, then they were usually confirmed, or consigned with Chrism in the
Forehead by the Bishop. And when children were baptized irregularly, or
besides the ordinary way, in Villages and places distant from the Bishop,
confirmation was deferred, said Durandus. And it is certain, that this affair
did not last long without variety: Sometimes they ministered both together;
sometimes at greater, sometimes at lesser distances; and it was left
indifferent in the Church to do the one or the other, or the third, according
to the opportunity and the discretion of the Bishop.

But afterward, in the middle and descending Ages it grew to be a question, not
whether it were lawful, or not, but which were better, To confirm Infants, or
to stay to their childehood, or to their riper years? Aquinas, Bonaventure, and
some others say it is best, that they be confirmed in their Infancy, quia dolus
non est, nec obicem ponunt, they are then without craft, and cannot hinder the
descent of the Holy Ghost upon them; and indeed it is most agreeable with the
Primitive practice, that if they were baptized in Infancy, they should then
also be confirmed, according to that of the famous Epistle of Melchiades to the
Bishops of Spain: Ita conjuctna sunt haec duo sacramenta, ut ab invicem nisi
morte praeveniente, non possint separari, and unum sine altero rite perfici non
potest. Where although he expressly affirms the Rites to be two, yet unless it
be in cases of necessity they are not to be severed, and one without the other
is not perfect, which, in the sense formerly mentioned, is true, and so to be
understood; That to him who is baptized and is not confirmed, something very
considerable is wanting, and therefore they ought to be joined, though not
immediately, yet (...), according to reasonable occasions and accidental
causes: But in this there must needs be a liberty in the Church, not only for
the former reasons, but also because the Apostles themselves were not confirmed
till after they had received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Others therefore say, That to confirm them of riper years is with more
edification. The confession of Faith is more voluntary, the election is wiser,
the submission to Christ's discipline is more acceptable, and they have more
need, and can make better use of their strengths then derived by the holy
spirit of God upon them; and to this purpose it is commanded in the Canon Law,
De consecrat. did. 5. c. ut jejuni.
that they who are confirmed should be perfectae aetatis, of full age; upon
which the gloss says, Perfectam vocat forte duodecim annorum; Twelve year old
was a full age, because at those years they might then be admitted to the lower
services in the Church. But the reason intimated and implied by the Canon is,
because of the preparation to it; They must come fasting, and they must make
public confession of their Faith. And indeed that they should do so is matter
of great edification, as also are the advantages of choice, and other
preparatory abilities and dispositions abovementioned: They are matter of
edification, I say, when they are done; but then the delaying of them so long
before they be done, and the wanting the aids of the Holy Ghost conveyed in
that ministry, are very prejudicial, and are not matter of edification.

But therefore there is a third way, which the Church of England and Ireland
follows, and that is, that after Infancy; but yet before they understand too
much of sin, and when they can competently understand the fundamentals of
Religion, then it is good to bring them to be confirmed, that the spirit of God
may prevent their youthful sins, and Christ by his word and by his spirit, may
enter and take possession at the same time. And thus it was in the Church of
England long since provided and commanded by the Laws of King Edgar, A. D. 967.
cap. 15. ut nullus ab Episcopo confirmari diu nimium detrectarit; That none
should too long put off his being confirmed by the Bishop, that is, as is best
expounded by the perpetual practice almost ever since, as soon as ever by
Catechism and competent instruction they were prepared, it should not be
deferred. If it have been omitted (as of late years it has been too much) as
we do in baptism, so in this also; it may be taken at any age, even after they
have received the Lords Supper, as I observed before in the practice and
example of the Apostles themselves, which in this is an abundant warrant: But
still the sooner the better. I mean, after that Reason begins to dawn: but ever
it must be taken care of, that the Parents and Godfathers, the Ministers and
Masters see that the Children be catechized and well instructed in the
fundamentals of their Religion.

For this is the necessary preparation to the most advantageous reception of
this holy ministry: In Ecclesiis potissimum Latinis non nisi adultiore aetate
pueros admitti videmus, vel hanc certe ob causam, ut Parentibus, susceptoribus,
and Ecclesiarum praefectis occasio detur pueros de fide, quam in baptismo
professi sunt, diligentius instituendi, and admonendi, Consultationis. cap. 9.
said the excellent Cassander. In the Latin Churches they admit children of
some ripeness of age, Sermon. 116. inramis Palmarum.
that they may be more diligently taught and instructed in the Faith. And to
this sense agree St. Austin, De lib. Ecclesiast. c. 26.
Walafridus Strabo, Ruardus Lovaniensis, and Mr. Calvin.

For this was ever the practice of the Primitive Church to be infinitely
careful of catechizing those, who came and desired to be admitted to this holy
Rite; they used Exorcisms or Catechisms to prepare them to baptism and
confirmation. I said Exorcisms or Catechisms, for they were the same thing; if
the notion be new, yet I the more willingly declare it, not only to free the
Primitive Church from the suspicion of superstition in using Charms or
Exorcismes (according to the modern sense of the word) or casting of the Devil
out of innocent Children but also to remonstrate the perpetual practice of
catechizing children in the eldest and best times of the Church. Thus the Greek
Scholiast upon Harmenopulus renders the word (...) by (...) the Primitive
Exorcist was the Catechist: And Balsamon upon the 26th. Canon of the Council of
Laodicea says* That to Exorcise is nothing but to catechize the unbelievers,
(...), some undertook to Exorcise, that is, (says he) to Catechize the
unbelievers: And St. Cyril in his Preface to his Catechisms, speaking to the
Illuminati; Festinent (says he) pedes tui ad Catecheses audiendas, Exorcismos
studiose suscipe etc: Let your feet run hastily to hear the Catechismes,
studiously receive the Exorcisms, although thou be already inspired and
exorcised; that is, although you have been already instructed in the mysteries,
yet still proceed: For without Exorcismes (or Catechisms) the soul cannot go
forward, since they are Divine and gathered out of the Scriptures: And the
reason why these were called Exorcismes, he adds: [Because when the Exorcists
or Catechists by the spirit of God produce fear in your hearts, and do inkindle
the spirit as in a furnace, the Devil flies away, and salvation and hope of
life Eternal does succeed,] according to that of the Evangelist concerning
Christ; Luke 4. 32.
They were astonished at his Doctrine, for his word was with power: And that of
St. Luke Acts 13. 12.
concerning Paul and Barnabas: The Deputy, when he saw what was done, was
astonished at the Doctrine of the Lord. It is the Lords Doctrine that has the
power to cast out Devils and work miracles; Catechismes are the best
Exorcismes: [Let us therefore, Brethren, abide in hope, and persevere in
catechisings (says St. Cyril) although they be long, and produced with many
words or discourses.] The same also we find in St. Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. de
baptism.
and St. Austin. In Psalm. 68.


The use that I make of this notion is principally to be an exhortation to all
of the Clergy, that they take great care to catechize all their people, to
bring up Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, to prepare a holy
seed for the service of God, to cultivate the young plants, and to dress the
old ones, to take care that those, who are men in the World, be not mere Babes,
and uninstructed in Christ, and that they, who are children in age, may be wise
unto salvation; for by this means we shall rescue them from early temptations,
when being so prepared they are so assisted by a Divine ministry; we shall
weaken the Devils power, by which he too often, and too much prevails upon
uninstructed and unconfirmed youth: For, (...), confirmation is the firmament
of our profession; but we profess nothing till we be catechized; catechisings
are our best preachings, and by them we shall give the best accounts of our
charges, while in the behalf of Christ we make Disciples, and take
prepossession of Infant-understandings, and by this holy Rite, by prayer and
imposition of hands we minister the holy spirit to them, and so prevent and
disable the artifices of the Devil; for we are not ignorant of his devices, how
he enters as soon as he can, and taking advantage of their ignorance and their
passion, seats himself so strongly in their hearts and heads. Turpius ejicitur,
quam non admittur hostis, It is harder to cast the Devil out, than to keep him
out. Hence it is that the youth are so corrupted in their manners, so Devilish
in their Natures, so cursed in their conversation, so disobedient to Parents,
so wholly given to vanity and idleness; they learn to swear before they can
pray, and to lie as soon as they can speak. It is not my sense alone, but was
long since observed by Gerson and Gulielmus Parisiensis, De exterminat. Schism.
Propter cessationem confirmationis tepiditas grandior est in fidelibus, and
fidei defensione: There is a coldness and deadness in Religion, and it proceeds
from the neglect of confirmation ritely ministered, and after due preparations
and dispositions. A little thing will fill a child's head: Teach them to say
their prayers; tell them the stories of the Life and Death of Christ; cause
them to love the holy Jesus with their first love, make them afraid of a sin,
let the principles, which God has planted in their very Creation, the natural
principles of Justice and Truth, of honesty and thankfulness, of simplicity and
obedience be brought into act, and habit, and confirmation by the holy Sermons
of the Gospel. If the Guides of Souls would have their people holy, let them
teach holiness to their children, and then they will (at least) have a new
generation unto God, better than this wherein we now live. They who are most
zealous in this particular will with most comfort reap the fruit of their
labors, and the blessings of their ministry, and by the numbers which every
Curate presents to his Bishop fitted for confirmation, he will in proportion
render an account of his Stewardship with some visible felicity; and let it be
remembered, that in the last Rubric of the Office of Confirmation in our
Liturgy it is made into a Law, that none should be admitted to the holy
Communion, until such time as he could say the Catechism, and be confirmed;
which was also a Law and Custom in the Primitive Church, as appears in St.
Dionysius his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and the matter of fact is notorious.
Among the Helvetians they are forbidden to contract marriages before they are
well instructed in the Catechism: And in a late Synod at Bourges, the Curates
are commanded to threaten all that are not confirmed, that they shall never
receive the Lords Supper, nor be married; and in effect the same is of force in
our Church; for the married persons being to receive the Sacrament at their
marriage, and none are to receive but those that are confirmed; the same Law
obtains with us, as with the Helvetians or the Synodus Bituricensis.

There is another little inquiry, which I am not willing to omit; but the
answer will not be long, because there is not much to be said on either side.
Some inquire whether the holy Rite of Confirmation can be ministered any more
than once? St. Austin seems to be of opinion that it may be repeated. Lib. 3.
de bapt. c. 16.
Quid enim aliud est impositio manuum nisi oration super hominem? Confirmation
is a solemn prayer over a man; and if so, why it may not be reiterated can have
nothing in the nature of the thing; and the Greeks do it frequently, but they
have no warranty from the Scripture, nor from any of their own ancient Doctors.
Indeed when any one did return from Heresy, they confirmed them, as I have
proved out of the first and second Council of Arles, the Council of Laodicea,
and the second Council of Sevil: But upon a closer intuition of the thing, I
find they did so only to such who did not allow of Confirmation in their
Sects, such as the Novatians and the Donatists. Novatiani poenitentiam a suo
conventu arcent penitus, and iis qui ab ipsis tinguntur sacrum Chrisma non
praebent. Quocirca qui ex hac Haeresi corpori Ecclesiae conjunguntur benedicti
Patres ungi jusserunt: Lib. 3. haeret. Fabul.
So Thedoret. For that reason only the Novatians were to be confirmed upon
their conversion, because they had it not before. I find also, they did
confirm the converted Arrians; but the reason is given in the first Council of
Arles, quia propria lege utuntur. They had a way of their own; that is, as the
Gloss says upon the Canon, de Arrianis consecrat. did. 4. their baptism was
not in the name of the holy Trinity; and so their baptism being null, or at
least suspected, to make all as sure as they could, they confirmed them. The
same also is the case of the Bonasiaci in the second council of Arles, though
they were (as some of the Arrians also were) baptized in the name of the most
holy Trinity; but it was a suspected matter, and therefore they confirmed them:
But to such persons who had been rightly baptized and confirmed, they never did
repeat it. Cyril. Hieros. in Procatech.
(...); the gift of the Spirit is an indelible seal, says St. Cyril, (...),
St. Basil calls it, it is inviolable. They who did re-baptize, did also
reconfirm. But as it was an error in St. Cyprian and the Africans to do the
first, so was the second also, in case they had done it; for I find no mention
expressly that they did the latter, but upon the forementioned accounts, and
either upon supposition of the invalidity of their first pretended baptism, or
their not using at all of confirmation in their Heretical conventicles: But the
repetition of confirmation is expressly forbidden by the council of Tarracon,
cap. 6. Apud Gratian. de consecrat. did. 5. cap.
and by P. Gregory the second: and sanctum Chrisma collatum and altaris honor
propter consecrationem (quae per Episcopos tantum exercenda and conferenda
sunt) evelli non queunt, Dictum est. and cap. De homine.
said the Fathers, in a council at Toledo. Council. Toletan. 8. can. 7.
Confirmation and holy Orders (which are to be given by Bishops alone) can
never be anulled, and therefore they can never be repeated; and this relies
(...) those severe words of St. Paul, having spoken of (...) ^oundation of the
Doctrine of Baptisms and laying on of hands, Hebr. 6.
he says, if they fall away, they can never be renewed; that is, the ministry
of baptism and confirmation can never be repeated. To Christians that sin after
these ministrations, there is only left a (...), Expergiscimini, that they
arise from slumber, and stir up the Graces of the Holy Ghost. Every man ought
to be careful that he do not grieve the holy Spirit; but if he does, yet let
him not quench him, for that is a desperate case, (...). The holy Spirit is the
great conservative of the new Life, only keep the Keeper, take care that the
spirit of God do not depart from you; for the great ministry of the spirit is
but once; for as baptism is, so is confirmation.

I end this discourse with a plain exhortation out of S. Ambrose; upon those
words of S. Paul, He that confirms us with you in Christ is God; Repete quia
accepisti signaculum spirituale, spiritum sapientiae and intellectus, spiritum
consilii atque virtutis, spiritum cognitionis atque pietatis, Spiritum Sancti
timoris and serva quod accepisti. Signavit te Deus Pater, confirmavit te
Christus Dominus. Remember that thou (who have been confirmed) have received
the spiritual signature; the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
council and strength, the spirit of knowledge and godliness, the spirit of holy
fear, keep what thou have received. The Father has sealed thee, and Christ thy
Lord has confirmed thee by his Divine Spirit; and he will never depart from
thee, Zonar. in Can. Laodican. 48.
(...), unless by evil works we estrange him from us. The same advice is given
by Prudentius.

Cultor Dei memento,
Te fontis and lavacri
Rorem subiisse Sanctum
Et Chrismate innotatum. Innovatum.

Remember how great things ye have received, and what God has done for you; ye
are of his flock, and his Militia; ye are now to fight his battles, and
therefore to put on his armor, and to implore his auxiliaries, and to make use
of his strengths, and always to be on his side, against all his and all our
Enemies. But he that desires grace, must not despise to make use of all the
instruments of grace. For though God communicates his invisible spirit to you,
yet that he is pleased to do it by visible instruments is more than he needs,
but not more than we do need. And therefore since God descends to our
infirmities, let us carefully and lovingly address our selves to his
ordinances; that as we receive remission of sins by the washing of water, and
the body and blood of Christ by the ministry of consecrated Symbols, so we may
receive the Holy Ghost sub Ducibus Christianae militiae, by the prayer and
imposition of the Bishops hands, whom our Lord Jesus has separated to this
ministry. For if you corroborate your self by baptism (they are the words of
S. Gregory Nazianzen) and then take heed for the future, Orat. in Sanctum
lavacrum.
by the most excellent and firmest aids consigning your mind and body with the
Unction from above (viz. in the Holy Rite of Confirmation) with the Holy Ghost,
as the Children of Israel did with the aspersion on the doorposts in the night
of the death of the firstborn of Egypt, what (evil) shall happen to you?
Meaning that no evil can invade you: and what aid shall you get? If you sit
down, you shall be without fear, and if you rest, your sleep shall be sweet
unto you. But if when ye have received the Holy spirit, you live not according
to his Divine principles, you will lose him again; that is, you will lose all
the blessing, though the impression does still remain till ye turn quite
Apostates, in pessimis hominibus manebit, Lib. 2. contr. lit. Petil. c. 104.
licet ad judicium (says S. Austin) the Holy Ghost will remain either as a
testimony of your Unthankfulness unto condemnation, or else as a seal of grace,
and an earnest of your inheritance of Eternal glory.

FINIS.
Books Printed at the Kings Printing House, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer
Bookseller in Castle-street Dublin.
DR. Jeremy Tailors (Lord Bishop of Down and Connor) three Sermons Preached at
Christ-Church Dublin. viz. The Righteousness Evangelical described. The
Christians Conquest over the body of Sin, and Faith working by Love. Octav.

His Funeral Sermon at the Funeral of the Lord Primate. 40.

This present Treatise of Confirmation. 40.

There will shortly be published his Treatise against Popery, of the necessity
of which no man can be ignorant.

Dr. Lightburne's Sermon at Christ-Church on 23. of October. 40.

A perfect Collection of Acts of the late Parliament, to be sold together or
severally. fol.

All sorts of Proclamations.

Jacobi Waraei Equitis Annals Henrici Octavi. 80.

The Lord Lieutenants Speech to the Parliament.

The Church Catechism at 1d. for children. 80.

Pompey, a Tragedy, often acted in the New Theater in Dublin. and written by a
Lady. 40.

The Counter-scuffle. 80.

Poems by several Persons of Quality and resined Wits. 40.

The Seven Wise Masters. 80.

The Acts of Custom and Excise with the Book of Rates to each of them annexed
in a small Pocket Volumn for the use of Merchants and others.

A Letter to a Person of Quality concerning the Traitor Leckey. 40.

The Accidence.

Sententiae Pueriles. 80.

Acts of Parliament made XV. Caroli. fol.


