A TRUE RELATION Of a most Horrid Conspiracy and Running away with the SHIP
ADVENTURE, Having on Board Forty Thousand Pieces of Eight, and other Goods to a
great Value. Together with the Cruel and Barbarous leaving and turning ashore
upon the Island Naias, in the East Indies, the Captain, and three Merchants
which were Passengers, and Sixteen honest and able Seamen, Eight whereof
miserably perished by Hunger and Hardship, and but Four of the Remainder yet
come to England.
Together with some short Account of what passed at the Trial and Condemnation
of those who Committed that Fact.
THE Ship Adventure, of which Thomas Gullock was Commander and Supra-Cargo,
bound to Borneo in East India, broke ground from Graves-End on the 16th of
March 1697/8. and touched at Brava one of the Cape de Verdy Islands, and having
there got plenty of Refreshment, Fowls, Hogs, Goats and green Trade, proceeded
on their Voyage, and in the Month of August fell in with the Coast of Sumatra,
went to Padang to get Refreshment for the Ships Company, lay there five days,
bought there four Bullocks, Fowls, Fruit, green Herbs, Potato's, etc. which was
equally divided to the Ships Company, also about a Tun and half of Rice, and
half a Butt of Arack, got one Boat-load of Water, and sailed thence; about 20
days after, being by calms and currents driven near Naias, an Island inhabited
by a barbarous sort of People who have no Commerce with any Europeans, came to
an Anchor, the Captain ordered the Long boat on shore with empt^ Cask to fill
Water, under the charge of Mr. William Hill his second Mate, with 24 Men well
armed, with orders that if a Gale of Wind should spring up, or that they should
see any Natives or tracks of them upon the Sand, then immediately to repair on
Board without Water, being in no great want of it, but thought that the best
use could be made of the time whilst lying at an Anchor. After the Longboat
was put off, the Captain was in great perplexity lest the Boats-crew might be
destroyed by the barbarous Natives, therefore went on shore himself in his Yaul
after them, and stayed at the watering place, being two or three hundred yards
distant from the Boat, until Mr. Hill sent him word the Water-cask were full;
the Captain then sent him orders to send the Longboat on board with fifteen
Men; Joseph Bradish Boatswains mate desired Mr. Hill to let him have the Yaul
to tow the Long boat off from the shore, which he agreed to, intending only the
Security of the Boat, but they continued to tow much farther than necessary,
and then cast off the Tow-rope, laying the Yauls Head to the shore, with only
two Men as appeared in her; when the Long boat was near the Ship, two Men more
rose out of the Yauls hull, and then with four Oars rowed direc^ly ^^^^board
the Ship getting bo^^ on board together; then did Joseph Bradish, John Lloyd,
Thomas Hughs and others, seize Mr. Abraham Parrott the chief Mate, telling him
he was their Prisoner, and the Ship and all that was in her was their own. He
asked them what was the matter, and what they thought would be the end of it?
They answered he need not trouble himself about that, they were for A short
Life and a merry one. The Conspirators being immediately armed, made themselves
Masters of the Ship, cut her Cable, loosed her Sails, and run away with her,
leaving the Captain and 14 Men upon the said Island, exposed to inexpressiable
Miseries and Dangers, not only from the barbarous Natives, but Tigers and other
wild Beasts, etc. without any manner of Provisions, Moneys or Clothes, except
the worst, which they had on their backs, or any prospect of returning to their
Native Country, or indeed of so much as preserving their Lives.

Soon after the Ship was under Sail, they turned (...) Yaul away, and in her
five Men, viz. Mr. Dru Hacker, Rex Kempson, George Reyner, Jona^ Grizley, and
Francisco an Indian, being such as would not join with them in their Villainous
Design, not giving them one Biscuit Cake, or any Sustenance, but refused to let
them go to their own Chests to put on a Coat, Hat, or Shoes, insomuch that
three were turned ashore without Coats or Hats, and two without Shoes, and
being forced to travel over sharp Rocks, they, with others whose Shoes soon
wore out, had their Feet torn and mangled, and bled in such a miserable manner,
that they desired to lie down and dye there, rather then to have gone on, if
the Captain had not over persuaded them.

The number left in this deplorable state were 16 of their fellow Seamen, with
the Commander and three Merchants, who, besides the extreme danger of perishing
there, were robbed of what they had aboard, frustrated of the fruits of their
Voyage, and their poor Wives and Children left to starve at home. Eight have
since perished by hunger and hardships, who, if they were present, would more
livelily set out the horrid Cruelty of those unmerciful Men who run away with
the Ship, and left them in that miserable and wretched Condition.

This distressed Company being thus left, without any thing to eat, did remain
so from Saturday morning the 17th of September till Thursday evening the 22th.

But though the Barbarity of their fellow Seamen left them in such unspeakable
distress, yet it pleased God wonderfully to bring about Means for the
Preservation of a few of them to be Witnesses of so horrid a Villainy; for there
happened to come two Boats to the said Island, which the Captain did hire with
the Promise of 500 Pieces of Eight to pursue his Ship, and was on Monday the
19th within 4 or 5 Miles of her, but by a sudden Storm was forced ashore, and
both those Boats staved to pieces, only himself with 5 Men in the Yaul escaped
that Shipwreck. But it pleased God none of them lost their Lives, but all came
by Land to a Creek or Cove, whither the Captain with much toil and difficulty
got in the Yaul; the Number was now by these Atcheeners increased to 42 Men,
and no Boat or Vessel but the Yaul, which could not carry in the Sea above
Eight or Ten. The Atcheeners seemed most afraid of the Natives, begging the
Captain to stand by them, or else the Natives would either kill or make Slaves
of him and them; for they said there was a Boat of Atcheen which came there the
Year before, the Men of which the Natives had knocked on the head, and halled
the Boat up above Highwater mark; this Boat was surveyed and found much rent
with the Sun, but that the Malayers undertook to stop, and did so, with Moss,
Bark, etc. whilst the Captain took care to get the Sail and some other things
of one of the wracked Boats, and did Launch her that day, (though whilst they
were about it they were attacked by 200 of the Natives, all armed with Swords,
Targets, and Lances, who made a fierce onset, but by firing Twelve or Fourteen
shot were put to flight) and with her and the Yaul got off to small Islands
called Maroos, where they got some Coker Nuts, and from a Boat they met at
those Islands got some Rice which had been wet with Salt water in the same
Storm when the two Boats were lost, and was heated and stank abominably, but
was eaten heartily: This Boat pretended to belong to Padang, so that the
Captain agreed with the Master for transport to Padang, giving the launched
Boat to the Acheeners in lieu of their two Boats, which was all the Recompense
he could then possibly make them. Going with this Boat toward Sumatra they were
chased with a Malaya Pirate, who came up with them, but seeing them stand to
their Arms bore up round, and stood away without one word. Coming near Priaman
there is a Shoal upon which the Malayar ran his Boat; and when the Boat was on
ground, the Englishmen all leapt over Board to go to a dry Spot not far
distant, but many had like to have been drowned by holes in the Rocks, which
dipped them over head and ears, but others who could Swim assisted and got them
safe to the dry Spot. The Captain went on shore with the Yaul, and begged the
Assistance of the Dutch Corporal, who sent a Boat with Natives, which brought
the Men all off from that Spot, which not long after was overflown with the
Tide, otherwise they must have been drowned; for the Malayar, after they jumpt
out, got his Boat off, and went away without staying to expect his Freight, for
what reason we know not. Two days after they went to Padang, where being ill
treated, and laboring under great Want and Sickness, three soon died there.
But it pleased God to raise them up there a Friend indeed, Mr. Antony Gillis a
Native of India, who pitied their Miseries, relieved their Wants, and (under
God) saved their Lives; whose inexpressible and almost inimitable Charity,
extended to the Dead and Living, shrowding the one, and succouring the other,
which is here mentioned to his honor, and in gratitude to him.

The remaining part of this distressed Company got their Passage to Bencoolen,
whereof one died by the way, and some remained there, of which three more soon
died, and it is to be feared several of the rest which staid there are since
dead, for only six of the Company proceeded to Batavia, where, after a
languishing Sickness, died one more, viz. George Rayner, from which place the
Commander and three more got passage to England.

The foregoing Account is given, not only by the Commander and poor surviving
Seamen, but was (long before the taking of any of the wicked Crew who run away
with the Ship) written from Padang in a Letter to the Owners by Mr. Robert Anby
and Mr. Ralph Peck, two Gentlemen, who, with some others, were to have staid at
Borneo to have settled a Factory; which Letters, with two others from Mr. Nixon
and Mr. Parrot at Batavia, may be seen at Mr. Crowches a Bookseller at the
Corner of Popes head-Alley in Cornhill, out of which, for Vindication of the
Commander from the base and unjust Aspersions of his ill usage of the Seamen,
the Owners have permitted the following Paragraphs to be printed with this
Narrative.

NOW, honored Sirs, we humbly crave your leave to do our worthy Captain
Justice, by acquainting you of his particular care of the Ships Company, in
respect to the health both of their Souls and Bodies; we never failed of
Morning and Evening Prayers in public upon the Quarter Deck, when the Weather
would permit, our Commander daily endeavoring to suppress all manner of Vice,
and to encourage Virtue. As to the health of their Bodies, he was as tender as
a Mother to any that were sick, daily minding the Doctor of his charge; and
when he had fresh Provisions at his own Table, would ask the Doctor who was
sick, and always sent them some. Those that were in health he endeavored to
keep so, by refreshing twice or thrice a day in bad weather with Drams. In
fine, God Almighty knows our hearts that we speak the truth; he is the most
religious, sober, careful and kind Commander that we knew or heard of ever.

Robert Anby. Ralph Peck.
P^dang the Twenty Third of October, School. Old Style.

Mr. Samuel Nixon Surgeon, in his Letter to the Owners from Batavia, Nov.
27th. School. writes thus:

I Do declare that I never saw in any of his Majesty's Ships, or any other
where I have been, better Victuals or Victualling, nor never so much care
taken, nor kindness shown, both toward Soul and Body, as was by the Commander,
both to well and sick; for though it pleased God to bless us with so healthful a
Passage, that we never had any Man lay down three days together, yet has the
Captain often circumvented me in sending Broth or other fresh Provisions to
sick Men from his own Table, and has sundry times ordered Fowls to be killed
expressly for them only, and has also several times in the Voyage given of his
Fowls to the whole Ships Company, and never killed a Hogg, but a great part was
given them; and the same by his Parsnips, Carrots, Pumkins, etc. allowing for
the sick Men Water grewel with Fruit, Sugar and Spice, such as I thought fit.
Insomuch that I am ready to give Oath, I have heard them say sundry times, that
they never saw so good Victualling, nor a Commander so kind and careful of his
Men.

Also he so husbanded the Brandy allowed for them that they had Drams always
when wet, and at the turning out of the Watches. And the Ships Company drank
all Beer until near the Southern Tropic, and to the Eastward of the Cape, and
then Beer and Water to the very last, giving the Seamen sometimes strong Beer.
As for Abuses I never saw any or less striking in any Ship where I have been,
the whole amounting to the punishment of four or five Persons, and that for
great Faults, as Thievery, etc.


Mr. Abraham Parrott Chief-mate, in his Letter to the Owners, gives the same
account of Victualling and Punishments, etc. adding, That after the Seizure of
the Ship it was freely discourst, William Griffeth the Trumpeter had taken upon
him to have shot the Captain.

And now to return, to give some Account of the procedure of those who ran away
with the Ship, taken from Three who by force were with them the whole Voyage,
and gave Evidence upon Oath thereof, at their Trial, viz. John Westby, Robert
Amsden, and William Saunders; the Captain only giving Evidence that the
Prisoners were aboard the Ship when it was run away withal.

After they had seized the Ship, and turned ashore the five Persons
beforementioned, they sailed about 50 Leagues to Sea from the Island, and then
turned away in the Long Boat Mr. Abraham Parrott the Chief Mate, William
Whitesides the Boatswain, and Richard Heath Armourer Note, These 3 poor
Creatures were 23 days at Sea, and had there perished if they had not by
accident met a Dutch Ship bound to Batavia, who carried them thither.
, to each of whom they gave a Certificate in the following words; the Original
whereof was produced and sworn to in Court, viz.

September. 21. School.
NOT willing to venture our selves near any Factory, and unwilling to keep any
to breed Faction among us, have turned to Sea in the Longboat all such as were
not willing to stay, except John Westby to act as Surgeon, and Robert Amsden
Carpenter, Servant, which two per force we keep; the others, viz. Abraham
Parrott, William Whitesi^es, and Richard Heath we forced away detaining
likewise William Saunders.

Joseph Bradish. John Lloyd. John Pierce. Andrew Marten.



This being done, they began to divide the Clothes and Moneys of those whom
they had so left and turned ashore, and some time after divided the Pieces of
Eight belonging to the Owners, weighing to each Man his Proportion by the
Stillyards, which came to about Fifteen hundred Pieces of Eight a Man.

When they came near the Coast of New England they agreed to destroy all the
Journals and Writings aboard, which they did by putting them into a Bagg, and
sinking them with Shot, saying, They should not rise up against them.

After this, near to Block-Island, they dispersed themselves into several
Sloops, taking with them their Moneys, etc. and were not contented with that,
but fired five Guns through the Ships bottom, and sunk her in deep Water, with
the Cloth, Lead, Iron, and other Commodities aboard; all which, as well as the
Ship, were thereby irrecoverably lost.

Notwithstanding their separating themselves into several distant Parts, Divine
Justice has pursued them, and they have all been taken but one, who is supposed
to be killed, and were brought to their Trial on the 21st of June last at the
Old Bailey, where what they said for themselves, as to the Matter of Fact, was
frivolous and inconsistent, but endeavored to extenuate their Crime by
charging the Commander with Severity and Ill usage, from which the Court was
pleased to give the Commander an opportunity to vindicate himself, which he did
upon Oath in the manner following, to the Satisfaction of the Court? Viz.

That he was sorry to see so many Men so remorsless, as to endeavor the
excusing one Villainy by committing another, as not content to have robbed him of
his Ship and Cargo, expos'^ himself and 19 more to those inexpressible
Hardships and Miseries, whereby the King lost eight of his Subjects by untimely
death, and no more than three besides himself returned to England, of the 20
left on shore,) but farther endeavored to Murder his Reputation with most
unjust, and base Aspersions. As for the Victualling of his Ship, he said, that
on Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays they had every Mess a piece of good Beef and
a Pudding of two pound and a half of Flower with of Suet, besides Butter or
Cheese for Breakfast. That on Mondays and Fridays they had Pork and Pease, with
Breakfast as before: On Wednesdays and Saturdays Fish and Burgoo; and they had
Burgoo for Breakfast, with Butter and Sugar, on those days. That they had three
Cans of Beer a Mess every day till far beyond the Cape of good Hope, and after
that two Cans of good Beer and Water; and when they drank Water, there was a
Cask with a Scuttle or Hole cut at the Bung enough to put a Cup in and drink
when they pleased, lashed fast to the Mainmast upon the Main-deck, filled as
often as there was occasion. Also that they had 28 pound of Bread per Week
every Mess, until John Lloyd desired the Captain to let him put two bags of
Bread about 50 pound each, (which his Mess alone had saved out of their
Allowance) into the Bread-room, which was done accordingly. That then they were
at no Allowance for a Fortnight or three Weeks, but had the Bread in an open
Cask in the Steerage, to eat when and what they pleased, until they left it
greasy up and down where they eat, and then 'twas retrencht to 25 pound per
Week every Mess, and never less by his order or knowledge. Also that they had
Drams Morning and Evening when fair, and as often as the Watches was changed
when wet, never letting them go to their Hamocks wet without a Dram, to be sure
of which he did not suffer the Steward to give it them below, but constantly
his own Servant at his Round house door. Also that every Mess had on Sundays a
Can of strong Beer; and when about the Cape in cold raw weather, they have
often had, both Morning and Evening, Burgoo, and sometimes Fowls for the whole
Ships Company^, with a very particular regard to all sick Men.

The same Account John Westby, Robert Amsdem, and William Saunders upon Oath
confirmed; except that Mr. Westby and Amsden said, they once heard or saw that
one Mess had but Sixteen pound of Bread one Week, which the Captain said he
never heard any Complaint of, for if he had, he should have as readily redrest
it as he did the only Complaint was ever made him of Victuals, which was by
William Griffeth, who brought him a piece of Pork very small, which he ordered
his Servant to take from him, and give Griffeth a piece from his own Table in
exchange for it; the truth of which was confirmed by the Witnesses, and cannot
he denied by the Prisoners themselves, unless they will run the hazard of going
from Man's Judgment to the most tremendous and eternal Judgment of God with
guilt.

As for Chastisement, he did acknowledge that Ham Edgell and Wetherell had been
punished; Edgell because that he being a Quartermaster, working in the
Lazaretta, did break open a Box, and stole about a dozen pound of white Sugar;
the next day the Captain demanded at once all Keys of Chests, and did find the
Sugar in his Chest: which Felony he thought fit publicly to punish, especially
in him, who being a Quartermaster, might have the opportunity of the same Fact
in Goods of far greater value, and that it might prove exemplary to the whole
Ships Company.

Edward Ham purely for the welfare of those who complain against it, because
that he after many checks, and some blows, continued nasty to that degree, that
upon a complaint of the copperishness of the Pease, the Captain himself went
into the Cook-room, and took off the sides of the Copper a great quantity of
Verdigreese, for which the Captain beat him with a Japan Cane, but not to that
degree as at all to wound or break his Skin, as the Chirurgeon's Mate, Mr.
Westby confirmed upon Oath. And Witherell was beaten for striking the Boatswain
of the Ship. And if Correction in such Cases be not used aboard Ships, no order
can be maintained, but all would run into Confusion.

And these very Men themselves, sometime after Seizure of the Ship, did seize
the same Edward Ham to the Gang-way, and severely beat him for the same Crime.

The Names of the Prisoners which were Condemned, were Joseph Bradish, John
Lloyd, Thomas Hughs, Ellmore Clarke, Edward Ham, Thomas Dean, William Griffeth,
Robert Mason, Thomas Edgell, Francis Read, Cornelius Larking, Thomas Simpson,
Tee Wetherell, Robert Knox, Thomas Davis, Andrew Marten, Rowland Marten, John
Pierce.

The Names of those left on shore, Capt. Thomas Gullock, Mr. Robert Anby, Mr.
Ralph Peck, Mr. Drew Hacker, Edward Watts, Rex Kempton, George Reyner, Jonas
Grizley, William Hill, Samuel Nixon, John Baker, John Hire, Daniel Gravier,
Henry Barnet, Giles Brown, Thomas Barrow, John Templer, one Frenchman, and one
Dutchman.

Names of the Dead are Rex Kempton, Henry Barnet, Giles Brown, Daniel Gravier,
Robert Anby, Ralph Peck, Edward Watts, George Reyner.

Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Pope's Head Ally, in Cornhill. 1700.
Price 1 Penny


