THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Monday the 17th of this Instant January, and ended on Tuesday
the 18th following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder,
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped. But more particularly
of the Trial and Condemnation of Alice Wigginton, alias Wiggens, for Murdering
a Child of about 12 or 14 years of Age, and in such a barbarous manner, that
the like has scarce been heard.

THe first we shall here give you an Account of, was one John Peetly, who was
Indicted for Killing one Mr. John Gerrard, Nephew to a person of Quality, the
manner thus, the deceased in the Company of several others, being upon the
Ramble on the 10th past, about one of the Clock at night, went into Whetstones
Park, where going to the Prisoners house who kept an Alehouse, they knocked at
the door for entrance, but the people being in Bed, or at least pretending so
to be, they could not have admittance; which so far transported them, that they
began to break the Windows, and to throw lighted Links up at them, and as the
Evidence for the Prisoner affirmed, one of them was thrown into a Closet, and
set Fire, to a parcel of foul Linen that was now produced in Court. at which
the Prisoner took his Musket charged with hail-Shot, and pursued them up great
Queen Street, whereat Wildstreet end the Watch-stopped them, and disarmed them,
when the Prisoner coming up, discharged his piece, and shot the deceased in the
Thigh; of which wound, in five hours he dyed: but the Prisoner alleging that
the piece went off without his knowledge, he was acquitted.

John Cooper and Richard Johnson were Indicted for the Murder of one Richard
Washborne Gentleman, the circumstances as follow; the Prisoners being Sedanmen,
had as they said, been carrying one Captain Lucy, and after having set him
down, as they were going by Nortnumberland-House, in the Strand, on the first
of December, they Jostelled the deceased against the Rails, whereupon he struck
them with his Cain, saying, that since they undertook the work of Horses, they
ought to keep the Horse-way, this began the Quarrel, after which they fell to
Fighting, in which conflict the deceased was so wounded and bruised, that in
thirteen days after he dyed, whereupon the Evidence being heard for both
parties, the Jury brought them in Guilty of Manslaughter.

Alice Wigington alias Wiggens, was Indicted, and Arraigned for whipping her
Apprentice Girl to Death. she having in some nature offended her, either that
she had taken some money from her which was two or three shillings, as she
pretended, or that she had spoiled some work that was the cause of her
proceeding to this unusual Cruelty, She having got one Sadler a Bailiffs
follower, that lodged in her house, to make a whip which they called a Cat with
nine tails, some of the Witnesses did affirm that they whipped her with the
same so cruelly, that the blood flowed from her in abundance, yet could not
this nor the Child's lamentable cries retard her Cruelty, but to hinder the
Neighbors from hearing her, she as it is said stopped her mourh, and still
continued to whip her till she sounded away as dead, and in a short time after,
by reason of that barbarous usage dyed, whereupon the now Prisoner was
apprehended, but the Man that was her Asistant sled, so that upon her Trial she
making but a bad defense, the Jury brought her in Guilty of Murder.

John Oliver a Frenchman, was Indicted for robbing one Alexander Man, at
Chearing-Cross, on the first of January, the Prosecuter keeping a Coffe-House,
the Prisoner came in and called for Coffe, staying there till he found an
opportunity to get innto a Chamber where he got a Gold Ring, and several other
things, which were taken about him, but for want of the Evidences being in
Court he was dischared.

Catherine Young, and Jane Harding were found Guilty for stealing several
parcels of Goods from a Gentlewoman in S. Sepulchers Parish, as Linen, Lace,
and Silk part of which was found about them, and they both having been old
Offenders, were brought in Guilty as aforesaid.

Thomas Wicks, was Arraigned and Tried, for that he in the Company of a Fellow
called little Anthony, and one Smith, broke open the House of one Thomas
Legisman, living in the Strand, during the time that He and his Wife were at a
Neighbors house at Supper, taking from thence a silk Perticoat laced with Gold
and Silver Lace, vallued at four pounds, seven other Pttticoats, Sheets,
Scarfs, Hoods, and other wearing Apparel, a Necklace of Peerl, a Gold Meddal,
and several other Goods, and nineteen pounds of money, in all, to the vallue of
100 pounds, being seen to come out of the House with the same. The Robbery was
committed on the 19th of Eebruary last and the Prisoner after much Search,
found in the Marshalsea Prison, his Plea was that he knew not any thing of the
Robbety; but the Evidence being very positive, he was brought in Guilty.

John Swift, was Indicted for the Murder of Charles Jones, in the Savoy; the
manner of the Fact was thus, The Prisoner, the Deceased and another Gentleman
being at Supper together, there arose a Quarrel betwixt the Prisoner and the
Deceased, caused by the Deceased's Singing a Baudy Song under a Ladies Window
which the Deceased did aggravate with many base words, so that the Prisoner
desiring to avoid farther mischif, took his leave to go home to his Lodging,
when as the Deceased geting from the Gentleman that held him, followed the
Prisoner, who standing upon his defense had the ill hap to wound him under the
right Pap, of which wound in a short time he dyed. So that upon the Evidence
the Jury found that what was done, was for self Preservation, and thereupon
returned it Se Defendendo.

This Session, Mr. Dougbty pleaded his Majesty's Gracious Pardon upon his Knees
for killing a Coachman, about Three Sessions since in Old-Pallace-Yard.

Phillip Le-Merry was Indicted for being in a Burglary breaking open the House
of James Holmes, on the 16th of June last, but refusing to Plead, the
Executioner was called to tie him up and he ordered to the Press; but
afterward being persuaded by the Court and the Ordinary he consented to Plead,
and Pleaded not guilty, but the Felony and Burglary being proved against him
by one Evans, who was Confederate with him in the Robery, he was Cast.

James Dixon, was Indicted for a Felony and Burgalary, for breaking open the
House of Rose Hayes Widow, near South-Town; and taking thence one Watch
vallued at Forty Shillings; the manner thus, Three of them as supposed being in
the Gang, the Prisoner broak open the Shutter of a Window and getting in, let
in the other Two who being in the House, light a Candel and made a Fire, after
which they went up Stairs and took a Suit of Clothes off from a Fellow's Bed
whilst he was in it; he not in the least feeling them and then putting out the
Candel they departed; next Morning the Prisoner having been formerly a Servant
to the Party robed was suspected, and upon inquiry after him he was found with
the Suit of Clothes upon his Back, and the Watch in the Room where he Lodged;
he said, that he bought the Clothes of a Traveller, but not being able to
prove it, he was convicted of the Burglary.

Thomas Vnderthrop, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, was tried for
having Two Wives, to both which it was proved he had been lawfully Married, the
former of which, viz. Elizabeth Toogood had been his Wife for several years
here in London, but he leaving her about a year ago to ramble in the Country,
courted one Dorothy Martin, in Wiltshire, whom he so far prevailed with as to
get her consent to Marriage, by telling her that he was a Sarjeant at the Mace,
and had a great Estate in London. In Court the latter Wife appeared against him
only, but the other Marriage being proved he was found guilty.

Catherine Nevil was likewise Indicted for stealing several Parcels of Silk
Linen and Plate from a Gentleman in Holbourn, for which being apprehended she
did confess that she had such goods, but that she did not steal them, but it
being proved against her she was convicted of the Felony.

Ann Ditcher, was Arraigned and Tried for stealing a Campaign Coat, and Stuffs
to the vallue of 40 shillings from one Mr. Horton in Drury Lane, the things
where she had sold them being discovered by a little Boy her Accomplice in the
Theft, she alleged that they were delivered to her by a strange Man, but the
Man being not then to be found, she was cast for the Felony.

Ann Carter was Indicted, for breaking into the House of Magdaline Woof, in
White-Chappel, and taking from her 10 or a 11 shillings in Money, and then went
her ways, the Prosecutor having known the Prisoner formerly, durst not as she
said interrupt her for fear she should cut her Throat, she being of a desperate
Inclination to mischief, as appeared by her Behavior at the Bar, upon which
Evidence she was found Guilty of the Felony and Burglary.

Matthew Snowden, was Indicted for Robing the House of Peter Erazmus in
Shadwell, on the 18th of November last, and stealing thence Linen and other
Goods to the vallue of 5 pounds, upon which Indictment he was found Guilty.

Blanch Thomas, was likewise tried, for Robing her Master, viz one William
Palmer, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, of 10 pounds, which she
took from between the Mat and the Bed, of which she was suspected, by reason of
her buying her Clothes and other things of a sudden; who no sooner being
examined, but she confessed the Fact, nor did she deny it in Court, so that
without any difficulty, she was found Guilty.

John Bully a Jesuit or Popish-Priest, was called to the Bar, and his
Indictment Read, but he making many great apollogies how he had been Tried and
acquitted in Lancashire, and that he was not prepared for his Defense, the
Court was pleased to defer his Trial till next Sessions.

There were in all 9 persons Received Sentance of Death, viz. 3 Men and 6
women, 10 burnt in the hand, and 5 to be whipped, and so concluded this Sessions.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet.


