THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BALY,
Which began on Wednesday the 13th of this instant October, and ended on Friday
the 15 following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder,
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.
THe first was Catherine Green, alias Johnson, alias Dodson, Tried for stealing
eleven Yards of Lawn, vallued at nine shillings, on the seventeenh of September
last, from one John Turner living in St, Lawrence Jury, the manner thus, She
coming in a Coach to his Shop-door, alighted and went in, pretending to buy
some Linen Cloth, and taking her opportunity conveyed the Goods aforesaid into
her Coat, or some other private place and then pretending a dislike, or that
she found none for her turn, she went into the Coach again, but Mr. Turner
missing his Lawn followed her, and upon search found it dropped in the Coach.
She pleaded she knew nothing of it, but upon full Evidence was found Guilty of
the Felony.

A second Indictment was preferred against her by one Mr, King, for stealing of
a Silver Tankard from him, vallued at four pound ten shillings, and a Scarff
vallued ten shillings, one pair of Buttons vallued at one shilling. She coming
to his House in Southampton-Building, took a Lodging, pretending she had a
Husband living in Gray's Inn, and after having been there for some time, desired
to have a Tankard of Beer set by her Bedside, the which being done, she very
fairly the next morning, getting up betimes took the Goods mentioned and
departed. The Tankard was afterward found in a Goldsmiths hands to whom she
had sold it, her Plea was, that she only borrowed it, and intended to restore
it again; but that frivilous excuse being common with such kind of People and
it being clearly proved against her, she was brought in Guilty of this also.

John Watkins and Edward Whettaker were Indicted for Murdering one Isaac
Smith a Watchman in Ivy-Lane on the 29th of May last, the manner thus, several
persons about 3 of the Clock in the morning of the same day, coming down
Paternoster Row, made a noise and seemed very unruly as they came along
whereupon the Deceased and another Watchman being upon their Stands,
endeavored to stop them, in order to the^r examining them, or having them
before the Constable to give an account of their business at such an
unreasonable time; whereupon they resisted and fell to scuffling with the
Watchman; Whittaker striking up one of their Heels, and Watkins beating down
the others Lanthorn, whereupon the Dispute grew very hot, so that after some
hard Scuffle with the deceased, Watkins got up his Staff and struck him a blow
on the left side of the Head, knocking him down, of which Wound he languished
till the 22 of September, and then died. The Prisoners pleaded that the
Deceased first assaulted them, and that they were Fruterers, and going about
their lawful occasions to buy Fruit in Newgate Market; but the Surgeon
giving in upon Oath that according to the best of his Skill, the man died of
the Wound, whereupon they were both found Guilty of the Murder.

Elizabeth Hull was tried for stealing one Bag vallued at two pence, and twenty
eight pounds of moneys numbered, being the moneys of Robert Hadcock of of the
Parish of St Giles in the Fields she being a Servant to him, took the
opportunity to get the Keys of a Trunck that stood under her Masters Bed, in
which the money was and opening it, or permitting some other to do it, conveyed
the Moneys thence, upon the missing of it, being taxed, she confessed that
there had been a Man with her, but that the moneys was not lost that day they
supposed it was, but the day before; so that upon Evidence of the Trunks being
opened. the Lock overshot, and no one but she admitted into the Chamber, where
it stood; whereupon she was found Guilty of the Felony.

Francis Nicholson, Indicted for stealing a Watch vallued at twenty-two
shillings from Robert Johnson of the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, the
manner thus, he coming into his Shop offered to sell a Watch which he said he
had bought, and by reason it was broak was not willing to go to the charge of
mending it. upon which, the Prosecutor bought it; but not looking well about
him the Prisoner had stolen another from him, upon which Indictment he was
found Guilty.

A second Indictment was preferred against him and one George Granger, for the
Murdering of one John Dimblebe, Servant to Mr. Marriot of Hampton Court where
the Murder was Committed, the manner of which barbarous exploit was thus;
according to the Confession of Nicholson that Granger upon some falling out
between him and the Deceased. had bidden him forty shillings to Murder him,
and something else not named, whereupon he consented to undertake the Villainous
Exploit, and at convenient times made three several Attempts, but his Heart
failed him. and as often he told Granger of the same, who encouraged him as he
said, upon which, the fourth time following him into a dark Room on the
sixteenth of September lost, in the Evening, he being a Carpenter by Trade,
with his Ax felled him, so that his Scull was broak in several places; whether
he gave him any more Blows is not certain, but there he left him weltering in
his Blood, till he was found by one Mr. Cole who came in quest of him, he being
quite senseless, lived only two days afterward but nevet spoke, upon which
Nicholson fled toward London, which gave suspicion of his Guilt, so that being
pursued. he was heard of at Kingston, and at the Half Moon there, had offered
to fell the Watch he afterward sold in Westminster; which he took out of the
Deceaseds Pocket. Upan his Trial he persisted that he was Guilty of the
Murder, but did solemnly Affirm Granger hired him, but there being no other
Testimony than his against him, and several Witnesses produced to prove his
good Behavior and peaceable Inclination, he was acquitted and Nicholson
according to his Confession, found Guilty of the Murder.

John Gibbons was Arraigned and tried for the Murder of William Smith, the
manner as follows. The Deceased being by Profession a Tailor, and working
with one Mr. Grimes in St. Paul's Covent Garden, where the Prisoner had put a
Suit of Clothes to alter, for which coming on the 19th of July last, and they
not being done, he fell to Cursing and Swearing, at which (as he alleged, the
Tailors, for there were many of them at work) fell a hollowing at him;
whereupon he took up a Goose that stood upon the Board, and threw it at the
Deceaseds Head, which missing him he afterward threw the Sheers, and struck
the Point of them through his Hat into his Head; making there a d^e^ wound, and
as it was sworn in Court, afterward drew his Sword, saying if he had not
enough he would give him more. Of this Wound Smith languished, often Vomitting
Blood, till the 21th of September. and then dyed. The prisoner endeavored to
prove he dyed not of that Wound but of a Feavour and in Order to the same
produced several Chirurgions who opened the Body yet notwithstanding the
Evidence being plain against him he was brought in Guilty of Manslaughter.

Ralph Markland, Elizabeth Markland, Ann Markland and Robert Gregory were
Indicted for Clipping, and Filing of his Majesty's Coin, the lawful moneys of
England, viz. 100 of Elizabeth shillings, 100 of King Charles the first his
Shillings and one hundred of his Half-Crowns The Evidence against Raplh
Markland swore, that he not only saw him, but often helped him to Clip several
parcels of moneys to the vallue of 100 pounds, or thereabouts; and that he had
given him 22 shillings of Clipped moneys for 20 of Broad, and thereby had made
Exchange for considerable sums. Several Clipping Blocks were likewise upon
search found in his House in the pa^ish of Saint Anns Blackfriars and two pair
of Sheers for Clipping, lately made for him by a Cutler in ^^u^hwark found hid
in the Nettles in Georges-fields, and that he sold several parcels of melted
Silver to a Goldsmith in the Mint. Against Gregory it was sworn that he bought
the Clippings of Markland, or that he received them to melt down, being a
Refiner by Trade and that he supplied him with moneys, the same being attested
by a Servant of Marcklands who had not only carried Clipped moneys to him in
Exchange, but likewise saw his Master weigh and deliver Clippings to him.
Against Elizabeth Markland the Evidence was, that she filed several sh^llings
to the number of 20 or thereabouts, but against her there was but single
Evidence. And against Ann Marckland none; so that after the Court had given the
Jury their Charge punctually to every circumstance, they only found Ralph
Marckland Guilty of the High Treason, and acquitted the rest.

There were several of the N^bility and Gentry appeared upon their Indictments
for Recusancy, many persons of Honor and worth conforming to the Church of
England in all the particulars of the Protestant Religion, and others continued
upon Bail to Answer the same at the next General Sessions to be holden for the
Ci^y of London and County of Mildlesex etc.

John Neal was tried for breaking open the House of James Jones of the Parish
of Ho^nsey on the eighteenth of July, and in the Company of eleven more, and
stealing thence Goods to the Vallue of fi^ty pounds, he confessed the Robbery
upon evidence, and thereupon was found Guilty of the Felony and Burglary.

Priscilla Winn was also found Guilty upon her Trial for stealing a silver
Porringer from David Lockly vallued at 50 shillings.

There were in all 8 that received Sentance of Death, Viz. Ralph Markland,
Frances Nicholson, Catherine Green, alias Dodson, John Watkins, John Neal,
Pris^^la Win, Elizabeth Hull and Edward Whittaker, and three to be whipped.

London, Printed by D. Mallet, 1680.


