THF TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Monday the 16th of this instant January and ended on Tuesday the
17th following, Giving an account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz,
For Murder, Fellonies, and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their
Names, and the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those
Condemned to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.
AT this Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, began and ended as aforesaid the most
remarkable Trials and proceedings were as follows,

Rowland St. John's, was indicted for Murdering John Styles Esquire, a
Gentleman of Lincolns Inn, the which upon Evidencc appeared to be thus, The
party deceased and the Prisoner being intimate Acquaintance, and often keeping
Company together, on the 7th of December last happened to meet, and after
having been at several Taverns, at last came to Richards Coffe-House near
Temple Bar, where laying a trivial wager about measuring two Dishes of
Chockalet, they afterward went to the St: Johns-Head in Chancery- Lane, to
drink it, where falling at some difference about paying their Reckoning, they
came from thence to the King's Head Alehouse, and there not well agreeing, from
thence they went to the three Cranes, and coming into the Company of some
Gentlemen that kept a Club there, they offered to refer their differences to
them; but they finding them both in Drink, and that some words had passed
between them, all but one Gentleman left them, when after two or three hasty
words passing between them, the deceased laid his hand upon his Sword, which
occasioned the other to draw, and whilst the Gentlemen that were in their
Company, went down to call for help to part them, the Prisoner had run the
deceased in two Inches under the Left Pap, of which in three days he dyed, but
there being no former Grudg nor premeditated Malice proved, notwithstanding
three Indictments were laid, one for wilful Murder, one upon the Corroners
Inquest, and one upon the Statute of Stabbing, yet he was found Guilty of
Manslaughter only.

Elizabeth White, Ann Dixon and Joyce Cove, were Indicted, the first as
principle, for Robing the Shop of John Crook in Soho Fields on the 23d of
December last: of Ribon, Silk-Stockings, Gloves, Silks, Laces and other things,
to a considerable value; and the two last as Accessaries in receiving the
Goods, upon which, the principle having confessed, not only that, but another
Robery, and the Goods upon search found it the Houses of the accessaries;
whereupon they were all three found Guilty, as likewise Elizabeth Sims, another
of the same Gang, for stealing Bands, Hoods and Table-Linnen, from William
Gresham on the 1st instant.

Robert Huckle was Indicted and took his Trial, for that he, together with one
Jane Rand, servant to Mr. Bethel in Cornhil, on the 4th of December last, Robed
the said Mr. Bethel of three Diamond Rings, two Silver Tankards, six Silver
Spoons, ten pieces of old Gold, eighty Guinies, and such other Goods of value,
as amounted to 300 pounds, The Maid confessed the Robery, and accused the said
Huckle, who not being able to give any good Account for himself, was brought in
Guilty.

Thomas Knight was Indicted for killing one Mr. Willer, a Life-Guardman on the
10th of December last, a little on this side Chelsey, the manner according to
Evidence thus, the deceased drinking at a House in the Road, and seeing the
Prisoner who was a Foot-Soldier coming by, called him to drink with him, and
after some time, they went to wrestling, which occasioned a Quarrel, whereupon
the Prisoner withdrew into the House, and staying there some time came out
again as he alleged, to have gone his ways, but the deceased following him with
his Sword drawn, and giving him several Cuts, he drew likewise, and run the
deceased in in two places of the Body, so that he instantly died, the Prisoner
pleaded, what he did, was in defense of his own Life upon which he be was found
Guilty of Manslaughter only.

William Motley a notorious Offender, who was brought from the Marshalsea,
having been burnt in the hand, was tried, and found Guilty for stealing several
parcels of Linen and other Goods, from Samuel Banfield in Holbourn.

Elizabeth Wollman of St. Martins in the Fields, was Indicted for killing John
Bret her Husbands Apprentice, the manner of the Murder as it was sworn to in
Court, being thus, she being at an Alehouse that joined to her House, saw the
deceased playing with her Son, and thtowing an empty Bag at him, and missing
him, flew out at the door, upon which, being over powered with Drink, she went
home in a Rage, and getting up a Broom-stick, fell upon the Youth, who took it
away from her, upon which, after some time, she took up a small Carving Chizel,
and struck it into his Breast, saying, she knew she should be hanged for him one
time or other, and seemed not to be sorry for what she had done, but rather
rejoiced, being so far transported with Rage, that she threw another Chizel at
him, and cut his Arm, upon this wound received, the Youth got down Stairs, and
went to the next house, where he instantly dyed! She pleaded that he gave her
saucy Language, but that not appearing in Court, she was found Guilty of wilful
Murder.

Elizabeth Scot was Indicted for stealing Plate, to the value of 30 pounds on
the 10 of December, from Mr. Comissary of Algate-Parish, which was evidently
proved against her, she being taken with it in her Lap, upon which, she
pleaded, that she had been drinking, and knew not what she did, but that served
not her turn, for she was found Guilty.

Humphry Bennet was found Guilty, for Robing William Sellwood of a Hat, Cravat,
and other things upon the Highway, on the second of this instant, the Cravat
being found in his Breeches.

John Johnson and William Ashurst were indicted for killing Lucy Cook with a
Cart, in the Parish of St. Giles Cripplegate, on the 10th of December, the
Evidence deposing, that she crossing of the Horses, one of them struck her
down, and thereupon the wheel went over her Head, of which wound she instantly
dyed, but it being adjudged Chance Medly, the Prisoners were acquitted, yet
received a severe Repremand from the Court, for their carelessness.

Charles Cockhill was indicted for stealing Leather out of Leaden Hall, which
being taken upon him, he confessed the Felony, saying a Cobbler set him on
work, and gave hlm a shilling to do it, upon which he was found Guilty.

John Smith was Indicted for stealing a Carpet, Cupbord Linen, and other
things, on the 10th of December from John Pordy of Stepny, but the things being
thrown down, and the Witnesses not able to swear they see him take them, he was
acquitted.

George Emerton was Indicted fot stealing a silver Tankard from the three
Black-Birds in Warwick Lane, on the 12th of January, which being positively
sworn to ho was found Guilty.

After the Court had been set a considerable time, Council moved for an Order
to warrant the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the delivery of the
Jesuits in Newgate, who are Ordered by the King and Council, to be sent to the
Scilly Islands, but the Court returned for Answer, that they could grant no
Order, the matter not being before them, but it was his Majesty's Pleasure to
Reprieve them, he might dispose of them as he thought fit, and the Sheriffs
must deliver them.

In Reply to which the Council cited a President that had been used upon the
like occasion, and the Sheriffs said they would be glad to be rid of them, so
they might be saved harmless, but in conclusion my Lord Ghief-Justice utterly
refused to grant any Order.

Clavel Cordwel had an Indictment preferred against him, for Marrying a second
Wife, the first being yet alive, upon which, the Witness swearing in Court to
both the Marriages, he was found Guilty.

Alexander Younger, being Indicted upon a Trespass, for entering the House of
Mr. Spencer in Great St, Bartholomews, under pretense of searching for
Prohibited Goods, took thence two silver Hilts of Swords, whereupon he was
found Guilty, and fined ten Mark, and to continue in Prison till next Sessions,
and from thence till the Fine be paid.

Paul Rutter, a French Surgeon, or Doctor had an Indictment of Murder
preferred against him, for poisoning Robert Morgan of St. Martins in the
Fields, about the Latter end of November last, which appeared in Court to be
thus, The Prisoner keeping the deceaseds wife from him, and using her at his
Will, the deceased one Morning meeting him, they went to drink together, and
treat about a Reconciliation, but after they had drank two pots, the deceased
before he could get home finding himself extreme Ill, concluded he was
poisoned, and to his last exclaimed, that the Doctor had poisoned him for his
Wife and Estate; after he was dead, being opened, several symptoms of Poison
was found in his Stomach, yet the Jury being English and French, he was
acquitted of the Murder.

Katherine Tobie was Indicted for stealing several pieces of Ribon, Lutestring
Hoods, Scarves, Peticoats, and other Goods, from one Nicholas Gullet, on the
5th of January of which upon the Testimony of the Witnesses was found Guilty.

Hestar Lemar, was Indicted for Robbing the Chamber of one Mary Pecks in St.
Paul's Covent Garden, on the 19th of December, and taking thence two silver,
Candlesticks, a Pearl Necklace, Spoons, Silver Plates, and other things, to the
value of fifty pounds, but it not being fully proved against her, she was
acquitted, by reason of several French Protestants came in, and gave Evidence
of her former Life and Conversation, she being one of those that fled the
Persecution,

Margaret Harison, was Indicted for Robing John Wise of St. Giles in the
Fields, on the 10th of December, of Petticoats, Hoods and Linen to a
considerable value, her Plea was, she took them with an intent to bring them
again, but that excused her not, for she was found Guilty.

Seven or eight were Indicted for Recusancy.

There were in all seven persons Condemned to dye, viz. William Bennet, Martha
Huckle, Ann Dixon, Joyce Cove, Elizabeth White, Elizabeth Scot, and Elizabeth
Crossman. Eight burned in the Hand, Five to be whipped, and three to be
Transported.

LONDON Printed, by D. Mallet. 1682.


