A TRUE NARRATIVE Of the whole PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions House IN THE
OLD-BAYLY, Begun on Thursday the 12th. of this Instant July, 1683. against
Captain Thomas Walcot, William Lord Russel, William Hone Joyner, John Rouse,
Captain Willam Blage, for conspiring the Death of the King, etc.
As also an Account of the Trials of several notorious Malefactors, for
Treason, Felonies, etc. together with the Judgment of the Court upon the same.
The First Day.
THE first that came were three Persons accused for Clipping, which being
positively proved upon them, by Persons that found them at work near Turn style
in Holbourne, and several pieces of Money brought into Court clipped, as also
Crucibles, etc. they were found Guilty of the Indictment.

The next that came on were the two Persons that robbed Captain Hine of a
considerable Sum of Money near Islington, which being likewise proved they were
brought in Guilty. They were also Indicted for, that being pursued on Suspicion
of the said Robbery, they shot one man dead upon the place, and wounded
several, of which they were found Guilty.

The Grand Juries of London having found the Bills against James Duke of
Monmouth, Ford, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armestrong, Robert Ferguson, William Lord
Russel, William Hone Joyner, John Rowse, Captain William Blage, Captain Thomas
Walcoat, etc. the five last were severally arraigned for High Treason.

The first that came on was Captain Thomas Walcoat, whose Indictment specified
that he, the second of March last, and at diverse other times, together with
many other Traitors, conspired the Death of the King, to depose him from his
Right and Title to the Kingdom of England, to subvert the Government, raise
Rebellions, etc.

Upon this Mr. North, Mr. Attorney General, and Sir George Gefferies, gave the
Particulars of the Evidence that was to be produced, insisting much on the
Hainousness of the Fact, and displaying it in its proper Colors; and added,
that if the several Particulars specified in the Indictment, were proved upon
the Prisoner, they would show themselves True English men, and Christians to
find it.

The first Witness was Colonel Rumsey, who deposed that there had been several
Traiterous Conspiracies and Consults to take away the Life of the King, and
that Captain Walcoat was present at the said Consults, and consented to the
Models laid, and Propositions made to effect that Horrid Treason. Nay, that
they were so Cock-sure of their Success, that they had already framed a Model
of Government that was to ensue. That an Ambuscade being to be placed at
Rumbold's House the Maltster near Hogsden, the said Captain Walcoat went to the
House to see if it was convenient.

Mr. Keeling, Boarn, and West, deposed much to the same effect, and further,
that their New Market Project not being compassed, they were to attempt it at
his going to Windsor, at the Playhouse, Bull-Feast, etc. all which was allowed
of, and encouraged by the Prisoner.

Then two Letters were produced under his own hand, the one to Sir Lionel
Jenkins, to implore the Pardon of His Majesty, and he would discover the whole
Intreague; the other seized by Captain Richardson, directed to a Friend, to
persuade Colonel Rumsey, etc. to be favorable in their Evidence.

His Answers were very insignificant, he alleging that he was Lame, but yet
could go to see Rumbald's House, and that though he had often associated with
the Conspirators, yet he hoped it could amount to no more than Misprision of
Treason; but the Jury, after some consideration, brought him in Guilty of the
Indictment.

The Second Day.
The first that came on this Morning, was William Hone, who desired that the
Plea he made yesterday might be allowed, which was, that he was Guilty of a
Conspiracy, but not of providing Arms to raise a Rebellion, which was not,
allowed and therefore pleaded not Guilty to the whole. This Indictment
imported, that as a False Traitor he had Conspired to depose the King of his
Crown and Dignity, and that particularly at a Consult, the second of March, 25.
Car. Secundi, in the Parish of St. Michael Bishaw, where were present Rumbold,
Ferguson, Holliway, Roe, Francis, and Richard Goodenough, and many other of the
Traiterous Conspirators, and that when they spoke of killing the King and Duke,
they called the former Blackbird, and the latter Gold-finch; the Prisoner
Confessing he did conspire the Death of the Blackbird, but not the Gold-finch.

Mr. Keeling being sworn, said that the Prisoner came acquainted with him by
Goodenough, and that he was one in the intended Assassination of His Majesty
and Duke of York: Mr. West insisted much to the same effect; and Sir Nicholas
Butler deposed that he confessed Matter in relation to the said Horrid
Conspiracy, which being plain proof to the Jury, they brought him in Guilty of
the Indictment, without going from the Bar.

The Lieutenant of the Tower having with great Guards brought the Lord Russel
from the Tower, surrendered him up the Sheriff North, who immediately brought
him up to the Court, where his Indictment was read, ( viz. for Conspiring the
death of the King, etc. with James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas
Armestrong, and Robert Ferguson) to which having pleaded not Guilty, and
desired longer time, (which the Kings Council opposed) he excepted against the
Jury, as not being Freeholders, which being a matter of Law, the Court
appointed Mr. Pollexfen, Mr. Holt, and Mr. Ward to argue it for his Lordship,
which being done, the Court overruled it, whereupon the Jury was called, two
and thirty of which his Lordship peremptorily challenged.

The Jury being Sworn, and the Indictment read, the Kings Council learnedly
opened it, and dilated much on the Hainousness of the Crimes alleged against
him.

Colonel Rumsey being the first Witness, deposed that the Prisoner, together
with the Persons aforesaid, being at Mr. Shepherds a Vintner in the Parish of
St. Nicholas Bashaw, he was sent to them by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to know
what forwardness they were in, as to an Insurrection, and that they received
answer, that Mr. Trenchard, who had promised to raise 1000 Foot and 4000 Horse,
to be aiding in the Design, had certified them by a Letter, that it could not
as yet be effected, because some would not rush on such a great Concern,
without deliberation correspondent to it.

Mr. Shepherd, then deposed, that being a Vintner, the persons before mentioned
being come to his house, they desired a private room, where he heard the
consulting about an Insurrection, and to his best remembrance, there was a
discourse of seizing the Guards.

The last was the Lord Howard of Escreek, who upon Oath declared the Conspiracy
at large, wherein he said the Earl of Shaftsbury was the Contriver of it, that
he was dissatisfied in the coldness of the Lords in it, that he had 10000 men
in the City at his beck, that diverse Messages passed betwixt them, but it being
put off from time to time, the Earl at last went for Holland to secure himself,
where he died; that Aaron Smith was dispatched to Scotland, to persuade the
Gentry to rise; that they had constituted a Committee of six, which consisted
of the Lord Russel, Lord Howard, Duke of Monmouth, Earl of Essex, Mr. Sidney,
and Mr. Hambden the younger.

Sidney was sent by them to see what posture the Guards were in; that they had
Money ready to carry on the Design, but expected more from Holland.

The Lord Russel confessed he was at the Consult, but came late, that he went
to Shepherds only to taste Wines; he then produced several Persons of Quality in
his behalf, touching his Reputation, but the Jury, after some consideration,
brought him in Guilty.

Then Rouse came on, against whom it was sworn much to the same effect, who was
also brought in Guilty of the Indictment for endeavoring to kill the King, etc.

Captain Blage was arraigned, for that his part was to seize the Tower, but
several Circumstances appearing to the Jury of his Innocence, they brought him
in not Guilty.

The Third Day.
This Morning the Lord Russel was brought up to receive Judgment, and being
asked what he had to say, why it should not be given, he desired his Indictment
might be read to him again, which was accordingly done, and therein he made an
Exception, but it being frivolous in the Opinion of the Court, Mr. Attorney
demanded Judgment in the King's Name, which was accordingly done, as the Law in
such cases has prescribed, the Recorder making a short but pathetical Speech.

Then Captain Walcoat, William Hone, and John Rouse were brought to the Bar,
the two first desiring only the liberty of their Friend to visit them, which
was granted, and the last run on in a strange harangue of his Innocence, and
thereupon they immediately received the same Judgment.

Capt. Blage being brought in not Guilty by the Jury, he was then discharged.

Then the Grand Jury for London presented an Address of Thanks to the
Lord Mayor, for His Majesty's deliverance from the Hellish Plot, and humbly
desired his Lordship to present it in their Names, which his Lordship
accordingly promised.

Then Thomas Vdal a Weaver in Spittle fields made his appearance, who was bound
over for making several Pieces of several sorts of Ribbon, wherein was the
Motto, No Slavery, no Popery, and being asked by whose order he made them,
replied, by order of one Harrington, who never called for them, and is not to
be found; and proving himself a Loyal Churchman was discharged.

The first that was called among the rest of the Malefactors, was Jonathan Ball
for stealing Goods to the value of 5 l. of which he was found Guilty.

Elizabeth Mason and Margaret Nicolson were Indicted for Clippers, but there
being no positive Proof, the Jury acquitted them.

Francis English an Innkeeper, Indicted for stealing a Horse, was cleared.

One P^unton an Apprentice was Indicted for stealing Silver Salts, Spoons, and
Forks from his Master, but the Jury acquitted him.

Rachel Bash and Sarah Day were Indicted for stealing a Yard of Bone-lace, to
the value of 1 s. 6 d. but were cleared.

Jane Dulton of Sunbury in Middlesex, was Indicted for a Witch, and several
strange things were alleged against her by a great number of Witnesses, and
particularly her bewitching Ann Collins to death; but the Minister of the Town
giving a satisfactory account to the Court of her Faith confessed to him, and
often Prayer with him, she was acquitted.

One Gratrix and Spittle were Indicted for robbing one Mr. Pits an Officer of
the Court of about 9 l. and they being known old Offenders, they were found
Guilty.

Richard Fennel and George James confessed their Felonies and Robberies.

Anthony Simson a Cripple of the Hospital, was Indicted for killing a
Fellow-Cripple by throwing a Bed-staff, but was cleared.

John Scot a Carman, and Samuel Coldicol were Indicted for killing Mary Edwards
in St. Paul's Churchyard, by the fall of a Bale of Paper, but the Jury
acquitted them.

Lastly Elizabeth Hall was Indicted for stealing Goods to the value of 5 l.
from Henry-Tayler, of which she was cleared.

And there being much business remaining still on Middlesex, side, the Court
thought fit to adjourn till Monday.

London, Printed by George Croom in Thames Street over against Baynards-Castle,
1683.


