THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY,
Whieh began on Wednesday the 10th of this Instant October, and ended on
Saturday the 12th, of the same Month.
Giving an Account of all the Remarable Trials there, Viz. For High Treason,
Murders, Fellonies, and Burglaries, etc. with the Criminals Names, and Places
of Committing their Facts, with the Number of those Condemned to be Hanged
Transported, and to be Whip.

AT the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly, on Wednesday the 10th. of this Instant
October, about 9 a Clock in the Morning, the Right Honorable St. William
Prichard Knight. Custos, Lord Mayer of the City of London; for the time being; with
several Aldermen, Justices of the same City; together with the Right Honorable
Sr. George Jefferies Knight and Barronet, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of King's Bench, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; Sr. Thomas Jenner the present Recorder and other Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer, for the City of London, Westminster County of Middlesex,
and Goal Dilevery of Newgate, being Assembled in Court, Proclamation was made
in the accustomed manner; For all Persons to appear, or give their Attendance;
which being ended, several persons accused, were called to the Bar, to whom
Indictments of Fellonies, Murders, Burglaries, etc. were read, as hereafter are
named, who pleaded not Guilty, and put themselves upon their Trials, Viz. John
Smith, William Smith, John Pyson, William Williams, Christopher Moor Robert
Vallers, John Thompson, Thomas Atkins, etc.

John Pyson being brought upon his Trial for Murdering of Susanna Roberts a
Child. It appeared; that upon turning of his Coach upon the Corner of a Street,
the Wheel accidentally ran over the Head of the said party, and no Malice
being, etc. the Jury found him Guilty of Manslaughter.

William Williams was Indicted for a Rape, upon the Body of Sibyl May, Aged
sixty years, or thereabouts; but upon full inquiry into the Fact, the Evidence
was not so convincing as to induce the Jury to find him Guilty. The same
Prosecuters preferred two other Indictments of Felony against the same person;
and alleged, he had Felloniously took from her a Ring, Scarf, and Hood, etc.
the same day: which appearing more reasonable for the Jury to believe, they
found the said William Williams Guilty of both Fellonies, and the Court
ordered him to be set aside, to answer Judgment thereupon.

Christopher Moor, was indicted for Felony and Burglary, stealing from one
William Reves, at the Lamb-Inn, in the Parish of St. Clement Danes, in the
County of Middlesex, diverse parcels of Apparel, and other Goods to a
considerable value; and upon the Trial of the Cause, the Evidence being plain,
besides the Goods taken upon the Prisoner produced, he was found Guilty, and
set aside for Judgment.

Robert Vallers, was Tried for stealing several pieces of Plate, from Nicholas
Ramsden, and found Guilty. Also one John Thompson was Tried for taking a Scarf
from Mary Harberly, and found Guilty. And one Thomas Atkins, was likewise found
Guilty of stealing a Silver Tankard from Elizabeth Green, and the Court
Adjourned till three a Clock: at which time being sat, and Proclamation made,
Richard Rouch, Thomas Fitz-James, and one Mr. Atkinson, were all three
Arraigned and Tried for Killing Mr. Isack Welsh in Chancery Lane; and after a
full hearing of the Evidence for the King, the Jury brought the two latter not
Guilty; and it appearing by the Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, that
there was no Grudge or Malice, between the said Rouch and the Deceased Mr.
Welsh, between whom the Quarrel hapined, which occasioned the death of the
latter, they found the said Mr. Rouch Guilty of Manslaughter.

John Smith, and William Smith, were Tried, for Felloniously stealing diverse
Goods of great value, from the Right Honorable the Earl of Lindsey. The
Evidences, and Circumstances being very plain, they were both found Guilty, and
set aside for Judgment,

John Green, was Arraigned, for Felloniously stealing Sheep, and other Cattle;
and pleaded Guilty to his Indictment, and was also set aside for Judgment.

Peter Crown, a Soldier, was Arraigned, and Tried, for Killing a Man. but upon
Examination of the Evidence, it appeared a Quarrel arose between the Prisoner
and the Deceased person, and not proceeding from any former Grudge or Malice
between them, the Jury found him Guilty of Manslaughter.

James Oagly was Arraigned and Tried for stealing from Joseph Hancokes eighteen
Shilling and sixpence in Money, but upon Trial of the Cause there being no
possitive Evidence, and the Circumstances not being sufficient, to make out the
Accusation, the Jury found him not Guilty; and the Court Adjourned till eight a
Clock the next Morning.

Thursday the 11th, according to the Adjournment last-Night, the Court, sat and
proceeded in the Business of the Goal Delivery and Charles Butler was Arraigned
and Tried for High Treason, beie charged for Cliping and Counterfeit Cuoining
his Majesty's Current Money: but upon the Trial of the Cause, the Evidence
being not sufficient to prove the matter according to the Direction of the
Statute he was brought in Guilty. And one Mrs. Elizabeth Hare, who was tried
for Hegh Treason, upon the same Statute, was found Guilty, and set aside for
Judgment.

Sidly Vanderlyn, Charles Dod, Charles Roberts, Hugh Jones, Edward Williams,
were Tried, for Robbing of Richard Litleton of a Hat and four Shillings in
Money.

The said persons, together with one Andrew Edwards, a Cheesemonger somewhat
near Billings-gate, and others of the same Gang, who are fled from Justice, had
made it their common practice to Ape some hot-head Debauches of the Town, in
kissing all women kind they met in the streets: and under that pretense they
took the opportunity of picking their pockets, or Robbing them of any goods
they might have about them; and were so audaciously insolent, that they pursued
several women, into the Houses they fled to avoid their Mischeivous useage:
many modest Women complaining of their Beastly Affronts. In this manner they
had pestered the streets, Alleys and Lanes, near the Royal Exchange for some
time, and would pass the streets with an unusual Boldnss for Villians of their
profession; Whooping, and Hallowing. Their Rendevouz being at a kind of a
Quakers Alehouse, at or near the Stocks Market: Being refused admittance into
all other public Houses in that Neighborhood. Mr. Weston the City Martial,
having notice of the said parties, took one of the same Profession of Filers,
or diverse that belonged to another Gang, and he ingeniously discovered the
whole Herd, and was industriously Instrumental in the taking and apprehending,
of the said notorious Malefactors. In the pursuit of them, The said Sydney
Vandelee, stobbed a Tallow Chandlers Apprentice, and but for the Extraordinary
care of the Surgeon, the wound might have proved Mortal. The said Vanderlyn
was taken at a Hatmakers near St. Brides Church that used to dress Hats, and
work in the way of his Trade, to several that are suspected to follow the said
course of life.

Our said Sparks, would sometime, according to the season of the year Travil
the Circuits, and repear to Inns in Towns appointed for the Assizes, and
pretend to take up Lodgings for the Judges Attendance; when indeed they had no
other business but Robing or Stealing where ever they came; and are said to
outdo any, that ever yet pretended to the Profession in all manner of
wickedness; though some of them have scarce seen sixteen years in the World,
and the Gravest of the Gang, not much above twenty, but most of them have the
Charracter of being Thieves, almost ever since they were able to walk the
Streets.

upon the said Trial, the Evidence was full and plain against them all upon
which the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies sumed up the Evidence minding the Jury,
the Danger every Man in his own person, as well as the person oi his Servants
were in, if such outrages were not Examplary punished, that the peace and
civil Government of the City was invaded by them, besides the evil Example,
they might possible give to Youth, being in a manner but Children, and might
with the more ease draw in many more young People with their dissolute way of
living; if they were not stopped in the Carreire, of their wickedness, and that
they were a sort of people, that Robbed every body they met. It being their
daily practice, to strole into all parts of the City and Country, upon no other
business, and that several of them had received the Mercy of the Court for past
offenses, and were become hardened in their wickedness. One swearing, he had
done the Rogues business, meaning the innocent honest Tallow-Chandlers Servant,
and attempted the like Mischief upon one of the Sheriffs Officers, but their
Villainies, being to many to repeat, his Lordship left the whole Charge to the
Consideration of the Jury, who brought them in Guilty of the Fellonies, and
Robberies, of which they stood Indicted.

Robert Thomas, Joseph Roberts, and Jonathan Parsons, were Indicted and Tried,
for stealing a Gelding valued at 10. l. and upon Trial of the Cause it
appeared, that the said Thomas, and Roberts, were no ways Consenting or privy
to the Felony, and the Jury brought them in not Guilty, and set them up for
Evidence, and both of them declared the said persons brought the Gelding, and
employed one of them to Ride him, and the other to sell him, which was all they
knew of the business and the Court was fully satisfied of their innocence, and
caused them to be immediately discharged without Fees, and proceeded on the
Trial of Parsons only, who was found Guilty. The same Parsons was Indicted of a
Felony, and Burglary, upon the House of one Jonathan Beck, and stealing a
Tankard and other Goods, but the Prosecuter not being able to prove Matter of
Fact (alleging only some Circum; stances) he was found not Guilty of that
Indictment. Thomas Wade, was found Guilty of stealing Tobacco to the value of
10. l. and Robert Dillaber was found Guilty of a F^lony of the same value.
Thomas Hernes and Jacob Horten, were tried for Kiillng John Harding at the
King's Head in Fanchurch-Street. brought in not Guilty Samuel Mathews, was tried
for stealidg a Silver Tankard from Tho. Caucor and found Guilty. Eliz. Green,
and Wm. Stanbrook, were tried for a Felony of the same Nature Green was
Convicted, and Stanbrook accquitred. Hanah Pesar, was tried for taking a Watch
from the person of Robert Rouse, and Accquitted. John Knight, Thomas Bybody,
and Thomas Edmunds, were all Convicted for stealing two Geldings.

Saturday Morning, the Sessions met, and proceeded in the business, Mary
Phelps, was found Guilty of Murdering John Charlton in Covent Garden, and
Francis Eggleston, was found Guilty of a Robbery on the Highway, and taking a
Cravat, and Hat, from Isaac Jacson. William Clark, was found Guilty of
speaking Treasonable Words, concerning his Majesty and saying the present
Fanatic Conspiracy, or Plot, was no Plot and ordered to stand in the Pillory,
and pay a Fine to the King, of 100 Marks. Charles Butler was Convicted of
High Treason, for diminishing the Current Coin. John Quarles, and Charles
Temple, were found Guilty of Felony. Diverse others were tried for Felonies of
diverse kinds, and accquitted. No possitive proof being brought against them, in
Fine. The Court passed Sentence of Death, upon ^7. Vez. Eliz. Hare, and Cha.
Butler, for High Treason, Mary Phelps for Murder, and several Felonies of
diverse kinds. 8 were Burnt in the hand, and 8 Transported, and 6 ordered to be
VVhip'd, which concluded the Sessions.

LONDON Printed for M. Steward 1683.


