THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF The Sessions Begun at the OLD BAYLEY On Wednesday the
Fifteenth of October, 1679.
Giving an Account of the PROCEEDINGS against the Westminster-Scholars, and
Three Persons found Guilty of killing a Bailiff there.

The Trial of Three other Persons likewise found Guilty of Murdering another
Bailiff in Dutchy-Lane.

The Trials of Three Persons Condemned for Robbery on the Highway: And of a
Woman Convicted of High Treason, and to be burnt to Death for Clipping of Money.

WITH

ONe of the first and most material T^yals on Wednesday, was of a woman lately
dwelling in the Parish of St. Giles Crippel-gate. For high Treason, for
Clipping of Money, she lived amongst her Neighbors in very good Equipage; and
was accounted Rich, but it appears she got her Money by very base practices,
making it her Trade to Buy stolen Plate, which having a considerable Stock she
would keep a great while by her, (...) ^em^m^rance or inquiry after it was
over, and then make Money of it, to this purpose she held correspondence with
the most noted Theives, amongst whom one having along time been eminent both
for House-robbing, and Exploits on the Highway, being now reclaimed and allowed
his Pardon, that he might discover the rest of his Gang, did now come to give
Evidence against her, and swore that one time going to sell a parcel of stolen
Plate, being well acquainted with her Habitation, he went up stairs, and
ope^^^ a door so suddenly that he sur^riz^d her in the very act of Cli^^^ng a
Shilling, holding it in the Sizzars in her hand, and just before her a large
parcel of Clippings but he then ^poke nothing to her of it at that time, but
only blushed and presently removed the Clippings, and so fell to b^rgaining
with him for his Plate. And when he first discovered her, Captain Richardson
and other officers going to apprehend her, took her with 27 Shillings in her
hand, just newly Clipped; which she endeavored to shuffle away. They also found
several large parcels of Plate that had lately been stolen from several Persons
of quality, and of which Public notice had been given, a stolen Diamond Ring
on her Finger, a parcel of melted Silver, and a Book of Receipts, whereby it
appears what Vast quanteties of Plate had passed through her hands. Besides
there was found in her possession* about 3^0 pound^ in Silver, which the
W^^nesses testified was all their Money; and generally the largest for such a
quantity that ever they saw. The Prisoner was or at least pretended to be very
Deaf and ^her^fore was brought from the Bar into Court, the better to hear
what was proved against her, which she had littel material to allege, but
only denied the crime: confessing that she did indeed buy Plate, but knew
nothing that it was stolen; and that the Witnesses swore against her, to save
his own Life, and merit his Pardon. But the other circumstances being so
apparen^t the Jury could not but find her Guilty.

The next seemed to be an object of Compassion to most People present, a poor
young Wench lodging about Thames street, betrayed (as she allead^ed) by a
promise of Marriage and getting her with Child, which being perceived by the
Woman that she lodged with, to whom she confessed the truth thereof, just when
she came to fall in Labor about 9 or 10 a Clock in the Night, thi^ barberous
Woman, fearing some charge or trouble might happen to her, who had so
entertained her, cruelly turned her out of doors, and set her in^o another
Parish, and there left her in pains, telling her that now the said Parish were
bound to provide for her. In this sad condition in the stre^t, and without any
help was this poo^ Creature delivered, and being found lying as one half dead
by the watch, and her condition perceived; a midwife was called, who found the
Child dead, but not separated from her Body, when she came to her; who asking
her if it were still-born, the Prisoner both then and now said, it was not, for
she heard it, cry, but denied that she intended or used any wilful means to
make away the Life of it nor did there any sign of Violence appear save only
some littel spots or marks of a Bruise or Pinch on the Throat, which some
conceive might be occasioned Involuntarily in struggling to Promote its Birth;
by an ignorant. Woman in her circumstances: however being a Bastard Child, and
the law making it death in that case for any woman to be delivered alone
without calling help, she was thereupon found Guilty.

A Women and 4 men were indicted for murdering a Ba^y in the Duchy Lane in the
Strand, the Balies came legally with an Execution to seize her goods, for 22.
pounds having a writ out of the Exch^q^^r; which runs as well within liberties
as without: however in civility they acq^^^ the particular Bailif^, of the
Duchy therewith; and had his consent, and a so had a Consiable to keep the
peace; so they quietly entered the House, and the Woman now Pris^ner, promised
them so fairly their Money, that they verily belie^ed her; but instead th^reof
she privately went forth and got together several Soldiers out of the Sav^y
and other Rabbels, which Violently entered the house wounded the Beadel
attending ^he Constable, and barbarously beat out one of the Bailes Brains: and
forced the rest to get away for the pre^ervation of their Lives she
encoura^eing them to come out and telling them there was no Constable there,
but they were Rogues got into her house etc. As to two of the Prisoners there
being no direct proof, they were a^quitted, the other two were met coming from
the Wounded Man and heard boast that they had done the Rouges business,
whereupon several honest Shop keepers endeavoring to apprehend them, they made
great resistance, and many Swords were drwan, but at last they were mastered;
and now the two and the said Woman that first accasioned all this ^umult, upon
a full Examination of all circumstances, were found Guilty of the Mur^e^.

The same day a man was found guilty of stealling an Horse, though the person
that lost it, was as favorable to him as possible he could in his expressions,
there were likewise three found guilty for Robberies, committed on the Highway
which rendered them considerable, though the booty they met with was not great.

On Thursday, several very young Gentleman Scholars of Westminster-School were
brought into Court, concerning the killing of a Bailiff, that came to serve an
Execution near the same School, where common Fame and Rumor has long talked
that there was appriviledge that no Bally should enter, and most certain it is,
that the Scholars at diverse times, have endeavored to keep out or Expel any
such Officers, but this was rather by might than right, nor can it be imagined
that there should be any privilege in the World to commit Murder and ^^^st the
Law* however in regard of their Youth, and the unusual circumstances, his
Majesty had been pleased to grant Eight of them his Gracious Pardon, which they
submissiively pleaded, and obtained to be allowed of by the Court, three others
of them took their Trials, and though the evidence seemed to charge them all
three to have been present at the Riot, yet there was Testimony beyond all
exceptation, that one of them was not so much as in Town that day, but in the
Country, with his Master the reverend Doctor Busby, Master of that Famous
School, in whose absence this accident happening, nor could there direct proof
b^ made against the other Two, that they were any actually concerned, but
rather likewise absent, so that they were all three acquitted. But two Women,
of whom one first called the Scholars to this Execution, and ^o her invited
them through her House, that they might the better come to assault the House,
wherein the B(...) and also a Man th^^ appeard very (...) to animate the Lads
on to the Mischief, were found Guilty.

An Old Thief, tried but the other sessions, being got out of custody, hired
her self to a Citizen in Bow Lane, but the very first day she came, in the
evening, Robbed them of a great quantity of Clothes and Linen, the matter was
fully proved, and she found Guilty.

Most Violent presumptions if we may not say sufficient proof, were made
against a person, for counter feiting of Money, several naughty half Crowns
that he exposed, being shown in Court, but the Jury upon weighing all
circumstances, thought fit to acquit him.

An arch Slut, having a mind to Rob her Aunt, drew in a young wench to assist
her, and taking an oppertunity when all the People, were out of the House,
stole away diverse Clothes, but the Jury in favor, valued them but at 8
Shillings, so they are both to be Whipped*

One French, a very lusty fellow, and notorious Padder, charged with two
Inditements, one for Robbing a Gentel-man of 30 Shillings and other things on
the Road, and another for stealling an Horse pleaded guilty to both.

One Richard Wood, was most maliciously prosecuted for the like offense of
Robbing a man at Noonday, on Tower Hill of ^ Shillings and a sack and a shovel
etc. but upon Examination, it appeared the prosecutor and he and some others
working together, the prosecutor was got Drunk, and tumbled up and down the
Hill, and spent or lost his money, and his Sack etc. were taken up in the Night
by the Watch so that there being no color of crime in the prisoner, he was
acquitted, and his Adversary severly checked for such a Base prosecution*

One Tho. Hudson was found Guilty of High Treason for Clipping of money, he had
often offered pieces notably circumcised at an Ale house, and desired to buy
Ginnies, offered a (...) a piece, yet confessed he must change them again into
Silver, and would rather give some advantage for broad Silver, particularly,
going into the Yard one day, and staying long there, a Woman belonging to the
House, went to look after him, and peping in at the House of Office, saw him at
work, a Clipping of shillings, with a Pair of Sizzars, and then rubbing them
over with a stone etc. He had also declared that he could take off 3 d. from a
Shilling, and yet it should go never the worse. He endeavored to suggest, that
there was some malice in one of the evidence against him, but could not make it
out, and so was convicted.

Two other both Jersy men, were arraigned not for Clipping, but a more secret
and dangerous Art, ( viz) washing, and by that means lessening of Coin, whereby
a Shilling was reduced to be worth not above a 4 pence and an half Crown not 20
pence, of these there were several pieces offered to be put off by one of the
persons produced in Court, and diverse Glasses of Aqua Fortis, wherewith 'twas
supposed he did the Feat, but he pretending he took the said ^ight Money, and
that the Aqua Fortis was used by him in a Trick* or Invention he said, to turn
Red, Brown or indeed any colored Hair, into bright Flaxen, and no home evidence
coming in against the other, they were both acquitted.

There was a long Trial likewise concerning the stealing of several Bottels of
a medicine called* Elix^r Vitae from one Salvator Winter a very ancient
Itallian Gentel* man* who has long professed Physic in this Kingdom, his man
was indicted for it, and the things found locked up in his Trunk, but he
alleged that they were put in there by another, nearly related to the Doctor,
without his, the said prisoners privity, and brought several witnesses that
made the same credible, whereupon he was acquitted.

Then two persons were Arraigned for Horse stealing, one of them discovered by
an Honest Hostler, which we mention for the honor and Encouragement of men of
that profession, he* having great commendations from the Court for such his
faithful service.

Two Indictments were preferred against one Mr. Valenciens, an out landishm^nt,
for supposed Rapes committed on two several Young Women, both the Daughters of
a Scotch-man, one was said to be done at Whitsuntide last, and the other 6
Weeks ago, the 2 Girls pretended abundance of modesty in giving their evidence,
yet in fine, each of them down right swore the matter of Fact, but the same was
attended with many improbable and suspicious circumstances, the first never
complained from Whitsuntide till about 3 Weeks ago, and then both a midwife
affirmed* and she confess*d she beleiv^d she was with Child on this Ravishment,
and the latter concealed it 6 Weeks, and then disclosed it rather on her
Mothers Importunity, than her own Inclination, Besides diverse other par^i^ulars
proved some contradictory to their evidence, others seeming as if they had been
Tutored, to say and swear what they did, so that upon the whole matter it was
generally looked upon as a design to get Money, and that the Prisoner was much
wronged by such an odious Accusation, and therefore was fairly Acquitted on
both Indictments.

There were in all, no less than one and thirty persons, that at this Sessi^ns
received sentence of Death, on Saturday the ^8 of October. That is to say.

Three for Treason, in Clipping and diminishing of Money, (viz.) Christian
Woodward, sentenced to be Burnt. Steven Push-worth, and Thomas Hudson, to be
drawn and Hanged.

Seven for Murdering, (viz.) Joan Black-well, for killing her B^stard Child.

John Two-good, Richard Hammond* and Ann Wing field, for murdering* the Bailiff
in Duchy Lane.

Richard Tailor, Mary Bishop, and Elizabeth Besstock, for murdering the Bailiff
at Westminster.

Four for Robbing on the High way, (viz*) Thomas French, John Hurst, Morris
Hunt, and Joseph Hunt*

Eight for Burghlary, and House breaking, (viz.) Edward Jarvis, John Weal, John
Martin, Charles Michener, J^aa^ Whitacre, Thomas^^ Moor, James Marmaluke, and
Charles Pain.

Three for Horse stealing, (viz.) Thomas Beecham, Richard Good, and George
Butler.

The other six were for other Felonies, but Old and Incorrigible offenders,
that had been Burnt in the hand, or Pardoned etc. and would take no Warning
t(...) Names were, Susan Smith, Jane Mo^d, Susan Hollis, Hannah Andrews,
Elizabeth (...) and Alice Skip.

There were likewise, 10 Burnt in the hand, and 7 or 8 ordered to be whipped, and
soended this most remarkable Sessions.

FINIS.

