CHRIST'S YOKE AN EASY YOKE, And yet the Gate to Heaven a Strait Gate. In two
excellent SERMONS, Well worthy the serious perusal of the strictest Professors.

By a Learned and Reverend Divine.

HEB. 11.4. Who being dead, yet speaks.

LONDON: Printed for F. Smith, at the Eliphant and Castle near the Royal
Exehange in Cornhil. 1675.

D. IER. TAILOR OBIIT AVG 13. 1667.



F. H. Van Houe fec

We Speak not great things, But Live them,
Variety in Opinion and unity In affection are not Inconsistent
Printed for f. smith at ye Elephant ^. Castle in Cornhill.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THese Sermons need no Epistle of Commendation before them; the Works of this
Reverend Author (already extant praise him in the Gates: By means of a Person
of Honor yet living, they are now come into the Press for Public use and
benefit. For the subject matter of these excellent Sermons, it is of all other
the most necessary, to make the Way of Christ pleasant to us, and to assure us
of a blessed and glorious Reward at the end: Both which are handled by a
Workman that needs not to be ashamed. What can more endear a Christian to the
obedience of Christ, than to find his very Yoke made easy, none of his
Commands grievous, but his Ways, ways of pleasantness, and all his Paths peace;
besides the great and everlasting Reward to all them that walk in them? And to
quicken our diligence, that we be not slothful, but followers of them, who
through faith and obedience inherit the promises, the Author has added another
serious and weighty Discourse, to show us, That strait is the Gate, and narrow
is the Way that leads unto life.

Though Christ's Precepts are plain and easy to a sincere heart, that truly
loves him; yet his Promises are not to be obtained but by a universal
endeavor, in a uniform obedience to all his Commands.

In a word, Christ's Yoke is easy; this should invite us to take his Yoke upon
us: The Way is narrow that leads unto life, this should provoke us with care
and circumspection to walk in it. The Reward is certain and infinite, this
should encourage us, with greatest diligence, that we may at last obtain the
Promise.

This we dout nobt was the design of the Author in preaching these Sermons; and
we do assure thee no less in printing of them: Which that they may conduce to
so happy and blessed an end, is the hearty desire, and shall be the sincere
prayer of thy

Friend, to serve thee,

CHRIST'S YOKE An Easy YOKE.
Matthew. 11.30. For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light.


THE Holy JESUS came to break from off our necks two great Yokes: the one of
sin, by which we were fettered and imprisoned in the condition of Slaves and
miserable persons; the other of Mose's Law, by which we are kept in pupillage
and minority, and a state of imperfection, and asserted unto us the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God. The first was a despotick Empire, the Government of
a Tyrant; the second was of a Schoolmaster, severe, but it was in order to a
further good, yet nothing pleasant in the suffering and load. And now Christ
having taken off these two, has put on a third: he quits us of our burden, but
not of our duty, and has changed the former Tyranny, and the less perfect
Discipline, into the sweetness of paternal Regiment, and the excellency of such
an Institution, whose every Precept carries part of its reward in hand, and
assurance of after Glories.

Moses Law was like sharp and unpleasant Physic, certainly painful, but
uncertainly healthful. For it was not then communicated to them by Promise and
universal Revelation, that the end of their Obedience should be Life Eternal.
But they ere full of hopes it might be so; as we are of health, when we have a
learned and wise Physician: But as yet the reward was in a cloud, and the hopes
in fetters and confinement.

But the Law of Christ is like Christ's healing of Diseases, he does it easily,
and he does it infallibly. The event is certainly cons^quent, and the manner of
cure is by a touch of his Hand, or a word of his Mouth, or an approximation to
the hem of his Garment, without pains and vexatious Instruments. My meaning is,
that Christianity is by the assistance of Christ's Spirit which he promised us,
and gave us in the Gospel, made very easy to us: and yet a reward so great is
promised, as were enough to make a lame Man to walk, and a broken Arm endure
the burden: a Reward great enough to make us willing to do violence to all our
Inclinations, Passions and Desires. A hundred weight to a Giant is a light
burden, because his strength is disproportionably great, and makes it as easy
to him, as an ounce is to a Child. And yet if we had not the strength of
Giants, if the hundred weight were of Gold or Jewels, a weaker person would
think it no trouble to bear that burden, if it were the reward of his portage,
and the hire of his labors. The Spirit is given us to enable us, and Heaven is
promised to encourage us; the first makes us able, and the second makes us
willing: and when we have power and affections we cannot complain of pressure.
And this is the meaning of our Blessed Savior's invitation in my Text, Mat.
11.30. Which St. John also observed, 1 John 5.4, 5. For this is the love of
God, that we keep his Commendments; and his Commandments are not grievous. For
whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World; and this is the Victory that
overcomes, even our Faith; that is, our belief of God's Promises; the promise
of the Spirit for present aid, and of Heaven for the future reward, is strength
enough to overcome all the World.

But besides, that God has made his Yoke easy by exterior supports more than
ever was in any other Religion, Christianity is of it self, according to humane
estimate, a Religion more easy, and desirable by our natural and reasonable
appetites, than Sin in the midst of all its pleasures, and imaginary
felicities. Virtue has more pleasure in it than Sin, and has all satisfaction
to every desire of Man in order to humane and prudent ends, which I shall
represent in the consideration of these particulars.

I. To live according to the Laws of Jesus, is in some things most natural and
proportionable to the desires and first intentions of nature. II. There is in
it less trouble than in Sin. III. It conduces infinitely to the content of our
lives, and natural and political satisfaction. IV. It is a means to preserve
our temporal Lives long and healthy. V. It is most reasonable; and he only is
prudent that does so, and he a fool that does not; and all this, beside the
consideration of a glorious and happy Eternity.
I.
Concerning the first I consider, that we do very ill, when instead of making
our natural infirmity an instrument of humility, and of recourse to the Grace
of God; we pretend the Sin of Adam to countenance our actual sins; natural
infirmity to excuse our malice, either laying Adam in fault for deriving the
disability upon us, or God for putting us into the necessity. But the evils that
we feel in this, are from the rebellion of the inferior appetite against
Reason, or against any Religion that puts restraint upon our first desires. And
therefore in carnal and sensual instances, accidentally we find the more
natural aversness, because God's Laws have put our irrascible and concupiscible
faculties in fetters and restraints: yet in matters of Duty, which are of
immaterial and spiritual concernment, all our natural reason is a perfect enemy
and contradiction to, and a Law against Vice. It is natural for us to love our
Parents, and they that do not, are unnatural, they do violence to those
dispositions which God gave us to the constitution of our Nature, and for the
designs of Virtue; and all those tendernesses of affection, those bowels and
relenting dispositions, which are the endearments of Parents and Children, are
also the bands of Duty. Every degree of love makes Duty delectable, and
therefore either by Nature we are inclined to hate our Parents (which is
against all Reason and Experience) or else we are inclined to do them all that,
which is the effect of love to such superiors, and principles of being and
dependency; and every prevarication from the Rule, Effects and Expresses of
Love, is a contradiction to Nature, and a mortification, to which we cannot be
invited by any thing from within, but by something from without, that^s violent
and preternatural. There are also many other Virtues even in the matter of
sensual appetite, which none can lose but by altering in some degree the
natural disposition; and I instance in the matter of carnality and uncleanness,
to which possibly some natures may think themselves apt and disposed; but yet
God has put into our mouths a bridle to curb the licentiousness of our speedy
appetite, putting into our very natures, a principle as strong to restrain it,
as there is in us a disposition apt to invite us; and this is also in those who
are most apt to the Vice. Women and young Persons, to whom God has given a
modesty, and shame of nature, that the entertainment of Lust may become
contradictory to our retreating and backward modesty, more than they are
satisfactory to our too forward appetites.

It is as great a mortification and violence to Nature to blush, as to lose a
desire; and we find it true, when persons are invited to confess their sins, or
to ask forgiveness publicly; a secret smart is not so violent, as a public
shame. And therefore to do an action which brings shame all along, opens the
sanctuaries of Nature, and makes all her retirements public, and dismantles
her enclosure, as Lust does; and the shame of carnality has in it more
asperity and abuse to Nature, than the short minutes of pleasure, to which we
are invited, can repay.

There are unnatural Lusts; Lusts, which are such in their very condition and
constitution, that a Man must turn a Woman, and a Woman become a Beast in
acting them: and all Lusts that are not unnatural in their own complexion, are
unnatural by a consequent and accidental violence. And if Lust has in it
dissonancies to Nature, there are but few Apologies left to excuse our Sins
upon Natures stock; and all that system of principles, and reasonable
inducements to Virtue, which we call the Law of Nature, is nothing else but
that firm ligature and incorporation of Virtue to our natural principles and
dispositions, which whosoever prevaricates does more against Nature, than he that
restrains his appetite. And besides these particulars, there is not in our
natural discourses any inclination directly or by intention of it self contrary
to the love of God, because by [God] we understand that fountain of being,
which is infinitely perfect in it self, and of great good to us, and whatsoever
is so apprehended it is as natural for us to love, as to love any thing in the
world; for we can love nothing but what we believe to be good in it self, or
good to us. And beyond this there are in Nature many Principles and Reasons to
make an aptness to acknowledge and confess God; and by the consent of Nations,
which they also have learned from the Dictates of their Nature, all Men in some
manner or other worship God.

And therefore when this our Nature is determined in its own indefinite
principle to the manner of Worship, all acts against the Love, the Obedience,
and Worship of God, are also against Nature, and offer it some rudeness and
violence. And I shall observe this, and refer it to every Man's Reason and
Experience, that the great difficulties commonly apprehended, commence not so
much upon the stock of Nature as of Education, and evil habits. Our Virtues are
difficult, because we at first get ill habits; and these habits must be
unrooted, before we do well, and that is our trouble. But if by the strictness
of Discipline, and wholesome Education, we begin at first in our Duty, and
practice of virtuous Principles, we shall find Virtue made as natural to us,
while it is customary and habitual, as we pretend infirmity to be, and
propensity to vicious practices. And this we are taught by that excellent
Hebrew; who said: Wisdom is easily seen of them that love her, and found of
such as seek her: she preventeth them that desire her, in making her self first
known unto them. Whosoever seeks her early shall have no great travel, for he
shall find her sitting at his doors, Wisd. 6.12, 13, 14.

II.
In the strict observance of the Law of Christianity there is less trouble,
than in the habitual courses of Sin. For if we consider the general design of
Christianity, it propounds to us in this world nothing that is of difficult
purchase, nothing beyond what God allo^s us by the ordinary and common
providence, such things which w^ are to receive without care and solicitous
vexations; So that the ends are nothing, and the way is easy; and this walk^d
over with much simplicity and sweetness, and those obtained without difficulty.

He that propounds to live low, pious, humble and retired, his main employment
is nothing but sitting quiet, and undisturbed with variety of impertinent
affairs. But he that loves the World and its acquisitions, entertains a
thousand businesses, and every business has a world of employment, and every
employment is multiplied and made intricate by circumstances, and every
circumstance is to be disputed, and he that disputes, ever has two sides in
enmity and opposition, and by this time there is a genealogy, a long descent
and cognation of troubles, branched into so many particulars, that it is
troublesome to understand them, and much more to run through them

The ways of Virtue, are much upon the defensive, and the works one, uniform
and little: they are like War within a strong Castle, if they stand upon their
guard, they seldom need to strike a stroke. But Vice is like storming of a
Fort, full of Noise, Trouble, Labor, Danger and Disease.

How easy a thing it is to restore the pledge! but if a Man means to defeat
him that trusted him, what a world of Arts must he use to make pretenses? to
delay first, then to excuse, then to object, then to intricate the business,
next to quarrel, then to forsware it, and all the way to palliate his Crime,
and represent himself honest. And if an oppressing and greedy person have a
design to cozen a young Heir, or to get his neighbors Land, the cares of every
day, and the interruptions of every nights sleep are more, than the purchase is
worth; since he might buy Virtue at half that watching, and the less painful
care of a fewer number of days. A plain story is soonest told, and best
confutes an intricate Lie. And when a Person is examined in Judgment, one false
Answer asks more Wit for its support and maintenance, than a History of Truth.
And such persons are put to so many shameful retreats, false color, fucus's,
and dawbings with untempered mortar to avoid contradiction or discovery, that
the labor of a false story seems in the order of things to be designed the
beginning of its punishment. And if we consider how great a part of our
Religion consists in Prayer, and how easy a thing God requires of us, when he
commands us to pray for blessings, the duty of a Christian cannot seem very
troublesome.

And indeed I can hardly instance in any Vice, but there is visibly more pain
in the order of acting and observing it, than in the acquist or promotion of
Virtue. I have seen drunken persons in their seas of Drink and Talk, dread
every Cup as a blow, and have used devices and private arts to escape the
punishment of a full draught; and the poor wretch being condemned by the laws
of drinking to his measure, was forced and haled to execution, and he suffered
it, and thought himself engaged to that person, who with much kindness and
importunity invited him to a Fever; but certainly there was more pain in it
than in the strictness of holy and severe Temperance. And he that shall compare
the troubles and dangers of an Ambitious War with the gentleness and easiness
of Peace, will soon perceive that every Tyrant and usurping Prince, that
snatches at his Neighbors Rights, has two Armies, one of Men, the other of
Cares. Peace sheds no Blood but that of the pruned Vine, and has no business
but modest and quiet entertainments of the time opportune for Piety, and
circled with reward. But God often punishes Ambition and Pride with Lust, and
he sent a Thorn in the flesh as a corrective to the Elevations of St. Paul,
growing up from the multitude of his Revelations; and it is not likely the
Punishment should have less trouble than the Crime, whose Pleasures and
Obliquity this was designed to punish. And indeed every Experience can verify,
that an Adulterer has in him the impatience of Desires, the burnings of Lust,
the fear of Shame, the apprehensions of a jealous, abused and enraged Husband.
Heendures affronts, mistimings, tedious waitings, the dullness of delay, the
regret of in^erruption, the confusion and amazements of discovery, the scorns
of a reproached Vice, the debasings of contempt upon it; unless the Man grows
impudent, and then he is more miserable upon another stock. But David was so
put to it, to attempt, to obtain, to enjoy Bathsheba, and to prevent the shame
of it, that the difficulty was greater than all his Wit and Power, and it drove
him into base and unworthy Arts, which discovered him the more, and multiplied
his Crime: But while he enjoyed the innocent pleasures of his lawful Bed, he
had no more trouble in it, than there was in inclining his Head upon his
Pillow. Virtue has not half so much trouble in it, it sleeps quietly without
startings and affrighting fancies, it looks cheerfully, smiles with much
serenity; and though it laughs not often, yet it is ever delightful in the
apprehentions of some faculty. It fears no Man, nor nothing, nor is it
discomposed; and has no concernments in the great alterations of the World,
and entertains Death like a Friend, and reckons the issues of it as the
greatest of his hopes: But Ambition is full of distraction, it teems with
stratagems as Rebecca with struggling Twins, and is swelled with expectation as
a Tympany, and sleeps sometimes as the Wind in a Storm, still and quiet for a
minute, that it may burst out in an impetuous blast, till the chordage of his
Heart Strings crack; Fears when none is nigh; prevents things, which never had
intention, and falls under the inevitability of such accidents, which either
could not be foreseen, or not prevented. The ways of Sin are crooked, desert,
rocky and uneven; they are broad indeed, and there is variety of ruins, and
allurements to entice Fools, and a large Theater to act the bloody Tragedy of
Souls upon, but they are nothing smooth, or safe, or delicate. The ways of
Virtue are strait, but not crooked; narrow, but not unpleasant. There are two
Vices for one Virtue, and therefore the way to Hell must needs be of greater
extent, latitude and dissemination. But because Virtue is but one way,
therefore it is easy, regular, and apt to walk in without error or diversions.

Narrow is the Gate, and strait is the way: It is true, considering our evil
customs and depraved Natures, by which we have made it so to us. But God has
made it more passable by his Grace and present Aids; and St. John Baptist
receiving his commission to Preach Repentance, it was expressed in these words,
make plain the paths of the Lord. Indeed Repentance is a rough and a sharp
Virtue, and like a Mattock and Spade breaks away all the roughness of the
passage, and hindrances of sin; but when we enter into the dispositions which
Christ has designed to us, the way is more plain and easy than the ways of
Death and Hell. Labor it has in it, just as all things that are excellent,
but no confusions, no distractions of thoughts, no amazements, no labyrinths,
and intricacy of counsels; But it is like the Labors of Agriculture, full of
health and simplicity, plain and profitable, requiring diligence, but such, in
which crafts and painful stratagems are useless, and impertinent. But Vice has
oftentimes so troublesome a retinue, and so many objections in the event of
things, is so entangled in difficult and contradictory circumstances, has in
it parts so opposite to each other, and so inconsistent with the present
condition of the Man, or some secret design of his, that those little
pleasures, which are its fucus and pretense, are less perceived and least
enjoyed, while they begin in fantastic Semblances, and rise up in smoke, vain
and hurtful, and end in dissatisfaction.

But it is considerable, that God, and the Sinner, and the Devil, all join in
increasing the difficulty and trouble of Sin; upon contrary design's indeed,
but all cooperate to the verification of this Discourse. For God by his
restraining Grace, the checks of a tender Conscience, the bands of public
Honesty, the sense of Honor and Reputation, the customs of Nations, and the
severities of Laws, makes, that in most Men the choice of Vice is imperfect,
dubious and troublesome, the pleasures abated, the apprehensions various, and
in differing degrees; and Men act their Crimes, while they are disputing
against them, and the Balance is cast by a few Grains; and scruples vex and
disquiet the possession; and the difference is perceived to be so little, that
inconsideration and inadvertency is the greatest means to determine many Men to
the entertainment of a Sin.

And this God does with a design to lessen our choice, and disabuse our
persuasions from Arguments and weak pretenses of Vice, and to invite us to the
trials of Virtue, when we see its enemy giving us so ill conditions. And yet
the sinner himself makes the business of Sin greater; for its Nature is so
loathsome, its pleasure so little, and its promises so unperformed, that when
it lies open and easy, and apt to be discerned, there is no argument in it
ready to invite us; and Men hate a Vice, which is every day offered and
prostituted; and when they seek for pleasure, unless difficulty present it, as
there is nothing in it really to persuade a choice, so there is nothing strong,
or witty enough to abuse a Man. And to this purpose (among some others which
are malicious and crafty) the Devil gives assistance, knowing that Men despise
what is cheap and common, and suspect a latent excellency to be in difficult
and forbidden objects; and therefore the Devil sometimes crosses an opportunity
of Sin, knowing that the desire is the iniquity, and does his work
sufficiently; and yet the crossing the desire by impeding the act heightens the
appetite, and makes it more violent and impatient. But by all these means Sin
is made more troublesome, than the pleasures of the Temptation can account for:
and it will be a strange imprudence to leave Virtue upon pretense of its
difficulty, when for that very reason, we the rather entertain the instances of
Sin, despising a cheap Sin, and a costly Virtue; choosing to walk through the
Brambles of a desert, rather than to climb the Fruit Trees of Paradise.

III.
Virtue conduces infinitely to the content of our lives, to Secular felicities,
and Political satisfactions; and Vice does the quite contrary. For the
blessings of this Life are these, that make it happy, Peace and Quietness,
Content and Satisfaction of desires, Riches, love of Friends and Neighbors;
Honor and Reputation abroad; a healthful Body and a long Life. Th^s last is a
distinct Consideration, but the other are proper to this Title.

For the first it is certain. Peace was so designed by the Holy Jesus, that he
framed all his Laws in compliance with that design. He, that returns good for
evil, a soft answer to the asperity of his Enemy, kindness to injuries, lessens
the contention always, and sometimes gets a Friend, and when he does not, he
shames his Enemy. Every little accident in a family, to peevish and angry
persons, is the matter of a quarrel, discomposes the Peace of the House, and
sets it on Fire, and no Man can tell how far that may burn; it may be, to a
dissolution of the whole Fabric. But whosoever obeys the Laws of Jesus, bears
with the infirmities of his Relatives and Society, seeks with sweetness to
remedy what is ill, and to prevent what it may produce, and throws water upon a
spark; and lives sweetly with his Wife, affectionately with his Children,
providently and discreetly with his Servants, and they all love the Major domo,
and look upon him as their Parent, their Guardian, their Friend, their Patron,
their Proveditor. But look upon a person angry, peaceless and disturbed, when
he enters upon his threshold, it gives an alarm to his house, and puts them to
flight, or upon their defense; and the Wife reckons the joy of her day is done
when he returns; and the Children enquire into their Father's Age, and think
his Life tedious; and the Servants curse privately, and do their service as
Slaves do, only when they dare not do otherwise; and they serve him, as they
serve a Lion, they obey his Strength, and fear his Cruelty, and despise his
Manners, and hate his Person. No Man injoyes content in his Family but he that
is peaceful and charitable, just and loving, forbearing and forgiving, careful
and provident. He that is not so, his House may be his Castle, but it is manned
by his Enemies; his House is built not upon the Sand, but upon the Waves, and
upon a Tempest, the Foundation is uncertain, but his Ruin is not so.

And if we extend the relations of the Man beyond his own Walls, he that does
his duty to his Neighbor, that is, all offices of kindness, gentleness and
humanity, nothing of injury and affront, is certain never to meet with a wrong
so great, as is the inconvenience of a Lawsuit, or the contention of
Neighbors and all the consequent dangers and troubles.

Kindness will create and invite kindness; an injury provokes an injury. And
since the love of Neighbors is one of those beauties, which Solomon did
admire, and that this beauty is within the combination of precious things,
which adorn and reward a p^aceable charitable disposition, he that is in love
wi^h Spiritual exc^llencies, with intellectual rectitudes, with Peace and with
blessings of Society, knows they grow among the Role-bushes of Virtues, and
holy Obedience to the Laws of JESUS. And for a good Man some will ev^n dare to
dye, and a sweet and charitable disposition is received with fondness, and all
the endearments of the Neighborhood. He that observes how many Families are
ruined by contention, and how many Spirits are broken by Care, and Contumely,
Fear and Spite, which are entertained as Advocates to promote a Suit of Law,
will soon confess, that a great loss and peaceable quitting of a considerable
Interest is a purchase and a gain, in respect of a long Suit, and a vexatious
Quarrel.

And still if the Proportion rises higher, the Reason swells and grows more
necessary and determinate. For if we would live according to the Discipline of
Christian Religion, one of the great Plagues, which vex the World, would be no
more.

That there should be no Wars, was one of the designs of Christianity, and the
living according to that Institution, which is able to prevent all Wars, and to
establish an universal and eternal Peace, when it is obeyed, is the using an
infallible instrument toward that part of our political happiness, which
consists in Peace. This World would be an image of Heaven, if all Men were
Charitable, Peaceable, Just and Loving. To this excellency all those Precepts
of Christ, which consist in Forbearance and Forgiveness, do cooperate.

But the next instance of the reward of Holy Obedience and conformity to
Christ's Laws is it self a duty, and needs no more but a mere repetition of it.
We must be content in every State; and because Christianity teaches us this
lesson, it teaches us to be Happy: for nothing from without can make us
miserable, unless we join our own consents to it, and apprehend it such, and
entertain it in our sad and melancholy retirements. A Prison is but a
retirement and opportunity of serious thoughts to a person whose Spirit is
confined, and apt to sit still, and desires no enlargement beyond the cancels
of the Body, till the state of separation calls it forth into a fair liberty.
But every Retirement is a Prison to a loose and wandering fancy, for whose
wildness no precepts are restraint, no band of duty is confinement, who, when
he has broken the hedge of duty, can never after endure any enclosure so much
as in Symbol. But this Precept is so necessary, that it is no more a Duty than
a rule of Prudence, and in many accidents of our Lives it is the only cure of
sadness: for it is certain, that no Providence less than Divine can prevent evil
and cross accidents; but that is an excellent Remedy to the evils, that
receives the accident within its power, and takes out the sting, paring the
Nails, and drawing the Teeth of the Wild-beast, that it may be tame or
harmless, and Medicinal. For all content consists in the in the proportion of
the Object to the appetite. And because external accidents are not in our
power, and it were nothing excellent that things happened to us according to
our first desires, God has by his Grace put it into our own power to make the
happiness, by making our desires descend to the event, and comply with the
chance, and combine with all the issues of Divine Providence. And then we are
noble persons, when we borrow not our content from things below us, but make
our satisfactions from within. And it may be considered, that every little Care
may disquiet us, and may increase it self by reflection upon its own Acts; and
every discontent may discompose our Spirits, and put an edge, and make
afflictions poynant, but cannot take off one from us, but makes every one to be
two. But content removes not the accident, but complyes with it; it takes away
the sharpness and displeasure of it, and by stooping down makes the heights
equal, proportionate and commensurate. Impatience makes an Ague to be a Fever,
and every Fever to be a Calenture, and that Calenture may expire in madness:
But a quiet Spirit is a great disposition to Health, and for the present does
alleviate the Sickness. And this also is notorious in the instance of
Covetousness. The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have
coveted after, they have pierced themselves with many Sorrows. Vice makes poor,
and does ill endure it.

For he, that in the school of Christ has learnt to determine his desires when
his needs are served, and to judge of his needs by the proportions of Nature,
has nothing wanting toward Riches. Virtue makes Poverty to become rich, and
no riches can satisfy a covetous mind, or rescue him from the affliction of
the worst kind of Poverty. He only wants, that is not satisfied. And there is
great infelicity in a Family, where Poverty dwells with discontent; there the
Husband and Wife quarrel for want of a full Table, and a rich Wardrobe; and
their Love, that was built upon false Riches, sinks, when such temporary
supporters are removed. They are like two Milstones, which set the Mill on fire
when they want Corn. And then their combinations and society were unions of
Lust, when not supported with Sacramental and Religious Love.

But we may easily suppose St. Joseph, and the Holy Virgin Mother in Egypt poor
as hunger, forsaken as banishment, disconsolate as strangers; and yet their
present lot gave them no affliction, because the Angel fed them with a
necessary Hospitality, and their desires were no larger than their Tables,
their Eyes looked only upwards, and they were carless of the future, and
careful of their duty, and so made their life pleasant by the measures and
discourses of Divine Philosophy. When Elisha stretched himself upon the body of
the Child, and laid hands to hands, and applied mouth to mouth, and so shrunk
himself into the posture of commensuration with the Child, he brought life into
the dead Trunk: and so may we by applying our Spirits to the proportion of a
narrow fortune, bring life and vivacity into our dead and lost condition, and
make it live till it grows bigger, or else returns to health and salutary uses.

And besides this Philosophical extraction of Gold from Stones, and Riches from
the dungeon of Poverty, a holy life does most probably procure such a
proportion of Riches which can be useful to us, or consistent with our
felicity. For (besides that the Holy Jesus has promised all things, which our
Heavenly Father knows we need (provided we do our duty) and that we find great
securities and rest from care, when we have once cast our cares upon our God,
and placed our hopes in his bosom: besides all this) the Temperance, Sobriety
and Prudence of a Christian is a great income, and by not despising it a small
revenue combines its parts, till it grows to a heap big enough for the
emissions of Charity, and all the offices of Justice, and the supplies of all
necessities. Whilst Vice is unwary, prodigal, indiscreet, throwing away great
revenues, as tributes to intemperance and vanity, and suffering dissolution and
forfeiture of estates, as a punishment and curse. Some Sins are direct
improvidence and ill-husbandry. I reckon in this number Intemperance, Lust,
Litigiousness,, Ambition, Bribery, Prodigality, Gaming, Pride, Sacrilege,
which is the greatest spender of them all, and makes a fair estate evaporate,
like Camphire, turning it into nothing, no Man knows which way. But what a
Roman gave as an estimate of a Rich Man, saying, He that can maintain an Army
is Rich, was but a short account: for he that can maintain an Army, may be
beggered by one Vice; and it is a vast revenue that will pay the Debt-Books of
Intemperance or Lust.

To these if we add, that Virtue is honorable, and a great advantage to a fair
reputation; that it is praised by them that love it not; that it is honored by
the followers and Family of Vice; that it forces Glory out of shame, Honor
from contempt; that it reconciles Men to the fountain of Honor, the Almighty
God, who will honor them that honor him. There are but a few more
Excellencies in the World to make up the Rosary of temporal felicity. And it is
so certain, that Religion serves even our temporal ends, that no great end of
State can well be served without it; not ambition, not desires of wealth, not
any great designs; but Religion must be made its usher or support. If a new
Opinion be commenced, and the Author would make a Sect, and draw Disciples
after him, at least he must be thought to be Religious, which is a demonsration
how great an instrument of Reputation Piety and Religion is; and if the
pretense will do us good offices among Men, the reality will do the same,
besides the advantages which we shall receive from the Divine benediction. The
Power of Godliness will certainly do more than the form alone. And it is most
notorious in the affairs of the Clergy, whose lot it has been to fall from
great riches to poverty, when their wealth made them less curious of their
Duty; but when Humility and Chastity, and no exemplary Sanctity have been the
enamel of their holy Order, the people, like the Galathians, would pull out
their own eyes to do them benefit. And indeed, God has singularly blessed such
instruments, to the being the only remedies to repair the breaches made by
Sacrilege and Irreligion.

But certain it is, no Man was ever honored for that which they esteemed
vicious. Vice has got money and a curse many times, and Vice has adhered to
the instruments and purchases of honor. But among all Nations, whatsoever they
called Honorable, put on the face and pretense of Virtue. But I choose to
instance in the proper cognizance of a Christian [ Humility] which seems
contradictory to the purposes and reception of Honor, and yet in the world
nothing is a more certain means to purchase it. Do not all the World hate a
proud Man? And therefore what is contrary to Humility is also contradictory to
Honor and Reputation. And when the Apostles had given command, that in giving
Honor we should one go before another, he laid the foundation of Praises,
Panegyricks, and Triumphs. And as Humility is secure against affronts, and
tempests of despite, because it is below them: So when by employment, or any
other issue of Divine Providence, it is drawn from its sheath and secrecy, it
shines clear and bright as the purest and most polished Metals. Humility is
like a Tree, whose roots, when it sets deepest in the Earth, rises higher, and
spreads fairer, and stands surer, and lasts longer; every step of its descent
is like a rib of Iron, combining its parts in unions indissoluble, and placing
it in the Chambers of security.

No wise Man ever lost any thing by cession; but he receives the Hostility of
violent persons into his embraces, like a stone into a lap of Wool, it rests
and sets down soft and innocently: but a stone falling upon a stone makes a
collision, and extracts Fire, and finds no rest: And just so are two proud
persons, despised by each other, contemned by all, living in perpetual
dissonances, always fighting against affronts, jealous of every person,
disturbed by every accident, a perpetual storm within, and daily hissings from
without.

The Gate to Heaven a Strait Gate.
Luke 13.23, 24. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that shall be
saved? And he said unto them;

Strive to enter in at the Strait Gate, for many, I say unto you will seek to
enter in, but shall not be able.


THe life of a Christian is a perpetual contention for mastery, a continual
strife: Indeed we usually strive too much, and that for trifles and rewards
inconsiderable; Nay, we strive for things that ruin us; whereas if we would
strive lawfully, that is, for that Crown that is laid up for us, and run that
race which is set before us, our strivings would be as good as peace and rest;
for they would bring us peace at the last; Victory and Peace, Security and
Eternity, Joy and infinite Satisfactions, and these are things worth striving
for.

But here plainly is our Duty.

I.
We must strive to enter. And this Duty enforced by a double Argument.

1. From the order of the end, and nature of the thing: the Gate is strait, and
therefore we must strive.

2. From the caution and example of them, that have fallen short for want of
due striving. Many sought, and fain would have entered, but for want of striving
they were not able.

1. And first of the duty it self, Contendite intrare: strive to enter in at
the strait Gate.

And here I consider, That besides the extension of our Duty, there being more
Duties required of us than of any sort of men before the preaching of the
Gospel (the Jews themselves, who reckon that Moses gave to them six hundred and
thirteen Precepts, having received no precept at all concerning Prayer, Faith,
or Repentance) besides this I say, I consider, that not only in respect of the
extension, but by reason of the intension of our Duty, and the degrees of
Holiness that the holy Laws of Christianity require of us, it is necessary that
we strive with great earnestness. Qui enim Sanctitatem Sancte custodiunt,
judicabuntur Sancti, says the Wisdom of Solomon. cap. 6. v. 10. A Man may do
holy things unholily. There are some that preach Christ out of envy, there are
many that get Proselytes for gain; there are some that are zealous to get
Disciples, that they may glory in their Flesh, as some fase Apostles did to the
Galatians; there is some zeal in an evil matter; and many times, when a Man
has done good actions, he is the further off from the Gates of Heaven, not
because he did the good actions, but because he wanted those formalities and
circumstances, those manners and degrees, those principles and ends, which make
good actions in themselves be good in us, which crown the actions and make us
to be accepted.

It was well done in the Pharisees to Pray often, and to Fast twice in the
week, and to give Alms; and yet these very good actions were so far from being
commended, that they became the object of his anger, and the matter of reproof,
and it was because they did it with a design to be accounted holy. Indeed they
blew a Trumpet, but that was to call the poor together, that was the external
end. But there was a little Ivy crept up on this goodly Oak, till it sucked its
heart out; they themselves would be taken notice of, and that spoiled all;
their actions went no further than the end which they propounded to themselves.
For that which Men make their principal end, that God will suffer shall be
their end. If they seek the praise of Men, that being their purpose, that shall
be their reward; but if they aim at the pleasure of God, and the rewards of
Heaven, thither will God's Mercy and their own good deeds bear them.

A little leaven it is that sowrs the whole lump. Who would have thought, that
our Blessed Savior should have found fault with the Pharisees for giving God
thanks for his Graces, or not have been satisfied with the exactness of their
Justice and Religion, that they would give Tith, even of Mint and Anise and
Cummin seeds; or have reproved Judas for having care of the poor, or
discountenanced the Jews for accusing the Woman taken in Adltery; or have been
discontented at the Doctors of the Law for being strict and severe exactors of
the Law of God at the people's hands, or checked them for observing the
innocent customs of their Nation, and Tradition of their Forefathers? Since
all these acts were Pious, or Just, or Charitable, or Religious, or
Prosecutions of some part or other of their Duty. The several reasons of these
reprehensions our Blessed Savior subjoyns at the end of every of them
respectively. They wanted a circumstance, or a good manner; their actions were
better than their intentions, and sometimes their malice was greatest in their
very acts of Charity. And when they gave God thanks, they did despite to their
Brother; something or other did envenom the face of these acts of Piety; Their
heart was not upright, or their Religion was imperfect; their Piety wanted some
integral part, or had an evil Eye. A word, a thought, a secret purpose, a less
holy intention, any indirect circumstance, or obliquity in an accident makes
our Piety become impious, and deprives us of our reward. Here therefore we had
need to Watch, to Strive, to Pray, to Contend, and to do all diligence that can
be expressed by all the Synonyma's of care and industry.

2. We had need to Strive, because though Virtues be nice and curious, yet
vitia sunt in facili et propinquo, Sin lies at the door, and is thrust upon us
by the violence of Adversaries, or by the subtilty and insinuation of its own
nature, which we are to understand to the following sense. For when we are born
of Christian Parents, we are born in puris naturalibus, we have at first no
more promptness to commit some sort of Sins, than to commit some good acts. We
are as apt to learn to love God, as to love our Parents, if we be taught it.
For though Original Sin has lost to us all those supernaural assistances,
which were at first put into our Nature per modum gratiae; yet it is but by
accident that we are more prone to Sin, than we are to Virtue. For after this
it happened that God giving us Laws, made his restraints and prohibitions in
materia voluptatis sensualis, he by his Laws has enjoined us to deny our
natural Appetites in many things. Now this being become the matter of Divine
Laws, that we should in many parts and degrees abstain from what pleases our
sense, by this supervening accident it happens that we are very hardly weaned
from Sin, but most easily tempted to a Vice; our Nature is not contrary to
Virtue, but the instances of some Virtues are made to come cross our Nature.

But in things intellectual and immaterial, we are indeed indifferent to Virtue
and Vice; I say, where neither one, nor the other satisfies the sensual part.

In the Old Law, when it was a duty to Swear by the God of Israel in common
Causes, Men were indifferent to that, and to swear by the Queen of Heaven; they
had no more natural inclination to the one, than to the other, except where
something sensual became the argument to determine them. And in sensual things,
if God had commanded Polygamy or promiscuous concubinate, and indifferent
unlimited Lust, Men had been more apt to obey that Commandment, than to disobey
it. But then the restraint lying upon our natural appetites, and we being by
ill Education determined upon, and almost engaged to Vicious Actions, we suffer
under the inconveniences of idle Education, and in the mean time rail upon Adam
and Original Sin. It is indifferent to us to love our Fathers, and to love
strangers. And if from our Infancy we be told concerning a stranger that he is
our Father; we frame our affections to Nature, and our Nature to Custom and
Education, and are as apt to love him, who is not, and yet is said to be, as
him who is said not to be, and yet indeed is our natural Father.

The purpose of this Discourse is this, that we may consider how Sin creeps
upon us in our Education so tacitly and undiscernably, that we mistake the
cause of it; and yet so effectually and prevalently, that we guess it to be our
very Nature, and charge it upon Adam, when every one of us is the Adam, the Man
of Sin, and the Parent of our own Iniquities. We are taught to be revengeful
even in our Cradles, and taught to strike our neighbors as a means to still
our frowardness, and satisfy our wranglings. Our Nurses teach us to know the
greatness of our birth, or the riches of our inheritance, or they learn us to
be proud, or to be impatient, before we learn to know God, or to say our
Prayers.

After we are grown up to more years, we have Tutors of impiety, that are
stronger to persuade, and more diligent to insinuate, and we are more receptive
of every vicious impression. And not to reckon all the inconveniences of evil
company, indulgence of Parents, public and authorized customs of Sin, and all
the mischiefs and dangers of public Society, and private retirements, when we
have learned to discern good from evil, and when we are prompted to do a good,
or engaged to it by some happy circumstance or occasion, our good is so seldom,
and so little, and there are so many ways of spoiling it, that there are not
more ways to make an Army miscarry in a Battle, than there are to make us
perish even in our good actions.

Every Enemy that is without, every weakness and imperfection we have within;
every temptation, every vicious circumstance, every action of our life mingled
with interest and design, is as a particular argument to engage our earnestness
and zeal in this Duty ut contendamus acriter, that we strive and make it our
business, to enter into the Strait Gate. For since the Writers of Moral
Institutions and Cases of Conscience have made no such abbreviatures of the
Duty of a Christian, but that I think there are amongst them all without
hyperbole five thousand Cases of Conscience, besides the ordinary plain Duty of
a Christian, and there may be five thousand times five thousand, and the wit of
Man can no more comprize all Cases, which are or may be within their Books,
than they can at once describe an infinity, or set down the biggest number that
can be; it will follow that it is a nice thing to be a Christian, and all the
striving we can use, will be little enough toward the doing of our duty.

And now if you enquire, what is meant by striving in this place? and what is
the full intention of this Precept?

I Answer; it is an infinite or indefinite term, and signifies no determinate
degree of labor and endeavor, but even as much as we can, supposing our
weaknesses, our hindrances and avocations; that is, to make it the business of
our Lives, the care of our Thoughts, our study and the greatest employment of
the whole Man to serve God. Holy Scripture gives us general notions and
comprehensions of the whole Duty of Man, that may be excellent guides to us in
this particular, Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every weight, and the Sin that
does so easily beset us. For he that contendeth for Mastery is temperate in all
things, says St. Paul. There is first an obligation of all Sin whatsoever,
every weight, every Sin, every hindrance; abstaining from all things whatsoever
that are impediments. And we do not strive to do this, unless we use all the
means we can to learn what is our Duty, and what infinite variety of Sins there
are that so easily beset us. And let me desire you to observe one thing; make a
trial in any one Sin that is or has been most pleasing to any of you, and
according to your Duty set upon its mortification heartily and thoroughly, and
try whether it will not be a hard strife with flesh and blood, and a great
contention to kill that one crime; I mean in the midst of your temptations to
it, and opportunities of acting it; and by this you may make a short
conjecture, at the greatness of this Duty. And this is but the one half; For
the extirpation of Vices is not always the introduction of Virtues. For there
are some Men that have ceased from an act of Sin, that still retain the
affection, and there are others who have quitted their affection to Sin, who
yet are not reconciled to the difficulty and pains of acquiring Virtues. I
thank God I am no Extortioner, no Adulterer, not as this Publican, says the
Pharisee: So far many go, and then they think themselves fairly assoiled, who
are only like misguided Travelers, that upon discovery of their error cease to
wander further, but are not yet returned, nor have made any progress in the
true way. Some Men cease to oppress their Neighbors, and will do so no more;
but they think not of making restitution of what wrongs have been done by them
long since. Some Men will leave off from Drunkenness; but they think not of
fasting, and enduring Hunger and Thirst and Pains to punish their past
Intemperance. There is a further striving, or we shall not enter into the
narrow Gate. St. Peter gives an excellent account of it; 2 Pet. 1.4. Having
escaped the corruption that is in the World through Lust; that is one half: but
he adds, And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue, and
to Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to
Patience Godliness, to Godliness Brotherly kindness, to Brotherly kindness
Charity: these things must be in you and abound, says St. Peter; and
therefore, as himself prefaces, you had need give all diligence, and strive
earnestly to all these purposes.

In the mean time I pray remember, that this is not to strive, when we only do
perform those Offices of Religion, which Custom or the Laws of a Church enjoin
us to: nor this when our Religion is cheap and easy, when we use arts to
satisfy our Conscience, and heap up Teachers of our own to that purpose, that
by a stratagem they and we may bend the Duty to our Conscience, not measure our
Conscience by our Duty; when we call security a just peace, want of
understanding a sufficient warrant for quietness, the not-committing of
deformed and scandalous Sins a pious Life; this is far from striving, here is
no striving in this, but how to cozen and abuse our selves. If the affairs of
the World (I do not say) take up not only most of our time, but most of our
affections; if the returns of Sin be frequent, and of Religion be seldom and
unpleasant; If any Vice has got possession of us, or that we have not got
possession of all those Virtues we have use of, we have not striven Lawfully.
Shall I tell you, how St. Paul did strive? that thence we a so may have a fair
pattern and president to imitate, 2 Cor. 6. you have his course of Life largely
described: Giving no offense in any thing, but approving our selves in much
Patience, in Afflictions, in Labors, in Watchings, in fast^ngs, by Pureness,
by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love
unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of
Righteousness, and by an evenness of Temper in the midst of an uneven, unquiet
and contradictory condition: this was his course of Life, thus did he labor
Mortifying his Soul, heightening his Devotion, bringing his Body under, and
advancing the interests of the Gospel, lest by any means he had run, or should
run in vain.

I speak not these things to discourage you, but to provoke you to good Works
and a Holy Life. For if you ask, who does all this, or indeed who is able?

I answer; it is no good argument of an affection to God, when we make such
scrupulous questions concerning his Injunctions. He that loves God, does all
this; Love is the fulfilling of the Commandments: Love hops all things,
endures all things, thinks nothing impossible; attempteth those things as
most easy, which to natural Reason seem impossible.

For consider, that as without God's Grace we can do nothing; so by his Grace
strengthening us we can do any thing. Faith works Miracles, and Charity does
more. Through Christ that strengthens me I can do all things, says St. Paul,
and Christ's Grace is sufficient for me, sufficient to all God's purposes, and
to all mine. For it is not commanded to us to remove Mountains from their
places, which we never placed there; but to remove our Sins which we our selves
have made. We are not commanded to do things, which are not in our Power; but
such things which God enables us to, and to which we disable our selves by
cowardice, and intimidating our own Spirits, by despairing of God's Grace, by
refusing to labor, by deferring our endeavors till the weight of our sin
grows great, and our strength grows less; till our iniquities are many, and our
days are few; and then indeed we have some reason to say, we cannot strive in
such measure, as the greatness of these Duties does require.

And yet remember it is but striving, that is, doing the utmost of our
endeavor; the best Man in the World can do no more than use all his endeavor,
and he that is weakest can do so much, that is, he can do his endeavor. And
although a Boy cannot strike so great a stroke as a strong Man, yet he can put
forth all his strength; and the just and merciful Lawgiver never requires more
of us than all we have upon the stock of Nature, and all he has given us in
the Banks of Grace. So that the Duty we are here engaged upon, is but an
earnest endeavor to do our best, and all we can; and every Man can do that:
But because they will not, because Men have habitual aversations from the
practices of a holy life, because to do actions of severe Religion and strict
Piety is troublesome to their affections, because contrariant to their wills,
therefore it is they call it hard and impossible; whereas it is not the
impossibility of the thing, but their own disaffections, that have heightened
the difficulty to a seeming impossibility.

And thus I have done with the first Part of the Text, the Duty it self, with
its manner of performance: We must strive to enter into the narrow Gate of
Life, and Blisful Immortality.

II.
And that leads to the second Part, or the first Argument to engage our
endeavors and earnest strivings; because the passage is hard and difficult,
and not to be acquir^d by men that love their ease; but by those that with
Christian fortitude encounter all difficulties and oppositions. Porta est
angusta, the Gate is narrow; therefore strive.

And 1. I consider that Virtues and Vices many of them are so very like, that
it is very often extremely difficult to distinguish them exactly, and pursue
the Virtue curiously. Virtue lies between two Vices, not as a mediocrity, but
as a thing assaulted by two enemies; for one Virtue two Vices, and each of the
extremes has something of the Virtue in it. A Prodigal has the
open-handedness of a liberal person; and a covetous person is as wary, as he
that spends nothing in vain, and both these would think themselves uncivilly
dealt withal, if the freeness of the one, or the restraint of the other should
be called vicious. And there are some Precepts, which some will think they have
Reason to say they have strictly observed, when they have been most notorious
Prevaricators of it: For may not a vainglorious person, that gives Alms out of
the promptness of his Spirit, think he has done his Alms well, although he
has done them publicly; it being a Divine Precept, That our Light so shine
before Men, that other Men seeing our good Works, might glorify our heavenly
Father. And if this be a Precept, possibly also some who transgress this
Precept, may think themselves safe on the surer side of Humility. And truly
that we may see how dangerous our condition is, and yet how safe our
imaginations are, I think no Man will doubt, but all God's Commandments have
been broken, and this of Luceat lux vestra, (Let your Light shine) amongst the
rest; and yet I never read or heard any man, in the greatest and largest of his
Confessions ever acknowledge that Crime, that he had not done his good deeds
publicly. But between the Duty of publication of good Deeds, and the Duty of
Humility, the way is so narrow, that it is hard to hit it right; and when, and
how, and in what manner, and in what circumstances to do either, is the work of
great understanding and much observation.

I consider yet further; many times a Virtue and a Vice differ but in one
degree: For there is a Rule of Justice to which if any Man adds but one degree
of severity more it degenerates into cruelty; and a little more than mercy is
remisness; and want of Discipline introduces licentiousness, and becomes
unmerciful as to the public, and unjust as to the particular. Now this
Consideration is heightened, if we observe that Virtue and Vice consist not in
indivisibili, but there is a latitude for either, which is not to be judged of
by any certain Rules drawn from the nature of the thing, but to be estimated in
proportion to the persons, and other accidental circumstances.

Virtue and Vice dwell too near together, unless they were better friends. All
the Learning of the Sanhedrim could not distinguish between the Humiliation of
Ahab and Manasses, nor between the Zeal of Jehu and Josiah, nor between
Joshuah's and David's numbering the people; and yet A^ab was but an imperfect
penitent; Jehu was a furious Zealot, and David sinned grievously; whereas
Manasses was truly contrite; and Josiah was a zealous Reformer, and Joshuah in
the same action was a wise and provident Captain. Abraham was called the friend
of God for offering Isaac at God's command. Now God commanded men to perform
their Vows, and yet Jepthah for offering up his Daughter, has left to
Posterity the reputation of a temerarious and inconsiderate person. There is a
right hand and a left in the paths of our life, and if we decline to either we
are undone. And therefore pious and holy persons are called upright men, and
the Precept in Scripture is frequently ingeminated, to walk in all God's
Commandments with an upright heart. For on the right hand of Man is ruin, and
on the left is destruction; and in all the infinite variety of sins, there is
no other variety of conditions, but either to perish, or to be undone.

For every one Vice kills the Soul, but every Virtue does not make alive.
Adultery condemns a Man to the lowest misery, but Chastity alone does not keep
our Souls from death: Because we are forbidden to commit any sin. Every crime
lies under a prohibition, and the same Laws of God command us to pursue all
Virtues, and enjoin the integrity of a holy life. Now as he that commits one
sin, or entertains a single Vice, breaks the Commandment, which enjoins him to
forsake all sin; so he observes not the Precept of God concerning Virtues, that
does not acquire and entertain all, universally all. A Man is spotted although
he have but one stain; but he is not clean, unless he be all clean. A Cup is
broken, if only the top be broken, but is not entire unless every part of it be
inviolate. One Disease can make a whole man sick, but the taking away one
Disease will not make all men well; and there are a hundred ways to wander in,
but one only way to Life and Immortality. So that I shall not need to urge the
variety of Temptations, the subtilty of Sin, the watchfulness and malice of the
Devil, the infirmities of our Spirits, the Ignorance of our Understandings, the
obliquity of our Will, the mutiny and disorder of our Affections, the
inconstancy of our good Purposes, the unstableness of our Resolutions, the
pleasingness of sensual Objects, the variety of evil Occasions, the perpetual
readiness of Opportunities for evil, our unwillingness to Good so great, that
we are loath to beg Blessings and Benefits of God Almighty. These, and thousands
more are but the particular Instances of this first Argument to engage our
striving. For the Gate, that is strait enough in its own abstract
consideration, is made ten thousand times straiter by the supervening enmities
of the Devil, the allurements of the World, the solicitations and impudent
temptations of the Flesh, and the imperfections and great weaknesses of
Mortality.

III.
I now come to the last Notandum of the Text, or the second Argument to enforce
our striving, the Caution and Example of such persons, who have fallen short of
entering, for want of due striving; For many, I say unto you, will seek to enter
in, and shall not be able.

Many shall seek. The five foolish Virgins sought, and they who shall tell
Christ, that they did Miracles in his Name, they sought, and the Pharisees
sought, but all seeking you see shall not find. Some seek themselves alone, and
they shall never find any thing to satisfy them. Some seek God and themselves
together. When Religion and their own ends can stand together, well and good;
when Ease and Devotion, Charity and good Husbandry, Repentance and no
restitution can stand together, we will seek to enter into Heaven; but if
Heaven cannot be had but upon hard terms, they will not paenitentiam tanti
emere; they will not buy Repentance at so dear a rate, as to part with their
goods unjustly gotten, that they may become true Penitents; neither will they
love God and hate themselves, that is no good Charity they think; and therefore
when God and our selves come to dispute the Question, whose interest shall be
served; these men surely will serve themselves first. No wonder that these men
enter not.

But there are some that seek more heartily, that throw away all encumbrances,
that set upon the work of holy Life with much zeal and fervor of Spirit in the
beginning of their Conversion and Resolutions of Piety; but their fervours
cool, their zeal grows from very hot to be tepid, from tepid to be cold, from
cold to be quite frozen and incrustated; and at last comes to have no heat
about them but zeal which is the (...) of Envy, and the heats of Lust, and of a
seared Conscience. For the more furiously new Converts drive in their first on
sets of Piety, if they once begin defervescere, to take off from their heights,
their tediousness is greater, their weariness more, their anger is more
impatient; and to take off from the shame of remisness and relaxation they
often justify it, and thence degenerating by degrees come at last to
induration. For if we observe the nature of Moral Alterations, and the malice
of some persons, when they are provoked by shame, and consider also the secret
ways, and just Counsels of God in taking away all those Graces, which men have
slighted and rejected; and commonly great zeals, if they degenerate, prove
either absolutely furious, or merely Atheistical; and to all these add the
probability of induration and obstinacy in such persons, and the Moral
impossibility of curing such distemperatures, or rising from such deaths, we
may well believe it impossible: Such Zealots who once grow cool for want of
perseverance in the strict courses of Piety, although they did seek to enter,
yet erunt exclusissimi, they shall not be able.

Some are disabled and stopped in their first setting out; some go half way, and
then turn back again; nay some there are that have as I may say, set one foot
in Heaven, and have drawn it back, and carried both to Hell. God's Counsels are
secret, but they are ever just. But it is full of horror to consider, that some
persons, who have lived holily and justly all their life, have at last yielded
in a temptation to a single Act, and by the just judgment and severity of God
have been taken away in that one act of Sin, whose condition then is most sad
and deplorable. It is not good to tempt God. If we will forget God in one act,
possibly he may with his Judgment so remember us, as to forget his Mercy
toward us to all Eternity. And Palladius tells of diverse old Hermits, who
lived fifty or sixty years in the strict service of God, and at last in some
peevish humor dispoil'd themselves of all title and hopes of a Crown.

Was it not a sad sight to have observed amongst the forty Martyrs, one of
them, that had endured torments almost till the expiration of his last breath,
and then to fall away to renounce Jesus Christ, and to go out of his torments
into a warm Bath immediately to dye and to perish? A thought, a minute may
destroy all our Glories, and our hopes of a blissful Immortality, which twenty
or forty years have been with great labor in erecting.

There are some that deny hopes of Heaven to persons that live excellent lives,
upon pretense, that they are very good Moral Men, but not of the household of
Faith; that is, not of their belief in all matters of Opinion. The mistake is
stupid enough; for the distinction of persons Morally good, and Religiously or
Divinely good, is not a distinction of subjects, but of degrees. For a moral
life is not a distinct life from a Theological, but a part of it, and that
Christian which is just to his Neighbor, and sober and temperate in his life,
has done some part of a Theological and Religious Life. Indeed it is not
revealed to us, how the good lives of Heathens without the Faith of Jesus
Christ shall be accepted in order to Eternity: But to undervalue the good lives
of Christians by saying they are only good moral Men, because they are not of
such a Sect, when they do those good actions in obedience to the Laws of Jesus
Christ, is a profane device, to advance Faction and discountenance Piety.

Indeed is to our moral Virtues we add not also others which are more
Spiritual; that is, if we strive not to acquire all habits, which are good in
genere morum, morally good, we shall not enter into Heaven: not because we were
only good moral Men, but because we were not moral enough; we did not reform
all our manners, we did not do our Religion and Charity to God, as well as
Charity to our Neighbors. Our Piety must be universal, our Morality must be
entire, and then the good moral Man shall go to God, when the Religious Man, as
he accounts himself, shall never see him.

And indeed one of the greatest dangers of miscarrying is, in actions and
undertakings, and intermixtures spiritual. For besides that the whole
Institution of a spiritual Life is a nice and a busy thing, the purgative way
being troublesome and austere, the illuminative being mysterious and apt to be
abused, the unitive way not to be understood till it be felt, and therefore
liable to all miscarriages, as not to be guided by Rule: besides all this, I
say, spiritual Vices are most dangerous, and yet most apt to insinuate
themselves in the actions of greatest perfections, and when they are mixed, it is
extremely difficult to discern them and make a separation.

How hard is it for a Man that has lived holily, and one that rejoices in and
thanks God for his Graces, for his Deliverances from the power of the Devil;
how hard, I say, is it for him to conserve either his Conscience and Truth, or
his Humility and Modesty, when he shall, or shall not say with St. Paul, I am
the least of good Men, and the greatest of Sinners! for if he says so, and does
not think so, he dissembles; If he thinks so, how can he acknowledge God's
Goodness in the manifestation of his Graces, and the deliverance of him from
Sin? If he does neither think so, nor say so, how is he so humble as his
pattern? for we are so to follow St. Paul, as he followed Christ. But then on
the other side, how apt are Men when they humble themselves, to do it with
greater pride? Est qui nequiter humiliat se, there is that humbles himself
wickedly. I cannot insist upon the particulars; but actions Spiritual are of so
nice and immaterial consideration, that both not to be deceived, and to
discover it when we are deceived, are matters of no small difficulty.

You may see in little, that a Man may go a great way in Piety, and yet not
enter into Heaven. What then shall we think of such persons, whose Piety has
no more age than a Fly; no more labor in it than walking in a shadow; no more
expense than in the farthing-alms of the street or highway; no more Devotion
than going to Church on Sundays; no more Justice than in preserving the rules
of Civil Society, and obeying the compulsion of Laws; no more Mortification
than fasting upon a Friday, without denying one Lust, and the importunity of
sinful Desires? These certainly are far from entering into the Gate, because
they are far from striving to enter. And yet there want not some Men, will not
do a quarter of this, and yet would spit in your face if you should put them in
doubt or question their Salvation. Some Men are so fond as to think Heaven is
entailed upon a Sect or an Opinion, and then nothing is wanting to them, when
they once have entered their name into that persuasion. Some are confident they
shall be saved because of their good meaning; and they think they mean well,
because they understand nothing, and in the mean time refuse not any
opportunity to an evil. Alas, they cannot help it, Flesh and Blood is frail;
for who can forgive him that has undone me and my Family? It Is true indeed, I
should, if you speak like a Divine, but we have Flesh and Blood about us: Alas,
I hate Drunkenness, and I am never intemperate for love of the Drink; but when
a Man is in company he cannot do as he would do. And yet, these Men will think
to go to Heaven, and yet will not do so much for it as either decline the
company and opportunity of it, or the inconveniences of it. Flesh and Blood is
the excuse, and yet we remember not, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God; but we by m^king it to be our excuse, hope to enter the rather
for it.

Remember those great words and terrible, spoken by an Oracle, by the Blessed
St. Peter; If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and
Sinner appear? If after much striving many fall short, and the Best is to work
out his Salvation with fear and trembling, What confidence can they have, that
are indifferent in their Religion, that have no engagement to it but custom, no
monitors but Sermons and the checks of a drowsy Conscience, no fruits of it but
not to be accounted a Man without a Religion? But as for a holy life they are
as far from it as from doing Miracles; and he that is so and remains so, no
Miracle will save him. These are the Men that when the Eternal scrutiny shall
come, then they shall seek, for they never seek till then to enter; and then it
is as fruitless as it is late, as ineffectual as unreasonable. Christ is the
Way, and the Truth, and the Light, and he that opens only the way for us to
go in there, whither himself is entered before: if we strive according to his
holy Injunctions, we shall certainly enter according to his holy Promises, but
else upon no Condition.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
CHrist's Yoke, though easy, quits us not of Duty. Page 2 Christian Duties
carry along with them a Reward so great as to wake the Considerate willing to
do violence to all their passions. Page 4 Virtue has more pleasure in it than
Sin. Page 5 Every degree of love makes Duty delectable. Page 8 There is even in
our very nature a principle as strong to restrain from Vice, as disposition to
invite thereto. Page 9, 10 Our Virtues are difficult, because we at first get
ill habits. Page 13 In the strict observance of the Law of Christianity, there
is less trouble, than in the habitual courses of Sin. Page 14 The ways of
Virtue are much upon the defensive part. Page 15 There is more pain in Sin,
than in the strictness of holy and severe Temperance. Page 18, 19 The ways of
Virtue are strait, but not crooked; narrow, but not unpleasant. Page 21
Peaceless spirits give an Alarm to all about them. Page 28 If we would live
according to the discipline of Christian Religion; one of the great plagues
that vex the world would be no more Page 31 A Prison is but a retirement, to a
person of a peaceable spirit. Page 32 All Content consists in the proportion of
the object to the appetite. Page 34 Impatience makes an Ague become a Fever,
and a Fever a Calenture. Page 35 He only wants that is not satisfied. Page 36
Humility the ready way to Honor. Page 42 The Gate to Heaven a strait Gate, and
cvlls for a continual striving. Page 45 Good Ends are the Crown of good
Actions. Page 48, 49 We are apt to learn to love God, as to learn to love our
Parents if we be taught it. Page 52, 54 All striving in Christianity is little
enough toward doing our Duty. Page 57, 58. A man may cease from the act of
Sin, and yet retain the Affection. Page 59, 60 A bad sign, when returns of Sin
is frequent, and of Religion seldom, and unpleasant. Page 62 Faith works
Miracles; but Charity works more. Page 64 God requires no more than he gives us
Nature and Grace to perform. Page 65 Many Virtues and Vices are so alike, that
it is often difficult to distinguish them exactly. Page 67, 68 Sometimes Virtue
and Vice differ but in one degree. Page 69 There is a right hand and a left in
the paths of our Life, and if we decline to either, we are undon. Page 71
There Is an hundred ways to wander in, but one only way to Life and Immortality.
Page 73 God's Counsels are secret, but they are ever just. Page 78 A thought a
minute may destroy all our hopes of a blissful lmmortality, which twenty or
forty years have been with great labor in erecting. Page 79 Spiritual Vices
are most dangerous, and yet most apt to insinuate themselves in the actions of
greatest perfections. Page 82 A Man may go a great way in Piety, and not enter
into Heaven. Page 83 If after much striving, many fall short, and the best is
to work out his Salvation with fear and trembling; what confidence can they
have that are indifferent in their Religion. Page 86
FINIS.

