A TRUE RELATION Of the Great VICTORY Obtained by the Christian Army OVER THE
TURKS, NEAR The Mountain HARSAN, in the Neighborhood of SYCLOS.
From the Camp of his Electoral Highness of Bavaria, near Barnowar, the 14 th
of August, 1687.
THE Christian Army having happily retreated from Esseck on this side the
Drove, and marched back toward Mohatz and the Danube; the Grand Vizier with
all his Forces, Artillery and Baggage, marched all night also, and followed us.
He Encamped near Barnowar, not far from Darda, at a very narrow Pass, having on
the Right, a large Bogg; and on his Left, a Wood, with very thick Furs, and
contrary to their Custom he fortified his Camp so well, that he could not
without great Difficulty be atrack'd in so advantageous a Post. And we having
reason to fear that our Army being further distant, the Imperial Places on that
side, might fall into the Hands of such Potent Enemies, it was resolved by all
the Generals, to take the Garrisons out of them, the Cannons and the
Ammunitions, and Demolish them. In order to it, our Army parted the 10th of
August from the Camp, near Mohatz. The Duke of Lorrain took the Front with the
right Wing toward Syclos, and his E. H. of Bavaria, followed in good Order
with the left Wing. The next day, 11 of the same Month, we continued the same
March in the presenee of the Enemy, who by his continual Attacks, sometimes
upon the right Wing, sometimes on the left, was endeavoring to hinder us from
it; and we persu'd it with great care on both sides, to the foot of the
Mountain Harsan, where we Encamped all Night. The 12th being St. Clara's day,
the Army Marched in good Order of Battalia toward Syclos. The Duke of Lorrain
taking the Front again with his right Wing, the Enemy showed themselves coming
out of a Wood, and endeavored to stop our March by continual Skirmishes; but
we perceived well enough, that the Body of their Army by favor of the high
Furs, was drawing toward our left Wing, and indeed we were soon convinced of
it; for our left Wing had no sooner passed the Forest that was before it, and
entered a Plain of three hundred Paces, or thereabout, but twelve thousand of
the best and finest Horse of the Enemy came full Speed, and with great Fury
fell upon our left Wing, with a design to put it into disorder, by Attacking it
in the Flank, and in the Rear; but their design having miscarried by the
vigorous Defense they found, and by the good Order which his E. H. had set
every where, they went back as quick as they came. Soon after the Enemy
attempted to pierce us by mere force; and in order to it, he caused his whole
Army, composed of a 100000 Men, to advance and meet our left Wing, and 5000
Janissaries, took post upon a height near it, from whence they made a continual
Fire upon us, and we played on both sides with our Musketshot and Cannon, till
near three of the Clock in the Afternoon. In the mean time, his E. H. took the
Heroic Resolution of Attacking the Enemy himself with his left Wing, having
first reinforced himself with some Regiments he had desired from the Duke of
Lorrain on purpose. And he soon put it into Execution with a Courage beyond all
Expression, boldly carrying the Battalions and Squadrons to Fight, and
encouraging them by his Voice and Example, so that that Wing alone, much
inferior to the whole Ottoman Army, fell bravely upon it, and after a most
bloody Fight, forced it to abandon to us the Field of Battle. The Left still
pursuing the Enemy flying before us, to the Retrenchments of his Camp he had at
his back, where by the favor of a Defily abovementioned, which was lined and
filled with Janissaries, he made a greater Resistance: This did not hinder our
Soldiers, encouraged by the Example of the Heroic Maximilian, charging at the
Head of them, and our whole left Wing from running under the Enemies Cannon
with incredible Diligence, notwithstanding their continual Fire. We passed
their Trenches, and chased the Enemies from their posts; half an hour after, he
made a halt, and took breath in another Retrenchment larger than the first, but
he made no great resistance there: He was soon chased from it, and forced to
fly in great Confusion at the approach of the whole Christian Army, but we
pursued him through his Camp as long as the light both of Day and Moon lasted,
and as long as our Horses could go.

Thus all the Camp (as big almost as that before Vienna) all their Artillery
consisting in a 100 Pieces of Cannon, and 12 Mortars, all their Ammunitions,
Provisions, Baggage, and all other things in great plenty fell into our hands,
and there remained above 8000 Men of the Enemy dead upon the place of Battle,
not reckoning those that remained in the Boggs, or were drowned in the Water,
or those that hid themselves among the Furs, their Janissaries not having been
able to follow, their horse flying with all speed. On our side we have lost
only some hundreds of Men: His Electoral Highness to his Immortal Glory has
been wounded with one of the Janissaries Balls on the Left Hand. The Prince of
Commercy, come that day to serve as Voluntier in the Left Wing, had the Top of
his Breast pierced by an Arrow, and the young Count of Zinzendorf had his Leg
shot off.

His Electoral Highness has had for himself the Tent of the Grand Vizier, which
is very Magnificent, and resembles a Palace, being a quarter of a League round,
with all the Movables, and the whole Chancery, where were found Papers in all
sorts of Languages, and especially a great number of Letters from Abaffi Prince
of Transylvania: His Electoral Highness passed all the Night in that Tent,
without lying down, writing almost continually; and by break of day he
dispatched Prince Engenius of Savoy to Vienna, and the next day Marquess
Gabrieli to Rome, the Chevalier of Beauvan into France, Colonel Sartory to
Munick, and la Chaffonnery his Page to Cologne.

The 13th we went to search into the Boggs and Furrs, the Turks hid there in
great numbers, most were killed, and the rest made Prisoners: We pursued also
our flying Enemy, and made a detachment of 4000 Horse, who advanced to Darda
and even to the head of the Bridge of Esseck, but could find none of them, and
heard only that the Garrison of Esseck seeing the flight of their fellow
Soldiers, they had endeavored to stop them, and for that effect had taken off
some of the Boats that made the Bridge, but that nevertheless the flying men had
got upon it with such precipitation, they had thrown one another into the
Drove, that the Bridge it self had at last broke under them, and that several
thousands had been drowned: All this was confirmed both by the Prisoners we
took to the number of 1700, and by abundance of Desertors that came into our
Camp, assuring us, there was above Thirty thousand Janissaries in the Ottoman
Army, and that not above six or seven Thousands had got safe on the other side;
from whence it is easy to conclude to what the loss of the Enemy may amount,
which is sufficiently evidenced by that vast number of dead bodies wherewith
the Ground, the Boggs, and the Furrs are filled. The G. Vizier, as said, has
very narrowly escaped by the means of a little Boat, but another too much
loaded with Officers is perished. The Remainder of the Enemies Army is
dispersed and in Confusion, and not able to keep the Field, having been forced
to fly, and quit all they had of all kind. And no doubt, but That Almighty God
that has so visibly fought for Christendom, has miraculously blessed the
Imperial Arms; therefore to return God Thanks, his Electoral Highness caused
the Te Deum to be sung in his Tent, which was that of the Grand Vizier; after
that Father Marco had said Mass in it, the Enemies Cannon being discharged
three times, all the Generals, and especially the Duke of Lorrain came to
Complement his Electoral Highness upon it, and attributed this Great Victory to
the Bravery of the Great Maximilian. The Duke of Lorrain in his Relation to the
Emperor, gives the same Testimony, and attributes all the Glory of that day to
his Electoral Highness, May the Almighty God long preserve that Hero, and
always send new Victories to Christendom.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Carr, MDCLXXXVII.


