THE True Relation OF THE TRIALS At the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, Held for
the City of London, County of Middlesex, and Goal Delivery of Newgate; which
began in the Old-Bailey the 17th of this instant January, and ended the 18th of
the same. As particularly of Elizabeth Wigenton FOR Whipping a Girl to Death at
Ratcliffe.
And John Peetly, for shooting a Gentleman in Queen Street. Also the Account of
the Proceedings with one John Bully a Popish Priest. The Number of the
Condemned, Burnt in the Hand, and to be Whipped, with many other material
Trials.
THE Sessions began at the Old-Bailey, on Monday the 17th of this instant
January, (being put off the Wednesday before, by reason of the sitting at
Guildhal) where were these following proceedings. Elizabeth Wigenton of
Ratcliff Parish, was Tried for the Murder of a Girl about Thirteen years of
age, which was her Apprentice, the manner of the Murder being thus: She being
by Trade a Coat-maker, and having set the Girl upon a Piece of Work, she had
not done it so well as she required; whereupon, she beat her grievously, the
which not sufficing her cruel rage, she went and got a bundle of rods, (and a
man to hold her) with which, after she had bound her, she whiped her so
unmercifully, that the blood ran down like rain; yet could she not be persuaded
to desist, till the Girl fainted away with crying, and of her unmerciful usage
in a short time dyed. Upon her Trial she pleaded little in her own defense,
only saying, that she did not think to kill her. So that it being proved that
she had been a cruel Woman by all her Neighbors, she was found guilty of
wilful Murder.

Katherine Neale was Tried for stealing about Twenty yards of Persian Silk out
of a Mercers shop, which being taken upon her, she was found guilty of the
Felony.

Jane Young was likewise found guilty for stealing Linen from a Gentlewoman in
the Parish of St. Sepulchers, to the value of nine shillings.

Jane Harding, a notorious Shop-lift, was Indicted for feloniously entering the
House of Will. Smith, of the Parish of Botolfes without Bishops-gate, and
stealing Goods to the value of eight shillings and six pence, of which she was
found guilty.

Jonathan Telcoat received his Trial, being Indicted for the Murder of an aged
woman; but upon Evidence it was found, that the woman being troubled with Fits,
he being in the room, hit her head upon an Iron, which gave her a wound, of
which she dyed; so that his being there, caused this Indictment; but upon proof
that he was not near her when she fell, he was Acquitted.

John Peetly Victualler, living in Whetstones-park, was Arrained and Tried for
the Murder of one Mr. Gerard, Nephew, as it is said, to my Lord Gerard; the
circumstances of which, were these: The Party killed, with several other young
Gentlemen, being late abroad, on the tenth of this instant in Holborn, took it
in their way to come through Whetstones-park, where spying Lights in Peetly's
house, they knocked hard at the door, and bid him open it, the which he
refusing, one or more of them, began to break the windows, and having Linkmen
with them, they threw up lighted Links, the which, as Peetly said, did set fire
to some Linen in a Closet, at which he being Allarumed, got his Carbine in his
hand, charged with small Bullets, and pursued them up great Queen Street, till
they came to the upper end on it, where the standing Watch had stayed them, and
caused them to deliver their Swords, whenas Peetly thrusting among the crowd,
was pushed by a Watchman, and thereupon his piece went off, and shot the
aforesaid Gentleman in the Thigh, of which Wound he shortly dyed: but the
Prisoner pleading that the Gun went off without his knowledge, he was Acquitted.

Richard Johnson, and John Cooper, two Chair-men, were Tried for the Murder of
one Mr. Washborn, whom they killed with excessive beating, on the second of
December; the cause of quarrel was their rushing him with their empty Chair,
against the rails of Northumberland-house, near Charing Cross, so that he
striking them with his Cane, they fell upon him, and gave him so many bruises,
that he dyed within twelve days after: wherefore they were Convicted of
Manslaughter, there being no proof that he struck them first.

John Oliver, a Frenchman, who could speak no English, was Indicted for
breaking into a Chamber, at Man's Coffee-house at Charing Cross, and taking
thence a Ring, some Lace, and other small matters: he pretended, as his
Interpreters said, that he went there only to sleep, when he was taken upon the
stairs, but being searched, the things were found about him; but for want of
the Constables Evidence, who searched him, he was found not guilty, by reason
none gave Evidence against him in Court, or saw the things taken about him.

Anne Ditcher, received her Trial for stealing forty yards of Serge, and a
Campaigne Coat out of the Shop of one Mr. Hatton in Drury Lane; the Discovery
of the Robbery was by a little Boy, who being taken upon suspicion for
hankering about the Shop, confessed that he knew where the Goods were, and that
he would carry him to the place where they were sold, which he did, being at a
Brokers in Southwark. The Broaker being questioned how he came by them, brought
out the woman. Upon her Trial she pleaded she had them of a man, but he not
being produced, she was found guilty of the Felony.

Anne Carter was Tried for Felony and Burglary; for that she on the 24th of
September, about two of the clock in the morning, drawing up the Latch, entered
the house of one Magdalen Wooff, and coming to her bedside, took away her
purse with eleven shillings in it, and departed, the Prosecutor not daring to
hinder her for fear of her life: they gave very bad Characters of each other in
Court, and railed at a high rate, but in fine, the prisoner was found guilty of
the Felony.

Thomas Boys was Indicted for stealing a Shirt, a Cravat, and a pair of worsted
stockings; the which being confessed by him to have been stolen from one
Edward Steevens of Hounstow, he was found guilty to the value of ten pence.

Dorothy Mathews, an old Shop-lift, was Tried for stealing about a pound and
half of Silk, and near sixty yards of Taffata Ribbon, and Ferrit, from one
Elizabeth Wait in Holborn. She coming into the Shop on the 19th of October,
there being only a little Girl in it, demanded where her Mistress was? who
told her, she was gone into London; whereupon, she desired to see some Ribbon,
which the Girl showed her, but none would please, till she had the box of
Ribbon set before her, whenas one of her Accomplices coming in, and desiring to
see some likewise, held the Girl busy, till she stole the Goods aforesaid; but
ere she could make her escape, being apprehended and carried before a
Magistrate, the Goods were found about her; so that the proof being plain, she
was Convicted of the Felony.

Eleanor Cockman was Tried as being accessory to the Murder of one Smith, who
was shot by one Orme, since flead, by reason a Watch which appertained to the
Deceased, was found in her custody; but she alleging she found it in the
pocket of the dead man, whose breeches she had to wash, delivered her by the
hands of his friends, she was acquitted.

Jobe Laud was Tried for stealing a Mare, appertaining to Wiliam Gun, the which
he had afterward sold to one Church; the bargain being made at the George in
Leather-lane, the said Church being taken upon her back, as he was riding into
the Country; but upon this Trial, the party from whom she was stole not
appearing, the prisoner was acquitted of the Felony.

Frances Emington was Tried for stealing about 600 weight of Red-wood from the
Royal African Company, which was taken from on board a Lighter, lying in the
River of Thames, the Hatches of the said Lighter being broken open in the
absence of the Waiters. The wood being taken about a Month after, as he was
conveying it by the help of Porters into Thames street, where he pretended he
had sold it to a dry Salter; and did so far impose upon his Apprentice, as to
lodge some of it in his house, he being gone into the Country, so that the
Felony being plainly proved, he was found guilty.

Blanch Thomas a servant-wench was Tried and found guilty, for Robbing her
Master William Palmer of St. Martins in the fields, of the Sum of Ten pounds,
which his Wife had hid between the Mat and the bed; so that as she was making
the bed she found it, and converted about three pounds of it to her own use,
before they missed it; but she being apprehended for the same, delivered the
other moiety. Her plea was, that she found it, and therefore imagined it was
lawfully hers, but that weak excuse did not serve her turn.

Thomas Vnderthorp was Indicted for having Two Wives, vix. Elizabeth Toogood,
whom he Married at Dukes-place; and Dorothy Martin, which he since Married in
Worcestershire, with whom he had a competent Portion. Both the Marriages were
proved against him by several persons, the former by the man that gave him in
Marriage, and by several others, the latter by the Woman herself, who appeared
in Court, the former not appearing, but upon proof she was alive, he was
Convicted of the Felony.

John Bully, a Popish Priest, was brought to the Bar, and his Indictment read.
To which he pleaded he had been Tried for the same Fact at Lancaster, in August
last, and that he ought not to be Tried twice for the same. But in that the
Opinion of the Court overruled him, intimating, that this Indictment being
laid for his being a Priest, in October last, he might since the former have
taken Orders from the Sea of Rome. Whereupon he had dir^ction to get Council,
and put in his Plea, and Time allowed him for that purpose; but when he was
brought to the Bar again, he made a long Apology, alleged as before: So that
at his humble Request, the Court thought fit to continue him untried till next
Sessions.

The Countess of Portland being brought into Court in her Sedan, having been a
long time sick, desired to Traverse her Indictment for Recusancy, the which was
allowed.

At this Sessions there were Nine Persons that received Sentence of Death; viz.
Katharine Nevil, Eliz. Wiginton, Anne Dicher, Anne Carter, Dorothy Mathews,
Blanch Thomas, Philip Demerry, Tho. Wicks, and James Dixon. Ten Burnt in the
Hand. And Five to be Whipped.

FINIS.

