A TRUMPET Blown in Sion, sounding an Alarm IN GODS HOLY MOUNTAIN: OR, A Voice
lifted up as a TRUMPET, Crying aloud, and not sparing, To show the Lords People
their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

By a poor Worm, that through the Lords great Grace, has found great Blessings
among the Presbyterian Ministry, and by conversing with some of the Lords
Upright Ones of the Presbyterian Way; and also choice Blessings among the
Ministry of the Independent and Baptized Congregations, and some of the
Faithful with them.

Micah 3. 5, 6, 8. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my
People err, -- Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
Vision. -- But truly I am full of Power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of
Judgment, and of Might, to declare unto Jacob his Transgression, and to Israel
his Sin. Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet,
and show my People their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sins. Jer.
4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be
saved. LONDON: Printed in the year 1666.

THe Reader is desired, before he read any part of the ensuing Discourse, to
take notice, That there is nothing at all said in this Book, that justifies
either the People called Quakers, or any others, in any of their Errors in
Judgment: But the drift of the whole is to show all the several
Understandings, those Evils that are among them, that are against their own
Knowledge, Light, and Understandings. See pages 40, 41, 51, 52, 64, 67, 68, 69.
to this purpose.

To the Reader.
IT is more then probable that this ensuing Discourse will meet with great
oppositions, and that the powers of Hell and darkness will muster their Forces
against it; not so much by stirring up the Enemies of the Lords People to
oppose it, for the Devil knows that their appearing against it, will be no
impediment to the virtue and efficacy of it, to the blessed ends proposed in
it. But it may be by stirring up those that are accounted Honorable Act. 13 45.
and Devout, to speak despisingly and slightly of it, and to pick out something
or other to carp at, and thereby think to cast dirt upon the whole, being
fretted that such a work as this should come abroad into the World, that should
discover the exceeding sinfulness of Sin in such as they. But though there
should be some such, (though possible not many) but the most covetous Person is
the most likely.

Yet I am very sure of this, that unto very many, yea most of the Lords People
of all distinctions, that have true Faith in God, and in Jesus Prove. 25. 11.
Christ our Lord, this Discourse will be like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver; to whom it will come as sweet showers of Rain unto the dry ground, as
refreshing Waters to a thirsty Traveller; who will lay it up in their Bosoms as
a Jewel of great value, who will say it is a precious Balm, and an excellent
Oil; who will bless the God of Israel for it, and the sharpest part of it will
be to them the sweetest. And it will not be to them as many other Books have
been, that once reading over has sufficed them, and so to lay them by as of no
more use; but it shall be so savory to them, as when they have once tasted it,
they shall be often chewing upon it with pleasure; not for the curiosity of the
Style, nor for the humane. Learning that is in it, for that sort of beauty is
not in it; but for the seasonableness of the Discourse, being what the poor
Saints of God now most stand in need of; so as it will be said, There is
nothing more needful now, then Discourses of this Nature; and for the plainness
and downrightness, and impartiality of it, striking at that in all sorts of
Professors, that stands in the way of true Peace and Sollace to the Lords
People; even at those grieving Briars, and pricking Thorns that grieve the
Soul, and pierce the inward man: for it is not outward Enemies that are
grievous to Saints, unless to their flesh, but they do them more good then
hurt, and make more for their inward peace then if they had prosperity without;
but it is Sin that is the makebate between Christ and their Soul, it is their
Iniquities that have separated between them and their God, and they have hid
his face from them; and that makes outward troubles uneasy and unpleasant to
them. But when they shall be purged from Sin, they shall glorify the Lord in
the Fires; even the Name of the Lord God of Israel in these Isles of the Sea,
although Isa. 24. 14 15. Psalm. 46. 2, 3.
the Earth may be moved, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of
the Sea; though the Waters thereof roar and be troubled, and the Mountains
shake with the swelling thereof, yet will they not fear.

There are at this day many thousands of true hearted Nathaniels, true
Israelites indeed, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, that are daily praying
more earnestly for holiness, then for outward ease; for deliverance from the
Enemies within their own Souls, then from the Enemies without. That the Lords
Name may be sanctified, and glorified in the holy Conversations of his People,
rather then that his People may be put into a posture of outward glory; that
desire that a pure Language may Zeph. 3. 9, 12.
be turned to his People, though he leave them an afflicted and poor People,
trusting in the Name of the Lord; and that fervently pray day and Romans 11. 26.
Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
night, that the Deliverer may come to Sion, that may turn away ungodliness
from Jacob, and that the Lord whom they seek may suddenly come to his Temple;
even the Messenger of the Covenant whom they delight in, may come; and be like
a Refiners Fire, and like Fullers Soap; and may sit as a Refiner and Purifier
of Silver, and purify the Sons of Levi; even all his own Inheritance, and may
purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in
Righteousness, that the Offerings of Judah and of Jerusalem may be pleasant
unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years. And these which
thus pray, are the Lords Watchmen, which are upon the Walls of Jerusalem, Isa.
62. 6.
which shall not hold their peace day nor night; even them that make mention of
the Name of the Lord, and keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth; even until the
Righteousness of Sion go forth as brightness; until true Holiness shine so
conspicuously in Sion, as men may have cause to say of Sion, The Lord bless
thee, O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness, Jer. 31. 23. For this
is that which will make Sion to become indeed the praise of the whole Earth,
when true Holiness, and Spiritual beauty shall appear in it; when it shall be
arrayed in the Robes of Righteousness, and clothed with Humility, that shining
beautiful Raiment, and be adorned with the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit;
and be beautified with the exceeding precious Jewels of Faith and Love; when
their Faith in God shall be such, as they shall not fear what all the united
Forces of men or of Devils can do against them; and their love such to God, to
his People, and to mankind in general, as it shall be the delight of their
Souls to do Service to God, and to do good in all respects to mankind in
general, as far as lies in them. And when this spiritual Beauty appears on
Sion, then it shall be the praise of the whole Earth; then men shall praise it,
and glorify the God of Israel, whose Children they are. And without this,
though Sion should have full deliverance from all outward Enemies, and though
it should have all the outward prosperity that heart could wish; instead of
being a praise in the Earth, and an honor to the Lord, it might become a stink
in his Nostrils, and a stain, a blot, and a dishonor to his most Glorious and
most Blessed Name.

But all those that wait for Redemption from sin in Jerusalem, and that pray
and long for the true glory of Sion, that it may truly be a praise in the
Earth; they will rejoice more in any work that has any tendency to the
discovery of the stumbling blocks hereunto, and to the taking them out of the
way, then if any one should give unto them thousands of Gold and Silver; it
will make their hearts leap for joy.

But I must tell the courtious Reader by the way, That my prayer has long
been, That God would call forth some better instrument to this Service that he
has appointed me to; and give a greater measure of anointing to some
excellent One of his, that is in this Earth, that might do it to greater
advantage; and so it had been done by any other, it may be I had been
altogether silent. But none yet appearing, behold a Babe must do it; it may be
to provoke others, who yet have fuller measures of the Holy Oil to pour out to
this purpose; for if this incission be not deep enough, and if this Potion do
not thoroughly stir all the Humors, which yet it aims at (this being but an
Essay) it may be a second, third, or fourth attempt of some one or more, that
may be greatly replenished with a large Portion of the Holy Spirit, that may
convince of sin, and be a word of Power, through the concurrence of the Spirit,
to draw forth bitter mournings in the Lords People over all their Iniquities,
may effectually prevail to cast all the stumbling blocks out of the way of his
Isa 57 14 Mat. 13. 41.
People, and to remove every thing that offends.

But if any of the Lords People shall after all that is or may be done in order
hereunto, hug their lusts as their beloved Delilahs in their Bosoms, and roll
them as sweet Morsels under their Tongues; the Souls of many will mourn in
secret for their pride. But that be far from any. But as I said before, so I
doubt not, but am very sure of this, there are many thousands in these three
Nations that are true hearted Nathaniels, that will not be offended, but
well-pleased with the convincing, charging, and reproving part of this
Discourse; even so well satisfied, as they will say as Peter said to his dear
Lord in another case, Lord, not my feet only, but my hands, and my head also.
So will they say to the God of Israel. Lord let not this Work, or any other
that may follow it, only tend to discover the Evils of the Paths of our feet,
and to turn us from them; but also convince us of, and turn us from all the
Errors and Evils of our heads, and hearts also, and of our whole man; we would
be all over fair and beautiful, and have no spot in us. And they will say, they
are not herein too harshly dealt with, but rather say the harshest word is the
most acceptable word to them.

The whole scope of this Discourse is to do that work that must be done, before
the approaching glory can be expected, viz. to prepare the Way of the Lord in
the Wilderness, and to make straight in the Desert a high way for our God: And
when that is done, the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall
see it together, as is plain, Isa. 40. 3, 4, 5. The Lords Sion has a long time
been, and is at present in a Wilderness Desert state: A Wilderness, a Desert,
is a rough unhewen unpollished thing, no beauty, no comeliness is in it. There
are no pleasant Walks, no plain and straight Paths drawn by a line in a
Wilderness, but rough crooked places, Hills, and Valleys, altogether
unpleasant; little fruit grows there but poor dry heathy shrubs that are of
little use. And thus it is and has a long time been with Sion, with the Lords
own People, they have been very barren and unfruitful, and like the dry and
parched ground; they have dead hearts, unprofitable and unfruitful lives and
conversations, in comparison of what they should be; little verdure, little
greenness appears in them, but they are like the heathy shrubs of the Desert
places: They have not plain and straight Paths among them, but have crooked
Spirits, and walk in crooked Paths. But though this is Sions sad case at this
day, yet there are glorious Promises made to it, as Isa. 51. 3. The Lord shall
comfort Sion, he will comfort all her waste places; though she is unfruitful
and waste, yet she shall not be forgotten; but the Lord will comfort her, and
how? by making her Wilderness like Eden; And he will make her Wilderness like
Eden: though she is an unfruitful Wilderness, yet she shall be as fruitful as
ever Eden was; even as the Garden of the Lord, and when she is so fruitful, she
shall be comforted indeed, then Joy and gladness shall be found therein,
thanksgiving and the voice of Melody. This is a very great and precious
promise; the like is Isa. 35. 1, 2. The Wilderness, and the solitary place
shall be glad for them, (viz. the judgments of God upon Babylon) and the
Desert shall rejoice (Sion, though a Desert, shall rejoice) and blossom as the
Rose, it shall blossom abundantly, (not a few thin blossoms, but abundantly)
and rejoice with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it;
the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, (no place more excelling in glory for
fruitfulness then it shall be) they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the
excellency of our God. So that it is plain, that though Sion be a Wilderness,
yet it shall become a most lovely, pleasant, glorious, and beautiful place. But
it is as plain, that in order hereunto, there must be a cry made in the
Wilderness, that must have a tendency to prepare the way of the Lord, and to
make his Paths strait, (Isa. 40. 2, 3.) to exalt the Valleys, and to make low
the Mountains and Hills; to make the crooked strait, and the rough places
plain, that the way of the Lord may be prepared.

But as yet, although the Judgments, the dreadful judgments of the Lord have
come upon the People in these three Nations, one upon the back of another, and
his anger is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, yet
there is no appearance of his Peoples making preparation for him, there is not
yet a turning to him that smites them; they do not put away the evil of their
doings from before his eyes, and Isa. 9 13. 17.
cease to do evil, and learn to do well; but they seem to be so far from it, as
they are not come to any sense of any of the Evils they have done, to provoke
him to do all that he has done; but they go on in their provocations of him
more and more, and are in the same sinful posture now, that they were in seven
years ago; as if they were altogether blind, and did not see the causes for
which he first turned the Wheel upon them, nor because of which his anger is
not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still; but they are
directly, and exactly in the posture of that people mentioned, Jer. 8. 9. Why
then is this people of Jerusalem sliden back by a perpetual backsliding? They
hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. I hearkened and heard, but they speak
not aright; no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done?
Every one turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle.

There has been a grievous backsliding from the Lord, by his People in these
Nations, into many Evils, and (how lamentable is it!) it seems to be perpetual,
to be more and more provoking the Lord to his very Face; and God having stricken
and smitten them, now is hearkening for their repentance, and for their
speaking right words, and confessing their Iniquities, and justifying him in
his Righteous Judgments; but instead hereof, it may be truly said, That no man
repents him of his wickedness; no man speaks right words in giving glory to
God; no, but men are so far from so doing, as they do not so much as say, What
have I done? as if they had not so much as a thought that they had done any
thing to procure all these dreadful Judgments. No man thinks the cause is in
himself; no man says, What have I done to procure all these heavy Judgments?
What cause is there in me? Or O that I knew what particular sin or sins in me,
in particular, are the causes of these things! And oh that I might obtain
strength from on high to turn from them! But every I mean the generality,
though one here and there is not so. Isa. 69. 11.
one plods on in the same Evils still, that he or she has done. And this may
be made manifest by the discoveries that are made of the temper and posture of
their Spirits, in all their Meetings generally; there is usually a great
complaining of their Sufferings, and many cries put up for deliverance; and
great lamentations over their desolations and distresses; and they roar all
like Bears, and mourn sore like Doves, because they have long looked for
deliverance, but there is none; for Salvation, but it is far from them.

But there is little acknowledging the causes of all these things; there is
little or no sense of them appears in their Spirits: It is true, they will in
general acknowledge, that they are Sinners, (and so will the worst of men do)
but they rarely make acknowledgements of the particular Sins of which they
generally are most deeply guilty. And though some are more excessively guilty
of some sins (and others of others) then some others of them are, yet most of
them are exceeding guilty of some particular Evils or other, of the Evils
herein declared to them. I say in their Meetings together to Worship the Lord,
they do not come with any sense of them at all, many times, having not so much
as a thought of them, by any thing that appears in their words or actions; but
as if they were altogether blind, and saw nothing of evil in themselves; they
come before the Lord without any shame or blushing for their sins in
particular, or any sense of his indignation against them for those Evils; and
consequently are far from Repentance, and from turning from them; for they are
strangers to the first step of Repentance. I considered my ways, says David,
and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 59.

But they do not so much as consider their ways, nor say, What have I done?
And without this, How can they be sensible of the evil of their ways? And if
they have no sense of the evil of their ways, How can they be ashamed of them?
How can they be grieved and broken in heart because of them? How can they
bewail and lament their unworthiness, and vileness, in rejecting the Word of
the Lord, even the blessed Precepts and Instructions of the Lord, and casting
them behind their back, to fulfill the lusts of their flesh? And if they do not
lament sore, and mourn over their unworthy, wretched, base dispositions of
Spirit, How can they repent of them, and turn from them, confess and forsake
them, loathing themselves because of them, abhoring themselves in Dust and
Ashes?

But for the most part, they are not come to this step, to say, What have I
done? They are not yet come to consider their ways.

But not doubting but that when many of them read these high charges that are
brought against them, they will be so far from stumbling at it, or being
offended, as they will rather say, Good Lord, if this be my Case indeed, that
though I think I have considered my ways, yet indeed I have not considered
them as I ought; be pleased to help me to come to this step in Truth, and in
sincerity, and in good earnest, to search and inquire, and say, What have I
done? Even I, What have I in particular done to provoke the Eyes of thy most
Blessed, aad most Glorious Majesty, to do all this that thou have done unto thy
People, in delivering the dearly Beloved of thy Soul into the hand of an Enemy,
and to chastise them by wicked men, who are thy Sword, the Staff, in whose hand
is thine indignation.

O help me in the multitude of thy tender Mercies, to search what I have done,
and not to cease going from step to step, until thine expectation be answered,
until thy Corrections have such kindly effects upon my Soul, as that thou
may say, Thou have thine end, and that true Repentance of, and turning from
Sin is brought forth, which thou aimest at in all thy rebukes, and
chastisements of thy Children, for thy great end in chastising thy Children, is
to make them partakers of thy Holiness.

And O Righteous Father, be pleased therefore, if I yet see not mine own
particular Iniquities to show them me, either by this published Declaration of
the Transgressions of thy People, or by any other means thou please, and
leave me not until thou have accomplished thy great designs upon my Spirit; and
grant the same Grace unto all thy People in general, and leave us not until
Sion become the Praise of the whole Earth. I say not, doubting but that such as
these will be the Supplications of the many thousands of Israel, that are
Israelites indeed.

I shall leave, Ingenious Reader, the following Discourse unto thy most serious
and most diligent consideration; as that which eminently, and evidently
concerns thy Peace in this thy Day. And the God of Israel shower down his Holy
Spirit upon thee, and upon whole Sion, in an abundant manner and measure; To
the Praise of his most Blessed, and most Glorious Name. Amen.

April 30. 1667.
Holy David, the Man that was after Gods * own heart, said, My 1 Samuel 13 14.
Psalm. 119. 129.
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

And Proverbs 28. 14. It is said, Happy is the man that fears always; But he
that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief.

And now, even NOW, in an especial manner, what great reason have we to be
afraid, because of Gods Judgments? Considering what dreadful judgments have
already come upon us in these Nations, and what terrible and astonishing
Judgments seem to be hanging over our heads, but as it were by a fine spun
thread, and may come suddenly with dreadful thunderings down upon us, so as
none may be able to resist.

It therefore greatly concerns all Persons whatsoever, to be afraid of
nourishing any Evils whatsoever in their bosoms, lest they prove as so much
Gunpovvder within them, that when the fiery Indignation comes down upon
them, may tear Psalm. 50 22.
them in pieces, and there be none to deliver them.

But it is a sad sign when persons are grown Preaching Proof, and Printing
Proof, and Judgment Proof.

A gracious Soul, when it hears a convincing Sermon, desires (as those Acts 13.
42.) that those words may be Preached to them again the next Saboth; or wishes
they might have it in Writing, or have it in Print; or if they meet with
persons that deal plainly with them, they desire more of that kindness from
them.

But hardened Souls care little for such company, and regard not any reproofs.

Prove. 13. 1. A Scorner hears not rebuke.

Prove. 12. 1. Who so loves Instruction, loves Knowledge; but he that hates
reproof is brutish.

Prove. 1. 20, 23. Wisdom cries without, she utters her Voice in the Streets.
-- Turn you at my reproof; Behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will
make known my Words unto you.

ERRATA.
REaders, though there be some small Errors in the Printing, that have escaped
the Press, by reason of the Authors being some time absent, yet there is but
one considerable word which you are desired to amend with you Pen, it is page
78. line 29. where for unreasonableness, write unanswerableness.

A Voice lifted up like a Trumpet, With a Loud and Full Sound: Declaring,
without Flattery or Partiality, to all that fear and love the Lord, small and
great, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, (that truly are of the House of
Jacob, whether they are Presbyterians, so called by way of distinction, or
Independants, Anabaptists, or Quakers, or any other that pretend to have
Interest in, or Relation to, the Lord JESUS CHRIST) what their Sins are: To the
end they may wash their Hearts from Wickedness, that they may be saved.
Beloved and honored, if You fear the Lord: Ps. 15. 4.

THe Lion has roared, who will not fear? The great and Amos 3 8
glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth has discovered his great displeasure
against us, who will not tremble? Our Number. 12. 14. Amos 3. 8 Isa. 58. 1.
Father has spit in our Faces, should we not be ashamed? The Lord God has
spoken, who can but prophecy? The Lord has said to his Prophet, Cry aloud,
spare not; lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

O House of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of Isa 2. 5. 2 Chronicles.
20 20.
the Lord: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; believe
his Prophets, so shall you prosper: Believe all the words of the Lord, all the
words of Truth, and of the Prophets of the Lord, that are written in this Book,
showing you YOUR TRANSGRESSIONS, and discovering YOUR SINS, which if you hide,
you shall not prosper; but if you confess and forsake, you Prove. 28. 13.
shall surely find mercy, and be establis^ed.

Your Sins, O House of Jacob, have been manifold and great; you have been great
Sinners, and you have greatly given occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme; and you have greatly provoked the Eyes of his Glory.

And, O House of Jacob, that your Sins have been very great, is clear by that
Voice of the Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 42. 24, 25. Who gave Jacob to the spoil,
and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned?
For they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law;
therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle; and it has set him on fi^e round about, yet he knew it not; and it
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

Did the Prophet Isaiah prophecy and declare this for the People of the Lord
that were in his own time or days only? Does not this Prophecy concern all the
House of Jacob in all times, to whom it may be as fully applicable as unto
them? Was it not written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World
are come?

If so; then, O House of Jacob, KNOW YE that the Lord, against whom you have
sinned, has given his Jacob to the spoil, and his Israel to the Robbers; and
it is of the Lord you are given to them. For your sins, you are a People Isa.
42. 22
robbed, and spoiled, and snared in holes, and hid in Prison-Houses: and ye are
for a prey, and none delivers; and for a spoil, and none says, Restore. And
he has poured upon you the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and
added to this that sore Judgment of the Pestilence, that walks in darkness,
and the Destruction that wastes at noon day.

Because ye would not walk in his ways, neither were obedient to his Law.

But if you should say, We have walked in his Ways, and we have been obedient
Isa. 42. 24
unto his Law, in some measure: We have frequented the Assemblies of his
Saints, we have gone to the Church Assemblies, where we have heard the good
Word of God, in the Parish-Assemblies, and in other Assemblies: and the Word of
the Lord has been sweet unto us. And we have been Partakers of that great
Ordinance of the Lords institution at his Last Supper, frequently; wherein we
have endeavored to do it in remembrance of him, and to show forth his death
until he come. And we have upon several occasions kept days of Fasting, and
days of Thanksgiving, both publicly, and more retiredly. And wherein have we
not walked in the Ways of God, nor been obedient unto his Laws?

The answer to these things, is this: It is true, O House of Jacob, that ye do,
many of you, seek the Lord daily, and delight to know his ways, as a Isa. 58. 2.
Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God:
yea, ye ask of him the Ordinances of Justice, and ye take delight in
approaching to God; and ye come and sit before the Prophets and Ministers of
God as his People; and ye say, the Word of the Lord is good, and it is sweet:
Ezekiel. 32. 31, 32.
and with your mouth you show much love. But notwithstanding all this, you are
a People that have greatly sinned against the Lord: for you would not walk in
his ways, neither were you obedient unto his Laws; and you must be showed
wherein. And you must know this, O House of Jacob, though there be many sins
that ye cannot be said to be guilty of living in the constant practice of, as
those others do, that cannot in any sense be called by the name of the House of
Jacob or Israel; because they do not so much as pretend to be Professors of
being the Lords servants, or being (as they call some) Puritans: but despise
being such. Yet there are some sins that you, the generality of you, are as
guilty of, as the generality of those others are: and those sins that you are
guilty of, are as odious and hateful in the sight of God, as the other sins
they live in are; as you will see by the Testimony of his Servants the
Prophets. The sins that you are not guilty of, or at least cannot be said to
live in them as others do, are these:

1. The Sins of common and profane swearing, and taking the Name of God in
vain, and of horrible and blasphemous speeches. The Sins of this sort are not
your Sins that are Professors of the Fear and Love of God in your hearts: but
are the Sins of wicked profane loose Creatures, that make no profession of the
Fear of God.

2. The Sin of a common profane idle loose spending the Sabbath Day, or the
first day of the Week, in sports and plays, and dancing and drinking, and vain
discourses. This has not been the Sin of any of them that have professed the
fear of the Lord: But they have generally in their measure, (though not without
their weaknesses) endeavored conscionably to spend that ^ay in exercises of
another nature: Yea, they that profess the fear of the Lord, have generally a
desire to keep, as a day to the Lord, one day in seven at least, either the
first day of the week, or the seventh day; and some of them have conscionably
observed and kept both the seventh day, and the first day of the week. So that
this has not been your sin, O ye that may be called by the name of the House
of Jacob, or of the Lords People; but the sin of the profane World.

3. The Sin of unconscionable and wicked lying and deceitful words, in jest or
earnest, in the common manner of some that make no conscience at all of telling
Lies; is not a sin that they that fear the Lord live in: but their words and
their reports of things, have generally been such as have credit upon the
account of their profession; and they are known to be such as will not lie; and
men will take their words in the things which they say or promise.

4. The sin of stealing, and common cheating and deceiving, which many make no
bones of, is not a Sin that they live in that fear the Lord: but if before
Conversion they have cheated any, yet when they come to fear the Lord, they do
restore it again.

5. The Sin of Adultery or Fornication, or Whoredom, is a Sin that they do not
live in, that fear the Lord: but they abhor such beastliness, such filthiness:
as knowing that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13. 4


6. The sin of Drunkenness and excessive abuse of those good Creatures that are
given for the refreshment of our Bodies, (and not for intemperancy, nor for the
destruction of the health of the Body, as intemperancy in the use of them is to
many.) This is not a Sin of the House of Jacob. They that profess the fear of
the Lord, do not live in the practice of it: But their sobriety and moderation
therein, is known unto all men.

These six great Evils, and the Evils of the breach of the fifth and sixth
Commandments, which some others make no Bones of, are Sins that are not at this
day chargeable upon the People that profess the fear of the Lord. It cannot be
said that they do live in the Practice of them: Though it cannot be denied but
in most of these very Sins, some or other of them that fear the Lord have
sometimes miscarried. But it may not be said that they, or any of them, do
constantly live in these Sins from day to day, or week to week, as they do in
some other Sins; but t^eir miscarrying in these things is very rare; and when
they do, they are grieved and troubled for, and repent of their so doing with
all their Souls. And as for some of these Sins, very many of them that profess
the fear of the Lord, were never guilty of the commission of them in all their
Lives; and if any of them ever were, it may be it is not one of a hundred, or
one of a thousand of them that have so bin guilty; and they have truly repented
of them, and turned from them; as Stealing, Cheating, Adultery, Fornication, or
Murder, or common Swearing: I say these Sins that have been named, are not the
Sins of the Lords People at this day: But if such things be discovered in any
that profess to be the Lords People, and are Members of Sion, of the Churches
of Christ, they soon come under Reproof and Censure; and if they live in them,
they are frequently Excommunicate or cast out of the Churches; as unfit to have
the Name of living in Sion, or of being accounted the Israel of God.

But, O House of Jacob, and you that are called by the Name of Israel, you are
generally guilty at this day of great and horrible Evils; for which the Lord
has brought upon you one Judgment after another; and his anger is not yet
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Therefore, O Israel, consider
Isa. 9. 17, 21.
well that Word of the Lord already mentioned. Isa. 42. 24, 25. Who gave Jacob
to the Spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we
have sinned? This is spoken to you now, and you have sinned against the Lord.
And though you have not lived in these Sins that have been mentioned, yet you
have greatly sinned, and your have lived in Sins which are as great as they:
Which are These:

1. The Sin of COVETOUSNESS. This Sin is and has been thy Sin, O House of
Ja^ob, and ye that are called by the Name of Israel. This I COVETOUSNESS is a
Sin of the Lords People. Jer. 5. 28.
has been one of your Sins, and this is one of your grand Iniquities, and your
horrible Sins, as will be made to appear: And this is a sin wherein you have
equalized, if you have not surpassed the deeds of the wicked. As appears by
what follows.

The Lord gave to the professing People of England, Scotland and Ireland,
within these twenty years last past, as much liberty to worship him as their
Hearts could wish, both in their Parish-Assemblies and other Assemblies: They
could not desire more liberty then was given to them, for every one to worship
him in that way in which they were persuaded in their own hearts was according
to the mind and will of God. And withal, he gave to multitudes of them the
additions of Health and Wealth and Riches. What could have been done more for
his Vinyard, then he did for them? But he looked that they should bring forth
Grapes, and they brought forth wild Grapes. Instead Isa. 5. 4.
of devoting themselves to Him, and to his Service, and of presenting their
Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which was their reasonable
Service: they fell in love with this present World, and the Wealth, Profits,
Pleasures, and Honors thereof; as if there were more beauty in it then in him;
and as if the Pleasures, Profits, and Honors of the World did out-bid him: and
they have chosen to set their Affections upon it, and to give up their Hearts
to it, and to spend their whole Time, and Strength, and Care, and Parts, and
Abilities, (which were given for more Noble Ends) to grasp much of it together:
And they have forsaken their God, and retained but the Name of being his; but
he has not been their Delight, their chief Joy and Solace, the chiefest of ten
thousand. But their profits and incomes of outward things, they have been their
delight and pleasure, and they have been as Cordials to them: But God has not
been in all their thoughts sometimes all the day long; no, they have had other
Lovers; this business to be done, and that, and the other business by which
outward profits might come in, and they have been as meat and drink to them;
and they can many times forget to eat their Bread, to do business of profit.
But the service of the Lord, that; what is that: That must not hinder this
business, and that business; that may be done when they have nothing else to
do. How many days have been spent, day after day, and scarce half an hour spent
in the service of God? And that with coldness enough, only to keep the Name of
being the Lords Servants; and therefore when nothing else could be done that
was for worldly profit, then the Lord was served (in such a manner as it was)
as on the first day of the week, when worldly business could not be done, then
there would be a coming to the Assemblies of the Saints, and a kind of
worshipping ^od, when the heart was f^r eno^gh from him: for having been
engaged in worldly business all the week long, it was full of worldly
contrivances for profit and gain, and wandering up and down in the world, as in
its proper element, when the bodily presence seemed to be before God. And so if
sometimes in the week days there were an hour, or two or three, spent in the
service of God in a day, (though very seldom) either at a Meeting, or it may be
in a Closet, the world had so much of the heart as very little of it was with
God all the while, whether on the Sabbath day, or any other day; only a
conscience and a Name of being the Lords Servants put upon it, more then love
to it, for other Lovers were set up in the hearts of Professors: fine Houses
were beloved, and fine Gardens and Orchards, and fine Trades that brought in
profits by hundreds, or five hundreds, or thousands by the year: O how sweet
were these things! O how pleasant for delights! What, for him that never
enjoyed fifty pound in all his Life, that he could say was his own, free of
debt, to fall upon such a Trade, or to come into such an Office or Offices, as
now to have gained fifty pounds per year, a hundred, two hundred, or three
hundred per year; O how sweet was this! What pleasure was there in this! What a
delightful and desirable thing was it, to be so much above those that were his
Equals before! To be now so and so advanced! How sweet were these things! So
sweet, as they were still more and more desired; and when a man had so much,
then he would fain have so much, and then so much, and then so much: and who
was it that ever came to a stint, to a satisfaction? To say, I have enough for
me and mine, I desire no more: I will never neglect one days service of God any
more, to gain any more of this World, which I must shortly leave; and I know
not, when I leave it, whether it will be a blessing or a curse to my Children;
I know not whether I do heap it up for to be Ecccl. 5. 13.
the hurt and the damage of me, and my Posterity after me, to nourish them up
in idleness and fullness of Bread, and it may be in Sodomy, even in all those
hateful evils which I see many great men's Children are addicted to, that it may
be it were better my Children had never been born, then to have such
Temptations left to them, as my Estate may be to them.

Who was it in all the three Nations that came to so much as this, while Wealth
did flow in upon them? Who was it that had their hearts dis-engaged from the
pursuit of it? How small was the number of them? But O thou that art named the
House of Jacob, how greatly have thou provoked thy God, by a perpetual
backsliding? Thou art gone away backward; thou have said in thy actions and thy
deeds, I have loved Strangers, and after them will I go; so that Jer. 2. 25.
there seems to be no hope of thy return.

Now consider, O thou backsliding Daughter, how the Lord resents this evil of
thine. Hearken unto that Voice of his by Jeremiah his Prophet, Jer. 2. 12, 13.
Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord: For my People have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, and have hewed them out Cisterns,
b^oken Ciste^ns, that can hold no water. My People have changed their Glory for
that which does not profit.

What a ho^rible thing was this? That you that are called the Lo^ds People,
that yo^ that once professed that the Love and Favor of God was more desuable
to you then ten thousand worlds; and that you could trample upon the Worlds
Wealth, and Honors, and Profits, and Pleasures, and count them but as dung, in
comparison of enjoying but one days communion with your God; and that though
you should always be an afflicted and poor People, yet if you could but have
the happiness and the privilege to be in the house of God, and in the
Assemblies of his Saints, and to hear his Word, and enjoy communion with him in
Prayer, you would reckon your selves exceeding happy, yea in better case then
the highest Emperor upon Earth. How horrible and astonishing a thing was this,
that those that once made these great professions, that they should so
extravagantly set their hearts upon this World, as to forsake their God, their
King, their Rock, their Shield, and their exceeding great Reward, their Father,
and the Guide of their youth, their Strength, their Glory, their all in all; to
dig and hew them out the vain perishing things of this World, which cannot
afford them one drop of true comfort!

Would not this make the glorious and beautiful Angels in Heaven to blush, to
think of it! and the blessed Saints that shine as the Sun, to be astonished!
and all the Hosts of Heaven to be horribly afraid, at such unworthy, such mad
and distracted deeds of the Sons of men; ten thousand times worse then him that
is so bewitched with a painted Strumpet, that is a filthy Harlot, as to forsake
a truly beautiful and faithful Bride?

O consider this, all ye that have so much forgotten God. Consider how he
disgusts this Sin of loving this World, this Sin of Covetousness. Consider what
title he gives it by his Servant and Apostle Paul, (Col. 3. 5.) he tells you it
is Idolatry. So that in loving this World, you have set up an Idol in 1 John 2.
15. Matthew. 6. 24. Luke 16. 13, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
your heart. And you are also told by his Word, that If any man love the World,
the love of the Father is not in him: and ye are told by his Son himself, That
ye cannot serve God and Mammon. But O what gross Idolaters have ye been, that
have so served the World as you have done, and so much neglected the service of
your God? O consider how that Word has been verified in you, that the love of
Money is the Root of all Evil: You have so loved, and adored, and admired, and
set up the World in your hearts, as it has been the root of all your neglect
of public service to God, and to his People for his sake; even of your neglect
of visiting the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction; of your neglect of
visiting the Lords Prisoners; of the neglect of Family Duties two or three
times a day; of neglect of taking pains with Children and Servants, and other
Relations, to bring them up in the nurture and fear of the Lord; of neglect of
Closet-performances, and of enjoying many sweet and blessed seasons in secret;
of conversing with your God, that should have been your chief Joy.

Consider how this love of Money has been the Root of all your sparing to deal
your Bread to the hungry, and to cloth the naked, and to bring the poor that
were cast out, to your Houses; of neglect of drawing out your Soul to the
hungry, and satisfying the afflicted Soul. Consider how the love of this World,
and coveting it, has almost estrarged you wholly from God, and from every good
Work, wherein he might be glorified, and ye might have Peace.

O consider, ye Lovers of Gold and Silver, what Moses speaks of such as you,
Exodus 32. 31. O this People have sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods of
Gold. Did they sin a great Sin? You have much more. They made them Gods of
Gold, but it was a sudden Temptation, and an Evil of a short continuance; and
it appears not that they set their hearts and affections upon them. But you
have set up your Bags of Gold and Silver, your Land and your Wealth, so in your
Hearts, as to forsake your God, and to love your Gold more then your God; and
if it were not so, your actions would witness the contrary: but your actions
have testified, and do testify to your Faces whom you love most.

O foolish People, and unwise; Do ye thus requite the Lord? Is not he thy
Father Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
that has bought thee? Has he not made thee and established thee?

O this People that are called by the Name of Is^ael, they have sinned a great
sin, they have made them Gods of Gold; and their very Hearts are set upon them,
so as they have forsaken the Fountain of Living Waters, they Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 16.
have lightly esteemed the Rock of their Salvation; they have provoked him to
Jealousy with strange Gods: Of the Rock that begat them they have been
unmindful; and have forgotten God that formed them.

Now consider, O House of Jacob, and ye that profess to be the Lords People,
whether this great Sin of yours be not as great, if not greater, then the Sin
of the profane wicked Worldlings. Are they Idolaters? So are you: They have
made themselves Idols: For as Paul speaks of some, They made Phil. 3. 19
their Bellies their Gods; so it may be said of their Lusts after other things,
even the things of this World, their Gold, and Silver, and Treasures, they have
made them their Gods also; but in that you have made you Gods of Gold, your Sin
is greater then theirs, because it is against greater Knowledge, and greater
Light, and against greater Grace. O what great aggravations have your
Idolatries beyond theirs?

Your Sin is verily double to theirs; for you have in this committed two Evils:
You have forsaken your true Glory, your dear and gracious, and glorious Lord,
the Fountain of all Good, of all that is lovely and precious, of durable Riches,
and substantial Good; for a Shadow, for a Trifle, for a fading Leaf, for that
which has no substance. Who would part with a substantial good thing, for a
shadow of it? What is a shadow? A shadow is nothing; as soon as the light
surrounds a thing, the shadow is vanished and is not, but appears to be
nothing. So are all your Idols, whether Bags of Silver or Gold, or
Merchandises, or Stocks in Bank, or at Interest, or Houses and Lands, and
Gardens, and Orchards, and pleasant Walks: Are they any more then a shadow of
true Riches, of durable Riches and Substance? Are they so much? Can there be
any kind of shadow of that Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, in these?

These Earthly Vanities, if they are a shadow, it is a poor shadow: But is it
not an astonishing Error, that rational Creatures should grasp after the Shadow
so eagerly, as to leave and forsake the Substance, to embrace the Shadow?

Now this is your double evil, that you for sake your God, the Fountain of all
Goodness, and dig out of this Earth for your selves such Vanities as cannot
give your precious Souls one grain of Peace or true satisfaction, in the
enjoyment of them: and yet they are your Gods, and you their Servants; and all
or most of your Care, Parts, and Abilities, and your precious Time, are speht
in the service of them.

Now the Sin of the poor blind World, is far less then yours. If they do serve
these Idols as you do, yet they are not such Sinners as you are: For they have
not that knowledge of the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, as you
have had. They never had such tastes how good the Lord is, as you have had:
They never saw his Glory and Excellency, and unexpressible Loveliness, as you
have seen it. They never had such blessed entertainments into his holy
presence, as you have had.

But YOU, you are the double-dy'd Sinners, the crimson Sinners, the scarlet
Sinners; that though the Lord has appeared unto you twice, yea ten times, yea
ten hundred times, have yet departed from him, and have sinned this great Sin,
and made you Gods of Gold. You are most horrible Idolaters; your sins have
over-passed the deeds of the Wicked. Jer. 5. 28.


But some may say, This Trumpet sounds aloud, and with a very piercing and
shrill Voice shows us our Transgressions, and the vileness of them, which we
cannot deny; for we cannot hide them: They are open to the view of God, Angels,
and Me^; though we have not so clearly seen them our selves, as we should see
them; though it might have been our happiness to have seen them clearly long
ago.

The Reply whereunto is, That the Trumpet must yet sound louder and louder; and
must cry aloud, and not spare for any account; to show the Lords People their
Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

NOT upon the account of hiding them from the World, that they may not see the
nakedness of Jacob; for that nakedness has been too visible already to them.

NOR yet upon the account of the Name of the Lord, lest it should be more
reproached by the sinfulness of the Lords People: for that blessed and glorious
Name has been and is greatly profaned thereby already.

BUT on the account of the Name of the Lord, that it may be hallowed, that it
may be sanctified and glorified in all his righteous Judgments that are come,
one upon the neck of another, upon his People; are these Transgressions of
Jacob to be showed to them, and to the World, with a SPARE NOT. Spare not
especially this great S^n, the Root of many Sins, Covetousness; wherein the
great and glo^ious Name of the Lord has been so much dishonored: Nor yet to
spare those other Sins of which they are to be declared guilty, (great numbers
of them) to the end the Lord may be justified when he speaks, and be clear
when he judges.

Therefore, O House of Jacob, to speak yet a little louder in your Ears, that
Psalm. 51. 4
it may sink down into your Hearts, you are to be informed further, That as you
have been Idolaters, and such Idolaters as have exceeded the Wicked in
Idolatry; so you have been also Adulterers.

Adultery is a Sin that is very hateful and loathsome to many People that know
little of God, or have little or no love to him; and it is a Sin that is very
shameful. It is a very shameful thing that it should be said among m^n, That
such or such a man is an Adulterer, a Whoremonger: If any man be so, he is
counted a filthy fellow, a vile fellow. As odious as an unclean filthy Adul
erer, or Fornicator is in the Eyes of all civil People: so odious has you^ Sin
been in playing the Harlot with this vain World, this deceitful World, who has
bewitched you with her painted Face, as if she were some great Beauty; whereas,
when her Vizard is off, she appears to him that looks upon her in true light,
but a mi^erable worthless thing, in which there is no true felicity at all, no
beauty at all; but appears to be vanity and vexation of Spirit: But O how have
you, most of you been deceived by her! Have you not thought, and do you not
think, that there is much sweetness and pleasure in taking your fill of the
love of her? Are not your Hearts so far gone to her, as that you are her
constant Servants, her humble Servants, her diligent Servants? Are you not
continually embracing of her, hugging of her in your Bosoms? Can you easily or
willingly be out of her company? Can you find in your heart to part with her,
though on a good account? Is not the thought of that unpleasant to you? Will
you not strain your Consciences so far as to make them crack, rather then part
with this Paramour of yours? Will you not rather make Shipwreck of a good
Conscience, then be deprived of this Harlot? Have you not, many of you, already
suffered many a bleeding wound in your Consciences, rather then you would part
with her? Are there not some things which some of you have done full sore
against your minds and Consciences, within these five or ten years, on purpose
to keep your beloved Mistress in your Bosom; which without wounding your
Conscience, you thought you could not so safely keep? O how hard and how
grievous is it for you to think of parting with her, though on the very best
ac^ount?

O consider this, all ye that too much forget God. Consider this, ye Adulterers
Ps. 50. 22 Jam. 4. 4.
and Adulteresses; know ye not that the friendship of the World is enmity with
God? Whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God.

Consider how ye are inslaved by this deceitful Strumpet; and how hateful your
Adulteries have been; how your whorish Hearts have grieved the good Spirit of
God; how you have gone a whoring from under your God; what filthy Adulterers
and Adultere^ses you have been. Consider whether your Sin of Adultery be not
more ha^eful and more odious, then the Adultery of an unfaithful Husband and or
Wife, that goes to another Bed: Their unfaithfulness is hateful, but it is but
unfaithfulness unto a poor mean Creature (whatever their quality be;) but yours
is unfaithfulness to your glorious and ever blessed Creator, to him that is
never unconstant to you, nor never gave you any temptation so to be to him; but
is most lovely in himself, and is the same yesterday, to day, and forever. But
vile Wietches that you are, how great have been your Whoredoms notwithstanding?
Had you any pretense for your forsaking him, and embracing the present World?
Was he a barren Wilderness unto you, or a Land of Darkness? What Iniquity have
ye found in him? Jer. 2. 5, 31.


Will you say, You were, some of you, poor in this World? What then? Did he not
choose you to be rich in Faith, and Heirs of a Kingdom? And was not your
condition therein better then the greatest Emperors upon Earth? Jam. 2. 5.
Could ye not be content to be an Heir of a Kingdom, but like foolish Children
must sell your birthright for a mess of Pottage, and choose to fall in league,
into friendship with this World, and consequently to enmity with God? What have
you done? Know ye not what ye have done? Know ye not that the friendstrip with
this World, is enmity with God? Knew ye not that if ye fell in love with that
Strumpet, she would steal your Hearts from God?

Behold, This is the plain assertion of the Spirit of God, Jam. 4. 5. Whoseever
therefore will be a friend of the World, is the Enemy of God.

Where are ye now? What a sad gulf have ye implunged your selves into, ye
Adulterers and Adulteresses, that have treacherously departed from the Lord,
and are become very filthy, very lewd, very poluted, very treacherous Creatures?

Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: And where will ye appear, that
Heb. 13. 4
have been such Adulterers in grain, and have so greatly provoked the Eyes of
his Glory with your abominable Uncleanness, and sinful Dalliances with a
deceitful Harlot, and have not had so much as thoughts of forsaking her, to
return to your first Husband; but you have loved Strangers, and after them Jer.
2. 25
will ye go? And what will ye do in the end thereof?

But that they may not be charged with this great Sin of Covetousness, (which
is more hateful in the Lords People, then Idolatry or Adultery in others) whom
(it may be) the Lord will not charge with it. Let me now declare, before I
proceed any farther, who they are, that in the clear Light of the Scripture, do
appear to be guilty of it; not naming Persons, but leaving them to acknowledge
themselves to be the men or women, before the Lord, and before some of his
People, if they have a Heart so to do; to the end he may be glorified.

And first, They that having made a Profession of being Saints, and have some
of them been Members of Churches, and have for a time been great Lovers of the
Word of God, and with desire have desired to be fed with the sincere Milk of
the Word, in Lectures and other Sermons, and in several Meetings; and having
been so fed, it has been sweeter unto them then the Honey and the Honeycomb.
And yet afterward, having opportunities of trading and employment in the
World, or of Offices Military, or Civil, have found Wealth coming in thereby;
and by degrees have weaned themselves from the blessed Paps of Sion's
Consolation, and from the Milk of the abundance of her Glory, whereof they
might have sucked and been satisfied; and have gone to the Breasts of this
World, and taken pleasure in them; and her Breasts have satisfied them almost at
all times: Having had the World flowing in upon them plentifully, and
delighting themselves therein, although they have been sensible of great
^eanness, and barrenness of Spirit, and have lost, in a great measure, their
first Love: But the pleasures of this new Lover has so taken away their
hearts, as they have therewith contented themselves, though without the Heart
solacing Comforts of their true Husband, which sometimes they enjoyed. I say
such as these have been guilty of this great Sin, as appears by these following
Scriptures: Hos. 2. from verse. 5. to 16. Ezekiel. 16. from verse. 15. to 30. Jer.
2. 11, 12, 13. Ezekiel. 23. 35. Deuteronomy. 33. 15, 18, 19.

And secondly, They are those covetous persons that out of eager and thirsting
desires of heaping up more and more of the Wealth of this World; though they
have had comfortable Estates, for the supply of themselves and theirs already,
and have had no need so to do; yet have neglected almost all opportunities of
enjoying Communion with their God, their first Husband, either in hearing
Lectures or Sermons, or in meeting together in Church-Meetings, or in taking
any solemn constant times of waiting upon their Lord, in Closets or in
Family Duties.

And if sometimes these things have been done, yet it has been but when
worldly business would admit o^ it; and many of these Opportunities have been
neglected week after week, and day after day. The which many of those that have
lived in the Families with them, and have bin in Church Fellowship with them,
can plentifully witness. And it is known how many days have bin past by some of
these idolatrous, adulterous covetous Persons, and but one half hour in a day
spent in any Religious performance, (yea sometimes not that) and that in the
Evening, when they have been wearied with other business, and been fit for
nothing ^ut to sleep and dream; or in the Morning, when haste about other
business has hurried them away: And when done, done with formality, coldness,
and dead heartedness enough.

I say, Those that have so greatly neglected these, and many other religious
Duties, to pursue the Worlds Profits, though they have had no necessity so to
do, having comfortable Estates, these are the Covetous Persons by the World
condemned; and not those whose necessities constrain thereto at sometimes: for
many blessed Servants of the Lord have been so put to it for want of daily
supplies for themselves and Families, as they have been fain to work morning
early, and evening late, to provide daily Bread for their Family; having only
had from hand to mouth: Some single Persons, and some that have had others
depending upon them; and if some of these should be charged with this Sin, they
that so charge them, may wrong the Generation of the Just, and condemn the
Innocent.

But many of these, that have had very little of this World, and have received
no Contributions from others, have appeared at Lectures and Church-Meetings,
mo^e constantly, and far more diligently, then they who have had twenty times
their Estates. And therefore they that are and have been in a mean condition,
and unavoidably are compelled to much daily Labor, are not hereby so much
condemned. But many of these will rise up in Judgment against their Brethren,
and condemn them, in that though they have been very needy and necessitous; yet
they have been more constant Attendants upon the solemn Worship of God, then
them.

And that these that (though not for need, but) for desire of much Wealth, have
made so bold as to neglect holy Duties, are the sinful Covetous Persons,
appears by these several Scriptures, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Heb. 13. 5. Col. 3. 5. Demas
has forsaken us, and loved this present World. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Luke 16. 13. Jam
4. 5.

But thirdly, Another character of a covetous Person, is this: That he is very
close fisted, and very unfree and unwilling to communicate any thing worth
mentioning, to the supply of others wants, or to any other good Uses: but these
Persons generally do with eager, and hungering, and thirsting desires, hoord up
the Wealth of this World, and lay up Bag after Bag, Wealth to Wealth, or do
add Land to Land, House to House, Field to Field, Isa. 5. 8.
and in this they take great pleasure. But are very hard to be drawn to part
with any thing considerable, to any good Use.

But it may be, these Wealth-mongers will say, I cannot accuse my self hereof,
for I have parted with sometimes five Shillings at a time, sometimes ten
Shillings, sometimes forty Shillings, sometimes ten Pounds at a time, for good
uses; when I have seen need and occasion. And it may be some good honest poor
People will witness for them, they have given good Gifts at such a time and
such a time, when they have been moved thereunto; and therefore who will dare
to say that they are covetous?

To which the answer is, That notwithstanding this, it may appear and will
appear, that many of you that have thus done, are mere covetous Earthworms,
mere filthy Idolaters, and Adulterers; and this poor mask cannot hide you,
especially you that have had, and you that yet have, very considerable Estates
in this World; as many of you have had, and many of you yet have, whom I will
not name, I say you will be found lamentable covetous Persons, such as whose
Covetousness the Lord abhors, and his People shall, and it may be do Psalm. 10. 3
abhor. It may be you have given this, and that, and to other Gift, to relieve
the Poor and Needy: But do but consider what you have done, I mean in what
degree and proportion to your Estates you have done it; and then consider
whether a poor Brother that has cast in three pence or four pence to the
weekly Contributions, has not cast in six times, it may be ten times as much
as you. Do ye not know what our blessed Lord spoke of the poor Widows two Mites?

You, of your abundance, have it may be, contributed sometimes that which has
seemed to be something in the Eyes of a mean Person, and they have blessed the
Lord for it; but what was it in the Eyes of the Lord? Consider that; ye that
know what your own Estates have been; what your yearly incomes by your Rents,
Lands, Tradings, Offices and Employments have been; what your Gains have been
by your great Bargains and great Purchases which you have made; and how much
has been cast upon you by Estates coming to you by Marriages, or by deceased
Friends, or good years Crops of Corn, or Sugars, or by any other Merchandises
which ye have traded in.

In these Gospel-Days, since the Grace of the Gospel has been so abundantly
revealed, the Lord now expects that the glorious Riches of Grace that is now
made known unto his Saints, should be a far greater inducement unto them to
abound in all good Works, then all the several Precepts and Injunctions in the
Law: Wherein he expressly tied them by several distinct Precepts, to very large
Contributions and Communications of their Estates, amounting in all it may be
to more then a sixth part of their yearly incomes: For now under the Gospel,
the Lord has left his People to their freedom, as to measure; giving them no
prescriptions of measures herein: as if he would now try his People what they
will do freely, seeing in these blessed days he has communicated so freely to
them: And will it not now be their shame to come short of what in the Law he
expressly required? It is said, Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to communicate,
forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. He is well pleased
when his People abound in offering such Sacrifices, but he loves a cheerful
Giver; and therefore now does not constrain, but expects it should be done of a
ready mind.

Therefore it would well become a man who has Three hundred Pounds per annum,
coming in by Rents or Trading, cheerfully and freely to part with Sixty Pound
per annum at the least, for the honor of his gracious Lord, who has freely
and graciously given him so large incomes, much exceeding what many, very many
of his Fellow Servants have: The Lord having given him also the clear evidence
of an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for him, over and above these outward things. If all these
Riches of Grace extended to a poor miserable Worm, will not induce him with a
willing heart to return back so much of his own to his Lord again, when he
knows that with such Sacrifices he is well pleased; that man is a very Churl.
And as it would become a man of Three hundred per annum, to return to the
service of his Lord more then a sixth part thereof, so much more is it the
concernment of him that has Six hundred per annum coming in, to part freely
with more then a fourth part thereof: and him that has a Thousand Pounds per
annum, to communicate freely for the Lords sake, more then a third part
thereof: For the greater a man's yearly incomes are, in the better capacity is
he to exceed them of lesser Estates: And for to observe their Rule of
Proportion, and to do no more, would be very unbecoming him.

Now I say, You that have plentiful Estates, that say you have been
communicative; consider what you have done; and know you, many of you, that
those your Contributions that you have made, from time to time, are
contemptible; because of the shortness and the niggardliness of them: and know
that the unworthiness of your Spirits herein, will be ere long clearly
discovered; and that you are filthy, covetous, vile Persons, and have proved
your selves to be Churles, and not liberal, kind and bountiful; and though some
it may be have accounted you bountiful and merciful, when out of your abundance
you have given it may be ten or twenty Shillings, or five Pounds, to the relief
of a poor Person, or a poor Family: yet the time is coming when such vile
persons as you shall no more be called liberal; nor such Churles as Isa. 32. 5.
you be said to be bountiful: But many a poor Housekeeper that out of their
Labors have given but Sixpence, will appear to be more bountiful by many
degrees then some of you, that have given ten pounds, five pounds, or three
pounds at a time, out of your great Estates.

So that this is the third Character of him that is a Covetous person, who is
an Idolater, etc. He is a Person that is close fisted, and very hardly is drawn
to communicate of the Wealth of this World; but loves to hoard it up, and takes
great pleasure therein; though it may be he will be much in holy Duties, if his
Estate consist in Lands or Bags, and he be not one that is in a way of Trading;
then you shall, it may be, have much of his Bodily Presence at Meetings; and he
will be ready to do any Service in his Person that may cost him nothing: Any
thing, so his or her purse may be spared. But you may as soon wring Blood from
their hearts, as any thing that is noble and handsome, and like a liberal
Person, proportionable to their Estates. But that this Lover of Money, this
nigardly Person, is the Covetous Idolater, is clear in the Scripture also; as
in Jam. 5. 3. Jer. 22. 13. to 17. Isa. 32. 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 112. 4, 5, 9. Isa.
58. 6, 7. Isa. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 9. 5. Ezekiel. 33, 31.

And under one or all of these three Characters, especially the last, you may
find out the Covetous Persons that are Idolaters, and that do so filthily play
the Harlot, and commit Adultery, as has been declared.

But now, though this may be said of the House of Jacob, and of them that may
be said to be the Lords People; yet among these I hope (nay, I question not)
that there are a few that are free, it may be perfectly free, from this evil;
that never set up this World in their Hearts, but are very loose from it, and
are no way engaged in their affections to it, so as to make it their Joy, or
their Delight; but have entirely set their affections on things above: and that
can and do freely and liberally part with it, communicating of what they have,
whether little or much, it may be to more then a third part of what their
yearly incomes are, and delight in their very Souls to be doing good, and
communicating bountifully. But these are but few.

But O how great is the number of the guilty of this Sin, among them that are
called the Lords People, of all sorts and Professions!

O how many of them that are accounted the Ministers of God, may charge
themselves, and be charged with two great degrees of it! Both among the
Presbyterians, (for distinction so called) and the Independants, and the
Baptized Congregations, and they of the Quaker's Societies. They that are the
Elder^ among the three former, and that are sometimes Speakers among the
latter; some of them all have great blots, and great stains of this kind; and
few but are more or less guilty of it: So that the Lords complaint against
Israel of old, may be his complaint at this day: Jer. 6. 14. and 8. 10. For
from the least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to
Covetousness; and from the Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals
falsely. (A covetous Professor deals falsely with God.) And how have the
Ministers and Preachers of the Word coveted this World? And how have they
thirsted after places of Profit? They that should have been blessed Examples of
the greatest detestation of this Evil, even they, many of them, have been very
evil Examples to their Hearers; both in coveting to scrape up much of this
World together, and in close keeping it, when they had it. How many of the
Lords Ministers have so hoorded up the Wealth of this World, as to be able to
give great Portions to their Daughters, great Estates to their Children, when
little has at any time appeared of their bounty to the Poor and Needy.

I do not blame the good People that have been free and liberal in
communicating of their Temporals to them that communicated to them in
Spirituals: for that is Fruit that will abound to their account, however their
Ministers have improved it: But rather have great Reason to blame many, that
have not been so free as they ought, in communicating to those Servants of the
Lord that they have pretended to love and affect much, whose covetous Hearts
have not suffered them to communicate to them according to their Estates, as
they ought; but they that have been covetous and close fisted to the Poor, have
been too much so to their Ministers or Elders also; and their sparing giving,
will one day be remembered against them.

I say I do not blame them that have been free to their Ministers, but I blame
the Ministers, many of them, that have so much loved this Worlds Wealth, and
set their Hearts upon it; and have not been so free and generous to the Poor
and Needy, as became them. I speak of those that have had good and comfortable
Estates cast in upon them. I speak not of others, who (some of them) have been
in a poor and needy condition themselves.

And I blame those Covetous Pastors that for more gain have left one People to
go to another, and that have preached for hire, and prophesied for reward,
rather then for love to the work; and that must indent for so much by the year,
or else they could not be satisfied, and could not be content to sit down with
a People that loved them, and to trust the Lord to incline their hearts to
provide comfortably for them; but they must have Engagements for so much by the
year, or else the Work must be left, which has rendered the Work of the Lord
contemptible.

Consider this, ye Ministers and Prophets, whose ways have much displeased the
Lord, and provoked the Eyes of his Glory.

Ought not his Service to have been preferred before Wealth and outward
Profits? Was there not enough in him? Would he not have been your Shield and
your exceeding great Reward? Be ashamed, and mourn, and weep for this, ye
unworthy Shepherds, lest you and your Offspring for whom ye desired Wealth, be
made a scorn and a reproach. How many Children of covetous Ministers have been
such, as a blast, and not a Blessing from the Lord, has attended them.

And as for the Ministers of Independent, and of the Baptized Congregations,
who have not so indented for a maintenance, it is true; yet some of them, yea
many of them, have been unworthy covetous Persons also; loving and hugging the
things of this present World; not having freely given, as they have freely
received: and as for some of them that have not received a maintenance from
their People, having Trades, or Lands, or Estates of their own to live on, but
have preached freely, yet they have been, some of them, as it is well known,
very unworthy covetous Persons, in eager pursuing their Trades and Offices, and
Employments for gain, with the neglect of many a Duty, which it would have
become them to have done: And though some of them have had very great Estates
(comparatively) yet were they never satisfied, but were still pursuing eagerly
the Profits of the World, and minding that, as if it were their chief Joy: And
though their Gifts have been excelling many of their weak Brethren, yet they
have been greatly neglected, and have been improved only when their Worldly
business would give them leave. And for their close-fistedness, it has been
such as has been gross and absurd in the Eyes of them that have taken
inspection into their actions, though it may be (poor Souls) they have not had
the courage or the confidence to reprove it: or if they had, would it have been
to any purpose? They have appeared, and do appear so fixed in their covetous
ways, and so settled upon their Lees, and hardened in their ways, that they
could not bear Reproof; and they have had devices to hide and cover their
Covetousness; but the Lord sees and knows all their wickedness in their
Covetousness, which his Soul abhors.

And as for those called Quakers, they also have among them many very covetous
Persons, which are eagerly pursuing the World in their several Callings, and do
hoord up Wealth plentifully, but part with any thing very sparingly; and yet
some of these, are men that are sometimes Speakers among them. It is true, some
of them that are said to be of the Ministry among them, have but little of the
World, and it may be do little mind the things of this World; but there are but
few such. But others of them love Wealth, and love Greatness, and mind Earthly
things in a shameful manner also; and the time is coming, when their
Covetousness will be discovered, and their hugging and close keeping the things
of this world, as if they were their greatest happiness, will be made manifest,
and all their hidings and coverings of it with specious pretenses, will not
serve their turns: Some of them being Shopkeepers, and some Merchants, and
others of other Trades; that yet do preach among them sometimes; but it may be
will not be said to be of their Ministry, because they will be more free to
follow the World, which they eagerly scrape up together, with the expense of
most of their time and strength and care, as if their Life consisted in the
abundance of the things they possess: and if they do communicate (I mean some
of them, yea most of them, but not all) they do nothing noble, nor handsome,
nor any thing proportionable to their Estates, nor so as to find acceptance
with the Lord, who loves to have his People liberal and noble, and not nigardly
nor base.

This that I speak to Ministers, to Prophets, to Elders, to Teachers, to Men of
Gifts and Abilities for preaching the Word of God, of the several
understandings, Presbyterians, Independants, Baptized, and Quakers, I do well
know to be true. I wish it were not so: Though I also believe that some that I
know well, (and it may be more that I know not) though of several
understandings, are men that are very unblameable herein; and they are very
beautiful ones in Sion, and the Glory of Christ; but the number of these is
very small, compared with the others that are more or less guilty of this
horrible Evil.

And as the Ministers, and gifted men of the several understandings, so the
people, the generality of the people, that are hearers of all these, and
Members of Churches and Societies among them, are guilty, very guilty of the
same evil; some very grossly so, and some in lesser degrees, but very generally
more or less are they guilty.

Which appears in their several capacities thus; Some that are eminent persons,
and worthy persons for gifts and parts, and for Zeal and forwardness in many
good things, who having no trades but yearly incomes, some of 500 l. per annum,
some of a 1000. l. per annum; some more, some less; of which quality I know
several that have no Trades, but have such yearly incomes, and so are not under
temptations of neglecting Meetings, and Lectures, and private and public
performances, who yet do appear to be as covetous as those that do; as appears
by their excessive backwardness to good works, and their hoording up their
Wealth, and adding Wealth to Wealth, as if all their happiness consisted in
being wealthy, and all blessings for themselves and Children (if they have
Children) consisted therein. Miserable wretched covetous persons are they, and
the Lord knows them to be so, and they have very much provoked him, although
some of them have been very forward at Meetings and Lectures, and very ready to
every thing that was commendable, except the parting with their Wealth; Any
service they would offer to the Lord that ye could desire, that might cost them
little or nothing; Who more ready then they to many services? But you must
spare their Minion, their beloved Darling, the Wealth of this World; but if
they were tried here, then they were tried indeed; and though for shame they
could not but do something, yet have they done it sparingly enough, and shall
reap sparingly enough, notwithstanding their other services: What though they
have been ready to preach, and been forward at Meetings? And what though they
could speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels? And what though they have
hazarded their Liberties to come to Meetings? And what though they have
hezarded their very Lives? Yet having another Beloved in their hearts; having
no heart to part with the Wealth of this World, to supply the Members of Christ
in Sickness, and in Prison, and in Nakedness, and in Hunger, the Love of God
has not appeared in them, but the Love of the World has had the chief place
in their hearts. How dwells the Love of God in that man or woman that shuts
up the Bowels of their compassion from Christ in his Members? Or if they have
given to such, they have done it sparingly, grudgingly, and nigardly: But God
loves a cheerful Giver. But these covetous Earth worms must know, that this
has been their great Sin; and until they reform herein, they must expect no
great Blessing from the Lord, but rather a blasting.

Show my People their transgression, their Sin in not drawing out their Soul
Isa. 58. 2:
to the Hungry, and bringing the Foor, that are cast out, to their Houses; and
that they hide themselves from their own flesh, and satisfy not the afflicted
Soul: Whereas, if they did these things in that full and ample manner as became
them, and as were suitable and proportionable to their Estates; then their
Light might break forth as the Morning, and their Health might spring forth
speedily; and their Righteousness should go before them, and the Glory of the
Lord should be their Rereward; they should call, and the Lord should answer,
etc.

But this sin cleaves yet as close to them as the Skin to their Backs, and when
will they reform! And some of them, the Husband and the Wife both agree in a
covetous humor, and all their actions discover it: And though Aldermen and
Aldermens fellows for Estates, yet they are as near and penurious in their way,
as their Tailor or Shoo-maker; and as little Generosity, in some cases, appears
in them: for they that are covetous, appear so every manner of way; only in
some things for a name, they will appear otherwise; it may be their Houses and
their Habits will be stately, but they will be as sparing as any man in many
other things; even in poor ordinary things, which some others of less Estates,
will be ashamed of. And both Husband and Wife, are of a temper herein.

But some may complain their Husbands are so; and some, their Wives do grudge,
and will not allow of other things. But where there is an Estate, the Wife, if
she be not covetous, may do much notwithstanding the Husband; but the Husband,
if he be not covetous, may do much more, notwithstanding the Wife: and that
will be but a slender excuse for either of them, if they love the sin in their
Hearts: Though they have such a pretense for it, let them therefore look to it.

But some are now Widows, who it may be while their Husbands lived had a
seeming fair excuse; but how great is their Sin, if they be the same still? And
have an Estate of a thousand or eight hundred per year, to command, and at
their own disposal, while they live; and it may be no Children to care for, but
what are provided for: What a price have they put into their hands, to be good
Stewards of such a plentiful Estate? And yet it may be they do not so much as a
poor man that gives six pence a week to some in need: What is it to part with
several hundreds yearly out of such an Estate, to good Uses, to refresh the
Bowels, and cloth the Backs of many poor Saints, or others? Do these think by
parting with fifty pounds per year to such Uses, they do well enough? Are such
as these good Stewards of the manifold gifts of God? Will it be said of such,
That their Prayers and their Alms are come Act. 10. 4.
up before God? Their Penuriousness may rather cause their Prayers to be spread
as Dung upon their Faces.

But one great Alderman, or Aldermans fellow, that has a great Estate in Land,
and a great and vast Trade also; says, I have married but so many Children, and
have so many more to ma^ry. And another great late Officer, that has a great
Estate in Land and Money, without a Trade; and another great Merchant, whose
Estate is in Bank and Trade at least twenty thousand pound; says, I have so
many and so many Children to dispose of also; and we must lay up for them: and
others have got Knighthoods, and all have got great Repute in the World, and we
must bear a port answerable to it; and we cannot but be frugal in our way, and
sparing in giving, having such occasions.

But ye covetous Earthworms, Do ye think that these pretenses will be a
sufficient Plea before the Bar of the great Judge of all the Earth? Do ye think
that your estates were given you only to be Stewards of? Or do you think they
were given you to be alone at your own disposal, for your own pleasure and your
own ends, so as you are never to be accountable for them to your great Lord,
how vainly and foolishly soever you dispose of them? Do you think it is not a
foolish and sinful disposal of them, to lay out so many hundred^, or so many
thousands, which you have hoorded up, to marry a poor child^sh Girl, puffed up
with pride, because of much Weal^h, to a man of so many hundreds per year, or
so many thousand pounds Estate in Merchandise, to the hazard of the Soul of
your Child? Do you think your Children cannot be happily disposed of in the
World, if they have not so many hundreds, or so many thousands for their
Portion? Have you not seen, that they that have had neither thousands nor
hundreds for their portions, have been blessed, being the Children of good men;
and have had greater Estates a dozen years after Marriage, then others that
have had hundreds, yea thousands, for their portions, who have been blasted and
cursed, lying in Prisons for Debt and Penury? Do ye not know that the Blessing
of the Lord makes rich? And can you that are covetous Professors expect a
Blessing from the Lord? Never look for it.

But to come to persons of a meaner Rank, that are Professors, and are called
the People of the Lord, who have Estates in Land, it may be of sou score, or a
hundred, or sixscore pounds per year, which they have gotten by trading, and
drive their Trade still, having a good Stock, and it may be but one Child, or
it may be two or three Children; but have always been so used to a mean Way, as
they can live with the profits of their Trades, and do so live and lay up their
incomes for that one or more Children, and add more Wealth to Wealth still;
for this may be much to them that live always in a plain and mean way: But if
they be moved to contribute part of their Estates to the supply of a poor
Family, they will it may be do a little; but it may be not so much as they that
have a less Estate, and more Children, and in no sort proportionable to what
their yearly layings up are, if it be compared with what the Lords People were
indispensibly required to do, under the Law.

You that have but one Child, if God should have given you five or six
Children, I hope you would not grudge to maintain them. But to give ou^ so much
yearly out of your layings up, as to maintain two or three Children, it is a
hard thing to persuade you to; though you might do it, and much more, and yet
live as comfortably as you do: and it may be a greater Blessing might come on
what remains for that one Child ye have, or two, or more, whatever they be.

But O the love of this World, how is it rooted in the Hearts of Professors!
And every one from the least to the greatest, is given to covetousness. They of
fifty pound per year Estate, are as covetous as those of a thousand; and those
of a thousand-pound per year, as covetous as those of fifty; and they think if
they can but hide what their Estates and Trades and Incomes are, and bring
forth some little instances of their poor Liberality, with pretenses of unknown
Charity, unto men, that they may not know how bad they are, that it is enough:
Not considering what God sees and knows.

But while I am speaking of great and small, that have Estates well known to
the Lord and themselves, and live with much less then their yearly incomes are:
I do not intend hereby to reprove those that drive Trades, and it may be among
men may be accounted some body, who yet notwithstanding have but small Estates,
and if they should contribute largely, might give other men's Estates; having
little of their own, when every man is paid. But let such be sparing for the
Gospels sake; though others for the Gospel^ sake ought not to be sparing, yet
they ought: for that were an unworthy thing ^o spend prodigally, either on
their Bellies or Backs, or to give liberal^y to others, when it is not their
own to spend or give: Such have been a dishonor to the Gospel; and the Lord
keep his poor People from so doing. God requi^es of a man according to what he
has, and not according to what he has not.

But it is you that are the Great Sinners, the great Idolators, the great
Adulterers, that have hundreds of Pounds free of Debt, or hundreds, or five
hundreds per year, more or less, that delight to hoord it up; and have your
affections so engaged unto it, as you cannot endure to part with any thing
that is considerable of it, not on good accounts.

And this is the Sin, THE great Sin which the House of Jacob, the Lords People
are guilty of: This is the Epidemical Sin, the general Disease among them,
though not of every individual Person of them; excep^ing only what is before
excepted. But it is so general a Sin, as there are but few left to bear witness
against it: for it is a rare thing for any to be a witness against himself; and
because that from the least to the greatest every one has been given to
Covetousness, there is few left to bear a Testimony against it: but they have
said one to another in their hearts, Bear with me, and I will bear with thee.
The Minister that p^eached the Lecture, or other Sermon, could not reprove the
covetous Shopkeeper, Merchant or Gentleman that was his Hearer, for fear lest
he should withold his G^fts from him. The Elders of the Independent and
Baptized People, and those called the Ministry among the Quakers, were the
same, if they were supplied by their Hearers; or if not, then having Estates of
their own, they have ^een eager in getting more still; and so closely kept
their Wealth, that they could not blame others that did so also: and the People
they could not blame their Teachers, nor one another for Covetousness, for they
were all alike, for every one, from the least to the greatest, were given to
Coveteousness. And therefore it was a thing rarely or never known, that ever
the Churches proceeded against any Member, merely for Covetousness: That either
the Presbyterian or any other of the Congregations or Societies ever excluded
any Member for Covetousness; though there is as plain a Rule for tha^ as for
Drunkenness. Yet I never heard that any Member was ever proceeded against for
that only, though there have been multitudes of them, that as much deserved to
be cast out of Fellowship, as some that have been cast out for Drunkenness, or
Adultery, or other Evils, for which they have been justly excommunicate.

But though the Rule is plain, That any that is called a Brother, that is a
covetous 1 Cor. 5. 11
Persons, we are not to keep company with; and it is as plain, That such shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, nor of Christ: Yet such have been 1 Cor. 6. 10
embraced, and are embraced in the Bosom of the Churches, and some of them are
highly esteemed in the Churches (though not for their Covetousness) for their
Gifts and Abilities to preach, and to feed the Flock, and for their name of
Greatness in the World; the poor Flock loving to have some silken Sheep among
them, even Persons of repute in the World.

But Covetousness has been, as has been said, so general a Disease, that the
little could not reprove the great, nor the great the little; and so the
Churches have been generally defiled and polluted, and the Name of the Lord
has been greatly dishonored among them.

And of this Sin of the love of this World, and the great delight that many
Professors have in it, and their close cleaving to it, and their sinful lustful
desires after it; it may be said, as is said of the whorish Woman, Prove. 7. 26.
She has cast down many wounded; yea, many strong men have been slain by her. O
how sad is it to consider of the many hundreds of those that have seemed to be
no little ones, nor no Fools, but those that have been great men, and wise men,
and strong men, men of no mean parts, that have fallen down wounded at her
feet, and have been carried away by her as an Ox to the slaughter, and have
truly been slain by her?

For the Profits and Pleasures, and Honor and Glory of this World, is none of
the meanest Engines which the Devil uses, by which he destroys so many Souls.
If it had been weak and mean, he would never have used it as his last and
greatest Engine against the Lord of Glory himself.

But though he used it in vain against him, against whom it was not possible
for him to prevail; yet he has prevailed, and prevailed in a lamentable
manner, against many thousands of you that are Professors, and that are called
the People of the Lord: And as you have been told, it is a universal Disease
among you; very, yea, very few among you excepted. Therefore let every one of
you faithfully and thoroughly search his and her heart; and say, Is it I? Is it
I? And finding your selves guilty more or less, set your selves against it, as
against the Plague, the bane of your Souls; and never leave using all spiritual
means, until you are thoroughly purged and cleansed of it.

But guilty in a high degree ye are of it, O House of Jacob, and the Lord your
Lord is highly displeased by it; and therefore chiefly, (though also for other
Sins) he so hides his Face from you, as he does. And therefore is it, that you
have for a long time, even for this seven and seven years, had so little
communion with him, and so little of the sweet Influences of his holy Spirit.
Therefore have you been so unfruitful under the Ordinances that you have
enjoyed, and do enjoy: Therefore have many of you had such cause to complain of
Deadness and Unprofitableness under the means of Grace: therefore is it that
there has been so few also that have been lately converted by the preaching of
the Word, and the Ordinances practiced among you, whether in Parish-Assemblies,
or other Congregational Assemblies.

For how could it be expected, that you should enjoy the sweet Rays of the
shining Face of your great and glorious Lord, and partake of the sweet
Influences of the Grace and Love of his Heart toward you, when your Hearts were
go^e to another then him, when you loved Strangers, and after them you would
and did go? And though you did come and bring your bodily presence into the
Assemblies on the Sabbath Day, or first day of the Week, and you came and sat
before him as his People, yet you^ hearts, which had been all the week
swallowed up in the World, would be then unavoidably also full of worldly
Contrivances, and your affections then as strongly set upon worldly things, as
all the week besides; and his Soul could take no pleasure in you; Ezekiel. 33. 31.
and you had no communion with him at all, but your hearts went after your
Covetousness: And he therefore withdrew the sweet Influences of his Grace and
Kindness from you, and left you to the vanity of your own Hearts, and hid his
face from you, so that you could hardly have so much as a glimpse of it from
week to week.

It is no wonder that the Wife is unfruitful when her Husband is withdrawn from
her: It is no wonder that you have been ba^ren and unfruitful, and that the
Fruits of the Spirit have not been brought forth by you, but you have been as a
barren Wilderness. Your Lord is withdrawn from you, for you have grieved his
Spirit, and he could take no pleasure in you, and therefore you must needs be
barren.

It is said of Believers in Christ, That they are married even to him who is
raised Romans 7. 4
from the dead, that they should bring forth fruit unto God. You have been
married unto him, but you have left your first Husband, and are gone to other
Lovers, and therefore have not brought forth Fruit unto God; neither in your
particular conversations, neither yet have you been Instruments in converting
others, and bearing Children unto him. The time was, when it might be said of
Sion, This and that man was born in her. But how few have been born in Sion of
late? But when you shall turn to the Lord again, and cast off with a holy
indignation all other Lovers, and shall say, I will return to my Hos. 2. 7.
first Husband, for it was better with me then than now; and shall be again
betrothed and engaged to him, so as never to depart from him any more: Then you
shall bring forth Fruit to him in another manner then you have done for these
many years.

But in the mean time, you are hereby told what your Sin is, and what the
reason of his great displeasure against you is; for which he has corrected you
again and again; even your Covetousness, your love of Money is THE Sin that you
have been generally guilty of; as well those in the highest, as those in the
lowest forms: And though some few Congregations or Churches, one or two, or
more of you, have exalted themselves up to heaven in their own imaginations,
and thought that they were excelling all others, on the account of some
peculiar Principles which they hold; and have upon that account separated from
all others, as not worthy to have communion with them; yet are they in respect
of this Evil, and the following Evils, as vile and as wretched as others; and
some among those Churches are as great Lovers of the World as others; and their
Idolatries and Adulteries are as odious as others: And there is no Church in
England, Scotland, or Ireland, found free, but they have all provoked the Lord
their God, in a very high degree, by this great Abomination. But there are
other Sins which the Lords People are guilty of also, which are to be shown to
them with a SPARE NOT: Cry aloud, SPARE NOT; show my People their
Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins; are the Lords own Words.

II. Another sin which is a sin of the Lords People, which is to be shown to
II. HARD-HEARTEDNES. Job 42. 6.
them that they may be ashamed, and abhor themselves, and repent in dust and
ashes, is the sin of HARD-HEARTEDNESS, and shuting up the bowels of their
Compassion from the Poor and Needy; which has sprung from that great Root of
Evil, Covetousness; which has been justly mentioned in the first place, it
being the spring and root of very much bitter Fruit: according to that word of
the blessed Apostle Paul, (who was clear no doubt of that sin himself, it being
plainly demonstrated in his whole course of Life) 1 Timothy 6. 10. For the love of
Money is the Root of all Evil. Hard-heartedness and close-fistedness has been,
I say, another great ^^n of many of the Lords people, especially of them that
are rich in this world, and that have free and comfortable estates that they
can call their own. I shall the more briefly speak to this sin under this head,
having spoken to it in the former; as it is one proof of that great sin of
Covetousness. But that this is a great and hateful sin appears thus.

The great Commandment of the Gospel, is Love; and it is the great Command not
only of the Gospel, but also of the Law; and therefore as it is called a New
Commandment, so it is called an Old Commandment also: I say the great New
Commandment, which also is the Old, is Love; and it is the great Character of a
Gospel-Saint especially: Hereby shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye love one another. Now this Sin of Hard-heartedness and John 13. ^5. Jam. 2 8.
Close-fistedness, in them that profess to be the Disciples of Christ, and the
Lords People, is a great blemish to their Profession, and a great Evidence of
their Disobedience unto the Royal Law of the Gospel, unto the great Command of
their great and glorious Lord and Master.

But this is the Sin of very many of the Lords People; and though they do obey
the Lord in many other things, yet in this they do not: Though this is that
great Commandment of his, that he did servently desire to be obeyed in; and
that he did so frequently inculcate again and again.

But you will say, We do love one another, we do love the Brethren; we love
them above all others, as they are Brethren, and as they are the Children of
our Father; and as the Image of Jesus Christ is in them, they are very dear
unto us.

To which the answer is, Yea, so you do in word and you will speak very kindly
to them, and you will wish them well, and you will do kindnesses for them, if
they cost you nothing. But consider what the Apostle James says; If a Brother
or Sister be naked, and destitute of daily Food, and one of you say, Depart
Jam. 2. 15, 16.
in Peace, be you warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those
things which are needful to the Body; what does it profit? If ye speak never so
kindly, and profess love, and it may be have some love to them; but if not so
much as to communicate wherewith to supply their wants, what does it profit?
What does it profit them, or what does it profit you? Do ye think that love ye
profess to have to them shall be taken notice of; if ye have Estates and have
not Hearts to manifest that ye have true love, and true Bowels of Compassion,
by supplying their wants? Whatever your Children need, ye have bowels to them,
and supply their wants, and ye cannot but supply them because ye love them; and
had you love to the poor members of Christ in necessity, you would also supply
their wants; but your Hard-heartedness appears in your Close-fistedness; and
therefore consider what the lovely Apostle John speaks, 1 John 3. 17. But whosoever
has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his
Bowels of compassion from him; how dwells the love of God in him? It is an
evidence that all Bowels of Compassion are shut up, when there is a
withholding of communicating of this Worlds Good to a needy Person by those
that have it; and what will such talk of Love? He that shuts up the Bowels
of his Compassion, how dwells the love of God in him? What evidence of it
does he give? He that loves God, loves the Children of God, whether sick, or
in Prison, or in Hunger, or Nakedness. But what demonstrations of it do
hard-hearted Persons give, that have this Worlds good, and shut up the Bowels
of their compassion? I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick and in Prison, Mat. 25. 42, 43.
and ye visited me not: How dare ye say ye love me, that were so hardhearted?

Of this great sin, very many Professors of Religion, of all the several
Understandings fore mentioned, are very deeply guilty; though they are
accounted the Lords People, and are Members of several Churches and Societies
of them that fear the Lord. And their fig-leaf excuses will not cover this
sore, nor hide it from the sight of the Lord, whatever it do from Men.

And such hard-hearted persons as have not a heart to communicate, but lay it
up either for Children, or for some Niece or other, may live to see them all
buried before them, and themselves soon after may have their Souls taken from
them; and then what comfort will they have in the thoughts of such hardness of
Heart, and such unanswerableness unto the Law of God, as has been in them?

Now the Law, as well as the Gospel, discovers how displeasing this Sin is in
the sight of God, and how pleasing the contrary Virtue is unto him. And if such
hard-hearted Persons have any desire to reform, and any love to the Truth and
Law of God; if they have any delight in it, let them read often, and read
considerarely those several Passages in ^is blessed Word, Isa. 58. 5. to 11.
Jer. 12. 15, 16, 17. Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Jam. 1. 27. Jam. 2. 8. Mark 6. 8.
Exodus 23. 11. Levit. 19. 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 24. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Levit. 23. 22. In
these three last mentioned places, you may see how the heart of the Lord our
God is bent to require Tenderness and compassion in us; which is so plentiful
and abundant in himself, in that though we have many other precious Precepts of
this nature besides, yet this one is repeated three times in the same words.
And that we may see how well he takes works of this nature, he tells us, Deuteronomy.
24. 13. Do this, says he, and it shall be Righteousness unto thee before the
Lord thy God. But there is but few that have desired to be abounding in this
Righteousness. Compare with this place Psalm. 112. and 2 Cor. 9. 9, 10. and
consider how many such righteous Men and Women there be in England: Some there
are, I do not doubt; but they are rare to be found. Read also Isa. 32. 8. Prove.
19. 17. Job 31. 19, 20. Ezekiel. 18. 7. Dan. 4. 27. Hos. 6. 6. Psalm. 18. 25. Mat.
5. 7. Luke 16. 9. Romans 12. 8. 13. and 2 Cor. 9. from 5. to 15. Heb. 13 1, 2, 3,
16. where we have a plentiful Testimony both from the Law and the Gospel, of
the blessedness of the Generous, the Liberal, the Bountiful, the Merciful Man
or Woman. And to show what the miserable, the wietched, and the unhappy case of
others are, I need mention no other place then that one, Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43,
46. And these (hard-hearted persons) shall go away into everlasting Punishment,
but the Righteous (who have dispersed abroad, and given to the Needy) into Life
eternal.

III. Another great Sin, that those that are called the People of the Lord,
III. OMISSION OF HOLY DVTIES.
the Israel of God, are guilty of, is the Sin of OMISSION OF HOLY DUTIES; of
which Covetousness has also been a great Root, as well as of hardness of
Heart: For this has been an evil Fruit of that bitter Root in many, where
Covetousness has been, though not in all that have been covetous: For some
have been very covetous, and yet very frequent in Duties; especially some that
have great Estates coming in (without a Trade) by Lands, and Interest-Money,
and Bank-Money: For upon such there was no such temptation as upon others, of
neglecting Duties, though they have been as covetous, as I said before, as
others; it being proved, as I said before, by their Close fistedness. But this
Sin of Omission of Holy Duties, I cannot say has always sprung from
Covetousness neither, though for the most part it has. Duties that have been
omit ^ed, are, ^. Solemn and constant Prayer in Families.


Now that this has been a great Sin of many of the Lords People, is too well
known to themselves and others. And the Duties that have been sadly neglected
by many of them, are these:

1. Solemn and constant Prayer in their Families, which ought to have been
carefully, and with great seriousness and fervency of Spirit performed, twice a
day at the least; together with spiritual Praises to God, for daily and
innumerable Mercies; with some exposition daily, or at least reading of some
part of the Scriptures, for the Edification and Instruction of the Family in
general: which being done with great Fear and Reverence, in a lively spritual
manner, is comely to be seen in the Tabernacles of the Righteous, Psalm. 118.
15. Dan. 6 10. Josh. 24. 14. Heb. 12. 28. Genesis 13. 4. Abraham, Joshua, Daniel
and David, did so, Psalm. 92. 2.

2. Taking frequent opportunities particularly to instruct Children and
Servants, ^. Parti^ular in^truction ^f Chil^ren and others. ^.
Closet-Performances.
one by one, examining the state and condition of each Soul; and applying
particular Instructions, or Reproofs, or Consolations to them, as the case
might requite; with a zealous, and fervent, and longing desire of doing good to
every Soul appertaining to the Family, or Acquaintance, or Kindred, or
Neighbors, as far as any opportunity might be had.

3. Being constant at daily Closet (as well as Family) Performances, in Prayer
and Praises, in conversing with the Lord alone; it being not possible to have
so much freedom to pour out a Persons own Soul-Cases, and to express i^s
Soul-Affections to the Lord among others, as alone: and frequent private
searching of, and meditating on the Law of God, the blessed Word of God, day
and night.

4. The often visiting the Poor, the Fatherless, and Widows in their
affliction, ^. Visit^ng of the ^oor, etc.
and the Sick and Imprisoned in their Trials and Sufferings: Wherein pu^e and
true Religion is manifested, Jam. 1. 17.

5. Taking special care of the Souls of your Acquaintance (whether you were
Members of particular Congregations, or not) that you observed to be ^.
Watch^ng over ^he Souls ^f others.
under any sinful distempered diseased frame of Spirit, in whom any sin did
appear, or any carriage or conversation not becoming the Gospel, according to
the Rules laid down in the blessed Word of Truth, both in the Law and Gospel:
as Lev. 19. 17. Mat. 8. 15, 16. Gal. 6. 1.

6. That great Duty of a constant frequenting the Assemblies of the Saints, and
the practice of the public Ordinances of Christ, which he taught all his
Constant and diligent attending the Assemblies of Saints publicly to worship
the Lord. 1 Pet. 4. 14
Disciples to observe; wherein there is a more public owning and honoring the
Lord in the Eyes of all the World: Which well becomes the Saints diligently and
solemnly to attend, whatever Persecution they suffer for it; (for happy are
they, if they suffer for well doing, the Spirit of God and of Glory re^leth
upon them) which was the blessed Practice of the Saints of old; as Psalm. 22 22.
and 107. 32. and 149. 1. and 122. 1, 2. and 27. 4. Heb. 10. 25. 1 Cor. 11. 18.
and 14. 23. and 1 Cor. 5. 4.

Now I say, That there has been a very great Omission of all these great
Duties by the generality of Professors, is too well known to themselves and
others: But I may not spare to tell them of it more particularly, and to s^ew
them the hainousness of those Sins.

As first, That great Duty of solemn and constant Prayer in Families, being
neglected, is to be charged upon many, even of the Baptized Congregations,
whose looseness therein has been very lamentable, and not only the people,
but some of the Elders and Teachers of those people also, have greatly offended
in this thing; and whatsoever their zeal has been in other things, and in
things never so excellent, yet in this they have been a shame and a dishonor
to the high profession of the Gospel which they have made; my Soul is grieved
to think of it. It having proceeded merely from a careless, carnal, sluggish
frame of Spirit, not from Opinion or Judgment that it ought to be so, or that
it were against a Rule to pray and praise the Lord in their Families, or to
exhort or instruct their Families; though that were very bad in them, if they
did it from Opinion: but it has not been so; for sometimes they have been
practicing that duty in their Families at their own leisure, and when their own
turns were served. O sinful people that have thus provoked the Lord, to perform
duties to God either not at all, all the day long, or else when its done
sleeping (by most present) bringing the blind, and the halt to the Lord; and as
these so more private and Closet performances have been very rare and seldom;
as those that have lived in their Families, and observed their looseness and
remisness can witness; and their own Consciences will testify to their faces.
And as the Professors of the Baptized Churches, so those of the Independent and
Presbyterian understandings, many of them, have been as gui^ty of the omission,
or slight, or seldom performances of these duties as they. But for the people
that are termed Quakers (by way of distinction from others) they have been
wretchedly guilty of the omission of these Family and Closet Duties; it being
their general way, never to pray in their Families, though many of their
Families have been made up of all such as have been called Quakets; all such as
have approved one of another, and could have no pretense why they should not
join together in Prayer and praises, why they should not worship the Lord
together in their Families, as well as in the greater Congregations, but only
a careless, carnal, vain heart, that is the occasion of the remisness of all
Professors, that are remiss in this Duty. But they have a pretense that they
may not pray, but when they have a strong impulse of Spirit thereunto; and if
that be the case, and that People may not pray that they may be quickened by
the quickening Spirit, nor pray for more of the Spirit, when they have but a
little, very little, in them; then why do they pray at all in their Meetings,
or join in Prayer with those that do? But it may be those that pray not all the
week before in their Families, will pray when they come to a Meeting. And had
not the devil a great design in hindering all sorts of Professors from Prayer,
they would not so easily, upon such slight and insufficient grounds, be hindered
from Prayer, as they generally are. But that subtle Adversary knows that
their Hearts shall live that seek the Lord; and that there are no Souls so
th^iving as the truly spiritual praying Souls, that are most in Prayer and
Supplication day and Ps. 22. 26. and 69. 32.
night; which none are, whatever they pretend, but those that spend much time
therein, both in their Families (where they fear the Lord) and in their
Closets. When thou prayest, (retire thy self, set time apart for that purpose)
enter into thy Closet, and pray to thy Father in secret; and thy Father which
sees in secret, himself shall reward thee openly. But some may say, I may pray
in Mat. 6, 6.
secret, when I neither enter into my Closet, nor none in my House observes
me. But let me tell such, That if they be observed (as they may be, when they
little think of it) to spend their day from morning to night, in being
implunged in some worldly business or other, or to be in company with some or
other, talking of this or that News, or this and that Trade or business, or
eating and drinking, and walking, and talking; and so fill up their whole day,
and no time set apart, nor no retirement, or being retired from the world, and
the affairs thereof; they are sorry Prayers that such make. Our dear Lord went
into Deserts and Mountains to pray, set time apart for that great and solemn
Work, and frequently continued all night in Prayer to God: It was not a little
and slight setting apart of time. And therefore let not any dare to deceive and
delude themselves and others, with deceitful pretenses.

But I have a little digrest, though necessarily, from my work in hand, to show
the Lords People their Transgressions. But I must proceed to show his People
among the Quakers, that this has been their great Sin, that they have been
very grossly, and in higher degrees then others, guilty of the omission of these
holy Duties, of Family and Closet-Praying, and Praising, and Worshipping the
Lord, which is of so great concernment to the increase of all spiritual Grace;
and that is the reason that they grow so little, but are come to a stint, and
do not add to their Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowlenge, etc. but in the
posture they were seven years ago, they are still, many of them; and are rather
declined in the purity of their conversations, though they stick to their
shells, and outsides of needless words and gestures, in the which there is no
savor to any truly spiritual taste.

Thus some of all Professors of the fear of the Lord, have been great
transgressors against him, in not glorifying him as God, and worshipping him so
frequently and so solemnly as they ought; but have been shamefully guilty of
the neglect hereof: Though some have been more guilty then others, as their own
Consciences, as well as many other Witnesses, can testify to their Faces. They
have not been so exercised in Thankfulness and Praises, as they ought; nor so
sensible of the multitudes of Mercies, which God has for a long time given
them; nor of his continued Mercies, which are new every morning, so as to
praise him for his loving kindness every morning, and for his faithfulness
every night; as David, Psalm. 92. 2. and 145. 2. and 119. 164. But they have
been unthankful, though Praise is comely for the Righteous, and frequent Prayer
and Praises becomes the Upright.

And as they have been guilty of the Omission of Family and Closet-Prayer and
Praises; so many of them have been guilty too much of the neglect of
instructing and taking pains with Children and Servants, to bring them up in
the nurture and fear of the Lord; if they have taken a little paits once in a
month, or a quarter of a year, they have thought it enough; and how many have
had Servants, of whose Souls they have taken no care at all, or very little? O
what great reason have very many, of all distinctions, to take shame to
themselves, on this particular account also?

Again, The Lords People have been very guilty, many of them, of that great
evil, of the neglect of visiting the Poor; the Fatherless, and Widows in their
affliction, and of the Members of Christ in their sick and imprisoned
conditions; so that it will be said of many of them, I was sick and in Prison,
and ye visited me not: and of this evil they have been generally guilty, except
some of them here and there; but some of them have been so guilty hereof,
through the love of this World, as they could very scarcely find time once in a
quarter of a year, to visit any poor Soul in their Distress, or S^cl^ness, or
Poverty, or Imprisonment; though some have been of the same Congregation of
which they have been: as thinking that the Visits that some others make, may
excuse them; or whether others visit such or no, it is all one to them; this
Worlds Business has been their Work, and their Delight: perform such Duties
who will, they have not been careful. This has been the shameful evil of some,
both Presbyterian, Baptized, and Independent Professors: but the People called
Quakers may not be so much charged with this evil, as many of the others may
be; there being generally a more forwardness and readiness in them to this
Duty, then in others: And though it is a Duty that an outside Professor may
perform, yet it is a Duty well becoming the the most eminent Saint.

But further, The Lords People have also been very guilty of that Sin, of
neglect of a tender and careful watching over the Souls of one another, when
any one has been overtaken with a fault; and of not endeavoring to restore
such a one with the spirit of meekness; but have suffered Sin upon others, Gal.
6. 1. Lev. 17. 17.
and have not been concerned about it; and have not taken that natural care of
the welfare of each others Souls, as they ought to have done; this being the
Duty of all Saints, but especially of the Elders and Teachers of a People. But
of this Sin many have been guilty; but the Elders and Preachers of the
Presbyterian Congregations especially have been very deficient herein, for
which they ought to be deeply humbled, for they most of them have been very
negligent herein: as if it were enough for them to preach two or three Sermons
a week, in a public Congregation to all Comers: and they have done little
else, in order to the Soul-advantage of the People, whom they have judged to be
committed to their Charge; never going to visit them that hear them, and to be
enquiring into the state of their Souls, and instructing them more particularly
in the things that belong to their Peaee: nor yet to endeavor with the Spirit
of Meekness to restore any of them that have been over-taken with a fault, and
that are guilty of particular Evils, which becomes not their Profession. But
they content themselves with a sluggish negligence of these things, as if
nothing else were to be done in order to the welfare of the Souls of the Flock,
the Sheep and Lambs of Christ, but merely a bare preaching once a week, as some
do no more; or two or three times a week, in a general way, to all Comers.

Of this, I say, the Preachers of the Presbyterian Congregations are most
guilty; but yet some of the Teachers and Elders of the Independent, and of the
Baptized Congregations also, as is well known, are as guilty hereof almost, if
not altogether, as any of these, and therefore such may be joined together: And
they must all know, That these are the Shepherds with whom the Lord is greatly
displeased, of whom he makes that great Complaint, Ezekiel. 34. 3, 4. The diseased
have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed the sick, neither have ye
bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, etc. which alas, alas,
has been your very Character.

How many of your Flock have been diseased, weak and seeble Souls? And what
care have you taken to strengthen them, by administering such particular
Applications unto their particular Cases, as might make them to be strong Men?

How many of your Flock have been sick of grievous Diseases; either of filthy
Covetousness, or of dangerous Pride, or of disturbing passionate peevishness,
and frowardness of spirit, upon every small occasion, or of desperate Unbelief?
etc. And what care have ye taken to heal these and suchlike fore Diseases of
the Souls of your Flock, by those blessed Prescriptions of the Word of God,
which you ought skilfully to have administered to each of them, Remedies
suitable to their several Maladies, as the matter might require; skilfully
dividing the Word aright, with a spirit of Meekness, Sweetness, and Love, and
yet with a holy Courage and Resolution not to spare Rebukes with all Authority
in Love?

How many in your Flock have had broken Bones, by reason of distress of Spirit,
that ye have not bound up? And how many of your Flock have been driven away; by
falling into company with persons that have led them astray, or by a propensity
in theit natures to run into loose and vain company, and to go astray from the
Footsteps of the Flock of Christ? And ye have not brought again that which was
driven away, neither have you sought that which was lost: if they be driven
away, they may be driven far enough for you, some of you, who never go to seek
their straggling Souls, by going to their Houses to endeavor their Return, not
once in twelve months; but if they be lost, lost they may be for you;
especially if they be some of the Poor of the Flock, if mean in the World: and
they may wander from Mountain to Hill, and be devoured of wild Beasts; for you
have neither cared to seek that which was lost, nor to bring again that which
was driven away, nor to heal the Sick, etc. And WOE BE TO YOU, ye Shepherds of
Israel, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 34. 2. that do not the work of a Shepherd, but
take care to feed your selves, and cloth your selves; and if that be done,
whether you have it of the Sheep, or any other way, you are satisfied: though
you do not those Offices of Shepherds of the Flock; as those that should watch
for their Souls; as those that must give an account of them to God: O how sad
an account have ye to make for these things! Heb. 13. 17


These Sins of your Omissions unto whom so great a Charge is committed, have
been very great provocations of the Eyes of his Glory, of whose blessed Service
you have been so negligent; and you must be told of it with a SPARE NOT.

Again, As this has been the Sin of Prophets and Teachers; so it has been the
Sin of others also, even of many of all distinctions, Presbyterians and
Quakers, etc. for it is the concern of all that fear the Lord, to endeavor the
Reclaiming and Recovery of any that are fallen or overtaken with a fault, and
to endeavor the restoring of them with the spirit of Meekness. But this has
been a general Sin among very many, viz the Omission of this Duty. It is true,
that many Professors are not gifted for such a Work, as ^ohers are, but every
one ought to be found performing it, according to their capacity, as need
^equires; and neglect of the discharge hereof, in any of the Lords People, has
been their sin, which the Lord will have them humbled for.

But the great Sin among the Sins of Omission of the Lords People, is, the Sin
of Omission of the constant attending of the Assemblies of the Saints in all
times wherein that Assembly, whereunto a person appertains, does appoint any
solemn Assembly for the public worshipping the Lord together, and waiting on
the Lord to see his goings in the Sanctuary, to behold the beauty of the Lord,
and to enquire into his Temple: For the Lord is pleased to declare (Rev. 1. 13,
20) that his presence is in the midst of the Churches, in the Assemblies of his
Saints; and there his people may inquire, may seek after, may find, and obtain
the Knowledge of the great Mysterie^ of his Gospel and Kingdom, and there the
spiritual Eye may behold his Beauty. And if some cannot see any Beauty there,
it is because their Eyes are blinded: But every spiritual Eye may and does
behold in some measure the Beauty of the Lord in his Temple, in his Churches.
But the reason why those that are truly spiritual see but a little, is because
there is a great defection in the very best of the Churches, and most of the
Elders of the Churches have their blots, and some in particular are very ^oul
ones, (as has been said, and may appear before this discourse be ended, it
being to show the Lords People their Transgressions, and the Churches, and the
Elders of the Churches, their Sins.) But though there be a very great defection
and backsliding in the Churches, and the very Elders of the Churches, to their
shame; yet there the Beauty of the Lord is to be seen, if any where upon Earth,
though it be very much beclouded. But though there be but a little Light, yet
some-Light, and some spiritual Beauty there is among many Churches and
Congregations of Saints; and let particular Souls know, that then they shall
know, if they follow on to Hos. 6. 3. Prove. 10. 4. Isa. 32. 20 Prove. 2. 4
know the Lord: And he that improves a little well, shall gain much more. The
diligent hand makes rich; and blessed are they that sow beside all Waters.
Blessed are they that improve all opportunities in public and private, to
search for the Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord, as for Silver, and dig for
it, as for hid Treasures: In all places or means in which there is any ground
to expect the obtaining of that blessed Treasure.

But this has been the Sin of the House of Jacob, (or those that pretend to be
of that House, viz. of the Israel of God) That they have greatly neglected, not
only other Duties, in the performance whereof they might have been blessed;
but also this great Duty, of attending the Assemblies of the Saints, wherein in
an especial manner they ought to ^e diligent: For in the Assemblies of the
Saints, God is most evidently and visbly honored, and glo^ified by his People
in the Eyes of the World: And the more they have been opposed, the more ought
his Saints to be diligent in giving up themsel^es by a faithful obedience unto
his Precepts, in the observance of all his Ordinances and appointments,
blamelesly, purely, and not according to men's inventions: for in vain do they
worship him, that teach ^or Doctrine the Precepts of men. But instead of
wai^ing on the Lord in the Assemblies of his Saints, in former times, wherein
the Lords People enjoyed Prosperity, and as much Liberty as they could desire;
they, many of them, followed the World, and the Profits thereof; and others,
for t^i^^^ng occasions, neglected their Duties, when it was not for matter of
Gain unto them, but merely from a sluggish, dull, dead frame of spirit, and
Indifferency in the Lords Service. And when Churches have appointed solemn days
of waiting upon the Lord, in solemn Assemblies, besides the Sabbath, or first
day of the Week, there have been slender app^^^ances of them of all
Distinctions: Even of some of the Baptized Churches (I say not all of the
Baptized Churches, but some) are very guilty hereof also; and it is too well
known to them, that their solemn Assemblies being appointed, have been slightly
observed weekly (^n the week Days) yea, many times when days of Fasting and
Prayer, and days of Thanksgiving have been appointed upon solemn occasions,
they have been unworthily neglected by many Church Members, and by some Elders
also; some affording but half the day to the Lord, and some no part at all. O
unworthy People! Was the Lord a barren Wilderness unto you, or a Land of
Darkness? Was there no pleasure to be found in waiting upon him? Was he no more
delightful to your Soul, then a Land of Darkness, which is very unpleasant to
the Body? Was he so to your Souls? Was there no more in him, then in a barren
heathy Wilderness? Who can choose but have his heart rise against the unworthy
doings of such a People, as have by their A^^ions seemed to manifest no more
regard unto the great and glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth, the blessed
Fountain of all manner of Loveliness, Beauty, Sweetness, and transcendent
Goodness, then unto a barren Wilderness, or a Land of Darkness, into which no
man desires to enter? Do not such a People deserve to be cast into utter
Darkness? Yet such a People have you been, O House of Jacob, and ye that are
called by the Name of Israel, many of you, that have refrained and abstained
from coming unto the House of the Lord, unto the Assemb^ies of the Saints, unto
the Place where his Honor dwells, upon every trivial and slight occasion,
and sometimes upon no occasion at all. What reason have you to blush, and be
ashamed of these things, that not only, as has been said, neglect the waiting
upon the Lord in private, but also in public! Wherein it is more visible to
the World, how slightly you serve the Lord, and how little you prize an
Opportunity of Worshipping him. His blessed Servant David could say, Psalm. 122.
1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the Lord: Our
Feet shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem. Psalm. 26. 8
And, Lord, I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the Place where thine
Honor dwells. But what do many of you say? You draw back, and keep off, when
you should go to the House of the Lord. You prefer your Shops before it, going
to Blackwell-Hall before it, going to the Custom-House, going to receive money
on Bills of Exchange, going aboard Ships, any pal^ry business before it. O
foolish People, and unwife! Do you not consider that Word, Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48.
Because thou would not serve the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with
gladness of heart, in the enjoyment of the abundance of all things: therefore
shall thou serve thine Enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in
hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things, and he
shall put a Yoke of Iron upon thy Neck, etc. Did you not neglect the service of
the Lord, in the last twelve years in which you had a full liberty, and a
fullness of all things that a people could desire; and therein in a high degree
provoked the Lord to deprive you both of your liberty and of your fullness of
riches together, whereof some of you have been deprived to purpose? And since
you have been deprived of that liberty you then had; have you not greatly
neglected the Service of the Lord still? (though it may be, there is a little
Beformation among some of you, though but a little) And do you not provoke him
yet more to anger, by your negligent attending his Courts, and the place where
his Honor dwells? So that you give him cause to deprive you both of all that
liberty and plenty that yet he vo^chsa^eth to you, or any of you, and to make
you mere Servants, and sla^es to your enemies, even to Foreigners, which seem
to be preparing to come against you.

But I shall not (in showing you this public sin, viz. the sin of the Omission
of the public Worship of God) mention more particularly then I have, who are
more or less guilty of this evil: It is so visible and manifest to all of all
sorts, that I need say no more, to show those of the Lords People that have
been guilty hereof, that this is their sin in particular. But let them, all of
them, that have been guilty hereof, know, that the Lord takes it very unkindly
at their hands; and let them consider those complainings of his against a
negligent People, that do neglect the frequent and solemn waiting upon him in
holy Serv^ces, Jer. 2. 31, 32. and what expostulations he there uses with them,
Have I been a barren Wilderness unto Israel, a Land of Darkness? Wherefore say
my People, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Can a Maid forget her
Ornaments, or a Bride her A^^ire? Yet my people have forgotten me, days
without number. What can ye answer to these words? Was the Lord a Wilderness
unto you, or a Land of Darkness? You can make no answer to this, but what will
^eturn shame and confusion of Faces upon you. What can you say to your Actions,
in which you have said, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Has not
your careless and indifferent waiting upon the Lord, manifested that you
thought you were Lords your selves, and independent upon the Lord, and had no
need of waiting on him, or praying or add^essing to him, or observing his Rules
or his Commands; but you were able to stand upon your own Legs, and therefore
would walk by your own Rules? (Poor miserable Worms!) And how many days have
you past over your heads, when God has ^ca^ce been in all your thoughts? but
you have forgotten him, days without number. The Heart of a young Girl has
been much mo^e upon her Ornaments, and of a Bride on her Attire, then yours
has been on your God. A Child has more minded its daily Ornaments (especially
a Girl) then you have your daily solemn waiting on your God; for which cause
that word may be justly taken up, Ezekiel. 19. 14. This is a Lamentation, and
shall be for a Lamentation. And O that it may be bitterly lamented by the Lords
People indeed!

But of this Sin, I must say that there are some here and there of the Lords
People (whom I do know, though it may be but one of a thousand) that are very
clear of it, in the generality of the course of their lives, that may (it may
be) be compared with David, and Abraham, and Daniel, and Paul, in their
diligent and constant waiting upon the Lord, (whom their Soul loves) both in
public and private, Worshipping of him; and with Moses, and Aaron, and Samuel,
among them that call upon his Name. Ps. 99, 4^


IV. Another great evil in some of the Lords People, is that great and IV.
COVENANT BREAKING.
heinous Sin of the BREACH OF COVENANTS, or Oaths solemnly taken and entered
into; wherein many of them have very much dishonored the Name of the Lord,
though it may be it is a Sin that they are not so sensible of as they should be.

There was a Solemn League or Covenant entered into about twenty two years
since. But the Deeds of them that did wittingly, and willingly break any part
of that Covenant, when it was in their power to have performed it, were a very
great dishonor to the Name of God, whose People they professed themselves to be
that were then swaying persons in the Parliament and Army. And whatever their
specious pretenses were for their so doing, by which pretenses they deceived
themselves, and blinded the eyes of many simple honest people; yet their sin
therein was very great, and they did thereby give great occasions unto the
enemies of the Lord, to blaspheme; and the Name of God was thereby profaned
abroad in the World.

The entering into that Solemn Covenant, was not a thing done in a Corner, but
was such a Public and Solemn Act, as was made manifest to all the Nations in
Europe, whose eyes were then gazing upon us, and observing of us; and the
entering into that Covenant was greatly cried up, as a most worthy Act, that
might conduce much to the happiness of those Nations, had it been inviolably
kept to the utmost of every man's capacity.

But when a Nation shall solemnly enter into a Covenant, with hands lifted up
to God, as if they desired his Blessings and Favors, no otherwise then as they
performed, and faithfully kept it to the utmost of their capacity, and then
per^idiously in a few years shall wittingly, willingly, and resolvedly break
some great and considerable parts of it, in the fight of God, Angels, and Men;
and yet profess to be the People of the Lord, and the Children of God; How
greatly do they dishonor his Glorious Name? whose People ought to be Children
that will not lie, much less break a Solemn Covenant; of whose Servant it is
said, Psalm. 15. 4. That he swears to his own hurt, and changes not. And it
well becomes him so to do: for it were better for him to choose affliction
rather then sin; to suffer prejudice, and loss, and great disadvantage, then in
any measure to break his Promise, much less his Oath; For what if he lose
outward things? God is ab^e to make up that ^hundred f^ll to him again. But if
he sin against the Lord, Who shall entreat for him?

But this Sin of false Swearing, or breach of an Oath is a great and horrible
s^n; which, as it greatly dishonours the Name of the Lord, does greatly provoke
the Eyes of his Glory, as appears.

Because it is evident in Scripture that the Lord does very severely punish his
people for that sin, that have been guilty of it; bringing dreadful judgments
upon them for that sin in particular, as is evident in Ezekiel. 17. The King of
Babylon having come up against Jerusalem, and taken away the King thereof, and
carried him to Babyl^n; he being one of the Sons of Josiah, and having set up a
Brother of his to be King of Judah, in the stead of him that he carried away to
Babylon; he made him whom he set up to be King, to en^er into a Covenant of
Subjection unto him: But in^^ead of keeping his Co^enant, he rebelled against
the King of Babylon, as you have the History, 2 Chronicles. 36. 10, 11, 12, 13. and
2 Kings 24. 17, 18, 19. and Jer. 37. the whole Chapter. And sent to Egypt for
help; But says the Lord, Ezekiel. 17. 15, 16. Shall he escape that does such
things? or shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? As I live, says the
Lord God, surely, in the place where the King dwells that made him King,
whose Oath he despised, and whose Covenant ^e brake; even with him, in the
midst of Babylon shall he die. Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army make
for him in the War, -- Seeing he despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant;
when lo, he had given his hand, and has done all these things, he shall not
escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely, my Oath that he
has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense
upon his own head, and I will spread my Net upon him, and he shall be taken in
my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for
his trespass that he has trespassed against me, and all his fugitives, with
all his bands, shall fall by the sword; and they that remain shall be scattered
toward all Winds: And ye shall know that I the Lord have spoken it.

Here we see, when the King of Judah had sworn to the King of Babylon, though
it may be he might think himself not bound to keep Covenant with him, being a
Heathen and an Idolater: and though it may be, when he took the Covenant, he
took it unwillingly; yet having taken it, he was indispensibly bound to perform
and keep it. For if the consideration of the quality of the Persons, whether
Heatheus, or Turks, or Atheists, should null the Covenants or Promises that are
made by the People of the Lord to them; then the Name of the Lord would be
greatly blasphemed amongst the Heathen by such Deeds: for it would justly open
the mouths of such to say, That there is no Truth no^ Righ^eousness amongst
such as profess to be the Lords Servants. For among all sorts of men in the
World, Truth and Faithfulness in Promises and Covenants, and Just and Righteous
Dealings among Men, is highly esteemed, and the contrary condemned; much more
among the People of the God of Truth (for Just and Right is He) therefore if
any such do Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
break a Covenant, a solemn Oath, God is more dishonored by them then by
others; and he will not bear with it in them, but usually does severely punish
it, as in this King: Therefore, says the Lord, Shall he escape that does such
things? Shall ^e break the Covenant and be delivered? He shall not escape, 2
Kin 25. 7. Jer. 39 6, 7.
he shall be carried captive, and he shall die in Babylon; seeing he despised
the Oath, by breaking the Covenant. And accordingly he was carried to Babylon,
and all his Sons were there slain before his Eyes, and then his Eyes were put
ou^, and he was blind to the day of his death.

And it is much to be observed, That the Lord calls the Covenant that this King
entered into, HIS Oath, and HIS Covenant: Thus says the Lord God, As I live,
surely MY Oath that he has despised, and MY Convenant that he has broken,
even it will I recompense upon his own Head. For we find in Scripture that the
entering into a Covenant or Oath, is a great and solemn Appointment of the
Lord, for the ending of Controversy, and for the confirming Heb. 6. 16
of Truth; and therefore it is called in Scripture, The Oath of the LORD, as
Exodus 22. 10. 11. If a man deliver unto his Neighbor an Ass, or an Ox, or a
Sheep, or any Beast, to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man
seeing it; then shall an OATH OF THE LORD be between them both, that ^e ^ath
not put his hand unto his Neighbors Goods, and the Owner of it shall accept
thereof, etc. And 2 Samuel 21. 7. But the King spared Mephibesheth, the Son of
Jonathan, the Son of Saul; because of the LORDS OATH that was between them;
between David and Jonathan the Son of Saul: The like Eccles. 8. 2. And so here:
As I live, says the Lord, surely MY Oath that he has despised, and MY
Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head:

And it is plain, that in an Oath or Covenant, the Party does in word or
gesture, call the Lord to witness to the Truth of it; either by Hands lifted up
to Heaven, or by kissing the Book of the Scriptures, which is the lord of God;
or by saying, SO HELP ME GOD. So that it is properly called, The Oath of the
Lord, because the Lord is solemnly owned as a Witne^^ to it, and it is a
dreadful thing to break it.

Another Scripture that manifests the dreadfulness and the hor^ibleness of the
evil of the Breach of an Oath, is that in 2 Samuel 21. where it is plain, that
whatever the Persons are to whom it is made; though Heathens, and though a man
be drawn into that Covenant by Fla^teries, or by the deceitful words of the
person or persons that drew him into it; that yet he is indispensibly bound to
perform it; and the breach of it is a great Provocation of the Lord. For it is
there said, That there was a Famine in the days of David three years, year
after year; and David enquired of the Lord, and the Lord answered, It is for
Saul, and for his bloody House, because he slew the Gibeonites. Now we know how
that by deceit and guile the Gibeonites had drawn Joshua, and the Elders of the
Children of Israel, to swear to them that they would not destroy them. So that
the Gibeonites, though they were Idolate^s, and of the sinful Nations that the
Lord would have destroyed; yet they had that sense of the weight, and
reverence, and streng^h, and force of an Oath, solemnly taken by the Lords
People, that they knew it would not be broken by them; and accordingly it
proved unto them: for though they had obtained this Oath by deceit and guile;
yet the Princes of the Children of Israel would not recede o^ go back from it,
nor break it in killing of the Gibeonites, but said, (Josh. 9. 20.) Let them
live still, lest Wrath be upon us, BECAUSE OF THE OATH which we swear unto them.

Here the fear of the Lord was upon the Children of Israel, when the power of
the Lord, and his Goodness had been much displayed unto them, in making them
Conquerours over their Enemies, when they were newly come into the Land of
Canaan. (O that it had been so upon others that have broken Covenants!) But
Saul, wicked King Saul, made no bones of destroying the Gibeonites, though it
was cont^ary to an Oath that the Elders of the Children of Israel had solemnly
sworn to the Gibeonites. But the Lord would not ^ear this Sin in him, but being
hereby greatly provoked, he sends a Judgment upon Israel for this, even three
years Famine, until seven of Readiness Sons were cut off for this Sin of Saul. So
greatly is the Lord provoked by those that do break a solemn Oath or Covenant.

How greatly therefore does it concern those that have been actually guilty of
the breach of any Oath they have taken, or any Covenant, or any part of a
Covenant they have entered into, to whom soever they have sworn it, though it
should be to Unbelievers and Infidels, that they greatly humble themselves for
their so doing, and repent unfeignedly of it, and resolve for the future to
perform all the Oaths and Covenants they have taken, to the utmost of their
Ability; I say, to the utmost of their Ability, for God requires no more of any?

And it is certain that it was not in the power of some to hinder others from
the breach of that Covenant which they had generally taken: For in the great
Breaches of the Solemn League and Covenant that have been made, it was not in
the power of men in a private capacity to hinder them. It being carried on by
them that were the Ruling Power of the Nation at that time; but as many as did
protest against it at that time, did well; and for those that did not, they
ought greatly to bewail it: And though they were deceived and blinded by the
subtle devices that were then used to put a fair color upon those Actions by
which the Covenant was broken; so that many good People in but a common
capacity, were ignorantly led to acquiesce in what was done by those that were
above them: ^et they ought now sincerely to repent of what they did then
ignorantly. To that end, let them consider how greatly the Lord has been
dishonored by his Peoples breach of Covenant. The Nations abroad that had
their Eyes upon us, might blush to behold that a People that so eminently
professed to be the People of the Lord, should so grossly and palpably break so
solemn an Oath: And what occasions of stumbling has been given to them
thereby, and occasion to Enemies of blaspheming the Name of the Lord? In which
respect this breach of Oaths has been a great Sin of some of the Lords People.

But though it ha^h been the Sin of some, yet I cannot say that it has been
the Sin of all; and they may have Peace that have been kept clear from the
breach of any Oath, or any part of an Oath.

But I say, I^ greatly conce^ns those that have been guilty of this Sin,
unfeigne^ly to repent of it: And though I mention no particulars of the breach
of Oaths, yet it concerns every one to consider their ways, and wherein soever
they have not kept to the utmost of their ability, any part of th^^ Oath, or
any other Oath they have taken, to repent thereof; whether it has been done
through ignorance, or careless indifferency, or any other way: for it is a
dreadful thing to break a Covenant, and a Sin that brings the Judgments of God
upon a people, that are wittingly and knowingly guilty of it; and sometimes
upon a whole Nation, though it be but the Sin of some of the Nation; as appears
by the instances already given.

Now it is much to be desired that the Lord would please to help all his People
that have been any way guilty hereof, to lay it indeed to heart, and truly to
repent of it, setting time apart to acknowledge it, and to be humbled for it
before the Lord, with full purpose of heart to do no more so wickedly; that if
it may be, the great Judgments of God that are already upon us, and that may be
coming on us, may be diverted, and the Plague may be stayed in all parts of the
Land.

I mention this S^n, as a great Sin of the Lords People, because though it be
but the Sin of some, yet it is such a Sin as for which God has brought
Judgments upon a whole Nation; though but a few of the Nation have been guilty
of it.

And because it is a Sin which brings so great a blemish on true Religion, when
some of the Professors of it shall be guilty thereof: as witness that dung that
was (by reason of the guiltiness of some Professors, of this Sin) spread upon
the Profession of Religion, by George Wharton, in his Almanac for the year
1660. in his Verses for the Month of June that year. His words are these: But
it is the Mode: Come, come, let us all comply;
There Is no firm footing on Integrity:
For, having said and done all what we can,
The pliant Willow is the Precious Man;
Whose Oaths of one day (though of fair pretext)
Vail to an Inspiration of the next.


And it is well known what great occasion there had been then given to him and
others, to bel^h out such Reproaches as these; though this ought not to have
been fastened upon all the Lords People, there being many thousands of them,
that do abhor that Maxim, That Integrity is no firm ground: This Principle
being firmly rivi^ed in the Souls of the Lords dear Servants, That Integrity
and Sincerity, and plain Dealing, without any hypocrisy or complements, is the
most bles^ed Path that any People or single Person can walk in.

And it is well known, that there are thousands that cannot be as the Willow,
bowed to comply with what men will bow them to; No, but they will rather break
then bow: And several blessed Servants of the Lord have chosen rather to be
broken, then to ^ow; to lose their precious Lives, then to comply unworthily
with any thing that may tend to the Dishonor of the Lord Jesus Christ, their
glorious Lord and King.

It is not the pliant Willow, the bowing complying Man, that is the precious
Man; but such a one is a degenerate Plant of a strange Vine; and it is not his
Preciousness but his Base^ess that is thereby discovered.

And there are also many thousands, who having taken an Oath or Covenant, dare
not renounce it, notwithstanding all the mo^^subtle charming Inspirations of
the highest Episcopal, or A^chiepiscopal shain imaginable: But rather then vail
to the Promises or Threa^n^ngs of the most advanced Hierarchy, of whose
Promotions they might soon have a sha^e, they will choose with Moses, to suffer
Affliction, though it should con^inue all the days of their lives, rather then
to enjoy the Pleasures of Sinful Complian^^ for a season.

But it must be acknowledged, that though there be many thousands that never
bowed the Knee to Baal, that never did nor never would comply to take any Oath
but such as they truly and conscionably intended to keep: yet so it was, that
there were some who had the Name of being the Lords People, who then were in
Power and Authority, who did very unworthily turn and wind, like the
Weathercock, and comply basely with some things afterward, which were contrary
to a former Oath which they had taken; and these gave the occasions of such
Reproaches and Blasphemies to be cast upon others, and caused the way of Truth
to be evil spoken of.

But who ever they were that did it, and were the chief Rin: leaders in it,
though they were and are never so eminent, and never so excellent in all
respects, and er^ed not in one point but this; yea, though they were as dear to
the Lord as Moses and Aaron, and though it may be he has forgiven, and will
forgive their Iniquity, yet he has taken, and may take Vengeance on their
Inventions, because they have not so honored the Lord before all People, as
they should have done, in an inviolable observance of his blessed Precepts, in
a faithful keeping Oaths or Covenants, though it should have been to their own
loss or det^iment: For the Righteous Man swears to his own hu^t, and changes
not.

V. Another great Sin which some of the Lords People have been guilty of V.
PRIDE.
is, PRIDE, and Haughtiness of Spirit. Though it may be the^e is but f^w of
them that have a full sense of their guilt of this evil. For it must be
acknowledged that this evil does not appear in the generality of them, as it
does in some others; who out of Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit, if they be
persons of Estate, will scorn and despise the Company of them that are poor and
mean in the World; or scorn that such a one should go before them, or such a
one should take the Wall of them, or sit above them in Feasts, or in the
Church-Meetings: I say there are few or none of the Lords People, whose Pride
works in such gross and palpable things as these are.

But notwithstanding it is evident, that too many are very guilty of that
abominable Sin, Pride; and one clear proof of it is this: That many of them are
very unable to bear Reproof one of another, when any evil or weakness has
appeared in them, for which they are justly reproveable; having taken that to
be a slighting and an undervaluing of them. So that though it has not been so
intended by the Reprover, yet it has been so interpreted by the Reproved.

But it is apparent, that inability in persons to ^ear things of this nature,
discovers Pride: for an humble man, that is truly low, and little in his own
eyes, and is not at all puffed up, can with all con^entedness and patience bear
Reproof, whether it be justly or unjustly administered; because another person
cannot have meaner thoughts of him, then he has of himself; and having mean
thoughts of himself, it is rather pleasing then displeasing to him, that others
see how mean and weak, and unworthy a person he is, rather desiring to be set
in a low place in their thoughts, then to be high; as judging himself not
worthy any high esteem in the thoughts of any; considering how unworthy he is
in himself before the Lord; and how unworthily he has carried himself (in many
respects) to the Lord; and how he deserves at the hand of the Lord, rather to
be despised and trampled upon by the worst of men, then to have any e^eem among
men: and therefore if he be despised, and counted poor and mean, it is but as
he deserves to be, because he is but a polluted lump of Dust and Ashes, as he
is in himself.

And this we find has been the way of the most eminent Saints and Servants of
the Lord, when they have had nearest Communion with God, and have seen
themselves in the clearest Light of the Spirit: As the Prophet Isaiah, when his
Eyes had seen the King, the Lord of Hos^s, having the clearest Vision of the
Lord, then he most clearly saw his own u^done Condition, and saw himself to be
a man of unclean Lips, Isa. 6. 5. How many of the Lords People would be very
little, and very vile, in their own Eyes, had they clearer Visions of the Glory
of God, and more intimate Communion with him? But it is an argument of the very
great darkness, and weakness, and meanness of that Christian, that has not a
very true and real sense of his own poverty, and vilene^s, and unworthiness.
When faithful Abraham stood before the Lord, he was truly sensible of his own
unworthiness, being but Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. 27. And blessed Job, when he
had seen the clearest Vision o^ the Lord, then most abhors himself in the sense
of his own Vileness, Job 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee; wherefore I abbor my self, and repent in Dust
and Ashes.

And as it is always so with particular persons, when they know most, and see
Truth with the most spiritual Eye, then they have always the greatest
abhorrency of themselves, in the truest sense of their own vileness: so it will
be with the who^e Church of Christ, when God shall in the latter days discover
his Glory, (which Isaiah and others have had some Glympses of) most clearly,
and most perspicuously; as he will then reveal it, as Isa. 35. 2. Jer. 31. 14.
Isa 40. 5. and many other places show. Then, when his whole Sion shall be
filled with the discoveries of the Goodness, the Grace, the Kindness, the
pardoning Mercies of the Lord: When all their Iniquities are pardoned, and all
that dwell in Sion shall be forgiven their Iniquity, Then shall they be most
humble, and most abhorring themselves for their own vileness: as, Ezekiel. 16. 62,
63. And I will establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am
the Lord; that thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth
any more; because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that
thou have done, says the Lord God. And the like, Ezekiel. 36. 31. where the Lord
having declared what great things he would do for them, it is said, Then shall
ye remember your own Evil Ways, and your Doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight for your Iniquities, and for your
Abominations:

But those persons are far from abho^^ing themselves in the sense of their
vileness, and from taking shame and confusion of faces to themselves, that are
greatly netled and offended at any reproof of another, that judges he sees
some Evil in a man that he oug^t to reprove him for. What does this argue, but
that such a person is puffed up, and has a high esteem of himself, as if he
could not err; and would not have any to think he does err, nor to have any
mean thought of him, because he has no mean thoughts of himself? What does
this argue, but Pride, and thinking more highly of himself then he ought to
think; that ought to be poor and needy, mean and unworthy in his ow^ esteem
continually?

But for a person to ^^et and ^ume, to be offended and highly displeased, and
to gather up all the Fig Leaves that possibly he can, to cover his shame, and
not ingeniously to acknowledge it to the very utmost circumstance of it, as f^r
as he is guilty; does discover a very proud and unworthy spirit. And of this
sin very many of the Lords People are too guilty. But I cannot charge (...)
upon any one Distinction or Understanding of them, more then upon others, some
of each being very sadly guilty of it.

But for an humble Soul, that is truly humble indeed, no Reproofs for Evil can
offend it, whether they be justly or unjustly administ^ed to him: for he will
say, Let the Righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness; and let him
reprove me, and it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head:
And will Psa. 141. 5
say to such, Blessed be you of the Lord, for your faithfulness to me; and
though it may be, I do not see this Evil in my self so clearly as you do, yet
it may be you may see what I do not; and I desire to search my hea^^ thoroughly
in this matter, for it is apt to deceive me; and I know I am a poor vile Worm,
and I desire to be more sensible of my own vileness and unworthiness, then you
can be; and I desire from my Soul to be cleansed from this evil, and I desire
your Prayers that I may be so, and may be fully convinced of it, and may repent
in Dust and Ashes; and blessed be God that has given this blessed Precept to
his People, to reprove for Sin: They that hate their Brother in Lev. 19. ^^.
their Heart will not do this kind Office: But this is an Act of Love to my
Soul, and I highly prize it; for the Love of this kind is better then other
Love that Prove. 27. 5. 1 Cor. 11. 31; 32.
may be in the Heart, but comes not forth into Act; therefore open Rebuke is
better then secret Love: And I desire always to be thus dealt with, that I may
judge my self, and condemn my self, that I may not be condemed with the World.

Thus the humble Soul will be so far from being offended at Reproof, as it will
with thankfulness receive the sharpest Reproof you can administer unto him.

But when a person cannot bear Reproof, whether it be justly or unjustly
administered to him, let him conclude that any unkindly bearing of Reproof,
springs from Pride; (not that a man ought not at any time to endeavor to clear
himself, when he is not at all guilty of an Evil, if upon a mistake, or
mis-apprehension, he be charged with it) for if a man be wholly guiltless of
that evil that he is charged with, yet if first he cannot with all meekness and
sweetness return an answer to his Brother or Sister that reproves him, but
storms and is offended, he is proud, and cannot endure that any should have
mean thoughts of him; and though he may be guiltless in this; yet in some other
respects, it may be he is ten times worse then they charge him with; Or
secondly, if he do make a soft answer, yet if he have a secret grudge in his
heart against that Brother, and heart-rising thoughts, and cannot as truly and
tenderly respect him as ever he did, and as one that has done him a very kind
and friendly office, he is proud; for nothing but a haughty spirit will move
him to disrespect him, for speaking that to him that may tend any way to his
abasing: for a truly humble Soulde^^res always to be abased in its own Eyes,
and is not troubled if it be abased in the Eyes of others, as knowing it cannot
be more abased then it deserves to be.

But that too many of them that are called the House of Jacob and Israel, and
that profess to be nearer to God then others, have been de^ply guilty of this
sort of proud spirit, has been too evident and apparent: Their proud spirits
and high stomachs that must come down, and their haughtiness that must be
humbled, being visible to many, when the^e have been Reproofs administered to
them; and of this both Presbyterians, Quakers, Baptized, and Independants,
(some of them all) are to be charged.

Another thing wherein some of them all have also been guilty of Pride, is,
their being lifted up because of Gods holy Mountain; and each of them despising
and undervaluing others, because they thought they in particular were Gods holy
Mountain.

As the Baptized Churches have, many Members of them, (if not most of them)
been ready to censure and judge all others, as being none of Christ's, but those
that were in their way, and they only were Sion, they only were the Israel of
God; and those that come in to them, they come to Sion, they And how came you
to attain to an infallibility and none but you?
only being the Churches of Christ.

And the Quakers arising after them, they swell high in their apprehensions,
and they despise and contemn the Baptized Churches, and account them to be as
mean, and low, and poor People, and as e^onious, and as much out of the way, as
any others, and as much in Babylon; and the Presbyterians, Independants, and
Baptized, are all alike with them, and all out of the way; and they And how
came you to attain to an infallibility and none but you?
only are Gods holy Mountain, and the Kingdom of Christ is only among them,
and all others are out of that Kingdom.

And the Presbyterians they boast of their way, an^ that they And how came you
to attain to an infallibility and none but you?
only are the Church of Christ, and all others are Heretics and Schismatics,
and deluded persons, and none of the Is^ael of God, but are Moabites and
Ammonites, and Edomites, and Canaanites, and are to be destroyed.

And the Independants, they judge that they are in a righter way then any
others, and that all others are in Errors and in darkness in many things, and
that they And how came you to attain to an infallibility and none but you?
only are the true Churches of Christ.

Thus each of them glory in Gods holy Mountain being among them, and not among
others: Each of them saying of themselves in particular, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we: lifting up themselves only, and slighting
all others, as not worthy to be compared with them. But this is from their
Pride, for else they would humbly conclude, and say, Surely, the Grace of God
shines as much in some of these, as in any of us, and we are not better then
others; but they may be better then we, and may be more dear to the Lord then
we; for though we walk in that way, which (as we judge) is most agreeable to
Truth, (as it is to be hoped all of them do, or else they would not walk in it)
yet we dare not conclude we are better then others: (for Truth is not revealed
to any man for his Goodness, but of mere Grace) for we are poor unworthy
wr^tched sinful Men, and have manifold Weaknesses among us; for which we
deserve to be set in the lowest Rank: and it is certain that many of them that
differ from us, do outshine us in Holiness, and more of the Glory of God
appears upon some of them, then on most of us: They are more clothed with
Humilty; they have the Robes of Righteousness about them; they have the
Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit shining in them; they have, some of them,
the Spirit of Love in power in them; and have Hearts enlarged to good Works: in
all which most of us come short. And therefore though we think we have more
Light and Knowledge in some things, yet if they have more power, it is an
argument that the Grace of Christ is more in their hearts, and consequently
they are deare^ to him then most of us: And therefore far be it from us to
despise them, or to say they are not as truly the Subjects and Servants of
Christ as we; seeing we differ not in our Judgments about the Power of
Godliness, but about some part of the Form, in which the Lord may so enlighten
us all, as we may be also all of one mind, when we are once brought to love and
honor each other truly and entirely; and notwithstanding our difference, we do
all come to the perfect pra^^ise of that blessed Rule, Rom 12. 10. Be ye kindly
affectioned one to another, with Brotherly Love, in honor preferring one
another.

But the contrary to this, appearing in all Distinctions, discovers their great
Pride and Haughtiness, so far as they persist in it, whether Presbyterians,
Quakers, Independants, or Anabaptists.

But first all these several Understandings are not hereby justified, as if one
of them were not in respect of the plain Scripture-Rules more nearer to the
practice of the primitive Churches, then all the other three are; for of that
there is no question: for one of the four must be the most near, though they
may come much short of the Primitive Times.

Secondly, Nor is it hereby intended that Persons ought to be doubtful of the
way they walk in; but they ought to walk in the way that they are persuaded in
their own minds is nearest the Rule; and though it may prove in the day of
D^cision to be furthest from the Rule of all the rest, yet ought a man to
cleave to that way, un^il he is otherwise persuaded; as appea^s, Romans 14. 5,
22, 23. And,

Thirdly, It must be acknowledged, that it is not what our Judgment at present
is, but what the Lords Judgment will appear to be, that shall de^ermine the
question in his time, which of them all is nearest the Rule; and although a man
know nothing by himself, but that he walks nearest the Rule of all the ^est;
yet is he not always hereby justified before God, though he is hereby justified
in his own Conscience. But,

Fourthly, All that is hereby aimed at, is that no one should think of himself
more highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly; that is, as often to
think of his own imperfections ^n many things, as of his supposed and believed
Perfections in that point of coming nearest the Rule in forms, that so he may
be kept from being pusted up, and from insulting over others, who
notwithstanding their darkness in some things, may be as dear to Christ as
himself; that so he may not be haughty, because of Gods Holy Mountain.

And the Lord tells his People, Zeph 3. 11. that the time shall come when this
shall not be: But, The Day shall come, says the Lord, in which I will take
away out of the midst of thee, them that rejoice in thy Pride, and thou shall
n^ more be haughty because of my holy Mountain.

Another Demonstration of that horrible Sin of Pride, to be in many of the
Lords People, is their aptness to Passion, Frowardness and Contention; but that
is also another of their great Evils, which I shall now come to declare unto
them, which will also further discover the odiousness of their Pride.

VI. Another Sin in the Lords People, of which too many of them are very
guilty, VI. PASSIONATE WRATH
is their being so propense unto hasty Frowardness, Passion, Bi^terness, Wrath,
Anger, Clamor, E^il speaking, and Malice; the apparent Fruits of the Flesh,
and Works of the Devil.

That this is the Sin of too many of the Lords People, is too well known: for
many of them do frequently, upon very slender occasions, break out into such
disturbing Passions, as do very much disturb their own spirits, and put them
out of tune for any good service for God or man; besides the disturbance and
trouble they make in the Family, at least in the spirit of the person against
whom the offense is taken, whether justly or unjustly: And these sudden
passions, and heats, and that anger, whether against one or mo^e persons,
seldom goes alone, without Bitterness, and heart-rising, and a kind Jam 3. 6,
14, 15, 16 17, 18.
of malice against the Party or Parties: For when that Evil One has kindled
that fire, he blows it up to the utmost he can: for all this kind of heat and
disturbance of spirit that appears in any, is that which is set on fire of
Hell, for it never comes from Heaven.

But, The Wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, Jam. 3. 17. And this
is the ble Ted Ru^e that o^r Lord himself gives us; Lea^n of m^, for I am meek
Mat. 11. 29.
and lowly in Spirit, and ye shall find rest to your Souls: And his meekness
and lowliness was such, as he was led as a Lamb dumb before the Shearers, and
opened not his mouth; and when he was reviled, he reviled not again. This i^
the blessed P^^te^n that we ought to follow: and whosoever professes to be
related to him, and that Jesus Christ dwells in him, as he does dwell in
persons except they be Reprobates; I say, he that says Jesus Christ dwells in
him, and he abides in Christ, he ought himself also so to walk as he walked, 1
John 2. 6. And therefore says James, Who is a wise man, and endued with
Knowledge? Let him show out of a good Conversation his Works, with meekness of
Jam. 3. 13
Wi^dom.

But where is the meekness of Christ manifested, when small matters in trivial
things, such as would not at all move or d^stu^b Men or Women of no Principles
or Profession at all, shall set a Professor into such an unkindly heat, a^
shall multiply words of Contention, and make mere vain People that are about
them, to account them very unlovely Persons to live with, and to be a burden to
them.

This has been found in some Servants, Men and Women Servants, that have been
Professors, and Members of Churches, (some of them) that are so p^^T with
Pride, and conceitedness of themselves, either for their abilities for Service,
or for their Knowledge, and their Privi^edges, in that they are professing
Persons, and therefore think themselves far above others, better then their
Fellow Servants, better then their Masters and Mistre^es; and have had such
high conceits of themselves, as if all others were inferior unto them: and
therefore every wo^d that is spok^n to them, or every action they are put upon,
that they think is an underva^uing to them, or a slighting of them, they cannot
bear, but fly out into heats and discontents, and unsober carriages; so that
those that are about them, whether Equals or Superiors; know not how to speak
to them, they are of such unmeek and impatient spirits: and if a word of
Reproof or Dislike, wherein they deserve Reproof, or deserve it not, be spoken
to them, they are of such hot and high spirits, as they will give ten words for
one; making no conscience at all of observing that Rule, Tit. 2. 19. where
Servants ar^ required to do faithful Service in all things, and not to be
answering again: But as if this were no Rule at all, or were not worthy to be
minded, they will in their heat, and pride, and passion, multiply words of
contention, to the burdening and disturbing those that have to do with them, as
if they were like the t^oubled Sea, which cannot rest, whose Waters cast up
mi^e and di^t; and such prove a great blot and shame to their Profession, and
cause Professors in general to be evil spoken of, many times; and make the
hearts of People to be offended with Religion it self, if they have not good
knowledge of other Professors, that are of a better spirit.

And as there are such Servants, so there are Masters and Mistresses, and
Husbands and Wives, that are very guilty of this hateful Evil; and therefore
some Mistresses, and some Masters also, that have high and swelling thoughts of
themselves, either as they are or would be thought to be somebody in the World
above others; or as they have a high esteem of themselves for their Place, or
Birth, or Degree, or Quality, or for their Knowledge, and Parts, or for their
being long Professors of Religion, or for the Abilities they have above others,
in spiritual Things: for one or more of these Reasons, or for no Reason rathe^,
being pu^t up, they cannot bear, or endure with any patience, any Word or
Action, that tends, as they think, to their undervaluing; from Neighbors or
Relations, or Acquaintance, or Servants; but sly out into great heats, and
passions, and discontents, to the great disturbance of themselves or others;
and those fires are not easily quenched. And if it were not for Pride, they
would never be blown up: for that is a true word, Prove. 13. 10. Only by Pride
comes Contention; but with the well-advised is Wisdom. But many impatient Men
and Women do not think they are proud, But will say, It is my hasty nature, and
my choleric temper of Body that causes me to transgress, and to be apt to be
soon angry; for which I am afterward troubled: but they little consider that
that passionate nature comes from a p^oud nature, from a self-loving and
self-conceited disposition, that is as natu^al to them as their Choler. But let
them consider this Word, tha^ says; Only by Pride comes Contention. And then
consider what it is to ^^ proud. And what it is to be humble.

First, To be Proud; is to think a man's self to be Rich, in something o^ other,
to be Good, to be Worthy, to be Deserving, and that he ought to be honored.

Now for a poor Man, or Woman, or Child, that is come to undestanding, to think
themselves to be better then others, and to entertain thoughts that they are
persons of Worth, that they must be esteemed, and ought to be honou^ed; is a
Character of a proud person. And this wretched, unworthy, base, vile nature, we
shall have some to manifest more then others, by their Actions and Carriages
from their Childhood; whether they or their Parents have little or much of the
World; whether they are Rich or Poor, or whether they have Wisdom, Parts, and
Abilities, or not; are Wise or Fools: for a proud Heart is as well under a
Beggars Cloak, many times, as under a Lords; and in a Fools Breast, as in a Wise
Man's. Now to be proud, is for a man to think himself somebody, to be better
then others; whether the^e be seeming reason for it, or not. I say whether
there seem to be reason for it or not: for to have the Riches of this World, to
be born to great Estates, to come of (that which is called) great Parentage; or
to have great Beauty and Comeliliness of Person, or great Wisdom,
Understanding, Parts and Abilities in things Natural or Spiritual; are ^o just
Reasons why any of the Children of Men should think t^e^ are Worthy, or Rich,
or Honorable, or they are better then others. And though they seem to be good
Reasons to the purblind, dark Souls of many Men; yet they are but seeming
Reasons.

But this is the Character of a proud man, Whether he have seeming Reason for
it, or not, yet he will think himself to be Worthy, to be Good, to be deserving
of Honor and Esteem.

But on the other hand: To be Humble, is for a Person to have mean and low
thoughts of himself, to be little in his own Eyes; to esteem himself to be (as
he is) a poor worthless, empty, naked, needy, impotent Creature, to be
wretched, miserable, blind and naked; and to have a constant deep sense of it
on his heart.

The former of these grows in Natures Garden, viz. Pride, though not in all
alike; it is much more abourding in some from their Childhood, then in others:
but in all ^^re is the Seeds, and some Sprigs (too many Sprigs) of it.

But the latter, viz. Humility, and truly to have such mean and such low
thoughts of self as we ought to have, is a Lesson and a Disposition of Spirit
that is taught, and wrought in the Heart by the Spirit of God alone. The Seeds
of which are sometimes sown, and grow up betimes in some Souls; and sometimes
are hardly to be sown, and it is long before they g^ow up in some Souls; and
bring forth that Fruit unto perfection that will make them happy.

I ^ay, to bring some Souls to be truly humbleed, truly little in their own
eyes, and truly to be sensible of their own poverty, and unworthyness, is a
difficult work: and though some Seeds of it be sown, and some Sprigs do
sometimes grow up, and they have true Humility in a measure, in a small degree,
yet the Old man's Fruit g^oweth up again, and is not so rooted out, but that it
does afterward make sad Work in some Souls, and that very fre^uently.

But further, A proud man, as I said, has high thoughts of himself, and ^h
think he has Worth, and that he is Rich, and Full, and increased with ^oods,
and that he ought to be esteemed, and accounted of, and reverenced by others.
And a humble man has truly mean thoughts of himself; and, as I said, thinks
himself a poor, mean, miserable Creature in himself; a poor, blind, naked,
unworthy, sinful, polluted, miserable Worm, that deserves nothing from the hand
of God, but to be trampled upon by the worst of Men: And therefore ^f any
affront him, or tramp^e upon him, it is but what he has deserved, and what is
fit for him. And if any slight him, he knowi^g what a poor Worm he truly is,
what a pitiful poor Creature he knows himself to be; the slightings of others
do never trouble him: But he loves to be low, and little in his own Eyes, in
deed and in truth, and therefore cannot be offended if any have little esteem
of him; for they cannot have meaner thou^hts of him, then he has of himself:
for he is ready to abhor himself, and loath himself, when he considers not
only his own nakedness and poverty, but his own sinfulness.

This is the hum^le man, this is the man that is poor in spirit; truly poor and
little in his own Eyes, in his own Spirit; and has not high thoughts of
himself. But if he behold any Grace of God displayed to and in him, o^ any
Gifts, he rejoices with trembling, and has still never a whit the ^ess sense
of his own unworthiness and meanness. But glories only in Gods Goodness,
acknowledging heartily that by the Grace of God he is what he is. 1 Cor. 15. 10.


Now having thus in part seen what it is to be a proud man, and what it is to
be an humble man, Let that word be considered, Only by Pride comes Contion.
Is any man offended at any time? Does he b^eak out into hea^s or passion?
Whence comes it? Is it because any one has affronted him, or slighted him? If
he cannot bear that, it comes from Pride. Were he truly humble, he would bear
all manner of ^lightings, as knowing his own pitiful poor mean condition, and
that none can think him to be a more mean and worthless Creature then indeed he
is.

But says one, I am a Servant, and I can do such and such business well, and I
am so and so qualified: I have such and such Parts, and I would not be ^lighted.

Answ. But admit thou art so and so qualified, yet thou art to acknowledge that
it is of Grace that thou art what thou art; and still to keep such a true sense
of thy unworthiness, as to think it no wrong to thee to be slighted; and thy
Gifts of an internal or external nature, will shine in thee never a whit the
less, but much the more, for thy patient and willing suffering thy self to be
slighted, in the sense of thy own unworthiness: but thy Humility will therein
Prove. 15. 33.
appear, which will bring thee to more honor.

But says another, I am a Master or Mistress, and it is not to be born, to
suffer the slightings of a Servant, and of Inferiors.

Answ. Admit thou art a Superior, and have many outward Enjoyments aabove
others; ye^ thou ought still to keep such a sense of thy unworthiness and
vi^eness, as to acknowledge that it is great Grace that God has given thee any
of these things, and to think it no wrong to thee to be slighted, though by
Servants: (Though it may be the Sin of them that do it; for Servants ought to
be subject to their Ma^^ers and Mist^elles; Hagar, Sarah's maid, was required
to do so; and all Servants, by the Ru^es of the Gospel, are required to do so;
and it is their sin if they do not so: and they will receive a Reward of the
Lord Christ, if they do so, Col. 3. 22, 23, 24, 25. Genesis 16. 8, 9.) And thou
ought with all meekness and satisfiedness to bear it: and if thou went in a
true humble frame indeed, it would ^ather gratify thee then displease thee, it
would be so suitable to thy own thoughts that thou would have of thy self.
And though thy Servant should slight thee, thou art a Master or a Mist^ess
notwithstanding; and all thy other Endowments, and Gifts, and Pa^ts, and
^bilities, are notwithstanding; and none of the Privileges that God has given
thee of his own Grace, will be eclipsed by thy meek and patient bearing and
forbea^ing, but rather shine the more; and God will be the more glorified in
thee, and in them. But the contrary argues great Pride, as if thou had very
high thoughts of thy self, and were not any way sensible of thine own
vileness, and filthiness, and unworthiness, when many times thou art offended,
and breakest out into passion, because thy business is not done, or not well
done, or done as thou would have it; this comes from Pride: For had^t thou
^ot high thoughts of thy self, and were thou not swollen and pu^t up, so as to
think thou art some body; and thou ought to have thy will done, and thy
business done, and thy orders observed in every pu^ctilio of them; thou wo^ldst
not be so offended, if sometimes thou were ^isappointed of having thy will and
pleasure; but would rather think sometimes, What am I? Who am I? that I
should expect such continual exact observance of my will? I am a poor unworthy
Creature; and though my Will be c^ost, or I am disappointed of my expectation,
whether through the sinful wilfulness, ca^elesness or perve^sness of my
Servant, or through their infi^mity, or weakness and debility for such
Services; or through any accidental occasion, yet I ought patiently to bear it,
considering how unworthy I am of having my will, or my Work, or my Business
^one, and admire Grace, that I have any thing that is satisfactory or
comfortable to me, being such a sinful pollu^ed vile Wo^m as I am, having so
often and so greatly ^ebelled against GOD.

But another may say, I being a Master or Mistress, am offended and angry
sometimes, because my Servants are not so careful as they should in keeping my
House clean, or being clean about dressing Food, and clean in ordering Clothes
for wearing, which I love; and love the more, because Cleanness is a shadow of
Purity, and is a thing the Spirit of God in the Scripture commends, as Eccles.
9. 8. And clean Clothes, and a clean House, and clean Vessels for use, are very
desirable things, and I love to have things so, and cannot endure the contrary.

Answ. Though it be true, that these are very desirable things, and such
Servants are to be most desired, as have these qualities; yet this justifies
not any Master or Mistress that have Servants cast upon them (by the Providence
of God) that are not so, if they be passiona^e o^ froward. In such a case
reproof may be given, and a dislike may be shown of such things; if it be done
in such a way as does neither move nor disturb the person reproving, nor the
person reproved; nor raise any unkindly hea^s or heart-risings in either, but
^o, as the party reproved may see that they are not despised, though their
miscarriage is disliked; may see that the party reproving, has respect to
them, notwithstanding the dislike of the offense; and may see that the party
that reproves them can bear with a fault with much meekness and patience. For
though Uncleanness be of the greatest abhorrency to a Master o^ Mistress, of
any outward thing, yet it is but the crossing the^r will; and if it be that
which a Servnant is not a Lover of, or be so habited in the contrary, as they
cannot conform to that cleanliness that is desired; yet that also which is most
averse to our natures, ought we to bear patiently, (when we cannot avoid it)
and to consider that our Passion or Impatience cannot reform it, but rather
strengthen it; and that if we cannot bear things that are contrary to our
pleasures and earnest desires, this does manifest that we have not such a due
sense of our own unworthiness, are not so humble, so lowly in heart, as we
ought to be, we being such unworthy Creatures as deserve nothing that is
desirable or comfortable to us; and therefore should ^ear contentedly those
things which are most irksome to our natures, and acknowledge that we might
justly be deprived also of all the other Mercies that we enjoy. And, Only by
Pride comes Contention, in this Case also. And they are poor proud Worms, puffed
and swollen Dust and Ashes, that contend about any outward things that are of
self-concernment, and cannot meekly and patiently persuade and reason only
with persons offending, without passion or discontent, in all such cases as are
our own outward concernments.

I do not hereby condemn persons that endeavor to have such desirable things
as are lawful and warrantable in themselves, as these things are. But that
which is condemned, is the impatient bearing the crossing of our desires in
those lawful things. We may desire them, and endeavor to procure them:

But if one Servant be not of a cleanly temper, we ought patiently to bear
that, until we can ^ai^ly put off one, and take another; and use any good and
just means to obtain those desnable things. But in the mean time, consider,
that as no hair of our head can fall to the ground without the Lords
Providence, much more may it be said, That no Servant can come into a man's
service, without the Lords Providence; and it may be appointed of him as a
punishment of the iniquity of such a Master or Mistress; and ought patiently to
be born of meek and humble Persons.

Remember what David said of Shimei, It may be the Lord has said unto 2 Samuel
16. 10.
him, Curse David; who shall then say, Wherefore have thou done so? And so do
you say.

And if one Servant be unpleasing to you, bear that; and if another be so, bear
that, until the Lord shall direct you to a better. But if you have ^ever so
many disappointments of that kind, it must still be born, acknowledging always
that he punishes us less then our Iniquities deserve. Ezra 9. 13


The like may be said of any Discontents, or Passions, or Heats that may arise
between Husbands and Wives, and Prethren and Sisters, and Neighbors, and
Fellow Servants; they all proceed from Pride: Either because one Party cannot
bear an Offense, which had he Humility he would b^ar. Or the other party cannot
endure to be char^ed with a fault; whereas had he humility, he would sweetly
receive Reproof, whether he was guilty or not guilty, as was said before, page
39. I say the cause of all Passions and Contentions, arise from want of
Humility in the one party or the other, or in both: But sometimes it arises bu^
from the one party; as for Example; If a man be proud, he is apt to take
offenses, though he have to do with persons that are never so humble, and never
so meek. Because sometimes, through such forgetfulness as the most careful
person may be subject to, there may be offenses taken: As if a Servant or a
Friend have forgotten to do what was expected, and what was fit to be done; a
proud person (that thinks he ought to have every thing that he desires, and
cannot be content to have his Will crossed in any thing) will be froward and
impatient, though it were not possible for the Party to do the thing, having
forgotten it.

And again, A proud person, that is puffed up with apprehensions of his own
worth, will expect such and such observances from Neighbors, and from
Relations, which a humble person never minds; and if the persons be never so
meek that such a man has to do with, it is not possible but Contentions and
Passions will break out in the proud Person, because the meek Person with whom
he has to do, never knows to the full, what such a man expects. Now he is
offended because he is not observed in such a thing, and then in another thing;
even in such things as a humble meek man would never be offended at. Or if he
did not like such or such a Carriage, yet a meek man would either forget it,
and take no notice of it, as a thing not worth speaking of; or else would speak
with such meekness, and such soft words as should manifest no hea^ in his own
spirit, nor be any trouble to the party spoken to.

And a meek man would be far from carrying it sullenly two or three days,
saying nothing at all, and harboring discontent, like fire, in his bosom so
long, and then break out into a flame. I say a humble meek man would be far
from such an ill temper: for of the two, the angry or passionate man, who is
suddenly heated, and then speaks his discontented mind as suddenly; and when it
is spoken, is as friendly as if he never spoke it; is a far better temper then
this Man.

But the man that being offended, calmly and meekly delivers his mind, without
any heat, in a sweet way, manifesting still love and kindness to the party,
notwithstanding the offense, and that suffers long, and is kind; he is more
excellent then his Neighbor. Prove. 12. 26.


But a proud man, through his Pride, is very apt to take offense at small
matters, petty things, which none can prevent: And what is said of a proud Man,
may be said of a proud Woman also.

But sometimes Discontents and Passions arise from Pride in both parties: The
one, through Pride, cannot bear an offense great or small; and the other,
through Pride, cannot bear his discontented words, nor bear any offense from
the other, though never so small: And small matters, through the Pride of each,
proving offensive to both, there is amongst such persons much frowardness, and
many unkindly heats.

But where two persons are, and both are humble and meek, they will ^ear one
another ^urthens and so fulfill the law of Christ. And if the o^^ ^al. 6. 2.
forget such a thing, or such a thing, that the other would be glad to have
done; that shall never disturb the other, but he is ready to wink at it, and
pass it by with only, I wish you had done it, or I pray remember and do it to
morrow, or when you have don such a thing: and I entreat you not to neglect it,
unless some great occasion hinder you: and if it be neglected again, ^e can
forgive it a^ain, and again, and again; and it is the glory of Pro. 19. 11.
Pro. 10. 11 1 Cor, 13. 4 5, 7.
that man that pas^eth over a transgression: and he manifests true love, that
can cover a multitude of off^nces. Gospel love in a man bears with many
things that are in themselves i^ksome to him, and endures many things that are
displeasing to him, and suffers many things that are grievous to him, yea
suffers such things long and yet is kind; he has no unki^dness in his heart,
no ranckor, no grudge, but is truly kind still, tenderly, de^ly, servently
loving to his friend still.

This was the glory of a man under the Law, and is the glory and honor of a
man under the Gospel, to endure and bear, not only some, but all^ things, all
offenses against our selves: and though they be a multitude, love will cover
them all, and humility will account t^em sma^l, and meekness will let them
fall, and never hold them up in contention. Thus it will be between Neighbors,
and Aquaintance, and Hus^ands, and Wives, and Brethren, and Sisters, and
Fellow Servants, where humility love and meekness are.

But by Pride comes Contention. Pride is the great root of Contention. And
though it may be observed sometimes, that men that are covetous do often break
out into passion, when any thing is done that proves to the loss of any part of
their Wealth, and their Coverousness seems to be the Root of that passion, yet
still it is plain that Pride is in the bottom; for why are men covetous, but
because they are proud, and do love the Honor and Glory of the World, and
cannot bear to be crossed in it, being not truly humble? They love Wealth and
outward Greatness, and cannot endure to be brought ^ow.

Thus it is clear that this is a true Word, Only by Pride comes Contention.

Now that of these two odious and abominable Sins, Pride and Passion, many of
the Lords People are guilty, is too apparent, and to well known: Though yet
there are among the Lords People, many that are, according to the Apostles
Exhorta^ions, clothed with Humility, and ador^ed with the Ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price, and are very
beautiful and lovely therein. I say there are many of these, both Men and
Women, both Pres^yterians, Baptized, Independants, and Quakers. But (O that it
were not so!) there are as many; if not more, among all these several
Professions, that are deeply guilty of Pride and Passion, and that have by
those hateful Evils of theirs, among others, provoked the Lord our God to bring
upon us one Judgment after another; and his anger is not yet turned away, but
his hand is st^^tched ou^ still. O that the hearts of all his Isa. 9. 17.
People were washed from all their ^^ckedness! When shall it once be?

VII. Another great Evil which the Lords People have been guilty of, is, VII.
UNCHRISTIAN BEHAVIOVR UNTO EACH OTHER, IN RESPECT TO DIFFERENCE IN JVDGEMENT.
The sore Evil of their Unbrotherly, Unchristianly, and Unworthy Deportments
one toward another, on the account of their differing in Judgments one from
another. The Lord having dispensed Light and Knowledge variously to his People,
to some he gives one degree of Light; to others, other degrees: And they,
because they have not all the same Understanding, and the same Knowledge, do
therefore slight one another, and despise one another; and like foolish
Children have such Heart-risings one against another, as to say they are not
their Fathers Children; and do deny them that their Father will own: upon a
great Presumption that the one party (whether Presbyterians, Baptized,
Independants, or Quakers) has all true Light and Understanding i^folded in
their Breast; an^ that they for their part are complete in Knowledge, and do
not er^e in any one particular of their Judgment; but their Understanding, and
their Way only is the Truth; and all others are in so great Errors, as they
cannot be the Children of God that do not own and practice what they understand
and practice.

And this has been the Way of those that are called Presbyterians, and
therefore they have preached and prayed against, and uttered many bitter
Invectives against the Independants, Baptized, and Quakers, as holding gross
Errors, gross Deceits, altogether out of the Way of God; and rendering them as
Enemies of God, and such as were to be opposed, and imprisoned, and banished,
and if hanged, it were good enough for them; and if they were even cut off that
troubled the Presbyterians, it were but righteous in their account: So little
of the Spirit of God appeared in them, and so little Love had they to all that
differed from them, and so ill thoughts did they harbor of them.

And on the other hand, it has been a frequent thing for the Baptized, the
Quakers, and Independants, to judge the Presbyterians to be Antichristian, and
to be in Babylon, in an Antichristian Way, as being such as the Lord would
never own.

And yet it is to be hoped, that by this time they are convinced on all hands
in a good measure, that they did e^e, in so judging and speaking one of
another. For the Baptized People, and the rest, do now see that there is a
spirit of Integrity, and of the true Fear of the Lord, among them that are
called Presbyterians; and that they cannot by the Temptations of this World,
nor yet by the Threats of it, be drawn to comply with things against their
Light, to keep their Be^^^ces, as they judged they would: for many of those
that had hard thoughts of the Presbyterians, judged that those that were
Preachers among the Presbyterians, preached only for Hire, and for Reward; and
that if their far Benefices were taken away, their work would be ended. But
they do now see that it is not so, but that they can and do preach, though
there be no Tithes nor Rates put into their mouths; and that they can be
content, as we^l as Independent and Baptized Preachers, and Quakers, to do
their Lords Work, and trust him to engage the Hearts of their Hearers to
administer to them supplies for their Livelihoods: And though it be not so much
as formerly, yet it may be it does them more good, and is more comfortable to
them then their former Incomes were, that were by Tithes, etc. And it may be
seen also, that those Impositions that came from Rome, even from the Babylonian
Crew, are not submitted to by the Presbyterians; but that they desire such a
Reformation in all things, as is most agreeable to the Word of God, and not
according to the Decrees, Canons, and Constitutions of Men. I say, these things
the Baptized, Independants, and Quakers, can now see in the Presbyterians, and
can bless the Lord for it.

Again on the other hand, The Presbyterians do now see, that it is not a great
Error for the Lords People to meet in private Houses, thereto worship God, and
preach and hear the Word, as the Primitive Saints did; seeing that liberty of
Worshipping God acco^ding to the Enlight^ings of their Understandings and
Consciences, is not to be had in the Parish Steeplehouses, which some do call
Churches.

And by this time they are all convinced that they all believe in, and worship
one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things; and that they are all made Partake^s of the same Spirit ^ Cor.
8. 6.
of Truth, that dispenses his Gifts, and Graces, and Teachings to them all
variously, dispensing to every one severally as he will; and that his Wind
blows where it lists. John 3. 8.


And they can rejoice in the Grace of God that is dispensed to them all,
inabling them, or any particular person of them, to bear witness unto the
Truth: Some by suffering Imprisonments, or Confiscations, and deprivements of
outward things, or Banishments, or Death. And they can all rejoice in that
Christ is exalted by any, who do preach up, and witness to this Truth, That
Jesus Christ is the only Lawgiver in his Church, and the only ^ph. 1. 22.
Isa. 33. 22 Ezekiel. 43. 8. Romans 14.-5.
King and Head of his Church; and that his Laws and Rules only are to be
obeyed and practiced in his Church; and that no men ought to set up their posts
by his Posts: and that every Servant of the Lord ought to worship him so as
they are persuaded in their own mind, is most agreeable to his Word and his
Rules; and not according to the Understandings and Prescriptions of others, but
according to that direction, Romans 14. 15, 23. Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind. Persuaded of what? Even that the Way in which he worships God,
is according to his Word and Laws, and not according to the Words and Laws of
men, as knowing that whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

And they all can rejoice in this, That that one Spirit in them all, pre^seth
all to Holiness, and Purity of Heart and Life; so that out of doubt, the^e are
many of all these that now can lie down at the Feet one of another, to do one
another good, though in some things they diffe^ in their Understandings as much
now as ever they did: And they have now l^arned to be more afraid of Judging,
and Censuring, and Condemning one another, lest they should be judged of Christ
for so doing.

But though we may hope that it is thus now with many of the Lords People; yet
it is most undeniable, that the generality of the Lords People have greatly
sinned against him in their sinful Deportments one toward another; ^ Tim. 6. 4
in ^aking up evil surmises one of another, and endeavoring to compel one
another to their own Understandings, and also manifesting such an unworthy
spirit, as that if any one party had prevailed, to have absolu^e Dominion over
all the rest, it was more then p^obable they would have used some severity to
con^^^ain the rest to con^orm to their Understandings.

This was known to be that which the Presbyterians did greatly seek for. And it
was too manifest by the words and actions of the Baptized, Quakers, and
Independants, tha^ they would have gone far in the same Path Though not to that
height as the Presbyterians desired to do.
which was a very unworthy disposition in whomsoever it was: for if it be a
very grievous thing, a very injurious thing for any to compel the Presbyterians
to do that which is against their Consc^ences in the Worship of God, it is the
same in any other.

But this has greatly displeased the Lord, that any should be compelled and
constrained to do any thing in his Service or Wo^ship, which they saw not his
Word and Rule for.

He is thy Lord, and worship thou him: He is not thy Lord, if thou observe
Psalm. 45. 11. Mat. 15. 9.
not his Rules, and his Commands and Directions, but the Commands and the Rules
of Men. In vain do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men.

But in that the Lords People have a Disposion to impose their own
Understandings one upon another, and in that though they have not had that full
power so to do, which they desi^ed; yet have they manifested a persecuting
spirit one against another, merely and only for differences in Understanding,
by reproachful speeches, which they have given out one of another, and by
taking up Evil Witness Mr. Edward 's Gangran^
Reports one of another, and manifesting no Brotherly Love one to another; but
ca^rying it one to another as if they were not Children of one Father. I say in
that the Lord People have done thus, they have provoked the Lord to scourge
them all, and to spare none of them. And they must know that as far as they
remain thus disposed, he is greatly offended with them.

Not that the Lords People ought not at all to judge one another: for there are
many things that we may judge and censure one another for; as when persons are
overtaken in faults or evils that are against plain Rules; such Rules as are
acknowledged by all that acknowledge and believe in the true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent; as to be a Liar, to steal, to cheat, to deceive, to
swear falsely, to commit adultery, to be malicious, or envious, or proud, or
covetous, or impatient, or froward, or to be scornful, are evils acknowledged
by all that truly believe in the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
to be against plain Rules received and acknowledged by them all; and when we
see a Brother overtaken in any of these or the like ^^^lts, we are to judge and
condemn them as the Works of Darkness, and the Fruits of the Flesh; and to
endeavor to restore them that are guilty of them, and to have no fellowship
with them in such unfruitful Works of Darkness.

And accordingly the Independants, the Baptized, the Quakers, and the
Presbyterians, do all bear witness, and that justly, against these and
suchlike E^ils, whether they are in any of their own Understandings, or in any
others.

And this kind of judging one another, the Lord both commands and commends: He
commands it in these Scriptures, Lev. 19. 17. Psalm. 94. 16. Mat. 18. 15, 16,
17. Ephesians. 5. 11. And the Lord commends it in the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 2.
I know thy works, etc, and how thou can not bear them which are evil. That
spirit of zeal that was in them against evil in any, in that they would not
bear no^ suffer sin in any, was very acceptable to him.

And therefore in such cases we may and ought to judge of the Ways and Spirits
of men, and to condemn the carnal mind, and sinful disposition of spirit, and
the sinful ways of men: for if a man be disobedient to that which he knows to
be the Will of his Lord, we ought to judge and condemn him therein.

But that which we are forbidden to judge one another for, is the things in
which we cannot be of one mind, but do differ in our Understandings: For though
we may be persuaded that the Way wherein we walk is the very Way which the Word
of God directs us to walk in, yet we ought not to say that therein we are
infallible: And though we are all to walk in those things wherein we differ,
every one as we are persuaded in our own minds, and should err therein; yet we
may not be judged to be none of the Lords Servants or People: For they only
may be said to be none of his, that wilfully rebel against his known Will, and
continue in so doing, without Repentance.

But there being this testimony in the Conscience of a man, that with his whole
Soul he desires and endeavors to do the will of God from the heart, and that
he does not knowingly err in one tittle from the Law of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but it grieves and troubles him: for to censure or judge such a one to ^e none
of the Lords, is that which the Lord forbids.

But it may be said, That some Quakers do not acknowledge the true God, nor
Jesus Christ our Lord, whom he has sent.

To that the answer is easy: If they be such to our own knowledge, as do deny
the true God, and Jesus Christ our Lord, whom he has sent; as do not own him
nor his Law; nor profess an unfeigned subje^ion to him in all things, so far as
they know his Will; Then they are not to be owned as the Lords Servants, but to
be accounted as Heathens and In^idels. Bu^ if they do profess Faith in God, and
in Jesus Christ whom he has sent; and if the true Fear of the Lord be in them,
and they do manifest a subjection unto the Laws and Rules of the Lord Christ,
in all things, so far as they know his W^ll, although they are very differing
from us ^n many other things not so generally received by all the Lords People;
yet he tha^ censures or judges them as Enemies of the Lord, or condemns them as
none of his, may offend the Lord Christ.

Now as far as the Lords People have been censoriou^ one of another, and
condemned one another as none of hi^; so far they have greatly grieved h^ holy
Spirit in walking contra^y unto the blessed Rules of his Word, in which he
sweetly instructs his People, thus:

Hereby shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
And, Joh. 13. 35 1 Cor. 13. 5 Romans 12. 10. Heb. 13. 1. Romans 14. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9,
10, 12, 13, 23.
Love thinks no Evil. And, Be kindly affectioned one toward another, with
Brotherly Love, in honor preferring one another. And, Let Brotherly Love
continue. And in another place, thus: For one believes that he may eat all
things; another who is weak eats Herbs: Let not him that eatet^, d^spise him
that eats not; and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats: for
God has received him. Who art thou that judge another man's Servant? To his
own Master he stands or falls; yea, he shall he holden up, for God is able
to make him stand. One man esteems one day above another, another esteems
every day alike: Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. -- To this
end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the
dead and living. But why do thou judge thy Brother? Or why do thou set at
naught thy Brother? We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. --
So that every ^ne of us shall give an account of himself to God. Let us no^
therefore judge one another any more. -- And, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is
Sin. And, Judge not, that ye be not judged. -- And, Why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy Brothers Mat. 7. 1 3, 4.
Eye, and considerest not the Beam that is in thine own Eye?

But very many of the Lords People have greatly sinned against him, in not
observing these blessed Instructions, but they have cast them all behind their
back, as if they were of no concernment to them to observe. But they have
rebelled against the Lord, and rejected the Word and Wisdom of the Lord herein.
And though he say, Judge not that ye be not judged: And, Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats, for God has received him: And, Who art thou
that judge another man's servant? For to his own Master he stands or
falls; yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. Yet
they have taken upon them to be Judges of the Spirits and Ways of the Lords
Servants, in that wherein they have differed from them; and have taken upon
them, some of them, to censure one another to be the Devils Servants. But
herein, viz. in censuring one another for things in dispute among them, have
the Servants of the Lord boldly violated these blessed Rules given us by our
Lord Christ himself, and by his Spirit in Paul; and have peremptorily taken
upon them to judge the Servants of their Lord, who takes it as a high indignity
offered to himself, that any poor Worm of the Children of Men, (who must all
appear before the ^udgment Seat of Christ, and every one give an account of
himself to God) should take upon them to judge, before the time they have given
an account of themselves. For what poor dark ignorant foolish insufficient
Creatures are we, to do that before the time, that Christ both died; and rose,
and revived, that he might obtain, viz. To be Lord and Judge of all, both Quick
and Dead? Can we search the Heart, and try the Reins? Can we say we are of
quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, and are able to Isa. 1^. 3.
judge not after the sight of the Eye, neither reprove after the hearing of the
Ears, but with Righteousness? etc. How presumptuous are they then that judge
their Lords Servants? How gross an affront do they offer him in it? Will they
say that such and such an one, that differs from them, is in such an Error as
is the path of Destruction, when it is said, He shall be holden up, for God is
able to make him stand; stand firmly upon the Rock of Ages, though he differ
from them in many particulars? How greatly therefore does it concern us, with
blessed Paul, to say, Let us not therefore judge one another* any more?

Seeing this Precept is so often inculcated in the blessed Scriptures of truth;
the Wisdom of God foreseeing our aptness to sin against Christ herein: Though
we have sinned g^ievously against him in so doing in time past, yet henceforth
let us not judge one another any more.

But further, Let it be known to the House of Jacob, That they have rebelled
against the Lord Christ, in that though he say, This is my Commandment, That ye
love one another, that ye may be thereby known to be my Disciples; and, Let
Brotherly Love continue; and, Be kindly affectioned one to another, with
Brotherly Love. And though this Precept be also in many more Scriptures again
and again inculcated, yet they have not loved one another, but they have been
very unkind one toward another, and have had many heart-risings one against
another; and they have not in ho^our preferred one another, but slighted and
despised one another, and spoken reproachfully one of another: And though the
Spirit of Christ in Paul has said, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind; yet they have been ready to ^ompel men to their understandings, whether
they have been persuaded in their own minds or not. And though it is said in
the Scriptures of Truth, That whatever is not of Faith, is Sin; yet they have
been ready to constrain others to conform to their way, whether they have had
Faith to believe it is the Lords mind, or not. And though our Lord say, Why
beholdest thou the mo^e that is in thy Brothers Eye, and considerest not the
Beam that is in thine own Eye? Yet they have been Eagle-ey'd to behold the mote
that ^s is in some o^he^s, which it may be has been real Errors in them, and
it may be not; but have not considered the great Beam of Errors and
Miscarriages that are in themselves; which may have been as much greater then
the miscarriages of othe^s, as a Beam is greater then a Mote.

And thus the Lords People have manifested a very great disobedience unto a^l
the blessed Instructions of the Spirit of Christ of this kind. And of t^is,
very many both of the Baptized Churches, the Presbyterians, the Independants,
and Quakers, have been very guilty, as is too well known.

The Lord make all his People sensible of it, and set them all unanimously a
waiting and a praying that all the Lords People may have a pure Language turned
to them; that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to ^erve him with
one Or ^houlder.
consent: All the mists and darkness that came from the bottomless Pit (that
are yer among them) being disp^lled by the clear Light of the Gospel, shining
more and more unto the perfect Day. And in the mean time loving and approving
whatsoever good thing they see one in another; and rejoicing in the Grace of
God communicated unto any Soul whatsoever, though they differ in many things
from those that see it: No more hating or despising, but pitying and
compassionating one another in any thing that they judge is Darkness or Error:
And being desirous more to have their Eyes upon the lovely part one of another,
then upon the naked part, but covering that with the Garment of Love: for Love
is not willing to entertain any evil thoughts of those it loves. Love delights
to look upon the lovely parts of the Saints very much, but to hide and cover
from its Eye that which is uncomely; at least so far as not to condemn them,
and to conclude them none of the Lords: No, Love will not think such evil
thoughts, but still hops well, and judges well of the Persons, though not of
the Infirmities or Evils. And though it rejoices not in Iniquity, (but pities
and compassionates the So^ls in whom any Iniquity is foun^) yet it rejoices in
the Truth, and in all that walk in the Truth, notwithstanding the weaknesses
that may be in any of them.

So let henceforth all the Disciples of Christ demean themselves one to
another. Amen.

VIII. Another great Evil in very many of the Lords People, is the Sin VIII.
^eg^ect ^ Medi^on on ^e Word ^ard.
of the neglect of a due and constant setting apart time to call to mind the
Word of the Lord, after they have heard it. And this may be aptly and fitly
called, The Sin of Indigestion, or of NOT CHEWING THE CUD.

The general coldness of Love to God (by reason, as has been said, of other
Lovers interposing) ha^ing been such, as they have so little, and do so little
^egard his Word; as that some persons do not afford any pains or time to
recollect what they hear; sometimes not once in a month, nor sometimes once in
a quarter of a year: But they go to hear the Word for customs sake, and to
pacify Conscience, and content themselves with ^a^e so doing; not considering
that the Apostle ^aies, That he that is not a forgetful Hearer, but a James 1:
25.
doer of the Word, that man shall be blessed in his Deed; but he that is a
forgetful Hearer, can expect no blessing. The good Seed of the Word cannot grow
up there, when he either suffers the Devil to catch it from him, o^ the cares
of this World, and the decei^fulness of Riches to choke it. This heart is not
the good ground in which the Word is sowed, so as to bring forth thirty, sixty,
or an hundred fold. But this has been a sin of very many, that they very
seldom take time so much as to call to memory the Word they have heard; but
hearing the Word on the first day of the weak, many times think no more of it
all the weak followi^g. It is well known that the two distinguishing Characters
that were given of the ^lean Beasts, which only were acceptable to God in
Sacrifice under the Law, were that they were such as did Chew the Cud, and part
the Hoof. and it is certain, that those Souls cannot be cl^^n under the Gospel,
that do not Chew the Cud; that do not review and recall to mind, and meditate
upon the Word of God when they have hea^d it. Paul speaking of the Word of the
Gospel, says, It is the 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2.
Word whereby ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I have preached unto you,
unless ye have believed in vain; and it is the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation. But those that keep it not in memory, cannot be saved. Romans 1. 16.
Whereby ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I have preached unto you. The
Word of Truth makes Souls clean. Sanctify them through thy John 17. 17.
Truth, thy Word is Truth; but it is by treasuring it up in the heart. The
cleanest and purest Souls, have the Word of Christ dwelling most plentifully in
them. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way, but by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word, Psalm. 119. 9. The Blessed man when he hears the Word,
does not let it go in at one ear, and out at another, but his delight is in it,
and he meditates on it day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. But it is no wonder such
pollutions and uncleanness appear in many of the Lords People, seeing they do
so little Chew the Cud. It is no wonder their Souls thrive no more, seeing the
Word so quickly passes from them undigested. They go to hear the Word as the
Food of their Souls, but digest it not by Meditation and Chewing upon it, and
getting the sweetness and no^rishment of it; and therefore are lean and starved
Souls, though a^^plentiful Tables.

THIS, this has been also another great evil in many of the Lords People. And
what is the ^oot of this carelessness, and indifferency whether they have
nourishment from the Word or not, has been showed in the mentioning of the
first Evil, that has been in this Discourse declared; and showed to the House
of Jacob. And they that have been guilty of not Chewing the Cud, in the sense
now declared, are some of the people of the several understandi^gs; and the
Quakers, (though all of them are not guilty of it, but) very many of them are
grossly guilty of this ^in of Indigestion; and though many of them are ready and
forward to go to hear the Word, yet they too much satisfy themselves with a
bare so doing, as if that were enough; and they very rarely take any time to do
themselves and their Families good, by repeating each what they remember, to
the help of one another memory in wha^ they have heard: So that there appears
little growth in many Professors; but where they were ten years since, the same
they are now: or scarce so far. But it may be some of them are gone back many
degrees, because they digest not their Spiritual Food.

And one great reason of some of the Baptized Peoples so doing, is their using
(when they had full liberty) to continue their First Day's ordinary Exercises
until four of the Clock in the Afternoon, (at which time if they had broken up,
they had done well) and then after that, to continue the rest of the Day in
doing the business of the Church, viz. To reprove particular persons, where
there was need, and to inquire into the state of the Sick, or the Poor and
Needy: and to receive in or cast out, as occasion required: And these things
taking up their time Which things should be done at other times appointed for
them.
until it was late, then they had no time before Supper for any other Service;
and after Supper such Services with Children and Servants use to be lame
Services, and some elder People also, being then unfit for any thing but to
sleep: so that they had no time on the First Day of the Week for to chew the
Cud: And for other Days, the World so took up some of them, as well as some
Presbyters, Quakers, and Independants, as they scarce minded to go to a
Meeting; or if they did, the World had so eaten them up, that they little cared
to mind any thing but their Worldly Business; and sometimes some would scarce
have gone to a Meeting any week day, but to stop the Clamours of their
Consciences; and it had been as good they had staid at home, as gone, and as
much acceptance it would have had with God, unless they had gone to more
purpose.

I mention this as a distinct Evil, and not among the Omissions already
mentioned; because (it may be) some do scarce think it to be a Duty required of
them.

But ^et all the House of Israel know, That this is assuredly a great Evil of
those that have been guilty of it; and that forgetful Hearers are not blessed.

But some Baptized People, and the Quakers, and many Presbyterians and
Independants also have been very guilty of this great evil, and it must be
declared unto them, and let them not think to hide it: but as they desire to be
blessed, let them Repent and Reform.

IX. Another great Evil of the Lords People, of which they are generally IX.
TALE-BEARING, OR BACK BITING.
very guilty, is the Sin of BACKBITING: And this is a sore Evil, and a
mischievous Sin; though it is a Sin which it may be many of them never think of
the sinfulness of it, nor scarcely ever think it to be a Sin. And that Evil
which the Spirit of God gives this title unto, is expres^ by a variety of other
suchlike Titles in the Scriptures: As the Whisperer, the Talebearer, the
Babbler, the Railer, the Slanderer, the Evil-surmiser.

Now that the Lords People may be shown their Evil herein, let them but take a
view of their deformity of this kind also, in the Glass of the Scriptures, even
in the blessed Words of Truth therein contained.

And first, It is against the express Precept and Commandment of the Lord, Lev.
19. 17. Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy People. So
that he that in any sense goes up and down, and carries Tales, sins against
this Command of the Lord: but much more he or she that carries Tales that tend
to the defaming of others, whether they be true or false; for it is expres^y
said, Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy people: And
therefore the Spirit of the Lord gives us that Precept also in the Gos^el, 1
Pet. 4. 15. But let none of you suffer as an evil doer, or as a busy body in
other men's matters. It is a sin in the Lords People to be a bus^e-body in other
men's matters. And if they keep their own Vineyard well, they have enough to do
there, and they need not busy themselves in other men's matters; they need not
go up and down as Tale-bearers and Back-biters. But,

Secondly, We find in Scripture, that this sin of Backbiting, Tale-bearing,
and Whispering, is ranked amongst the worst of sins, as Romans 1. 29. It is said
of some of the Heathen that were given over unto a reprobate mind; that they
being fi^led with all unrighteousness, were Fornicators, covetous, malicious,
full of envy, Whisperers, Back-biters, etc. And how sad a thing is it, that any
of these evils should be found in Saints, in persons professing Godliness.

But the Question is, Wherein does the evil and hainousness of this sin appear,
that it is ranked among these other hateful sins?

The Answer is, This sin is very heinous, because (if we well consider it) we
shall find that it goes not alone, but many other evils at^end it, and are the
constant Companions of it. And to the end we may take a view of them, let it be
considered what are the temptations to, or the leading causes of this evil; and
they are three; Either,

First, This sin is occasioned by some discontent, or contention or
heartrisings that are between two parties. Or,

Secondly, It is occasioned through a great disposition that is in many people
(but in some more then others) to be very talkative, and prattling; and such
persons, ratheir then ^ail to maintain discourse, though to little purpose, are
often meddling with other men's matters. Or,

Thirdly, It is occasioned sometimes through a disposition in men to boast, and
vaunt, and to speak of others weakness, to render themselves to be the more
excelling in Parts, or in Virtue, or in Zeal, or Courage, or Faithfulness, etc.

Now as it is occasioned either of those ways much evil attends it; for if it
be occasioned through discontents and discords between any, then he that is the
Back-biter is under a great temptation to render the actions, or words of the
man whom he back-bites, much otherwise, and much worse then they will appear to
be when a man is present to make his defense: for the very alteration of a
word, may make a matter seem much worse then indeed it is; or the leaving out,
or the not telling some part of a man's words; but leaving out some material
word, may also do the like; or the agravating some little circumstances of a
man's words, carriages, and actions, straining them to the highest pin, and
stretching them beyond what they were; and withal cove^ing and hiding of a
man's own weaknesses, or miscarriages, and putting the best face and covering on
a man's own words: These things also do much alter the case, and may render the
Back-biter very worthy, and honorable, and the back-bitten a very unworthy and
and unlovely person in the thoughts of them that hear it; if they have so
little prudence or wisdom, or so little justice or honesty, as to take up those
reports, or to receive or believe them before they hear the party that is
back-bitten to make his own defense.

And these are the evils that in this case (where there is heart-risings
between two parties for any offenses given or taken) do attend Backbiting and
Tale-bar^ing.

1. Lying. 2. Slandering. 3. Unrighteousness and Deceitfulness. 4. Malignity
and Envy. 5. A sowing of Discord. 6. Great Injuriousness. For in the alteration
of a man's words, he that reports them with alterations of them, tells alie, for
the man spoke not so: And in leaving out of somethings, and making addicio^s
and alterations, (either upon mistakes, or forgetfulness, or wilfulness) men do
often slander their Brethren, and cast such an odium upon them as ought not to
be cast. And herein they are unjust, unrighteous, and deceitful, and oftentimes
malignity, and spleen, and envy, is therein manifested: And oftentimes this
Tale-bearing, and speaking to the defaming, reproaching and undervaluing of a
man behind his back, does ^eget ill blood in the parties that hear it, and
sometimes makes a man that was a dear and intimate friend to such a man, to
become strange to him; it sepa^ateth chief friends: and herein besides in other
respects which might be mentioned, the back-biter is very injurious unto him
that he back-bites.

And all these evils are common with Back-biters, and whisperers, that is, such
persons as are apt to take a liberty to speak any thing at any time, to the
defaming, undervaluing; or di^paraging a man behind his back. I say it is
common for Back biters to be liars, slanderers, unrighteous, deceitful, etc.
Yea though in other respects the Back-biters may be good men, and good women,
and such as tr^ly fear and love the Lord: Yet in being Back-bite^s, and taking
a liberty to speak any thing, that tends to the defaming of others behind their
backs; they do often therein appear to be liars, slanderers, unrighteous,
deceitful, injurious, etc. Yea though the persons that do back-bite, do little
think themselves to be so, but think themselves to be very just, and very
righteous, and that they a^hor to tell a lie, or to slander any, or to be any
way injurious; yea they think they loath such things: but herein their own
hearts deceives them, and they are deceived; and though either they know not,
or think not, or are not willing to think that they are deceived; yet they are
deceived, and deceive others: And the more eminent such persons are for the
good, and the worth that appears in them in other respects, the more they
deceive the persons to whom they speak: for they will be ready to think, this
is a good man, or a good woman, that speaks these things, and they would not
report thus if it were not so. Whereas if it were a loose person, or a vile
person that spoke it, their words would not be taken up, or credited so soon,
they could not so easily deceive the hearers.

And again; if a man be a Back-biter, not upon the account of any offense given
or taken, but merely through a disposition to prattle and ta^^le, to be very
talkative, and full of words, and a love to hear himself talk among company; of
which disposition women usually are more guilty then men, though some men are
too guilty of it: Herein also the Back-biter does become very guilty of lying,
and slandering, unrighteousness, and deceitfulness, and sowing discords, and
injuriousness. For these pra^lers and ta^lers, do either speak something they
have heard from other tatlers or tale-bearers, or something which they
conjecture, or imagine from such and such circumstances, or from seeming
grounds, or from mistakes, or mis^pprehens^ons, which they have in themselves,
or have ^eceived from others, in which they think they have very strong grounds
for what they repo^t. All which being examined, may be no grounds for such
reports. And so in all these things the Talebearer, that ^peaks any thing that
tends to the defaming of a person not present, is oftentimes a great liar, and
slanderer, and is very unrighteous, and unjust, and is a sower of discord, and
is very injurious; for it is very frequent for persons that tell tales or
reports of things which they have heard from others, to make additions and
alterations; either through badness of memory, or delight in many words, or
both; for some cannot remember things exactly, and they speak at ^andom; and
others love many words, and have a faculty to stretch things beyond what they
are; and most are subject to mistake words; and when one word is taken for
another, or a sentence is taken to have another meaning then was intended, it
much alters the ca^e: and on these accounts many m^schiefs, and evils have
attended this kind of Talebearing also; when persons out of a desire to
pra^tle, and for want of better discourse, do take that sinful liberty to speak
things which tend to the defaming and undervaluing of others: wherein they have
been guilty of much evil, and have greatly wronged their own Souls.

And so also when through a disposition to vaunt, and boast, and ^ender ^ man's
self to be excelling in Parts, or in Virtue, or Zeal, or Courage, etc. and to
render another more mean, or low, and despicable, or unworthy, and to lessen
the esleem that others have of them, or of any work or worth of t^eirs, herein
also such a Backbiter is many times a hai^ous and grievous sinner, in the
forementioned particulars; and does prove to be also a proud boaster, and evil
doer in a high degree.

And by this time it does in part appear that the sin of Backbiting is a
heinous crime; and it is no wonder that it is ranked amongst the worst of sins.
But,

Thirdly, As the Scripture declares the sin of Talebearing to be against the
express command of the Lord, and as it ranks it amongst the wo^st of sins. So
thirdly, The Scriptures declare the words of Talebearers to be as wounds, and
as the bitings of a Serpent, as Prove. 18. 8. The words of a Talebearer, are as
wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the Belly: and Eccles. 10.
11. Surely the Serpent will bite without enchantment, and a Babbler is no
better: And how unworthy a thing is it for the Servants of our Lord Jesus
Christ to wound one another, and to bite one another like the bitings of a
Serpent? And how greatly unbecoming the Gospel, that requires such great
degrees of love to breth^en? Our Lord Christ gives this as the great Character
whereby all men may know who are his Disciples, viz. Their love one to another,
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have John 13. 35. 1
John 3. 14.
love one to another. And the beloved Apostle John declares that this is the
great evidence, which Saints have in their own Souls, that they are passed from
Death to Life, because they love the Brethren. Now when a man does wound and
cut his Brother, yea wound and gash his very inward parts, as the Scripture
declares, that the words of a Talebearer do; and when a man bites his brother,
like the bitings of a Serpent, as the Scripture says, the words of a
Talebearer are no better. I say, When a man does thus wound and bite his
Brother, What proof does he give to others of his being a Disciple of Christ?
Or what comfortable evidence can he have in his own Soul, that he is passed
from Death to Life? And yet these are the hateful and odious qualities of a
Talebearer, as the Scripture declares them. And,

Fourthly, The Scripture declares that a Whisperer or Talebearer, is one that
makes divisions among Brethren; as Prove. 16. 18. A Whisperer separateth chief
Friends. It is a very blessed thing for men and women to be always studying
and striving to be Peacemakers, when there is any contention among Brethren.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called Mat. 5. 9.
the Children of God. God is styled the God of Peace, and the Peacemakers
shall be called his Children; it is a mark of a Child of God that is a
Peacemaker. And great are the blessings that attend Brethrens dwelling
together in Peace, in Love, having dear, and true, and cordial affections one
toward another; And as Peter phrases it, having love unfeigned, and loving one
another, with a pure heart fervently. And assuredly some of the Lords Servants
do so love one another, they are very dear one to another; beholding 1 Pet. 1.
32.
the Image of the Lord Christ one in another, they are very lovely one in
another Eye; and the trouble or grief that comes upon one, cuts the heart of
another; and the joy of one, is the joy and comfort of another; and so they
dwell together in unity, having one heart in dear love one to another: and this
may be, though in some things they may differ in their judgments. Now where
this dwelling together in amity, and unity is, the Scripture declares it to be
a very lovely, and a very pleasant thing, and tells us, that there the Lord
commands the Blessing, even life for evermore; and such are surely passed from
Death to Life. Ps^^. 133 1, 2, 3.


But a Whisperer does that contrary, that sinful, that hateful work, that tends
to separating of chief Friends; not only of common and ordinary Friends, but
such as were chief Friends, such as had a preference more then ordinary in the
hearts and affections one of another: And this has commonly been done by
Tale-bearers: For the words of Tale-bearers, which they have spoken behind a
man's back, have sometimes had such a deep influence upon the minds of men, as
to race a friend out of the affections that before was very dear to them; and
thence has come an estrangedness, and distance which has never been made up;
And this has been many times when there has been no cause at all for it; if
all things had been examined in a sober Spirit, face to face: But the
Tale-bearers words having been received and taken for truths without
examination, they have made a great distance between those that were before
intimate Friends.

Fifthly, The Scriptures declare that a Talebearer reveals secret, which is
an unworthy thing in any: for there are things which ought to be kept secret,
if we love the welfare, or the peace, or the credit one of another; and being
concealed, and kept secret, no inconvenience, no evil effects come of it; but
being revealed, are many times of very evil tendency. But says the Spirit of
God, A Talebearer reveals secrets; but he that is of a faithful Spirit,
concealeth the matter, Prove. 11. 13. And, he that goes about as a Talebearer,
reveals secrets; therefore meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips,
Prove. 20. 19. So that he that is a Talebearer is very unfaithful, and it is a
very indiscret thing to have much to do with such a one; therefore meddle not
with him, though he speak never so fairly.

Sixthly, The Scripture declares the displeasure of God to be great against
such persons, as Prove. 6. 16, 17. These six things does the Lord hate; yea,
seven are an abomination unto him; A proud look, a lying tongue, etc. And him
that sows discord among Brethren. And Psalm. 50. the Lord speaking of the
wicked man, says this of him among other things, Thou sittetest and speak
against thy Brother, and slanderest thine own Mothers Son. (This is indeed an
evil work, which evil men are found in.) But says the Lord, These things have
thou done, and I kept silence; and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a
one as thy self; But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee,
etc. So that we see the Lord hates such works in any; it is an abomination unto
him, and he will reprove them sharply that are guilty of them. And,

Seventhly, The Scripture declares that the Lord will cut off such from his
house, and from his Holy City, if they repent not; as Psalm. 101. 5. Who so
privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off: Him that has an high
look, and a proud heart will not I suffer; and, verse. 8. I will early destroy
all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City
of the Lord.

Now having thus in part taken a view of what the Scriptures of Truth speak
concerning Tale-bearers: We see that it greatly concerns the Lords people to be
exhorted for time to come, to be very wary of that hateful Evil of
Tale-bearing, or Backbiting; and to keep a strict watch over themselves, lest
they be found some way or other guilty of it; and to that end it concerns them
to be very careful what they say of any person, or party behind their backs.

And indeed upon all accounts the Lords People have great reason with David to
set a watch before the door of their lips; for says he, I will take Ps. 39. 1.
heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a
B^idle. Happy are they that so do, and that do restrain their lips from many
words; for it is a great point of wisdom so to do, as the Scripture declares,
Prove. 13. 3. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life; but he that opens
wide his lips, shall have destruction. And Prove. 10. 19. In the multitude of
words there wants not sin; but he that refraineth his lips, is wise. Many
p^atling Women, and Men also, that take a liberty to let their tongues run
wildly, do not consider the great Truths contained in these words. They seldom
think, that to be full of words, is to be sinful; and that it is true wisdom to
refrain their lips from many words, unless they are sure they are words that
may adminis^er grace to the hearers: And they little consider, that the life
and safety of their Souls depends upon the keeping their mouth, and that
destruction to their Souls may be the issue of opening wide their Lips. And O
how few are there that are so wa^y of keeping their tongues as they ought? For
says James, If any man ^ffend not in word, the same is Jam. 3. 2.
a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. But how few such
perfect men are there?

How greatly therefore does it concern the Lords People to be deeply sensible
of the greatness of this great Evil, which many of them have been very guilty
of, and most of them more or less have e^ed in?

Not that it is hereby asserted, that in no case there ought to be any thing
said of any person or persons miscarriages, but to their faces; for sometimes
there may be good ends in speaking of them to some others in order to the
reclaming of them; as in order to the bringing of it to the Church, when the
rule requires it; or in order to the moving Parents to reprove, correct, or
instruct their Children as the occasion may be. It cannot be said to be the fin
of Joseph, that he ^rought the evil repo^t of some of his Brethren to his Genesis
27. 2
Father; The like may be said in other cases.

But what is here declared against, is plainly showed to be the Sin of
whomsoever are guilty of it. And that some in a Gospel Church have been guilty
of this Sin of Backbiting, is clear by what Paul speaks to the Church of
Corinth, 2 Cor. 12. 20. For, I fear lest when I come among you, I shall not
find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as you would
not: Lest there be debates, envying, strifes, back bitings, whisperings,
swellings, tumults. And 1 Cor. 1. 11. It has been declared unto me, of you, my
Brethren; by them of the House of Cloe, that there are contentions among you;
and Chap. 3. 3, 4. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you
envyings, and strife, and divisions; are ye not carnal, and walk as men? He had
thus expressed himself in the first Chapter concerning this very Church. I 1 Cor.
1: 4, 5, 6, 7.
thank my God always on your behalf, for the Grace that is given you by Jesus
Christ, that in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and in
all knowledge; even as the Testimony of Christ was corfirmed in you; so that
you come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ.
Here we see that some that were in a Church of Christ, that were enriched by
him in all utterance, and all knowledge, and came behind in no gift, and that
were waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, had contentions, and
strifes, and envyings, and back-bitings, and whisperings, and swellings, and
tumults amongst them; which were a grief and trouble to Paul. So that he was
like to come among them, when he did come, rather with reproof, and with a Rod,
then with that joy and comfort that he desired to come among them with; And
might it not be for these among other Evils, that many of them were sick and
weak, and many were fallen asleep? 1 Cor. 11. 30.


But as in the Church of Corinth, so many among the Churches in England are
very guilty of this great Evil which the Lord ha^es, and the mischiefs which
Back-bitings, and Tale-bearings have done among many Church Members, have been
very great; and to cure the Wounds, and heal the Divisions that have been made
among some Church Members, has cost many hours, and many days of precious
time: And yet with some, all time and labor has been lost; the breaches have
been so great, as have ^ever yet been made up; and these breaches have been
greatly widened by the whisperings, and the back-bitings of many amongst them.

And this is the ninth sore Evil which must be showed to the Lords People, to
the end they may be greatly humbled under the sense of it, and may wash their
hearts from this wickedness also, that they may be saved in the day of the
Lords anger; that the Lords People may be so thoroughly purged, and cleansed from
this Evil. as they may not only refrain their lip^ from Backbiting, but may be
of that B^essed ^isposition of him that shall dwell in Go^s Ho^y Hill;
mentioned Psalm. 15. 3. That, He back-biteth not with his tongne, nor does evil
to his Neighbor; nor takes up a reproach against his Neighbor. Though a
Back-biter should utter a reproach to him against his Neighbor, yet he will by
no means take it up o^ receive i^. And this is a Blessed disposition indeed,
which the Lord grant that all his People may pre^s after.

X. Another great Evil to be showed to the Lords People, which is the last X.
MISPENCE OF TIME IN VAIN DISCOURSES.
that is to be mentioned in this Catalogue, Is the spending too much of their
precious time, when they come into company one with another, in discourses of
worldly things, and sometimes unnecessary things. I do not say that all talk of
worldly business is always unnecessary: But that there is very frequently, and
very commonly talking that is unnecessary, which is the Evil of many of the
Lo^ds People; and shows they savor the things that be of men more then the
things that be of God. This is a sad token that many of the Lords People have
lo^^ their first Love, for it was not wont to be so with them. But I cannot say
that of all the several distinctions of the Lords Servants, any one are more
guilty of this Evil then other; but some of them all are eminent in the
contrary virtue, viz. Generally full of Spiritual Discourses, wheresoever they
can have opportunity; but these are but a few. But the far greater number of
them all, do manifest but little Spiritual savor when they come together, or
where ever they come; which does manifest great carnality, and is contrary to
the plain Rule of the Scripture, as Ephesians. 4. 19. Let your communication be
such, as may minister Grace to the Hearers. and Ephesians. 5. 19, 20. Col. 3. 16,
17. 1 These. 5. 11. But the more Spiritually minded we are, the more will we be
coveting to spend our time in things that are of a Spiritual advantage to our
selves, to one another, ^o Acquaintance, to near Relations, to Children, to
Servants, and all Companies, so far as we may.

But O House of Jacob, you have been greatly deficient herein. And for this,
together with all the other Evils that are herein showed to be the Sins of the
Lords People: it concerns you to * be on the Mountains, like Doves of the Ezekiel.
7. 16.
Valleys, all of you mourning, every one for his and her Iniquities in
particular whatever they have been.

Which the Lord grant unto you all.

AMEN.
An ALARM TO REPENTANCE.
THese ten particular Evils that are here declared, are the Transgressions by
which the Lords People have very greatly provoked the Lord to anger; and though
there are no other particular Evils here mentioned, yet it may not be concluded
that the Lords People are not guilty of other Evils also: But these Evils, are
the Evils that are most apparently against clear light, and against the plain
and undisputable Rules of the Gospel, and of the Law and the Prophets, even
such certain Truths as cannot be denied, but are fully owned by every one that
does truly fear the Lord.

There are many Errors and Evils either of Omission or Commission, which the
Baptized, the Presbyterian, the Quakers, and the Independants are most
certainly guilty of, in the way of their particular distinct understandings and
practice; for some of them do not practice the Ordinances of Christ, according
to the Rules of the Gospel, but according to men's inventions; and some of them
do omit, and ^l^ght, and neglect the Ordinances of Christ unworthily; and some
do sinfully admit of unfit and unworthy subjects to the Ordinances of Christ;
which are great Evils in all them that are guilty of them. But these things are
not done, I hope, by any of them against their light and understanding, (if
they be, it is a fearful thing) but they all walk and practice, as we may hope,
according to the clearest Light they have in their understandings, and as God
gives them more Light, we may hope they will be ready to walk in it; for which
doubtless they are all waiting.

But the Evils which I have had a Commission to declare unto the House of
Ja^ob, are such as they cannot deny to be their Evils, when they hear this
Declaration of them, and such as they must and will confess to be abounding
among them. The which no doubt they will ack^owledge they ought to repent of,
and to abhor themselves for them in Dust and Ashes.

And it being so, none of the Lords People (I presume) will dare to cavil with
it. The Word of the Lord giving such full Authority unto all that are enabled
to Preach and Publish it, (and to me in particular, upon whom the burden, the
Blessed burden of it is said) to declare among other Messages, this Message:
To declare unto his People their Transgressions. And I hope all the wise in
heart will unde^stand the Voice of the Lord in it, and improve it to the end
for which it is published.

DANIEL 12. 10.

Many shall be purified, and made white and ^ryed; but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and n^ne of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
unde^stand.

I have had in my custody, for about three years time, the Copy of two Letters
which came from Amsterdam, in August, 1661. to a person of worth in this
Kingdom; concerning a Vision which an Ancient man of Friesland had about that
time, which I judge worthy of publishing. And though I cannot say that I am so
confident that the Vision and Message, mentioned in those Letters, is so t^uly
from the Lord, and so ce^tainly the Word of the Lo^d, as that which is written
in the Scriptures of Truth; yet because so much of the Prophecy therein
mentioned (if it be a Prophecy) is come to pass, I dare not say it is not
truly from the Lord; but it is very probable that it is the Word of the Lord.

And therefore I publish it, that it may be observed by the Lords People, and
all whom it may concern. And I shall publish those Letters in the very words of
him that sent them, without altering or adding so much as a Syllable; not
imposing it on any to believe, but leave it to a^l persons to make such use
thereof as the Lord shall direct them.

The Copies of part of two Letters Written from Amsterdam, in August 1661. so
far as relates to the business that is here intended to be Published.
I Have been told by two or three sober Persons, that there has been in this
Town, whiles I was at the Hague, an Ancient man of Friesland, who came hither
by the direction of an Angel, who he said appeared unto him at night about
eleven of the Clock, when he was a bed, making his Rome, formerly dark, more
bright then when the Sun at noon day shined ^^on it; whereat he being amazed
and troubled, he says, The Angel stood still till he had recovered himself,
and then told him, That he was sent from God; to command him to go to the
reformed Ministers of this Country, to bid them exhort earnestly their Hearers
to Repent, and abstain from the Profaneness, and sinfiul excesses which
abounded in their courses, because God has determined to visit this People
with the Sword, with the Plague, and with Famine, in the extremity of all these
Plagues, except they be humbled and Repent; that the Sword shall be in all
their Quarters at once; that the Plague shall be such, that the living shall
not be able to bury all the dead, but that the Dogs shall eat the Carcasses
lying unburied; and that the Famine shall be such, that one pound of Bread
shall be worth a Rix Dollar. And when the Old Man did ask him when this should
be; the answer was, That he should give the Reformed Ministers warning thereof
first, and as they should behave themselves, he should then come to him again
and let him know further; That if they repented not, he should be told of the
time, which should not fail one hour.

Mr. Rulice told me ^ome part of this, having understood it from a sober Woman
of his Congr^gation, who spoke with him, of whom (when she came to spoke to
him) he asked whether she was of the Refor^^ed Church Members? And when she had
answered, Yea; then he told her these things; and added, That the Angel said,
That because he was an Old Man, He was not charged to carry the same Message of
the like Judgments to befall to England, except they also Repe^^ed for the
great sins which bear sway in that Nation, but that he should Write unto
England to warn them of the same purpose of God against them if they did not
alter their courses. I shall inquire further into this matter, and let you know
what I learn.

The Woman that related a part of this to Mr. Rulice, (for some part, namely
concerning the Sword to be upon the four corners of the Provinces, I heard from
another hand) added, That he was commanded to give the same warning to the
Reformed Ministers in Braband; and that he said, He could wish it had pleased
the Lord to employ some body else in this Message: For, said he, I scarce dare
go along the Streets for Boys, and people following and taking me for a Q^aker^
which is very troublesome to me.

Whether this matter of the Vision be true or no, that the man (who is known to
be of a good life) has seen, it is not material to me, but that he says these
things is out of doubt; And that the duty of Repentance is very necessary, no
man can deny, that can look into the lives of Professors: But that th^^ Message
should now be sent, when this People think themselves at peace with all the
World, and in a more flourishing condition then ever, is remarkable to me, and
like unto the way of God; who to balance their carnal confidence, and wanton
security, does let them know the danger whereby they are, except they behave
themselves wisely, and walk humbly before him; Which I beseech the Lord to make
you in England, as well as those that are here, sensible of.

Amsterdam, the 9/19 of August, 1661.

The Copy of the other Letter.
I Wrote last week of an old man of Frie^land who had seen an Angel. Two days
agce, Mr. Comenius and I, with another, went to him, and spoke with him; his
name is Homme Theus, his Age is 76. his abode in a Villag^ near Sneck in
Friesland; his Employment is in the Winter, a Schoolmaster of Boys; in the
Summer, because the Children are in the Field, commonly he goes about as a
Physician of Beasts, and gets some livelihood by that means. I asked him first,
whether an Angel had spoken to him? and he said, That in the night when he was
asleep, he found himself wakened, and an Angel standing before his B^d with a
great light, as if it had been the Sun in the Room; and that he stayed with him
from about eleven of the Clock until toward morning, about four hours time; and
that he told him, He was sent to command him to give warning unto the Ministers
of the several professions of this Land, viz. The Reformed, the Lutherans, the
Anabaptists, the Papists, that God would punish the said Land for their
unthankfulness; for the great prosperity hitherto bestowed upon these
Provinces, for their Pride, for their Covetousness, for their Oppression of the
poor in Judicatures; for their excess of Riot and Wantonness; for Adultery and
Fornication; and for their hatred one of another, and their persecuting each of
other for differences of Religion, seeking to force each other to their
particular way of Profession; saying, That God did hate this practice, and
would severely punish them for it, except they Repented.

And further the Angel said, That the Gospel was truly preached in these Lands,
but their sin lay in that they did not live up to it, and to the knowledge they
had of it. And he said, That if the Ministry did not warn this People, that God
would first visit them and their Houses, for the neglect of this duty; and that
he would send upon the Land, if they repented not, the Sword, the Famine, and
the Pestilence; A Pestilence, such that the Living should not able to bury the
Dead, but they should lie upon the streets and be torn with Dogs; A Famine,
such that a pound of Bread should cost a Rix Dollar, which should be upon the
four Corners of the Land. He said, The Angel comm^nded him to give the same
warning into England, and for the same sins, the same Judgments should befall
unto them. -- I asked him concerning the discharge of his Commission unto the
Ministers of this place, how he had performed it: He told me, He had been with
one of the Ministers of his acquaintance, Mr. Sihelanus, with whom that day he
had dined, and that ^y him he would send a writing unto the Consistory of this
City; and that this Minister had undertaken to deliver it at their Meeting the
next day; and that he would cause it to b^ Printed, to give a warning to all.
Now whether this be done or no, I know not, but I suppose we shall hear more of
it if the Confistory was made acquainted with this matter.

Yesterday a Friend of mine went to see him, and speak with him, but he was
early gone out of Town to Sardum, a Village not far from hence, in North
Holland; And this day one has been to inquire after him, but he is not yet
come to Town, and it is doubtful whether he will come or no hither again.

Just now I am told, that he has given a Relation of the Message, written with
his own Hand, to a Lutheran, from whom I may happily get a Copy of it. The Old
Man has told the same things to others as well as to me, and I make no doubt
but others will write of it into England.

Amsterdam, August, 16/26 1661.

In which Letters I shall only take notice of this one passage, (leaving the
res^ to be of what use the Lord shall please to make it to any) namely, That
the Judgments of God are therein said to come upon those prosessing people,
For not living according to what they knew. It is unquestionably true, that
sins against knowledge have much higher aggravations then sins of ignorance;
and God takes it more unkindly from his People when they sin against their
knowledge, then if they sin ignorantly. Luke 12. 47, 48
The Servant that knew his Masters Will, and did it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes: But he that knew The times of this ignorance God winked at, Acts.
17. 30.
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with fe^
stripes: for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required.
Happy are the People that live up to what they know. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them. But those Peoples case is very deploreable and sad,
who have continued long in living in sins against knowledge^ David's sins
against knowledge cost him very dear; and so have the sins against knowledge of
many others, and many that are yet prospering may be reserved to more severe
judgments unless they repent.

In the consideration of which, how greatly does it concern the Lords People to
dread and fear the continuing to live in the Sins that are in the preceding
Discourse declared to be their sins? They being all sins against their
knowledge, Sins which they all know to be Sins against the plain Laws and
Precepts of the Lord their God, and their Redeemer. They may be, and are many
of them, sinners in other respects, in which they sin for want of knowledge,
they sin through ignorance; but they cannot say so of any one of these Sins.

They sin (as has been said) some of them in their Omissions of the Ordinances
of the Lord Christ; and others in the pra^^ise of them in an irregular way; but
this they do for want of knowledge; (though they are not thereby wholly
excused) they do not sin therein against their knowledge; for it is out of
doubt that many of them, if not most of them, do practice according to what
they know and understand.

But the great sin of the Lords People lies in this, That they do not live up
to what they know, do not walk according to the knowledge of the Gospel, that
every one in particular has.

But now to provoke the Lords People to Repentance of these Sins against Some
great and weighty Considerations which it concerns the Lords People in good
earnest to consider of.
knowledge especially, and thoroughly to amend their ways. I must here lay
down some great and weighty Considerations, which it concerns them seriously
and in good earnest to consider.

I. It concerns them to Consider that when a People live in a continued course
of sinning against the Lord, in such great Abominations as these, which the
Lord so much abhors; that though that People make never so high a Profession of
being his People; and though they appear much in worshipping of him in the
Ordinances of his own appointment, that yet the Lord does abhor and loath their
most solemn Services. And they may keep many solemn Fasting Days, or Feasting
Days, and yet have no acceptance with him, but he may so loath them, as to be
ready to spue them out of his mouth; yea though they be such, as seem to have
such confidence Am^s 5. 21, 22, 23, 24. I hate, I despise your Feast Days, and
I will not smell in your Solemn Assemblies; I will not accept them, neither
will I regard the Peace Offerings of your Fat Beasts. Take thou away from me
the noise of thy Songs, for I will not hear the Mellody of thy Viols; But let
Judgment run down as Water, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream.

This People pretended to desire the Day of the Lord, as appears in the three
former Verses, and they were diligent in worshipping him, but they continued in
a course of sinning against him, and therefore he says, I hate, I despise your
Services. People may not think to live in sin, and to pacify the Lord with
keeping days of Prayer, or Praises, or of hearing his Word. No, nothing
without a through-amending of their ways, will find acceptance with him; and
it is a most unworthy thing to think that any thing else without this will do
it.

I have heard a Story of a vile Profane wicked Man that would wear an Image of
Gold continually in his Hat; And when he had done any great Evil that did
trouble his Conscience, then he would take down his God of Gold and kiss it,
and pray forgiveness of it, and think all was well.

And what do they think less that think they may continue in Sin, and paci^ie
the Lord with their Prayers and Performances? But they deceive themselves, that
will not do it: Therefore it is said, Mich. 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? Shall I come before him
with burnt Offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
firstborn for my Transgression, or the Fruit of my Body for the sin of my
Soul? (All this were vain.) But he has showed thee, O man, what is good; and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to love mercy, and do justly, and to
walk bumbly with thy God. Nothing less will please the Lord, then a righteous,
holy, humble walking before him. And let none think to abuse Gospel Grace, and
turn it into wantonness, because they must not be saved by works, but by the
Blood of Christ; therefore to wa^k loosly: for this is a certain truth both in
the Law and Gospel, That without Holiness no man He^. ^^. 14
shall see the Lord. It is true, there is no Salvation by Works, but by Christ
alone. But those who are saved by Christ, are also Sanctified by Jesus Christ.
And for those that pretend Faith in Christ, for such to live in sin, because
Grace h^th abounded, it is the more an abomination unto the Lord; and of such
he will say, That he hates and despises their Services; and he will not smell
any sweet ^avour in their performances; neither can they make any mellody in
their Hearts to the Lord. And as it is said here, Take away from me the noise
of thy Songs; I will not hear the mellody of thy Viols. So may he say to such.
And to this purpose the Lord expresses himself also by his Prophet Jeremiah,
^er. 14. 12. When they fast, I will not hear their cry; And when they offer
burnt Offerings, and an Oblation, I will not accept them, but I will consume
them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence. And Jer. 6. 20. To
what purpose comes there to me Incense from Sheba, and the sweet Cane from a
far Country? Your burnt Offe^ings a^e ^ot acceptable, nor your Sacrifices
sweet unto me.

It is well known that this People were the Lords People; ^hey were the House
of Jacob, and they frequently drew near to God, to ^^rship him according to his
own appointments, offering burnt Offerings, and Sacrifices, and Oblations, and
Fasted and Prayed; and yet the Lord says, To what purpose do you do all this?
It is not acceptable unto me, I will not accept them, nor hear your cry. And he
speaks also to the same pu^pose by the Prophet Isai^h, Isa. 1. 11, 12. etc. To
what purpose is the multitude of your Sa^rifices unto me? says the Lord. I am
full of the burnt Offerings of Rams, and of the ^at of fed Beasts. I delight
not in the Blood of Bull locks, or of Lambs, or of He-goats. When ye come to
appear before me, who has required this at your hand^, that ye tread my
Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abom^nation unto me. The
new Moons, and Sabbaths; The calling of the Assemblies I cannot away with, it
is iniquity, even your solemn Meetings. Your new Moons, and your appointed
Feasts, my Soul hates; they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them.
And when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: Yea, when
ye make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood. Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to
do evil, learn to do well, etc.

Here it is plain, that though there be a multitude of Duties performed, yet if
a People be polluted with Sin and Defilement, it is to no purpose. To what
purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices to me, says the Lord? The Lord
desires Holiness more then Sacrifices, and Purity of Heart more then Prayers;
For if a People be full of sin and iniquity, and hugg that, and keep that in
their bosoms still; though they make many Prayers, he will not hear them: and
for the fastings of such a People, they are not at all acceptable unto him.
When they fast, I will not hear their cries, because they do not put away the
evil of their doings from before his eyes; the evil of their Coverousness, and
hardness of heart, etc. But he tells us what Fast will be acceptable unto him,
Isa. 58. 6, 7. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? To loose the bands of
Wickedness, to undo heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that
ye break every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that are cast out to thy House? When thou see the naked, that
thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh?

This is the Fast that God has chosen; such a day of Fast, as wherein a man
does so truly repent of sin, as ^o put it quite away, and never return to it
any more, but to be greatly exercised in the contrary virtue for ever after.
And days of Humiliation and Fasting are appointed for this end; that persons
may be so truly humbled under the sense of sin, as to loath themselves for it,
and to acknowledge that they are not worthy to ear Bread, or to ^eceive any
mercy for their refreshment. And if we ought to loath our selves for sin, much
more should we ^oath all our abominations in the sight of the Lord; and this
the Lord requires. Put away all the evil of your doings from before mine eyes;
cease to do evil, learn to do well; to be free-hearted, tenderhearted,
compassionate. Deal thy Bread to the hungry, bring the poor that are cast out
to thy House; cloth the naked, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh,
from the pinching streights of thy Brother, whose pinching necessiries should
be on thy heart, with as much sense as if it were on thine own flesh; for their
flesh is as our flesh, and their Neh. 5. 5.
Children as our Children. Would thou suffer thine own Body, or thine own
Wife or Children, to be in such streights and distresses, as tho^ see some of
the Lords dear Servants sometimes a^e in?

O hide not thy self from thine own flesh, put away covetousness, and hardness
of heart; cease from that and all other Evils, and learn to do well in these
and all other blessed deeds. Remember them that are in bonds as bound with
them, and them that be in adversity, as being your selves also in the Body.
Heb. 1^. 2. And to do good, and to communicate forget not, For with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased, verse. 16. Such Fastings as are accompanied with
such Sacrifices, with a liberal and bountiful doing of these things, ^e the *
Fastings that God expects, and accepts; and otherwise when person^ Fast, and
bow down their hands as a Bull-rush, for a time, and continue in sin, though
they should pray till their voice and strength should fail, and Fast till their
bodies were fainting and dying, it would find no acceptance with God, but be
loathsome unto him. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates,
they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them.

Why does the Lord so loath these performances which were of his own
appointments? Because they were a sinful People, a People laden with iniquity,
a seed of Evil doers, Children that were Corrupters, that had forsaken the
Lord, and provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, and were gone away
backward, Isa. 1. 4. Which are the direct Characters of many of the Lords
People now, though they continue worshipping of him in his own appointments, as
they did them; for they did come to appear before the Lord, and tread his
Courts, and frequent the solemn Assemblies, and observe the new Moons, and
offer a multitude of Sacrifices, and burnt Verses 11 12, 13, 14 15.
Offerings of Rams, and of Bullocks, and Lambs, and of He-Goats, and did spread
forth their hands, and make many Prayers.

Now let all the Lords People seriously ponder this great Consideration, and
fear and dread the continuing in any known sin, and be fa^ from deluding
themselves with the vain thoughts of finding acceptance with God, in spending a
whole day or days in a week, in the most solemn Church Assemblies, or in any
other duty which the Lord requires, while they continue in sin, as remembering
what the Lord here speaks in these Scriptures, and what is said, Psalm. 66. 18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. And let
them observe the gracious Exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Let us
have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear;
for our God is (not like the vanities of the Heathens, to be pleased with many
Lip-Services, without Reformation, but) a consuming fire.

II. Another great Consideration, that may be of use to provoke the viz. That
no persons that are not washed from the Pollutions and Iniquities mentioned in
the preceding Discourse, shall be admitted to be of the number of them that
shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; or that shall be accounted worthy
to serve him, in the great work he has to do in the latter day; for it is
evident that those that are his Followers, are described to be such as have
none of these Iniquities found in them, as appears in the Description, Rev. 14.
1, 2, etc. in these words, And I looked, and ^o a Lamb stood upon Mount Sion;
and with him, a hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name
written in their Fore^eads; and they were redeemed from the Earth. These are
they which were not defiled with Women, for they are Virgins. These are they
which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: These were redeemed from among
men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was
found no guile; for they are without fault, before the Throne of God. And Chap.
17. 14. He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and they that are with him, are
Called, and Chosen, and Faithful.

In which great Characters of the Lambs Followers, it is apparent, That they
are not defiled with any of those Pollutions, which the greatest number of the
Lords People are now defiled with. For,

First, It is said, They have his Fathers Name written in their Foreheads.
Characters of the Lambs Followers.
Which is an evident Demonstration that they shall be of such Holy and Heavenly
Conversation^, as shall evidently manifest whose Children they are; for it
shall be as appa^ently manifest, as any thing is manifest that is fixed in a
man's Forehead.

Secondly, In that they are said to be redeemed from the Earth; it clearly
manifests, that they shall not be men of an earthly mind, but be altogether
disingaged in their affections from sublunary things, as having their
affections wholly set on things above; and having their very hea^ts there, and
having their conversations there also (For our conversation is in Heaven, Phil.
3. 20) contemning, and despising any thing in the Earth, when it comes in
competition with the Service of their Lord and King; for they shall not love
the World, nor the things that are in the World, but shall trample upon them
all, having all things in the World under their Feet. No fear of loss of
earthly things, nor hope of gain of worldly things, shall either de^er them
from the ser^ice of their Lord, or induce them unto any unworthy compliance.
And in the service of their Lord, they shall not expect great Earthly Rewa^ds,
nor desire any more thereof then Abraham did in his service, in subduing the
five Kings, that desire nothing but what the young men had eaten; as he said to
the King of Sodom, I will not take any more, lest thou should say, I have
made Abraham rich. So shall the Followers of the Lamb say to the World, to whom
they may do good offices, by the appointment of their Lord; We will not take of
you any reward for this Service, but what we have eaten, even what is enough to
supply us and ours, while we are about this Work; And when our Work of this
kind is done, we would not have any thing left of what we take for our Service:
for we would not be one penny richer in estate then we were before; but what we
have more, we shall account as a Canker, and as a Moth to the rest of our
Estates, or to what the Lord may after give us, in the lawful and moderate
following our particular Callings; but therewith we desire to be content,
whether it be little or much; desi^ing to come off from public Service, rather
with less, then more then we had before. And we desire to manifest to the
World, That we seek their Weal, and not their Wealth; their increase of Wealth
Exte^nal and Internal, and not the DIMINISHING OF ANY PART OF THEIR ESTATES.

It shall be manifest that they are ^edeemed from the Earth, by their being
every way loose from the things that are on the Earth; and wholly set on the
things that are above, and rejoicing in that their Names are written in Heaven;
and in that they are sure of an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and
that fades not awa^, reserved in Heaven for them.

Thirdly, It being said, That they shall not be defiled with Women, for they
are Virgins; It does manifest that they shall not only be pure from
Fo^nications or Adu^teries in the Letter, but also in a Mystical and Spiritual
sense; they shall not set up any other Lover in their hearts, but ^emain chaste
Virgins to Christ. They shall be as pure as Virgins, from having their hearts
insna^ed with the Wo^ld, or any other thing that defiles. They shall not be
defiled with the allu^ements of the Scarlet Who^e; but shall hate to have any
thing to do with the Cup of her Fornications. Her Trumpery they shall not
meddle with: But as soon as it is discovered to them, they shall detest it, and
shall give themselves up wholly to the Lord Christ, to be guided by him alone,
cleaving to him as a faithful and loyal Spouse, that abhors the thoughts of any
but her only Beloved; but shall give themselves up wholly to the Lord Christ,
to be gu^ded by him alone, and to follow him alone, which is the next Character
that is given of them.

Fourthly, They shall follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. He being their
Leader, they shall follow their Blessed Leader. They shall not receive the
Precepts of men in the Worship of God; but the Rules of Christ alone; and shall
receive the Law from his mouth alone, and not admit of men's inventions, and
men's interpretations, further then they are persuaded it is according to his
mind. He alone shall be observed by them; and whatsoever he reveals to them,
they shall do; and into whatsoever Path he guides them, they shall go; and
shall not be tied and stinted by men, to go hitherto and no further, but they
shall follow him whithersoever he leads them; for he has promised, Isa. 42.
16. That he will lead the Blind by a way they know not, and will lead them in
Paths that they have not known; and will make darkness light before them, and
will make crooked things straight. These things he will do unto them, and will
not forsake them.

That we are at present in great blindness and darkness, is very evident; and
there are Ways that yet we know not, and Paths that yet we have not
understood; namely, the Ways and Paths which we all shall know, before we
shall all walk in one Way. But we shall all so clearly see the true Way, in
which we all ought to walk, as that the wayfaring men, though fools, shall ^sa.
35. 8.
not err therein; which Way we have not yet known, and which Path we have not
yet understood. But the Lambs Followers shall be led by him purely, and he will
make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight; and his Sheep
shall hear his Voice, and shall not follow a stranger, but shall follow him
whithersoever he goes, and into whatsoever Way or Path he leads them.

Fifthly, They are redeemed from among men. They shall appear to be such as
shall not walk according to their former vain Conversations: not according to
the ways and customs of men, but as men of another Principle, and of another
World, as redeemed from among men; whereas before they walked so and so, and
did so and so; now they shall neither so walk, nor so do. It shall appear that
they are not carnal, and walk as men, but as the Children of the living God.
They shall not be proud, and passionate, and froward as men; but meek, and
lowly, as the Son of God was. They shall not be vain and worldly, and
hard-h^arted as men are, but regardless of the World, and Holy, and full of
Love, and loveliness, as the Son of God was. They shall plainly appear to be
redeemed from among men. For,

Sixthly, They are the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. They that shall
be thus extraordinarily, and beyond what men have yet been, for these fifteen
hundred years, enabled to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, they shall be
the first fruits unto God, and unto the Lamb; appearing very beautiful and
lovely in Holiness; and their Righteousness shall go forth as brightness,
according to the prophet Isaiah's Word; great Splendour and Isa. 62. 1.
Glory shall appear in them, worshipping the Lord in the Beauties of Holiness.
And as the first Fruits come before the full Harvest; so is the time a coming,
and is also near at hand, wherein these first Fruits unto God, and unto the
Lamb shall appear, which shall be a ^^rtain evidence of a Glorious Harvest
presently following, of a Happy, a Pure, and blessed State of the Church of
Christ on Earth; for as the first Fruits shall be Holy, so the Lump shall be
also Holy, and Pure, and without fault. For,

Seventhly, In their mouth was found no guile. There shall be no Hypo^risie, no
Cheat, no double-tongu'dness, no Promise-breaking, no Engagement, Oath, or
Covenant Breaking, no Guile found in their mouths. They shall be all thoroughly
principled in this Maxim, That Truth, and Plainheartedness will never bring
any to shame; but Lies, and Deceit, and Guile will bring shame, and dishonor,
and distress upon those that are exercised in them. But in their mouths no kind
of dissimulation, or deceit, or guile shall ever be found. For,

Eighthly, They are (said to be) without fault before the Throne of God, and of
the Lamb. It will appear that they shall be very Holy, and very Pure indeed,
when they shall so walk, as they shall be found to be without fault before the
Throne of God and of the Lamb. Men may have many faults, and yet not ^e found
faulty before the Thrones of Earthly Kings, or Potentates; beca^se they cannot
search the Hearts, and try the Reins: Men can but judge according to outward
appearance, and according to the sight of the Eye, and the hearing of the Ear.
But if these shall be found to be without fault before the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb; then they shall not only be blameless, and pure in all their
outward Conversation, and Actions, that are vis^^le to the eyes of men, but
also in all their most secret Actions, in all the inward motions, and working
of their hearts, in all the aims, ends, and ben^ of their whole Souls, they
shall be Holy. They shall be, as Psalm. 45. 13.
it is said of the Kings Daughter, All-glorious within, and her clothing of
wrought gold.

Ninthly, The Lambs Followers, Rev. 17. 14. are said to be Called, and Chosen,
and Faithful. By which it is plain that they are not as the common sort of
People are, but shall be persons that shall be called out from among others;
and were also chosen and elected unto that Honor and Dignity, to be the Lambs
Followers. And it is also clear, that they shall be truly faithful unto him,
and to his Service and Interest. They shall never be unfaithful unto him; none
of them shall ever be as Judas, to betray their Master, or any part of his
interest, for the obtaining of pieces of Silver, or bags of Gold, or Estates of
five hundred, or a thousand, or ten thousand per annum; but shall be so
faithful, as to deny themselves all their worldly interest, and their very
lives also, rather then betray any part of their Lords Interest; They are
Called, and Chosen, and Faithful.

And the seven Angels that are said to come out of the Temple, Rev. 15. are
said to be clothed in pure and white Linen, having their Breasts girded with
golden Girdles; which signifies very great purity and integrity, and the
beauty of Holiness appearing in them.

The like is said of those Followers of the Lamb, that are mentioned Rev. 19.
14. And the like we have expressed, Psalm. 101. being a Prophecy speaking in the
Person of Christ, of what he will do in the latter-day-dispensation, when no
unclean person shall be in Sion, in these words, I will set no wicked thing
before mine eyes; I hate the works of them that turn aside, it shall not clea^e
to me; a f^oward heart shall depart from me; I will not know a wicked per^ son.
Who so privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off: Him that has a
high look, and a proud heart, will not I suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me. He that walks in a perfect
way, he shall serve me; he that works deceit, shall not dwell within my
House. He that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. I will ea^ly destroy
all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked do^rs from the City
of the Lord.

The like Description is also given in the fifteenth and twenty fourth Psalms,
where the question being put, Who shall dwell in the Lords Holy Hill? It is
answered, Psalm. 15. He that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and
speaks the truth in his heart. He that back biteth not with his Tongue, nor
does evil to his Neighbor; nor takes up a ^eproach against his Neighbor: in
whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that f^ar the
Lord: He that swears to his own hurt, and charge not; he that puts not
out his money to Usury, nor takes a Reward against the innocent. And Psalm. 24.
He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his Soul unto
vanity, nor sworn dec^itfully. And Isa. 33. 15, 16. It is said, That that man
that shall dwell on high, and that shall see the King in his beauty, and whose
eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, that he shall be a man that
walks Righteously, and speaks uprightly; and that he despises the gain of
Opp^ession, and shakes his hands from holding of Bribes, and stops his Ears
from hearing of Blood, and shuts his Eyes from seeing Evil.

There are also many Scriptures that do give ^ull Testimony to this, that the
latter-day-Saints shall have this Inscription written on them, HOLINESS ^^ch.
14. ^^.
TO THE LORD. So that persons that live in a continued course of any of the
forementioned Evils, are altogether incapable of dwelling in the Holy Hill, in
the House, in the City of the Lord; and of being the Lambs Followers: For he
hates the works of them that turn aside, of back-sliders, of them that have
forsaken him, and cleave to other Lovers; or that turn aside and betray his
Interest; or that are unrighteous, in neglecting his Worship, and his
Ordinances. Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
Righteousness, says he to John, implying that the being obedient unto God in
the practice of all his Ordinances and Appointments, (that being then a
dispensation and appointment of the Lord, in that season, he having appointed
and commissioned his blessed Servant John, ^o Baptize his People Israel) is a
p^rt of the Righteousness of his People. And he hates unrighteousness, in not
keeping his ^recepts also, that require Love, Mercy, Meekness, and Lowl^ness,
and Faithfulness. But he says, That he that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me; he shall have that honor and happiness; and, Mine Eyes shall be upon
the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me. And, He that speaks
the truth in his heart; and he that is of such a tender heart, and gracious
Spirit, as he will not back-bite his Neighbor, will not speak evil of him
behind his back, nor hear evil to be spoken of him; will not take up a reproach
against him, no^ will swear deceitfully, but will keep his Oath, though it be
to his own hurt and prejudice; such a man shall dwell in his Holy Hill. But a
wicked person he will not know; he that is of a froward heart shall depart from
him, and he that slandereth his Neighbou, the will cut off; and him that has a
high look, and a proud hear, the will not suffer. He that works deceit shall
not dwell within his house, nor him that tells lies. But he will early
destroy all the wicked of the Land, and cut off all wicked doers from the City
of the Lord:

How greatly therefore does it concern all the Lords People, to fear and
tremble at the thoughts of living in those sins, of which many of them: are
declared to be guilty; or in any others of which they may know themselves to be
guilty?

Now then, it is clear from these several Scriptures, that these Blessed Ones,
that shall be near the Lamb, and shall follow him whithersoever he goes, shall
be a People that shall hate Covetousness; they shall be a chaste Spouse unto
him, they shall be perfectly free from Harlotty. No Beloved shall have their
hearts but their Lord; and though it may be some of them have been Idolaters,
yet when they are convinced of the abominableness of this Evil, they shall with
a holy indignation cast away their Idols of Silver, and their Idols of Gold,
which they have made each one for themselves, unto the Moles, and the Bats,
they shall have the thoughts of their Idolatry Isa. 2. 20.
and Harlotry. They shall be grieved to look upon their Bags of Money, and
their great Stocks in Trading, and Merchandising; when they cast up the sum of
them, and of their Lands, and Houses, and Rents which they have purchased, and
hoorded up with delight. And that which was their greatest delight, shall be
their greatest bu^then; and it shall grieve their Souls, and cut them to the
heart, to think how hard-hearted they were, in laying up all this, and
suffering many dear Servants of their Lord to want, when they knew it, and were
told of it, and yet had not hearts to relieve them; and they shall be so
grieved, and so humbled, and so reformed herein, as it shall be most apparent;
that though they were defiled with the love of the World, and that Harlot had
stolen away their hearts; now it shall be so no more. Now, none but Christ,
none but Christ is the delight of their Souls; and the World shall be trampled
under their feet. They shall despise it, and all the offers of it, when it
comes in competition with the service of their Lord, whose Worship and Service,
in private and in public, in Closets, and Families, and Churches; and in the
world, if they call them to any service there, shall be their mea^, and drink,
their joy, their delight, their Heaven upon Earth.

Thus there will be a blessed freedom from that Sin of Covetousness; and not
from that sin only, but from all other Evils also.

Now how greatly does it concern all the Lords People, to fear and tremble at
the thoughts of living in those sins, of which many of them are declared to be
guilty, or in any others of which they know themselves to be guilty? But if ye
love to be near the King, to dwell with^n his House, to be of the City of the
Lord, to see the King in his Beauty, to have the honor to serve him; Be ye
sure to wash and make clean, and to put away all the evil of your doings from
before his Eyes; Lest he be angry and ye perish; le^t he destroy you as the
wicked of the Land, and cut you off from the City of the Lord. But remember
this one Word of his, He that walks in a perfect way, ^e shall serve me.

III. Another great Consideration that I would lay before the Lords People, to
provoke them to a deep Humiliation, and a through Reformation, is Ephraim shall
not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim any more:

For thus the Lord expresses himself by his Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 43. 10, 11,
12. Thou Son of Man, show the House to the House of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their iniquities; and let them measure the Pattern of the House; and
if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the House,
and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in
thereof, and all the Forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the
Forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they
may keep the whole Form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them.
This is the Law of the House; upon the top of the Mountain, the whole limit
thereof round about, shall be most Holy: Behold, this is the Law of the House.

Now if the House of Israel, from the consideration of the greatness of their
iniquities, which have been showed to them, (and of their lamentable
unreasonableness to what the Lambs Followers shall be, and to what some few
particular Followers of the Lamb now are, and some few of them have been in all
Ages; and of their unfitness to dwell in the House of the King, in the City of
the Lord) shall be ashamed of their iniquity; then may they obtain the favor
to be showed to the full, all the Forms of the Lords House, and the Fashion
thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof; and all the
Fo^ms thereof, and the Ordinances thereof, and all the Laws thereof; even of
that House upon the top of the Mountain, the whole Limit whereof, round about,
shall be most Holy; even of that House which has this Name, THE LORD IS THERE.

IV. Another great and weighty Consideration, to provoke the Lords People Ezekiel.
36. 22, 23. Therefore say unto the House of Israel, Thus says the Lord God, I
do not this for your sakes, O House of Israel, but for my holy Names sake,
which ye have profaned among the Heathen whither ye went; and I will sanctify
my great Name, which was profaned among the Heathen, which ye profaned in the
midst of them. And Ver. 17. ^t is said, When the House of Israel dwelled in
their own Land, they defiled it by their own way, and by their doings; their
way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed Woman. The ^inful and unclean
ways of this People, defiled and profaned the Name of the Lord; and not only
so, but defiled their own Land when they dwelt in it.

The House of Israel do profane the Name of the Lord by the sinfulness of
their ways, mo^e then others do by their abominations; for the House of Israel
are nearer unto God, and are more under his teachings then others, having his
Oracles committed unto them; and they profess to be a People near unto him, but
others do not; and they pass in the World for a People that have chosen the
Lord, for their Lord, and their God. Now when these do break his Law, and
behave themselves like the Heathen, and when their Conversation is sinful. They
do greatly dishonor their Lord, when they are as the men of this World are.
When as the men of the World, that have their portion in this World, and have
no better thing to set their hearts upon, having no interest in God, nor
Christ, nor having any as^urance of that inheritance uncorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fa^eth not away, that is reserved in Heaven for Saints; As
these are Covetous, so are they that profess to be the Lords People; as these
do spend the greatest part of their time, and strength, and parts, and
abilities, to get w^^lth, though they have no necessity so to do, (for they
that have but from hand (...) mouth, and must work for Bread before they can
have it, have a neces^^^ ^o spend most of their time so) so do many of those
that pro^ess to be the Lords People. Again, as these are close-fisted, and
hard-hearted, and have not bowels of compassion unto their Brethren, so it is
with them; as they are negligent, and remiss in that which they account to be
the Worship and Service of the Lord, though some of them are zealous of it in
their way, so are many of the Lords People; and as these are Proud, and
Passionate, and Covenant-breakers, and spend much time in prattling of needless
things when they come together, and take no care to remember the Word when they
hear it; so it is with many of them that pro^ess to be the People of the Lord.
Now when the Lords People do thus, then they do greatly profane, and pollute,
and wound, and reproach the Name of the Lord.

For if there be a man that is a discreet man, that is a good and a just man,
and a man of port in the World, if he have under Servants in his Family, that
are Idle, Drunken, Sottish Persons, that are W^oremongers, and Swearers, which
things he hates: If such be in his Family, Are they not a dishonor and a
reproach unto him? But it would be more a reproach unto him, if those Servants
that were near his Person were such; but much more would it be a dishonor to
him, if his Children were so; and much more would it be a shame, and a blot,
and a disho^our to him, if the Wife of his Bosom should turn a Strumpet, a lewd
Person, a Drunkard, a Sot.

So is it with respect unto the most High. Those that are in the nearest
Relation to him, are the greatest dishonor to him, and do most of all blot,
and wound, and reproach his Holy Name; if their Conversations be irregular,
uncomely, unworthy of bearing his Name. And the nearer persons are to him, the
greater reproach do they bring unto his Holy Name. They that are Professors at
large, and profess to be his Servants, though far off from him, do by their
sinful ways dishonor him more then others; but they that seem to be Servants
that are nearer to him, being very sinful; dishonor him more; but they that
pretend to be in a higher state, and call themselves his Children, and call him
Father; These by their iniquities dishonor him much more. But that those are
yet nearer, and are accounted Gospel-Churches, which the Scriptu^e styles, and
which, if truly constituted, are indeed the very Spouse, the very Bride of the
Lord Jesus; for these to play the Ha^lot, and embrace other Lovers, for these
to be drunken with the cares of this Life; for these to be drunk with passion,
and frowardness of Spirit; for these to be proud, and haughty, which vice he
ha^es; for these to be wretched, perfidious, Covenant-breakers, which God and
man abhors; for these to be hard-hearted, stony-hearted Creatures; and to be
regardless of holy Duties, which they should be more diligent in then any; for
these to be regardless of his Counsels, and Love Letters, and not to meditate
on his Word, as if it were not worthy to be regarded, is the highest reproach,
and dishonor, and the greatest grief, and wounding to him, that can be
imagined.

O what cuts and gashes, to speak after the manner of men, do these make in the
very heart of Christ? O what a dishonor are these to him? What a blot and
reproach do they bring upon his most Glorious, and most Holy Name?

Therefore says the Lord by Ezekiel, I will sanctify my great Name, which
Ezekiel. 36. ^3.
was profaned among the Heathen, which ye (the House of Israel) profaned in
the midst of them.

And on the other hand, when the Lords People do walk in all his Laws and
Ordinances blamelesly; when they cannot be blamed for Covetousness, nor Pride,
nor any other Evil, but they do in all things observe the blessed Commandments
of the Lord Jesus; Then says our Lord Jesus, Men may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16. And ^erein is my Father
glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. So John 15. 8.
that it is undeniable, that the good Works, the Holy and Heavenly
Conversations of his People, do glorify the Lord; are to his Praise, and to
his Honor: and that the sinfulnesses of their Conversations, are a great
dishonor, reproach, and blot un^o his great Name. And therefore Na^han tells
David, That he by his sinfulness in the matter of Vriah had caused the Enemies
of the Lord to blasph^me. And the Apostle James, speaking of some that were
rich, that did despise the poor; having the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord of Glory, with respect of Persons, (respecting the Man in rich Array, more
then a man in mean Apparel,) says thus, Do not they Blaspheme that worthy Name
by which ye are called? Jam. 2. 7


And that the unrighteousness of Saints do greatly profane, and dishonor that
worthy Name by which they are called appears thus. To instance but in one
particular Evil of theirs, viz. That sin of Covetousness. When they that are
the Lords People, who profess that he is their Portion, are as (...) s^eking
for themselves and theirs, the things of this World (though they therein break
many of his blessed Precepts and Instructions, and neglect many Duties) as any
others; as if they would give the World thereby to understand, that there is no
such satisfaction in the Lord for their Souls, as is declared; as if there were
more sweetness in the World, then in Him: as if that were an untrue Character
of him that the Spouse gives, Cant. 5. from 9. to 18. verse. As if Habakkuk had
not reason to say, Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit
be in the Vines: The labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield
no Meat: The Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and the Herd shall be cut
off from the Stalls. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my Salvation. As if that were not fit to be said that David says, Psalm. 73.
25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire
beside thee.

I say, when they that are the Lords People do this; How horribly do they
herein reproach their Lord, and wound and profane his most holy Name! The like
may be said of all, or of any of the other Evils, that any of them are guilty
of. And such as continue in these, or any of those Evils, will not 1 Pet. 1. ^
be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

But happy are they that so walk, as that God in all things may be glorified by
them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Happy are they that so use the World, so
labor for things convenient for their Families; so eat and drink, and enjoy
all outward Comforts, as only to fit them for the Service of their Lord and
King; and are not Servants to the World, or any thing that they enjoy, but the
Servants of their God only, that, Whether they eat, or drink, or whatsoever
they do, do all to the Glory of God, and do not dishonor him in their seeking
after earthly things; nor in eating or drinking, or enjoying 1 Cor. ^^ 31.
any Creature-Comfort, but have their moderation so to all those things, as it
shall appear to all men, that God is the great delight and joy of their Souls,
and none of these things do steal their hearts from, or weaken their affections
to him. Happy are they that are so overcome by the Mercies of God, as they
present their Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
their reasonable service. And happy are those that so Romans ^^. ^
walk in all things, that God may have glory in them, and they may indeed be
the glory of Christ.

But O how few are of this Stamp! and what great reason have we to pray, and
say, Our Father which art in Heaven, sanctified be thy great Name.

And oh that the consideration of this, how grea^ly the Lords People have
profaned, and do profane his holy Name, might be so deeply fixed on all their
hearts; as that they might be greatly drawn to look on his precious Name which
they have profaned, dishonored, wounded, and reproached; and mourn, and be in
great bitterness, as one mourns and is in bitterness for his only Son, or for
his Firstborn. Zach. ^^. 10.


There might be several other Considerations added to these, as inducements to
the Lords People, to induce and provoke them to that thorow-amending their
ways, and turning to the Lord, from all their Evils, with their whole heart,
and cleaving to him with full purpose of heart; but these four, are of so great
weight and force, as if these prevail not, twenty more may not. But through the
Lords Blessing these may be thoroughly effectual, to that blessed, desired, and
longed-for end.

Now from the whole Premises, these following Positions may be clearly laid
down.

First, That those Professors of the fear of the Lord, that have been so
polluted, Mat. 3. 11.
Floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner.

Secondly, That is the great duty of those that are gifted, and gracious
spirited For some Officers may be ^^ guilty of these Evils as some others.
any others that are so qual fied, to do these three things.

First, To promote and press with all earnes^ness, and ^ervency of Spirit, the
work of unseigned Humiliation before the Lord, and of true Repentance for all,
or any of these Evils that are found among any of them all, yea to be lying at
the Feet of the Lord continually, and to give him no res^, until he pour our
such a po^tion of his Spirit upon them, as may truly ^nable them to be ashamed
of all the Evils they have done, and to loath themselves in Truth for all their
abominations; I say, To give the Lord no rest, until Ezekiel. 7. 16. of them that
shall escape from the Sword without, and th^^ ^estilence and Famine within)
like Doves of the Val^eys, (...) of them (...) every one for his Iniquity; even
for his and her part^cular In^qui^y, most especially; and also for all the
abomi^ations of others also, that they may have that special Mark, chap. 9. 4.

And, Secondly, It is the Duty also of such faithful Ser^ants of the Lord, viz.
The Royal Robes of Righ^eousness, the Blessed Ornament of a meek and Isa. 51.
10 1 Pet. 3. 4 1 Pet. 5. 5 Rev. 15. Psalm. 45.
quiet Spirit; and the precious clothing of Humility, even all those white
Robes, and Golden Girdles, and Cloathings of Wrought Gold, that do signify all
the Fruits, and gracious Operations of the Holy Spirit. And that it is
dangerous, appears 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, to 30. For as often as ye eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lords Death until he come. Wherefore
whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup; for he that
eats and drinks unworthily, e^teth and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords Body. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you,
and many are fallen asleep. Where it is clear, that, it is a very dangerous
thing for a man to draw near to the Table of the Lord, without examination of
himself, whether there be any iniquity that he lives in, whether he be a Vest^^
on whom holiness to the Lord is visibly written or not. It is very dangerous to
rush unto the Table of the Lord, without any fear or dread of coming
unworthily, not considering that such as have so done, are guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord; and that such as have so done, have for this cause been
sick, and weak, and have fallen asleep. And it is most certain, That

It is a dangerous thing to come to that Table without the Spirit of Love, that
ingages the Soul to true and u^feigned love to all Saints, as Members of the
same Body, so as to communicate freely, and liberally (as God has blessed) as
to Members of our own Body, not like a Chur^.

It is a dangerous thing to come to that Table with hearts full of Adultery,
Mystical Adultery, hearts given up unto other Lovers, and not to the Lord.

It is dangerous coming to that Table with froward hearts, contentious spirits,
having any heart rising against any person, or persons. Or which is somewhat
less;

It is a dangerous thing to come to that Table, with slightings of any others
that are members of Christ as truly as we: for the Corinthians coming together,
and some having a fullness of outward things, did eat and drink when others that
were poor in this world had not, and were hungry. The Apostle calls these
Actions in them that were full, a despising of the Church of God, (the poor
Members, a^ truly making up the Church of God as those that were rich) and a
shaming of them that have not. The poorer sort, it may be seeing their fullness,
having their Bottles of Wine, and costly Cakes, and dainty Viands, being made
ashamed that had it not. Now their thus ^lighting the poor, (which Evil, James
also reproves, as has been showed;) and shaming of them in that particular, is
the sin the Apostle here reproves, and advises them rather to eat and drink in
their own Houses, then They it may be would tarry for the rich.
to grieve and shame the Poor; and not to slight the Poor, but to tarry one for
another; for says he, verses 20, 21. When ye come together therefore into one
place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper; for in eating every one takes
before another his own Supper, and one is hun^ry, and another is drunken, (that
is, Has drunk sufficiently, and fed sufficiently.) And verse. 33, 34. Wherefore
my Brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another; and if any
man hunger, let him eat at Home, that ye come not together unto condemnation.

It is a dangerous thing to come to that Table with a proud Heart, Psalm. 101.
5. Him that has an high look, and a proud heart, will not I suffer. Such shall
not be welcome to his Table.

In a word, He that is guilty of, and continues in any Evil, whether of
Omission, or Commission, whether of the Evils that have been declared to be the
Sins of the House of Jacob, or whether of any other Evil whatsoever that he is
convinced of, if he be not truly penitent, and have not truly forsaken those
Evils, It is a very dangerous thing for such a one to approach to the Table of
the Lord; such do eat that Bread, and drink that Cup of the Lord unworthily;
and do come together unto condemnation. And the Lord will condemn them for it,
unless they speedily repent, and judge themselves, and condemn themselves, that
they may not be judged.

But O how unpreparedly, and unworthily have many, without examination, or
consideration of the greatness of the undertaking, rushed unto the Table of the
Lord without the Wedding Garment? and how seldom have some Administrators of
that O^dinance given warning unto their Heare^s of the danger of it, and
Preached preparation (Sermons or) Words, which they ought to have done, as they
tendered the safety or welfare of their Souls?

The Lord has been greatly provoked to anger for the Sins of the House of
Jacob; and shall such sinners still be permitted to come to the Table of the
Lord without repentance?

Thirdly, It is also the Duty of every such faithful Servants of the Lord

For one great Reason why Sin has so abounded among the Professors of the fear
of the Lord, is the unfaithfulness of the generality of the Churches unto the
Lord, in not exercising his Ordinances, and Appointments faithfully; but
suffering sins one upon another, and not showing that true love, and true
friendship one toward another, to reprove one another faithfully, and
graciously, and meekly, according to the Gospel-Rule, (and the Rule of the Law
also) for restoring such as are overtaken in faults; But their suffering
sinners to go on in sin, (in those Sins declared to be their ^ins) and to grow
old in Sin, and hardened in Sin; So that now it is a hard work for them to
break off their Sins by Righteousness, and their hardhea^ted iniquities, by
showing mercy to the Poor. (Dan. 4. 27.) Who whereas, had the Ordinances of
Christ been faithfully, and frequently, and duly practiced, whenever there
was occasion, Sin might have been nipt in the B^d, and never have risen up to
such a Rod of Wickedness as it has Ezekiel. 7. ^1.
done. If Covetousness had been curbed betimes, it would not have grown up to
that monstrousness that now it is in many Church Members. And if hardness of
heart, and close-fistedness, had been faithfully reproved, it would have been
more a shame to be so. I^ the odiousness of Pride and self-conceitedness had
been faithfully laid open in the Spirit of meekness and love, to those in whom
at any time it appeared, it might have greatly prevented the continuance of it.
If ^^owardness of Spirit had been faithfully declared against, as an Evil very
unbecoming Saints, and an Evil wherein they are most unlike their Lord, (who
was meek and lowly in heart, and as a Lamb dumb before the Shea^ers, he opened
not his mouth,) and therefore not to be tolerated in any that is a Member in a
Church of Christ; it might greatly restrain, and mortify that detestable Evil.
So also if neglects of holy Duties had been declared against as not fit to be
suffered in any Member of a Church of Christ, it would have been both a shame
and a grief of heart to any person to neglect Duties, that ought to be duly and
constantly performed; whereas now Duties are neglected without shame, or
blushing, or true grief of heart. So also if Covenant Breaking had been
reproved in any on^ Churchmember, and declared against as an Evil abhorred o^
God, and of his People; and that it was not fit that any such person should
remain a Member of a Church of Christ without true repentance; I say, if this
Rule had been put in ^re in the Churches of Christ, when, first, any Member of
any Church appeared to be guilty of it, as many were fifteen years ago and
more, it might have prevented many others, and have caused them that were so
dealt with (viz. orde^ly reproved for that Evil, and if impenitent, cast out as
grievous sinners, and not worthy to remain in the House of the Lord) to have
considered their ways, and to have been truly humbled and penitent long ago.
But they being suffered to remain in a Church of Christ impenitent, under the
first Evil of that kind, they were left to hardness of heart, and searedness of
Conscience in that and many other Evils; making no bones of breaking Oaths and
solemn Engagements in every particular 1 Timothy 4^ 2.
part of them; and left to such other Evils as they would have abhorred the very
thoughts of them, if they had been told but three years before, that within a
few years they should be very grievous sinners against the Lord, in such and
such sorts of Sin, and to such and such high degrees. And they would have said
as Hazael said to Elisha, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great
thing? But being suffered to rema^n in Churches impenitent, in the first breach
of Covenant, they were so hardened, as they justified themselves in that and
other grievous iniquities, and saw no Evil in them; neither we^e penitent in
the sense of them, until the judgments of God came in like a deluge upon them:
and though the judgments of God are come, they do not at all repent, nor give
him glory, nor sanctify his Name, in saying, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and
just are thy Judgments. Ps. 119. 137.
Though his judgments are come upon us for this very end, that he may
sanctify his great Name, which has been polluted by his People among the
Heathen, among the unbelieving Nations about us, and among the unbelievers in
these three Nations.

I say, they do not repent of, nor turn from their Evil, nor glorify, and
sanctify the Name of the Lord, in declaring that he is just when he speaks,
and clear when he judges: It is true, they will confess in general that they
are sinners; and so will the worst of men. But where is the acknowledging Psalm.
5^^ 4.
of particular Evils in the Public Congregations; and taking shame for them
before all in the great Assemblies? that God may be glorified, and the
declaring a detestation of them, and the public manifestation of the turning
from them; that the Name of the Lord may be Hallowed, Sanctified, Psalm. 5. 4.
and 11. 7.
and Glorified: for he is not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness, neither
shall Evil dwell with him. And, The Righteous Lord loves Righteousness; his
Countenance does behold the upright. And if such as are accounted his People,
do wickedly, and do not walk in the Ways of Righteousness, and delight to do
the Will of God, and fulfill all Righteousness, in all things to do his Will,
but tu^n aside into crooked Paths, he will have no pleasure Ps. 40. 8. Mat. 3.
15
in t'em; but he will bring his Judgments sooner upon them then upon others,
until they sanctify his Name, by humbling themselves before him, and by
turning from all their Evils, and by walking in the Paths of Holiness. But, I
say, had the Rule of our Lord and King been observed, toward many, on their
first fall in breaking the Covenant they had solemnly taken, how many Evils
might it have prevented? But again, had there been at first a faithful
reproving of a Spirit of bitterness, and hea^t-ris^ng against any that were
Saints, for their differing in judgment in some particular things, and a
following the Rule unto a casting such out of Churches, as nourished
heart-risings against any that were Saints, because they were not of the same
mind with us, this Evil might have been banished from among Saints. And if care
had been taken to have admonished, and reproved such as neglected to Chew the
Cud, viz. to call the Word to mind after they had heard it; this profitable
exercise would have been more constantly, and more conscionably practiced among
Saints. And if the Members of Churches had taken inspection into such as spend
time unprofitably together, when it might be spent to more edification; it
mig^t have been a more constant pract^ce among Saints to study, that when they
come together, the^^ discourses may be such as may minister Grace to the
Heare^s.

But all the House of Israel must know as^uredly, that the Lord their God
expects a through Reformation henceforward, in this and all other things which
concern the glorifying, and sanctifying his great Name. All wicked doers must
be cut off from the City of the Lord. No particular person that is a wicked
doer in any of these respects, continuing and living in these Evils, or any
other Sin against knowledge, may be received into the House of the Lord. Or if
any that were reformed, and then received into the House of the Lord, do
back-slide and relaps into Evil again; they must be cut off from that holy
place; every vessel therein must be holiness to the Lord.

The third position that is to be laid down from the Premises, is this; That
London, and in all England. (not to say any thing of Churches elsewhere) For
the Church of Ephesus, we find to be greatly commended for many things, in
these words; I know thy Works, and thy Labor, and thy Patience, and how thou
can not bear them which are evil; And thou have tried Rev. 2. ^, 3.
them that say they are Apostles and are not, and have found them lya^s; and
have born, and have patience, and for my Names-sake have labored, and have not
fainted. In which words we have many excellent Characters given of this Church.
As,

First, They were Laborers, and labored in good Works. They were not idle
Drones in the Church of Christ, but they labored in the Lords Work and
Service; and though they might suffer Persecutions, and mockings for their so
doing, yet they had patience to endure it all for the Lords-sake. And,

Secondly, They had such a Spirit of Zeal for the Lord, and for the Holiness
that became his House, as they could not bear them which were Evil, but would
search it out, and di^cover it, and prosecute Evil doers according to the Rules
of Christ. And,

Thirdly, They ^^yed them which said they were Apostles and were not, and found
them Liars; which is their great commendation, that they would not suffer any
persons to impose upon them, with the authority of Apostles, which were not
appointed by God thereunto, but were found Liars. And,

Fourthly, It is said, They had born the Yoke of Christ, and continued patient;
and as it is said, They labored, so it is said, They had not fainted; which is
their great commendation.

And though they had all these blessed quallifications, yet the Lord thus
expresses himself, Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou
have ^^st thy first Love; remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent; and
do thy first Works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

And if the Lord said thus to this Church of Ephesus, that had so many worthy
things in them, because they had lost their first Love; that is, lost the heat
and fervency of Love, which they first had to him, and to his ways; How much
more may he say thus to many Churches now, who come much short of the good that
was in them; and it may be, have much more lost their first Love; who have
forsaken their first Husband, and entertained other Lovers into their Bosoms:
whose coldness of Love is notoriously manifest to Men and Angels, and whose
extravagancies are many and great? How can they expect any thing less, but that
that Sentence should be pronounced against them, I will come unto (such and
such a Church) thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place,
except thou repent?

O that therefore all the Churches in England may remember from whence they are
fallen, and may repent.
The Conclusion of the whole Discourse.
NOw for a Conclusion of this Discourse, That all the House of Israel may be
encouraged to repent and return to the Lord, even every particular Person; as
well those that are not Members of Particular Churches, as those that are; I
have this further Message to declare unto them all that fear the Lord, viz.

That there is hope in Israel concerning this thing; which is grounded upon the
word of truth, in these following Scriptures. Isa. 5. 17. For the iniquity
Ezr^. 16. 2.
of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was wroth and he
went on frowardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his ways, and I will
heal him. I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his
mourners. I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace to him that is far off,
and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him: but the wicked
are like the troubled sea which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt, there is no peace, says my God to the wicked.

In which portion of the precious Scriptures of Truth, the Spirit of the Lord
takes special notice, of that which is the great, the grand Sin of the
Professors of the ^ear of the Lord in this Age, which of all their Evils is the
most abominable, though they are all hateful to the Lord. And what is said in
this Scripture, is for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are
come. And the Lord here speaks of a People that were for this Sin of
Co^etousness smitten by him; as his people now have been, and yet they went on
frowa^dly in the way of their heart, they went on perve^sly in their
covetousness; notwithstanding his rebukes being an unworthy people; as his
people now have been of whom it may be said, as he complains of them of old
Isa. 9. 13. For the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do
they seek the Lord of hosts. A people that have both abused his favors; and
are regardless of his being wroth, and his s^itings, and corrections of them:
yet he notwithstanding their perverseness, and unworthyness, is pleased to
manifest such riches of grace; as to say, that he had seen the evil of their
ways, and would heal them, and resto^e comforts, etc. So that the hardest, and
most froward, and most rebellious heart, may be softened, and turned, and
healed, and then comforted; for here is sufficient ground of Hope for Israel in
this Case. But there is no ground for any Hope, that while a Souls Diseases,
and defilements remain upon it; whether it be Covetousness, or any other Evil,
that they shall have any comfort or peace in that state; for there is no Peace,
says my God, to the Wicked; not to any Soul ^iving in any Wickedness; But they
shall be like the troubled Sea, which cannot rest, whose Waters cast up mire
and dirt. But to a Soul that is healed of its backsliding, God will Create the
fruit of the Lips Peace to it, and will restore comfort to it, and to its
Mourners. And God can, and will heal them that have been, and are guilty of the
Iniquity of Covetousness; and have, notwithstanding they have been smitten by
him for it, yet gone on forwardly in the way of their Hearts.

But here is no word of Peace for any but the healed Soul. Some, it may be,
that are covetous, will be covetous still; and some that are filthy, will be
filthy still; but the most covetous may be so healed, as they may become such
as are most hating Covetousness; and God will heal such as have gone on
frowardly in the way of their hearts; and he will then speak Peace unto them.

Another scripture to this purpose also is Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus. Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, ye even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth I^
Ephraim my dear son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him. I
will surely have mercy on him says the Lord.

In which Sc^ipture we find that Eph^aim had bin chastised; as the Lords people
have now been for sin; but Ephraim was froward, and untoward under it, and
behaved himself like a Bullock not accustomed to the Yoke, and could not submit
to the Lords chastisements. And yet notwithstanding Ephraim is brought at last
to bemoan himself, that ever he should be so froward, and so unmo^ti^ied, and
unsubmissive to the Lords Righteous Chastisements. And at last Ephraim is
brought to pray, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my
God. As if he should say thus, Thou know how unsufficient I am to turn my
self. O turn thou me, for thou art allsufficient, for thou art the Lord my God.
It is a work that thou can easily Isa. 26. 12
do in me; For thou who art the Lord our God, workest all our Works in us, and
for us.

And then Ephraim is become very teachable, and very gentle, and very ready to
bea^ the Lords Yoke; and Ephraim is turned, and repents, and is instructed,
and smites upon his thigh, and is ashamed; yea even confounded, because he did
bear the reproach of his Youth. And thus, when Ephraim is brought into this
humble and gracious posture; then the Lord speaks Peace unto him, and manifests
the yearning of his Bowels toward him, and promises that he will have mercy on
him. Eph^aim being healed, being turned, the Lord soon creates the Fruit of the
Lips Peace to him.

The like Scripture we have also, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. O Israel, return unto
the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words,
and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graci^usly; so will we render thee the Calves of our Lips, Ashur shall not save
us, we will ride no more upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work
of our hands, Yea are our Gods; for in thee the fatherless finds mercy. I
will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away from him. I will be as the dew unto Israel; he shall grow as the
Lillies, and cast forth his Roots as Lebanon.

In which Scripture we have a backsliding People encouraged to return to the
Lord; and a promise that the Lord will heal their backslidings. Though they
have lost their first Love, and back-sliden from the Lord, and have forsaken
him in a great measure, and his blessed Rules of Love, and Humility, and
Me^kness, and Righteousness, etc. Yet he will heal their backslidings, and
love them freely. And then when they are healed, and do take unto them words,
etc. And not until then does the Lord speak Peace unto them, and declare his
anger to be turned away; and promise to be as the dew unto Israel: And he shall
cast forth his Roots as Lebanon.

There are several other Scriptures that confirm this great and blessed Truth;
but I shall mention but one more, with which I shall conclude this Work and
service for the Lord, and for his People; humbly praying that the great and
precious blessings therein mentioned, as also in the forementioned Scriptures,
may speedily be the portion of all the Lords People; It is, Jeremiah 33. 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, concerning the houses of this
City, and concerning the houses of the Kings of Judah, which are thrown down by
the Mounts, and by the Sword. They come to fight with the Caldeans, but it is
to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in my anger, and in
my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this City.
Behold, I will bring it Health and Cure, and I will cure them, and I will
reveal unto them the abundance of Peace and Truth. And I will cause the
Captivity of Judah, and the Captivity of Israel to return, and will build them
as at the first; And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
have sinned against me. And it shall be unto me a Name of Joy, a Praise, and an
Honor before all the Nations of the Earth, which shall hear all the good that
I do unto them. And they shall fear, and tremble, for all the goodness, and for
all the prosperity that I procure unto it. In which Scripture, we find that the
Lords People had sinned, and greatly provoked him. And therefore the Houses of
Jerusalem, and the Houses of the Kings of Judah were thrown down by the Mounts,
and by the Sword; and the places were filled with the dead bodies of the men,
whom the Lord had slain in his anger, and in his fury; and for all whose
wickedness the Lord had hid his face from that City: which does manifest, that
their sins had been very great against the Lord; and yet notwithstanding, the
greatness of their sins does not hinder, but the Lord who is rich in mercy, and
abundant in goodness and truth, graciously promises that he will b^ing it
Health and Cure; he will heal all their Soul-Diseases, all then Wounds, and
^ruis^s, and pu^ifying Sores, and cure them effectually; and wi^ cleanse t^em
from all the iniquities whereby they have sinned against him; and when ^e has
cleansed, and healed them, then he will ^eveal unto them the abundance of Peace
and Truth. So that it is clear, and unquestionable, that though a People have
been great back-sliders, and have ^^^atly re^ol^ed from the Lord, yet there is
hope concerning such. The Lord can heal such, and the Lord will heal such, for
he has promised it; and when he has healed, he will speak Peace unto them;
yea he will reveal unto them the abundance of Peace and Truth, and such shall
be unto him, A Name of Joy, a Praise, and an Honor before all the Nations of
the Earth, which shall hear all the good that he will do unto them; and shall
fear and tremble for all the goodness, and all the prosperity that he will
procure unto them.

PSALM. 81. from 8, to 16.

Hear, O my People, and I will testify unto thee; O Israel, if thou will
hearken unto me; There shall no strange God be in thee, neither shall thou
worship any strange God. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt; open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. But my People would not
hearken unto my Voice; and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up unto
their own hearts lusts; and they walked in their own Counsels. O that my People
had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways. I should soon have
subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand against their Adversaries. The haters
of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him; but their time should
have endured for ever. He should have fed them with the finest of the Wheat,
and with Honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee.

MAT. 5. 18, 19.

For verily I say unto you, Till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore
shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall
be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere are two or three things in this preceding Discourse that may possibly
be mistaken and mis-understood by some, to prevent which, I thought good to add
this Postscript before it comes forth to public view.

The first is page 14. in these words, As to be able to give great Portions to
their Daughters, great Estates to their Children. Which words I do not recall by
no means; but as they are expressed with the words that next follow them in the
same and in the line following them, they are for just reproof to those
covetous Sheepherds, those Isa. 56. 11.
greedy Dogs that scrape up all that ever they can of this World, and ^oard it
up covetously and currishly, not communicating freely to the Members of Jesus
Christ that are in distress; or if they part with it, do it spareingly and
grudgingly, and not of a ready mind. But that I may not be mistaken in the
recited words, I must declare that I do by no means condemn those worthy and
blessed Preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that have good and plentiful
Estates, and that are of a generous and bountiful Spirit, as I know some are;
and that do make it manifest that they have the quallifications of Elders of
Churches mentioned, 1 Timothy 13. 2. and Tit. 1. 8. and that are enabled both to
be liberal and bountiful, and have wherewith to give good Estates to their
Children, for they are left at the same liberty therein that all other Servants
of the Lord are, that have large Estates, whose duty it is to give largely to
his Saints, of what God has given them; and who may withal give large Estates
to their Children, and it cannot be said to be their sin so to do; for it is
unquestionably the duty of them that hear the Word, to 1 Cor 9 from 6, 10 14.
communicate so plentifully to them that Preach it, (if they have it not
otherwise) that they may have wherewith to do both; and it is the sin of their
That are rich in this world. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
Hearers if they do not so do. For ordinarily many that Preach the Gospel, are
men of as good Parts and Abilities to manage a Trade, or Merchandises, or any
Office that may bring in a good Estate for the supplies of their Families, and
large supplies also, as any other men that do by such ways get great Estates
in the World. And if by giving up themselves to this Service of the Lord, they
are taken off from so doing; they ^^ consider it not, and administer not to
them accordingly, are v^ disingenious and unworthy people.

Secondly, Another passage in the preceding Discourse, in whi^^ I would not be
mistaken, is that though I do not particularly mention any other Oaths,
Engagements, Protestations, Vows or P^mises that have been solemnly made, but
the Solemn League a^ Covenant that was entered into about 22 years since; that
yet t^ breach of any other Oath, Vow, or Covenant, is as much condemned as the
breach of that. And woe is me, that I must say it, Th^^ Land mou^ns because of
Oaths, of Oaths that have been wicked^ and sinfully broken by those that have
professed the Fear of the Lo^^ And I am persuaded that nothing but unfeigned
Humiliations, a^ deep Contritions (of those that have been guilty of this Sin)
for the Sin; or the taking away their lives from the Earth will pacify the
Lords Wrath, or stay his dreadful Judgments from coming do^ upon these Nations.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, page 73. That the Lambs Follow^ shall be of the
disposi^ion of faithful Abraham. Thereby is meant, The they shall by no means
take, when it is offered to them, the Wor^^ Wealth from any of the World, no
more then Abraham took of the King of Sodom. But yet may the Lord give them
some other wa^ plentifully of these things, as he did to Abraham: But the Wor^
shall have no cause to say, That their Wealth has made them ric^

Christian Reader, whoever thou art, thou may be assured, (for the Lord
knows that I speak the Truth, and lie not.)

I. That this whole Work is done in obedience to the Lord, wh^ laid it with a
strong hand upon me, though I As Jeremiah pleaded, and not otherwise. Jer. 1. 6.
pleaded to be e^empted from it; and though to flesh and blood it was a hard
t^^ for several Reasons. And,

II. Thou may be as well assured also, that this whole work i^ done in true
love to every Soul that is reproved therein, wheth^^ they be known or unknown
to me, for it may reach the Souls o^ many thousands, whose faces I never saw,
and of whose Name^ much less Conversations, I never heard. And the God of Isr^^
grant his Blessing to it. Amen.

FINIS.

