A TRUE RELATION OF THE Wonderful Cure OF MARY MAILLARD, (Lame almost ever
since she was Born) On Sunday the 26th of Nov. 1693.

With the Affidavits and Certificates of the Girl, and several other Credible
and Worthy Persons, who knew her both before and since her being Cured.

To which is added, A Letter from Dr. WELWOOD to the Right Honorable the Lady
Mayoress, upon that Subject.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1694.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas there has lately come out an Account of the Wonderful Cure of Mary
Maillard, These are to Certify the Reader, That that Account is very Lame and
Imperfect, as will appear by the Original Affidavits and Certificates that are
in the Hands of Richard Baldwin, which any Inquisitive Person may see and
peruse whenever he pleases.

Imprimatur,

December. 20. 1693. Edward Cook.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE Wonderful Cure OF MARY MAILLARD, etc.
IT IS not without reason, that the most Rational People of the World, and
especially Protestants, show but a very slight and indifferent inclination to
believe Miracles which are said to have been wrought since the times of the
Apostles. Indeed if we examine very narrowly into them, we shall find,
generally speaking, that they owe their rise to the Interest and Avarice of the
Clergy; who, under the shelter of that thick darkness, which for so long a time
had covered the Christian world, Invented a thousand Miracles to establish
their Authority, their Opinions, and chiefly the great Revenues of the Church.
This is so manifest a truth, that we need but to read the Golden Legend, and
Metaphrastus, to be convinced of it. Now as those fseigned Miracles were only
established through the Ignorance of the deluded People; so we saw them in some
manner to disappear after the taking of Constantinople, when Learning was
forced to take its sanctuary in the West: They began then to question the truth
of Visions, and the Credit and Honesty of the Clergy, which made Miracles less
frequent: But as soon as the great Light of the Reformation appeared, they
vanished away entirely; and since that time have not dared to show themselves
on our Horizon, but in bugger-mugger, if I may be allowed that common word. It
is true, the Jesuits say that they have rose again in Iapan and in China; but
since they produce no other Witnesses for the proof of such a Report, but the
Fathers of their own Society, which makes them very much to be suspected, we do
not think it worth our while and pains to go about to show that these Miracles
are no more real, than an infinite number of other Stories related in the
Legend.

The many Tricks and Cheats which have been already discovered upon this
Subject, ought to oblige every Rational man to stand upon his guard, and not to
believe over-hastily all the Miracles that are said to have been wrought. This
is a very just precaution and not to be blamed; but then it is only thus far
that our mistrust ought to extend; for to push it further would be to drive it
in partibus Infidelium.

But th^re are I know not how many persons that break this Rule; some, without
ever entering into any (...)tion at all, believe every thing that is (...) and
if the Event be but ever so li(...)ing (...) it goes down with them for a
Miracle. Others, who pretend to be more refined, do very stiffly deny all that
is said to them; but if a Fact be proved so clearly that they cannot contradict
it, then they answer coldly that this is a Natural Effect, without ever being
at any trouble to examine or explain whether it be so or no, though they are
never so much pressed to it. It Is plain now, that both these sort of persons do
lay their stress upon foundations equally false, the former do frame to
themselves a Commonplace of the power of God, and to these it is enough to
say, that God is Almighty, to make them believe the truth of all the Miracles
that ever have been published. On the contrary, the other, whether they have
examined any of the pretended Miracles, and found them false, or else have
learnt it from somebody else make to themselves another Commonplace from this
Error and so concluding from a particular to the general, against all the
Rules of good Logic, they affirm, that all the Miracles which are said to have
happened in the world, are false, and without any foundation: These two faults
are to be condemend, but the former of them has some appearance of goodness
mixed with their simplicity; whereas the Vice of the latter has the characters
of an excessive pride, and malignity of heart. This Remark obliges me to divide
these Incredulous persons into two Classes; because some of them through a
foolish presumption deny the truth of all Events that do but shock the small
light of their understandings; and the others do avoid examining these Events
for fear least they should find there the finger of Divine Providence, which
they would gladly efface out of the works and order of Nature. The First Vice
is the fault of the self-conceited half-witted sparks; and the Second that of
the Impious, which are ironically, but commonly Styled, Esprits forts.

From what I have observed it follows, that we ought to keep a just medium
between these two extremes, and seriously to examine the Events we are told of,
before we pass a judgment on them: Shall we show a curiosity or earnestness for
the least trifles, and can we be cold and negligent in informing our selves of
the truth of an important matter of Fact, which happens against the ordinary
course of the things of this World?

To proceed in this Examination we ought, in my Judgment, to do these Four
things: First, to examine whether the Fact in it self be wonderful, and
contrary to the Laws or common Effects of Nature; for if it has not this
character, why should we spend our time in vain to seek for a Mystery where
there is none? Secondly, We ought to consider the Person on whose behalf this
Miracle is pretended to be wrought: It is a Lesson that was heretofore given to
the Pharisees by the Parents of the man, that St. John mentions was blind from
his Birth, We know that this is our son, said they, and that he was born blind;
but by what means he now sees, we know not: He is of age, ask him, he shall
speak for himself. Io. 9. Thirdly, We ought to examine the probity and the
number of Witnesses; because if a Fact be attested by a competent number of
persons of Credit and Reputation, of diverse Nations, of different Interests,
and whom we can have no suspicion of, for joining in a Conspiracy to carry on a
Lie, such a Fact ought to be accounted as true as if we had seen it with our
own Eyes; for there is the foundation of the most part of our knowledge.
Fourthly and Lastly. We ought carefully and without partiality to seek whether
Interest may not have corrupted any of the Persons who relate this Event, which
we are finding out the Truth of.

These Rules being once established, I do believe we may make a just judgment
upon the Healing of this Young French Girl, Lame almost from her Birth, whose
surprising History makes such a noise in the Town, and which gives occasion of
so many different discourses. But that I may not be accused of breaking the
first of these Rules which I have laid down; I will now simply relate the Fact,
and then afterward see whether it has the Characters that we have observed.

Marie Maillard, the Daughter of John Maillard a Sword-Cutler, and Charlotte du
Dognon, was born at Coignac in Xaintonge the 25th. of September, 1680. She was
scarce a Year old when her Father and Mother first perceived that she was Lame,
having a hollowness in that place where we usually perceive the Bone of the
Left thigh to fall into the Hip, (these are their own words), These good people
sent for a Surgeon to come and see her; but either through Ignorance, or
somewhat else, there was found no Remedy for her. They rested there, and
looking upon her Disease as incurable, they brought her up without applying
themselves to any other Surgeons or Physicians. According as the Girl grew up
in Years, so her Lameness increased proportionably, insomuch that there arose a
great Tumor above the Cavity of the Ischion. Her Leg became shorter by above
Four Inches, her Knee turned inwards, and her Foot in such a distorted manner,
that the inward Anckle-bone almost supplied the place of the Sole of her Foot,
She Lived in France till the Persecution obliged Protestants to think of
retiring; Her Father and Mother being of that number, Fled first to Lauzane,
and carried their Daughter along with them, from thence they went into Germany,
and at last came over into England about Four years and a Half ago.

This Traveling increased the Girl's Distemper, and she became worse and worse
as to her Lameness; so that when she walked, she threw her Body first on one
side, then on the other; and, which was still worse, she felt very violent
Pains. Her deformed way of going caused the little Children to flock about, and
abuse her with rude Language; and these, being naturally inclined to do evil,
were not contented with only giving her ill Names that were expressive of her
Deformity, but also threw Dirt at her; so odious seemed her sight to them.

Monsieur Debat, a Surgeon of the poor Refugees, was called about two years ago
to visit her, and he did so, but he thought her Distemper was not to be cured,
and therefore only advised her Mother to chase her with some Oyis, to endeavor
to alleviate her Pains; but that had no Success: so that then her Father and
Mother despaired of being ever able to do her any good; for they did not
flatter themselves that she could be cured. Thus you see in what a Condition
Marie Maillard has continued, till on Sunday the Six and twenti^th of November
last.

She went on that day in the Afternoon to the French Church behind
Leicester-Fields, and as she returned home, she was again set upon by those
little Children that all over bespattered her with dirt, and followed her with
several Ill Names, even to the House where Mademoiselle de Laulan lodged, (to
whom she served as an Interpretess) in St. James's Alley, near the Church, in
Germain street. This ill usage extremely grieved her, insomuch that she wept,
and complained of it to her Mistress, who exhorted her to have Patience, and to
comfort her self in God.

Between Seven and Eight of the Clock in the Evening, she took the New
Testament to read in it; and reading the Second Chapter of St. Mark, she told
her Mistress that she wondered at the Unbelief of the Jews; and, If such a thing
had happened now, (said she, upon the Wonderful Cure that was wrought upon the
Sick of the Palsy, mentioned in that Chapter) I would run very quickly, and
believe too. And scarce had she uttered those Words, but a redoubling of her
Pain came upon her, which forced her to stretch out her Leg; and as she would
have drawn it in, upon a Reproof her Mistress made her of the Indecency of that
Posture in stretching it out so near to hers, she heard a Snap that her Bone
made, her Leg extended it self, her Foot and Knee were restored to their proper
and Natural Situation; her Pains ceased, and she thought she had heard a Voice
saying to her, Thou art healed. Let that be as it will, she found her self
effectually healed, and went to walk up and down the Chamber; and she continues
very well, saving a little Weakness; her Left Leg is now in as good a Position
as her Right, and she walks very easily.

This is the Matter of Fact, the Person in whose behalf this surprising Event
is wrought, relates it her self; she there declares to all those who have had
the Curiosity to see her, and even upon Oath before my Lord Mayor of London.

The Witnesses who depose that she was extraordinarily Lame before the 26th.
day of November, are her Father and Mother, the Inhabitants of the Place where
she was born, and a world of others, both English and French, of all Ages, of
both Sexes, and of different Qualities: Children of Five and Six Years old, who
are incorruptible, and not subject to be unsincere: A Tailor who made her
Clothes, and observed the Deformity of her Body: The Shoe m^ker who made her
Shoes, and who was obliged to make one Shoe for her higher than the other Four
or Five Inches: An honest man, a Swiss by Nation, who has known her from her
Cradle, and with whom she afterward lodged here, who would have made an
Artificial Leg for her, to have helped to support her Body: In a word, we will
produce for a Witness, the Surgeon who visited her about two years ago.

This Girl having lived above Four Years in and about Westminster, we have more
Proof than needs to justify that she was extraordinary Lame long before the
time we have taken notice of; and since all the world may speak with her her
self now, and so many people have seen her since she was healed, it would be to
no purpose to stay any longer upon this Subject: We will therefore proceed to
say something as to the Manner how she came to be thus healed.

I confess, That properly speaking, there are but Two Witnesses of the
Wonderful Healing of this Girl; but is not this Number sufficient? The Law
requires no more even in Capital Cases, which concern men's Lives, provided
there be no Objection against them to invalidate their Evidence. Would it not
then be a great piece of Folly to require a greater Number here in this Case?
This being so, we will now proceed to give you the Character of our Witnesses.

We yet cannot pass a true Judgment on the Disposition and Manners of a Girl of
Marie Maillard's Age; Infancy is most commonly divided between little Pastimes
and Diversions, and at Thirteen Years old we seldom have any thoughts of God,
and of regulating the way of our lives; yet this we may say, That the Girl we
speak of is to be excepted out of this Rule; and whether the Condition of a
Refugee obliged her Parents to speak oftener to her of God, than otherwise
perhaps they might have done, or else the Discourses that were made her to
comfort her concerning her Deformity, touched her heart, it is certain that
this Girl has discovered a great deal more of Religion, than is ordinarily
seen in a Riper Age: She is very well instructed in the first Rudiments of the
Christian Religion, and she has for her years a competent Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures. This, I think, is sufficient for our first Witness.

The second is Mademoiselle de Loulan: She is an Honest Gentlewoman, who has
always had a very good Reputation; she lived a considerable time in the Family
of Madam de Turenne, that Incomparable Princess, who was less Illustrious in
her She was the only Daughter to the Duke de la Force.
High Birth, and Rank she had in the world, than in that which her Piety has
given her Name in the Church, where her Memory will be always celebrated. This
Instance would be enough to recommend the Reputation of Mademoiselle de Laulan;
but if we add to it her leaving her Husband in France, and a considerable
Estate for the sake of her Religion, and her having met with Misfortunes here
capable to shake almost any heart less steady than hers, it must be confessed
that Virtue is required for such a thing, and that a Person of her Character
cannot be suspected of inventing a Lie, which besides the Loss of her
Reputation, is of no advantage to her in the world. Those who will not be
satisfied with the Testimony I have here given of her, I am sure will be
convinced of it, if they will take the pains to enquire the Character of
Mademoiselle de Laulan, of Madam the Countess de Roye; I should not presume to
take the Liberty of mentioning here the Name of this most Noble Lady, but
because I am sure that she will not refuse to do Justice to the Reputation of
this Gentlewoman; and besides, that she saw a very few days before, the Girl we
are speaking of, and also that she saw her the day after she was cured, that is
to say, the 27th. of November last.

These are the Characters of our two Witnesses; is it not now unjust to
question the truth of their Testimony? I am not much given to be fondly
credulous, but when I consider the Number of people that have seen this Lame
Child, and that she is not so now; that there is no body who attributes the
Glory of Curing her to himself; and that her Mistress and she deposed that she
was healed in the manner as we have related, I am persuaded that it will be a
great Folly in any one to deny the Truth of the Fact, as they have declared it.

This now is the Narrative of this Mavelous Event, which I have taken from
the Affidavits and Certificates hereunto annexed: I come now to apply to them
the Rules I have laid down. And First, I maintain that the healing of this Girl
has something Supernatural (if the matter has been as we have related it) and
this is what we shall see. Her Thigh Bone has most certainly been out of its
place for above these Twelve years, for how else could the Cavity of the
Ischion have been perceived? Her Left-leg was considerably shorter than her
Right; her Foot and Knee distorted after that manner as I have given an Account
of; she feeling very great pains; and behold! in an instant this Bone retakes
its place, her Leg becomes long again, her Foot and Knee returning to their
Natural Situation, her pains leaving her: Now, has there ever been any Event
more surprising? I do believe I have a very just Idea of Events, to which
Physicians have ascribed the Name of Miracles of Nature. But I challenge any of
them to find out in all the Anuals of their Medicinal Science one Example so
wonderful and astonishing as this, and all the Philosophers in the World to
explain it naturally.

Now, tho there should be only this in it, I am apt to think they could not but
say, that it is an operation immediately proceeding from God; but if a
Christian will superadd to it the remarkable Circumstance of her reading the
Word of God, and the Discourse that the Girl had, so full of Faith at the time
when her healing was effecting; I cannot believe but that he must confess, that
this here is as manifest and notorious a Miracle as those the Gospel speaks of.
Let us subjoyn to this another reason. All the World knows, That when a
Dislocated Thigh or Leg is put into its place by the Skill of an Artist, the
Patient must keep his Bed, or repose himself for at least two or three Weeks
after; there must be I know not how many bindings about the place so set, and a
world of other necessary precautions used. For without them they could never
cure the Evii. And, humanly speaking, all the same care was as necessary here
in this case as in any, her Infirmity being of several years standing; but now
let us see what care she had of her self; instead of resting her restored Foot,
at that very moment she betook her self to Walking, and Leaping up and down the
Chamber; and the next day, instead of keeping her Bed, she went to several
places, and particularly to the Countess de Roye, and to her Father, to tell
him the News of her being cured. How can we call this any otherwise than the
Continuation of a Miracle?

If this Cure had been naturally effected, there is none can deny, after what we
have already said, but it must have proved the Surgeon's or Physician's
Masterpiece; and if so, is it to be imagined that these Gentlemen who so much
value themselves upon the least Cures wrought by them (that so by inhauncing
their Reputation they may the better make their Fortunes,) would neglect the
publishing of this to the World, which is doubtless one of the most surprising
and amazing that ever has been heard spoke of?

2dly, I affirm, That this Girl in whose behalf this wonderful Event has been
wrought, is of a competent Age to give her Testimony to the truth, and to speak
for her self; but has not Discretion sufficient to be entrusted with an
Intrigue so nice and refined, as this must needs be, if there were any trick or
foul play in it: Ask her, she will tell you, I was Lame, but thanks be to God,
I am not so now; I was healed in reading such a Chapter without any humane help.

3dly, All the other Witnesses, who depose or certify about this Fact, are
Persons of known Honesty and Credit, most of whom have left considerable
Estates behind them for the Testimony of a good Conscience. These are English,
French, of different Characters, of different Parties, and Children that are
every day playing with her. Now, what foolishness is it to suspect that so many
Persons should conspire together to confirm a Lie, by which they can receive no
profit, and wherein they can have no interest? This is a Character that makes
their Testimony absolutely good and valid, according to the fourth Remark we
have before made.

Tho I do not insist upon the Voice she thought she had heard, yet it is not
because I believe nothing of it, for the wonder of her Cure renders it very
credible to me; but it is only because her Mistress heard nothing of it; and
having so many other proofs besides. I will not make use of this. It seems but
just that Heaven, who wrought this Miracle upon the Girl, did let her know at
the same time from whence that great Blessing to her came, for fear least being
ignorant of her Benefactor, she should attribute her Cure to some Second Cause.

I know not whether this Argument I have made, or rather the Affidavits taken
upon Oath before a Right Honorable Magistrate will be able to convince some
incredulous Persons; but this I am sure of at least, that an honest and sincere
Mind, who only seeks for truth, will find enough here to satisfy him that God
does still work wonderful things in the midst of us.

I will conclude with answering two Objections, which I have heard already made
against this Miracle. Miracles, say some, are ceased: I know this has been a
Doctrine delivered by several famous Protestant Divines; but however we ought
not to understand them in too strict a sense: For where is it to be found, that
God has threatened the World with working no more Miracles? We may say indeed
they have ceased in one sense, because they are extraordinary rare in this Age,
to what they were in the time of the Apostles. God works not Miracles but
through a kind of necessity; at least it is my Conception so: But the Sacred
Text tells us, That he wrought one in favor of a King that was Sick, and why
cannot he do so now to cure a poor Girl, who showed so great an instance of
Faith? Moreover, if Miracles are chiefly to confirm the Truth, may not we say
that they are at this day as necessary as ever, so many Errors and open
Defiances of God being now so common and reigning in the World?

The second Objection is taken from the weakness that the Girl is in still;
God, say they, does not use to work Miracles by halves. To this I answer, That
the Miracle is complete: And as I may truly affirm, That I am cured of an Ague,
when I find I have no more fits, although my Plumpness, my Color, and my
Strength, are not so well restored to me, as they were when I was first seized
with the Ague; so likewise is it with this Girl, she is actually Healed, her
Thigh Bone being got again into its place, her Leg being come to its due
length; and her Foot and Knee in their Right Situation, and (what is more
still) her violent pains being quite gone, though she yet feels a little
weakness.

The Miracle consists in doing what Nature could not do. Nature could not set
the Bone of the Girl's Thigh in its proper place again, it could not stretch
out her Leg to its due length, make her Foot strait, and deliver her from her
pains in an instant: But Nature may strengthen her weak parts, and by an equal
communication of Nourishment to all the parts of her Body, may in time take
away that little inconsiderable difference that we now see in her walking.
Experience furnishes me with this Argument. The Girl grows better and better
every day; and there is all the reason in the world to believe, that the
Difficulty they make so great a noise about now, will be wholly gone in a
little time.

You, who will not for all this yet acknowledge here the hand of God, tell us
at least how this great Cure has been wrought? Dic quibus in Terris, and eris
mihi Magnus Apollo.


This is what I have to say of this most wonderful Event; I refer the rest to
the Affidavits and Certificates which are here annexed; and will only advertise
this, That as I have no design to impose upon any body, I have set down the
Names of the Places where these Witnesses here alleged live, that so all those
who would inform themselves further in this matter, may, if they please, have
recourse to them.

As this was going to the Press, a Letter written by the Learned Dr. Wellwood
to my Lady Mayoress upon this Subject, having been communicated to me, I have
thought fit to publish it; and though I acknowledge that Civility obliged me to
ask first his leave, yet I hope he will excuse me, if I have not done it. I
knew his Modesty to be so great, that I was afraid he would not consent to it;
and therefore I had rather be taxed with Incivility, than that the World should
lose so curious a Piece.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Lady ASHHURST; Lady Mayoress of LONDON.
Madam,
IN desiring me to give my opinion about the so much talked of Cure of Mary
Maillard, Your Ladyship puts upon me a harder Task, than perhaps you imagine it
can be. My Stars never designed me for a Bigot on the one hand, nor an Atheist
on the other. Let any body judge then, if I be in a fair way to become a
Favorite of the Age we live in. It is hard to say which of these two sorts of
men who degenerate into Bruits, deserves most the scorn and hatred of the wiser
part of Mankind. I shall not take upon me to decide their Pretensions. Only,
Madam, give me leave to say, The Atheist (tho the greater Rebel to his Maker)
is yet the easiest of the two toward his Fellow Creatures, whom he does not
hurt, unless it be when his Appetites, Passions or Immoralities set him on
forbidden Game. And then indeed it is a sport to him to do all the mischief
that is in his way, being under no inward restraint: Yet his Impious Opinions
are but Lazy Speculations, which do less mischief to others. Whereas, the Bigot
is never at ease till the flames of his blind Zeal have set all the World on
fire about him: While the other hugs himself in his own folly, without
declaring War against his Neighbors for not being so mad as himself. Both the
one and the other are out of all hazard of falling under the weight of that
Axiom, He that increases in knowledge, increases in sorrow. Ignorance first
misleads them, and then it shuts up all Avenues to reclaim them. In short,
Madam, of all Trades I know, it requires the least stock of true Wit to set up
for an Atheist, or Bigot, but the greatest stock of false shows of it to
support either: For the plain Sense of Mankind lies strongly both against the
one, and the other.

There are two extremes of Opinion that relate to these opposite Ranks of Men.
Some are inclinable to believe every matter of Fact that is told them, which
seems to serve their particular Opinions, or Notions of Religion. They do as
easily believe the Fact in question, as they are forward presently to ascribe
it to a Supernatural Cause: And conclude a man to be an impious person that
shall dare to question either the one, or the other, that shall either doubt of
the Fact, or shall go about to show from what Natural Causes it might have
arisen. Others again take up a formed Resolution to disbelieve every thing they
cannot account for, or explain. And let it bear never so many Signatures of
Truth, and of its being effected by a Supernatural Power, they are resolved
either to cry it down as an Imposture; or otherwise, if there be no place for
denying it, to ascribe it to some Natural Cause, to the force of Imagination,
Accident, and I know not what. It is not easy to determine which of these two
Extremes ought the most to be shunned, or discovers the worst Temper. The first
arises out of a weakness of mind, or a partiality to Opinions: For the very
same Person who does easily believe an extraordinary thing when it seems to
favor his own Sect, is as positively determined against believing it, if it
had happened out of that Communion to which he belongs. The other discovers a
profane Arrogance of Temper, and an impious aversion to every thing which may
strengthen men's Persuasions about Religion, which he hates of all sides,
reckoning that the Priests of all Religions are the same.

The mean betwixt these two, is to resolve on believing nothing that is
extraordinary, but upon very great and full evidence. In short, men are apt
even to lie or amplify (which is a lying in some degree) and therefore we have
a right to suspend our belief, and to examine well the Fact when any strange
thing is told us; and this is what every wise man ought to do. But when the
averment of the Fact is full, then every Enquirer into Nature ought to consider
how far the Powers of Nature may have co-operated to the Effect in question. As
for instance, Imagination has certainly great force in giving a strong motion
to the Blood and Animal Spirits, which may clear Obstructions, alter the mass
of Blood, and allay its fermentations. There are also great Secrets in Nature,
and many wonderful Virtues in Plants and Minerals, as well as in Animals, which
Observation, as well as Lucky Accidents, bring every day to our knowledge. So
that we cannot certainly define the Extent of Nature, or the Compass of Second
Causes; yet from Theory and Observation we may come to frame a general Scheme
of what lies in the road and course of Nature, and what is so much out of it,
that we have reason to ascribe it to a Superior and Supernatural Power. To be
slow in believing, and severe in inquiring after unusual things carries with it
the Characters of a truly Inquisitive and Philosophical Mind. Yet after all, To
reject a thing when the truth of it is apparent, and to impute it to Second
Causes, when we do not see the least shadow of any one, gives a strong
presumption of a secret hatred of all Religion and Virtue; that I had much
rather fall under the Censures, and even the Scorn of that Tribe, than be
corrupted by so Pestilential and spreading a Contagion.

To come to the Case of the French Girl, your Ladyship has seen her, as she is
now, and has heard it sworn by several persons, whom you have no cause to
disbelieve, how she was before. It Is certain she was monstrously Lame from her
Childhood till the 26th of November last: And it is as certain, since that time
till now, she goes straight. How she came to be cured in an Instant, is the
Question, and such a one as I am not able to determine. But to give your
Ladyship all the satisfaction I can in so difficult a matter; and that you may
be better enabled to judge of so surprising an Effect, I shall in as few words
as possible, set down the Manner* Causes and Consequents of her Lameness, so
far as they occur to me from any thing I know in Anatomy; and in the next
place, shall inquire how far the Cure of it, as it is sworn to, can be ascribed
to a natural Influence.

For the first; It appears by the Affidavits you sent me, That when she came to
be about Thirteen Months old, she was then first observed to be Lame, and some
time thereafter there appeared a Hollowness in the place where one usually
finds tht knitting of the Thigh Bone to the Hipp, as also a considerable
swelling a little above that place, to give it in their own words. In process
of time she grew worse and worse, and not only the Thigh Bone became both
higher up, and shorter than it used to be, but her Knee and the Ankle-bone of
that Leg turned inwards; so that she went upon the Ankle the Sole of her Foot
turning upwards, and all this attended with a great deal of pain. Here Madam,
you have the History of the Disease, and all these symptoms are the natural,
and some of them, the necessary Effect of a dislocation of the Thigh Bone.

To render this the more intelligible, give me leave Madam, to lay down a short
hint of the natural structure of the parts here affected. The Thigh Bone has at
the upper end a round head: This is received by a large Cavity of the
Hipp-bone, and is detained and fixed therein by two strong Ligaments, one that
encompasses the brim of the Cavity, and another that springs out of the bottom
of it, and is inserted into the tip of the round head of the Thigh Bone, in
order to the movement of the Thigh, and consequently of the whole Body. Nature
has wisely accompanied these Bones with Cartilages, Muscles, Tendons and
Ligaments, which are all of them so variously placed and situated, as to answer
every beck of the sensitive Soul, in moving either backwards or forwards, to
the inside, to the outside, or obliquely.

This being the natural structure of the parts, a dislocation of the Thigh
happens, when the round the head of the Thigh Bone is by some violence
displaced out of that large Cavity of the Hpp bone This cannot happen but by
some violent force, because of the strength of the Muscles that help to keep
the Bone in its proper place, of the depth of the Cavity where it is lodged,
and the strength and shortness of the Ligaments I have named. The longer such a
dislocation lasts, the less it is curable, seeing by it the Ligaments and
Muscles must be greatly relaxed, and so much the more, if the Patient walk
about as this Girl did: For the more stress she puts on that Leg, the more must
these parts be relaxed, they bearing in such a Case, most, if not all, the
weight of that side of the Body, which the Thigh Bone should have done, if it
had been in its proper place.

Its to me beyond all question, that in the Case of this poor Refugee, there
was a luxation or dislocation of the Thigh Bone, such as I have explained: And
of the four kinds of it reckoned up by Anatomists, it must necessarily have
been that they call a Dislocation outward. A hollowness on the place of the
Joint, a considerable Tumor a little above it, the Thigh Bone of that side
being both higher and shorter than the other, a constant pain attending, with a
turning inwards of the Knee and Ankle, and a turning upwards of the Sole of the
Foot, are all of them agreed to by Anatomists and Surgeons to be undoubted
signs, as well as necessary consequents of this kind of dislocation. The place
of the Joint must needs have appeared hollow, partly for want of the Cavity,
its being filled up with the round head of the Thigh Bone, and partly from the
rising turnour above it. The tumor it self has been nothing else but the round
head turned outward with the Muscles and fleshy parts around it: The pain was
owing to the stretching of the Ligaments, and nervous parts, and to their
supplying the Office of the Thigh Bone in sustaining that side of the Body: The
Bone must needs appear shorter from the thrusting of its head higher than the
Cavity for which it was naturally designed. The distortion of the Knee proceeds
partly from the relaxation of these Muscles and Tendons that serve to move the
Thigh outward, and partly to the relaxation more on one side than the other of
that Ligament I mentioned, which ^^compasses the brim of the Cavity of the
Hipp-bone. The like contorsion of the Ankle is owing to the former, and to the
stress the poor Girl was obliged to lay upon the dislocated Thigh, by walking,
occasioned through the narrowness of her Circumstances.

This much Madam, for the Manner, Causes and Consequents of the Girls
Distemper. Neither has it any weight to object against its being a Dislocation,
that her Parents remember not the precise Time nor Manner, how she came by it:
for we see every day, examples of Children Dislocated in the same manner,
without their Parents, being able to tell when and how they became so; the
Bones of young Children being much more easily put out, than those come to Age,
and they being more obnoxious to Accidents through Errors of People about them.

To trouble your Ladyship, with the ordinary Manner and Method of Cure in this
Case, would seem altogether needless, since every body of common sense will
tell you, it is done by putting the Thigh Bone in its proper place; that is, by
bringing back the Head of it, into the Cavity of the Hip-bone, and keeping it
there. This is done with no small difficulty, even when the Dislocation is
recent, where many times, both the Surgeon and his Assistant are forced to
employ their utmost strength, and the best of their dexterity and skill.

But when the Dislocation is of a long standing, as it was with this Maid, most
Surgeons and Anatomists look upon the Case as deplorable, if not desperate.
Among a great many others, these following reasons may be given for it. 1. The
Cavity of the Hip-bone, for want of the head of the other Bone to play in it,
must needs in process of time be filled up with that Mucilaginous Matter, which
the Gland, situated in the bottom of it, does constantly furnish for the
Lubrication of the Joint. Being once thus filled up, either in whole, or in a
considerable part, it becomes unfit to re-admit the head of the Bone dislocated
for want of room. And this the rather, that of all the Mucilaginous Glands,
situated upon the Joints of Humane Bodies, this Gland, by the Wise Providence
of Nature, is the largest, and discharges the most Matter. If it were not for
this constant supply, the greatest torture that could be inflicted on a
Criminal, were but to oblige him to walk. 2. The constant afflux of Humors,
even in the ordinary course of nutriment, upon the Head of the Bone dislocated,
must render it in a little time too big to re-enter its proper Cavity; the
constant attrition of the parts having prevented that inconvenience, while it
stayed in its natural situation. 3. Nature having once accustomed it self to a
posture out of its ordinary road, it makes the best it can of necessity, and
seldom or never of it self, changes a tolerable evil, for a hazardous good.
Lastly, Though the Bone should be got set again, even when recent, it is yet
easily put out again by the least motion or accident: because by the
Dislocation, the Muscles and Ligaments, are either rendered feeble, or relaxed,
or broken, and consequently very unable to fix the Thigh Bone in its place so
firm as it ought to be.

Now Madam, upon the whole matter, I do not see it good Manners' to question
the Fact, since the present state of the Person is visible to all the World,
and her former condition was so well known to such numbers that do attest it.
And though the extraordinary suddenness of the Change, cannot be maintained by so
many Witnesses, there being but one other person present, yet as other
Witnesses saw it in a very little time afterward; so there are very many that
know how she was the Day before, and the Day afterward, which do reasonably
enough support the want of variety of proof, for the Instantaneous Change that
was made. Therefore I cannot see what is possible to be said as to the Fact.

I would not pretend to be Philosopher, Physician, or Anatomist enough to say
what Nature can do; but there having been no applications used either outward
or inward, and no operation of Surgery, even of the slightest kind interposed,
I confess, I cannot imagine what probable or possible Color there is for
ascribing this to any Natural or Second Cause, that yet occurs to me. And
therefore am not ashamed to own, that there is something in it which I cannot
well comprehend, and shall not be angry with any body that shall ascribe it to
something above, or out of the Road of Nature.

The only objection against this is, that a little Lameness, a small and scarce
discernable halting still remains. From which some may think it reasonable to
infer, since God does not work Miracles by halves, this is not to be ascribed
to him. It Is true, the one Leg is a little shorter than the other, which may
arise from a shrinking of the Nerves, or want of Nutriment, that do naturally
flow from so long and great a Dislocation. If the halting did proceed from a
looseness or feebleness of what is now put in Joint, the objection would indeed
be stronger; for the thing this poor Creature wanted, was the firmness of the
Union between the upper and lower parts of her Body. This deprived her of the
Use of her Limbs, and put her to perpetual pains, all which is now entirely
changed, so that the work is complete. And though it may be suitable to the
Infinite Goodness of the Supreme Mind to give such a Person the entire use of
her Body; yet an exact streightness being only a part of the Ornament of the
Body, there is not that reason to expect a second Miracle, (though the first had
been one) for the stretching out the Leg to an exact equality with the other;
since probably enough, that may come in time of it self, the halting being now
scarce discernable, and as you know very inconsiderable.

If it were worth your while, Madam, I could give your Ladyship an account of
very surprising Effects produced in some people by a rapid turn of the Animal
Spirits: And if I should tell you, that it were no derogation from the Miracles
our Savior wrought upon Earth, that a flame of Imagination setting the Animal
Spirits in a swift Motion, and thereby raising a new Fermentation in the Mass
of Blood, might cooperate to the wonderful Changes that were made upon the
persons he healed, though I should say all this, I should not perhaps
contradict the Principles of Philosophy, nor the Economy of Faith. For we find
in holy Writ, that there was requisite toward their Cure a belief of the power
of the Operator, which, though it was properly an Act of the Mind, yet it must
certainly have produced a mighty flame of Imagination, and, a rapid motion of
the Animal Spirits. But this is a thought I dare scarce warrant my self in, and
therefore I wish it almost unsaid.

But whatever Effects this Rapidity of Motion in the Spirits and Blood, raised
by a strong impression on the Imagination may produce, in laying or raising
Fermentations in the Body, or altering the Crases of the Fluids; it is hardly
possible, at least highly improbable, that any such Impression of Fancy could
restore a Bone long dislocated into its proper place, where both the recipient
and the thing to be received, were by a necessary consequence from Anatomy, and
the structure of the parts, rendered utterly unfit for such a Rejunction.

If it is said, Why should God work such a Miracle, if it be any* (as I shall
never determine) I must own to your Ladyship, that if I do not know all the
Secrets of Nature, I do much less know the Secrets of the Author of Nature: Yet
after all, if he should think fit to do such an extraordinary thing in the Age
in which we live; we must all confess there is occasion enough for it; since
the very Existence of a Supreme Being and his Power and Authority is so much
questioned. Nor need we search long to find a Reason why the Subject on which
this is wrought should be one of those who h^ve so ^^^en and sacrificed all for
their persuasion about the Truth of Religion, and who are under so severe a
persecution for it; since this both carries a Character of God's tenderness to
them, and may be a mean to awaken our regard and charity for them, which are
now run too low. And this is one use I am sure your Ladyship will make of the
whole matter. You, and your Noble and Generous Husband not being satisfied with
all the good you do your selves, but as you can engage others to follow so
worthy a Pattern as you both give them; which among many other reasons engages
me to be with all possible respect,

Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble and Obedient Servant, J. W

The Joint Affidavits of the Father and Mother of the Child.
WE John Maillard, and Charlotte du Dognon, of the Town of Cognac in
Xaintonge, now living at the Corner of Newport-Court in Westminster, do
certify, that Mary Maillard our Daughter was born at Cognac the 25th day of
September 1680. and that about twelve or thirteen Months after she was born, we
observed that she was very lame, having a hollowness in the place where one
usually finds a knitting of the Thigh Bone in the Hipp. The Surgeon to whom
we showed her at that time, found there was no Remedy for her; so our Daughter
always continued in that condition, and became more and more lame, insomuch
that since we have lived in this City, that is to say, since within these four
Years and a half, or thereabouts, the Bone of her Thigh was not only higher
than it used to be; but her Knee also was turned inward, and the Ankle-bone of
her left Foot turned likewise in such a manner, that it touched the ground, and
that Leg was shorter than the other by four Inches or thereabouts, and which
made her go very deformedly, feeling great pain. About two Years since we
showed her to Monsieur Debatz, Surgeon to the French Refugees, who, having
examined her, judged her Disease incurable, the Bone having been so long put
out of its place; and therefore he advised us to chafe it with certain Oils, to
try if we could alleviate her pains, which we did, but without any success.
About that time a Gentlewoman, whose name was Laulan, desired us to let her
have her to be an Interpreter to her in English, which we did, and she has
lived with her ever since till now, continuing always Lame, and so deformed,
that the little Children were used to follow her in the Streets, and to give
her many Nicknames, such as struck at her Deformity. She went to the French
Church behind Leicester-fields on Sunday the 26th of November last, and coming
from thence home, she was again followed by the Children, who threw Dirt upon
her, and followed her with injurious Reproaches even to St. Iames's-Alley, near
St. Iames's-Church in Germain-street, where then Lodged Mademoiselle de Laulan,
at an English Apothecaries house. This Evil Treatment put our Girl into such a
Consternation, that she went weeping into her Mistresses Chamber, who, after
she had understood the cause of her crying, advised her to read the Holy
Scriptures to comfort her which she did; and in reading the second Chapter of
the Gospel of St. Mark, which gave an account of the healing of one sick of the
Palsy, and the Incredulity of the Jews, this Girl showed a surprise at their
Obstinacy, and declared to her Mistress, as we have heard from her own Mouth,
that if she had lived at that time, she should have had Faith enough to have
been healed: And at the same Instant she felt a great pain, and heard a Noise
that the Bone of her Thigh made, and thought she heard a Voice which said to
her, Thou art Cured The Crack the Bone made was heard by her Mistress, but not
the Voice, as she has told us. However the matter was, she was at the same
Instant, that is to say, between seven and eight of the Clock in the Evening,
on the six and twentieth day of November last, actually Cured, and continues to
be in so good a condition, that she now walks straight upright, her Legs being
of the same length, her Knee, her Foot, her Hip and Thigh, being in their
natural situation as they ought. This is all that we can say about the Cure of
our Daughter, which we cannot look upon but as miraculous; and for which we
give our most humble Thanks to God.

In Witness whereof we have signed this Certificate in London this Eighteenth
Day of December 1693. John Maillard, Charlotte Dognon.

Jurat 19 die December. 1693. coram me

William Ashhurst, Mayor.



The Affidavit of the Child her self.
I Mary Maillard, Daughter of John Maillard and Charolotte du Dognon his Wife;
Do Testify and Declare, that ever since I can remember from my infancy I have
been very Lame and in a great deal of Pain; my Hipp-bone sticking very much
out, and under the Bone was a great Hollowness, which made me go very uneasy.
I have been in England almost five years, and have lived about Sohoe and
Picadilly all the time; and above a thousand People have seen me in that
miserable Lame condition: and whenever I used to walk abroad, a company of Boys
and Girls were wont to flock about me, and follow me; calling me by diverse ill
and reproachful names: My Left Knee and Foot were quite turned inward, and the
Sole of my Foot was upwards, so that I was forced to walk upon my Ankle; which
made that side much shorter than the other, and that distorted my Body on both
sides as I walked. It pleased God that on Sunday the Six and Twentieth of
November last, 1693. as I came from the French Church behind Leicesterfields,
in the Afternoon; several rude Boys and Girls that saw me go in that limping
and pitiful posture, followed, abusing me in their Language, and throwing dirt
at me; which troubled me extremely, that I was even ready to cry at their
Unchristian and Barbarous usage of me. When I came home to my Mistress,
Mademoisselle du Laulan, in St. James's Alley, near St. James's Church in
Germin Street; I told her how rudely I had been treated by those Children: to
which she answered, that I should not complain of it, but take it patiently, as
an Affliction laid upon me by God for his own wise Ends, and the carrying on of
his Providence in the World. After Supper about Eight of the Clock in the
Evening I took the New Testament in French, and read to her the second Chapter
of the Gospel of St. Mark, about Christ's curing the Sick of the Palsy; and
complaning to her of the incredulity of the Scribes; I said to her, stretching
out my Lame Leg as I was wont; Madamoisselle, those Folk were very naught that
they would not believe this great Miracle; if there were such things done now,
said I, I would run and believe too: And immediately after those words, my
Hipp-bone snapt aloud, so that she heard it, but thought it had been somewhat
in the Fire that made that noise: But I replied, Mademoisselle I am cured, and
with that I rose up, and as I thought, heard a voice say, Thou art cured; but
she told me I was running Mad, but I replied, indeed Madam I am cured; and
thereupon went up and down the Room as strait as I do now, without any pain at
all. Upon which my Mistress bid me return hearty thanks to God, and thereupon
we went to Prayers. And I bless God I continue so to this hour.

Signed this 18th. Day of December, in the year of our Lord 1693. The mark of
Mary M. A. Maillard.
Jurat 19. die December. 1693. Coram me

William Ashhurst, Mayor.



The Affidavit of Mrs. Laulan the Mistress of the Girl.
I Renee de Laulan, do certify, that Marie Maillard, (commonly called Marie
Anne) Daughter of John Maillard and Charlotte du Dognon; has lived with me two
years or thereabouts, being always very lame, so that she walked with great
difficulty, and felt extreme pains. Her Left Leg was considerably shorter than
her Right, her Foot was also turned inwards, and her Thigh Bone was, as far as
I could judge, out of its place. She all along continued in that condition till
Sunday the 26th. of November last; when coming from the French Church behind
Leicesterfields, besmeared with dirt almost all over, and crying, she told me
that she had been very ill used by the little Children, who had called her many
naughty Names, such as chiefly reproached her Deformity: Whereupon I told her,
that she ought to take it patiently, and comfort her self in God. At length,
after Supper she took the New Testament, and opening the Book, fell upon the
place that speaks of the wonderful cure of St. Peter's Mother-in Law; and I at
the same time being very ill of an Ague, said, I had great need of such a
Physician. She continued to read on, and then reading the second Chapter of St.
Mark; which speaks of the Cure of the Man Sick of the Palsy, she seemed to
wonder very much at the Jews incredulity, who would not be convinced upon the
sight of such a Miracle. If such a thing should happen now, said she to me, I
would run very quickly and believe too. I perceived her then stretching out her
Leg toward me, and looking upon it as too uncivil a Posture, bid her draw it
in again, and told her that it was not decent; she replied to excuse her self,
that she was in a great deal of pain; but however she endeavored to pull it
in. And just at that moment she heard the snap that her Thigh Bone gave, which
I heard also; but attributed it to something in the Fire. She said to me in a
Transport of Joy, Mademoisselle I am healed, my Bone is slipped into its place
again. I answered, Mariane thou art a fool: said she again, Mademoisselle I am
healed; and came to embrace my Knees, telling me that she thought she heard a
Voice saying unto her, Thou art healed: She thereupon went to walk in the
Chamber, and prayed me to look upon her Legs, which appeared to me then to be
of an equal length, and she added that she felt no more pain. This happened on
the said 26th. Day of November. 1693. And this is all I can say of the healing of
this Girl. I shall add only this protestation, that neither I my self, nor any
other person as I know of, had any share, or contributed in any wise directly
or indirectly toward it: And that the day following she went out of the
Lodging, and walked as well as she does now. This is the Testimony I think my
self obliged to give to the Truth.

London this 23d. of December, 1693. Renee de Laulan.
Jurat 28. December. coram me.

Ja. Vernon.



The Affidavit of Monsieur Debat, Surgeons
I James Debat, Master Surgeon, a French Refugee, serving the poor of the
Committee, do declare, that about two years ago, I was called by Charlotte du
Dognon, Mother of Mariane Maillard, to visit the said Mariane; whom having
examined, I found on her left side, first a Tumor or Swelling, which seemed to
me to be very considerable, about and a little above the Cavity of the Isch
ium, into which the Head of the Thigh Bone ought to fall. I observed secondly,
that the Left Leg was considerably shorter than the Right. Thirdly, I took
notice that her Leg was turned inwards. Having been since called within these
ten days to visit her, I went thither with Mr. Metayer, a French Minister, and
Mr. Dulac a Gentleman; I found the said Mariane in this following Condition.
First, the Tumor which I had observed, appeared to me very inconsiderable both
in feeling and seeing. Secondly, The Left Leg as long as the Right, within very
near the thickness of a Crown Piece. In the Third place, the Left Leg and Foot
in the right and natural posture and situation. This is the Testimony I render
unto Truth.

Given at London the 19th December 1693. James Debat.
Jurat 20. die December. 1693. coram me.

William Ashhurst Mayor.



The Affidavit of Monsieur Lafargue, Doctor of Physic.
I John Lafargue, Doctor of Physic, do declare, that I have known for near
these two years Mariane Maillard, whom I have seen, and with whom I have often
spoken. I have always observed, when I saw her standing, that her Body bent
backwards, and that when she walked, she threw her self first on the one side,
then on the other, as if she would have broke her back. I have not entered into
the same examination concerning the Estate of her Leg, as Monsieur Debat at
that time; but having seen and visited her with him to day, in the present
condition wherein she now is, I can attest, that all which he has said of her
is very true.

Given at London the 19th of December, 1693. I. Lafargue. James Debat.

Jurat. 20. die December. 1693. coram me

William Ashhurst Mayor.



The Certificate of Monsieur Dela Menardiere.
I do hereby Certify that Mrs. Laulan was known in France by many persons of
worth and honor, to be a very Virtuous, Honest Woman, and that since her
coming here, upon the account of her Religion, she has lead a very Exemplary,
Pious Life; and is respected as such by all those that know her. As to what
relates to the Girl, she has taken into her Service within these three years,
who was Lame, and halted to a very considerable degree, having endured violent
pains in one of her Hipps, from her Infancy, it is most certain that she was
considerably eased on Sunday being the 26 of November. I saw her the very next
day my self, in a condition which has raised great admiration in all those that
had seen her walk the preceding days; her Hipp being restored to its natural
condition of it self, which is looked upon by every body, as an extraordinary
Deliverance by the immediate Hand of God, and almost without example. In
Witness whereof, I have signed this present Certificate.

London December the 25th 1693. Dela Menardiere.

The Certificate of Daniel Taureau.
I Daniel Taureau, Shoemaker, living near the Sign of the City of Paris in
Soboe, do certify, that I have made Shoes for these two years last past for
Marie Maillard, Daughter of Mr. John Maillard, Sword Cutler, living at the
Cornerof Newport Court; and she being extremely Lame, and her Foot turning in
such a manner as that her Ankle touched the ground, and so she walked upon the
Inward Quarter of her Shoe; I was forced to make her one Shoe for her Left Foot
higher than the other about four Inches. Secondly, To strengthen the inward
part of that Heel by putting there a piece of Leather considerably thicker than
on the outside. Thirdly, To double the inward quarter of that Shoe by putting
to it another strong Leather to keep the Ankle of her Foot from touching the
ground, and from hurting her as she walked. I declare also that I took notice,
that when I made her a pair of new Shoes, I found the old ones in the inward
quarter of the Left Shoe extremely worn, and the sole but very little,
notwithstanding all the care I had taken.

In Witness whereof I have signed this Certificate at Westminster, this 26th
day of December 1693. The Ordinary Mark of Daniel D. T. Taureau.

The Certificate of Monsieur James Gorgo, a Swiss.
I Underwritten, James Gorgo, born in Switzerland, Gun-smith, living at present
in Grafton-street, Sohoe, in Westminster, at the Sign of the Lance, do hereby
Certify, that while I lived in the City of Xaintes, the Metropolis of
Xiantonge, I Lodged in the House of one Ioguet, Sword-Cutler, where I have
often seen Mary Maillard his Niece, Daughter to John Maillard, and Charlotte du
Dognon, who was about a Twelve Month old, and exceeding Lame. I also declare
that I have seen her within these four years and a half, in this City at my own
House, in which her Father and Mother lodged for some time, still very Lame,
and in so deplorable a condition, that being thereby moved to Compassion, I
resolved to make her a kind of an Artificial Leg, to support her; but yet I did
not do it, by reason of her Father and Mother's negligence. This is all I have
to say about this Girl, excepting that she is now no longer Lame, and that her
Father and Mother, whom I have all along known to be very honest People, have
assurd me that she was Miraculously cured on Sunday being the 26th of N^vember
last past, without the least humane assistance,

London December the 18th 1693. James Gorgo.

The Certificate of Mr. Daniel Demier.
I Daniel Demier of the City of Xaintes, living at present in Quaker street, in
Spittle-fields at Mr. Du Vivier, Gawse Maker, do hereby Certify, that I have
known Mary Maillard ever since she was three years of Age, or thereabouts:
having seen her, at that time at her Father's House, John Maillard, Sword
Cutler, at Coignac in Xaintonge, exceeding Lame. I have seen her since in the
same Condition in this City. And do further declare that I have seen her
upright, and perfectly cured within these three Weeks, and that her Father and
Mother, who have always been reputed very honest people, have assured me, that
after having been lame for the space of Thirteen years, or thereabouts, she was
miraculously cured on Sunday being the 26 of November last past, without the
least humane Assistance.

In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand London, November the 18, 1693.
Daniel Demier.

The Affidavit of Mrs. Margaret Megee.
I Margaret Megee, living in Leicesterfields next to the Standard-Tavern; do
certify that I have seen several times a French Girl, (whose Name I understand
to be Mary Maillard) going extremely lame: And that I have seen her since,
going and walking upright, and that she told me that she had been cured without
any Humane help on Sunday the 26th. of November last, upon reading the second
Chapter of the Gospel of St. Mark.

December. the 21st. 1693. Margaret Megee.

The Certificates of Mr. Thomas Strutt, and Ellenor Harding.
WE Thomas Strutt, Master of the Standard Tavern in Leicesterfields, and
Ellenor Harding Servant in the said House; do testify and declare, that we
have several times taken notice of a French Girl as she past by the door, who
walked in a very lamentable lame manner; which moved in us a great concern and
pity for her: We have understood since that her Name is Marie Maillard, the
Daughter of a Sword Cutler. On Monday the 18th, of December 1693. she was
brought to our House, and we both saw her there go very upright and strait; and
upon enquiry she assured us that she was cured on the 26th. of November last,
upon reading the second Chapter of the Gospel of St. Mark, by the immediate
hand of Providence, without any Humane Art or Means.

Signed the 26th. of December 1693. Tho. Strutt. Ellenor Harding.


FINIS.

