A TRUE RELATION OF TWO Prodigious BIRTHS, The like not happening in many
Generations, the signification whereof is left to the judicious to contemplate.
NOt to be troublesome with a tedious Insignificant Preamble, irksom to a
curious Reader, and usually the common Prologue to notorious Lies. I shall here
acquaint the Judicious Reader with Two Strange Births as any Age has produced:
And the Knowledge of them came to me on this Account:

A Friend, (and considerable Citizen of London living in Cheap Side nigh the
Nags-head Tavern,) sending to a near Relation, in Summerset shire, an Account
of the strange Hail, which fell in London, on Tuesday the 18th of May 1680.
etc. of the which they had not heard in those parts: Answered his Kindness with
a Relation of these Admirable Births; as acceptable to him, as his to them viz.

On May 19. 1680.
IN Summerset-shire, near Taunton Dean, at a Place called Eill Brawars Was a
woman brought to Bed with Two Children: They grow together side to side from
the Armpits to the Hip-Bone; They have two Fundaments whereby to avoid their
Excrements; They have also two Passages for their Urine; yet have they but one
Navel, by which both were nourished while in the Womb; both suck together, or
are both equally desirous of Nourishment together; and as they equally covet
Refreshment, so they are equally sensible of their Grief and Pain, for they
weep and express their Sorrow together: They are both Christened, and called by
the Names of Aquila and Priscilla.

Their Births being thus with their Bodies strangely united, has proved very
much Advantageous to their Parents, by the numerous Access of the Multitude,
who come to see the Children from many Miles round about, and give the Parents
considerably.

ALso, within a few Miles of this Town, which is likewise admirable, A Cow was
Calving, but dying before she could bring forth, she was Cut open, and in her
Body was found two Calves grown together, and were joined by their Bellies,
their Forelegs clinched about each other: they have two Heads, 8 legs, and two
Tails.

This happened likewise about the same time when the woman was delivered. And
has beheld to Admirations. The Truth hereof will be certified at Mr. Jones' s
Coffee house behind the Exchange in Ship yard, in Bartholomew Lane.

LONDON, Printed by T. D. 1686.


