A True Representation TO THE KING and PEOPLE of ENGLAND; How Matters were
carried on all along in IRELAND BY THE Late King James, In Favor of the Irish
Papists there: From His Accession to the CROWN, To the Tenth of April, 1689.

By an Impartial Eyewitness.

LICENSED, Aug. 16. 1689.

J. Fraser.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

A True Representation to the King and People of England, how Matters were
carried on all along in Ireland, by the Late King James, in Favor of the Irish
Papists there, etc.
TO satisfy those that make it their business to reflect on the Protestants
who left Ireland in the late Calamities; the following Reasons are briefly
offered.

First, It is clearly evident, That Ireland is a Kingdom depending on England,
and that the Acts passed in it are to be altered, amended, and confirmed by the
King and Council of England, as by Poyning's Act in Ireland, may more fully
appear. That England received K. J. as their lawful King, is likewise granted;
and that Ireland entirely submitted, is evident: And here I will not enter into
a tedious discourse of all the measures taken since 1660, to subvert the
Protestant Religion, and the Laws Established, ( which will be shortly at large
set forth, by another Hand, to the full satisfaction of every Impartial and
Vnprejudiced person) but briefly and truly give an account of the Proceedings
in Ireland since his Accession to the Crown. It is plain, that his whole
endeavors were bent to introduce Popery, and establish it in these Kingdoms,
and that he could not more readily effect it, and try the Genius of his
Protestant Subjects of Ireland (who were taught to yield him Passive Obedience,
by the easy compliance of some of their Party then in power, to his fierce
Encroachments) than by a new modelling of the Army there; which in a very
little time was so purged, that scarce a true Protestant, or honest Gentleman
was left in it: And though it began by degrees whilst his Excellency the Lord
Clarendon had the Sword, yet it was fully executed (to the almost ruin of many
a worthy Gentleman, whose fortune depended on it) a little after the Lord
Tyrconnel had the honor of being his Deputy in that Kingdom. This being the
first step, the Irish were made Officers, and Troops and Companies filled every
where with them, and were trained and exercised by an extraordinary diligence
of some good old Officers, kept in I suppose of purpose for it, who soon
became, not only contemners of their Protestant Commanders, but were preferred
to their places. So that the Sword (and consequently the Military command of
that Kingdom) was wholly in their power. The next thing to be looked into was
the Civil Magistrate, and he who was known to be a true Protestant, was laid
aside, and new Judges of the right stamp were first Coined, who had command in
their respective Circuits to inform the Government of all Protestant Justices
(or Cromwell's favorers as they called them) who were likewise presently eased
of their Commissions, and all other Impoloyments. Then the Officers of the
Revenue were also purged; and several of the Irish who had got in among them
(in inferior Stations) yet in regard they were not so well qualified as the
Protestants, by a knowledge in those affairs, some were removed, and the most
useful of the Protestants restored for a while; yet as the Irish grew skilful,
the Protestants still were outed again: Matters being thus acted and the
Protestant Nobility, and many of the Gentry knowing of no better Expedient than
to come into England (since they could not struggle against the King's will,
which was a Law in Ireland) therefore they removed hither to make a
Remonstrance of the Grievances of that Kingdom to the late King: and though they
flocked over out of all parts, yet they prevailed so little to gain any
redress, that they saw plainly they could not return into Ireland without
apparent hazard of their Lives.

And now was it judged by the Ld. Deputy the fittest time for him to put his
long contrived designs of Subverting the Protestant Religion, and introducing
Popery, into full Execution; upon which in November last, there was a motion
made in Council for disarming all the rest of the Protestants of that Kingdom,
which being known, and most concluding that as soon as their Arms were taken
(there being then a hot Discourse of a general Massacre intended) 'twas only to
leave them more naked and exposed, so as that might have its full effect more
easily, and with less opposition upon them, which alarmed the Protestants so,
that many thousands came flocking over to avoid that fatal stroke. Now were the
few Protestants who lived dispersed left to shift for themselves. In the mean
time the Lord Tyrconnel (who still had the Sword undemanded and undisposed of
to any other) issues new Commissions, not only to the To. Ca. who had some
Estates; but to all, who were willing to stand up for the Cause, that were men
of broken Fortunes and worse Fame, but could influence the Rabble and raise
Companies, only with this Salvo, that they should maintain them for 3 months on
their own cost and charge, and then they should have their Commissions given
them: by which it was adjudged, that in regard there was but little Money in
the Treasury, they should be fitted for service against the time K. J. should
come, or send them Money; or, that if the Deputy found an Army ready to Land
out of England, what Money was there would be little enough to bear his
Charges, and furnish him with Necessaries on his flight. But these Commissions
(or rather Encouragements) being very many, for every one who could get about
60 Kearnes, or Country Fellows to join with them, and own him as their Captain,
immediately strutted and looked very big, and was honored, by the name of
Captain; so that it was nothing strange to have 20 or 30 Companies in a County,
and these the noted Idlers and Cow-stealers. So that presently the Captains
(many of which had not 3 Cows of their own) had several scores of Cattle driven
into Nooks and Bypath; and all that were branded, were sure to go to Pot, in
regard the Horn (as they called it) spoke English; the rest were sent into
other remote Counties to the Officers there, and those again sent their stolen
Cattle in exchange for the other (which was done to elude a Proclamation from
the Lord Deputy on the many and daily Complaints and Petitions he received on
account of the stolen Cattle) requiring all Officers and Soldiers as well as
others to be aiding and assisting to recover the stolen Cattle, and to punish
the Offenders; which passed for current. For it was well if a Protestant could
go safe to the Captain of the next Garrison, who sometimes would be so civil
(especially if a Sum of money were given his men to assist in the search) as to
send 8 or 10 miles, but be sure the Cattle must be far enough from the place
searched; and sometime when 30 or 40 good fat Bullocks came to be made a Prey,
that about a 3d or 4th part must be laid aside for the Pot; the rest for a
Bribe of 5 or 6 l. would be got by some of the Soldiers, who would swear
lustily they were forced to promise so much to their Spy: Yet no sooner (on the
delivery of the greater part of the Cattle, and the money received) but be sure
in a night or two the Cattle were again stolen. Thus the merry Drovers (as they
called themselves) valued not to join about 60, or 80, or 100 in one Party, and
force away what Cattle they had a mind to: so that sometimes 100 Sheep would
scarce feed the Drivers with their Families and Friends; and a purchase of
about 100, was only fit to be divided among them and their Crew into Lots and
Parts, (but they called them Steages.) And now these new raised Forces were
most of them half armed out of the Stores, the rest were pretty well fitted for
Pikes made in the Country, and the Priests and Friars commanded (on obedience
to the Holy See) that no person whatsoever should appear at Mass without his
long Skeane and Halfpike, which accordingly was performed, and one person who
had not one foot of Land but what he Farmed from an English Gentleman, had 12
dozen of each made for himself and Tenants, an account whereof was sent the
Government, but no notice taken.

And now was it judged fit that those new raised forces should betake
themselves to Garrisons, which was suddenly done -- And not only were the
Kings Garrisons, Forts, and Castles, well stored with them, but many Gentlemen's
houses that were strengthy, (or whose ownes were judged disaffected to them)
were likewise filled with their Numbers, and the Proprietors, or Possessors
turned out, and the provision seized, (and it was an extraordinary favor to
get off any Goods that were of any value) on pretense that it was for the Kings
use, and that he would make satisfaction as he thought fit, and that it was
done by his Command.

Now was it plain, that this Army was not designed to fight with Butterflies,
and that the Lives of all the Protestants that stayed, were in apparent danger:
On which an humble request was made to one or two persons of greatest Quality
and Station, to stand up for the Protestant Religion. -- But either through too
much Loyalty, or judging the scattered and dispersed Protestants, too weak to
withstand their shock, (much less to disarm the Party designed) was therefore
declined and judged unfit to attempt as they proposed, seizing the Sword, Lord
Deputy, and Dublin.

Matters being thus transacted, it was judged by the Protestant Gentry of the
West of Ireland, that in regard Sligoe, (which is a Seaport Town, and the
chief in the County) one of the best Posts and strongest, being also well
situated to pass from the North to Connaght; (the Irish Company a little before
being drawn out of it to a General Rendezvous) and many of their new raised
Forces possessing them selves daily of the most considerable strengths in the
County, as Belahy, Moygara, which belongs to the L. Kingston and his Tenants,
Ousted, and Ballymoate; therefore, lest they should likewise possess themselves
of Sligo as they intended, it was resolved by the Protestants there to enter
it, and possess themselves of it for their defense and safety: and so they did
unanimously issue their Declaration on the 4th day of Jan^ar. last, that they
associated themselves in the necessary defense of their Lives and the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, which to their utmost powers they
would maintain, and would not prejudice even Roman Catholics whilst they
demeaned themselves according to the Laws -- The Protestants then chose the
Right Honorable Robert L. Baron of Kingstone, and the Honor. Chidley Coote, Esquire
their Commanders in chief, to whom they promised entire obedience. -- And
accordingly all were formed into Troops and Companies, and all furnished
themselves with the Men under their respective Commands, with Horses, Arms,
Ammunition, Provisions, etc. employing all the Smiths in fixing Arms, making
Pikes, Stars, and other Inventions against Horse, and to defend Forts, buying
all the Scythes, and fixing them on Poles, building up the old and decayed
Forts, making Draw bridges, ordering frontier Garrisons, keeping strong Watch
and Ward on all Quarters, at Grange near Midway to Balishannon, to hold their
Correspondence with Derry, at New-town, Dromahere, and Mannerhamelton, to have
intelligence with Enniskilling, at Dr. Leslies, at Coolooni, and Marcray, to
prevent an infal from the Boil, or Ballymoate; at Ardinglass, Lackan, and
Cottlestown, to awe the new raised Army in the County of Mayo, part of which
had seized the Bishop of Killalla's House: And when one Mr. Tremble (a Servant
of Sir Arthur Gore's) asked one Captain Walter Bourke why he would seize the
Bishop's House, and make it a Garrison, the Gate was shut upon him, and he set
upon and barbarously murdered. Likewise an Account of the Protestants, who
were at Foxford, and many other places, who were drawing to Sligo on the Orders
that issued for disarming all Protestants of the Kingdom; as also to take all
their Service-Horses, which was obeyed with that Secrecy, Diligence, and Care,
that not so much as a Plow-Horse was left; so that many a Family, for want of a
Horse to carry their Luggage, was forced to stay and submit to their merciless
Cruelty; but this Garrison relieved and conveyed many a distressed and robbed
Protestant to Sligo, who soon was recruited and put into Troop or Company at
the Officers cost. During this time there was a secret Intreague with Secretary
Ellis and Mr. Temple: As also a sham Letter from the Lord Tyrconel into England
about delivering the Sword; and had there one been sent to demand the Sword
with about a Thousand Soldiers, it is not doubted but it would be delivered,
though at the same time the Lord Montjoy (least he should stand up for the
Protestants) is Complemented with an Embassy into France.

And now the Irish getting all this time to strengthen themselves, and the Arms
and Horses taken from the Protestants, they began to increase to an Army of
90000. strong: And all this while there was neither Commission, Arms,
Ammunition, or Money sent to the Protestants at Sligo, notwithstanding that as
they were Informed, it was earnestly solicited by a Person of Quality in
England, who knew the goodness and strength of that Post they were in, and that
they daily expected some Succors, so that the Protestants there began to be in
very great want of Ammunition; and notwithstanding all their endeavors, wanted
many Arms, though all the fowling Pieces were cut into Carbines, and Smiths
continually at work. And the Sword (to which the Supreme Acknowledgment is
paid) was still undemanded in the Lord Tyrconnel's hand, and sure without
Command he would not lay it down; yet the Protestants at Sligo continued in
their own and Protestant Religions defense, according to their Declaration of
the Fourth of January, without any violation of it, and kept constant Watch and
Ward with the usual Exercise against occasion offered, only on account of
several Protestants who were stopped at Boil, and their Goods seized by Colonel
Mac Donel, who possessed himself of my Lord Kingston's House there, and likewise
on all the Corn and Hay of his Tenants near it. The said Lord Kingston writ to
the Colonel, desiring him to let the Protestants with their Goods come down,
for he did not hinder any Papist to remove to him; which not being done, my
Lord resolved to deliver those from their Restraints, and accordingly with a
considerable Party of Horse and Foot marched to Boil; but the Colonel hearing
of my Lord's coming, drew in all his Men and Horses into my Lord's House and
Court, and Capitulated, and let his Prisoners go; and engaged on Honor not to
hinder any from joining at Sligo; but no sooner was my Lord and his Party gone,
than the next day those that heard of that Engagement, and were desirous to go
thither, were all seized and kept close Prisoners till the Assizes -- About
this time, which was the 12th of March, the unlucky Declaration (pardon the
Expression) of the Second of February last, as being sent before any Army was
Landed to back it, and was there received, which gave time to all Papists to
lay down their Arms and repair to their respective Dwellings by the 10th of
April last, etc. which did so tie up all the Protestants from offering
Violence, even to those who some time before stole their Cattle, that the least
Violence was not offered them, in an absolute and entire Obedience to that
Declaration; by which means they were encouraged to have pardon for their
Villainies and Robberies, and told by the Priests, Friars and Officers, that no
Army would be sent to suppress them: and therefore till the time limited, they
should let none know their Resolutions, whether to lay down, or stand to their
Arms. -- Also the French Marquess Dupont landing in Kinsale, and going to
Dublin about this time, was splendidly entertained there by the Lord Deputy,
who assured him it would not be long till an Army Landed in Ireland out of
France, as also of King James's going thither very speedily, and a full account
of what since happened, which would not at all be credited by any Protestants,
but that an Army would land out of England before any could come from France;
but it was hoped the Marquess would not return back to France nor escape our Men
at Sea -- Intelligence being now received, and Account of the Army, and how
Affairs stood, being sent back by Monsieur, it was judged expedient to march an
Army with all speed to the North, and suppress the Protestants there.
Accordingly an Army came to Lisnegarvy which (after a little Dispute, a great
number of their Men falling on a small Party of ours) made them quit their
Ground. -- The noise of this Victory soon took wing, and gave them
encouragement to Besiege Colerain; and not being able to do any Execution on
that side, drew off their Men to march them back to get over the Bridge above
it, and so fall on that Town from the other side of the River, on which
Colerain wanting trusty and good Officers in it to Command, the Rabble with the
Inhabitants deserted and left the Town, (excepting only those that resolved to
submit to the Enemy) by which means, and the great disorder they were in to get
to Derry, many a good Horse and Arms, as well as the Riches of that Town, fell
into the Enemies hands. -- Notice of these Disasters being immediately sent
from Derry by Colonel Lundee to the Gentlemen, who kept Garrisons in their
Houses in the Counties of Monaghan, Cavan, etc. who were earnestly desired to
draw down immediately with their Men, and join Derry Men; and understanding the
Condition Derry was in, marched forthwith: And lest the Enemy should possess
themselves of their strong Houses, Goods, and Provisions, set fire to all, and
marched away by the light of it; consuming their own Goods and Houses, to join
with Derry Men, and oppose the Enemies marching thither to besiege it. And
though it might be judged, the Loyalty and Zeal of these Gentlemen need not be
questioned; yet hitherto there is but small Provisions made for them. And if it
be asked what made them come over, it is easily answered, the Divisions in Derry
amongst several there, (who hitherto have escaped being called to account for
it, may be feared, were private Instruments) and who took on them the Command,
and ordered Matters as they themselves pleased, taking no advice but that of
their own Pleasures, gave such plain occasion of distrust, that it was judged
better by those and other honest Gentlemen there, to come over and give an
Account how matters were, than to stay in disorder and Confusion, when
especially they were not able to stem the Current that so violently run against
them, and whose business it was to join and assist with the Governor, rather
than to give him public opposition, when private Advice proved vain; so that
as well to avoid mutinying with him, as to bring a Calumny on themselves, to be
so much as suspected for betraying that Interest and Religion they were not
able to defend or preserve, the Rabble being in Confusion, who sometime would
have one, another day another Officer; and sometime would join themselves, and
do as they pleased. The one part of Protestants deserting the other, and these
not able to withstand the Enemy without mutual assistance; and if they could,
not daring to trust their Governor, who was there (as well as he had been at
Colerain) when they were about seizing him, and shut the Gates on him that he
should not get away, till by his Oaths of Fidelity to them, (which he freely
gave) and a little Policy, he got off; and being under vehement Suspicions of a
private Correspondence with King James, who about this time was in Dublin, had
created such great Jealousies, Feuds and Heart burnings in the Soldiers, he
refusing to give the Command to him chosen by the People: which was of no small
Advantage to the Enemy, and daily weakened the Town, by the Desertion of those
who durst neither trust him, nor themselves under his Command.

During these disorders, Letters came to Sligo by Expresses one after another
from the Colonel, desiring my Lord Kingston to send a Party to join them at
Derry. But answer being immediately returned him, that there were not men enough
at Sligo to keep that Post (so far from all relief and) in the Face of the
Enemy, and of the want there was of Arms and Ammunition (which were then at
Derry to be had for Money.) Every Officer for himself and Men, sent for so many
as they wanted, according to their Proportions, and made a Purse, and thought
it convenient to send Captain Coote forthwith to acquaint them with the state
of the Garrison and know theirs; -- and bring Arms and Ammunition, which were
very much wanting; -- whilst another Letter came posting, to desire a speedy
joining them at Derry. But a Council being called, it was resolved to stay till
Captain Coote returned and brought the certainty how Matters were, and not to
quit that advantageous Post lightly, which cost so much Money and Work to
strengthen it, and had so many Men, Women and Children, that had from almost
all parts of Connaght flockt to it, and could not get room, nor be provided for
at Derry; and above all, was so considerable to awe all Connaght Forces, that
in case of Hardships, Succors could come by Sea, which were now daily expected
by every blast of an Easterly Wind, which was heartily wished and greedily
longed for. But straight a third Express was suddenly hastened, showing the
great Danger the North was in; and if that were lost, (as it was feared,
without Sligo-Forces joining them, it would) that Sligo could not hold out long
after, and earnestly desired to desert it; and that he had provided Quarters
and Forage ready for them there, and come immediately to their relief. On
which Express another Council was held, and knowing the great want there was of
Ammunition (not much above one Barrel of Powder being in the Garrison at
Sligo,) and the Danger that threatened them at Derry, it was resolved to join
them forthwith, and quit Sliego, and to put all to the short Issue of one
Field-Fight. Accordingly all now resolved to march with Bag and Baggage. The
next day was spent in providing Horses and Necessaries, in getting Boats,
breaking the big Guns, and sending of the small to Derry by Water; burning and
destroying all the Corn, Hay, and Haggards about the Country; calling in all
the Frontier Garrisons; -- and every one using his utmost endeavors (some by
Water to the Island of Enishmorrey, that was judged capable of defense till the
Goods and Men could get off by Water to Derry,) the rest with what Horses they
could get: so that the day following all marched; and a Vessel lying then at
Sligo, as many as could get off, with some Goods, the Wind being fair, sailed
away. But after two days March (in the saddest Weather that could blow,)
coming to Belashannon, 20 miles from Sligo, a fourth Letter comes to my Lord,
to stay him there till Quarters were provided for him, and Forage got for
Horses; which was no small surprise, after drawing him from his Post, on
Assurance of providing those necessaries, and of the distress that threatened
Derry.

A Boat also with Passengers and Goods from Sligo was cast away near Donigale,
and another sent with the Fieldpieces, by reason of the Storm put into an
Island, and the next day seized and taken back, as were all the Goods,
Provisions, Men, and Women that went into the Island, which was no small Booty.
-- But now was my Lord Kingston forced, for want of Forage, to disperse his
Men, some to Beleeke, some to Donigale, some to Killabegs (to keep Boylagh men
in Awe, who were extremely increased, and began to rob publicly on
Barnesmore,) some at Belashannon, and some about the County; and so continued
for seventeen days in a very ill condition for want of Forage, many of the
Horses being turned to Grass for want of it, and the Weather continuing
extremely bad; which so abused them, that many were made unserviceable. -- At
length a Letter comes from the Colonel to my Lord to Belashannon about ten at
night, to secure the Pass at Ballymofey (30 Miles thence) by ten next day,
which was altogether impossible to be done; -- neither could it be (under half
that time) that the men could have notice of it sent them, as they lay
scattered in their several Quarters, which formerly I mentioned; and many were
likewise to provide Horses, their own being dead, or so weak and out of
Condition for want of Forage, that they were of little use for Service:
However two Companies that were at and near Donnigale, marched in the Morning
betime to join the Northern Men, and to secure that Pass, which was 20. Miles
from them, and many hundreds of Men, Women and Children marched with them, with
Bag and Baggage in hopes to get to Derry before the Enemy intercepted them; but
this day being dismally wet, and extreme windy, and marching over that horrible
Mountain of Barnesmore, which is 15 miles long, though they marched at an
extraordinary rate, yet it was seven at night before they could reach it; and
my Lord (expecting to meet Colonel Lundy there) rid with a dozen Horse, to
discourse him, and to know why he was drawn from his Post on pretense of so
great danger? why he kept there in that bad condition so long after he had
received his Letter, that Quarters and Forage was provided for him and his
Party? why he had not notice sooner sent him of the Enemies approaching so
near? and how was it possible for him to march his Men, who lay scattered at
such a distance, under at least three days notice? but coming thither, there
was soon an account given by those, who that day were broke and fled from
Cladyford Fight, that the Colonel, with the Horse whom he commanded to go with
him to secure a Pass on the River above Cladyford, was gone to Derry; and it
was not much questioned but the Enemy, who soon fell into Rapho, killing Men in
the very Streets there, would be as soon at the Gate, and enter, as the
Colonel. -- And it is not much to be doubted, that had the Irish Army Liberty
of getting over that Ford, which they could not possibly do, without great
danger of their Lives, the Water being so very high with that days rain, and
the Bridge being broken down, that if they could have marched over and pursued
their Victory, they would have got in without great (if any) opposition; for
Colonel Cunningham, with the Succors sent by him for the relief and defense of
the Town, had set sail, and reurned: and it was not doubted but Derry as well
as Colerain, would be left to them by the Colonel, in regard that neither Men
nor Arms were landed: -- And now this Party thus disappointed at Ballemofey,
and the Enemy in Rapho between them and Derry, after this days sad March, were
now forced to return that night, over that wild Mountain; and Horses being weak
and weary with the long March and bad weather, could not get back that night,
but were left with Loads and all: So that by much difficulty, and by the great
care the two Companies of Foot (who brought up the Rear) took to bring off the
Women and Children, who were sadly toiled and tired, many of them would have
been left and lost, as almost all their Goods and Baggage were. -- And next
Morning got back to Donigale, with much difficulty and distress, by reason of
the badness of the Weather, as well as that of the way, and the Darkness,
Windiness, and Rain, contributing not a little to the Hazards and Losses they
sustained. -- And now consulting what was to be done in these Disorders, or
rather treacherous Practices, it was concluded that my Lord Kingston (with the
Officers of his appointment that were there with him) should come off in three
or four Vessels that lay at Killabeggs, and hasten over and give an account how
matters were, and get Commissions and return with all speed to their Friends,
Relations and Tenants, whom they mounted and armed and sent straight to join
Eniskillin Men; which was no small trouble to them, that after about four
months cost, sufferings, and acquaintance, they must now part, having neither
Arms, Ammunition, nor Supplies sent them: but it was now plain, that the
Colonel (who knew very well that King James was near his Army) which gave clear
occasions of distrust, and that the private underhand intelligence he held
would be to the ruin of the Protestants; and the day after the Lord Kingston,
the wind being fair, set sail. But to relate the miseries and hardships they
endured at sea, lying a Shipboard like packt Herrings in their Boots and wet
Clothes for six or seven days, and twice like to be cast away on the Scotch
Shore; and thence getting to Glasgow in small Boats, some again riding post to
London with my Lord, others going to Edinburgh, and then by Sea, some afoot to
Leverpool above 200 miles, others again venturing, thither by Sea, who ever
since have been waiting, petitioning, and expecting to return with Commissions
for themselves as well as for some of their Friends, who have given the World
satisfaction of their Courage and Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and whose
Names ought to be honored with a perpetual Remembrance of their Actions. And
if the Archbishop of Tuam or Bishop of Killalla, who very well knows my Lord,
with the Gentlemen that came over with him, and what they did and suffered
whilst they were at Sligo, be enquired of the truth of this matter, that
certainly persons who are provided for, and who never showed that Zeal would
not be preferred, and these (not only neglected, by which means they suffer
many hardships, but) even discountenanced, by being called Deserters of their
Country; and whether this usage be not a Trial of their Zeal, I leave to any
one to judge: also on due enquiry, or after what is said, if they for coming
over, or the Person who drew them from their Post, who by their Majesty's
Commission, was Governor of Derry, and who hazarded their Lives and Fortunes
to join with him, without Commissions to oppose the Enemy, to be so served, or
he be most to blame? -- Or whether they who know the Mountains, Creeks and
Passes, as well as the notorious bloody Rebels and Cow-stealers, who have most
of their nearest Relations, either hazarding their Lives against them, or under
their Power, at least in restraint, with cruel usage and hardships enough, if
they have yet escaped with their Lives: whether also that these Gentlemen, who
have left their Goods, and come over, some with a very little Money, Plate, or
other Movables of value, which is now all spent; and some who have a great
Charge of eight or ten in Family, who in probability might have starved many of
them, had not that charitable Course been taken for their support; that is, who
cannot raise Money here for want of City-security; neither their own (tho they
have good Estates in Ireland) nor the Gentlemen thence to be taken bound for
them; whether, I say, these be able to return for want of Horses, Arms, or
Necessaries to carry them over, having spent all, and to carry a Musket, and
leave their Families in want, and wholly unsettled and wanting Bread, would not
only be bad encouragement for them, but that Pay would neither maintain them,
nor scarce any one of their Family; and whether a due consideration and regard
be not to be had of those so quallified for Employments, and Persons of known
Courage and Zeal for the Protestant Religion, of whom there are many unprovided
for of any Employment, which would be a great ease to England in the several
Sums paid for the Relief of those Protestants, who are now here in no capacity
nor ability for providing for themselves, tho they are sufficiently zealous for
their Majesty's Service.

And whether a farther delay may not be prejudicial as Matters stand,
considering that for want of a speedy relieving of Ireland, and not sending
over but about 100. Officers, and one to Command in Chief with Arm, Ammunition,
Commissions, and Money in January, February, March, or April last, that Kingdom
had not been wholly in the Protestants hands, notwithstanding all the French
Army since Landed, as well as that raised by Tyrconnel, and if it had not
prevented the ruin, Destruction, Desolation, and Cruelties, which the
Protestants there have since suffered?

And now it is hoped it may not be amiss to inspect and enquire who the
Retarders are; and to do it so effectually, that they at length be frustrated
of carrying on any farther Designs, to the Apparent ruin of the Protestants,
and to bring them to Condign Punishments for the Blood and Miseries many
Thousands have suffered by the Irish and French Cruelties, who were the
Instruments who occasioned it. And whether they did not endeavor by such
Practices to Establish Popery, as well as Confusion.

May they therefore be found out and made Examples for their Perfidy. May their
Sacred Majesty's ever be happy and defend the Protestant Religion from Popery
and Superstition, and have the Hearts of all their Subjects entirely united to
them, whilst all Ackitophels justly suffer. May England with all their
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions flourish under Peace and Safety, whilst we
Bless God for his great Deliverances he wrought for us, in Placing their
Majesty's on the Royal Throne. May the Poor Protestants of Ireland Bless the
Almighty, who they hope has raised a Deliverer for them, that they may return
in Peace to enjoy their Possessions; that they may make the right and
Sanctified use of their Afflictions, so that they and their Children may never
forget the great Deliverances wrought for them: Whilst the Irish and French be
turned out of that Land, and receive their just demerits, and that Religion and
true Piety, may ever flourish and be established among us for all Generations.
And may Duke Schomberg have this also added to his former Renowned Acts, to
prove the Deliverer, first of the Irish Protestants, and then of the French in
France.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
THe Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland, to a late Letter from N. N.
upon a Discourse betwixt them concerning the present Posture of that Country,
and the Part fit for those concerned there to Act in it.

An Aplogy for the Protestants in Ireland, in a Brief Narrative of the late
Revolutions in that Kingdom, and an Account of the Present State thereof.

The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland, Humbly presented to
the Parliament of England by G. P. Esquire

There is in the Press, and will be shortly Published
A Full and Impartial Account of all the Secret Consults, Negotiations,
Stratagems, and Intrigues of the Romish Party ^n Ireland, from 1660 to this
present year 1689. for the Settlement of Popery in tha Kingdom.


