A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measures of Friendship, With Rules of
conducting it.

Written in answer to a Letter from the most ingenious and virtuous M. K. P.

By J. T. D.D.

(...).

Dion. orat. 1. de regno.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1657.

To which are added Two Letters written to persons newly changed in their
Religion.

The first to a Gentlewoman seduced to the Roman Church,

The other to a person returning t ^he Church of England.

By J. T. D.D.

Volo Solidum Perenne.

A Discourse of the Nature and Offices of Friendship. In a Letter to the most
ingenious and excellent M. K. P.
Madam,
THe wise Bensirach advised that we should not consult with a woman concerning
her of whom she is jealous, neither with a coward in matters of war, nor with
a merchant concerning exchange; and some other instances he gives of interested
persons, to whom he would not have us hearken in any matter of Counsel. For
where ever the interest is secular or vicious, there the bias is not on the
side of truth or reason, because these are seldom served by profit and low
regards. But to consult with a friend in the matters of friendship is like
consulting with a spiritual person in Religion; they who understand the secrets
of Religion, or the interior beauties of friendship are the fittest to give
answers in all inquiries concerning the respective subjects; because reason and
experience are on the side of interest; and that which in friendship is most
pleasing, and most useful is also most reasonable and most true; and a friends
fairest interest is the best measure of the conducting friendships: and
therefore you who are so eminent in friendships could also have given the best
answer to your own inquiries, and you could have trusted your own reason,
because it is not only greatly instructed by the direct notices of things, but
also by great experience in the matter of which you now inquire.

But because I will not use any thing that shall look like an excuse, I will
rather give you such an account which you can easily reprove, then by declining
your commands, seem more safe in my prudence, then open and communicative in my
friendship to you.

You first inquire how far a Dear and a perfect friendship is authorized by the
principles of Christianity?

To this I answer; that the word [ Friendship] in the sense we commonly mean by
it, is not so much as named in the New Testament; and our Religion takes no
notice of it. You think it strange; but read on before you spend so much as the
beginning of a passion or a wonder upon it. There is mention of [ friendship of
the world,] and it is said to be enmity with God; but the word is no where else
named, or to any other purpose in all the New Testament. It speaks of friends
often; but by friends are meant, our acquaintance, or our Kindred, the
relatives of our family or our fortune, or our sect; something of society, or
something of kindness there is in it; a tenderness of appellation and Civility,
a relation made by gifts, or by duty, by services and subjection; and I think,
I have reason to be confident, that the word friend (speaking of humane
intercourse) is no otherwise used in the Gospels or Epistles, or Acts of the
Apostles: and the reason of it is, the word friend is of a large signification;
and means all relations and societies, and whatsoever is not enemy; but by
friendships, I suppose you mean, the greatest love, and the greatest
usefulness, and the most open communication, and the noblest sufferings and the
most exemplar faithfulness, and the severest truth, and the heartiest counsel,
and the greatest Union of minds, of which brave men and women are capable. But
then I must tell you that Christianity has new Christened it, and calls this
Charity. The Christian knows no enemy he has; that is, though persons may be
injurious to him, and unworthy in themselves, yet he knows none whom he is not
first bound to forgive which is indeed to make them on his part to be no
enemies, that is, to make that the word enemy shall not be perfectly contrary
to friend, it shall not be a relative term and signify something on each hand,
a relative and a correlative; and then he knows none whom he is not bound to
love and pray for, to treat kindly and justly, liberally and obligingly.
Christian Charity is friendship to all the world; and when friendships were the
noblest things in the world, charity was little, like the sun drawn in at a
chinke, or his beams drawn into the Center of a burning-glass; but Christian
charity is friendship, expanded like the face of the sun when it mounts above
the Eastern hills: and I was strangely pleased when I saw something of this in
Cicero; for I have been so pushed at by herds and flocks of people that follow
any body that whistles to them, or drives them to pasture, that I am grown
afraid of any truth that seems chargeable with singularity: but therefore I
say, glad I was when I saw Laelius in Cicero discourse thus. Amicitia ex
infinitate generis humani quam conciliavit ipsa natura, contracta res est, and
adducta in angustum; ut omnis charitas, aut inter duos, aut inter paucos
jungeretur. Nature has made friendships, and societies, relations and
endearments; and by something or other we relate to all the world; there is
enough in every man that is willing, to make him become our friend; but when
men contract friendships, they enclose the Commons; and what Nature intended
should be every man's, we make proper to two or three. Friendship is like rivers
and the strand of seas, and the air, common to all the world; but Tyrants, and
evil customs, wars, and want of love have made them proper and peculiar. But
when Christianity came to renew our nature, and to restore our laws, and to
increase her privileges, and to make her aptness to become religion, then it
was declared that our friendships were to be as universal as our conversation;
that is, actual to all with whom we converse, and potentially extended unto
those with whom we did not. For he who was to treat his enemies with
forgiveness and prayers, and love and beneficence was indeed to have no
enemies, and to have all friends.

So that to your question, how far a Dear and perfect friendship is authorized
by the principles of Christianity? The answer is ready and easy. It is
warranted to extend to all mankind; and the more we love, the better we are,
and the greater our friendships are, the dearer we are to God; let them be as
Dear, and let them be as perfect, and let them be as many as you can; there is
no danger in it; only where the restraint begins, there begins our
imperfection; it is not ill that you entertain brave friendships and worthy
societies: it were well if you could love, and if you could benefit all
mankind; for I conceive that is the sum of all friendships.

I confess this is not to be expected of us in this world; but as all our
graces here are but imperfect, that is, at the best they are but tendencies to
glory, so our friendships are imperfect too, and but beginnings of a celestial
friendship, by which we shall love every one as much as they can be loved. But
then so we must here in our proportion; and indeed that is it that can make the
difference; we must be friends to all: That is, apt to do good, loving them
really, and doing to them all the benefits which we can, and which they are
capable of. The friendship is equal to all the world, and of it self has no
difference; but is differenced only by accidents and by the capacity or
incapacity of them that receive it: Nature and the Religion are the bands of
friendships; excellency and usefulness are its great indearments: society and
neighborhood, that is, the possibilities and the circumstances of converse are
the determinations and actualities of it. Now when men either are unnatural, or
irreligious, they will not be friends; when they are neither excellent nor
useful, they are not worthy to be friends; when they are strangers or unknown,
they cannot be friends actually and practically; but yet, as any man has any
thing of the good, contrary to those evils, so he can have and must have his
share of friendship. For thus the Sun is the eye of the World; and he is
indifferent to the Negro, or the cold Russian, to them that dwell under the
line, and them that stand near the Tropicks, the scalded Indian or the poor boy
that shakes at the foot of the Riphean hills; but the fluxures of the heaven
and the earth, the convenience of abode, and the approaches to the North or
South respectively change the emanations of his beams; not that they do not
pass always from him, but that they are not equally received below, but by
periods and changes, by little inlets and reflections, they receive what they
can; and some have only a dark day and a long night from him, snowes and white
cattle, a miserable life, and a perpetual harvest of Catarrhes and
consumptions, apoplexies and dead-palsies; but some have splendid fires, and
aromatic spices, rich wines, and well digested fruits, great wit and great
courage; because they dwell in his eye, and look in his face, and are the
Courtiers of the Sun, and wait upon him in his Chambers of the East; just so is
it in friendships: some are worthy, and some are necessary; some dwell hard by
and are fitted for converse; Nature joins some to us, and Religion combines us
with others; society and accidents, parity of fortune, and equal dispositions
do actuate our friendships: which of themselves and in their prime disposition
are prepared for all mankind according as any one can receive them. We see this
best exemplified by two instances and expressions of friendships and charity:
viz. Alms and Prayers; Every one that needs relief is equally the object of
our charity; but though to all mankind in equal needs we ought to be alike in
charity; yet we signify this severally and by limits, and distinct measures:
the poor man that is near me, he whom I meet, he whom I love, he whom I fancy,
he who did me benefit, he who relates to my family, he rather then another,
because my expressions being finite and narrow, and cannot extend to all in
equal significations, must be appropriate to those whose circumstances best fit
me: and yet even to all I give my alms: to all the world that needs them; I
pray for all mankind, I am grieved at every sad story I hear; I am troubled
when I hear of a pretty bride murdered in her bride-chamber by an ambitious and
enraged Rival; I shed a tear when I am told that a brave King was
misunderstood, then slandered, then imprisoned, and then put to death by evil
men: and I can never read the story of the Parisian Massacre, or the Sicilian
vespers, but my blood curdles and I am disordered by two or three affections. A
good man is a friend to all the world; and he is not truly charitable that does
not wish well, and do good to all mankind in what he can; but though we must
pray for all men, yet we say special Letanies for brave Kings and holy
Prelates, and the wise Guides of souls; for our Brethren and Relations, our
Wives and Children.

The effect of this consideration is, that the Universal friendship of which I
speak, must be limited, because we are so: In those things where we stand next
to immensity and infinity, as in good wishes and prayers, and a readiness to
benefit all mankind, in these our friendships must not be limited; but in other
things which pass under our hand or eye, our voices and our material exchanges,
our hands can reach no further but to our arms end, and our voices can but
sound till the next air be quiet, and therefore they can have intercourse but
within the sphere of their own activity; our needs and our conversations are
served by a few, and they cannot reach to all; where they can, they must; but
where it is impossible it cannot be necessary. It must therefore follow, that
our friendships to mankind may admit variety as does our conversation; and as
by nature we are made sociable to all, so we are friendly; but as all cannot
actually be of our society, so neither can all be admitted to a special,
actual friendship; Of some entercourses all men are capable, but not of all;
Men can pray for one another, and abstain from doing injuries to all the world,
and be desirous to do all mankind good, and love all men; Now this friendship
we must pay to all because we can, but if we can do no more to all, we must
show our readiness to do more good to all by actually doing more good to all
them to whom we can.

To some we can, and therefore there are nearer friendships to some then to
others, according as there are natural or civil nearnesses, relations and
societies; and as I cannot express my friendships to all in equal measures and
significations, that is, as I cannot do benefits to all alike, so neither am I
tied to love all alike: for although there is much reason to love every man;
yet there are more reasons to love, some then others, and if I must love
because there is reason I should; then I must love more, where there is more
reason; and where there is a special affection and a great readiness to do good
and to delight in certain persons toward each other, there is that special
charity and indearment which Philosophy calls friendships; but our Religion
calls love or charity. Now if the inquiry be concerning this special
friendship. 1. how it can be appropriate, that is, who to be chosen to it; 2
how far it may extend; that is, with what expressions signified; 3 how
conducted? The answers will depend upon such considerations which will be
neither useless nor unpleasant.

1. There may be a special friendship contracted for any special excellency
whatsoever, because friendships are nothing but love and society mixed together;
that is, a conversing with them whom we love; now for whatsoever we can love
any one, for that we can be his friend; and since every excellency is a degree
of amability, every such worthiness is a just and proper motive of friendship,
or loving conversation. But yet in these things there is an order and
proportion. Therefore

2. A Good man is the best friend, and therefore soonest to be chosen, longer
to be retained; and indeed never to be parted with; unless he cease to be that
for which he was chosen. (...)
(...).
Where virtue dwells there friendships make,
But evil neighbourhoods forsake.
But although virtue alone is the worthiest cause of amability, and can weigh
down any one consideration; and therefore to a man that is virtuous every man
ought to be a friend; yet I do not mean the severe, and philosophical
excellencies of some morose persons who are indeed wise unto themselves and
exemplar to others: by virtue here I do not mean justice and temperance,
charity and devotion; for these I am to love the man, but friendship is
something more then that: Friendship is the nearest love and the nearest
society of which the persons are capable: Now justice is a good intercourse for
Merchants, as all men are that buy and sell; and temperance makes a Man good
company, and helps to make a wise man; but a perfect friendship requires
something else, these must be in him that is chosen to be my friend; but for
these I do not make him my privado; that is, my special and peculiar friend:
but if he be a good man, then he is properly fitted to be my correlative in the
noblest combination.

And for this we have the best warrant in the world: For a just man scarcely
will a man die; the Syriac interpreter reads it, (...) for an unjust man
scarcely will a man die; that is, a wicked man is at no hand fit to receive the
expression of the greatest friendship; but all the Greek copies that ever I
saw, or read of, read it as we do; for a righteous man or a just man that is,
justice and righteousness is not the nearest indearment of friendship; but for
a good man some will even dare to die: that is, for a man that is sweetly
disposed, ready to do acts of goodness and to oblige others, to do things
useful and profitable, for a loving man, a beneficent, bountiful man, one who
delights in doing good to his friend, such a man may have the highest
friendship; he may have a friend that will die for him. And this is the meaning
of Laelius: Virtue may be despised, so may Learning and Nobility; at una est
amicitia in rebus humanis de cujus utilitate omnes consentiunt: only friendship
is that thing, which because all know to be useful and profitable, no man can
despise; that is (...), or (...), goodness or beneficence makes friendships.
For if he be a good man he will love where he is beloved, and that is the first
tie of friendship. (...).
That was the commendation of the bravest friendship in Theocritus They loved
each other with a love
That did in all things equal prove.
-- (...)
(...)
The world was under Saturns reign
Wen he that loved was loved again.


For it is impossible this neerness of friendship can be where there is not
mutual love; but this is secured if I choose a good man; for he that is apt
enough to begin alone, will never be behind in the relation and
correspondency; and therefore I like the Gentiles Letany well. (...)
(...)
Let God give friends to me for my reward,
Who shall my love with equal love regard;
Happy are they, who when they give their heart,
Find such as in exchange their own impart.
But there is more in it then this felicity amounts to. For (...) the good man
is a profitable, useful person, and that is the band of an effective friendship.
For I do not think that friendships are Metaphysical nothings, created for
contemplation, or that men or women should stare upon each others faces, and
make dialogues of news and prettinesses, and look babies in one another eyes.
Friendship is the allay of our sorrows, the ease of our passions, the discharge
of our oppressions, the sanctuary to our calamities, the counselor of our
doubts, the clarity of our minds, the emission of our thoughts, the exercise
and improvement of what we meditate: And although I love my friend because he
is worthy, yet he is not worthy if he can do no good. I do not speak of
accidental hindrances and misfortunes by which the bravest man may become
unable to help his Child; but of the natural and artificial capacities of the
man. He only is fit to be chosen for a friend, who can do those offices for
which friendship is excellent. For (mistake not) no man can be loved for
himself; our perfections in this world cannot reach so high; it is well if we
would love God at that rate, and I very much fear, that if God did us no good,
we might admire his Beauties, but we should have but a small proportion of love
toward him; and therefore it is, that God to endear the obedience, that is,
the love of his servants signifies what benefits he gives us, what great good
things he does for us. I am the Lord God that brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt: and does Job serve God for naught? And he that comes to God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder: all his other greatnesses are
objects of fear and wonder, it is his goodness that makes him lovely: and so it
is in friendships. He only is fit to be chosen for a friend who can give me
counsel, or defend my cause, or guide me right, or relieve my need, or can and
will, when I need it, do me good: only this I add: into the heaps of doing
good, I will reckon [ loving me] for it is a pleasure to be beloved; but when
his love signifies nothing but Kissing my Cheek or talking kindly, and can go
no further, it is a prostitution of the bravery of friendship to spend it upon
impertinent people who are (it may be) loads to their families, but can never
ease my loads: but my friend is a worthy person when he can become to me
instead of God, a guide or a support, an eye, or a hand; a staff, or a rule:
There must be in friendship something to distinguish it from a Companion, and a
Countryman, from a School-fellow or a Gossip, from a Sweetheart or a
Fellow-traveller: Friendship may look in at any one of these doors, but it
stays not any where till it come to be the best thing in the world: and when
we consider that one man is not better then another, neither toward God nor
Man, but by doing better and braver things, we shall also see, that that which
is most beneficent is also most excellent; and therefore those friendships must
needs be most perfect, where the friends can be most useful. For men cannot be
useful but by worthinesses in the several instances: a fool cannot be relied
upon for counsel; nor a vicious person for the advantages of virtue, nor a
beggar for relief, nor a stranger for conduct, nor a tatler to keep a secret,
nor a pittiless person trusted with my complaint, nor a covetous man with my
childs fortune, nor a false person without a witness, nor a suspicious person
with a private design; nor him that I fear with the treasures of my love: But
he that is wise and virtuous, rich and at hand, close and merciful, free of
his money and tenacious of a secret, open and ingenuous, true and honest, is of
himself an excellent man; and therefore fit to be loved; and he can do good to
me in all capacities where I can need him, and therefore is fit to be a friend.
I confess we are forced in our friendships to abate some of these ingredients;
but full measures of friendship, would have full measures of worthiness; and
according as any defect is in the foundation; in the relation also there may be
imperfection: and indeed I shall not blame the friendship so it be worthy,
though it be not perfect; not only because friendship is charity, which cannot
be perfect here, but because there is not in the world a perfect cause of
perfect friendship.

If you can suspect that this discourse can suppose friendship to be mercenary,
and to be defective in the greatest worthiness of it, which is to love our
friend for our friends sake (for so Scipio said, that it was against friendship
to say, ita amare oportere ut aliquando esset usurus, that we ought so to love,
that we may also some times make use of a friend:) I shall easily be able to
defend my self; because I speak of the election and reasons of choosing
friends: after he is chosen do as nobly as you talk, and love as purely as you
dream, and let your conversation be as metaphysical as your discourse, and
proceed in this method, till you be confuted by experience; yet till then, the
case is otherwise when we speak of choosing one to be my friend: He is not my
friend till I have chosen him, or loved him; and if any man enquires whom he
shall choose or whom he should love, I suppose it ought not to be answered,
that we should love him who has least amability; that we should choose him who
has least reason to be chosen: But if it be answered, he is to be chosen to be
my friend who is most worthy in himself, not he that can do most good to me; I
say, here is a distinction but no difference; for he is most worthy in himself
who can do most good; and if he can love me too, that is, if he will do me all
the good he can, or that I need, then he is my friend and he deserves it. And
it is impossible from a friend to separate a will to do me good: and therefore
I do not choose well, if I choose one that has not power; for if it may
consist with the nobleness of friendship to desire that my friend be ready to
do me benefit or support, it is not sense to say, it is ignoble to desire he
should really do it when I need; and if it were not for pleasure or profit, we
might as well be without a friend as have him.

Among all the pleasures and profits, the sensual pleasure and the matter of
money are the lowest and the least; and therefore although they may sometimes
be used in friendship, and so not wholly excluded from the consideration of him
that is to choose, yet of all things they are to be the least regarded; (...)
When fortune frowns upon a man,
A friend does more then money can.
For there are besides these, many profits and many pleasures; and because
these only are sordid, all the other are noble and fair and the expectations of
them no disparagements to the best friendships. For can any wise or good man be
angry if I say, I chose this man to be my friend, because he is able to give me
counsel, to restrain my wanderings, to comfort me in my sorrows; he is pleasant
to me in private, and useful in public; he will make my joys double, and
divide my grief between himself and me? For what else should I choose? For
being a fool, and useless; for a pretty face or a smooth chin; I confess it is
possible to be a friend to one that is ignorant, and pitiable, handsome and
good for nothing, that eats well, and drinks deep: but he cannot be a friend to
me; and I love him with a fondness or a pity, but it cannot be a noble
friendship. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...). said Menander.
By wine and mirth and every days delight
We choose our friends, to whom we think we might
Our souls entrust; but fools are they that lend
Their bosom to the shadow of a friend.
(...). Plutarch calls such friendships, the Idols and Images of friendship.
True and brave friendships are between worthy persons; and there is in mankind
no degree of worthiness, but is also a degree of usefulness, and by every thing
by which a man is excellent, I may be profited: and because those are the
bravest friends which can best serve the ends of friendships, either we must
suppose that friendships are not the greatest comforts in the world, or else we
must say, he chooses his friend best, that chooses such a one by whom he can
receive the greatest comforts and assistances.

3. This being the measure of all friendships; they all partake of excellency,
according as they are fitted to this measure: a friend may be counseled well
enough though his friend be not the wisest man in the world, and he may be
pleased in his society though he be not the best natured man in the world; but
still it must be, that something excellent is, or is apprehended, or else it
can be no worthy friendship; because the choice is imprudent and foolish.
Choose for your friend him that is wise and good, and secret and just,
ingenuous and honest; and in those things which have a latitude, use your own
liberty; but in such things which consist in an indivisible point, make no
abatements: That is, you must not choose him to be your friend that is not
honest and secret, just and true to a tittle; but if he be wise at all, and
useful in any degree, and as good as you can have him, you need not be ashamed
to own your friendships; though sometimes you may be ashamed of some
imperfections of your friend.

4. But if you yet enquire further, whether fancy may be an ingredient in your
choice? I answer, that fancy may minister to this as to all other actions in
which there is a liberty and variety; and we shall find that there may be
peculiarities and little partialities, a friendship, improperly so called,
entering upon accounts of an innocent passion and a pleased fancy; even our
Blessed Savior himself loved S. John and Lazarus by a special love, which was
signified by special treatments; and of the young man that spoke well and
wisely to Christ, it is affirmed, Jesus loved him: that is, he fancied the man;
and his soul had a certain cognation and similitude of temper and inclination.
For in all things where there is a latitude, every faculty will endeavor to be
pleased, and sometimes the meanest persons in a house have a festival; even
sympathies and natural inclinations to some persons, and a conformity of
humors, and proportionable loves, and the beauty of the face, and a witty
answer may first strike the flint and kindle a spark, which if it falls upon
tender and compliant natures may grow into a flame; but this will never be
maintained at the rate of friendship, unless it be fed by pure materials, by
worthinesses which are the food of friendship. Where these are not, men and
women may be pleased with one another company, and lie under the same roof,
and make themselves companions of equal prosperities, and humor their friend;
but if you call this friendship, you give a sacred name to humor or fancy; for
there is a Platonic friendship as well as a Platonic love; but they being but
the Images of more noble bodies are but like tinsell dressings, which will show
bravely by candlelight, and do excellently in a mask, but are not fit for
conversation, and the material entercourses of our life. These are the
prettinesses of prosperity and good natured wit; but when we speak of
friendship, which is the best thing in the world (for it is love and
beneficence; it is charity that is fitted for society) we cannot suppose a
brave pile should be built up with nothing; and they that build Castles in the
air, and look upon friendship, as upon a fine Romance, a thing that pleases
the fancy, but is good for nothing else, will do well when they are asleep, or
when they are come to Elysium; and for ought I know in the mean time may be as
much in love with Mandana in the Grand Cyrus, as with the Countess of Exeter;
and by dreaming of perfect and abstracted friendships, make them so immaterial
that they perish in the handling and become good for nothing.

But I know not whither I was going; I did only mean to say that because
friendship is that by which the world is most blessed and receives most good,
it ought to be chosen amongst the worthiest persons, that is, amongst those
that can do greatest benefit to each other; and though in equal worthiness I
may choose by my eye, or ear, that is, into the consideration of the essential
I may take in also the accidental and extrinsick worthinesses; yet I ought to
give every one their just value; when the internal beauties are equal, these
shall help to weigh down the scale, and I will love a worthy friend that can
delight me as well as profit me, rather then him who cannot delight me at all,
and profit me no more; but yet I will not weigh the gayest flowers, or the
wings of butterflies against wheat; but when I am to choose wheat, I may take
that which looks the brightest: I had rather see Time and Roses, Marjoram and
July flowers that are fair and sweet and medicinal, then the prettiest Tulips
that are good for nothing: And my Sheep and Kine are better servants then
race-Horses and Grayhounds: And I shall rather furnish my study with Plutarch
and Cicero, with Livy and Polybius, then with Cassandra and Ibrahim Bassa; and
if I do give an hour to these for divertisement or pleasure, yet I will dwell
with them that can instruct me and make me wise, and eloquent, severe and
useful to my self, and others. I end this with the saying of Laelius in
Cicero: Amicitia non debet consequi utilitatem, sed amicitiam utilitas. When I
choose my friend, I will not stay till I have received a kindness; but I will
choose such a one that can do me many if I need them: But I mean such
kindnesses which make me wiser, and which make me better; that is, I will when
I choose my friend, choose him that is the bravest, the worthiest and the most
excellent person: and then your first Question is soon answered; to love such a
person and to contract such friendships is just so authorized by the principles
of Christianity, as it is warranted to love wisdom and virtue, goodness and
beneficence, and all the impresses of God upon the spirits of brave men.

2. The next inquiry is how far it may extend? That is, by what expressions it
may be signified? I find that David and Jonathan loved at a strange rate; they
were both good men; though it happened that Jonathan was on the obliging side;
but here the expressions were; Jonathan watched for David's good; told him of
his danger, and helped him to escape; took part with David's innocence against
his Fathers malice and injustice; and beyond all this, did it to his own
prejudice; and they two stood like two feet supporting one body; though
Jonathan knew that David would prove like the foot of a Wrastler, and would
supplant him, not by any unworthy or unfriendly action, but it was from God;
and he gave him his hand to set him upon his own throne.

We find his paralels in the Gentile stories: young Athenodorus having divided
the estate with his Brother Xenon; divided it again when Xenon had spent his
own share; and Lucullus would not take the Consulship till his younger brother
had first enjoyed it for a year; but Pollux divided with Castor his
immortality; and you know who offered himself to death being pledge for his
friend; and his friend by performing his word rescued him a bravely: and when
we find in Scripture that for a good man some will even dare to die; and that
Aquila and Priscilla laid their necks down for S. Paul; and the Galatians would
have given him their very eyes, that is, every thing that was most dear to
them, and some others were near unto death for his sake; and that it is a
precept of Christian charity, to lay down our lives for our Brethren, that is,
those who were combined in a cause of Religion, who were united with the same
hopes, and imparted to each other ready assistances, and grew dear by common
sufferings, we need enquire no further for the expressions of friendships:
Greater love then this has no man, then that he lay down his life for his
friends; and this we are obliged to do in some Cases for all Christians; and
therefore we may do it for those who are to us in this present and imperfect
state of things, that which all the good men and women in the world shall be in
Heaven, that is, in the state of perfect friendships. This is the biggest; but
then it includes and can suppose all the rest; and if this may be done for all,
and in some cases must for any one of the multitude, we need not scruple
whether we may do it, for those who are better then a multitude. But as for the
thing it self, it is not easily and lightly to be done; and a man must not die
for humor, nor expend so great a Jewel for a trifle: (...): said Philo; we will
hardly die when it is for nothing, when no good, no worthy end is served, and
become a Sacrifice to redeem a footboy. But we may not give our life to redeem
another: unless.

1. The party for whom we die be a worthy and a useful person; better for the
public or better for Religion, and more useful to others then my self. Thus
Ribischius the German died bravely when he became a Sacrifice for his Master,
Maurice Duke of Saxony; Covering his Masters body with his own, that he might
escape the fury of the Turkish Soldiers. Succurram perituro, sed ut ipse non
peream, nisi si futurus ero magni hominis, aut magnae rei merces; said Seneca.
I will help a dying person if I can; but I will not die my self for him,
unless by my death I save a brave man, or become the price of a great thing;
that is, I will die for a Prince, for the republic, or to save an Army as
David exposed himself to combat with the Philistin for the redemption of the
Host of Israel: And in this sense, that is true; Praestat ut pereat unus, quam
Unitas, better that one perish then a multitude. 2. A man dies bravely when he
gives his temporal life to save the soul of any single person in the Christian
world. It is a worthy exchange, and the glorification of that love by which
Christ gave his life for every soul. Thus he that reproves an erring Prince
wisely and necessarily, he that affirms a fundamental truth, or stands up for
the glory of the Divine attributes, though he die for it, becoms a worthy
sacrifice. 3. These are duty, but it may be heroic and full of Christian
bravery, to give my life to rescue a noble and a brave friend; though I my
self be as worthy a man as he; because the preference of him is an act of
humility in me; and of friendship toward him; Humility and Charity making a
pious difference where art and nature have made all equal.

Some have fancied other measures of treating our friends. One sort of men say
that we are to expect that our friends should value us as we value our selves:
which if it were to be admitted, will require that we make no friendships with
a proud man; and so far indeed were well; but then this proportion does
exclude also humble men who are most to be valued, and the rather because they
undervalue themselves.

Others say that a friend is to value his friend as much as his friend values
him; but neither is this well or safe, wise or sufficient; for it makes
friendship a mere bargain, and is something like the Country weddings in some
places where I have been; where the bridegroom and the bride must meet in the
half way, and if they fail a step, they retire and break the match: It is not
good to make a reckoning in friendship; that is merchandise, or it may be
gratitude, but not noble friendship; in which each part strives to outdo the
other in significations of an excellent love: And amongst true friends there is
no fear of losing any thing.

But that which amongst the old Philosophers comes nearest to the right, is
that we love our friends as we love our selves. If they had meant it as our
Blessed Savior did, of that general friendship by which we are to love all
mankind, it had been perfect and well; or if they had meant it of the inward
affection, or of outward justice; but because they meant it of the most
excellent friendships, and of the outward significations of it, it cannot be
sufficient: for a friend may and must sometimes do more for his friend then he
would do for himself. Some men will perish before they will beg or petition
for themselves to some certain persons; but they account it noble to do it for
their friend, and they will want rather then their friend shall want; and they
will be more earnest in praise or dispraise respectively for their friend then
for themselves. And indeed I account that one of the greatest demonstrations of
real friendship is, that a friend can really endeavor to have his friend
advanced in honor, in reputation, in the opinion of wit or learning before
himself. Martial. l. 8. ep. 18.
Aurum and opes, and rura frequens donabit amicus:
Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit.
Sed tibi tantus inest veteris respectus amici
Carior ut mea sit quam tua fama tibi.
Lands, gold and trifles many give or lend;
But he that stoops in fame is a rare friend:
In friendships orb thou art the brightest star
Before thy fame mine thou preferrest far.
But then be pleased to think that therefore I so highly value this
signification of friendship, because I so highly value humility. Humility and
Charity are the two greatest graces in the world; and these are the greatest
ingredients which constitute friendship and express it.

But there needs no other measures of friendship but that it may be as great as
you can express it; beyond death it cannot go, to death it may, when the cause
is reasonable and just, charitable and religious: and yet if there be any thing
greater then to suffer death (and pain and shame to some are more insufferable)
a true and noble friendship shrinks not at the greatest trials.

And yet there is a limit even to friendship. It must be as great as our friend
fairly needs in all things where we are not tied up by a former duty, to God,
to our selves, or some pre-obliging relative. When Pollux heard some body
whisper a reproach against his Brother Castor, he killed the slanderer with his
fist: That was a zeal which his friendship could not warrant. Nulla est
excusatio si amiei causa peccaveris said Cicero. No friendship can excuse a
sin: And this the braver Romans instanced in the matter of duty to their
Country. It is not lawful to fight on our friends part against our Prince or
Country; and therefore when Caius Blosius of Cuma in the sedition of Gracchus
appeared against his Country, when he was taken he answered, that he loved
Tiberius Gracchus so dearly, that he thought fit to follow him whithersoever he
lead; and begged pardon upon that account. They who were his Judges were so
noble, that though they knew it no fair excuse: yet for the honor of
friendship they did not directly reject his motion: but put him to death,
because he did not follow, but led on Gracchus and brought his friend into the
snare: For so they preserved the honors of friendship on either hand, by
neither suffering it to be sullied by a foul excuse, nor yet rejected in any
fair pretense. A man may not be perjured for his friend. I remember to have
read in the History of the Low Countries, that Grimston and Redhead, when
Bergenapzoom was besieged by the Duke of Parma acted for the interest of the
Queen of Englands forces a notable design; but being suspected and put for
their acquittance to take the Sacrament of the Altar, they dissembled their
persons, and their interest, their design and their Religion, and did for the
Queens service (as one wittily wrote to her) give not only their bodies but
their souls, and so deserved a reward greater then she could pay them: I cannot
say this is a thing greater then a friendship can require, for it is not great
at all, but a great villainy, which has no name, and no order in worthy
entercourses; and no obligation to a friend can reach as high as our Duty to
God: And he that does a base thing in zeal for his friend, burns the golden
thread that ties their hearts together; it is a conspiracy, but no longer
friendship. And when Cato lent his wife to Hortensius, and Socrates lent his to
a merry Greek, they could not amongst wise persons obtain so much as the fame
of being worthy friends, neither could those great Names legitimate an unworthy
action under the most plausible title.

It is certain that amongst friends their estates are common; that is, by
whatsoever I can rescue my friend from calamity, I am to serve him, or not to
call him friend; and there is a great latitude in this, and it is to be
restrained by no prudence, but when there is on the other side a great
necessity neither vicious nor avoidable: A man may choose, whether he will or
no; and he does not sin in not doing it, unless he have bound himself to it:
But certainly friendship is the greatest band in the world, and if he have
professed a great friendship, he has a very great obligation to do that and
more; and he can no ways be disobliged but by the care of his Natural
relations.

I said, [ Friendship is the greatest bond in the world,] and I had reason for
it, for it is all the bands that this world has; and there is no society, and
there is no relation that is worthy, but it is made so by the communications of
friendship and by partaking some of its excellencies. For friendship is a
transcendent, and signifies as much as Unity can mean, and every consent, and
every pleasure, and every benefit, and every society is the Mother or the
Daughter of friendship. Some friendships are made by nature, some by contract,
some by interest, and some by souls. And in proportion to these ways of
Uniting, so the friendships are greater or less, virtuous or natural,
profitable or holy, or all this together. Nature makes excellent friendships,
of which we observe something in social plants; growing better in each others
neighborhood then where they stand singly: And in animals it is more
notorious, whose friendships extend so far as to herd and dwell together, to
play, and feed, to defend and fight for one another, and to cry in absence, and
to rejoice in one another presence. But these friendships have other names
less noble, they are sympathy, or they are instinct. But if to this natural
friendship there be reason superadded, something will come in upon the stock of
reason which will enoble it; but because no Rivers can rise higher then
Fountains, reason shall draw out all the dispositions which are in Nature and
establish them into friendships, but they cannot surmount the communications of
Nature; Nature can make no friendships greater then her own excellencies.
Nature is the way of contracting necessary friendships: that is, by nature such
friendships are contracted without which we cannot live, and be educated, or be
well, or be at all. In this scene, that of Parents and Children is the
greatest, which indeed is begun in nature, but is actuated by society and
mutual endearments. For Parents love their Children because they love
themselves, Children being but like emissions of water, symbolical, or indeed
the same with the fountain; and they in their posterity see the images and
instrument of a civil immortality; but if Parents and Children do not live
together, we see their friendships and their loves are much abated, and
supported only by fame and duty, by customs and religion which to nature are
but artificial pillars, and make this friendship to be complicated, and to pass
from its own kind to another. That of Children to their Parents is not properly
friendship, but gratitude and interest, and religion, and what ever can
supervene of the nature of friendship comes in upon another account; upon
society and worthiness and choice.

This relation on either hand makes great Dearnesses: But it has special and
proper significations of it, and there is a special duty incumbent on each
other respectively. This friendship and social relation is not equal, and there
is too much authority on one side, and too much fear on the other to make equal
friendships; and therefore although this is one of the kinds of friendship,
that is of a social and relative love and conversation, yet in the more proper
use of the word; [Friendship] does do some things which Father and Son do not;
I instance in the free and open communicating counsels, and the evenness and
pleasantness of conversation; and consequently the significations of the
paternal and filial love as they are diverse in themselves and Unequal, and
therefore another kind of friendship then we mean in our inquiry, so they are
such a duty which no other friendship can annul: because their mutual duty is
bound upon them by religion long before any other friendships can be
contracted; and therefore having first possession must abide for ever. The duty
and love to Parents must not yield to religion, much less to any new
friendships: and our Parents are to be preferred before the Corban; and are at
no hand to be laid aside but when they engage against God: That is, in the
rights which this relation and kind of friendship challenges as its propriety,
it is supreme and cannot give place to any other friendships; till the Father
gives his right away, and God or the Laws consent to it; as in the case of
marriage, emancipation, and adoption to another family: in which cases though
love and gratitude are still obliging, yet the societies and duties of relation
are very much altered, which in the proper and best friendships can never be at
all. But then this also is true: that the social relations of Parents and
Children not having in them all the capacities of a proper friendship, cannot
challenge all the significations of it: that is, it is no prejudice to the duty
I owe there, to pay all the dearnesses which are due here, and to friends there
are somethings due which the other cannot challenge: I mean, my secret, and my
equal conversation, and the pleasures and interests of these, and the
consequents of all.

Next to this is the society and dearness of Brothers and Sisters: which
usually is very great amongst worthy persons; but if it be considered what it
is in it self, it is but very little; there is very often a likeness of
natural temper, and there is a social life under the same roof, and they are
commanded to love one another, and they are equals in many instances, and are
endeared by conversation when it is merry and pleasant, innocent and simple,
without art and without design. But Brothers pass not into noble friendships
upon the stock of that relation: they have fair dispositions and advantages,
and are more easy and ready to ferment into the greatest dearnesses, if all
things else be answerable. Nature disposes them well toward it, but in this
inquiry if we ask what duty is passed upon a Brother to a Brother even for
being so? I answer, that religion and our parents and God and the laws appoint
what measures they please; but nature passes but very little, and friendship
less; and this we see apparently in those Brothers who live asunder, and
contract new relations, and dwell in other societies: There is no love, no
friendship without the intercourse of conversation: Friendships indeed may last
longer then our abode together, but they were first contracted by it, and
established by pleasure and benefit, and unless it be the best kind of
friendship (which that of Brothers in that mere capacity is not) it dies when
it wants the proper nutriment and support: and to this purpose is that which
was spoken by Solomon: [ better is a neighbor that is near, then a Brother
that is far off: Prove. 27. 10.
] that is, although ordinarily, Brothers are first possessed of the entries and
fancies of friendship, because they are of the first societies and
conversations, yet when that ceases and the Brother goes away, so that he does
no advantage, no benefit of intercourse; the neighbor that dwells by me, with
whom if I converse at all, either he is my enemy and does, and receives evil;
or if we converse in worthinesses and benefit and pleasant communication, he is
better in the laws and measures of friendship then my distant Brother. And it
is observable that [ Brother] is indeed a word of friendship and charity and of
mutual endearment, and so is a title of the bravest society; yet in all the
Scripture there are no precepts given of any duty and comport which Brothers,
that is, the descendents of the same parents are to have one toward another in
that capacity, and it is not because their nearness is such that they need
none: For parents and children are nearer and yet need tables of duty to be
described; and for Brothers, certainly they need it infinitely if there be any
peculiar duty; Cain and Abel are the great probation of that, and you know who
said, Fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
It is not often you shall see
Two Brothers live in amity.
But the Scripture which often describes the duty of Parents and Children,
never describes the duty of Brothers; except where by Brethren are meant all
that part of mankind who are tied to us by any vicinity and endearment of
religion or country, of profession and family, of contract or society, of love
and the noblest friendships; the meaning is, that though fraternity alone be
the endearment of some degrees of friendship, without choice and without
excellency; yet the relation it self is not friendship and does not naturally
infer it, and that which is procured by it, is but limited and little; and
though it may pass into it, as other conversations may, yet the friendship is
accidental to it; enters upon other accounts, as it does between strangers;
with this only difference that Brotherhood does oftentimes assist the valuation
of those excellencies for which we entertain our friendships. Fraternity is the
opportunity and the preliminary dispositions to friendship, and no more. For if
my Brother be a fool or a vicious person, the love to which nature and our
first conversation disposes me, does not end in friendship, but in pity and
fair provisions, and assistances; which is a demonstration that Brotherhood is
but the inclination and address to friendship; and though I will love a worthy
Brother more then a worthy stanger; if the worthiness be equal, because the
relation is something, and being put into the scales against an equal
worthiness must needs turn the balance, as every grain will do in an even
weight; yet when the relation is all the worthiness that is pretended, it
cannot stand in competition with a friend: for though a friend-Brother is
better then a friend-stranger, where the friend is equal, but the Brother is
not: yet a Brother is not better then a friend; but as Solomon's expression is,
[there is a friend that is better then a Brother,] and to be born of the same
parents is so accidental and extrinsick to a man's pleasure or worthiness, or
spiritual advantages, that though it be very pleasing and useful that a
Brother should be a friend, yet it is no great addition to a friend that he
also is a Brother: there is something in it, but not much. But in short, the
case is thus. The first beginnings of friendship serve the necessities; but
choice and worthiness are the excellencies of its endearment and its bravery;
and between a Brother that is no friend, and a friend that is no Brother; there
is the same difference as between the disposition, and the act or habit: a
Brother if he be worthy is the readiest and the nearest to be a friend, but
till he be so, he is but the twilight of the day, and but the blossom to the
fairest fruit of Paradise. A Brother does not always make a friend, but a
friend ever makes a Brother and more: And although nature sometimes finds the
tree, yet friendship engraves the Image; the first relation places him in the
garden, but friendship sets it in the Temple, and then only it is venerable and
sacred: and so is Brotherhood when it has the soul of friendship.

So that if it be asked which are most to be valued, Brothers or friends; the
answer is very easy; Brotherhood is or may be one of the kinds of friendship,
and from thence only has its value, and therefore if it be compared with a
greater friendship must give place: But then it is not to be asked which is to
be preferred, a Brother or a Friend, but which is the better friend; Memnon or
my Brother? For if my Brother says I ought to love him best, then he ought to
love me best; Vt praestem Pyladen, aliquis mihi praestet Oresten

Hoc non fit verbis, Maree ut ameris, ama. Mart. l. 6. ep. 11.


if he does, then there is a great friendship and he possibly is to be
preferred; if he can be that friend which he pretends to be, that is, if he be
equally worthy: but if he says, I must love him only because he is my Brother,
whether he loves me or no, he is ridiculous; and it will be a strange relation
which has no correspondent: but suppose it, and add this also, that I am
equally his Brother as he is mine, and then he also must love me whether I love
him or no, and if he does not; he says, I must love him though he be my Enemy;
and so I must; but I must not love my Enemy though he be my Brother more then I
love my Friend; and at last if he does love me for being his Brother, I confess
that this love deserves love again; but then I consider, that he loves me upon
an incompetent reason: for he that loves me only because I am his Brother,
loves me for that which is no worthiness, and I must love him as much as that
comes to, and for as little reason; unless this be added, that he loves me
first: but whether choice and union of souls, and worthiness of manners and
greatness of understanding, and usefulness of conversation, and the benefits of
Counsel and all those endearments which make our lives pleasant and our persons
Dear, are not better and greater reasons of love and Dearness then to be born
of the same flesh, I think amongst wise persons needs no great enquiry. For
fraternity is but a Cognation of bodies, but friendship is an Union of souls
which are confederated by more noble ligatures. My Brother, if he be no more,
shall have my hand to help him, but unless he be my friend too, he cannot
challenge my heart: and if his being my friend be the greater nearness; then
friend is more then Brother, and I suppose no man doubts but that David loved
Jonathan far more then he loved his Brother Eliab.

One inquiry more there may be in this affair, and that is, whether a friend
may be more then Husband or Wife? To which I answer, that it can never be
reasonable or just, prudent or lawful: but the reason is, because Marriage is
the Queen of friendships, in which there is a communication of all that can be
communicated by friendship: and it being made sacred by vows and love, by
bodies and souls, by interest and custom, by religion and by laws, by common
counsels, and common fortunes; it is the principal in the kind of friendship,
and the measure of all the rest: And there is no abatement to this
consideration, but that there may be some allay in this as in other lesser
friendships by the incapacity of the persons: if I have not chosen my friend
wisely or fortunately, he cannot be the correlative in the best Union; but then
the friend lives as the soul does after death, it is in the state of
separation, in which the soul strangely loves the body and longs to be
reunited, but the body is an useless trunk and can do no ministeries to the
soul; which therefore prays to have the body reformed and restored and made a
brave and a fit companion: So must these best friends, when one is useless or
unapt to the braveries of the princely friendship, they must love ever, and
pray ever, and long till the other be perfected and made fit; in this case
there wants only the body, but the soul is still a relative and must be so for
ever.

A Husband and a Wife are the best friends, but they cannot always signify
all that to each other which their friendships would; as the Sun shines not
upon a Valley which sends up a thick vapor to cover his face; and though his
beams are eternal, yet the emission is intercepted by the intervening cloud.
But however, all friendships are but parts of this; a man must leave Father and
Mother and cleave to his Wife, that is [ the dearest thing in Nature is not
comparable to the dearest thing of friendship:] and I think this is argument
sufficient to prove friendship to be the greatest band in the world; Add to
this, that other friendships are parts of this, they are marriages too, less
indeed then the other, because they cannot, must not be all that endearment
which the other is; yet that being the principal, is the measure of the rest,
and are all to be honored by like dignities, and measured by the same rules,
and conducted by their portion of the same Laws: But as friendships are
Marriages of the soul, and of fortunes and interests, and counsels; so they are
brotherhoods too; and I often think of the excellencies of friendships in the
words of David, who certainly was the best friend in the world [ Ecce quam
bonum and quam jucundum fratres habitare in unum:] It is good and it is
pleasant that Brethren should live like friends, that is, they who are any
ways relative, and who are any ways sociall and confederate should also dwell
in Unity and loving society, for that is the meaning of the word [Brother] in
Scripture [It was my Brother Jonathan, said David: such Brothers contracting
such friendships are the beauties of society, and the pleasure of life, and the
festivity of minds: and whatsoever can be spoken of love, which is Gods eldest
daughter, can be said of virtuous friendships; and though Carneades made an
eloquent oration at Rome against justice, yet never saw a Paneg rick of malice,
or ever read that any man was witty against friendship. Indeed it is probable
that some men, finding themselves by the peculiarities of friendship excluded
from the participation of those beauties of society which enamel and adorn the
wise and the virtuous might suppose themselves to have reason to speak the
evil words of envy and detraction; I wonder not for all those unhappy souls
which shall find heaven gates shut against them, will think they have reason to
murmur and blaspheme: The similitude is apt enough, for that is the region of
friendship; and love is the light of that glorious Country, but so bright that
it needs no Sun: Here we have fine and bright rays of that celestial flame,
and though to all mankind the light of it is in some measure to be extended,
like the treasures of light dwelling in the South, yet a little do illustrate
and beautify the North, yet some live under the line, and the beams of
friendship in that position are imminent and perpendicular.

I know but one thing more in which the Communications of friendship can be
restrained; and that is, in Friends and Enemies: Amicus amici, amicus meus non
est: My friends friend is not always my friend; nor his enemy mine; for if my
friend quarrel with a third person with whom he has had no friendships, upon
the account of interest; if that third person be my friend, the nobleness of
our friendships despises such a quarrel; and what may be reasonable in him,
would be ignoble in me; sometimes it may be otherwise, and friends may marry
one another loves and hatreds, but it is by chance if it can be just, and
therefore because it is not always right it cannot be ever necessary.

In all things else, let friendships be as high and expressive till they become
an Union, or that friends like the Molionidae be so the same that the flames of
their dead bodies make but one Pyramid; no charity can be reproved, and such
friendships which are more then shadows, are nothing else but the rays of that
glorious grace drawn into one center, and made more active by the Union; and
the proper significations are well represented in the old Hieroglyphick, by
which the ancients depicted friendship: In the beauties and strength of a young
man, bare-headed, rudely clothed, to signify its activity, and lastingness,
readiness of action, and aptnesses to do service; Upon the fringes of his
garment was written Mors and vita, as signifying that in life and death the
friendship was the same; on the forehead was written, Summer and Winter, that
is, prosperous and adverse accidents and states of life; the left arm and
shoulder was bare and naed down to the heart to which the finger pointed, and
there was written long and prope: by all which we know that friendship does
good far and near: in Summer and in Winter, in life and death, and knows no
difference of state or accident but by the variety of her services: and
therefore ask no more to what we can be obliged by friendship; for it is every
thing that can be honest and prudent, useful and necessary.

For this is all the allay of this Universality, we may do any thing or suffer
any thing, that is wise or necessary, or greatly beneficial to my friend, and
that in any thing, in which I am perfect master of my person and fortunes. But
I would not in bravery visit my friend when he is sick of the plague, unless I
can do him good equal at least to my danger, but I will procure him Physicians
and prayers, all the assistances that he can receive, and that he can desire,
if they be in my power: and when he is dead, I will not run into his grave and
be stifled with his earth; but I will mourn for him, and perform his will, and
take care of his relatives, and do for him as if he were alive, and I think
that is the meaning of that hard saying of a Greek Poet (...)
(...).
To me though distant let thy friendship fly,
Though men be mortal, friendships must not die.
Of all things else there is great satiety.
Of such immortal abstracted pure friendships indeed there is no great plenty,
and to see brothers hate each other, is not so rare as to see them love at this
rate. The dead and the absent have but few friends, say the Spaniards; but they
who are the same to their friend (...), when he is in another Country, or in
another World, these are they who are fit to preserve the sacred fire for
eternal sacrifices, and to perpetuate the memory of those exemplar friendships
of the best men which have filled the world with history and wonder: for in no
other sense but this, can it be true; that friendships are pure loves,
regarding to do good more then to receive it: He that is a friend after death,
hopes not for a recompense from his friend, and makes no bargain either for
fame or love; but is rewarded with the conscience and satisfaction of doing
bravely: but then this is demonstration that they choose Friends best who take
persons so worthy that can and will do so: This is the profit and usefulness
of friendship; and he that contracts such a noble Union; must take care that
his friend be such who can and will; but hopes that himself shall be first
used, and put to act it: I will not have such a friendship that is good for
nothing, but I hope that I shall be on the giving and assisting part; and yet
if both the friends be so noble and hope and strive to do the benefit, I
cannot well say which ought to yield, and whether that friendship were braver
that could be content to be unprosperous so his friend might have the glory of
assisting him; or that which desires to give assistances in the greatest
measures of friendship: but he that chooses a worthy friend that himself in the
days of sorrow and need might receive the advantage, has no excuse, no
pardon, unless himself be as certain to do assistances when evil fortune shall
require them. The sum of this answer to this enquiry I give you in a pair of
Greek verses.

(...)
(...).
Friends are to friends as lesser Gods, while they
Honor and service to each other pay.
But when a dark cloud comes, grudge not to lend
Thy head, thy heart, thy fortune to thy friend.
3. The last inquiry is, how friendships are to be conducted? That is, what are
the duties in presence and in absence; whether the friend may not desire to
enjoy his friend as well as his friendship? The answer to which in a great
measure depends upon what I have said already: and if friendship be a charity
in society, and is not for contemplation and noise, but for material comforts
and noble treatments and usages, there is no peradventure, but that if I buy
land, I may eat the fruits, and if I take a house. I may dwell in it; and if I
love a worthy person, I may please my self in his society: and in this there
is no exception, unless the friendship be between persons of a different sex:
for then not only the interest of their religion, and the care of their honor,
but the worthiness of their friendship requires that their intercourse be
prudent and free from suspicion and reproach: and if a friend is obliged to
bear a calamity, so he secure the honor of his friend, it will concern him to
conduct his intercourse in the lines of a virtuous prudence, so that he shall
rather lose much of his own comfort, then she any thing of her honor; and in
this case, the noises of people are so to be regarded, that next to innocence
they are the principal. But when by caution and prudence and severe conduct, a
friend has done all that he or she can to secure fame and honorable reports;
after this, their noises are to be despised; they must not fright us from our
friendships, nor from her fairest entercourses; I may lawfully pluck the
clusters from my own vine, though he that walks by, calls me thief.

But by the way (Madam) you may see how much I differ from the morosity of
those Cynics who would not admit your sex into the communities of a noble
friendship. I believe some Wives have been the best friends in the world; and
few stories can outdo the nobleness and piety of that Lady that sucked the
poisonous, purulent matter from the wound of our brave Prince in the holy Land,
when an Assasine had pierced him with a venomed arrow; and if it be told that
women cannot retain counsel, and therefore can be no brave friends; I can best
confute them by the story of Porcia, who being fearful of the weakness of her
sex, stabbed her self into the thigh to try how she could bear pain; and
finding her self constant enough to that sufferance, gently chid her Brutus
for not daring to trust her, since now she perceived that no torment could
wrest that secret from her, which she hoped might be entrusted to her. If there
were not more things to be said for your satisfaction, I could have made it
disputable whether have been more illustrious in their friendships men or
women? I cannot say that Women are capable of all those excellencies by which
men can oblige the world; and therefore a femal friend in some cases is not so
good a counselor as a wise man, and cannot so well defend my honor; nor
dispose of reliefs and assistances if she be under the power of another: but a
woman can love as passionately, and converse as pleasantly, and retain a secret
as faithfully, and be useful in her proper ministeries; and she can die for her
friend as well as the bravest Roman Knight; and we find that some persons have
engaged themselves as far as death upon a less interest then all this amounts
to: such were the (...) as the Greeks call them, the Devoti of a Prince or
General, the Assasines amongst the Saracens, the (...) amongst the old
Galatians: they did as much as a friend could do; and if the greatest services
of a friend can be paid for by an ignoble price, we cannot grudge to virtuous
and brave women that they be partners in a noble friendship, since their
conversation and returns can add so many moments to the felicity of our lives:
and therefore, though a Knife cannot enter as far as a Sword, yet a Knife may
be more useful to some purposes; and in every thing, except it be against an
enemy. A man is the best friend in trouble, but a woman may be equal to him in
the days of joy: a woman can as well increase our comforts, but cannot so well
lessen our sorrows: and therefore we do not carry women with us when we go to
fight; but in peaceful Cities and times, virtuous women are the beauties of
society and the prettinesses of friendship. And when we consider that few
persons in the world have all those excellencies by which friendship can be
useful and illustrious, we may as well allow women as men to be friends; since
they can have all that which can be necessary and essential to friendships,
and these cannot have all by which friendships can be accidentally improved; in
all some abatements will be made; and we shall do too much honor to women, if
we reject them from friendships because they are not perfect: for if to
friendships we admit imperfect men, because no man is perfect: he that rejects
women does find fault with them because they are not more perfect then men,
which either does secretly affirm that they ought and can be perfect, or else
it openly accuses men of injustice and partiality.

I hope you will pardon me that I am a little gone from my undertaking, I went
aside to wait upon the women and to do countenance to their tender virtues: I
am now returned, and, if I were to do the office of a guide to uninstructed
friends, would add the particulars following; Madam, you need not read them
now, but when any friends come to be taught by your precept and example how to
converse in the noblest Conjugations, you may put these into better words and
tell them

1. That the first law of friendship is, they must neither ask of their friend
what is Undecent; nor grant it if themselves be asked. For it is no good office
to make my friend more vicious or more a fool; I will restrain his folly, but
not nurse it; I will not make my groom the officer of my lust and vanity. There
are Villains who sell their souls for bread, that offer sin and vanity at a
price: I should be unwilling my friend should know I am vicious; but if he
could be brought to minister to it; he is not worthy to be my friend: and if I
could offer it to him, I do not deserve to claspe hands with a virtuous person.

2. Let no man choose him for his friend whom it shall be possible for him ever
after to hate, for though the society may justly be interrupted, yet love is an
immortal thing, and I will never despise him whom I could once think worthy of
my love. A friend that proves not good is rather to be suffered, then any
enmities be entertained: and there are some outer offices of friendship and
little drudgeries in which the less worthy are to be employed, and it is better
that he be below stairs then quite thrown out of doors.

3. There are two things which a friend can never pardon, a treacherous blow
and the revealing of a secret, because these are against the Nature of
friendship; they are the adulteries of it, and dissolve the Union; and in the
matters of friendship which is the marriage of souls; these are the proper
causes of divorce: and therefore I shall add this only, that secrecy is the
chastity of friendship, and the publication of it is a prostitution and direct
debauchery; but a secret, treacherous wound is a perfect and unpardonable
Apostasy. I remember a pretty apologue that Bromiard tells. A Fowler in a sharp
frosty morning having taken many little birds for which he had long watched,
began to take up his nets; and nipping the birds on the head laid them down. A
young thrush espying the tears trickling down his cheeks by the reason of the
extreme cold, said to her Mother, that certainly the man was very merciful and
compassionate that wept so bitterly over the calamity of the poor Birds. But
her Mother told her more wisely, that she might better judge of the man's
disposition by his hand then by his eye; and if the hands do strike
treacherously, he can never be admitted to friendship, who speaks fairly and
weeps pitifully. Friendship is the greatest honesty and ingenuity in the world.

4. Never accuse thy friend, nor believe him that does: if thou do, thou have
broken the skin; but he that is angry with every little fault breaks the bones
of friendship: and when we consider that in society and the accidents of every
day, in which no man is constantly pleased or displeased with the same things;
we shall find reason to impute the change unto our selves; and the emanations
of the Sun are still glorious, when our eyes are sore: and we have no reason to
be angry with an eternal light, because we have a changeable and a mortal
faculty. But however, do not think thou did contract alliance with an Angel,
when thou did take thy friend into thy bosom; he may be weak as well as thou
art, and thou may need pardon as well as he, and (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Theog. that man loves flattery more then friendship, who would not only have
his friend, but all the contingencies of his friend to humor him.

5. Give thy friend counsel wisely and charitably, but leave him to his liberty
whether he will follow thee or no: and be not angry if thy counsel be rejected:
for, advice is no Empire, and he is not my friend that will be my Judge whether
I will or no. Neoptolemus had never been honored with the victory and spoils
of Troy if he had attended to the tears and counsel of Lycomedes, who being
afraid to venture the young man, fain would have had him sleep at home safe in
his little Island. He that gives advice to his friend and exacts obedience to
it, does not the kindness and ingenuity of a friend but the office and
pertness of a Schoolmaster.

6. Never be a Judge between thy friends in any matter where both set their
hearts upon the victory: If st^angers or enemies be litigants, what ever side
thou favourest, thou gettest a friend, but when friends are the parties thou
losest one.

7. Never comport thy self so, as that thy friend can be afraid of thee: for
then the state of the relation alters when a new and troublesome passion
supervenes. ODERUNT quos METUUNT. Perfect love casts out fear, and no man is
friend to a Tyrant; but that friendship is Tyranny where the love is changed
into fear, equality into empire, society into obedience; for then all my
kindness to him also will be no better then flattery.

8. When you admonish your friend, let it be without bitterness; when you
chide him, let it be without reproach; when you praise him, let it be with
worthy purposes and for just ca^ses, and in friendly measures; too much of that
is flattery, too little is envy; if you do it justly you teach him true
measures: but when others praise him, rejoice, though they praise not thee, and
remember that if thou esteemest his praise to be thy disparagement, thou art
envious, but neither just nor kind.

9. When all things else are equal prefer an old friend before a new. If thou
meanest to spend thy friend, and make a gain of him till he be weary, thou will
esteem him as a beast of burden, the worse for his age; But if thou esteemest
him by noble measures, he will be better to thee by thy being used to him, by
trial and experience, by reciprocation of indearments, and an habitual
worthiness. An old friend is like old wine, which when a man has drunk, he
does not desire new, because he says the old is better. But every old friend
was new once; and if he be worthy keep the new one till he become old.

10. After all this, treat thy friend nobly, love to be with him, do to him all
the worthinesses of love and fair endearment, according to thy capacity and
his; Bear with his infirmities till they approach toward being criminal; but
never dissemble with him, never despise him, never leave him.

Extra fortunam est quicquid donatur amicis
Quas dederis solas semper habebis opes.
Mart. l. 5. ep. 43.
Et tamen hoc vitium, sed non leve, sit licet unum,
Quod colit ingratas pauper amicitias.
Quis largitur opes veteri, fidoque sodali.
ep. 19.

Give him gifts and upbraid him not, Non belle quaedam faciunt duo: sufficit
unus
Huic operi: si vis ut loquar ipse tace.
Creed mihi quamvis ingentia Posthume dones
Authoris pereunt garrulitate sui.
ep. 53.

and refuse not his kindnesses, and be sure never to despise the smallness or
the impropriety of them. Confirmatur amor beneficio accepto: A gift (says
Solomon) fastneth friendships; for as an eye that dwells long upon a star
must be refreshed with lesser beauties and strengthened with greens and
looking-glasses, lest the sight become amazed with too great a splendour; so
must the love of friends sometimes be refreshed with material and low Caresses;
lest by striving to be too divine it becomes less humane: It must be allowed
its share of both: It is humane in giving pardon and fair construction, and
opennesse and ingenuity, and keeping secrets; it has something that is Divine,
because it is beneficent; but much because it is Eternal.

FINIS.
Postscript.
MADAM,
IF you shall think it fit that these papers pass further then your own eye and
Closet, I desire they may be consigned into the hands of my worthy friend Dr.
Wedderburne: For I do not only expose all my sickness to his cure, but I submit
my weaknesses to his censure, being as confident to find of him charity for
what is pardonable, as remedy for what is curable: but indeed Madam I look upon
that worthy man as an Idea of Friendship, and if I had no other notices of
Friendship or conversation to instruct me then his, it were sufficient: For
whatsoever I can say of Friendship, I can say of his, and as all that know him
reckon him amongst the best Physicians, so I knew him worthy to be reckoned
amongst the best friends.

Two Letters to Persons changed in their Religion.
A Copy of the First Letter written to a Gentlewoman newly seduced to the
Church of Rome.
M. B.
I Was desirous of an opportunity in London to have discoursed with you
concerning something of nearest concernment to you, but the multitude of my
little affairs hindered me, and have brought upon you this trouble to read a
long Letter, which yet I hope you will be more willing to do, because it comes
from one who has a great respect to your person, and a very great charity to
your soul: I must confess I was on your behalf troubled when I heard you were
fallen from the Communion of the Church of England, and entered into a
voluntary, unnecessary schism, and departure from the Laws of the King, and the
Communion of those with whom you have always lived in charity, going against
those Laws in the defense and profession of which your Husband died, going from
the Religion in which you were baptized, in which for so many years you lived
piously and hoped for Heaven, and all this without any sufficient reason,
without necessity or just scandal ministered to you; and to aggravate all this,
you did it in a time when the Church of England was persecuted, when she was
marked with the Characterismes of her Lord, the marks of the Cross of Jesus,
that is, when she suffered for a holy cause and a holy conscience, when the
Church of England was more glorious then at any time before; Even when she
could show more Martyrs and Confessors then any Church this day in
Christendom, even then when a King died in the profession of her Religion, and
thousands of Priests, learned and pious men suffered the spoiling of their
goods rather then they would forsake one Article of so excellent a Religion; So
that serioufly it is not easily to be imagined that any thing should move you,
unless it be that which troubled the perverse Jews, and the Heathen Greeks,
Scandalum crucis, the scandal of the Cross; You stumbled at that Rock of
offense, You left us because we were afflicted, lessened in outward
circumstances and wrapped in a cloud; but give me leave only to reminde you of
that sad saying of the Scripture, that you may avoid the consequent of it; They
that fall on this stone shall be broken in pieces, but they on whom it shall
fall shall be grinded to powder. And if we should consider things but
prudently, it is a great argument that the sons of our Church are very
conscientious and just in their persuasions, when it is evident, that we have
no temporal end to serve, nothing but the great end of our souls, all our
hopes of preferment are gone, all secular regards, only we still have truth on
our sides, and we are not willing with the loss of truth to change from a
persecuted to a prosperous Church, from a Reformed to a Church that will not be
reformed; lest we give scandal to good people that suffer for a holy
conscience, and weaken the hands of the afflicted; of which if you had been
more careful you would have remained much more innocent.

But I pray, give me leave to consider for you, because you in your change
considered so little for your self, what fault, what false doctrine, what
wicked or dangerous proposition, what defect, what amiss did you find in the
Doctrine and Liturgy and Discipline of the Church of England?

For its doctrine, It is certain it professes the belief of all that is written
in the Old and New Testament, all that which is in the three Creeds, the
Apostolical, the Nicene, and that of Athanasius, and whatsoever was decreed in
the four General Councels, or many other truly such, and whatsoever was
condemned in these, our Church has legally declared it to be Heresy. And upon
these accounts above four whole ages of the Church went to Heaven; they
baptized all their Catechumens into this faith, their hopes of heaven was upon
this and a good life, their Saints and Martyrs lived and died in this alone,
they denied Communion to none that professed this faith. This is the Catholic
faith, so says the Creed of Athanasius; and unless a company of men have power
to alter the faith of God, whosoever live and die in this faith, are entirely
Catholic and Christian. So that the Church of England has the same faith
without dispute that the Church had for 400 or 500 years; and therefore there
could be nothing wanting here to saving faith, if we live according to our
belief.

2. For the Liturgy of the Church of England, I shall not need to say much,
because the case will be very evident; First, Because the disputers of the
Church of Rome have not been very forward to object any thing against it, they
cannot charge it with any evil: 2. Because for all the time of K. Edw. 6. and
till the 11th year of Q. Elizabeth, your people came to our Churches and prayed
with us till the Bull of Pius Quintus came out upon temporal regards, and made
a Schism by forbidding the Queens Subjects to pray as by Law was here
appointed, though the prayers were good and holy, as themselves did believe.
That Bull enjoined recusancy, and made that which was as an act of rebellion
and disobedience, and schism, to be the Character of your Roman Catholics.
And after this, what can be supposed wanting in order to salvation? We have the
Word of God, the faith of the Apostles, the Creeds of the Primitive Church, the
Articles of the four first general Councels, a holy Liturgy, excellent
prayers, perfect Sacraments, Faith and Repentance, the ten Commandments, and
the Sermons of Christ, and all the precepts and counsels of the Gospel; We
teach the necessity of good works, and require and strictly exact the severity
of a holy life; We live in obedience to God, and are ready to die for him, and
do so when he requires us so to do; We speak honor of his most holy Name, we
worship him at the mention of his Name, we confess his Attributes, we love his
Servants, we pray for all men, we love all Christians, even our most erring
Brethren, we confess our sins to God and to our Brethren whom we have
offended, and to Gods Ministers in cases of scandal, or of a troubled
Conscience, We communicate often, We are enjoined to receive the holy Sacrament
thrice every year at least; Our Priests absolve the penitent, our Bishops
ordain Priests and confirm baptized persons, and bless their people and
intercede for them; and what could here be wanting to Salvation? what necessity
forced you from us? I dare not suspect it was a temporal regard that drew you
away, but I am sure it could be no spiritual.

But now that I have told you, and made you to consider from whence you went,
give me leave to represent to you, and tell you whither you are gone, that you
may understand the nature and conditions of your change: For do not think your
self safe, because they tell you that you are come to the Church; You are
indeed gone from one Church to another, from a better to a worse, as will
appear in the induction, the particular of which before I reckon, give me leave
to give you this advice; if you mean in this affair to understand what you do;
it were better you enquired what your Religion is, then what your Church is;
for that which is a true Religion to day, will be so to morrow and for ever;
but that which is a holy Church to day, may be heretical at the next change, or
may betray her trust, or obtrude new Articles in contradiction to the old, or
by new interpretations may elude ancient truths, or may change your Creed, or
may pretend to be the Spouse of Christ when she is idolatrous, that is,
adulterous to God: Your Religion is that which you must, and therefore may
competently understand; You must live in it, and grow in it, and govern all the
actions of your life by it; and in all questions concerning the Church you are
to choose your Church by the Religion, and therefore this ought first and last
to be enquired after. Whether the Roman Church be the Catholic Church, must
depend upon so many uncertain enquiries, is offered to be proved by so long, so
tedious a method, has in it so many intrigues and Labyrinths of Question, and
is (like a long line) so impossible to be perfectly strait, and to have no
declination in it when it is held by such a hand as yours, that unless it be by
material enquiries into the Articles of the Religion, you can never hope to
have just grounds of confidence. In the mean time you can consider this; if the
Roman Church were the Catholic, that is, so as to exclude all that are not of
her communion, then the Greek Churches had as good turn Turks as remain damned
Christians, and all that are in the communion of all the other Patriarchal
Churches in Christendom, must also perish like Heathens, which thing before
any man can believe, he must have put off all reason, and all modesty, and all
charity; And who can with any probability think that the Communion of Saints in
the Creed is nothing but the Communion of Roman Subjects, and the Article of
the Catholic Church was made to dispark the enclosures of Jerusalem, but to
turn them into the pale of Rome, and the Church is as limited as ever it was,
save only that the Synagogue is translated to Rome, which I think you will
easily believe was a Proposition the Apostles understood not. But though it be
hard to trust to it, it is also so hard to prove it, that you shall never be
able to understand the measures of that question, and therefore your salvation
can never depend upon it. For no good or wise person can believe that God has
tied our Salvation to impossible measures, or bound us to an Article that is
not by us cognoscible, or intends to have us conducted by that which we cannot
understand, and when you shall know that Learned men, even of the Roman party
are not agreed concerning the Catholic Church that is infallibly to guide you,
some saying that it is the virtual Church, that is, the Pope; some, that it is
the representative Church, that is, a Council; Some, that it is the Pope and
the Council, the virtual Church and the representative Church together; Some,
that neither of these, nor both together are infallible; but only, the
essential Church, or the diffusive Church is the Catholic, from whom we must
at no hand dissent; you will quickly find your self in a Wood, and uncertain
whether you have more then a word in exchange for your soul, when you are told
you are in the Catholic Church. But I will tell you what you may understand,
and see, and feel, something that your self can tell whether I say true or no
concerning it. You are now gone to a Church that protects it self by arts of
subtlety and arms, by violence and persecuting all that are not of their
minds, to a Church in which you are to be a Subject of the King so long as it
pleases the Pope: In which you may be absolved from your Vows made to God, your
Oaths to the King, your promises to men, your duty to your Parents in some
cases: a Church in which men pray to God and to Saints in the same Form of
words in which they pray to God, as you may see in the Offices of Saints, and
particularly of our Lady: a Church in which men are taught by most of the
principal Leaders to worship Images with the same worship with which they
worship God and Christ, or him or her whose Image it is, and in which they
usually picture God the Father, and the holy Trinity, to the great dishonor of
that sacred mystery, against the doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church,
against the express doctrine of Scripture, against the honor of a divine
attribute; I mean, the immensity and spirituality of the divine Nature; You are
gone to a Church that pretends to be infallible, and yet is infinitely deceived
in many particulars, and yet endures no contradiction, and is impatient her
children should enquire into any thing her Priests obtrude. You are gone from
receiving the whole Sacrament to receive it but half; from Christ's Institution
to a humane invention, from Scripture to uncertain Traditions, and from ancient
Tradition to new pretenses, from prayers which ye understood to prayers which
ye understand not, from confidence in God to rely upon creatures, from entire
dependence upon inward acts to a dangerous temptation of resting too much in
outward ministeries, in the external work of Sacraments and of Sacramentals:
You are gone from a Church whose worshipping is simple, Christian and
Apostolical, to a Church where men's consciences are laden with a burden of
Ceremonies greater then that in the days of the Jewish Religion (for the
Ceremonial of the Church of Rome is a great Book in Folio) greater I say then
all the Ceremonies of the Jews contained in Leviticus, etc. You are gone from a
Church where you were exhorted to read the Word of God, the holy Scriptures
from whence you found instruction, institution, comfort, reproof, a treasure of
all excellencies, to a Church that seals up that fountain from you, and gives
you drink by drops out of such Cisterns as they first make, and then stain, and
then reach out: and if it be told you that some men abuse Scripture, it is
true, for if your Priests had not abused Scripture, they could not thus have
abused you, but there is no necessity they should, and you need not, unless you
list; any more then you need to abuse the Sacraments or decrees of the Church,
or the messages of your friend, or the Letters you receive, or the Laws of the
Land, all which are liable to be abused by evil persons, but not by good people
and modest understandings. It is now become a part of your Religion to be
ignorant, to walk in blindeness, to believe the man that hears your
Confessions, to hear none but him, not to hear God speaking but by him, and so
you are liable to be abused by him, as he please, without remedy. You are gone
from us, where you were only taught to worship God through Jesus Christ, and
now you are taught to worship Saints and Angels with a worship at least
dangerous, and in some things proper to God; for your Church worships the
Virgin Mary with burning incense and candles to her, and you give her presents,
which by the consent of all Nations used to be esteemed a worship peculiar to
God, and it is the same thing which was condemned for Heresy in the
Collyridians, who offered a Cake to the Virgin Mary: A Candle and a Cake make
no difference in the worship; and your joining God and the Saints in your
worship and devotions, is like the device of them that fought for King and
Parliament, the latter destroys the former: I will trouble you with no more
particulars, because if these move you not to consider better, nothing can.

But yet I have two things more to add of another nature, one of which at
least may prevail upon you, whom I suppose to have a tender and a religious
Conscience.

The first is, That all the points of difference between us and your Church are
such as do evidently serve the ends of covetousness and ambition, of power and
riches, and so stand vehemently suspected of design, and art, rather then truth
of the Article and designs upon Heaven. I instance in the Popes power over
Princes and all the world; his power of dispensation, The exemption of the
Clergy from jurisdiction of Princes, The doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences
which was once made means to raise a portion for a Lady, the Niece of Pope Leo
the tenth; The Priests power advanced beyond authority of any warrant from
Scripture, a doctrine apt to bring absolute obedience to the Papacy; but
because this is possibly too nice for you to suspect or consider, that which I
am sure ought to move you is this.

That you are gone to a Religion in which though through Gods grace prevailing
over the follies of men, there are I hope, and charitably suppose many pious
men that love God, and live good lives, yet there are very many doctrines
taught by your men, which are very ill Friends to a good life. I instance in
your Indulgences and pardons, In which vicious men put a great confidence, and
rely greatly upon them. The doctrine of Purgatory which gives countenance to a
sort of Christians who live half to God and half to the world, and for them
this doctrine has found out a way that they may go to Hell and to Heaven too.
The Doctrine that the Priests absolution can turn a trifling repentance into a
perfect and a good, and that suddenly too, and at any time, even on our
deathbed, or the minute before your death, is a dangerous heap of falsehoods,
and gives license to wicked people, and teaches men to reconcile a wicked
debauched life, with the hopes of Heaven. And then for penances and temporal
satisfaction, which might seem to be as a plank after the shipwreck of the duty
of Repentance, to keep men in awe, and to preserve them from sinking in an
Ocean of Impiety, it comes to just nothing by your doctrine; for there are so
many easy ways of Indulgences and getting pardons, so many con-fraternities,
stations, priviledg'd Altars, little Offices, Agnus Dei's, amulets, hallowed
devices, swords, roses, hats, Churchyards, and the fountain of these annexed
indulgences the Pope himself, and his power of granting what, and when, and to
whom he list, that he is a very unfortunate man that needs to smart with
penances; and after all, he may choose to suffer any at all, for he may pay
them in Purgatory if he please, and he may come out of Purgatory upon
reasonable terms, in case he should think it fit to go thither; So that all the
whole duty of Repentance seems to be destroyed with devices of men that seek
power and gain, and find error and folly; insomuch that if I had a mind to
live an evil Life, and yet hope for Heaven at last, I would be of your religion
above any in the world.

But I forget I am writing a Letter: I shall therefore desire you to consider
upon the premises, which is the safer way. For surely it is lawful for a man to
serve God without Images; but that to worship Images is lawful is not so sure.
It is Lawful to pray to God alone, to confess him to be true and every man a
Liar, to call no man Master upon Earth, but to rely upon God teaching us; But
it is at least hugely disputable and not at all certain that any man, or
society of men can be infallible, that we may put our trust in Saints, in
certain extraordinary Images, or burn incense and offer consumptive oblations
to the Virgin Mary, or make vows to persons of whose state or place or
Capacities, or Condition we have no certain revelation: we are sure we do well
when in the holy Communion we worship God and Jesus Christ our Savior, but
they who also worship what seems to be bread, are put to strange shifts to make
themselves believe it to be Lawful. It is certainly Lawful to believe what we
see and feel; but it is an unnatural thing upon pretense of faith to disbelieve
our eyes, when our sense and our faith can better be reconciled, as it is in
the question of the real presence, as it is taught by the Church of England.

So that unless you mean to prefer a danger before safety, temptation to
unholiness before a severe and a holy religion, unless you mean to lose the
Benefit of your prayers by praying what you perceive not, and the Benefit of
the sacrament in great degrees by falling from Christ's Institution, and taking
half instead of all; unless you desire to provoke God to jealousy by Images
and Man to jealousy in professing a religion in which you may in many cases
have leave to forfeit your faith and lawful trust, unless you will still
continue to give scandal to those good people with whom you have lived in a
common religion and weaken the hearts of Gods afflicted ones, unless you will
choose a Catechism without the second Commandment and a faith that grows bigger
or less as men please, and a hope that in many degrees relyes on men and vain
confidences, and a Charity that damns all the world but your selves, unless you
will do all this, that is, suffer an abuse in your prayers, in the Sacrament,
in the Commandments, in faith, in hope, in Charity, in the Communion of saints,
and your duty to your supreme, you must return to the bosom of your Mother the
Church of England from whence you have fallen, rather weakly then maliciously,
and I doubt not but you will find the Comfort of it all your Life, and in the
Day of your Death, and in the day of Judgment. If you will not, yet I have
freed mine own soul, and done an act of duty and Charity, which at least you
are bound to take kindly if you will not entertain it obediently.

Now let me add this, that although most of these objections are such things
which are the open and avowed doctrines or practices of your Church; and need
not to be proved as being either notorious or confessed; yet if any of your
Guides shall seem to question any thing of it, I will bind my self to verify
it, to a tittle and in that sense too which I intend them, that is, so as to be
an objection obliging you to return, under the pain of folly or heresy, or
disobedience according to the subject matter. And though I have propounded
these things now to your consideration, yet if it be desired I shall represent
them to your eye, so that even your self shall be able to give sentence in the
behalf of truth. In the mean time give me leave to tell you of how much folly
you are guilty in being moved by such mock-arguments as your men use when they
meet with women and tender consciences and weaker understandings.

The first is; where was your Church before Luther? Now if you had called upon
them to speak something against your religion from Scripture, or right reason
or Universal Tradition, you had been secure as a Tortoise in her shell; a cart
pressed with sheavs could not have oppressed your cause or person; though you
had confessed you understood nothing of the mysteries of succession doctrinal
or personal. For if we can make it appear that our religion was that which
Christ and his Apostles taught, let the truth suffer what eclipses or
prejudices can be supposed, let it be hid like the holy fire in the captivity,
yet what Christ and his Apostles taught us is eternally true, and shall by some
means or other be conveyed to us; even the enemies of truth have been
conservators of that truth by which we can confute their errors. But if you
still ask where it was before Luther? I answer it was there where it was
after; even in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; and I know no
warrant for any other religion; and if you will expect I should show any
society of men who professed all the doctrines which are now expressed in the
confession of the Church of England; I shall tell you it is unreasonable;
because some of our truths are now brought into our public confessions that
they might be opposed against your errors; before the occasion of which there
was no need of any such confessions, till you made many things necessary to be
professed, which are not lawful to be believed. For if we believe your
superinduced follies we shall do unreasonably; unconscionably, and wickedly;
but the questions themselves are so useless abstracting from the accidental
necessity which your follies have brought upon us, that it had been happy if we
had never heard of them more then the Saints and Martyrs did in the first ages
of the Church; but because your Clergy have invaded the liberty of the Church,
and multiplied the dangers of damnation, and pretend new necessities, and have
introduced new articles, and affright the simple upon new pretensions, and
slight the very institution and the Commands of Christ and of the Apostles, and
invent new sacramentals constituting ceremonies of their own head, and promise
grace along with the use of them, as if they were not Ministers but Lords of
the Spirit, and teach for doctrines the Commandments of men, and make void the
Commandment of God by their tradition, and have made a strange body of
Divinity, therefore it is necessary that we should immure our faith by the
refusal of such vain and superstitious dreams: but our faith was completed at
first, it is no other then that which was delivered to the saints, and can be
no more for ever.

So that it is a foolish demand to require that we should show before Luther a
systeme of Articles declaring our sense in these questions: It was long before
they were questions at all; and when they were made questions, they remained
so, a long time, and when by their several pieces they were determined, this
part of the Church was oppressed with a violent power; and when God gave
opportunity then the yoke was broken; and this is the whole progress of this
affair. But if you will still insist upon it; then let the matter be put into
equal balances, and let them show any Church whose confession of faith was
such as was obtruded upon you at Trent: and if your religion be Pius quartus
his Creed at Trent, then we also have a question to ask, and that is, where
was your religion before Trent?

The Council of Trent determined that the souls departed before the day of
judgment enjoy the beatifical vision. It is certain this Article could not be
shown in the confession of any of the ancient Churches; for most of the Fathers
were of another opinion. But that which is the greatest offense of Christendom
is not only that these doctrines which we say are false were yet affirmed, but
that those things which the Church of God did always reject, or held as
Uncertain should be made Articles of faith; and so become parts of your
religion; and of these it is that I again ask the question which none of your
side shall ever be able to answer for you, where was your religion before
Trent? I could instance in many particulars; but I shall name one to you which
because the thing of it self is of no great consequence, it will appear the
more unreasonable and intolerable that your Church should adopt it into the
things of necessary belief, especially since it was only a matter of fact, and
they took the false part too. For in the 21. Session, the fourth Chapter it is
affirmed, that although the holy Fathers did give the Sacrament of the
Eucharist to Infants, yet they did it without any necessity of salvation; that
is, they did not believe it necessary to their salvation, which is notoriously
false, and the contrary is marked out with the black-lead of every man almost
that reads their works; and yet your Council says this is sine controversia
credendum; to be believed without all controversy: and all Christians
forbidden to believe or teach otherwise. So that here it is made an Article of
faith amongst you that a man shall neither believe his reason nor his eyes: and
who can show any confession of faith in which all the Trent doctrine was
professed and enjoined under pain of damnation? De potest. Eccles. cons. 12.
and before the Council of Constance, the doctrine touching the Popes power was
so new, so decried, that as Gerson says he hardly should have escaped the note
of heresy that would have said so much as was there defined: so that in that
Article which now makes a great part of your belief, where was your religion
before the Council of Constance? and it is notorious that your Council of
Constance determined the doctrine of the half communion with a Non obstante to
Christ's institution, that is, with a defiance to it, or a noted, observed
neglect of it, and with a profession it was otherwise in the primitive Church.
Where then was your religion before John Hus and Hierom of Pragues time;
against whom that Council was convened? But by this instance it appears most
certainly that your Church cannot show her confessions immediately after
Christ, and therefore if we could not show ours immediately before Luther, it
were not half so much; for since you receded from Christ's Doctrine we might
well recede from yours; and it matters not who or how many or how long they
professed your doctrine, if neither Christ nor his Apostles did teach it: so
that if these Articles constitute your Church, your Church was invisible at the
first, and if ours was invisible afterward it matters not; For yours was
invisible in the days of light, and ours was invisible in the days of
darkness. For our Church was always visible in the reflections of Scripture,
and he that had his eyes of faith and reason might easily have seen these
truths all the way which constitute our Church. But I add yet further, that
our Church before Luther was there where your Church was, in the same place and
in the same persons; for diverse of the errors which have been amongst us
reformed, were not the constituent Articles of your Church before Luthers time;
for before the last Councels of your Church a man might have been of your
Communion upon easier terms; and indulgences were indeed a practice but no
Article of faith before your men made it so, and that very lately, and so were
many other things besides. So that although your men cosen the credulous and
the simple by calling yours the old religion, yet the difference is vast
between truth and their affirmative even as much as between old errors and new
Articles. For although ignorance and superstition had prepared the oar, yet
the Councels of Constance and Basil, and Trent especially, were the forges and
the mint.

Lastly, if your men had not by all the vile and violent arts of the world
stopped the mouths of dissenters, the question would quickly have been
answered, or our Articles would have been so confessed, so owned and so
public, that the question could never have been asked; but in despite of all
opposition, there were great numbers of confessors who did protest and profess
and practice our doctrines contrary to your Articles; as it is demonstrated by
the Divines of Germany in Illyricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, and in BP.
Mortons appeal.

But with your next objection you are better pleased and your men make most
noise with it. For you pretend that by our confession salvation may be had in
your Church; but your men deny it to us; and therefore by the confession of
both sides you may be safe, and there is no question concerning you; but of us
there is great question, for none but our selves say that we can be saved.

I answer; 1. That salvation may be had in your Church, is it ever the truer
because we say it? If it be not, it can add no confidence to you, for the
proposition gets no strength by our affirmative. But if it be, then our
authority is good or else our reason; and if either be, then we have more
reason to be believed speaking of our selves; because we are concerned to see
that our selves may be in a state of hope; and therefore we would not venture
on this side if we had not greater reason to believe well of our selves then of
you. And therefore believe us when it is more likely that we have greater
reason, because we have greater concernments, and therefore greater
consideration.

2. As much charity as your men pretend us to speak of you, yet it is a clear
case our hopes of your salvation is so little that we dare not venture our
selves on your side. The Burger of Oldwater being to pass a river in his
journey to Daventry, bad his man try the ford; telling him he hoped he should
not be drowned for though he was afraid the River was too deep yet he thought
his horse would carry him out, or at least, the boats would fetch him off. Such
a confidence we may have of you, but you will find that but little warranty, if
you remember how great an interest it is that you venture.

3. It would be remembered that though the best ground of your hope is not the
goodness of your own faith, but the greatness of our charity; yet we that
charitably hope well of you, have a fullness of assurance of the truth and
certainty of our own way; and however you can please your selves with Images of
things as having no firm footing for your trifling confidence, yet you can
never with your tricks outface us of just and firm adherencies; and if you
were not empty of supports, and greedy of bulrushes snatching at any thing to
support your sinking cause, you would with fear and trembling consider the
direct dangers which we demonstrate to you to be in your religion rather then
flatter your selves with collateral, weak, and deceitful hopes of accidental
possibilities, that some of you may escape.

4. If we be more charitable to you then you are to us, acknowledge in us the
beauty and essential form of Christian Religion; be sure you love as well as
make use of our charity; but if you make our charity an argument against us,
remember that you render us evil in exchange for good; and let it be no brag to
you that you have not that charity to us; for therefore the Donatists were
condemned for Heretics and Schismatics because they damned all the world, and
afforded no charity to any that was not of their Communion.

5. But that our charity may be such indeed, that is, that it may do you a real
benefit, and not turn into Wormwood and Colliquintida, I pray take notice in
what sense it is that we allow salvation may possibly be had in your Church. We
warrant it not to any, we only hope it for some, we allow it to them as to the
Sadduces in the Law, and to the Corinthians in the Gospel who denied the
resurrection; that is, till they were sufficiently instructed, and competently
convinced, and had time and powers to out-wear their prejudices and the
impresses of their education and long persuasion. But to them amongst you who
can and do consider and yet determine for error and interest, we have a greater
charity, even so much as to labor and pray for their conversion, but not so
much fondness as to flatter them into boldness and pertinacious adherencies to
matters of so great danger.

6. But in all this affair though your men are very bold with God and leap into
his judgment seat before him, and give wild sentences concerning the salvation
of your own party and the damnation of all that disagree, yet that which is our
charity to you, is indeed the fear of God, and the reverence of his judgments;
we do not say that all Papists are certainly damned; we wish and desire
vehemently that none of you may perish; but then this charity of judgment
relates not to you, or is derived from any probability which we see in your
doctrines that differ from ours; but because we know not what rate and value
God puts upon the article; It concerns neither you nor us to say, this or that
man shall be damned for his opinion; for besides that this is a bold intrusion
into that secret of God which shall not be opened till the day of judgment,
and besides that we know not what allayes and abatements are to be made by the
good meaning and the ignorance of the man; all that can concern us is to tell
you that you are in error, that you depart from Scripture, that you exercise
tyranny over souls, that you leave the Divine institution, and prevaricate Gods
Commandment, that you divide the Church without truth and without necessity,
that you tie men to believe things under pain of damnation which cannot be made
very probable much less certain; and therefore that you sin against God and are
in danger of his eternal displeasure; but in giving the final sentence as we
have no more to do then your men have, yet so we refuse to follow your evil
example; and we follow the glorious precedent of our Blessed Lord; who decreed
and declared against the crime, but not against the Criminal before the day. He
that does this, or that, is in danger of the Council, or in danger of judgment,
or liable and obnoxious to the danger of hell fire; so we say of your greatest
errors; they put you in the danger of perishing; but that you shall or shall
not perish, we leave it to your Judge, and if you call this charity, it is
well, I am sure it is piety and the fear of God.

7. Whether you may be saved, or whether you shall be damned for your errors,
does neither depend upon our affirmative nor your negative, but according to
the rate and value which God sets upon things. Whatever we talk, things are as
they are, not as we dispute, or grant, or hope; and therefore it were well if
your men would leave abusing you and themselves with these little arts of
indirect support. For many men that are warranted, yet do eternally perish, and
you in your Church damn millions who I doubt not shall reign with Jesus
eternally in the Heavens.

8. I wish you would consider, that if any of our men say salvation may be had
in your Church, it is not for the goodness of your new propositions, but only
because you do keep so much of that which is our Religion, that upon the
confidence of that we hope well concerning you. And we do not hope any thing at
all that is good of you or your Religion as it distinguishes from us and ours:
we hope that the good which you have common with us may obtain pardon directly
or indirectly, or may be an antidote of the venom, and an amulet against the
danger of your very great errors, so that if you can derive any confidence from
our concession, you must remember where it takes root; not upon any thing of
yours, but wholly upon the excellency of ours; you are not at all safe, or
warranted for being Papists, but we hope well of some of you, for having so
much of the Protestant: and if that will do you any good, proceed in it, and
follow it whither soever it leads you.

9. The safety that you dream of which we say to be on your side is nothing of
allowance, or warranty, but a hope that is collateral, indirect and relative;
we do not say any thing whereby you can conclude yours to be safer then ours,
for it is not safe at all, but extremely dangerous; we affirm those errors in
themselves to be damnable, some to contain in them impiety, some to have
sacrilege, some idolatry, some superstition, some practifes to be conjuring
and charming and very like to witchcraft, as in your hallowing of water and
baptizing bells and exorcizing demoniacs; and what safety there can be in these,
or what you can fancy we should allow to you, I suppose you need not boast of.
Now because we hope some are saved amongst you, you must not conclude yours to
be safe; for our hope relies upon this. There are many of your propositions in
which we differ from you, that thousands amongst you understand and know
nothing of, it is to them as if they were not, it is to them now as it was
before the council, they hear not of it. And though your Priests have taken a
course that the most ignorant do practice some of your abominations most
grossly, yet we hope this will not be laid upon them who (as S. Austin's
expression is) caut a sollicitudine quaerunt veritatem, corrigi parati cum
invenerint: do according as they are able warily and diligently seek for truth,
and are ready to swallow it when they find it; men who live good lives, and
repent of all their evils known and unknown. Now if we are not deceived in our
hopes, these men shall rejoice in the eternal goodness of God which prevails
over the malice of them that misguide you; but if we be deceived in our hopes
of you, your guides have abused you, and the blind leaders of the blind will
fall together. For,

10. If you will have the secret of this whole affair, this it is. The hopes we
have of any of you, (as it is known) principally relies upon the hopes of your
repentance. Now we say that a man may repent of an error which he knows not of;
as he that prays heartily for the pardon of all his sins and errors known and
unknown; by his general repentance may obtain many degrees and instances of
mercy. Now thus much also your men allow to us; these who live well, and die in
a true though but general repentance of their sins and errors even amongst us
your best and wisest men pronounce to be in a saveable condition. Here then we
are equal, and we are as safe by your confession as you are by ours. But
because there are some Bigots of your faction fierce and fiery who say that a
general repentance will not serve our turns, but it must be a particular
renunciation of Protestancy; these men deny not only to us but to themselves
too, all that comfort which they derive from our Concession, and indeed which
they can hope for from the mercies of God. For be you sure we think as ill of
your errors as you can suppose of our Articles; and therefore if for errors (be
they on which side it chances) a general repentance will not serve the turn
without an actual dereliction, then flatter not your selves by any thing of our
kindness to your party; for you must have a particular if a general be not
sufficient. But if it be sufficient for you, it is so for us, in case we be in
error as your men suppose us; but if it will not suffice us for remedy to those
errors you charge us with, neither will it suffice you; for the case must needs
be equal as to the value of repentance and the malignity of the error: and
therefore these men condemn themselves and will not allow us to hope well of
them, but if they will allow us to hope, it must be by affirming the value of a
general repentance; and if they allow that, they must hope as well of ours as
we of theirs: but if they deny it to us, they deny it to themselves, and then
they can no more brag of any thing of our concession. This only I add to this
consideration; that your men does not, cannot charge upon us any doctrine that
is in its matter and effect impious; there is nothing positive in our doctrine,
but is either true or innocent, but we are accused for denying your
super-structures: ours therefore (if we be deceived) is but like a sin of
omission; yours are sins of commission in case you are in the wrong (as we
believe you to be) and therefore you must needs be in the greater danger then
we can be supposed, by how much sins of omission are less then sins of
commission.

11. Your very way of arguing from our charity is a very fallacy and a trick
that must needs deceive you if you rely upon it. For whereas your men argue
thus. The Protestants say we Papists may be saved; and so say we too: but we
Papists say that you Protestants cannot, therefore it is safest to be a Papist;
consider that of this argument if it shall be accepted, any bold heretic can
make use, against any modest Christian of a true persuasion. For, if he can but
outface the modesty of the good man, and tell him he shall be damned; unless
that modest man say as much of him, you see impudence shall get the better of
the day. But it is thus in every error. Fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem in
immediate succession were circumcised, believing it to be necessary so to be:
with these other Christian Churches who were of the uncircumcision did
communicate: Suppose now that these Bishops had not only thought it necessary
for themselves but for others too; this argument you see was ready: you of the
Uncircumcision who do communicate with us, think that we may be saved though we
are circumcised, but we do not think that you who are not circumcised can be
saved, therefore it is the safest way to be circumcised: I suppose you would
not have thought their argument good, neither would you have had your children
circumcised. But this argument may serve the Presbyterians as well as the
Papists. We are indeed very kind to them in our sentences concerning their
salvation; and they are many of them as unkind to us; If they should argue so
as you do; and say, you Episcopal men think we Presbyterians though in errors
can be saved, and we say so too: but we think you Episcopal men are Enemies of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and therefore we think you in a damnable
condition, therefore it is safer to be a Presbyterian; I know not what your men
would think of the argument in their hands, I am sure we had reason to complain
that we are used very ill on both hands for no other cause but because we are
charitable. But it is not our case alone; but the old Catholics were used just
so by the Donatists in this very argument, as we are used by your men. The
Donatists were so fierce against the Catholics, that they would rebaptize all
them who came to their Churches from the other: But the Catholics, as knowing
the Donatists did give right baptism, admitted their converts to repentance,
but did not rebaptize them. Upon this score, the Donatists triumphed, saying;
you Catholics confess our Baptism to be good, and so say we: But we Donatists
deny your Baptism to be good; therefore it is safer to be of our side then
yours. Now what should the Catholics say or do? should they lie for God and
for religion, and to serve the ends of truth say the Donatists baptism was not
good? That they ought not. Should they damn all the Donatists, and make the
rent wider? It was too great already. What then? They were quiet and knew that
the Donatists sought advantages by their own fierceness, and trampled upon the
others charity; but so they hardened themselves in error, and became evil,
because the others were good.

I shall trouble you no further now, but desire you to consider of these things
with as much caution, as they were written with charity.

Till I hear from you, I shall pray to God to open your heart and your
understanding, that you may return f^^m whence you are fallen, and repent, and
do your first work, which that you may do, is the hearty desire of

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, I^^^ Tailor.

The Second Letter: Written to a Person newly converted to the Church of
England.
Madam,
I Bless God I am safely arrived where I (...) after my unwilling departure
from the place of your abode and danger, and now because I can have no other
expression of my tenderness, I account that I have a treble Obligation to
signify it by my care of your biggest and eternal interest. And because it
has pleased God to make me an Instrument of making you to understand in some
fair measure the excellencies of a true and holy Religion, and that I have
pointed out such follies and errors in the Roman Church, at which your
understanding being forward and pregnant, did of it self start as at imperfect
ill-looking Propositions, give me leave to do that now which is the purpose of
my Charity, that is, teach you to turn this to the advantage of a holy life,
that you may not only be changed but converted. For the Church of England
whither you are now come is not in condition to boast her self in the
reputation of changing the opinion of a single person, though never so
excellent; She has no temporal ends to serve which must stand upon fame and
noises; all that she can design, is to serve God, to advance the honor of her
Lord, and the good of souls, and to rejoice in the Cross of Christ.

First, Therefore I desire you to remember that as now you are taught to pray
both publicly and privately, in a Language understood, so it is intended your
affections should be forward, in proportion to the advantages which your prayer
has in the understanding part. For though you have been often told and have
heard, that ignorance is the Mother of devotion, you will find that the
proposition is unnatural and against common sense and experience; because it is
impossible to desire that of which we know nothing, unless the desire it self
be fantastical and illusive: it is necessary that in the same proportion in
which we understand any good thing, in the same we shall also desire it, and
the more particular and minute your notices are, the more passionate and
material also your affections will be toward it, and if they be good things
for which we are taught to pray, the more you know them the more reason you
have to love them; It is monstrous to think that devotion, that is, passionate
desires of religious things, and the earnest prosecutions of them should be
produced by any thing of ignorance or less perfect notices in any sense. Since
therefore you are taught to pray, so that your understanding is the praecentor
or the Master of the Quire, and you know what you say; your desires are made
humane, religious, express, material (for these are the advantages of prayers
and Liturgies well understood) be pleased also to remember, that now if you be
not also passionate and devout for the things you mention, you will want the
Spirit of prayer, and be more inexcusable then before. In many of your prayers
before (especially the public) you heard a voice but saw and perceived
nothing of the sense, and what you understood of it was like the man in the
Gospel that was half blind, he saw men walking like Trees, and so you possibly
might perceive the meaning of it in general; You knew when they came to the
Epistle, when to the Gospel, when the Introit, when the Pax, when any of the
other more general periods were; but you could have nothing of the Spirit of
prayer, that is, nothing of the devotion and the holy affections to the
particular excellencies which could or ought there to have been represented;
but now you are taught how you may be really devout, it is made facil and
easy, and there can want nothing but your consent and observation.

2. Whereas now you are taken off from all humane confidences, from relying
wholly and almost ultimately upon the Priests power and external act, from
reckoning prayers by numbers, from forms and outsides, you are not to think
that the Priests power is less, that the Sacraments are not effective, that
your prayers may not be repeated frequently; but you are to remember, that all
outward things and Ceremonies, all Sacraments and Institutions work their
effect in the virtue of Christ, by some moral Instrument; The Priests in the
Church of England can absolve you as much as the Roman Priests could fairly
pretend; but then we teach that you must first be a penitent and a returning
person, and our absolution does but manifest the work of God, and comfort and
instruct your Conscience, direct and manage it; You shall be absolved here, but
not unless you live a holy life; So that in this you will find no change but
to the advantage of a strict life; we will not flatter you and cozen your dear
soul by pretended ministeries, but we so order our discourses and directions
that all our ministrations may be really effective, and when you receive the
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, or the Lords Supper, it does more good here
then they do there, because if they consecrate ritely, yet they do not
communicate you fully; and if they offer the whole representative Sacrifice,
yet they do not give you the whole Sacrament;) only we enjoin that you come
with so much holiness, that the grace of God in your heart may be the
principal, and the Sacrament in our hands may be the ministering and assisting
part: we do not promise great effects to easy trifling dispositions, because
we would not deceive, but really procure to you great effects; and therefore
you are now to come to our offices with the same expectations as before, of
pardon, of grace, of sanctification; but you must do something more of the work
your self, that we may not do less in effect then you have in your
expectation; We will not to advance the reputation of our power deceive you
into a less blessing.

3. Be careful that you do not flatter your self, that in our Communion you may
have more ease and liberty of life; for though I know your pious soul desires
passionately to please God and to live religiously, yet I ought to be careful
to prevent a temptation, lest it at any time should discompose your severity:
Therefore as to confession to a Priest (which how it is usually practiced
amongst the Roman party, your self can very well account, and you have
complained sadly, that it is made an ordinary act, easy and transient,
sometime matter of temptation, often times impertinent, but) suppose it free
from such scandal to which some men's folly did betray it, yet the same severity
you will find among us; for though we will not tell a lie to help a sinner, and
say that is necessary which is only appointed to make men do themselves good,
yet we advise and commend it, and do all the work of souls to all those people
that will be saved by all means; to devout persons, that make Religion the
business of their lives, and they that do not so in the Churches of the Roman
Communion, as they find but little advantage by peridiocal confessions, so
they feel but little awfulness and severity by the injunction; you must confess
to God all your secret actions, you must advise with a holy man in all the
affairs of your soul, you will be but an ill friend to your self if you conceal
from him the state of your spiritual affairs: We desire not to hear the
circumstance of every sin, but when matter of justice is concerned, or the
nature of the sin is changed, that is, when it ought to be made a Question;
and you will find that though the Church of England gives you much liberty
from the bondage of innumerable Ceremonies and humane devices, yet in the
matter of holiness you will be tied to very great service, but such a service
as is perfect freedom, that is, the service of God and the love of the holy
Jesus, and a very strict religious life; for we do not promise heaven, but upon
the same terms it is promised us, that is, Repentance toward God and Faith in
our Lord Jesus: and as in faith we make no more to be necessary then what is
made so in holy Scripture, so in the matter of Repentance we give you no easy
devices, and suffer no lessening definitions of it, but oblige you to that
strictness which is the condition of being saved, and so expressed to be by the
infallible Word of God; but such as in the Church of Rome they do not so much
stand upon.

Madam, I am weary of my Journey, and although I did purpose to have spoken
many things more, yet I desire that my not doing it may be laid upon the
account of my weariness, all that I shall add to the main businese is this.

4. Read the Scriptures diligently, and with an humble spirit, and in it
observe what is plain, and believe and live accordingly. Trouble not your self
with what is difficult, for in that your duty is not described.

5. Pray frequently and effectually; I had rather your prayers should be often
then long. It was well said of Petrarch, Magno verborum freno uti decet cum
superiore colloquentem. When you speak to your superior you ought to have a
bridle upon your tongue, much more when you speak to God. I speak of what is
decent in respect of our selves and our infinite distances from God: but if
love makes you speak, speak on, so shall your prayer be full of charity and
devotion, Nullus est amore superior, ille te coget ad veniam, qui me ad
multiloquium; Love makes God to be our friend, and our approaches more united
and acceptable; and therefore you may say to God, the same love which made me
speak, will also move thee to hear and pardon: Love and devotion may enlarge
your Letanies, but nothing else can, unless Authority does interpo^e.

6. Be curious not to communicate but with the true Sons of the Church of
England, lest if you follow them that were amongst us, but are gone out from
us, because they were not of us) you be offended and tempted to impute their
follies to the Church of England.

7. Trouble your self with no controversies willingly, but how you may best
please God by a strict and severe conversation.

8. If any Protestant live loosely, remember that he dishonours an excellent
Religion, and that it may be no more laid upon the charge of our Church, then
the ill lives of most Christians may upon the whole Religion.

9. Let no man or woman affright you with declamations and scaring words of
Heretic, and Damnation, and Changeable; for these words may be spoken against
them that return to light, as well as to those that go to darkness, and that
which men of all sides can say, it can be of effect to no side upon its own
strength or pretension.

The End.

