A DISCOURSE OF NATURAL AND MORAL IMPOTENCY.

By Joseph Truman, B. D. late Minister near Nottingham.

The Second Edition, with Additions left by the Authors own Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel; and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Peacock in St. Paul's Church yard, 1675.

TO THE Ingenuous, Christian READER.
I More fear the censures of those that shall read but part of this discourse,
or take their estimate concerning the import of it at the second hand, from the
representation of the Ignorant, or deeply prae-engaged Learned; than an
attempted confutation of any deliberate Opposer; yet I promise my self
exemption from neither.

I pretend not here to teach new Divinity. The things here maintained, that can
be pretended strange, are not so remote from the common sentiments of men, as
the most will suppose, being but the opinions, or the immediate consequences of
such opinions, as the most moderate men have, at least virtually, granted, and
maintained; though I cannot deny but many of them, being not well consistent
with themselves, have also maintained the contrary; not that I hereby accuse
any: for this is only a not denying such, while good Christians, to be, in this
particular, ill Logicians.

That no man is justly bound by any Law of God, or man, any further than his
natural faculties and power reach, is written with indelible Characters on
every man's Soul as legibly, as that there is such a thing as justice or
injustice.

And secondly, That a man is bound by the Law of God (what ever some say to the
contrary) so far; so that his greatest wickedness or aversation of will to obey
it, will not excuse him, but really add to his inexcusableness; is as legible
as that the greatest wickedness is wickedness, and does not excuse. And he that
will deny this, may with as much reason deny the moral laudability of Christ's
obedience on Earth, or an Angel's in Heaven, because of their morally
insuperable inclination of Will to such obedience; whereas such obedience is
more laudable, as having more of the Will.

Yet thirdly, such wickedness, or aversation of Will to good, will as
certainly, as what is most certain, hinder (else you must say, Man's wickedness
is no hindrance, or so little a hindrance of his obedience, that he has no
need of the grace of the Hole Spirit to overcome it) I say, will most certainly
hinder man's compliance with the divine commands, till God shall take away, or
overcome such reluctance of will by some such superffluence of Grace, as he is
not bound in justice to afford them, or hold them excused. For God is bound in
justice to do no more for men in order to the making them obedient to his Laws,
or else to hold them excused for not being obedient; than so much as would
render their not obeying his Laws culpable and inexcusable, if men were not
wicked, or had no aversation of will to such obedience.

Now from these three positions by evident consequence follows, (supposing you
will allow men to have any culpable or sinful Impotency on them; which he that
denies, must affirm, that men can, for any Impotency on them whatsoever, so
order their Conversations, as not to need Christ's death or pardon for their
failings therein; And may also, with as much show of reason, either deny, that
it can, in any sense, be said truly, That Christ could not sin, or Angels in
Heaven cannot sin, or God cannot sin, or lie; or else deny that this their
morally insuperable rectitude or holiness of will was or is Morally
commendable) I say, it hence follows,

First; That man's culpable Impotency lies only in an Impotency, to do what he
has a power to do, or (to speak the same in other words) in Man's not being
able to do in one sense, what he can do in another sense. And to say otherwise,
is to forget, that Morality supposes, and is subjected in a naturally capable
subject, viz. in a rational Being, or a being endued with the power or faculty
of free Will; And consequently that a Moral or culpable Cannot-obey,
necessarily supposes, and is subjected in natural power to obey; and a Moral
or laudable Cannot sin, in a Natural power to sin.

Secondly; That the effect of the Grace of the Holy Ghost, lies not in man's
receiving from God the mere power to obey God's Commands: Since, First, This
power is due in justice, supposing he require obedience from men, and therefore
is not from Grace (The Law supposes this, or it could not be a Law, because not
obligatory to a man wanting such power.) And Secondly; Man could not sin, or be
guilty, or inexcusable without this power, in not doing what the command
requires; whereas men can sin without this Grace; else why do any pray for it
for themselves or others to keep them from sin.

But the effect of this Grace lies in receiving from God something over and
beside this power, to cause a man to do what he is bound to do, and would be
too blame for not doing it, and therefore consequently had a power to do it,
though this Grace had been denied him.

Me thinks these things are so clear, that it would be a reproach, not only to
Learning, but to humanity, if any, especially of many Learned men, should be
found seriously to hold the contrary.

Sure I am, that this distinction of Natural and Moral impotency, is of such
Importance in Divinity, that they that shall speak, of the Controversies hereby
endeavored to be cleared without keeping clear Notions about this distinction,
shall (though otherwise learned Fathers and Doctors) speak like Children
concerning them; And also that men of ordinary understandings, keeping to this
distinction, may competently satisfy themselves and others, if willing to be
satisfied in such Controversies as have posed the greatest wits and Shollars,
that keep not to it.

I look upon St. Jerome's humor as much obstructing the increase of knowledge;
who endeavored to discourage attempts against his writings, by telling*
Ruffinus, his Antagonist, Hoc unum denurcio, and repetens iterum iterumque
monebo, corrut^m bestiam petis, Hieron. Apol. 1. cont. Ruffin.
that he had Horns, and whoever meddled with him should find him a horned
Beast. Yea, I so far dislike it, that I hereby signify to ingenuous men that
shall have any inclination to reflect upon this discourse, that I am so far
from having, or at least from desiring to have any such offensive weapons
against the truth, that I desire to lie open to truth, by being naked of any
armor of defense against it is convictions; And therefore have no great
aversation to say, as those, Judge. 19.30. once did, viz. [Consider of it, take
advice, and speak your minds.] Provided, men would but observe the commonly
neglected order prescribed in that speech, by practicing the two first parts of
the advice, before the last.

That this discourse may be as influential to the promoting of Truth, Holiness,
and Peace amongst us, as it is proper and suitable to such ends, is the prayer
and hearts-desire of the Author.

A DISCOURSE OF Natural and Moral IMPOTENCY.
You will not come to me that you might have Life, John 5.40. No man can come
to me except the Father, which sent me, draw him, John 6.44.
IT is so apparent, that a proper Impotency (in the common strict sense) does
excuse from all obedience, to commands before God and man, and makes all
Conditional Promises on such a condition, so far from being of Grace and
kindness, that they are Nullities, that all The Law constructions of our
Common, and, in cases Testamentary, of the Civil Law, in making such
conditional promises absolute; do not contradict but confirm this, because made
upon this reason: else they would be Nullities.
Lawyers and Casuists generally acknowledge it. And such as deny Man's having
any ability to Good, do it not willingly, but for fear of inconveniences on the
other hand; and though they do deny it, yet at other times grant it implicitly,
yea and fly to it as the only refuge from extremes on their own hand.

And again; That there is an Impotency in men to Good is apparent, not only
from Scripture, as, No man can come to me, exceept etc. and can the Blackmore
change his skin, etc. but from the woeful Experience of all; yea the Heathens
Plato.
acknowledged it, and were puzzled how to give an account of its original:
Perprrie also exhorts all to lament it as the Ancients dil, propounding the
ancient Heathens for a pattern, lib. de Abstin.
so that he is a Monster of men that does not acknowledge and lament it.

Yet it is so apparent. That we are too blame in not doing the things we have
an Impotency to, and that Promises of mercy to returning Sinners are of Grace;
that a man should contradict his own knowledge and the sentiments of all the
world, beside the Scripture, to say otherwise: All which notions, taken
together, seem irreconcilable: and are indeed irreconcilable (say men what they
will) without some Distinction about Impotency.

Now it is a desirable thing, if possible, to come to a staiedness and
consistency, that we may not as in the dark say and unsay, as the present
difficulties press us on either hand, not knowing what we say, or whereof we
affirm.

That Distinction well understood, which is much insisted on by the French
Protestant Divines, would much conduce herein, namely, the distinction of
Natural and Moral Impotency.

And though many of Dr. Twisses Judgment in other things, oppose it, Rursus,
impotentia faciendi ( it is misprinted facience) quod Deo gratum est and
acceptum. non est impotentia Naturae sed morum: nulla enim nobis deest facultas
naturae, per pecatum originale; juxta illud Augustini, Nulli agnoscendae
veritatis abstulit facultatem. Adhuc remainet potentia qua facere possumus
quaecunque volumus. And, Page 212. Amplius advertas, Impotentia, ex amputatione
manitum orta, est impotentia naturae; at imp^teutia ad (...) est duntaxat
impotentia Morum, qua nihil obstante poterit homomorale aliquod officium
praestare si velit. So in his Answer to Hord. page 115. Observe (says he) how
this Author confounds Impotency Moral, which consists in the corruption of
men's powers natural; and Impotency Natural, which consists in bereaving him
of power natural.
yet he himself in many places, when pressed with difficulties, fled to it as
his chief Sanctuary, Vindic. great. lib. 2. Errat. 9. Sect. 6. page (mihi) 211.

This distinction of Natural and Moral power, or Impotency, is not used to
affirm or deny the coming or arising of one or either of them from nature: for
I am not now speaking de origin, whence they arise; but to denote the species
or kinds, and the essential difference of their Natures, Non refert scelus unde
cadat, scelus esse farendum est. Manil
come they which way they will.

That is a Physical or Natural habit or action, that is neither (...) nor (...)
laudable nor vituperable in genere morum, that a man can neither be counted
good and honest, or bad and dishonest, for his agility or lameness, dullness,
blockishness, or acuteness; but may be (having such power, and doing
accordingly) admired though not praised? and for the defect of such power may
be pitied, but not blamed or punished: and this Impotency may be a punishment,
but cannot be a sin.

The Moral and Ethical act or habit is just contrary, It is that which is
laudable or vituperable, and that which a man may be looked on as honest or
dishonest for.

Now Natural Impotency is always, in this sense, of something that a man cannot
do if he would never so much; or has not the very faculty of willing it.

The Moral Impotency is of something that a man has the natural faculty to
will, or can do it if he would; but is hindered only by moral vicious habits,
from willing or doing it.

The Stoic Philosophers use to express this difference well, by (...), and
(...).

Every man (though he know not how to express this to others, nor possibly
clear it to himself) has a notion of these things differing; and which belong
to one sort, and which to the other; and that one is capable of a just command
or prohibition, the other not.

If any one hear of a man that abhorrs such a particular meat, which is Gods
good creature appointed for food, he pities him, but does not blame him; and
so, when he hears of the man that so abhorred Wine, that he could not receive
it in the Sacrament: But if he hear of a man that hates and abhorrs God and
good men, and that cannot endure to hear any good instructions, he blames him;
and is sure, this is not blameless as the other is. But I will speak more
plainly, if possible.

That Man has, and wants not, a natural power of doing any duty, who has,
first an objective Evidence, that is intelligible, fitted and suited
objectively to produce the Act, that he either knows, or may know what is
required of him, if he make that use of his understanding, that he has power
to do.

Secondly: That has the natural faculties of understanding and willing the
thing commanded, and that not only in actu primo, as, we say Natural Fools
have; but actu secundo. i.e. without natural impediments hindering their
exercise: Here now is enough named already for all elicit Acts. viz. mere acts
of the will and understanding.

Thirdly: Then he has the natural power for performing the imperate acts, when
there is no external or internal force, no man or thing hindering him; and has
a body rightly disposed, is not deaf or blind, etc. and has the outward helps
necessary for some imperate acts, as, a sufficient estate to give, etc. So that
he can do the imperate act if he would.

This is it, Then a man has the natural power to do any thing, when he has
the natural faculties, and no hinderance but that he can do the thing if he
would; And then he has a Natural Impotency when he has not these faculties,
or cannot do the thing commanded, if he would never so much. Now I will name
the Proprieties of it.

First; The want of this natural power, their Natural Impotency, does excuse,
as is commonly granted; and they that deny it are not consistent with
themselves, but unawares grant it. Total Natural Impotency does excuse before
God and Man: Yea all Natural Impotency does excuse according to the measure and
degree of it. Some little Natural Impotency does in some measure, though not
wholly; a tanto, though not a tot. It is some excuse if a Servant be commanded
a foot journey and go not, if something lame. so that he could not go it but
with great difficulty, but if quite lame (could not at all) a full excuse. If a
man be hebetior, blockish, something dull, it is some excuse for is not
understanding difficulties in Religion, which he might yet possibly, with great
difficulty, understand; but if quite a Fool, so as to have no more use of
Reason than a Beast; it is a total excuse from any command to learn or
understand. Without doubt aman of dull Intellectuals, is not bound to
understand such things in Divinity, as require great acuteness of parts to
understand; for, he cannot if he would. And doubtless a command for a man to
will his own misery formally, or to nill his own happiness formally (which all
agree, No man can do) would not oblige; so as that a man should be too blame in
not doing it: since a man has not the natural faculty or power to do such
things.

If a man that is not much inclined to it, give himself over to sleep in times
of Religious worship, it is a great fault: If a man be very sleepy, and sleep
at such a time, it is some excuse, even so far as it arose from a natural
cause; but yet it is a fault so far, as it was from carelessness to stir up
himself, from want of the awe of Gods presence, so far as he might, if he
would, do otherwise; but if it so seized on him, that his greatest desires and
endeavors could not preserve him from it, no fault: Need I prove this? The
very mention seems enough.

All those Divines, consulted about it, took it for granted that it was not the
duty of that good man, to drink wine in the Eucharist, that could not, if he
would, and that the genoral command did not oblige him.

And all generally grant it as apparent, That the Heathens (that never had, nor
could obtain the Revelation of it) shall never be condemned for not Believing
Christ and his death, because they had not the means that were naturally
necessary; And by the same Reason they must affirm (else they must say That is
no reason, and find some other) that they shall not be condemned for not doing
the things they could not do, and also that we shall not be condemned for not
knowing or doing the things that we cannot know or do: else they must say, God
had greater respect for the Heathen, than for us. There are only three
Exceptions that I can call to mind, that are made by any to this general
Assertion, with any show of reason.

First, some make this Exception, That if a man's natural Impotency proceed
from his own fault, or his Ancestors, so as to be his own fault, in Law, or
reputatively; then it does not excuse him from obedience to the command.

I think it apparent, that yet it does excuse; and I will bring their own
strongest Instances; If a man have, by his own lewd courses, run himself into
debt, so that now he cannot pay his debts if he would; his not paying in this
case after his disability, cease to be a fault. He ought indeed to lament
that former wickedness, that brought this Natural Impotency upon him (and to
aggravate it in his Confessions with these afflictive consequents, that, He
cannot now pay, and, His Creditors are provoked, and God dishonored) for he
could then have done otherwise; And he ought to desire to pay, and for the
future resolve to use such probably means diligently, as that he may hereafter
be enabled to pay part or all, for this he can do.

But he cannot truly, when the Creditour bids him pay, and he would, but
cannot, in his Confessions of his faults to God that day, say I have, to all my
other sins, added this sin, that I did not this day pay the man when he
required it. Now, suppose the Creditor had demanded it ten times in a day,
there would have been ten several sins of injustice in not paying him his own,
if he had been able to pay it; but he cannot, when unable, lament that, over
and besides the committing those sins that disenabled him from paying, he is
guilty before God of ten new faults that day in not praying. It cannot be said
that a man overwhelmed in debt, through his own former defauls, and would pay
but cannot, lives in known present omission of that which is his duty: And so
if a man have, by some sinful ways broken his legs, or brought some Natural
Impotency on himself, that he can not go to hear a Sermon, he may lament his
former wickedness that brought that Impotency on him, but cannot lament it as
his fault that day that he did not go to hear the Sermon: that is, he ought to
lament that as his fault which he could have not done when he did it, and that
is not to be lamented as his fault, which he could not do, when he did it not.

If you shall object, But God may punish these men? I answer, There can be no
just punishment but for a fault; but this is no fault.

God may for ever punish them for those their faults that caused this
Impotency: for they might have done otherwise, but not at all for the not doing
that which they could not do.

If you object. But men may punish the Debtor abovementioned? Will you say,
Laws are unjust that do so? This Objection has greatest strength to silence
Antagonists, to run them upon the prejudice of speaking against wise Laws, and
Senatus-consulta, and Responsa prudentum, which are to be reverenced. I Answer,
the Lawmakers, in allowing such men to lie in prison at the will of the
Creditors, do justly and wisely: For, how could any be restrained from
luxuriously lavishing all away with fear of Law, if when they had rendered
themselves unresponsible, they were to be acquitted from punishment. Yea, they
do not unwisely or unjustly (because humane laws must be general and finite,
and not infinite, and taking notice of all particulars, unless they will make
this only Law, which would be virtually infinite. To leave all to the
discretion of Judges, which Legistators that have care of the Commonweal must
not do,) I say they do not unjustly to suffer men to lie in Prison at the will
of the Creditor, where there was no fault, but the man's poverty came some way
unexpected, and unavoidable by humane prudence; because greater inconveniences
would ensue in having a Law to free men from punishment from the Creditors, if
poverty came on them without any fault. Because it is an easy thing to conceal
Estates, and this would unavoidably subject Creditors to the Will and
Conscience of their Debtors: whereas there is far greater reason that the
Borrower (as Solomon speaks) should be Servant to the Lender, and in his power;
than that the Lender should be Servant to the Borrower and in his power: and it
is more agreeable to natural equity, and Reasons of Government; and the
contrary would be destructive to the Community. Legislators suppose, or will
and desire, that Creditors will not keep Debtors in Prison when unable to pay,
and this disability came on them without any former fault, as in riotous
mis-pending, but if Creditors do otherwise, they judge it would be more
inconvenient to the Community, to hinder them by a Law, than to leave it to
their own Conscience. But if there was a fault, whereby they came to their
want, the Creditors do justly in keeping them in prison (provided the
punishment exceed not the offense) if they have respect to their former fault
and wickedness in mispending, and also do it to make them warnings to others
that they do not sinfully lavish. But if any should know he is unable, and yet
keep his Debtor in Prison, not with respect to his former fault, or to warn
others; but merely in wrath and vexation, because he does not pay him when he
knows he cannot, it would be sinful and irrational, because, so far, it is
for no fault. But now, God will not do such a thing (as humane Laws must
suffer, and some irrational sinful men may do) in his immediate Government; He
can infallibly distinguish where a fault is, and where none; And as he will not
punish a man for not paying his debts, when his Poverty came on him by the hand
of God, and not by his own default; so where his disability to pay did come by
his own sin, he will not punish him for that which was no fault, as his then
not paying when he could not; but for that which was his fault, his sinful
making himself unable when he could have done otherwise.

The instance of Drunkenness seems difficult to be answered. I may here be
overwhelmed with the Authority of those that grant, All Natural Impotency does
excuse, except that Impotency of understanding and will, that arises from
drunkenness; and that this is so far from excusing, that it (...). Arist. ad
Nicom.
increases the fault, I shall, before I directly answer, premise this, (which
I perceive is the greatest Objection against what I shall say, and causes the
Mistake of Casuists in determining otherwise;) Just and prudent, and necessary
Laws that men ought to make, are not to overruled our judgments here. I like
well that saying of our English Lawyers, that, The Law will rather suffer a
mischief, than an Inconvenience; meaning by a Mischief, that which may fall too
heavy on a particular man accidentally; and by Inconvenience that which would
be a general Inconvenience to the whole Community; it being incumbent on them
Ne quid decrimenti respublica caperet. It would be a miss, could it be helped
without a greater Inconvenience, to allow an injured man's testimony to take
away another's life; yet I think it a good Law that a man's Oath against him
that robbed him, is Evidence enough to a Jury; because otherwise, whereas not
one in many is apprehended, they might so order their Robberies, as not one in
a multitude would be punished So the Law of concealing a dead Bastard-Child
seems hard, but is necessary on this account. God himself, if he make Laws,
possibly fit for humane Judicatures; they must subject some to mischief in the
Lawyer's sense, as that of the Oath of two Witnesses being irrefragable, which
some innocent man might suffer by.

I think, Legislators do wisely and justly in inflicting a penalty on men for
doing the thing when drunk, that they would inflict if he had done it when
sober; For

First, for the most part, Men drunk have the use of their will and
understanding in some measure, and so may at that time be restrained by
consideration of the penalty; and they have also at that time the greatest need
for the most part to be restrained by the greatness of the penalty; And if they
then knew there was no danger, or no great danger of the penalty, the
punishment being to be mitigated; it would subject the Innocent to the Lusts
and rage of Drunken men.

Secondly: Suppose, some may be quite mad with drink, and utterly deprived of
the use of Reason, and consequently of Will, and yet are capable of committing
such wicked acts (I mean materially wicked): It would be an imprudent
particular Law that should be made to spare such; because the most that commit
enormities in their drink, would escape upon this pretense; and many would
designedly drink to excess, that they might without danger, or with little
danger, be revenged, or fulfill some other Lust; and they would know that the
more horrid their fact was (as killing a Father) the more likely they would be
to escape upon pretense of madness, as if none, but one mad, would do it

Thirdly: There would yet be something of justice, though wholly deprived of
the use of reason, because the punishment is for the offense of Drunkenness,
which was voluntary; and to make other dread Drunkenness, especially they that
have in this respect the most need, that are apt to be in a rage by it, as that
which may bring on them, by the consequence, Capital punishment. And also when
the Law gives a man as much power to hold his neighbor to his Bargain which he
made when Drunk as when Sober; partly it may be for penalty; and partly it may
be for inconveniences, that otherwise would follow, were the Law otherwise.
And yet no Conscientious man (however in ordinary cases) would hold a man to
his bargain if quite, or but almost, deprived of the use of his reason by his
drink. But to speak to the Case.

If a man should, through Drunkenness, proceed to such madness, as to be
totally deprived of the use of his reason, and should then kill a man; he
ought, when in his right mind, lament the sin of making himself Drunk; and
ought to aggravate it with such Circumstances: but he might rather look on his
killing the man, as a punishment God suffered him to incur for his sin, and as
his sorrow, rather then any distinct sin; for it would not be properly and
formally Murder, nor any other sin; because not at all voluntary: for if there
be no Understanding, it is impossible there should be any thing of will,
univocally and properly so called; and proportionably it lessens that
particular fault, if almost deprived of Reason. Yet I dare not say with
Augustine, lib. 22. Contr. Faust. Manic. cap. 44. Culpandus est Lot, non
quantum ille Incestus in ebrietate admissus, sed quantum illa ebrietas,
meretur, That this, that Lot was to be blamed for his Drunkeness, but not for
his Incest. Because Expositors are not agreed of the meaning of the place; And
I durst less say it of his second Incest: for he might be guilty of Incest
interpretatively, it not being enough against his will, while he had the use of
it, if he, before his second Drunkeness, knew what had fallen out in the first,
and might not improbably suppose the like might follow again. But I should be
tiresome, if I should endeavor too great exactness. You see the thing, in
thesi, made plain, and that is enough here. Suppose a Master find his Servant
Drunk to a total senselesness, and then should utter such words as these, I
command thee now to go immediately such a Journey, would it not be irrational
in the Master to be angry at his Servant, not only (which he may be) for making
himself Drunk, and unfit for hearing and obeying his commands, both which he
could not have done when he did them; But also for his not going the journey at
that time when he knew he could not?

Secondly; Others make this Exception, that all Natural Impotence does excuse,
except the man think he is able, and that he has the Natural power to do the
thing he is commanded, and then it does not excuse; then it is his fault not to
do the thing commanded, though he cannot. The instance they use to bring is
this, If a Servant be bound in his bed, that he cannot rise, he knowing nothing
of it, and his Master calls him, and bids him rise; but he resolvedly lies
still and will not.

This is easily answered: For any one may see that the fault here, is not, That
he did not rise, which he could not; but that he did not will, desire, or
endeavor to rise, which he could do.

This Instance rather confirms what I say. And again, this Instance is very
improper for the thing it is commonly brought, and as it is commonly applied;
for this seems to take for granted, that the wicked are in no fault, in that
they do not Repent and Believe; and so that the commands of Repenting and
Believing do not oblige them, but only it is their fault they do not desire,
will, and endeavor to do these: and it is to grant they may will, desire, and
endeavor to obey the Gospel, as having no Impotency to these, but only cannot
do the thing desired. Whereas I must deny this as pelagianism, and must say,
that, in the sense they cannot believe and obey, they cannot desire, will, and
endeavor it; and I can show you that to will so far as to come to the
prevailing choice, would be Saving. Yet these mean the prevailing degree: For
when they tell men they cannot believe the Gospel, but wish them do what they
can, viz: Will it; they do not mean that they exhort them by this to will, to
obey the Gospel in such a low degree, and so remisly, as yet to will
prevailingly to reject the Gospel. This again implies to make it sense, That,
if wicked men did know (as the Objectors suppose themselves do) that they have
no Power, then it would be no fault for them to reject the Gospel. And then it
would be Ministers duty indeed (or they are very cruel to Souls) to tell them,
they have no Natural power to Repent and Believe, to free them from this
supposed error, that they might be free from fault, and know they are not
bound to comply with the Gospel.

Object. But is it no aggravation of the very not doing any thing, when a man
thinks he can do it, and cannot?

I Answer. Not in the least: For Natural Impotency comes not in the least
within Morality. You may as well say, it would lessen a man's fault before God,
that thinks he has no greater an estate then will merely serve his
Family-necessities, and spends it on a great Feast, to have a superfluous
Estate before that is fallen to him that he knew not of.

Thirdly, Others make this Exception to the general rule, That man's Natural
Impotency to obey, does excuse from obedience, except the reason why men obey
not, be, not because they cannot, though they cannot, but because they will
not; and this, say they, is the common cause of men's not Believing and
Repenting; they cannot with this proper cannot, distinct from will-not; and yet
that is not the reason why they do not Repent and Believe, but because they
will not, now though such design the same (I believe) that I do in this
discourse, yet to bring these dark words into the light, is enough to shame
them. Either they that make use of this evasion mean by cannot, the Natural
Impotency of doing the very same thing that he cannot do; or else only deny the
power of doing the thing he has an Impotency to; but grant a power,
notwithstanding of doing another thing required of him different from that he
wants the Natural power of doing.

1. If they mean it in the first sense, ad idem, that a man cannot do the same
thing required, but the reason why he does it not, is not because he cannot.

First: It is a Contradiction, as you may see in any instance keeping to the
same, If a man have not the Natural power of Willing, this cannot but be a
cause, yea a sufficient cause, yea the only cause of his not Willing. It would
be a strange idle kind of hindrance that hinders not; a strange kind of
Impotency to doing, that hinders not that doing, that is no reason of the not
doing. This is to say, A man's blindness is no reason or cause of his not
seeing, or, not the only cause.

Secondly: It is contrary to express Scriptures, to say, their cannot is no
reason of their not Believing. We must say, that a man's Impotency of Believing,
in what sense soever we take his Impotency, is the cause and reason of his not
Believing: For that Impotency that Christ speaks of, is given as the reason why
men Believe not on him, John 6.64, 65. There are some of you that Believe not:
For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that Believed not, and he said,
Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it be given him
of my Father. So John 843. Why do you not understand my speech? Even because
you cannot hear my Word; you are of your Father the Devil; that is, You are so
wicked, you are of such Devilish qualities.

II. If they mean by these words, that the fault is, notwithstanding their
Impotency, that they do not some other thing than that they have the Impotency
to; and so the meaning is, He has an Impotency to something; but his fault is,
that he does not that which he has a power to do, and has no Impotency at all
to. First: This rather confirms what I am saying, yea overgoe's me quite, as
you will after see. Secondly: This is no more to the purpose, than to say, A
blind man is too blame for not hearing, because his Impotency to seeing, does
not hinder his hearing; yet this is apparently the chief Part of the meaning of
this saying, as it is applied by those that use it.

Thirdly: This Saying leans upon an aerie, nice, false employed difference or
distinction; or it would have no color of reason, which is this, between
Willing, desiring, endeavoring to Repent and Believe, and Actual Believing and
Repenting. But any that looks upon these actions as elicit acts of the Will
(with the heart man Believes and Repents) may know, this is a Contradiction.
Imperate acts require another power distinct from the Will to execute them, and
so may be hindered by the want of that other Power, as want of Estate to give;
but it is otherwise where they are not Imperated, but only Elicited. What
should hinder, if a man Willed it to the prevailing degree? nay it is the thing
it self, and if one could suppose such a thing possible, God would accept it
without the distinct thing from it you suppose, called Repenting and Believing,
while he would do it, and it is no fault of his, no want of Will, they do not
follow; and to think otherwise, would be to have hard thoughts of God.

Fourthly: This leans upon another false foundation, that men have no
Impotency at all to Willing, desiring, or endeavoring that which is good;
which to affirm, as I said before, is Pelagianism. Yet, you must not charge men
with that doctrine that follows from their unwary obscure speeches by remote
consequence, when it may be said of them, That if they saw it followed, they
would not use those speeches, and do disown the consequence as not seeing it
follow.

Thus I have, I think, satisfactorily made out, that Natural Impotency does
excuse from fault. This is the first property of Natural Impotency, wherein it
differs from Moral; I have been large in this, but will recompense it with
brevity in the following.

Secondly: A second property of this Natural Impotency is this, Natural
Impotency ( viz. when a man has not the faculty of willing, or cannot do the
thing if he would) would make all conditional promises made upon condition of
doing that that men have this Impotency to do, nullities. Suppose the promise
made to fallen man that has no wings, If you fly you shall be saved, would not
this have been so far from gracious, as to be a Nullity? Yea though Adam had
had wings, and lost them by his sin, from himself and us; as indeed I grant the
case to be much so, in respect of original sin between Adam and us: Could any
man setiously give thanks for such a promise, or say, It was a kind and
gracious promise?

The sticking to this opinion of man's Natural Impotency to perform the
Gospel-condition, has driven some, otherwise learned and worthy men, to deny,
Such are promises, viz. If men Believe and Repent, they shall be saved; and to
use this argument for their opinion, that if they be, they are no more gracious
than the Law. I must say, their argument is unanswerable, if a man now have no
more power to fulfill the Gospel-condition, than to make all his sins undone.
Nay, there are no degrees in Impossibilities or total Cannots. It is no more of
grace to say to a man, If thou will run a mile I will give, etc. if he cannot,
than if thou will run a thousand. To say, men have not the Natural power to
perform the Gospel-condition, is to set forth God as one that mocketh; and to
say, He will encreast their misery if they do not, is to set him forth as doing
(horresco refer^ns) worse than mocking. What fearful things are extremes?

Thirdly: While there is this Natural Impotency of obedience to a command, or
performing the condition of a promise, men that obey not, or fall short of the
thing promised, will never repent of, or befool themselves for it; for that
which they could not help if they would never so much. I forbear aggravating
this opinion, as having load enough on its back already to make any considerate
man stand off lest it fall on him.

Now I come to speak of the Moral or Ethical Impotency. It is a thing as quite
different from Natural Impotency as can be almost supposed, as I shall show
you. They agree in nothing, but only in the thing that is the reason of the
Metaphor borrowed from Natural Impotency, to express this by which is this,
That as a lame man cannot walk, a blind man see, or dead arise without a
Miracle; so neither can these ever Repent and believe without some wonderful
help from Heaven, though upon another account it cannot be done, and not
because they want the Natural power of doing it.

Moral Impotency is when a man has the Natural power, can do the thing in
respect of his Natural powers, but will not; and not only so, but cannot obtain
of himself to will it, though yet he has the Natural power of obtaining this
of himself, else it would be a Natural Impotency; as, a Fool has not the
Natural power to obtain of himself to will a thing, has not the right Natural
use of his faculties; So (as all agree) a man has not the Natural power of
willing his own misery, as his misery; or of nilling his own happiness: his
soul is not framed capable of these things; and therefore these things come not
within Morality; neither are, nor possibly can be matter of a serious command
or serious prohibition.

These expressions, a se impetrare non potest ut velit; he cannot find in his
heart to choose it, cannot obtain of himself to will it, seem he fittest to
represent it to you by.

And it is not from any Natural defect that he cannot find in his heart, cannot
obtain of himself to will it, but from his Wickedness, his pride, Covetousness,
Malice, Voluptuousness, and such things as prevail with his will in a Moral
way, to keep it fast to them, John 5 44 How can you Believe, that seek honor
one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only: That is ( as
you may see, comparing cap 12. v. 43) This hinders you from giving your selves
up to me and my obedience, your Pride, your affectation of applause, your care
to keep up your Repute amongst your Friends and Acquaintants. This Impotency is
the same with that which a man means when he says, I cannot break my own Legs;
not but that he can do it if he would, but he is so resolved to the contrary
upon some arguments that prevail with him, that all that you can say, cannot
Persuade him to do it.

This Impotency is a rational thing, so far as that may be called rational
which is done upon reasons, but inconsiderable and slight reasons, and upon
fallacious arguments and grounds, and such as he does, or might know to be
fallacious, did he make due use of his reason: Else it would be a Natural
Impotency, and a man could be no more blamed for it, than you can blame a man
for his antipathy to Cheese, that is not chosen upon any arguments. Now in this
sense a Cannot and Will not are all one; they do not differ specie, in kind;
only, in degree: It is a higher degree of volition or choosing; you may call it
Wilfulness, stubbornness, Obstinacy, Moral Impotency, all these signify the
same. Deuteronomy. 21.18. If a man have a stubborn Son that will not obey the voice of
his Father, Stubborness is only a Will not obey, not a Cannot in the properest
sense as opposed to Will not; only a higher degree of will not, but of the same
species. In this sense are apparently these and such Scriptures to be
understood; Can the blackmore change his skin? so, He that is accustomed to
evil cannot do well. The first Cannot here is Natural, and so without fault; he
cannot change his skin if he would never so fain, and therefore a command to
change it would not oblige: But the second is the Moral Cannot, Genesis 37.4.
Joseph's Brethren hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him; that is,
through envy, not but that they could if they would. Luke 11.7. Trouble me not,
my door is shut, and my children in bed, I cannot rise to give thee. This
cannot is a will-not upon such reasons, and is so explained in the words
following; Though he will not rise; yet because of his Importunity he will rise
and give him whatsoever he needs. In this sense the Carnal mind is Enmity
against God, and is not subject to the Law of God; neither in deed can be, in
this Moral sense, And God gives us power in this sense (observe, I do not say
only in this sense, but mostly as the chief meaning, for something I could say,
but I must not intermix things aliene) not by giving new faculties; but by
causing us to will, and do of his own good pleasure. Phil. 3.13. And in this
sense we pray, Create in us a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit within us.
No man can come to me except the Father draw him, means no more than that, Ye
will not come to me that ye might have life, only it may denote a more strong
overflowing stream of the will, and a resolved refusal of him: or, to speak
more exactly, it denotes the Will-not with a modus; and modes do not differ
really from the things modified; It denotes the Will not with this wicked
modification, that this willnot will always continue, unless God do by some
super-effluence of his grace make them willing of unwilling; not but that they
had the Natural power or faculty of willing it, or could if they would without
that adventitious drawing; but they were so resolved against submitting to him,
that they could not obtain to will the contrary; yea this Cannot was through
their own choice upon some reasons like that, Luke 14.20. He had Married a Wife
and could not come: The design of the parable is to show what hinders men from
coming to Christ, and how inexcuable they are in refusing such offers; the
meaning therefore is not, that his new Wife did cling about him, or tie his
legs that he could not, (for this would have excused;) but that he chose to
stay and entertain himself with his new Married Wife, as more desirable to him
than the Feast. And so, one must go see his Oxen, and another his Farm. The
meaning is, it is so far from being an indifferent thing to me, whether I leave
my Wife to go or not, that I so quite praeponderate the other way, that I
cannot so much as obtain of my self to parley about it, to debate upon it; my
reason is so great, that you may well excuse me; have me excused. Dut this will
admit of no excuse, there is no sufficient reason can be given for forsaking
the Fountain of Living Waters, to go to broken Cisterns; and this they did, or
might have known.

I could here, if there was need, demonstrate further to you, that it is
impossible there should be any thing but Will in this Impotency; for if there
was, it would excuse so far. But this will appear more fully in going on, and I
suppose I may spare my self that labor: For to make this fully intelligible to
you, is I think enough to prove it. And therefore I will represent it further
to you. The Angels in Heaven have an Impotency of Sinning (if I may call the
Moral perfection an Impotency, which is most properly to be called the Moral
power, being a holy rectitude of Will, and the power opposite to the Moral
Impotency, in eodem genere morale; and so is of the same general nature, and
fit to explain this by; for it is a Moral Cannot sin, not a Natural, for they
have the Natural power of sinning, can sin if they would; else it would not be
laudable Morally; no more than it is, that a Beast cannot sin) they have such a
Moral rectitude and goodness, they cannot obtain of themselves to Will it; but
you may as well go and persuade a man in his right mind to put his hand into
the fire: they neither will nor (in the sense explained) can Will it, nor dare,
(the Angel durst not bring a railing accusation) and that for substantial and
weighty reasons. This calls to mind those expressions, How can I do this evil.
And Rev. 2.2. Thou can not bear those that are evil. And 1. John 3.9. He
cannot sin, because he is born of God; and, Gods people are dead and Crucified
unto the World and to sin. Which last words show, that if you will have dead in
Scripture always to signify a want of Natural power, you must say that Gods
people have not a Natural power to sin, cannot sin if they would.

I dare say farther, you have such apprehensions of God, as of Angels, and of
good men (I mean Analogically) though you should in anger say, you have not;
However I am sure, you ought to have such apprehensions; for otherwise you have
unworthy and sinful apprehensions, and contrary to Scripture, which speaks in
such a way as God must speak, or else could not be understood by us, in
speaking of Himself. I say, you have such apprehensions of God, as you borrow
from these things amongst men, when you thank God for keeping Covenant and
Promise; you apprehend, He has the Natural power of destroying you when he
will, notwithstanding-his promise; else you cannot possibly thank him for
keeping Covenant. You might indeed admire him under a contrary Conception; but
not thank him; for Thanks, in the very formal Conception of it, is for doing
some thing that one had a Natural power to do otherwise.

If any should conceive that his Promise, like some kind of Charm, did take
away his Natural power of being provoked to will or do otherwise; it would be a
very finful apprehension; for, during such a Conception, a man could not give
thanks for his keeping promise, unless in jest. You have apprehensions of his
keeping promise, as not coming from not having Natural power to do otherwise;
but you conceive of him as being hindered from destroying his people,
notwithstanding their great provocations, and from dealing falsely in his
Covenant, upon the account of something in him, that you conceive of
Analogically to Moral Virtue and goodness, even Justice, and Faithfulness and
Truth, Genesis 9.16. I will look upon the Bow in the Cloud, that I may remember my
Covenant; Implying, he has power to destroy the Earth again with a Flood,
notwithstanding his Covenant.

Now I will, according as I promised, show you the different properties of this
Moral Impotency from Natural; and it is contrary in every thing to Natural,
which shows they are contrary indeed.

First: this Moral Impotency does not excuse from fault, or make threatenings
unjust. Nay it is also in this contrary to Natural (which I would have you
observe and consider well, to convince you of their great difference); That the
Natural Impotency, the greater it is, by so much the more it does lessen the
fault in not obeying the command; and the less it is, by so much the more it
does greaten the fault: But the greater it is the greater is the fault, and
more blameworthy, and further from excuse; and the less it is, the less faulty.
For any to say, I cannot-but hate the Minister that reproves me; and any that
live holy lives, I cannot but wish some great fall or mischief to them; for
they call my sins to my remembrance, and admonish me to leave my wicked ways;
and I am resolved not to leave them; I have so firmly chosen this way, that I
am resolved not to change: This is the meaning of [ I cannot obtain of my self
to leave this way] will any say, this is not a greater fault? If a Thief should
say, Once I was almost willing to have left my course of life; but now I am
resolved to stick to it, notwithstanding all Laws and dangers; and he say true,
Is he not now more too blame than formerly, and less excuseable? Would not all
humane Judicatures look upon that man as mad, that should say, This does
excuse, or not aggravate his fault?

Secondly: This Moral Impotency does not hinder promises from being of Grace.
This is not to mock men, to promise a reward, if they will do that which they
have this Moral Impotency to do. Nay such a promise is not a jot less gracious,
than if there was all readiness and willingness of mind in us to embrace it, by
performing the condition; when only, chosen, wicked willfulness hinders. He is
bound nevertheless to thank him; and, as the Apostle says, Man's unbelief
cannot make the Faith (meaning the Faithfulness) of God of none effect; so our
wickedness and unthankfulness does not make the Grace of God cease to be Grace,
and his kindness cease to be kindness.

If an Act of Oblivion be made by the Prince (when the Rebels are in his power,
and Justice saying, Shall I smite them, shall I smite them?) provided they will
acknowledge their offense in some humble manner and submit; if some, yea if all
should say, and that truly, We so hate him, notwithstanding this kindness; and
we shall be so scoffed at by those we have made great boasts of our
resolvedness unto, and they will say, Where is that mouth wherewith thou
said, Who is Judge 9.38.
Abimeleck? that we cannot through these reasons obtain of our own wilful and
proud hearts to submit; yet it was a great favor and kindness, as long as the
condition was so easy to them, that they had the Natural power so easily to do
it. Yea, and though they had no benefit by it, but their Condemnation was
increased. So though it may truly be said of some, It was good for them if they
had never been born, and Christ never been born, or dyed, and no Law of Grace
ever made; yet all this hinders it not from being of Grace, while this
falling-short, was through their own wickedness.

Thirdly: They that through this Moral Impotency, this insuperable obstinacy,
refuse to yield, will befool themselves, Was I mad! I was told and knew: What
hindered me, but my own wickedness?

I will now set before you one Instance to make all plain, and to call the
sum of what has been said to your mind. Suppose a Father has a Son, both
Vicious and Debauched, and also Lame; which Lameness (because I will forestall
all possibility of exception) proceeded from some former wickedness, as, in
endeavoring to kill his Father: Suppose his Father should say, Thou have long
deserved to be dis-inherited, and I am now about to dis-inherit thee
irrecoverably in selling my Land; But now Run, and I will receive the into
favor. He may reply, Father, I thank you for nothing, this is to mock, I
cannot. And again, here is no fault in not-running, and he will never
afterward befool himself for, and repent of not-running, though dis-inherited
upon it: This is Natural Impotency. But now, suppose the Father say, Son, thou
art Vicicus and Debauched, living loosely abroad; but now live at home with me,
and leave these Vicious courses, and I will receive thee; He has the Moral
Impotency to this, Can the Blackmore change his skin? so he accustomed to evil,
cannot do well; and so the Son goes on in his old course, and cannot obtain of
himself to do otherwise. Here notwithstanding, he ought to say, Father, I thank
you, this is a kindness to condescend to such easy terms, after such great
provocations; and this will not excuse him; and he will be-fool himself after,
and say, Oh that I had hearkened!

Obj. But, Is not the whole of your discourse notoriously against the knowledge
and experience of men? Cannot we say of wicked men, They would forsake their
sins but cannot? and do not the best complain with Paul, when they would do
good, evil is present, and they have a will, when yet to do good they find not?
they are sure they would do more good than they do. And do you say, They do not
sin in not doing those things they would, but cannot?

Ans. First: There is a willingness in wicked men to escape Condemnation, and
attain Salvation: this is supposed, else God would never promise these upon a
condition. Though yet they may be said indirectly, and interpretatively, to
will and choose death, in choosing those courses that lead to it, and so have
their choice, all things considered, in perishing: for they choose rather to
undergo his wrath, than to accept him on the terms and conditions of his love
and favor.

Secondly: They would, if it could be (and wish it might be so) have Christ,
and Heaven, and their Lusts too.

Thirdly: They, or many of them, are willing to do many things for Salvation,
would part with some sins they can best spare, and do some duties they have no
great aversness to, and so either do leave such sins, or would actually if they
really thought, Going so far would serve the turn.

Fourthly: They, or some of them, have a remiss Will to perform the whole
Gospel-condition, to give up themselves to the obedience of Faith; but the
actual choice, the prevailing part of their will, is against it. Aristotle's
Instance is pertinent to explain this by, ad Nicom. lib. 3. A Mariner casts his
goods overboard in a Storm, to save his Life and Ship. He puts the question,
Whether such actions should be called voluntary or involuntary; he calls them
(...), mixed actions, for (says he) No man would cast away his goods,
altogether willingly; (...) but they are (says he) rather voluntary actions;
for they are chosen and preferred by them as the wisest actions in such
Circumstances. Such a man would fain have his riches preserved, and yet rather
than lose his life, chooses not to keep them; resolved, though repining, to cast
them away, with the prevailing choice. And though the other weaker inclination
be a will, a remiss will, or volition naturally so called, and really, being a
desire upon some reasons, (...) as Aristotle defines (...) rightly, yet Morally
it may be said to be no-Will: For it is not to denominate, not being the
prevailing choice, Qui mavult, vult, only in this sense: so that you may say
They will not, in ordinary custom of speaking: For where this chusing-Will is,
the imperate acts essentially follow, and are performed in some measure; or,
where they do not follow, it is as much accepted by God as if they did, e. g.
If a man's prevailing choice be to go to the Church, he goes; If to stay at
home, he stays; if to pray, he prays; to give, he gives: except there be such a
hindrance as will so far excuse, as if he had done it; as, suppose the (...)
should be stiff or stubborn, when the Will is not.

You see wicked men would have Christ and Heaven, and would therefore remisly
(what they are convinced is the only means) Holiness of heart and life; yet the
prevailing will is rather to lose happiness, than to forgo all their lusts; to
let go the offered happiness, rather than live a Spiritual, Heavenly life;
something unwilling, thus to lose all; yet, with the prevailing bent of their
will, prefer this sinful course.

Fifthly: In the regenerate, the prevailing choice of their will, is for the
best Interest, and this will Denominate, they are willing in the properest
sense: there is no sin but they habitually would have strength against it, and
no duty, but they would have strength to perform it; And this will be accepted
of God unto Salvation.

But yet their Will is renewed but in part, and they have much unwillingness to
it, and will to the contrary; they do not will in such a degree as they ought;
and this is their sin. They would do such and such difficult duties, and yet
they would not; and this is a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation.
When I say, they Would in a prevailing degree, I know this cannot always be
affirmed particularly pro Hic and Nunc, else they would never omit any known
duty, or commit any known sin; for, the Imperate acts would follow the Elicit.

I am something at a loss here, how to express my Conceptions, which are not
very clear. But you may conceive, a Child may some-time disobey, provoke his
Parents, though his general and habitual bent of heart and will be, to please
him. And so, Gods people's willingness to the whole, and in general, is greater
than their unwillingness, though not in the particular Act of known sin; else I
could not tell how to maintain, that a Regenerate man has the Gospel-condition
in the main, during a wilful sin, and so is not unjustified; whereas I cannot
think, such a one has quite changed his ultimate end, and is become
unsanctified, like another man for a time. Methinks those words of the Apostle
serve best of any I can think of, to express my meaning by, which if it be not
the meaning of the words, I only allude to them, viz. So then, with the mind I
my self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the Law of Sin. I my self,
which part do I my self wish most may prevail? which side do I take? which
interest do I frown at and wish might go down? That is I my self, my will in
the properest sense, which I prevailingly, habitually choose, so as to be most
displeased with my unwillingnesse; and I find, I am not displeased, or not
much, at my unwillingness to sin.

I know it is difficult, when a man's choice but-just turns the scale, and is
not vehement to discern which part he prevailingly takes; And people though of
great and strong affections to things above, and in whom things below have very
little Interest; yet if their Reason be clouded with Melancholy or otherwise,
it is hard for them to know which is I, I my self, and which side they mainly
take; yet this is the way to enquire: For come to a wicked man, and he may say,
I my self serve the flesh and world, and that interest I am most careful to
secure and maintain, whatever become of the Spirit's Interest; though my mind
and Conscience is for the Law of God, and serving of that; and so I have a will
to do something; but the side I my self take, and am most careful it go not
down, is the Flesh-interest. And to answer to Romans 7. I grant that Paul speaks
in the person of a Regenerate man, though some worthy men oppose it, and as for
what they object, that he speaks of it as Aristotle represents his (...), his
Incontinent man who is (...), below a Moral man; it is easily made apparently
unlike, if one by sin mean not gross sins, but those of daily infirmity which
Aristotle accounted no sins; and by Flesh, mean the most subjugated, hated part
of his will and affections; and by his Mind, the prevailing interest which he
sided with. However there is as much said, Gal. 5 17. For the Flesh Lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, so that you cannot do the
things which you would; which words are confessed to speak of the Regenerate.
But to Answer, First, I doubt not but the Apostle desired to be freed from many
Natural Imperfections that were his sorrows and punishments for sin, and not
his sins. Secondly, We must say, the reason why the Apostle or any other do not
do any duty they would, is, because they do not will it enough; and what he did
will in the prevailing degree he did it in some imperfect measure. But he would
fain have been freed from all unwillingness, and have gotten on his Will
further, but could not obtain it. And whereas, he says, It is no more I; that
is in the vulgar sense, as to denominate, not proceeding to the choice; for his
countenanced, loved, prevailing choice was the contrary. It was against his
will, which was most strictly his will; (though too much his will); and so God
would accept it to Salvation.

Sixthly: I add this as an overplus: Was there as full a willingness, as our
frail and naturally defective humane Nature is capable of, there could be no
actual sin; I mean so full a willingness only, as to exclude every degree of
unwillingness. For, where the reason why men do not, is not at all, Because in
part they will not; there it must necessarily be only, Because they cannot, and
therefore no fault.

This is the sum of what is here said: If there be a willing mind as to the
prevailing degree, to obey every command, God will in mercy accept it to
Salvation. But, was there a willing mind to any thing, so willing as to have
nothing of unwillingness; God would not in this case account sin at all, nay
though it was not done through some other hindrance. Those that would freely
give if they had it without any unwillingness, it will not be sin they did not
give.

You may see also by this (farther than I thought to have spoken) that we have
the Natural power, though not of undoing the sins we have done: yet of
unsinning actual obedience for the future; else we should not sin in not
performing perfect actual obedience; we only want will: Which may much humble
us, would we well consider it.

I shall Transcribe to you a passage out of Mr. Fenner's Wilful Impenitency,
which speaks as high as the most ungrateful expression I have used, page 25.
Romans 7.18. I quote this place the rather (says he) because many wrest it to
their own destruction. O, says a wicked man, I have a good will, I would, as
Paul says, but I cannot perform; Thus men mis-interpret this place, for look
how far Paul would, he could perform: for the will has potentiam executricem,
and an Imperative force over the man; what he did will, he did perform; he
performed it in his heart, and tongue, and hand, etc. But he would draw his
will forwarder than it was, but could not; his very will was partly unwilling:
he could not indeed perform so much as he would; that is, he could not draw on
his will so strongly as he would. His will was not perfectly sanctified; no
Saint in this world has any compleatness of will; and therefore his
performance is not perfect, because his will is not perfect.

I say, If thy will be converted to God, thou art Converted, obedience ever
goes as far as the will: And therefore if thou art willing, it is certain thou
art obedient, Isa. 1.19. whosoever is willing to obey, that man does obey in
some measure, because the Will has power of Execution, and the whole man at
command. This is the reason why Divines say that, The sincerity of the will is
the condition of the Gosspel. Thus he, verbatim; and page 86. We never sin
against the Gospel, but only upon Will-nots; indeed we sin against the Law in
every of our Cannots. This last passage I confess I do contradict, and so I
think he does himself in the passage beforecited, and also in the following
page 87. Conscience can never condemn us, but only upon Will-nots.

If any should yet be dubious and unsatisfied, or contentious and quarrelsome,
as indeed one may easily take occasions, the saculties of the Soul being such
abstruse things;

I shall appeal to them though they object either on one hand, or on the other.

First, To those that should affirm a Natural Impotency. First; Dare you think
that God has promised to men Salvation if they do, and will punish them if
they do not, things they cannot do, if they would never so fain? (etiamsi
maxim velint.) If so, Can you think that an Act of Mercy, and this of Justice?
would not this be a punishment for no fault? Do you not say that the reason why
a Deaf man is not bound by the command of hearing, or a Poor man of giving, or
the Fool by the command of understanding the Gospel, is, because they cannot do
it, or else they would be bound by these general commands as others? Is not
this to grant that Gods Laws oblige to obedience, only quoad posse and nosse,
as Lawyers speak? (...)
None can possibly evade here but by saying, as some do, It is true, such
Impotent people are not obliged, and the consequence (that all are by the same
reason exempted from doing what they cannot do) would be good, if this was the
cause or reason why men are not obliged by such general Laws; but this is not
the reason, but the reason is, Because God does not require it of them, else
the blind would be as much obliged to read, and the deaf to hear, etc. But I
would ask one thus replying, such questions, How does he know since the Law is
general, that God does not require the deaf to hear, etc. but by knowing this,
that God does not require men to do what they cannot do? Again, Do you think
that if God or man should require things which we cannot do, that the Law would
be as equal, as a Law requiring what man can do? and would the man be as much
to blame in not doing, as if he could? And why does not God require the deaf
man to hear the Minister? is there no reason of it in the Nature of things?
Suppose you should have read a Command in Scripture, requiring you to forget
all injuries, Would not Natural reason, and the notion you have of the
injustice of requiring things impossible, dictate to you to interpret such a
Scripture Metaphorically, To forgive all injuries? And would you not have given
this as your reason of so interpreting the words, Because a man cannot forget a
great injury if he would, has not the Natural power of so doing, the Memory
not being totally subject to the Will? A man may forgive, but cannot forget,
who it was that injuriously lamed him, or put out his eye. So also if a promise
had been of a great reward, If we forget all injuries, would you not give this
as your reason why you cannot interpret the words according to the first and
properest sense of the word [Forget], because if you do, no thanks could be due
for such a promise, it would not be gracious but lusorious.

Secondly: Did your hearts ever rereproach you, as sinning in not doing that
which you could not do, or omitting that you could not but omit? Tell me, or
rather your selves, When and where, and for what, (I except Melancholy people
out of this Appeal, for some of those I have known to have had great trouble of
mind for things they could not help) yea though your Natural Impotency came
from sin, as I think all Natural dullness of understanding, and blindness, and
lameness of Body, do. Suppose you had lived in a place where you never heard of
Christ and the Gospel, till you came to great years; And if as soon as you did
you had yielded to the Gospel, Do you think your hearts would have reproached
you that you received Christ no sooner? I know you will answer, No. If I ask
you why, I know you can give no answer but this, Because you could not; you
wanted something that was Naturally necessary to enable you to that act, viz. an
objective evidence. But do not your hearts reproach you for refusing him so
long? you will say, Yea. Now you are very ignorant of right reasoning, if you
cannot draw the conclusion.

Secondly, I appeal to those on the other Extreme that should object against
this Moral Impotency, as either that there is no such thing, or if there be
that it would excuse.

First: Art thou as inclinable to good as evil, to please God as to please thy
Flesh and Senses? Can thou in this Moral sense obtain of thy self to choose
good and refuse evil? why then do thou not? Why do thou pray See Anstin
well urging this, Ep. 107. ad Vitalem.
him, to incline thy heart to his Testimonies? what need have thou or any else
of the Spirit's help? do thou not see multitudes going on resolvedly in
wicked ways, notwithstanding all rebukes, engageing themselves more deeply
against God and holiness, that thou think, unless God work some wonderful
way by his Spirit, they can never obtain of themselves to leave those ways they
are wedded to, though nothing hinders but their own choice? Again, Will you not
grant that it may in some true sense be said, That no man can live so
innocently as not to need Christ's death for pardon of his Omissions and
Commissions? Now consider, and you will find, that, while you allow, that no
man sins in not doing the things he has a Natural Impotency to, you can in
no sense grant it true, while you deny this Moral Impotency, or deny it to be
one kind or sort of Impotency.

Secondly: Thou go on, or have gone on, in such sins, as thy heart is privy
unto, and could not of a long time obtain of thy self to leave such courses;
Does not thy Conscience tell thee, it would be just with God to Condemn thee;
and with men (if great crimes) to punish thee for them? If a Thief, Robber, or
Murderer should say (and say true) I was so resolved, I could not obtain of my
self for all the Laws of God and man to leave my wicked ways, is this an
excuse? Is he not justly yet punishable? would not thou punish him if Judge?
would thou not do unworthily to let him escape upon this pretense, though
true? whatever thou may say against this in words to confound; yet it appears
plain, though against thy will; It is to dispute against the Sun's light, when
we know it is so, though we cannot tell how. One may as well dispute against
motion, as that Ancient did, because so difficult to tell what it is. If he
should puzle you in saying, It was from my Pride and Covetousness, or Enmity
and Hatred, that I could not obtain of my self to leave those courses; how
could I help it but obey my Lusts? you are yet sure, this does not excuse, and
so are all Lawyers, yea and all men in the world; but this Impotency is of a
different sort from that which does excuse. The Will's hinderance by wicked
habits, and the habits themselves, so far as sinful, are voluntary things.
Covetousness cannot be an unwilling thing, or Pride, or Enmity; no man is an
Enemy to another against his Will. Do not mis-interpret these words, I mean his
whole will; else I know he may be an Enemy to a man, and Covetuous against his
will; when his will is divided, and partly for it, and partly against it upon
contrary Reasons, as it is often even sensible in the best, though their
darling, countenanced will and choice, is against it.

Let any man tell me (and I will impartially consider it, yea, I desire help
here) what a Virtuous or Vicious habit is, as different or distinct from an
inclination of the will, which is appetitus totius suppositi, the Appetite of
the man, as other merely sensitive inclinations are not, that do not (...),
that are not chosen upon reasons, as other appetitions or aversations are not.

If any man should have some sensitive Appetite altogether against his will, it
would not be Covetousness, or Pride, or Intemperance; and if it should in some
little degree draw his will to it, yet so far as it is against his will, it is
without blame; and only so much as it has the consent of the will, or the will
does not dissent enough, he is culpable; so Enmity, if a man should have any
particular aversation to another man or woman (like that, Non amo te, Sabidi)
that is not chosen upon any reason, and so is not voluntary at all, it would
not be called Enmity univocally and properly. Virtuous and Vicious habits, are
I think (I would not be over-confident where, for any thing I know, I go alone)
only a continued confirmed inveterate inclination of the Will.

A man that has chosen Riches to pursue them by all means direct or indirect
as his end, wherein he places his felicity, is a Covetous man, and, continuing
this choice, is habitually Covetous. Did he now choose God for his ultimate end,
and constantly and resolvedly will holiness and the pleasing of God, he would
be habitually holy. If any should have a Conception of such habits, as things
that are not volitions, or, which is all one, inclination of the will, but
distinct from them specie, and things that men could not put off if they would,
it would be an erroneous Conception; for they would not then be Virtuous or
Vicious; and God would not require the putting them off, and it would not be
the duty of such men to will what is good, if they could not, had not the
Natural power, to will good, notwithstanding such habits. Therefore Aristotle,
who was a man acute to admiration in such things, seems to sleep, and forget
what he had proved, That all Virtue and Vice is voluntary, Ad Nicom. Lib. 3.
when he says, (...), that is in effect, Vicious habits are not to be called
voluntary in the ordinary sense; for, says he, A Vicious man cannot if he
would, (...), do well, or otherwise than according to these habits.

I have told you the meaning of the Scripture; he accustomed to do evil, cannot
do well: he can if he would; but he cannot Morally obtain of himself to Will
it. But Aristotle says, he cannot if he would: but he says, Such habits are
yet to be called (...), or voluntary, because those Acts were voluntary,
whereby they brought them on themselves; and he brings this Instance to show in
what sense they are voluntary, When a man has brought a Disease on himself by
Intemperance, he may be said to be sick of a voluntary Disease, though he would
fain be freed from it and cannot. Any one may see that, if the case was so, you
could not call them vicious habits formaliter, and voluntary formaliter and
properly: but only sinful and voluntary figuratively, originally, effective, as
every punishment of sin is, because voluntary sins were the cause of them. If a
man should say, I would not at all be Covetous, and choose the world for my
chief good, but I do choose it; Would it not be a Contradiction? And if such a
thing was possible, would it not be far from being sin and punishable? You may
see by this, that such habits are only this Moral Impotency, the wilfulness it
self under another consideration.

If any should yet be unsatisfied, and think Vicious habits are not Elicited,
but Imperated; Let him reduce them to what notion he will, and it will come all
to one for Argument: for he must then say of them, as of all other Imperate
things, that they are subject to the will wholly, or so far as they are not,
they are sinless, and that God does not require us to put them off.

If you will have them (...), and merely sensitive inclinations, then they are
not Vicious any more than they are consented to, or not enough disliked; As
suppose you should call a great Thirst (brought upon a man by excessive
drinking) Drunkenness. And again, either they take away the Natural power of
Willing ( i.e. make him no Rational Creature) and then they would excuse; or
they cause that a man cannot Will good if he would (pardon this Contradiction,
for I speak it docendi causa) and this would excuse indeed. A thing impossible
cannot be a Moral fault. Or they only hinder the effects of the Will, the
Imperate acts; and then they so excuse, that God would accept his Will without
those Imperate acts. But these would be irrational notions of Moral habits: for
let any man consider, and he may easily see (I think) that they are not
different specie from volitions, that is, inclinations of the Will, but
comprehend in their notion, some kind of radication and continuance of
volition, that we cannot well understand. Doubtless they are not a kin to other
habits, which only enable the subject facily and dexterously to do the act; for
a good man could as facily and dexterously commit a sin as another man, but will
not.

Now to let you see further a necessity of thus distinguishing, consider how
the Ancients were, for want of this distinguishing, puzzled to answer the
fallacious arguments for the Pelagian (...), or perfection in this life, (while
yet the Orthodox Fathers held in the main as we ordinarily do, as may be made
fully apparent). Pelagius maintained amongst his other errors, this, That a
man in this life can keep the Law perfectly, and meant it Morally in the sense
wherein I oppose it: his Arguments were these Epistle Pelag. ad Demetriadem:
Duplici ignorantia accusamus Deum, etc. Tom 4. Hieron. It is Pelagius his
Epistle, though through the Ignorance of former times, placed with, and read
amongst Jerome's, as B. Usher and others observe.
which prove it only Naturally possible, viz. To deny a man's power to keep the
Law perfectly is to accuse God of a double Ignorance, in not knowing our
weakness, or in not knowing what he commands us; or it is to accuse him of
Injustice in commanding what man cannot do. Or thus, as Hierom lib. 1. advers.
Pelag. Aut possibilia mandata D us dedit aut impossibilia Si possibilia, in
nostra potestate est, ea facere: Si impossibilia, nec in hoc r^i sumus si non
facimus quod non possumus. Ac per hoc, sive possibilia sive impossibilia D^us
dedit mandata, potest homo sine peccato esse.
Critobulus (by which feigned name, Jerome represents Pelagius, as by Atticus
himself) forms the Argument; Either God has given possible or unpossible
commands: If possible, it is in our power to keep them: if unpossible, we sin
not in not-doing them since we cannot: And so it follows that, whether God have
given commands possible or impossible, a man can live without sin.

Augustine ( Lib. 2. de peccat. merit. and remiss. cap. 6.) endeavors to answer
this difficulty, and affirmed it as undoubted, that God commands no man any
thing which he cannot do. Therefore he says in Answer, that a man can live
without sin through Grace and by Gods help. But this does not answer the
difficulty at all, unless he will affirm, that no man does sin except God give
him this Grace; that is, except God by his Grace make him that he does not
transgress the Law; which is in effect to say, Man does not sin; except God
make him actually not to sin, which would be to come to Pelagius, at the
backdoor, and to go beyond Pelagius, and hold, That it is impossible any man
should sin at all.

Jerome endeavors to answer this, but more palpably spoils all for want of
distinguishing, He also maintains as undoubted amongst all Christians, That God
commands nothing but what man can do, and yet maintains that no man can
perfectly keep all the Commandments, which is good sense if we distinguish,
but, without distinguishing, an express contradiction. But he trusts to this
weak Evasion to salve it ( Lib. 1. adversus Pelag: Vides quod Deus possibilia
jusserit, and tamen nullum posse, etc.) His commands are possible (says he
going on) because some men can keep one part and some another of the commands,
but yet none can keep all; and adds, therefore it is not the duty of single men
to keep them all: and so God commands nothing but what we can do; But Augustine
is express against this of Jerome, Sermon. 191. de Tempore Execramur eliaw
blasphemiam eorum, qui dicunt Impossible aliquid homini a Deo esse praeceptum,
and mandata Dei non a singulis, sed ab omnibus in comuni posse servari.
and calls it Blasphemy, to say, that God commands any thing that men in
particular cannot do, but only men in general.

Neither is there, I think, to be found one of the Ancients, accounted
Orthodox, that does maintain in the strict sense opposed, that God commands
men what they cannot do, but all abhorred it as an opinion laying an high
Accusation on God, till many hundred years after this age of Augustine: But at
last Who lived 700 years after this. Sermon. 2. in vigil. Romans
Bernard being pressed with this difficulty, does (yet any one may see
unwillingly) fly to this, that God may command what man cannot do, and does
mean it of a Natural power. But he does it in these words, God may command
nimis, too much. And in giving his reason for it, he does not fly to that, that
men once had power, or that men think they have power, which it is likely he
would have done, had he not thought them invalid; But he gives this reason for
it, that God may command too much, even that which men cannot do, To humble
them. But this is but a very defective humiliation that this can cause: for
though it can cause grief and sorrow, and anger, that God should be so severe
to require what we cannot do; yet it cannot cause Repentance; for it is
essentially necessary to Repentance, that the man could have done otherwise.
And yet for all this Super Cant. Sermon 10.
Bernard would fain compound the matter, and not say that God requires what men
cannot do, and offers to deny it on this condition, that they will grant that
men cannot do all that God requires, and says he, Who dare arrogate to himself
that which Paul had not attained? which is no Contradiction, though it be
virtually to say, No man can do all that he can do, but good sense with the
distinction I have explained. Yea, it is so obviously apparent, that a man's
culpable Impotency only lies in his disability to do that which he has the
Natural power to do, that I wonder it is no more taken notice of.

Councils are called against Pelagius, Council, Milevit. Palestine.
and make many worthy, pious determinations, but any one may see are perplexed
what to say against Pelagius in this case; and all that was determined about
this particular, was against affirming (which Pelagius had done) that any man
lives so Innocently as to have no need to say, forgive us our debts. Yet they
determine, that a man can, Arausicum.
by the Grace of God, live without sin. And the Orange Council against Pelagius
determines, that all Baptized ones, Christ helping and cooperating Depent and
possunt.
can, and ought to fulfill all things necessary to Salvation, if they would
labor faithfully. But any one may see, though these Councils meant well and
Orthodoxly, as will appear to any perusing their determinations; yet the
difficulty remains unanswered, and will do so for ever, without this
Distinction. For they rightly maintained, as all the Ancient Fathers before
them, that no man ought to do more than he can do; And therefore, without
distinguishing, it comes to all one for the answering the difficulty, whether
the Grace they speak of be given, or not given. For suppose it be affirmed that
this Grace is given to men, Then either they can obey perfectly, so as to need
no pardon; and this they abhorred the affirming of: or if they cannot with this
Grace given, obey perfectly, so as to have no need of pardon, or Christ's
satisfaction; then they are Innocent, and sin not, in not living perfectly, and
so need no pardon in not obeying perfectly, it being no fault not to obey
perfectly, since they Cannot obey perfectly. Again, suppose it be affirmed,
that this grace is not given to men to obey perfectly, but only their meaning
was, That God could, if he had so pleased, have given men such Grace as might
enable them to live without sin, but did not. Then they were not bound to live
without sin, and so were, or might be perfect still; As a man that is tied by
Sickness to his Bed, can by the help and assistance of God, go to the Church,
viz. When God shall so raise him up; yet till God do so first raise him up, he
is not bound to go, needs no pardon for not going.

Therefore, when all is said, we must distinguish of man's Power and Impotency,
so as we may truly say, A man can in one sense without Grace, obey perfectly,
has the Natural faculty and power to do it, or he could not be obliged to it
by the Law; (the Law would be no law to him, no more than the general command
of hearing the Word is a Law, or Obligatory to a man Deaf; and the effect of
Grace, is not the giving this power, else we might say, A man could not sin
unless God gave him Grace:) And also, that we may say truly; A man cannot in
another sense obey perfectly, nor do any good thing without Grace, viz.
Morally; his Wickedness, his Unwillingness, which is Moral Impotency hindering.
And every man understands this, though he know not how to express it, as you
will perceive by asking any man, lamenting his Omissions or Commissions,
whether he could not have avoided those sins, though God did not give him that
Grace to avoid them eventually. When any man is lamenting his long refusal of
Christ, he knows in some sense he could have done otherwise; God gave him
help and power enough naturally-necessary (yea, few or rather none that enjoy
the Gospel, but they can say more than enough, else he could not befool himself
for thus refusing mercy; Though God did not give him Grace sooner to take away
his resistance, and unwillingness, and so to cause him actually and eventually
to turn from sin to God; and yet in some sense he could not do otherwise; God
not giving him Grace sooner, that would eventually take away his unwillingness,
and cause him actually to choose Mercy on the terms of it.

I may add here, How this distinction does wonderfully serve to reconcile the
Doctrine of the Ancients to themselves, and one another, They maintained not
only that the will was free from co-action, and force; but that it had a
freedom from any Natural necessity of choosing or refusing. And it is apparent
that where the will has only a freedom from co-action; but not a Natural
liberty of both choosing and refusing, e. g. As in willing the ultimate end,
happiness; or Nilling it; It is not in such things capable of command or
prohibition, and so not capable of Virtue or Vice, whatever some late
Schoolmen and others say.
All men versed in their writings, know and confess; that all the Fathers, and
the whole Church (nemine contradicente) of the purest age, next after the
Apostles, after a Controversy was moved concerning it, as in the second and
third Century, did maintain free Will, as a foundation-principle of all
Religion against the Manichees and other Heretics, that denied it, (and indeed
the Ipsa ratio quemlibet nost um quaerentem vehementer angustat, ne sic
defendamus gratiam ut liberum arbitrium auferre videmur; rursus nec liberum
arbitrium sic asseramus, ut superba impietate ingrati Dei gratiae judicemur.
Aug. lib. 2. de peccat, Merit. c. 18. Si non est Dei gratia quomodo salvat
mundum? Et, si non est liberum arbitrium; quomodo judicat mund^m? Ep. 46. ad
Valemin. Nihil tam in n^st^a potestate quam ipsa voluntas est. Voluntas nostra
nec voluntas ess^t, nisi esset in nostra potestate; porro quia est in nostra
potestate, libera est. Aug. de. lib. arb. lib. 3. c. 2. Hieron. Ep. ad
Cresiphont. Frust^a Blasphemas, and ignorantium auribus ingeris, Nos liperum
arbitrium cond^mnare, damnetur ille qui damnat.

Author lib. Hypognosticon (which was not Austin, but an Ancient writer against
the Pelagians a little after Austin) says, Quisquis negaverit liberum
arbitrium, Catholicus non est Aug. lib. de Fid. cont. Manic. Quis non clamet.
Stultum esse prae cepta dare ei, cui liberum non est quod praecipitur facere?
Et Inquium esse eum damnare cui non fuit potestas jussa complere. But you shall
find none of the Ancients saying, that it is unjust for God to require of men
what their stubborn or morally inflexible wickedness of their Wills only
hinders them from deing; or what they cannot find in their hearts to do; or
what they are so wickedly bent not to do, that except God take away this
resistency of Will by his Grace, they will never do; which is the Moral or
Wicked Impotency, I have explained.


following ages did also maintain it, whatever any say to the contrary.)

Now it is a common answer of Centur, Magdeburg. Scultet. Medul. Pat.
learned men, that it is true, They did so, but yet their judgments herein are
not much to be regarded, because they (say they) contradict themselves: For
those very Authors that lived before Pelagius, had not that occasion to speak
largely and exactly of the necessity of Grace, none being so boldly wicked as
to deny it, till he, (as Vincentius Lirinensis observes,) yet when they have
occasion, they speak as high as any for the necessity of Grace, and of men's
insuperable wickedness, and how that without Christ, and his Spirit, and Grace,
we can do nothing good; and of Gods working in us to will and to do of his good
pleasure.

I grant it is apparent, that those more Ancient Fathers, do generally, as is
said, thus You may find many occasional short expressions demonstrably to argue
their judgments in this particular, against the Pelagian way, in these Authors
following, though censured, as speaking too high for Free Will, and in almost
any other of the Ancients before Pelagius, viz. Just. Mart. Jerenaeus. Tertul.
Arnob. Cypr. Lact. Athanas. Basil. Ambr.
speak, viz. of our Impotency to God, and for the necessity of Grace; But am
confident they do not in sense contradict themselves, no more than I, but meant
generally the same that I do, (and could easily make it appear) viz. That men
have the Natural power of Free Will, but were far from denying the Morally
insuperable wicked wilfulness of it without Grace; And now I must leave it to
your Judgments and Censures, Whether I contradict my self or no.

There are many learned men, pretend with great confidence, that this
Distinguishing is to no purpose; and that men are not too blame, if there be
any present Impotency at all on men to the immediate duty, be it what it will,
or call it what you will, Wilfulness, Wickedness, Moral Impotency, for, It will
excuse, say they, as well as Natural; and therefore contend, that except God by
his Grace give to men, over and beside their Natural power, some kind of
aequilibrium, or equal-inclination of their Will to good and bad, they would
not be too blame for disobeying the Gospel; this they call a second power, and
it is the same they mean by their Preventing and Subsequent Grace, as appears
when they explain them, and they pretend that this Grace does work; and that
this is all that Grace does work; for it does not (say they) incline the Will
any farther than by giving it a power to incline either way. Now I greatly
dislike this Notion, and this also must either fall, or the notion of Moral
Impotency, and what has been said of it, falls; as not standing in any stead,
but excusing as well as the Natural. I shall therefore search more narrowly
into it, and also into what can be said any way, that I can think of, against
what is here propounded.

I wish any Opposer was now here (for I would impartially know the truth) that
would soberly tell me what he would have God do to wicked men, to make them
without excuse, if he pretend that this is not enough for this end, that they
have the Natural faculties, and promises, and threatenings, and providence
afflicting or prosperous; that is an object intelligible, fitted and suited
objectively to work this great change of heart and will:

I am confident such a one could only name these five things with any show of
reason; and he that can name a sixth, erit mihi parvus Apollo, would do more
than ever was done yet.

First; I would have God give a man more of the Natural power and faculty of
choosing good, and refusing evil, that he may be inexcusable. But this is
irrational; He has power of willing good, and if a third or fourth power, yea,
if ten times as much power of willing good was given him, it would be all one;
For this is no reason at all of his not willing good, because he has not the
Natural power to will it, else it would excuse; but he will not choose it: And
they that do choose good, and refuse evil, have not more of this Natural
faculty, are not more men, are not in this sense further from Natural fools
than other men.

Secondly; Or I would have God give him more of the Gospel, send more
Ministers, and awakening providence; yea, send some from the Dead. But this
was well answered, They have Moses and the Prophets, that was enough to make
them inexcusable, and these under the Gospel have more than so, more than the
Old Testament.

Thirdly; I would have God to make them actually willing, that they may be
inexcusable. But this is a contradiction, and it is to say, Wicked men and
Devils do not sin, except God actually make them not to sin. And yet this is
the meaning of such passages, or they are not sense; It does not excuse for God
to give the faculties of willing (which is the power of choosing it) except he
give them also preventing Grace; that is, make them willing actually. Indeed
when all is said, you must say, or say worse, that, That Grace, concerning
which the Controversy is, lies, in making men actually willing, as distinct
from giving power of Willing, call it second or third power, or what you will,
and the design of what I say here, is not to oppose this, but to prove it, as
you will see in going on; but only I am showing here that Gods denying of this,
does not excuse men, so as it can be said, they do not sin in not obeying the
Gospel.

Or Fourthly: I would have him make them to be without Temptation to sin, that
they may be without excuse: But will not your Servant be without excuse in
Robbing you, unless he had no temptation to it: This is an unreasonable demand;
it is enough that God promises a far greater good than that they deprive
themselves of by obedience, and threatens a far greater evil to them sinning,
than that they incur by their obedience. Would you have no self-denial in the
World? Many obey God, that have greater temptations to disobedience in those
things wherein they obey, than those have that disobey him in such things.

Fifthly; Or I would have God make them less actually unwilling to good, and
take off from them much of this Moral Impotency, or chosen resolvedness to go
on in sinful ways (which is in part to sanctify them, and to make them in
part actually willing to deny themselves, as any one may easily understand) and
then they will be too blame, and be guilty of sin if they obey not.

First; Suppose God do not this (as we are certain he does not to all) yet are
not you and all men in the world sure, This does not excuse? Else the most
incorrigible and wilful offenders would be most sinless and excusable. Can any
man in earnest say that a man is not bound to leave his evil ways, and that he
does not sin in going on in them, while he is fully and peremptorily resolved
to go on in them? Yet this seems apparently to be the meaning of many learned
men in pleading for an indifferancy of Will.

Secondly; What way is there possible to cause a man to leave off this
wilfulness, to put off this Vicious habit, which he has the Natural power to
put off if he would, that is threatened enough, and promised enough, but some
way moving a volition, by some way causing him to desire the good, and dislike
the evil?

If you shall say, I would have him take away the Vicious habits, you hide your
meaning in obscure words, or you mean, I would have him not only give him the
power of willing the contrary, which he has; but also some way make his Will
incline to the other way, that he may be inexcusable.

Thirdly; Do not you use to Object, that this would be to destroy the freedom
of man's will, and so his humane Nature, to cause the volition any other way
than by giving the power of Willing? For if God may, by his Spirit, in some way
to us unknown, distinct from merely propounding the object (which he does where
the Gospel is preached without difference) without destroying man's freedom,
take away in part man's great Wilfulness or Unwillingness to good; why may he
not quite and totally (or however to the prevailing degree) take away thus, by
his Spirit, his Unwillingness to Good, and cause a man to Will or choose Good,
without destroying his Freedom?

Do not now put this all off with these common words unexplained (which
distinction may have a good sense, if rightly explained), viz: God gives all
men Preventing Grace, else they would be in no fault, and upon their right use
of that, he gives them Subsequent Grace. I will show you that these words do
but hide your meaning; and that by the subsequent, you mean no more than by
your preventing Grace, and by preventing Grace, no more then the faculty or
power of willing and obeying, if one would; you make the subsequent Grace to be
given only ex hypothesi, upon the supposition men use the preventing well.
Consider therefore a little, that you call preventing Grace, whether is this
the same with some of those things beforementioned, or some thing distinct?
Whether is this preventing Grace any more than Gods general, povidential Act of
making men Naturally perfect, giveing men the power or faculty of choosing Good
and Evil, and so leaving them to their mere self-determination? If not, it is
no more than giving the faculties, which is rather to be called giving Posse
habere fidem and Charitatem naturae est hominum: habere autem gratiae fidelium.
Aug. de praed. Sanct. cap. 5.
Nature, than Grace. If you say (as some do, and then unsay it again) this
preventing Grace does more, for it does excite and move.

Let me ask, Does it excite and move potentially only, or actually and really?
you will, it may be, say, Actually; for to say only potentially is a
contradiction, and is no more than it does not, but it would move if it was not
hindered (which I shall after take notice of) therefore you will say, It does
actually move and excite. Now what does it move and excite but the Will? And
what is that but to cause actual Willing? If it excite motion, there is no
motion of the Will but willing and nilling, consenting or dissenting, liking of
the thing it is moved to or disliking; and it does not move nilling dissent or
dislike of the good; if it really move and excite, it does not move nothing,
this would be to cause a standing motion So that this, if granted, is to grant
that God does not merely give power by it to the will to move it self, but
does, over and above this, move the Will, which you so much dread. If you shall
say (as I know you will at last) movet, sed nihil promovet, this does move the
Will, make men willing actually, only on condition they consent, be willing and
obey, and use it well.

First; This is a weak manner of speaking: It is to say it makes men willing
on condition they be willing, or not unwilling; that is, on condition they have
no need of it, and that the work be done before it come.

Secondly; This is to run them both into one, and make the preventing Grace the
same with the subsequent. Thirdly; Yea, this is to deny all but the common
Grace of giving the faculties (if it be proper to call it Grace) and the Gospel.

Now to speak of the subsequent Grace. If a man use this preventing Grace well,
will the subsequent certainly follow? You say, yea. Which of those things above
named does this belong to? Will this subsequent grace only give them power of
willing Good, or make them actually to will it? If it only give them power to
choose the good, this is the Natural faculty. Does it also make them actually
willing? you will say, That cannot be the proper use of this, for they are
actually willing before; else they could not have used the preventing Grace
well. Therefore you will say, this is to make them continue and persevere, and
grow in actual willingness. But, will this keep them actually willing? You will
say, No; not unless they continue using this Grace right, and that they do not,
except they continue actually willing to use it aright: That is, it will make
them persevere in choosing Good, and refusing the Evil, on condition they do
persevere choosing the Good and refusing the Evil; that is, on condition they
have no need of it. And your subsequent Grace is also no more than giving the
faculty and power, and the same with your preventing Grace. And so the total
amounts to no more than this, If they improve that Free Will, without which
they cannot be men, they shall be men still while they live. You may apply what
is here spoken to any effect that can be assigned to this Grace (while they
will maintain only general Grace) as taking away resistance, and unwillingness
to Good; or causing a man to pray and seek after God. I am ashamed thus to
represent to you that which is the Grace, that some other-wise Learned and
Reverend men will only grant beside giving the Gospel.

And by the way let me wish such as make this Objection, Nos autem dicimus
humanam voluntatem sic divini^us adjuvari ad faciendum justitiam, ut praeter
quod creatus est homo cum libero arbitrio; praeterque doctrinam qua ei praec
pitur quemadmodum vivere debet, accipiat Spiritum Sanctum etc. Aug de Spir. and
litt. cap. 3.
to take heed for all the specious fair show it has, viz. This, That it would
destroy our humanity for God to move man's Will, any other way than by giving
him power to Will. For a man that should keep to this as his opinion, may be
easily forced, by dint of Argument, against his Will, to affirm, that the holy
Spirit does nothing in the first Conversion, or carrying on the work of Grace
after; beside barely propound the object, which is done by the mere preaching
of the Gospel; and also give the faculties or Natural power.

Now if you should hold this tenent, that God does no more for any than thus, I
do freely grant that some of those inconveniences that many have endeavored to
ascribe to this opinion, would not follow from it; (he that endeavors to
confute one error with another, which is too common, does ordinarily confirm
his Antagonist in his error): as for Example, it would not follow, that a man
would be the proper cause of his own Justification and Salvation, and that he
was not beholden to God for them; and to speak ingenuously, you do well enough
answer this Accusation. We cannot say properly, a Fellon that reads, pardoned
himself, or saved himself; but the Legislators upon his reading, pardoned him;
yea adaequately, though the Legislators did no ways cause him to read. But
these things will follow unavoidably. Per quorum disputationem suadetur ut nec
or are debeamus, non quia hoc audent aperte dicere, sed eorum sententiam,
velint nolint, sequitur, Aug. Epist. 143. ad. Anast.

Cur petitur, quod ad nostram pertinet potestatem, si Deus non adjuvat volunta.
tem? Aug. de great. Chr. Lib. 1. c. 15.

Quis optat, quod in potestate sic habet, ut ad facien dum nullo indigeat
adjumento? Aug. de peccat. merit. and remiss. Lib. 2. c. 6.


First; It would be impossible for a man that should hold this practically to
pray for such things as these following seriously. First, For grace and
Holiness, and that God would incline his heart to his Testimonies; because he
holds that God cannot with Justice and Honor, without a culpable respecting of
Persons, and without destroying man's Nature, do any more than give him the
power, and leave it merely to himself to make use of it. He can only pray God
would give him power to make use of it if he will, and give him the Gospel; but
not that God would Act any further to make him willing and to make him to obey.
It is to say, Give me but power to obey, and let me alone for willing and
obeying; Give but Talents, and let me alone for using them. I do not beg any
more, for it would be to destroy my Humanity, and dishonor thee to give any
more.

Secondly; Neither can he pray for continuance of Grace, or to be kept from
Apostasy; Quando ergo rogavit Christus ne fides Petri deficeret, Quid aliud
rogavit nisi ut haberet in fide liberrimam, invictissimam and perseveratissimam
voluntatem. Aug. lib. de corrupt. and great. cap. 8.

Est quippe in nobis per hanc Dei gratiam in bono recipiendo and perseveranter
tenendo, non solum posse quod volumus, verum etiam velle quod possumus.
Subventum est igitur infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut divina gratia
indeclinabiliter, and ut suberrabiliter ageretur and ideo quamvis infirma, non
tamen^ deficeret, neque adversitate aliqua vinceretur. ibid. cap. 11.


he cannot pray as David, Keep this in the thoughts of our hearts for ever, and
confirm our hearts unto thee; so as to mean any more, than that God would cause
him to persevere, only if he do persevere; that is, if he shall remain
constantly willing; but cannot pray that God would preserve him from willing to
forsake him, and to cleave to the world; that God would so irradiate his mind
with the danger of loosing all that is dear to him, and so confirm his
resolution, and habituate his choice, that he may not be able morally to obtain
of himself to forsake God, because he holds that this God will by no means do.
And he that cannot pray thus, whatever Prayers he may say beside, must
necessarily live very carelessly, or very uncomfortably wanting an humble,
fiducial confidence in God, to keep him from degenerating, or, which is worse,
he must be very Proud, and have such confident thoughts of his own heart and
will's goodness and constancy, that he dare lay a greater wager on his own head
and heart, that if he have but a Natural power of Willing, be but continued a
man, he shall do well enough for Willing. As for example, you have seen my
judgment; Now this being my judgment, I must acknowledge that I cannot pray that
God would take away my Whosoever is born ^f God, cannot sin; not that he has
not a Natural power to sin, but ^e has not a Will, a mind to sin. Mr. Caryl on
Job. Last Volum. pa. 5.4.
Natural power of willing Evil, of sinning, and finally falling away, and
consequently of being undone for ever; for this would be to destroy my
faculties, and make me no Man, as you see by that I have said. But I can pray
that he would so work in me by his Spirit (in such a way agreeable to my
humanity, as he understands and I do not) that I may have that Moral rectitude
of Will, which is opposite to that Moral Impotency I have spoken of; that I may
not be able to obtain, of my self, to leave off to be Wise and to be Good, and
to turn from the way of Righteousness; but may say with Joseph, how can I do
this Evil? and I am sure (what ever any should object, of this destroying my
will, and making me a beast, and not a Rational Creature, and that it would be
rather God's willing it in me, than my willing it) this would perfect my will;
unless we can say, Saints in Heaven will be no men, and Aug. de praed. Sanct.
lib: 1. c. 17. Speaking of Christ's free Will, An ideo in illo non libera
voluntas erat, ac non tanto magis erat, quanto magis peccato servire non
poterat?
Christ on Earth was no man, and that it is not the Saints in Heaven love God,
but God in them loves God.

Thirdly; He cannot pray that God would make the Gospel prevail effectually in
the world; Destruunt orationes quas facit ecclesia, sive pro infidelibus and
Doctrinae Dei resistentibus, ut convertantur ad Deum: Sive pro fidelibus, ut
augeatur' eis fides, and preseverent in ea. Aug. Haeres. 88.

Si fides est tantummodo liberi arbitrij, nec datura Deo, propter quod pro iis
qui nolunt credere oramus ut credant? Quod prorsus faceremus inaniter, nisi
rectissime crederemus etiam perversas, and fidei contrarias voluntates.
Omnipotentem Deum ad credendum posse convertere. Aug. lib. de great. and lib.
Arb.


or in his Congregation, if a Minister; he cannot pray after his Preaching,
when he has Sown, and Planted, and Watered, that God would give the increase;
nor can he Pray for such things for his Relations, but must mean no more than
this; that God would give them that free Will which they have already, and all
men besides, even the Natural powers, and that they may be able to obey the
Gospel if they will.

And by the way, neither can they pray very earnestly for this power or ability
to obey the Gospel (which it is granted they may pray as earnestly for, as a
man may pray that God would not deprive him of the right Natural use of his
faculties of understanding and will) to be given, or continued to themselves or
others, since they ( viz. that maintain this power is all that the Grace of the
Holy Ghost gives) hold, they cannot sin, or be guilty, or inexcusable in not
obeying the Gospel without this power, and so could not be condemned for not
obeying the Gospel if God denied it them; especially also considering they must
hold consequently to this principle, that God is bound in Natural justice,
either to give this power, whether they Pray or Pray not for it, or not to
condemn them for not obeying the Gospel, because God will not do unjustly,
whether men Pray or Pray not. Yea further, since it may well be questioned,
whether it be lawful to Pray God to do that which he is bound by Natural equity
and justice to do, (though I confess it is otherwise when only bound by
promise) or not to do that which he is bound by Natural justice not to do; It
is therefore questionable, whether it can be maintained lawful, according to
the principles of those that hold that the only effect of Grace in dispute, is
giving that power, without which men could not sin, or (which is all one) be
inexcusable in not obeying the Gospel, to Pray God to give themselves or others
that which they hold is the only effect of this Grace. ( viz. this power of
obeying the Gospel) for this end; viz. for this, That they may not be condemned
for disobeying it; since he could not, as they say, in justice so condemn them
if he gave them not this power. And further, Such as hold that the only effect
of this, commonly called the Grace of the Holy Spirit; or commonly called
subjective and internal Grace (different from the objective and external Grace,
consisting in giving and promulgating the Gospel, and external providence,
prosperous or afflictive; objectively fitted and suited to cause Obedience to
the Gospel, (concerning which objective take notice I do not speak, nor move
any Controversy) is only the giving that power to obey the Gospel, without
which they could not be too blame, or inexcusable, or condemned for not obeying
it; I say such as these can give but very cold and heartless thanks for Grace,
causing them to obey the Gospel, comparatively to the thanks they of other
apprehensions can give. But this on the By, for I am now only professedly
speaking of these things in the sense wherein they cannot, as not pray at all,
so neither praise God at all for them; which now I return to again.

Secondly; He cannot praise God for such things named before, as being done by
God, if he hold they are not; he cannot say Cordially what the Pharisse is
represented speaking with his lips; God I thank thee, I am not as other men
are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. I would not
wrong any, I mean he cannot say this Prorsus non gratias Deo agimus, sed nos
agere fingimus, si unde alli gratias agimus, ipsum facere non puta^^us, Aug.
Epist. 107. adlem.
heartily, except he mean no more than this; I thank thee thou did as much
for me as for these men; but that I differ from them in these respects, I had
the power indeed from thee as they had; but, that I used it better than they, I
owe to my self free Will. Whereas using this common Grace is surely the chief,
prime matter. Oh but he received this power from God to use it? It is true; but
yet a man that knows he has done some good thing, or avoided Evil more than
others; if he be of this opinion, he accounts it was not therefore done by him;
as, because he received more from God than others, in the same circumstances
with him; but holds that he owes nothing here for any special Grace or help
from God; for though that which God did for him was the cause, according to his
Hypothesis, of his goodness, and differing, taken absolutely, yet not at all
taken comparatively in the sense now in hand; it was no cause of the difference
taken as a difference: take this instance, Two men had equal great stocks given
them, one increases his estate, the other prodigallizeth all away, if the
reason be asked absolutely, How one of them comes to such a great Estate, far
greater than the other, the Stock given was a cause, and so thanks are due to
him that gave it; but if the reason be asked comparatively, why he differs
from the other, he ows that to himself, and his good Husbandry, and not to him
that gave him the Stock, no thanks is due here at all in this sense; for this
was no cause of, and so no thanks due for his differing taken comparatively,
and not absolutely, in which sense I am now speaking. And then if God did
afterward do great things for a man, give him subsequent Grace (be it what it
will) it was not from any peculiar favor or good pleasure without respect to
any thing in him, but because he used the preventing general Grace (be it what
it will) rightly, which others had in as great a measure as he, and did not. So
if a man have fearfully declined from his wonted integrity, and is after
recovered; he cannot thank God for this, as coming from any special Grace (if
he hold that God does not, because he cannot, without unjust (...) give imparia
paribus) but holds, God did no more to recover him, than to others, going yet
on in such degeneracy; whereas others can say, if they were more noble, like
the Beraeans, Acts 17.11. better tempered and more ingenuous than those of
Thessalonica, so as to receive the Gospel when others refused it, Solet dici,
Ideo credere ineruit, quia vir bonus erat antequam crederet: Quod de Cornelio
dici potest, cujus acceptaesunt Elcemosynae and auditae orationes antequam
credidisset in Christum; nec tamen sine aliqua fide donebat and orabat: nam
quomodo invocabat in quem non crediderat? etc. Quicquid igitur, and antequam in
Christium crederet, and cum crederet, and cum credidisset, been operatus est
Cornelius, totum Deo dandum est, ne forte quis extollatur, Aug. lib. de praed.
Sanct. cap. 7.
that this readiness of mind to comply with the Gospel, was from some special
Grace of God vouchsafed to them, that was not to others, like that Grace that
opened Lydia's heart. And these can also say, that though they have the Natural
power of willing and doing good, or God would not require it of them; yet such
is the wicked wilfulness of their hearts, they could not morally obtain of
themselves to will and do any good, or avoid any evil, but for this Grace and
help of the Spirit; which yet helps them (they are sure, though they know not
how, it may be, to answer all difficulties) in a way suitable to keep up their
greatest care and diligence, and ordinarily only gradually, and in the serious
and diligent use of means, And whatever God may do, or has done more
arbitrarily in being found so far of some that seek him; not as to make them
seek him; (else the worser sort of men would always continue the worst, or if
recovered, might ascribe it so to themselves, as not to any special Grace,
which might justly have been denied them, and was denied others of like equal
demerits) yet they do not, yea, account it would be their heinous sin, and a
deserved forfeiture of this Grace, to expect it any other way. Let intellegent
men reflect back and consider, whether all these ill Consequences will not
equally follow from the opinion of Aequilibrium, which it is pretended Grace
gives, distinct from liberum Arbitrium; while it is said to be given to all
alike, and that God will do no more; yea, whether it be possible any way to
avoid these inconveniences while men deny the whole design and substance,
(though some may express such things less conveniently) of those passages in
the reformed Churches Confessions, concerning Election and special Grace. I had
rather that you gathered it of your selves, than that I should show it more
plain. I could show you many other fearful Consequences from this Opinion: but
I, designing brevity, forbear it as needless, considering all forms of Prayer
Ancient and Modern, and the whole current of Scripture concerning man's
disability, and need of the Spirit's help, laugh this Opinion to scorn; and
considering this Opinion was abhorred and spewed out as Poison by the ancient
Church, as soon as set abroach by Pelagius, and offered to, and tasted by her;
and it is also professed to be abhorred; and is, I hope, however practically,
by those that yet oppose the motion of the Will by this Grace any other way,
than by giving to all men a power of self-determination upon this evasion and
pretense, that such a power of self-determination is given by Grace, distinct
from, and over and above, that which is essentially necessary to a sound man,
and therefore, say they, in this we differ from Pelagius, and upon this account
they deny it, because to do any more than to give such a power would be (say
they) to destroy our humanity. Both which are mere assertions without any
cogent show of proof that ever I could see, and the contrary is easily proved.

Let us Remember we are but men, and God's actings are above our reach, yea,
our own Souls-acts are so too. But God well understands his own actings and
ours also; and what well consists withour freedom and faculties, and what not,
which may content us. Surely that man never studied such things, that shall
pretend he can satisfactorily decide all those School-difficulties about our
Understanding and Will, wherein there seems to be demonstrative proof on both
sides. God has given us knowledge enough of our Souls for use, but not to
satisfy our curiosity. I confess I cannot comprehend the holy Spirit's way of
making men willing of unwilling in the first, or after, or continued
Conversion. And I think it folly for me to attempt it that understand my own
Soul's action so little. Yet, I think I can prove (so, as it cannot be answered
by man) that this working on the Will is only mediante intellectu (or, which is
all one, and yet avoids the disputes of faculties differing, mediante ratione)
i. e. only by setting fast upon men the apprehensions of the good of the one
way, and evil of the other; by so irradiating the Understanding with reasons,
as to cause this choice: and the Jo. 6.44, 45. 1 These. 4.9. Ephe. 1.17, 18, 19.
2 Cor. 4.4. 1 Cor. 2.4, 6.
Scripture seems to run much this way. But I dare not yet say, I am sure it is
only this way, though I strongly incline to it, and think I could answer what
can be opposed. But then how he sets home truth thus in Evidence, how he
thus irradiateth the understanding; by what act distinct from the naked
propounding the Truth and Gospel; what this demonstration of the Spirit is, I
do not understand, and dare not so much as pray to God to tell me; I know it is
too high for me, yea, or any man in this lower world. But yet, See this more
fully spoken to in my Book. called the Great Propuiation.
sure I am, First, something he does, yea, a noble operative, something in those
gracious effects on the Soul, beside giving us our Natural faculties, and the
Gospel to make us willing. And Secondly, that it is something well consistent
with man's humanity, and the freedom of man's will.

And Thirdly, That it shall not God in converting men, takes not from them the
Natural created power of Nilling, purum (...) posse nolle, Christo contrahente;
but he takes away the Moral, Wicked and Godless power, and Vicious and Corrupt
dispositions of resisting. Rutherford, Christ dying, p. 314.
actually be prevailingly resisted to the end, by such and such particular
persons, known only to God; and so they shall not be able Morally to obtain of
themselves finally to resist it; that is, they will not, though they can in the
ordinary Sense. And Fourthly, What he does in time, he intended to do from
Eternity. And Fifthly, That it is something God needed not, was not bound in
justice to have done, to make men inexcusable in not obeying the Gospel;
whereas it is necessary, in justice, to make men inexcusable in not obeying,
That they be endowed with the Natural faculties and power of understanding and
willing; i. e. that they be not Fools and Children that have not power and
knowledge to chose the Good and refuse the Evil. And also that they have a
suitable objective evidence propounded, which they could understand if they
would; that is, that they could obey it if they would, though this distinct
help of the Spirit that actually causes to will, be not given them; else they
would be excusable and without blame if it had not been given them. And
Sixthly, That this something, and all that is here spoken is well consistent
(whether we can understand it is so Say with St. Austin. Quaeras tu rationem,
ego expav scam altitudinem; tu ratiocinare, ego credam.

Nunquid ideo negandum est quod apertum est, quia comprehendi non potest quod
occultum est? Aug. lib. de persev. bon cap. 14.

Illi dicunt, Vt quid rogamus Deum ne vincamur tentatione, quod in nostra
potestate est? Isti dicunt, Vt quid conamur been vivere, quod in Dei est
potestate? O Domine, O Pater, qui es incoelis, ne nos inferas in quamlibet
istarum tentatiorum, sed libera nos a malo. Aug. Hom. 53. in Johan.


, or not) with the greatest hopeful encouragement of certainty of Salvation to
all men's sincere desires and diligent endeavors, and with the greatest
discouraging danger to all negligence; And that it would be as really
destructive to true Religion, and consequently damnable to hold an opinion of
such endeavors not being necessary to, and not certainly attaining Salvation,
or the neglect of them not undoing; (I mean to hold it finally and practically)
as the grossest Pelagianism held thus practically would be. And Objections here
are very inconsiderable. It may be made plain to men of competent rational
parts for such things, that Gods knowing from Eternity what men will do in the
variety of Circumstances, is no more inconsistent with man's freedom, and no
more difficult to be answered and reconciled, than Gods knowing the week or day
before, what a free agent will do, would be inconsistent with his freedom and
liberty: and it is no more difficult to answer any objection made from Gods
fore-knowledg, than it is to answer the same argument against man's freedom,
drawn from that undoubted maxim, Quicquid est, quando est, necesse est esse,
the same answer equally serving both. As for example: If one should object thus
against man's liberty to act and not act, to will and not will; He has power
both to will and not will such good, either before he actually wills it, or
when he actually wills it; not before he actually wills it, for then he does
not will it; and when he does not will it, it is impossible he should will it:
not when he actually wills it; for then he does actually will it; and when he
does not will it, it is impossible but he should actually will it; and
therefore no man can have freedom of will, to will and not will at any time.

This fallacious Argument may be so urged, that it is impossible to give any
answer but this, That this impossibility ex hippothesi, is not at all
inconsistent with man's liberty, because it is an impossibility posteriour to,
or after the acting or not acting, in order of Nature. So the same may be here
truly answered, that, The infallible fore-knowledg of future free Agents
actions, is no way inconsistent with the freedom and liberty of such actions;
this foreknowledg being after the said actions in order of Nature, and
existendi consequentia. He fore-knew it (...). Origin Philocal cap. 23. Quo
circa nulla negotio cogimur; aut, retenta praescientia Dei, r^llere volunta is
arbitrium aut, retento voluntatis arbitrio, Deum quod nefas est, negare
praescium futurorum, sed utrumque amplectimur, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 5.
cap. 10.
because the free Agent would do it, and not on the contrary the free Agent
would do it, because he foreknew it.

And if any should take occasion hence, to harden their hearts in the neglect
of Gods means of Salvation, and so perish, how easily will God hereafter
confute a man making such an objection; Is it not fit that a heartsearcher, and
one that knows what men will do, one that knows our thoughts long before,
should rule the world?

And the only, possible, seemingly-unanswerable difficulty that I can call to
mind, that is urged with color of reason, and that it concerns us to answer to
justify God, is this, of such particular men's obedience, being not commendable
and rewardable. But how can we make such an objection, when we know not
certainly what it is that God does, no more then Elisha did what Elijah had
done to him, beside the casting the Mantle over him, 1 King. 19.19, 20. when he
said, What have I done to thee? to hinder thee from going home? And yet
something God has done to some, that they must follow him, and cannot (in a
right sense) refuse or leave off as others do, to follow him, though they
cannot tell what he has done.

And suppose a man make such Quid opus est, ut affirmentur, vel negentur, vel
definiantur cum discrimine, quae sine discrimine nesciuntur. Aug. Enchir. ad
Laux.
Hypotheses as these following, to maintain Election and special Grace; how
will such Objections vanish, as having no color or appearance before them?
Suppose that one should maintain, that Gods Spirit does only use in conversion
the same Grace and operation specie, the same in kind, and only so much more of
it in degree, as he by his omniscience knows will prevail actually; I say, so
much Vocatio alta and secreta qua fit ut legi atque doctrinae accomoden us
ass^nsum, Aug. Ep. 107.
higher than that whereby he restrains wicked men from some particular sins,
and whereby he sometimes keeps their greater concernments on their minds
against their wills, and almost overcomes them to the obedience of Faith. Quid
no. bis est in vestiga^e ea quae neque scire compendium, neque ignorare
detrimentum est ullum? Remitre haec Deo, atque ipsum scire concedire. Vestris
non est liberum rationibus implicare vos talibus, and tam remotas inutiliter
curare res: vestra in ancipiti sita est salus animarum vestrarum, and nisi vos
applicetis, etc. Arnob. adv. Gentes.
Why is not this commendable and rewardable in these that turn, as well as it
would have been in the other to have turned? The degree cannot alter the
species; so that at most you can but say, It would be less commendable, and yet
I could say something to oppose this, but will not, for I am not careful to keep
up their overgreat honor. Yea, suppose he does something less in degree than
he does to some continuing wicked, that are made to tremble like Felix, and
only continues this striving with them longer, even so long as he certainly
knows by his omniscience will prevail with them; yea, suppose he have so
restrained some by his gracious operations, that they have not so much as
others, made it their interest to oppose the work of Grace; or begins with some
betimes, before they are so resolved to go on in their sinful ways, as some
hardened sinners; and then uses less of that, we know not what of the gracious
operation of his Spirit, even so much as would not prevail with more hardened
customary sinners, but yet more than he does to others in equal degree of
tenderness with them, and so much as he knows will prevail with these. Why is
not the Turning of such commendable and rewardable? why does this destroy their
humanity and freedom? what, because God knew that in the Moral sense
explained, they could not obtain of themselves to refuse to yield to such
drawing? Suppose God had not known it, it would then (you will grant if this be
the reason) have been commendable, and his knowledge does not alter the nature
of things. Why may we not as well say, it would hinder it from being culpable
and punishable; for a man to sin, when he cannot find in his heart to do
otherwise, though he has the Natural power of doing otherwise (which I have
showed is apparently false) as say it would hinder an act from being
commendable and rewardable, for God so to work by his Spirit, that a man cannot
find in his heart, cannot Morally obtain of himself, to reject Christ and Mercy
offered on such easy and reasonable terms, while he has the Natural power of
rejecting them, and so of eternally undoing himself. Suppose again, another
should maintain that God does something for the Conversion of all the Elect,
different specie from what he does to any others, representing in an
extraordinary way for kind, something to their mind like the Angel with the
drawn sword to Balaam, to turn them when set forward in an evil way; or
something like the shining light about, and the voice unto, Paul. How will you
prove that it would not be commondable or rewardable in them to be moved by it?
Do you think that Paul's turning from persecuting Christianity to it, was not
commendable? Paul mentions it as well done of him, that he consulted not with
flesh and blood, but obeyed. And what wrong would this be to others; whilst
God does enough for them; yea more then enough, did they not wilfully resist it
and oppose it? Suppose God had not done more for any, would they then have been
inexcusable in not turning from sin to God? How then can this be possibly
conceived to detract from their inexcuseableness?

And for any other difficulties whatsoever, it may be made apparent to any
intelligent opposer, that they will no more encumber a man here, than they will
in that difficult providence of giving and denying the Gospel. And to make this
out, consider these things. First, You use to urge these Scriptures following,
so as some think you build too much upon them, being not improbably
hyperbolical, Ezekiel. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. Get thee to the House of Israel, and speak my
words unto them, for thou art not sent unto a people of a hard language (i. e.
to the Gentiles): Surely had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened, but
the House of Israel will not hearken. Mat. 11.21. If the mighty works which
were done among you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have Repented.
So Mat. 12.14.

Secondly, Consider, this was denied some places, that it is said, had it been
given them, they would have Repented.

Thirdly, You grant that multitudes are ordinarily saved, where the
Scripture Light of the Gospel comes, that would have perished had it not come:
and that God dealt, and deals not with every Nation for their Salvation in so
high a degree as with the former Jews, and them that enjoy the Gospel.

Fourthly, You constantly grant, and it is express from Scripture, that God
knew they would not Repent to whom he sent such high means.

Fifthly, You affirm, God did not, sometimes, send the Gospel to such places
where he knew, had he done for them, as those others that Repented not, they
would have Repented. This is necessary as a foundation-truth of your Fabric.
And I for my part, freely grant that a man may say, If God had not given me
such clear means as he denied others, I had perished. And I dare not deny but
that that height of means internal and external, which he uses with some, and
yet it prevails not, would have prevailed with others, that more common Grace
has restrained and prepared.

Sixthly, God fore-knoweth it will prevail with all such, with whom it will
actually prevail; this you readily grant.

Now there is as much granted in these your constant Confessions as I have
said, viz. that God does that in order to their Salvation, for some, yea for
multitudes, which he knows will prevail with them, that he does not for
others. Only I add this, And that without respect to any good thing in them.
Now a man must be either very weak, not to see it, or very wilful, not to
grant it, That all the odious consequences that can be pretended to be sastned
on the Doctrine of special Grace delivered by me, may as truly be charged on
that which you grant and maintain, except this be true, That this denying of
the Gospel is only to those that are worse then any that enjoy it. Which now
comes to be tried.

That learned worthy man answered Mr. Perkins thus, about this thing (and
others of his mind generally follow him in it) Thus, ad praedestinationis and
gratiae singul ritatem adstruendam, non magnopere servit Isthoc, eo quod illi
contra quos disputas, etiam supposita illius veritate, duplici tibi occunrent
ratione, etc. that is, There may two things be answered here to avoid special
Grace, and consequently special Election, which follow thus,

First, says he, the Reason why any are deprived of the Revelation of the
Gospel, is because their parents, or Ancestors rejected it (he means more than
any other that enjoy it, or else it would be, as any one may perceive, weak
Impertinency;) Now, to say nothing of the inconsistency of this, with other his
principles, and how this would not avoid the force, if true, I answer, This is
apparently not true. I will bring but one instance instead of many; How many
Infants have been secretly stolen away, or by force and Arms taken away from
Christian Parents, and carried away, and Educated in dark Countries, though
their Parents were far from rejecting the Gospel, or however far from rejecting
it more than others, whose Children enjoyed it? And lest you should reply yet,
Some of their atavi or tritavi, their higher Ancestors, were greatly guilty
this way, I will suppose these very Parents had more Infant Children not
carried away, and so all the same Ancestors.

Secondly; Or says he, they made themselves unworthy (he means more unworthy
of it than any that enjoy the Gospel, as they confess that defend these words,
and this opinion, else it would be Impertinent) of this great favor by
mis-improving Natural light. But many were deprived of the Gospel before they
could mis-improve their Natural Light, as in the case abovenamed, and the
cause must be before the effect: And God gives the Gospel to many, not
improving their Natural Light well. How contrary is this to Scripture, to say
that the Jews had Gods Statutes and Judgments, because better than all other
Nations? The Jews indeed were deprived of such privileges, because of their sin
and unbelief; but the Apostle signifies to us, that the Gentiles were not taken
in, because better than they; else they might boast against them in the sense
he opposes their boasting. The Apostles were forbidden to preach to some where
they found no opposition in the people, and were commanded to preach to other
places where they showed themselves unworthy. And to say, that yet they not
long after preached in those then prohibited places, avails nothing; for you
will grant that many dyed in the mean time: yet while you say, that Gods
denying the Gospel to any, or denying the gracious help of his Spirit to any,
is for their sin and ill deserts, I am far from opposing it: I heartily grant
it, and it does not in the least oppose what I say, or help you, while you mean
it only absolute, absolutely; But if you should mean it comparate,
comparatively, you see, or may see by what I have said, it is not true. If a
Prince take away the privileges and immunities of one City for their
Rebellion, and yet continues the immunities to another City, equal in the
Rebellion; If the Reason be asked absolutely, why he took away the immunities
of the City, and would by no means spare it, the Reason is, their Rebellion,
their ill deserts: But if the Reason be asked why he took away their immunities
any more than he did from the other City, it must be answered, It was his
pleasure, and some special Grace or Favor to the other City was the cause of
this difference, i. e. not for any deserts, or less ill deserts of that City
spared.

It is here commonly replied, Though it be granted that God does give to some
this way, a special benefit, without any deserts that others have not equally
that want the Gospel; yet we deny that God does it out of any special or
greater Love to them, than he has to others that enjoy it not. And so they
suppose they maintain yet by this saying (but it would not help if true) that
God does for the Salvation of all alike; but only wherein man's free Will (or
which is all one as to the argument in hand, man's free Will equally assisted by
Grace) occasioneth the difference; And they cite a saying of Aquinas, to show
they are not singular in this Opinion. But this evasion is very harsh, and very
offensive to my Ears: for if benefits be not conferred out of love and kindness
they would be only benefits materially, but not formally, and so no thanks
would be due for them, no more than for benefits done to a man by another,
without, or against the Dono'rs intention. And so if special benefits in order
to a man's Salvation, ought to be apprehended to come, not from special Love and
good Will; no special thanks could possibly be accounted due for them: and
consequently we are to account our selves no more bound to gratitude for the
Gospel, nor no more guilty of ingratitude in not improving it (what ever else
we may be guilty of) than they are that want it.

What straits does this Opinion of denying special Grace and kindness bring men
into? If the Gospel should by the Providence of God be sent into one of the
American Countries, they must unavoidably according to these principles, think
with themselves, We are either better than other Americans, and God is bound to
do so, or he would be culpably partial, and so would do the same to every
Country as good as we: and so they cannot thank him for any special love or
favor that he denied to others as good as they; or they must think with
themselves, If we be as bad as others that want the Gospel, we need not thank
him for the Gospel, as coming from any love or good will that he has to us,
more than to others that enjoy it not. So also the Jews anciently might have
said; and so proportionably any Town that has gotten a more powerful Ministry
than formerly, Either we are better than we were, or than other Towns; or, if
not, we are no more beholden to him than they are that he takes not this pains
with, and so no more thanks due from us than them. They say, Where the great
Sultan's Horse treads, no grass will grow: I may say with truth, Where this
opinion is held practically, no Grace will grow; and yet some maintain this
with great confidence, as seeing there is no way else to avoid special Grace,
and consequently Election. And yet this evasion, if true and not absurd, does
not at all take off those difficulties that are pretended to follow from
Election and special Grace, but they as much encumber your Concessions still;
and a wicked heart would say, I care not whether it be out of love or no, so
that God do but that more for me, than others as bad as I, that he knows will
save me: for if it be not out of love, I shall be freed from the obligation of
thankfulness.

Let such Scriptures as these be well considered to prove special benefits, and
to prove them to be from special love, Deuteronomy. 7.8. The Lord thy God has chosen
thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the
face of the earth. The Lord did not set his love on you, nor choose you,
because you were more in number, but because he loved you, cap. 9.4. Speak not
thou in thy heart after the Lord casts out the people of the Land, saying,
for my Righteousness the Lord has brought me to this Land. For the wickedness
(observe it) of these Nations did the Lord drive them out; but not for the
Righteousness, or uprightness of thy heart, do thou go into their Land.
Understand therefore (how he urges it as a matter of great concernment in
Religion, to make them thankful!) that the Lord gives thee not this good Land
for thy Righteousness.

The Learned Grotius has this observation on this place, as seeing it apparent
hence. Prima Dei beneficia sine meritis contingunt; illis, in troductio
interram; nobis, ipsa fides. Which I cannot English better than thus, "God
gives the first benefits without conditions, and so gives Faith or the
Gospel-condition without Conditions, though other consequent benefits upon
conditions. Now I doubt not, but when God thus urged this upon the people [
Speak not in thy heart, and Understand therefore] as of great concernment in
Religion, he would have been very angry if one should have stood up and said,
as many now; God's love and kindness is to every one alike, but only where
Virtue or Vice makes the difference; and so God either does not love you better
than other people, or, if these benefits have love in them, then it is true,
God does not love us so as to give us these privileges and ordinances which he
denies to other people, because we were more than others, for we are fewer;
yet (however for any thing we know) because we are better; and not merely from
his good pleasure, without respect, to any good or less-hurt in us: and it is
true, It is not for our Righteousness in a strict sense; but it was for some
occult quality in us a kin to Righteousness: For this would have been to have
said to God, I either know better than Thou or Moses, or, if you know as well
as I, you conceal your meaning to engage us more to thankfulness: For though
you seem to speak largely, yet you have not made a sufficient ennumeration; for
it was not merely from some special love and favor not granted to others as
good as we; but something God had respect to, in us, better than in others.

Again, when God said, Mal. 1.2, 3. I have loved you says the Lord, yet you
say, Wherein have thou loved us? was not Esau Jacob's Brother, says the Lord?
yet I loved Jacob, and hated Esau: that is, I preferred Jacob before Esau. God
spoke this to upbraid the Jews with unthankfulness, and to move them to
gratitude, to love and honor Him as a Father. But one might have replied here
according to some, This giving to him and us his posterity greater mercies than
to Esau, was not to love him and us, his posterity, more than Esau and his
posterity, though you call it so; and so we can say for all this, Wherein have
thou loved us, more than Esau and his posterity? or else, this was not from any
special love to him and us, without respect to any special thing in him or us,
that would not have been to Esau and his posterity, if as good as he or we; and
therefore it does not oblige us to any special obedience and thankfulness, more
than them.

They might have defended themselves, That their ingratitude was no more
culpable than that of the Edomites, had they been of some men's opinion, thus;
There is only a twofold love or good will, antecedent Love, and consequent
Love, or good will (which is a distinction, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap.
1. hom. 1. (...).

And Damascenus after him, explain's more sully this Distinction.


Ancient and of good use, and ought to be taken notice of, to keep our notions
clear; though I dislike their saying, that the Antecedent love is equal to
all,) The Antecedent love is that which has no respect to any good in men, but
does good to all men, without respect to any good in them; now this, say they,
is equal to all men alike. I grant it, to all men; but am proving, it is not
equal to all men.

Secondly, the Consequent Love, called also If we consess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive.
Amor justitiae, being according to a Rule and Law; which Consequent Love, or
Love of Justification, is Conditional, and has essentially a respect to some
good thing in men, being by, and according to a Law, the Gospel Rule. Now this,
say they is equal to all men alike, but where their goodness or wickedness
occasion's the difference. And I readily grant this as apparent, That this
Consequent Love is to all men alike, as to the main and substance of it, and
the effects of it, as they perform the condition or not; which is no more but
this, He that is Holy, and so continues, shall not perish, but have everlasting
Life, be he who he will, without any respect of Persons; and, He that is more
Holy shall be more Happy; even as he that is wicked, and so continues, shall be
miscrable; and he that is more wicked, more miserable, without any exception of
Persons whatsoever, as it is said Act. 10.34. Of a truth I perceive that God is
no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him.

Now, how easily might they have defended themselves, if the Antecedent-love
was alike to all, you have seen already: And if this was to be understood, as
Opposers generally would have it, of the Consequent conditional love that has
respect to man's goodness or wickedness, they might have replied, What though
Esau was Jacobs Brother, and so equal in that respect? Yet this is said to no
purpose; for they were of no equal good qualities, one was a good man, the
other a bad; You would have been guilty of at least not fair dealing, if you
had not done for him more than Esau; What an inconsequent manner of speaking
would this have been, to move them to special thankfulness, to greater
thankfulness than was due from Edomites, if he mean by Love, the rectoral and
conditional Love, that has respect to something in men.

If a Prince should say, when one Brother of many was Executed for Treason
going on in his Rebellion, and the other Brethren ceased their Rebellion, and
became Loyal, when there was an inviolable Act of Oblivion made to all, on
condition they would cease their Rebellion, If he should say, Was not he your
Brother? And yet I have not hanged you all, what cause have you to be thankful
in an especial manner, that I dealt not with you, as with your Brother? They
might reply, This of his being our Brother is nothing to us; we are indeed much
engaged to You for your general Love and favor, in making such an Act of
Oblivion upon such an easy condition; but, that you did not Execute us as well
as our Brother, is no special favor; for though he was our Brother, we
performed the condition, and he did not; and, had we done as he, you would have
Executed us also. You urge a fallacious argument to impose upon us special
thankfulness, which is not due; It would indeed be right arguing if you meant
by his being our Brother, our being and doing like him in every thing; but then
it is not true; but if you mean by it only his being our Brother, it will not
enforce on us any special thankfulness.

So if two Brethren have equal Stocks given them to trade with, and one has
improved well by his industry, and the other is undone by negligence, what a
loose speech would this be of the donor, Is not he your Brother? what cause
have you to be observant of me more than your Brother? and how far more great,
would your ingratitude be than your Brother's?

What do these words here, Was not Esau Jacob's Brother? but stand in the place
of a sufficient ennumeration, to fignifie that they were equal every way, but
only where his love and especial Grace made the difference? And how I think it
an easy matter to Vindicate that Chapter, Romans 9. that it does speak of the
Antecedent Love, viz. Vocation, and not of the Consequent or Justification,
from v. 9. to 30. though yet I think some on the other hand, build that height
upon it, that they have no foundation there, for; But I choose to reason from
places and things more obvious, as requiring fewer words.
Impertinently else does the Apostle Paul alledg them, Romans 9.13?

Now if it be once granted, that God does any special Act of Grace for any
without respect to any good in them, which he does not for others; I see, you
constantly and readily will grant, that he willed and decreed to do it from
Eternity: For the Vorstian Hypotheses do not take with rational men. So that I
think, instead of proving this While a man holds special Grace, and the
necessity of it, he holds all virtualy that I am most solicitous to maintain
against opposers; And I could favorably pass by any errors in a man's notions
about Election, that lightly he can hold, while he holds this. And I like well
the moderation of those Ancient Councils held against Pelagianism, and wish
others would imitate so reverend a pattern, who all of them determined for
Grace, and its necessity, but none of them determined any thing about Election,
though then much controverted, as not holding that fundamental, but left that
to be defended and taught by the Orthodox Doctors of the Church, by strength of
argument drawn from Scripture and Reason, according to their best apprehensions.
Consequence; which is agreed on both sides, I have more need, if this was a
place for it, to tell people that, so they do but grant this Consequence, it
would be their sin ordinarily to think of it in their ordinary duties, except
in some few cases, and it is their duty ordinarily to think of such things as
present, or as if they were to begin now, but this would require too many words
to explain.

And further, to put the thing I have spoken of, quite out of doubt. Let any
intelligent man consider, and he will perceive, that he that should hold this
opinion practically, that the giving and continuing of the Gospel, is
conditional in that proper sense that Justification and Salvation are; will
unavoidably run into such mischiefs, as I have before at large mentioned. He
could not pray seriously, that God would send the Gospel to places where their
Parents rejected it, or where they improve not well their Naturals; but can
only pray in such words, viz. that, God would send the Gosspel to the dark
places of the world if they have not, or do not abuse their Naturals; that is,
if they be good; but not send it to make them good, while bad; And also cannot
pray that God would continue the Gospel where it is, but only that God would
continue it to him and his, and the Nation or Nations, if they shall carry
suitably to it. For a man cannot cordially pray, yea, it would be his sin to
pray, for that he holds God will by no means do, because he cannot in justice,
because it would be an unworthy respecting of Persons, or because God has made
such a rule as he doctrinally holds he will not break; no more than he can pray
that God would send the Gospel to men departed this life in their Impenitency
and Unbelief. And also he cannot Praise God heartily for the Gospel, as coming
from any love to us that was denied to others as good as he or we.

I am sensible, it may possibly be in your thoughts to object that this
difficulty may truly lie upon me, thus, Do not I pray that God would forgive
great incorrigible sinners, and yet I have affirmed pardon to be properly and
strictly Conditional.

Therefore I will answer this, though it require many words, and also because
in so doing, I hope I shall make plain some things that confound some men; And
I dare say, that they that do not keep such Notions as these following,
distinct, shall contradict themselves almost in every word they shall speak
about such things.

God's Love, and Grace, and Mercy, is used in several senses in Scripture.
First, sometimes by it is meant, that Love in giving Christ a Ransom for the
world, that whosoever of sinful men turned, should Live. This Love, take it
precisely so far and no further, it is to all alike common (though I have
showed, in another place, it is in some other sense special) this Love is great
Love indeed, and the greatest in a sense; for it is greater than any of the
rest taken singly and abstractly, 1 John 4.9, 10. Herein is Love, etc. This
Love is absolute and not conditiona; he absolutely gave him, that if men
believed, they should not perish, and whether any believe or no, it no way
lessens this, being alien to it; though yet the great actual benefit of it, is
conditional. Again, notwithstanding this Love to all, in thus bringing them
from under a necessity of perishing by their sins, yet they may be under his
rectoral Wrath and displeasure, under condemnation; yea, and all are so, till
they Repent and Believe.

Secondly, Sometimes by it, is meant the Love or Mercy of giving his
Ordinances, as to the Jews in the Scriptures before mentioned; and the giving
the Revelation of Christ in the Gospel. Now, this Love is not common to all
alike. And this Love is not conditional strictly and properly; God being not
tied in justice and honor, neither having tied himself to any certain rule or
condition; though yet the deprivation of it, is granted, to be for men's sins
absolutely (as I have explained it) and none can expect the continuance of it,
that carry not suitablely to it. This Love also is consistent with Rectoral
hatred, and being under condemnation. We may also pray that God would give this
to people unworthy and wicked even while they are so, that it may turn their
hearts; and may pray for the continuance of it to people neglecting and
slighting it; because, as I said, is is left arbitrary to God.

Thirdly, That, called the Love, or Illud nescio quo modo dieatur, Frustra Deum
misereri nisi nos velmus: Si enim deus miseretur etiam volumus. Aug ad Simpli.
Lib. 1. qu. 2.
Mercy of Election, whereby God makes people to differ, the Fruit of it being
working the Gospel-condition, turning men from sin unto God. Now a man is under
the Rectoral hatred of God, that is, is unjustified under condemnation,
notwithstandinging this Love, while you mean by it only Gods intention to
convert him, yea, and till this effect be wrought, I mean, till after in order
of Nature though not of time: for a man is first Converted in order of Nature,
before he be justified, or have right to Heaven, which is the Rectoral Love.

Again, This Love of Election is not conditional, neither in the intention, nor
effect, or Execution, in a proper sense; though none can expect this effect,
but in the use of the means, and God does work this effect by means, and men
deservingly provoke God to deny it by their sin and neglect of means, Yet God
having tied himself to no uninterruptible rule, nor being tied in justice, we
may pray for it, for those that neglect means, and seek him not, and have
highly deserved his denial of it. We may pray, that God would turn and change
their hearts, before they be turned and changed, yea or have any desire of this
Grace.

Again; But now that which is most properly called Rectoral Love, or consequent
Love, or justifying Love, pardoning saving Love, is properly conditional in the
strictest sense, is tied to a Rule or Law, and is a resultancy from a Law, upon
something done by men; to wit, upon their performing the Condition of the said
Gospel-Law or Promise, Jo. 16.27. The Father Himself Loves you, because you
have Loved me, and believed and believed that, etc. So Cap. 14.21, 23. 1 Cor.
3.8. If any man love God, the same is known; that is, loved of him. But you see
this Rectoral Love, or Love of Complacency is after our loving of him in order
of Nature.

This Love and Mercy of Election, the effect whereof is, softening the Heart,
or working the first Grace of Conversion, is not of him that wills and
runs, but of God that shows Mercy, Haec gratia quae occulte humanis
cordibus divina largitate tribuitur, a nullo duro cord respuitur. Ideo quippe
tribuitur, ut cordis duritia primitus auferatur. Aug. de praed. Sanct. Cap. 8.
namely this Mercy; that is, It is not to be ascribed to man's choosing Good of
himself; but to this special Mercy that caused him to choose, will and run. But
the Rectoral Love, the Love or Mercy of Justification and Salvation, is of him
that wills, runs, seeks, striveth; yea, and is of man's willing and
running, formally; I mean only as opposed to it is being formally, as of Gods
working it in us. Because if a man did it without this special help of God that
makes, willing he would have right to Heaven, be justified. (It would here be
great weakness for any to say, You must not make such Suppositions; for surely
we may suppose, such things as a man has a natural power to do, and that his
heart reproaches him, for not so doing: I will only ask a man, making this
Objection, this silly Question; Did your Hearts never reproach you for not
being willing to omit that Sin which God did not make you actually willingly to
omit?) Also, because else you must say, there are no rewards; or, that God
rewards himself and his own Act; which would not be sense, no more than to
say, Gods putting man into Paradise after he had created him, was the reward of
his creating him: And also, because the Promise is not made to God but to us,
and not to God's Act but to ours: The Promise is not, If God work the condition
in us, we shall be Saved; but if we repent and believe; this Law or Promise,
and so this Rectoral Love, taking no notice which way it comes, so it be but
performed.

We are not Loved with the Love of Election because we chose him, or (which
comes all to one) because foreseen to choose him; No, in this sense it is said,
You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained, that you shall
bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain; that is, He chose us
first in this sense. But yet we choose him first, choose the better part first,
the way of Obedience and Life first (when he sets before us Life, and Death
in Good and Evil; and bids us choose his ways that we may live) I say, first
in order of Nature before he chooses, loves us, with this Rectoral Love of
complacency, Pardon Justification.

Now to answer the difficulty urged; having thus cleared my way. This Rectoral
Gospel-Law Love of Justification and Pardon is properly conditional, I mean as
to the main substantial and great part of it, which is this; He that believes
shall not perish, but shall have Eternal Life: For there is some lesser part of
this that is not strictly conditional, wherein God has so kept himself
uningaged, that he may with safety to his Truth and Justice use a Liberty
arbitrarily, and does; as in Temporal Punishment, and Temporal Prosperity. And
concerning this inferior part, wherein God is left at Liberty, we may pray,
God would pardon such a wicked man though he continue wicked, as to temporal
Destruction, e. g. Relations may lawfully pray that God would not destroy his
Estate, or take away suddenly his Life, though he continue wicked, they having
some dependence on him; though yet they cannot pray that God would justify him
in the great things of Salvation though he continue wicked. And true Believers
may praise God, for it is a special Favor, and coming from special Love denied
to many as good or better than themselves, that he does not many ways make
their Lives dreadful uncomfortable, for those sins they were guilty of before
and after Conversion: For this he might arbitrarily have done, and does so by
some sincere Ones, But we cannot rationally, or properly pray that God would
give to a man continuing wicked, the full and most properly and usually called
Pardon of his sins; for this is properly conditional, and this God will not,
yea cannot do, with keeping to his inviolable Rule; but it would be as
irrational and unlawful as praying for the Dead, To pray he would do it
immediately before he has made a Change in him. Though yet we may pray God,
that he would do something in order to his Pardon, and we may pray that God
would pardon such in the sense that Scripture sometimes used the Word, as when
Christ said, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, he meant, They
have highly deserved to be destroyed immediately, and deprived of all Hope and
Means; but do thou, even as they are, immediately pardon them so far, as to
continue Means and Patience to them, and strive with them, and Convert them;
and it may more remotely connote, after thou have done so, fully pardon them (
lest, they should see with their Eye and be converted, and their sins be
forgiven them. Mark 4.12.)

But he did not mean by Forgive them, the full pardon immediately: For this
would have been to pray for the breach of the Gospel-Law founded in his Blood.
Again, a sincere Christian can praise God for special grace and favor in
turning his Heart, and converting him while he was unconverted, and when he did
not convert others as good, or better than he: And so, for his justification
and Salvation, as more remotely and fundamentally coming from special grace,
(because the working the condition was so); but not formally. But he cannot in
praising God, say, that God gave him his justification, pardon, right to
Salvation by such special grace, as that they were denied to others that were
as good, or better than he was (I mean as truly converted as he) when they were
conferred upon him. They can say, God converted them, before they were
converted in order of Nature; but they cannot truly say, Justification and
right to Heaven were conferred on them in order of Nature, before they were
converted.

You can only now reply upon me thus; But though God do something special for
the Salvation of some, which he does not for the Salvation of others, as good
as they, and so without respect to any good thing in them; yet he does enough
for the Salvation of all. I heartily grant it, for I know you cannot in Reason
mean any more than this, that nothing hinders any men's Salvation, but their own
wicked willfulness: For you cannot mean by it, God takes away every man's
unwillingness, makes every man actually willing, and choosing the better part.

I am so far from denying this, that I have endeavored to prove it. You see it
is my judgment, that none ought to do more than they can do; (taking Can in the
ordinary sense.) And if any amongst That saying of Claudian would please me,
had I assurance he meant Deus, natura naturans, -- Natura beatis Omnibus esse
dedit si quis cognoverit uti.
Heathens had done what he could, in seeking and serving God, he should either
for Christ's sake have been accepted with that little knowledge he could attain;
or else, as Calvin says, Comment Act. 8.13. Rather then he should have
perished, God would have sent an Angel to Reveal further things to him.

If you shall yet reply, and say, But God does Love and Will the Conversion of
every one? I hold this as much at least as you do: for you do not maintain that
he is resolved actually to convert every man, else every man (you say your
selves) would be converted; But you hold that God gives such means through
love to all, that if they did what they ought to do, and therefore could do,
they would be Converted and so saved; and that their Conversion is commanded by
him, and is amiable and desirable to him; and that this is enough to denominate
it a willing and desiring the Conversion of all. If any deny there is any such
thing as understanding and willing in God properly and univocally so called,
but only something that we men cannot conceive of better than under the notion
of understanding and willing, and therefore ought so to conceive of it. I
should be far from opposing him. And I grant that this spoken of, is, to be
conceived of by us, as a Willing the Conversion of all: and they that say, this
is not to be conceived by us as a Will properly, do contradict express
Scripture, which is to be a rule of our Conceptions; and I dare say they do not
consider that what ever objections they do, or can possibly, bring against men's
apprehending this as a Volition or Will, the same lie as much against what they
do hold, (as any man may find by trying a little) that God approves of the
Conversion of them that will never turn, and their Conversion is amiable, and
their refusal offensive and displeasing to him. And I cannot see that you do
thus far differ from your moderate opposers, except sometimes in words: for you
distinguish thus (when you are to give the meaning of such Scriptures, viz. Who
has resisted his Will? He does whatsoever he will. God will have all Salvos
fieri with an approving Will, but will not with an efficacious Will omnes
Salvos facere.

But here only is the difference, you say Certum est nullius Conversionem
praeise intendi.
God does not with a precise Will, intend the Conversion of any man. And you
mean by it, he intends not the Conversion of one man more than another, no
further than by giving to all men, through love, power and means enough, and so
leave it to themselves, which is that you call the Approving Will. Now I and
your moderate opposers differ from you in this: we hold that he not only
wills so far as you hold it, the conversion of all; but that he precisely
intends the Conversion of some; which we use to call a decretive Will, or the
Will of Purpose, as we call that you agree with us in, the will of Precept; the
object of one being Event, and of the other Duty. So that here is the
difference, I do not hold that God does less will the conversion of, or does
less for, or is less gracious to all, than you do, I abhor such a thought; but
only that God does more will the Conversion; and does more, and is more
gracious to some in order to their Salvation than you do. Yea, I could (if it
were worth while) show, that I hold he does more for, and is more gracious to
all that live to years of discretion, in order to their Conversion and
Salvation, than is consistent with your Principles.

And take notice once for all, that I exclude the case of Infants and Idiots
out of this discourse, as being alien, and of less concernment in Religion, and
also difficult; and so either not to be spoken of here, or spoken more largely
to, than can stand with my designed brevity.

If you should yet urge that I hold something irrational: for, what though he be
beforehand with all, do enough and more than enough for the Salvation of all,
nothing hindering their Salvation, but their own willfulness, and he D^us,
prius quam deseratur, neminem deserit; and multos desertores saepe converit.
Prosp. Resp ad object. Vincent.
forsakes none but those that forsake him, so that if he did no more for any,
we should be satisfied of his justice.

Yet why does he not forsake all equally, that equally forsake him? Why does he
give the Gospel to some that are as bad as others that want it? And give Grace
to some that have as highly as others provoked him? And why to such places and
persons in particular? Some pretend to go such away as to deny these things, or
where they cannot deny, give Reasons.

I answer, I could give you something like reason in general, why he would not
forsake all that forsake him, and so deserve his forsaking them, but that would
not answer the doubt. But why he gives the Gospel and Grace to such in
particular more than others, I confess I can give no Reason, but must with the
Scripture, resolve it into his free love and pleasure, and into his
unsearchable judgments, though I doubt not but God has wise Reasons that no
man in this flesh can understand. The University of Heaven will resolve many
such doubts. And it troubles me to see learned men attempt to find out those
ways that we are told are past finding out, and it pleases me to see their
attempts as weak as bold. And I should think it no incivility to bid him Go
look, that asks me reasons of these things. But if any urge me as they did
Elisha, that they might go and seek, I will only say, let them go seek in the
words of St. Austin, de Spir. and lit. cap. 34. Si ad illam profunditatem
scrutandum quisquam nos coarctet, cur illi ita suadetur ut persuadeatur; illi
autem, non item; duo sola occurrunt interim quae respondere mihi placet; O
Altitudo divitiarum! and, Nunquid in iquitas apud Deum? Cui responsio ista
displicet, quaerat Doctiores, sed cavcat ne inveniat ^resumtores. That is, If
any be not satisfied with this answer, let him go seek him a more learned
Teacher; but take heed he meet not with a more presumptuous Teacher. If you
shall reply, You seem to grant you hold something unaccountable to men, and so
what seems irrational to men:

I Answer, I shall not altogether deny this, but only will say these two things.

First; Remember you are but men; and so no more competent judges of the
rationality of Gods actings, when he does not reveal the reasons of them unto
us, (and that it may be, because humane Nature cannot apprehend them) than the
Beasts are of ours, the distance being without comparison greater. Movet me
quod ille perit, ille non: Si verum vis audire, and me movet quia homo sum: Sed
si tu homo es, and ego homo sum, ambo audiamus dicentem. O homo! ipsam naturam
infirmam ac debilem alloquitur Apostolus dicens, O homo, tu quis es qui
responses Deo? Si posset pecus loqui and dicere Deo. Quare istum hominem
fecisti, and me pecudem: nonne just succenseres and diceres? O pecus, tu quis
es, etc. Et tu homo es, sed ad Deum pecus es. Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon 10.


Secondly; Though a Rational man in his first undeliberate thoughts would be
apt to say, It is fit that all things should be done alike to all, and that God
should make no difference, but where free Will makes it; yet these very
thoughts do dictate equally, Let Gods government of sinful men be in such a
way, as there may be no such Prayers or Praises for our selves and others, for
grace and holiness, as I have before instanced in, to show this opinion would
destroy them. But if all men being so wicked, as it is apparent they are, we
judge it rational as right reason does (yea the reason of some Heathens has)
that we should be such depending creatures, as to pray such Prayers, and to
give such thanks and praise for our selves and others, then it is most
rational, yea, and essential to consistency with our reason, that God should
dispose of things in such a way for substance, as they have been imperfectly
described, viz. that doing enough for all, there should be such an
arbitrariness in God, in using special Grace to some.

And if any man of competent abilities, have any temptation to think otherwise,
would he but be at the pains deliberately to form any Hypotheses which are not
apparently inconsistent with Prayers and Praises, he will find himself, I am
confident, wonderfully stilled and calmed, and far from saying with Alfonsas,
Si ego adfuissem, melius ordinassem.

If any should object and say, You yet bring in the Stoic fate, or something
like it. This was an objection against Austin, and you may see it well answered
by him, Lib. 2. ad Bonifac. cont duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 5, 6, 7.

I must acknowledge, I cannot well understand what that Fate ordinarily charged
on the Stoics by the Ancients, was, nor how it was consistent with their
principles of morality, except they excluded free will from that series implexa
causarum, all of them that we have any remains of (worth the name of remains)
being Seneca, Epictetus and Antoninus Pius, who are commonly charged (and
Seneca truly) with being over great defenders of Free Will. But it seems clear
that they of them, and other Ancients, Poets and others that maintained it,
held it upon this ground; that they might clear God of all things that seemed
irreconcilable to Humane Wisdom and justice in the Government of the World; So
that when any thing seemed amiss, they could say, He was, alas, bound by Fate
and could not help it, and so was Innocent.

I would wish those that charge others with holding Fate, to consider if this
following Principle be not like it, viz. That God does as much as he may for
the Conversion of every one, and that God could not in Justice have made Judas
a Convert as well as Peter; else he would have done it. I grant, He is bound in
Justice not to condemn any for not doing what they had not power and means to
do; And he has bound himself to save all Repenting and Returning Sinners, and
none else; and so is here bound.

But to say, He may not do good, more good in order to some men's Conversion,
who, if he did it not for them would perish as well as others; or may not give
the Gospel to any, unless better than others that have it not; is to tie him
where Justice does not tie him, nor his Revealed Word; and wherein we grant
every King, yea, and Man a Liberty; and would think it a miss to bind them; and
is virtually to say, We may not pray for such things for our selves or others,
for he is bound: And it is such away of clearing God as he would not be cleared
by, but he would rather have us confess we cannot answer such Difficulties, as
this Opinion is maintained to answer.

As for Seneca, Vnum Bonum est, quod beatae vitae causa and firmamentum est,
Sibi fidere. And a little after, Turpe est, De^s fatigare. Quid vo^u opus est?
fact ipse felicem. Sen. Ep. 31. Quam stultum est ^ptare, cum possi, a te
impetrare: non sunt ad coelum elevandae manus. Ep. 41.

And which is woe se Ep. 53. ^otam Philosophiae canverte mentem, omnes mortales
multo anteced^s, non multo to Dii antecedent. Quid inter te and illos
imerfuturum quaeris? Diutius erunt. Atm hercule, magni Artificus ^st clausisse
torum in exiguo.

Tantum sapienti sua, quantum Deo omnis aetas paret. Est aliquid quid Sapierce
antecedat Deum: ille naturae beneficio, non sue, sapience est. Ep. 53.


the most Ancient Stoic Writer that we have, this puts me out of conceit with
him, he was a Pelagian Stoic and hell God did alike for all to make them
Virtuous, Wise, or Happy (he uses these words for the same); and Free Will
only caused the difference: And therefore (as it would have been inconsistent
with that Principle to hold otherwise) he has much against Prayer for virtue
and praising God for it, and not a word, that I remember for Prayer or Praise,
for these or any other benefits, notwithstanding his many other good
Instructions.

But Antoninus in these particulars, viz. In maintaining Free Will, and yet
special grace, pleases me better than many I have better thoughts of. Toward
the end of the first book, he gives thanks for many special restraints, and
particular kindnesses in order to Religion, much like Plato before him that
gave thanks to God for it as a special favor (as Plutarch in Mario tells us)
that he was born a Grecian, and not a Barbarian, and in the time of Socrates;
things which he knew were not common to all, and he thought were given him out
of Love, or he could not have given thanks for them. And especially Antoninus
gives thanks to God for inclining him to Religion; and then justifies God,
and says, God has done much for him by secret helps and suggestions; so that,
says he, I have been only wanting to my self in the 9th. book; 40. He proves
the Duty of Prayer to God to make us better, and answers the difficulty that
the Opinion of Free Will makes against it. He thus argues from their common
custom of praying for other things, but not for Holiness and Religion. (...);
etc.
Either, says he, God can do nothing, or he can; if he cannot, Why do you pray
for other things; if he can, Why do not you pray rather for piety; as that you
may not inordinately desire any of these worldly things, or not be anxious
about them, rather than that you may have these things? But perhaps you will
say (...), etc.
These things are things in my own power, things of my own free will, to choose
good or evil; he grants they are so, and therefore, says he, they are more
excellent and desirable then external things, and consequently more to be
prayed for; and then adds, (...), etc.
Who has told you that God will not help in things that belong to your own
free will? do but begin to pray for these things, and thou shall see what God
will do.

And Epictetus speaks some-where to the same purpose. It must be from a
shortness of discourse for any not to see, especially if he read that place,
that Antoninus is against the opinion of them that hold, God will only give men
a power of Willing Good and Evil, but will not keep any men from willing Evil,
or which is all one, not except they continue not willing it; nor will cause
any to Will good any further, how-ever, not except they continue Willing it,
which is in sense, if sense, He will not do it at all.

As for that which is ordinarily meant by Fate in this angry Charge, you may as
truly be charged with it (though untruly) as your moderate Opposers: For you
hold (whatsoever some little Retainers that know not your mind, or their own,
say) that it is a known certainty to God from Eternity, who shall be Converted
and Persevere, and who not; and also that he has decreed in particular, and in
individuo, such to Salvation, and such to Condemnation upon this fore-fight,
and that it will certainly and eventually be so; not one Person more or less,
eventually doing otherwise, and being otherwise in the end dealt with. You well
Origin clearly answers that cavil of Celsus, viz. [That must be and canno: be
otherwise, which God has fore-known or fore-told] by distinguishing and
showing how it can, and cannot be otherwise. Cont. Cells. Lib. 2. Philecal. Cap.
25.
understand how this Decree is consistent with Man's Freedom. And yet these are
Difficulties, and require a long and operous intention of mind to understand
their consistency. And some of short heads will be offended at this your
Opinion, not understanding the Consistency of it with man's natural Freedom of
Will, and the Gospel-Promises; or will make it like Fate to themselves. It
would yet be a false Charge for any to say, that according to your Opinion and
Principle, what God has decreed concerning men's future Estate must be, and
cannot be otherwise, taking such words in the ordinary Sense; for though there
be a Truth in this Charge, in a Sense remote from the vulgar use of such Words;
yet according to the ordinary and most obvious Sense of such words, this
Accusation is false; which is, that men have not Free Will to do good or not do
it; or else; if they have, that they are concluded antecedently to the use of
it, that, do what they can, turn to God, or not turn, their final Estate shall
not be ordered according to their thus turning or not, which is false. And some
it may be will undo, or have undone themselves for ever, upon mis-apprehensions
of your meaning, and their false Conclusions drawn from it.

So here, I know it does follow from what I say, that though God do enough
(yea, and more than enough) for all, or will not condemn them for not doing
what they had not Power and Means enough to do; yet if He do arbitrarily more
for some, I mean arbitrarily as not being any way bound to do it, as having
made no such promise to them or others properly so called, though there are
such Intimations, commonly called half-Promises, that it is probable he may
(though he may refuse) make such a man willing of unwilling, upon others
praying to him in particular for such as bad or worse than others; and also
sometimes without any such particular Prayers of others for them; I say, it
does follow from this, that where he does such arbitrary things, he willed or
decreed to do so from Eternity upon such Prayers of others, or without them as
the case is, he being Immutable and Omniprescient.

Yet people in going so high in their ordinary Conceptions, would be very apt
to make this like Fate to themselves, as it is apparent they do that apprehend,
as if such volitions were not now as arbitrary to God as ever: For this is to
destroy the right and true Conceptions of such things, as are merely done by
him prolibitu, to think that he is by Decree bound, so as they are not now
arbitrary.

And therefore, as a man that is deliberating, and thinking upon a return to
God, must not go and conceive, It is a mere arbitrary thing to God, whether he
will receive me to Happiness or no; this would be an Error: For God is bound,
has bound himself to receive him; and would have us conceive of him as bound
by his Promise; and he must not go and think (though confessed true by both
Parties) it is in a true Sense determined by God, whether I shall be saved or
not, he knowing whether I would return to him or no; but he ought to consider,
God is not at liberty upon my turning to accept or reject me; For he is bound
by his promise, if I turn I shall live; and this Decree, or Will of God is well
consistent with this Promise, and I must make my Notions of the Decrees of God
to give way to this Promise, and by no means make this Promise give way to
them; For so far as my Notions of his Decrees contradict this promise really,
so far they are false: And that Notion about Gods determination which men,
versed in such things, can conceive consistent with this, is built upon his
high infinite unsearchable understanding and foreknowledge, what I would do
through my free will only, or through Grace assisting it.

So when a man is Praying, or designing to Pray for a thing that is arbitrary
to God, e. g. for the Conversion of such a Relation (as Monica for her Son
Austin) he ought not to rise so high as to think God has decreed, whether he
will convert him or no, in hearing my Prayer or no; and so though God be a
gracious God hearing Prayers, and has commanded me to Pray thus for him, and
is apt to be moved with Prayers, yet this Decree may hinder the success of this
Petition

For this would be an erroneous Conception, and to conceive his degree to be as
Ill, and much like the Stoic Fate: For it is to conceive it is not now
arbitrary to God to be moved with my Prayers; but it is to conceive though it
was at first arbitrary to him, yet it is not so now, but he is precluded and
bound, and so it is to conceive such a Decree as is something distinct from his
present Will. This is, I say, to hold Fate, as Also Homer makes Fate to be
(...), Jupiters ancient determination, and yet I^ad 16. brings in Jupiter
weeping and lamenting, that his Da^ling Sarpedon must be slain by Patroclus,
for Jupiter could not help it, because it was fatal to him.
Seneca does: for he makes Fate (which is well spoken thus far) to be nothing
else but an Eternal Determination of God concerning future things: But then
(which is a very sinful Conception of him) he looks upon it as though it was
free to God to determine things at first, yet now he is bound by it and cannot
help it, so that things are not now arbitrary to him being thus bound, Eadem
necessitate (says he speaking of Fate) Deos alligat. Ille ipse omnium conditor
and Rector scripsit quidem fata, sed sequitur: Semper paret, semel Jussit. Sen
de provid. Lib. 5. Which is a very irrational Conception, leaning upon his
Heathenish Apprehension, that things may now fall out to move his Will that
were not in his Eternal Willing foreseen, or particularly apprehended, else
they might move it now if at Liberty. And every one of our short and finite
understandings at the first notion, as soon as we hear or think of an Eternal
Decree, are apt to have the like Apprehensions, till our Reasons pry a little
more into it; as if His Eternal Thoughts and Willing, did not grasp and
comprehend all these Prayers to be made, as being objected as clearly to him as
present from all Eternity, to move his Will in the sense wherein we must
understand them to move his Will now.

Let me advise all to take heed of speaking or thinking of such things as these
I am now speaking of; as if they were not free to Him now; as if they were not
now to be done pro libitu; as if his Decree was once his Will, but is now
something we are to have a notion of besides his present Will; as if the doing
of such arbitrary things was not now arbitrary; as if there was something tied
him besides his Justice and Promise, besides his own present most-free will.
Take heed of that Notion, as if he was as much bound by Decrees, or as really,
as by Justice and Promise.

But do you conceive of these things merely of his Will, as being at present
the free things imaginable, even altogether as free to him as if they were to
begin now?

I mean things of this Nature, that he is no way bound to do, unless you will
say, bound by his Will and Decree, (which we cannot call binding, but in such a
contradictious sense; as we should say, a man that has free Choice given him,
is bound to do what he Will;) as in giving, or continuing the Gospel to a
People, wherein you are to conceive him so free as that he may, or may not be
moved with your Prayers for them, even as free as if to begin to determine now.
And so when you Pray for a good Nights sleep, which God may or may not give you
upon Prayer; you must not think, It may be in vain for me to Pray, for he has
decreed I shall not have it: this is to hold Desine fata Deum flecti sperare
precando. Virg. Aen. 2.
Fate, and to think there is something may hinder him from hearing your
Prayers, besides his present Will, and it is to have unworthy Thoughts of God
and to hold an Opinion, overthrowing all Religion, if held practically; and it
is vertually to deny, this Prayer was objected before him in his Willing or
Decreeing this Nights Sleep. Yet it is very hard when we go so high in our
Thoughts, to get this Fate out of our minds.

And therefore, take a man of the vastest Comprehensions in this World, and
clearest in his Notions about these things, and their Consistency with Gods
present Freedom; yet they are so intricate, and require such Intention of the
mind to understand them consistent, that it is his duty in Prayer for these
arbitrary things, to apprehend and conceive as if God was now to begin to Will
them: and such Apprehensions are not false Apprehensions, but only inadequate
Apprehensions; and that which the contrary Apprehension would immediately
suggest into his mind, would be false, viz. That it is not now as arbitrary to
him to be moved with Prayer, as if he was to begin to be moved with Prayer now.

If any should object; What, may we pray to God as apprehending, as if he was
to decree such things de novo, to begin to Decree now? May we pray that he
would change his Decree?

I answer, You may, and you may not. Do but consider, that by the Decree of
God, you mean no more than the Will of God, and this may immediately call to
mind, that you often pray to God, that he would do things which you fear he
will do not, or doubt he will not do; and that he would not do things to the
Person, Family, or Nation, you fear he is in Anger bent to do; this you do
frequently, and yet do well.

I grant you may not pray that God would alter his Decree, or begin to decree,
in the notion that the Word Decree, is used by the custom of speaking on both
sides to signify; for it is used by almost constant custom, to denote the Will
of God under the very Notion of Eternal, and so signifies by common use the
same that these very words [To will from Eternity] would do. Now if a man
should pray God to will in this sense, or begin to will or change his decree in
this sense, it would be in effect, to pray in express Words, and Formally under
that very Notion, that he would not Will that now, he Willed from Eternity;
which would not be only to pray, not considering his Immutability, but to pray
him to put off his Attribute of Immutability, which would be foolish and
sinful, and contrary to the result of our deliberate Conceptions, concerning
his Essence.

But take the Will of God as we are bound to do in ordinary duties Abstractione
praecisionis, sive abstractione Simplici; non abstractione negationis, sive
composita.
abstractly from that Consideration, that whatsoever he can will he always
Willed; and we may have, yea ought (or we should otherwise sin) to have such
Apprehensions as if he was now to begin to Will it: yea, we ought to pray that
he will do such arbitrary things, as we have some reason to fear he will not
do, as when we pray for such a wilful Sinner's Conversion; we ought to consider
God in this Duty (or we could not be serious and servent) as one that may, if
he please, be moved with the present Duty; and we are not in our Addresses to
consider him, as one whose Will was to be moved, or the Request to be
arbitrarily denied with this present Prayer foreseen from Eternity.

It would be a weak pretense for any to reply; We pray only in Obedience, and
not to attain the things prayed for; or to say, We do not pray to incline, or
to move Gods will; or to say, We pray for the thing, but not to incline Gods
will: If so, you pray only with your Lips, but not with your Hearts; it is to
say, We pray for the thing, but not, ut velit, that God would do it; which is
in effect to say, We pray it may be done without, or against his Will, or, We
do not pray he would do it out of Love or good Will.

As you are to conceive God has a Will, or you would have sinful Conceptions;
so you are to conceive of God as being moved with his Peoples Prayers; and the
contrary Conception to this would be false: For it would be this, That it is
all one to God in giving benefits, whether they pray or pray not, for the
attaining of those benefits: And then if you conceive of God, as moved with
prayer, you can conceive nothing moved by prayers, but his Will.

I expect that some will yet say, You make God the Author of Sin and men's
misery; for if you hold that God does more for the Conversion of some, than
others, then you hold he does less for the Conversion of some than others, and
that he did not Will to do so much for them as others as bad as they. I would
stop men's mouths, if possible. You must be so ignorant as not to understand
what I have said, or you must grant, that since I do not make him the Author of
sin, in turning some men actually from sin, which is a contradiction, that
therefore I make him the Author of sin and men's misery in those Assertions
wherein I comply with you, for I hold: He does for all men, as much as you do
toward their Conversion; I mean, setting a side the second power which (because
I have a greater dislike of, than I can express) I will show you it is nothing,
but what I grant every man has, viz. mere humane Nature, or it is worse than
nothing.

And I will, if I can, make it very plain, that all may take heed lest, upon
any fair pretense whatsoever, they should ascribe no more to Grace than Non
dicit Christus, Omni qui audivit a patre and aidicit, venire potest ad me, sed
venit. Venire posse in natura ponit, Pelagius vel etiam, ut modo dicere capit
in gratia. Aug. lib. 1. de great. advers. Pelag and Celest. cap. 10.

Sub ambigua generalitate quid sentiret abscondens; gratiae tamen vocabulo
frangens invidiam, ossensionem que declinans, ibid. cap. 37.


Pelagius did, that at last found out a way to use the word Grace, and God's
giving men Grace to obey, but meant by it, merely God's giving the Natural
power of free will, which a man cannot be a man without, or sin without,
confounding Natrue and Grace, as Austin complains.

It is a Firstborn of wonders to me, that so many learned men should with
confidence maintain that a man is not to blame, or not inexcusable in not
choosing Good, or not refusing Evil, except he be made by Grace, through Christ,
(...), and (...), that is, having a Will as equally inclined to Good as Evil;
which is, at least, to say, No man sins, or is to blame, except he be a better
man than ordinary. And it is the like wonder to me that they should not see,
The effect of the Grace spoken of in Scripture, and prayed so much for, and
disputed so much concerning these Controversies, is something that men can
possibly sin without, can sin though God deny it them: for we need not, yea,
cannot rationally pray for it, to keep us from sin, if we cannot sin without it.

And now I am speaking of wonders, take this also into the number, that those
learned men on the other side, that hold, that men can, and do sin, and are to
blame, though God do deny them that Grace spoken of, to keep them from sin;
that yet they should deny that men in some true sense can do otherwise without
it: For this is to say, that all our Repentance is only for doing something that
we could in no sense have done otherwise.

Now, lest you should suspect that I speak thus vehemently without reason,
against this aequilibrium, that it is pretended Grace only gives; let me obtain
leave to digress a little farther, to put you out of this suspicion. Tully de
not. Deorum, tells us of One arguing thus, As giving Wine to sick persons often
does hurt, and seldom good; and therefore it is better never to give Wine to
sick people: So it had been better that Man had not been endued with Reason,
because it does more men hurt than good. Now we can well answer this Objection;
The compalint is unreasonable, because we had not been men without Reason; and,
what hurt comes to men by their Reason, is through their own default; and,
much good might come by it, did they use it aright. But me thinks it may be
made apparent, that that called Grace, which some will only admit, would, as
they explain it, be really unlucky and mischievous, and no benefit can possibly
be assigned to come to men by it. And because I would not be over-large, so as
to weary you in making this out, let me beg I may take these things for
granted, and not be put to prove them; and I think I am not immodest in my
begging. First; That multitudes of men will perish. Secondly, That all would
have been saved eternally in Heaven, that should not sin, or disobey God in any
thing; I mean, that there is no middle state between Heaven and Hell for men.
Thirdly; That I may have leave to take their explications of this general
Grace, that maintain and plead for it, without naming the Authors, who are
many, and deservedly much esteemed in other things; and I will not mention by
way of disparagement any needlessly. Any one may soon see whether I set down
their explications of it bona fide or no; yea, any one may understand that
every one of these things following, are essential to it, to support it, that
it be not either needless to the making men culpable, and inexcusable, that
have the Natural faculty; or merely giving the saculties; or no way subserving
their design, to avoid especial Grace; that is, Gods doing something for one,
in order to his Salvation, that he does not for another, and that without
respect to any good in him. Now their Affirmations concerning it are these.
First, This Grace is given to all men alike. Secondly, The Effect of this Grace
is a thing, that men would be found men without; I mean, men in their right
Wits, having the right Natural use of their Faculties without it. For they
affirm that to say, Grace only, gives the Natural Faculties, would be
Pelagianism; and deny they mean by Gods grace, this giving the Natural Power.
Thirdly, They call this, which I call the Natural Power and the Faculties, the
remote Power of Willing and Obeying, but they call that which grace gives to
all men Proximam potentiam, a next, Proximate Power; which is not given to make
men Take notice I do grant, that they do say, this Grace is given to make men
Actually willing, and they use to complain that they mis-represent them that
should say, they hold that God does not make those Actually willing that are
so: For he that gives the Talent, does in a true sense cause the Improvement
of it. But they tell us, They mean Grace gives men Actually to Will no further
than this common way, by giving a power of Choosing or Refusing: And if I have
any Expressions that may seem contrary to this, I so far wrong them.
Actually willing, and Actually to Believe and Obey, but to give men a Proximam
potentiam, a second next Power of Believing and Obeying if they would. The
Effect of Grace is say they, to give a man such Power as puts him in bivio,
in an Equipoize: gives him a more full second Power of choosing Good and Evil;
by this he is enabled more proximately to obey the Gospel if he would.
Fourthly, They say, a man would have been in no fault in not believing and
obeying the Gospel, if God had not in Grace given him this proximate Power; he
could not have sinned in not repenting, or believing without this Power which
Grace gives, and that for this Reason; because he could not but disobey the
Gospel without it, and could not but They mean without doubt materially; do
that Act which is materially Sin without it.
Sin without it: And to say that he could do otherwise than sin without it, say
they, would be Pelagianism. Fifthly, They say, it is no sin for a man to do a
thing a man could not but do, or omit a thing he could not but omit.

Now let any man, if these things be so, tell me, what this Grace (passively
taken) this proximate Power, that Grace (Actively taken) gives, is good for:

First, you cannot say to make them Men; for they would have been as perfect
men without it.

Secondly, You cannot say, That they might be enabled to Obey the Gospel: For
what Loss would there have been to men if they had not Obeyed the Gospel? There
would have been, according to these Principles, no need of Obeying of it, if
this proximate Power had not been given: Because they could not have Obeyed the
Gospel without it; and so because they could not, it would have been no Sin in
them, no Disobedience not to obey the Gospel, though they had been sound men.
And to deny this would be to grant what I have proved; and what they oppose,
That men are to blame in not doing what they have the Natural Faculties to do,
though they have not this proximate Power of Grace: And also would make it
needless for this end, viz To make them inexcusable.

Thirdly, You cannot say that this Grace was needful that men might be saved;
For they would be saved if they did not Sin, and they could not Sin without
this Grace, giving the proximate Power; because they could not but Sin without
it; could not but Disobey the Gospel without it And therefore it would have
been no Disobedience, or Culpableness, because they could not do otherwise; and
therefore all men would have been saved if this Grace had not been given, for
they could not have been Condemned for no fault, and therefore must have been
saved.

Fourthly; You cannot say, But though they would not if this Grace had been
denied, have been Condemned for Disobeying the Gospel; yet they would have been
Condemned for breaking the Law: For according to these Principles, they could
not but Disobey the Law without this Grace; and therefore it would have been no
sin in them to Disobey the Law, and they could not be Condemned, because they
could not do otherwise than do it, and so they would have been saved.

Obj. But you will say, Your Accusation is too high; for if this Grace be
granted to do no good to men, yet surely it does them no hurt.

Ans. Yea, according to these Principles if it be but granted, That some men
will perish; for none would have perished had not this proximate Power been
given; because, as they say, they could not have done otherwise, and so, as
they say, it would have been no Fault, and God could not have Condemned men for
it; and so there being no middle state, all would have been without this Grace,
sound and perfect men here, and might have lived jolly and jovial Lives, and
have been saved at last in Heaven.

You cannot tell me, I cannot answer these Difficulties: For you have seen or
may see, how this distinction of Natural and Moral Impotency, if admitted, does
unty, or rather cut all these Knots, by showing; This Grace of theirs is
needeless, for the end assigned by them to it, viz. To make men inexcusable by
giving them Tower of Willing, and Power to Obey if they would; and that Grace
which they deny, is necessary (in a right sense) to a greater end, to make men
actually willing.

I could further show you the Inconsistency with it self, and the Contradiction
to Scripture, and the It might truly be said, if this Opinion of theirs was
true; That men can for any Impotency whatsoever on them to the contrary, so
live all their Lives, as not to need Pardon, or Christ's Satisfaction for any
of their Omissions or Commissions.
danger of this Tenent, which yet is a Foundation-Principle of some Discourses,
viz. That the Impotency that the Scripture speaks of upon men to any good, is
not (to the immediate Duty to be performed) either upon good or bad men now,
nor was then, else they had been blamless (say they) in not doing that Duty:
but only it signifies what would have been upon men, if that Grace through
Christ had not taken it off from all. But I have spoken enough for them that
will consider words of Sobriety and truth, and too much for them that will not.

Obj. But whence came this Moral Impotency?

I will not say, What is that to you? (because it is something to you): but I
will say, What have you to do to ask this here? For I am not now speaking about
it, and you have no need to ask it for the Understanding of what

I have spoken; It can stand on it is own legs, without flying to that foreign,
or more remote help; however I am resolved to try it for a time, for some
Reasons. I answer, First, It came not from God, he made man upright.

Secondly; The Scripture teaches you how sin came into the World, and much is
said, and may be said of that, to justify God against men's accusations; and
much may be said for our increasing it on our selves; But my business is
designedly not to interest this discourse in it.

Thirdly; Let it come which way it Non refert scelus unde, etc.
will, you see it does not excuse, and so do all men, whatsoever they say to
the contrary.

Fourthly; You see, or may see (I speak advisedly) that there is no Impotency
can hinder your Salvation, but what you may prevail against, if you would: for
I have showed you it differs not from the Will, not in specie.

Take notice I have not at all denied Natural Impotency on us (for I should
then contradict my own judgment) but only say, it excuses so far as it hinders.

There is much of Natural Impotency to many desirable things, yea, in the best
in this life, as a punishment, or product of Adams Fall, and much as a
punishment, or effect of our (in a stricter sense) own sins, e. g. many
ignorances, and roving extravagancies of the mind, melancholy, yea, and
natural desires or inclinations in the sensitive part of the affections, which
are not at all subject to the Will and understanding. And God may and does heal
such things by degrees, by way of reward, upon prayer and endeavors of his
people, for their comfort, help, and encouragement in their Christian course;
And also it may be, that repeated contrary-acts, and repeated denials, do in a
natural way lessen some altogether involuntary sensitive desires. But these
things, though done by God and his Spirit, may be matter of the promissory part
of his promises, but not of the mandatory or conditional part of them; however
not immediately, that is till those impediments be removed, and in the mean
time, we are to use those means that we are to expect the removal of them in. I
do believe, that not only the rational part of the affections, and that part
which is now subject to the Will, but the most sensitive part of them, was
subject to the Will in Adam, before his Fall, and that he could not say, as we,
I would not be troubled, or afraid, or put into a trembling, but cannot help
it; I would have the more affecting and sensible part of joy, but cannot.

But now alas, if a man would as much as he can, without any unwillingness,
many such passions cannot be caused, or prevened; and some desirable passions
are caused, when our desires and volitions of them, are less vehement; and
consequently, when we less please God in our duties, being more wanting in our
duty and obedience.

There is such a thing as Obligation and Duty growing upon us; that becomes
duty, that was not so before, upon some Natural inward impediment removed by
God's Spirit or otherwise; so that after, it would be ones sin not to do, or
not to do to such a measure, things which before were not a duty, (however
immediately) and yet things greatly desirable, and their want to be lamented.

But there is a present Obligation, and it is the present duty of every man
that has his faculties and an objective evidence, this day to perform the
Gospel condition, to consent heartily to the obedience of Faith, and resolve to
hold on; and if he did this which he has the Natural power to do, and should
dye, he should be saved; else he might say, I would, and thou would not; and
not only his duty to do something that may mediately and remotely tend to this,
else we must say, It is not his duty this day to Repent and Believe, and he
does not sin in not doing it; but only in not doing something else that may
remotely tend to it. e. g. It is not this day a man's duty to read the
Scriptures that cannot, and so not his sin he does not, though he had
opportunities to learn and sinfully lost them; but only it is his sin, that he
does not lament such loss of opportunities, and that he does not resolve and
endeavor to use such means whereby he may learn; and when he can read, it will
be his duty to read. So if a man complain of distractions, and a shattered head
and thoughts in duty, and that these came on him by his own former negligence,
we must say he is to lament these as an affliction and chastisement for his
sin; but they are formally sins only, so far as they do not displease him
enough, so far as his Will is not enough set against them; and it is not his
duty to have his duties free from them, if his greatest desire cannot attain
it; But it is his present duty to pray against them, and to use Gods means to
be freed; and when they are once subjected by God, more or less to his Will,
then it would be his sin to have his duties torn, or so partly torn
proportionably, because then it comes for want of present due care and
watchfulness.

As for the Affections or Passions, I judge as Interest autem qualis sit volunt
as hominis, quia si perver sa est, perversos habebit hos motus: Si autem recta
est, non solum inculpabi les verum etiamlaudabiles erant-Volantas est quippe in
omnibus; imo omnes nihil aliud quam viluntates sunt. Nam quid est cupiditas,
and laetitia, nisi volm^^as in eorum consensionem quae volumus? Et, quid ests
me^us atque tristitia, nisi volunt as in diss^nsionem ab his quae nolumus: Aug.
de Giv. Dei. Cap. 6. lib. 14.
many others, that the chief rational part of what we call the affections both
concupiscible and irascible, is but the very motion, the inclination or
aversation of the Will, respectively differing according to the variety of the
objects apprehended as Good or Evil, present or absent, easily or difficultly
attainable or avoidable, e. g. Love is a complacency of the Will, desire a
volition of a thing absent, and this very desire, were the thing present, or
present in the imagination, would be joy; and if so, the chief part of the
affections is elicited and not imperated. And as for the more passionate and
sensitive part of them which is imperated by the Will this may be said, that in
some the more sensitive part is more subject to the Will than in others; and
only so far as they are subject to the Will, they are capable of sin; and so
far only as they are not willed enough, or not nilled enough, they are sinful.

And that Distinction of the Schoolmen may be applied unto them all, and be of
much use to us. Amor, dolor, timor; affectivus and appretiativus; affective
love and appretiative love. By the appretiative, they mean the more rational
and less sensitive part of the affections. Take this instance, suppose the
Husbands of two Women are dead; one Wife, it may be none of the most loving, is
excessive in sensible sorrow, the other a more loving Wife is more composed,
and cannot obtain of her self that passionate stirring of grief. Now this is a
sure rule to go by, to judge who loved most; she does the more truly love, and
more truly grieve that would give most of what is dear to her, to redeem his
life. It may be one would give much, the other that has overflowing passions
but a little. If a man do Will and desire God and things above, above all the
world, so as to put him on all endeavors, this is the true rational Love, and
would be accepted, though he should not have the more sensible passionate
affective part: So if he have such a real displicency and dislike of sin, so as
he would give all the world to be freed from offending God; this would be
accepted without the more passionate and sensible grief.

But yet the more sensible part of the affections is greatly desirable, and
the want ordinarily to be lamented, and God gives it as a reward and sensible
encouragement to his people. And it is without doubt wonderful difficult, and
it rquires a great measure of Grace to keep the Will constant and resolved,
with full purpose of heart cleaving to the Lord, when affections have not these
sensible tastes in passionate complacencies and meltings, which are sensible
encourageing smiles from above; I mean (for there may be great deceit here)
when in Conjunction with the integrity of the heart and Will. But the main
thing we are to enquire after, and judge our selves by, is the appretiative
part, the more voluntary and rational part.

Pardon such expressions as these, which I have used, (partly carelessly, and
partly for explication sake, that I might the better be understood.) He can
Will it if he would, or he cannot Will it if he would, which hypothetical
speeches are not proper. You may indeed say of imperate acts that a man can do
them if he would, or cannot if he would; But of the elicite acts that are no
way imperated, you must only say, he can Will, or he cannot Will a thing
simply: or he has, or has not the Natural power or (...), or faculty of
Willing the thing; or he has or has not the Moral power, of Willing it. And I
confess also, it is not proper to say, A man can believe; perform the Gospel
condition if he would, but simply he can perform it: for it is in effect to say
he can consent if he would. But the impropriety here is competently well
hidden, by the variety of expression, and the vulgar taking of it as differing
from volition, as if it was rather imperated than elicited by the Will. Yet I
have used some expressions (and I doubt not, properly) that seem to contradict
this; as when I say, A good man would fain draw on his Will further to Good,
and further from Evil; that is, he would Will good more. But such passages if
well considered, do not, I think, contradict this really. Let this be weighed a
little; Any one that speculatively considers his own Souls actings may perceive
that there is not only a direct act of the Will, a direct volition that is
carried straight forward, to its external object; but a reflex act of the Will,
that has an act of the will for its object; else a man could not pray for the
willing of Good. A man may not only Will that which is Good, which is the
direct act, but may will and desire, that he did Will and desire such a thing
more; and this second or reflect act is really a Will, a volition, being upon
reasons, and also distinct from the other direct volition, having a quite
differing object, and whether it be possible to go further with another reflex
act terminated on this reflect act is a question, but I suppose one may. But
then (which keeps truth in what I have spoken) It seems the direct act of
Willing is essentially before the reflex; and that a man cannot Will he did
Will such a thing, till first he do Will it really, or (which comes all to one)
he cannot, Will he did not Will such a thing till first we have a direct
aversation of his Will to it. A wicked man cannot remissly Will he did Will
that which is Good (as it is granted he may) till first he have a direct remiss
Will to it: and if this was not so, it would object before us a most perplexing
difficulty. Though yet to come to a mere sensitive appetite, a man may desire
he had it, though he have it not; or that he had it not, though he have it. So
that this does not contradict what was said: for in propriety a man cannot Will
a thing if he would, except he do Will it.

And also I said, an act of the Will, which is merely elicited; But here (which
is strange) we must grant such a thing as the Will imperating a volition, or
quasi imperating a volition, distinct from eliciting one. And yet this reflex
volition cannot, I think, possibly have any imperated effect of its imperating
a volotion immediately to increase the direct volition immediately; but only
can increase it by putting a man on the use of such means as may increase the
direct volition. As for example, A man does by this reflex Will for some good
reasons, will and desire he did will and desire, and love God and holiness
more; This reflex will though in its own Nature, and formally it comprehends
more of volition, yet it does not cause a man to love, desire or Will God and
Goodness more, with the direct act immediately; but only it causes a man to
pray for it, and read and meditate on such things as may increase the direct
volition; so that the direct act is not subject to the imperation of the reflex
act at all immediately; but yet it is remotely; for the reflex act puts him on
useing means to get a more clear, or more abiding apprehension of the worth and
goodness of the object, to cause a higher and more practical dictate of the
understanding, that the direct act of the Will may be thereby increased; it
excites and sets that on work that can prevail.

Let any one try if any use may be made of this, either to discover the
prevailing interest and bent of the Soul more fully, or any other way. Any
attempt of mine, I see, will be in vain here; such things are too wonderful for
me. What boldness is it for men that know their own Souls nature and acts so
little, to pretend to know more of God and his actings, who curiously wrought
this Soul, than he has revealed to us?

I shall account what I have here written lost in part, if it have not some
good effect upon the Readers in reference to their Morals, as well as
intellectuals; And therefore will add something by way of practical application,
and hope therein to answer some objections that may yet be in your thoughts.

USE. 1.
HOw much to blame are those that dread not Extremes? It is very common with
men, when once they are fully convinced that there is a dangerous error on one
hand, to be careless how far they run on the other hand, and to entertain an
error as dangerous, and maintain it to help against the other; though it may
prove as incommodious to their Souls, as once our predecessors found it to the
State, when they fetched in the Saxons to drive out the Picts.

St. Austin tells us it was the great care of every Orthodox Teacher in his
time, Lib. 2. de peccat. merit. cay. 18.
to take heed lest they should so defend Grace, as to deny free will; and lest
they should so defend free will, as to deny Grace: and a good care it was.

Some have spoken against Free Will to good in any sense, have spoken without
fear of over-speaking of man's Impotency to Good, without any check or
limitation; yea, and called it a Natural Impotency in the sense explained; and
however custom has so obtained, that the most understand it (without
explication) of a Natural Impotency, which to affirm, is virtually to lay man's
destruction at Gods Door, notwithstanding Christ's Death and the Gospel, and to
clear Man. How sad it should be to us, that many have expressed themselves in
such terms, (though they did contradict it again virtually) that if wicked men
had Believed them (without doubt they had such checks of Conscience, that they
did not) they might have encouraged their Hearts, as if their refusal of Christ
and Grace was not their Malignity and Wickedness; was not a Moral thing, but
their Weakness, as opposed to Moral and Voluntary; a Weakness opposed to
Wilfulness, or however different from it, a Cannot distinct from Will not;
which every one has a Notion that a man may be pitied, but not blamed for. If
any say I have spoken thus, and held thus; but now see it is an Error
subverting the very Foundation: but while I did hold it, I held it only
Cloudily and Notionally, but I did practically hold the contrary, or I could
not have Reproved others, or Repented of my former Sins: I readily believe you,
and shall only say, Learn Charity to those that differ from you.

Again, some have so defended Free Will, that they have maintained, that God
gives to Men only a power of Choosing Good and Evil, and will go no further
with any. If any such are sensible that Blasphemhy to the Spirit is written on
the Forehead of this Opinion, and that it makes the Spirits help, needless to
a Man of sound Intellectuals; having a sufficient objective Evidence, and shall
say, I held this only Notionally; for I did pray, which I could not have done
had I held it practically: I shall say the same, I readily believe it, do you
also learn Charity.

If any should tell me I am too Charitable, in granting that Men may hold
Errors destructive of Religion, Notionally and Doctrinally, and yet hold the
contrary Truth Practically. I answer, I know I am not, and any observant Man
sees it very frequent. If you should reply, surely no Man holds
Contradictions; quite contrary Opinions, however no judicious Man. Yea, I may
confidently say, every judicious Man does so, since every man in this World
holds some Errors; and this may convince you, viz. If there be any man that
you think you can truly Convince of an Error he holds, you do equally think he
holds Contradictions; Because else you could not think you could Confute him,
or so much as rationally Dispute with him, if you did not think he agreed in
something with you, even in that which you will make your medium to Convince
him, by showing that his erroneous Opinion contradicts that which he agrees
with you in. And you also judge that he holds that Truth wherein he agrees with
you far more distinctly and firmly; so that when you have manifested unto him
that those Opinions contradict one another, he will rather Renounce and Condemn
(for no man can hold what he sees a Contradiction) that Erroneous Opinion, than
that Tenent wherein he agrees with you, and therefore he holds as you judge the
Truth opposite to the Error more firmly and practically.

If any should ask me, Which Extreme is most dangerous? I shall only answer,
there have been many have constantly held this middle way for Substance, yea,
the most have done so virtually; and they of them in extremes were in most
danger that did least contradict themselves.

And if such an Incompetent judge as I, may speak without offense (and why may
I not, you suffer Fools gladly, your selves being wise) I would commend both,
and blame both. I commend their Zeal in general on the one hand, for
maintaining Gods Love to the World, and his willing the Salvation of all men,
on condition they would turn to him. And though I blame their denying special
Grace, yet I am confident the main Reason of their denial was, because they
were sure there was such general Grace, and none could Preach without holding
it in sense; and they could not see it consistent with special: and their
Obposition to this special Grace was not through any ill will to it, had they
thought it consistent with general.

So I commend the Zeal in the other, in maintaining special Grace, but I blame
their denying the general Grace. But yet am confident the main Reason of their
denial was, because they were sure there was special Grace; and none could Pray
without holding it in sense, while they deny it in words; and they could not
see it consistent with the general Grace; and their Oppositions to this general
Grace was not through any ill will to it, had they thought it consistent with
special.

But Sirs, are these so inconsistent, that you must either deny one or the
other? For God to be so far willing of the Salvation of all, as to be willing
to receive them on a condition, they have so far power enough to perform, that
nothing hinders their performances but their own wilfulness; And to be so much
further willing of the Salvation of some, as to resolve to use effectual means
to cause such to perform it eventually? Is not the Scripture clear for both?
And if we must measure Him by our selves, is it such a difficulty that none can
understand? for one to be really willing to entertain such a one to be his
Servant, if he will upon such sufficient offers and persuasions; and yet
resolve he will go no further; and to be so willing to have another his
Servant, that he is resolved to use all means to compass it. Suppose we cannot
understand these things, may we deny in Divinity whatsoever we cannot
understand consistent, as the Trinity in Unity. It is apparent, that many
things that were inextricable Difficulties in former, have in after Ages been
made well Intelligible by Studious Men. How know you but had half that Pains,
that Learned men have lately taken in opposing, been spent in reconciling the
distant Opinions about Grace and Free Will; That might ere this have been done
more satisfactorily which I have here weakly endeavored, and done but too
unsatisfactorily to my self.

USE 2d.
OWn, and thankfully acknowledge God and his good Spirit in every good Work, in
things you are sure were done by your own Free Will, as all such are; yea,
though you know not how to answer the Objections you can frame against this
thankfulness. Have you believed, complied with the Gospel? To you was the Arm
of the Lord revealed; to you it was given to believe. Are you made of his
willing people, it was done in a day of his Power. Therefore say not, How am I
to be commended? But say with David, 1 Chro. 29.14. Who am I, that I should be
able to offer so willingly? for all things come of thee. Who made thee to
differ? Why made he thee to differ? and since you cannot answer this last
question, Adore special Grace. Can you say, you must follow him, and cannot let
him go; and that you have, in the sense explained, a Moral cannot sin and draw
back? This is not from Self, and Nature; No the Moral cannot do Good is from
that. O say, God has cast his Mantle over me, though I cannot tell what he
has done, or how, yet God knows what, and something he has done; say, The
Finger of God is here. It is God has made such Iron to swim; the Father has
drawn How opened he thine eyes? I cannot tell; but this I can tell, whereas I
was born Blind, and Deaf, and Lame, now I see, and Walk, and hear.

Have thou this day done some Good, avoided some Evil, overcome some
Temptation? Say not (though true in a right sense) as Deborah once did, O my
Soul, Thou have trodden down strength; but say with them, This day we perceive
the Lord has been amongst us, in that we have been withheld from this Sin.

I live, yet not I, but Christ in me, Gal. 2. 10. labored more abundantly than
all; yet not I, but the Grace of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10. Have you labored
abundantly? it was from an abundance of Grace.

If a good Thought arise in your mind, a good Desire in your heart, take notice
whence it is, and be thankful, he works to will and do. The Preparations of
the Heart in man, and the answer of the Tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16.1.
City, grace, grace, at the setting of the first Stone, at the first Springings
and Offers toward good; and at every degree of Progress, set up your Stone,
and say, Hitherto the Lord has helped us. Thou have wrought all our Works in
us, and for us, Isaiah 26.12.

USE, 3d.
BE deeply apprehensive of your need of help; cry for the Spirit's help in
every thing. He that has begun the good Work must finish it, or it will never
be finished. When you have with David praised him for what is past; that you
should offer so willingly, and with a perfect Heart, then pray, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.
Keep this for ever in the I magination of the Thoughts of the Hearts of thy
People, and prepare (or establish and confirm) their hearts unto thee. When you
cleave to the Lord with full purpose of Heart, with full Resolution, go unto
God to satisfy such Resolutions; go to him and say, the Lord God say Amen to
them. Take heed of leaning to your own strength, do not think you can do with
some little courtesy of the Spirit, with some little of the Divine Traction.
We are mutable Creatures, change with every Wind of Temptation, it may be
resolved to day, and staggering to morrow. Oh our Levity, Fickleness, Oh the
Rebellion of the Law of our Members! put no Confidence in your selves: Every
man is a Liar. Be not high minded but fear, We are not sufficient of our selves
to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.
It is by his Power we are kept through Faith to Salvation; and we can only be
strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Not only our first drawing
is from God unto God through Christ, but the keeping us when drawn; else we
should draw back unto Perdition: For we are Prone to it. Our goodness is as the
Morning Cloud, and early Dew which soon goes away. Say, draw O Father, we
cannot come except the Father draw; say while you live, Draw us and we will run
after thee; draw, and we will run with it. Say not, Draw, and we will be idle
and sit still. Say not, God works to will and to do, therefore we will be
idle. You have not so learned Christ, but contrary, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out
your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: For it is God works in you, to
will and to do, of his good pleasure; that is, Forsake not him; fear to refuse
to cooperate with him, lest he forsake you in respect of those Assistances,
that come from his free undeserved Will and Pleasure.

USE, 4th
HOw ill do they that Place the Gospelcondition, (the thing that must be done
or we undone,) in something that a man may say, He cannot do if he would never
so fain. As in Assurance, or, Believing a man sins are pardoned; or, That he
shall be saved. Man has a Natural Impotency to this, till God have so revealed
it by some Prophet or Revelation; or some way that he may know in particular,
that his sins are pardoned: And therefore it cannot fall, till then, under
command. Suppose there had been such a Promise as this (which I abhor almost to
mention): If any man shall believe his Sins are pardoned, they are or they
shall be pardoned, otherwise not; no man could yet believe it. A man might Lie,
and say I believe it, but it is impossible he should upon this promise: for
there must essentially be some way to notify unto him that his sins are
pardoned before he believe it. This would have been to have set life before us
upon an impossible condition. If a Master should tell his Servant, There is a
sum of money in one room of his house, but will not first tell him what room it
is in, but bids him believe it is in any particular room, and he shall have it.
The Servant may possibly Lie to get the money, and say he believes it is in
such a Chamber, but it is impossible he should believe it. And if his Master
should beat him because he believes it not to be in some particular room, it
would be for no fault: for he cannot do it, till his Master, or some credible
person tells him first, it is in such a room. A man must see he has performed
the Gospel-condition, before he may or can, without irrational presumption,
account or esteem his sins pardoned.

And so also Relyance. Many a sincere Christian can say, I would rely on Christ
to save me, but cannot; or, which is the same. I would cast off my fears, but
cannot. Without doubt men will not cry out hereafter, Why did not I believe my
sins were pardoned? Why did not I rely on Christ to save me? for God no where
commanded these things immediately; these are not the Condemning sins. But
bring out those mine Enemies that would not have me to rule over them, Luke 19.
14, 17. And the complaint will be, Why would I not have this man to rule over
me? and why would I not yield and submit to the Gospel-conditions? Something it
must be that men are Condemned for, that they could but would not do.

But it would be a contradiction for any to say, I would with the prevailing
choice, have Christ for my Lord and Savior, and would not with the prevailing
choice.

USE 5th.
HOw comfortable is this to people of upright hearts, that nothing is required
of you but what you can do, if there be a willing mind: They are sometimes
troubled they do not the things they cannot do, if they would never so much,
and they may be so; but they may not be troubled as if they offended God by
this defect, but as at an affliction for their sins. All the people of God are
troubled at their unwillingness, and that they do not so much as they could,
had they but Will. If this be your greatest trouble, it argues your
willingness to be greater than your unwillingness; and so you need not be
troubled with desponding trouble; but go on mourning over this remainder of
unwilingness with tears of hope.

What advantage may we take here, to comfort troubled ones, and to help them to
keep up good thoughts of God! Many of them; through misapprehensions, are apt
to think him a hard Master, expecting to reap where he has not sown, whereas
it is not so. Many of them have such strong and sensible affections and
inclinations to Good, that even their own Souls do bear that record of
themselves, which the Apostle bare concerning others, that they are willing,
even beyond their power, 2 Cor. 8. 5. and yet are afraid God will not accept of
them in doing what they can; and so are greatly perplexed, because it may be
they have not such tears, or such freedom from distractions as they desire and
expect. But as Abraham said, If she will not come, thou shall be clear from
this thy oath: So if tears and passions, and other such things will not come,
and that not from any want of your own will; you are clear in this particular.

If any should say, I am willing with all my heart to obey God in every thing.
But this is a small matter.

I know, it is a small matter in some sense; but it is no small matter in Gods
acceptance; and this is no small matter, if you speak of the original of it; It
is a thing of high and noble descent, if you had rather have a good heart than
a great Estate. The finger of God is here, The Father has drawn. You have
better thoughts than you would have, or than you ought to have of corrupt
Nature, if you think this fruit grew on that Tree. Corrupt Nature, says with
them, As for the words which thou have spoken, we will not hearken. They are
Gods servants who so desire to fear his Name, Nehem. 1.11. We should praise
God, and say, Who are we, that we should be so willing?

Obj. I am willing, but I can do nothing, I do what I can in some weak measure,
and would have it better, but my duties are blind and lame, and torn; I have
done God much dis-service, but can now do him no service worth calling Service.

Ans. What ever thy sins have been, and let thy services be never so weak, thy
weakness never so great, be thou never so unfit for thy Masters use and
Service, though thou should be able scarce to speak a wise word for him, or
to him; yet, if thou do what thou can, and desire it was better, and
endeavourest to increase, this is enough for acceptance, as long as thou art
thus willing.

If a willing mind, he accepts what thou have, and does not require what thou
have not We read of a Master, 18 am. 30.13.
it is like some Captain or Officer, leaving his Servant a Soldier because
unfit for Service, because he was weak and sick: But the Captain of our
Salvation is gracious; if we be so feeble as to be unable to wield our weapon
or follow him, yet if we follow him as we are able, and resolve in his strength
to do what we can, and never to turn Renegadoes, Turn-coats; this shows we
are true to our Captain, and he will not leave us and forsake us, we shall
receive pay. Greg. Moral. Lib. 12.
Deus non respicit quantum homo valet; sed quantum velit. God looks not on
the quantity or outward extension, but on the quality and inward affection. The
desire of a man (says Solomon) is his kindness, not the weight or worth of the
gift. The Widdow's Mite was accepted, being her All in upright desire, the
reason she cast in no more, was for not want of Will, but ability; because she
had no more. Yet it may be a question, whether all simply, or all that was not
just necessary for her sustenance; but it is most likely all simply, and then
it might possibly be her failing, and against the duty of care of her self; and
though there might be such imprudence, yet God takes no notice of it, being in
the integrity of her heart. As if a man should lose opportunities from worldly
advantages imprudently, through love to God to attend his Service, God would
accept it while it was in the Integrity of his heart, according to the best of
his knowledge.

Do but endeavor to Love and Esteem Christ more, and admire Free Grace more,
and never fear your natural Weaknesses as opposed to Moral. It is not the
outward quality of the Person, or outward Excellency of the duty commends us to
God but the Heart. You need not envy others Abilities; serve God in your places
according to your Abilities. Ministers of weak Abilities and Parts, are as
acceptable to God, while there are competent ministerial Abilities; yea, more
acceptable, when there is more of Desire and Endeavor to do good, than
Ministers of greater Abilities; and often more successful. Greater Abilities
are apt to puff men up; it is hard to give much, and not let the left hand know
what the right hand does. So, hard to be extraordinary in any Duty, and keep
humble. Let Devils and Wicked men scoff at Weak, but Willing Ministers; and
say, (What will these feeble people do?) as they did, these are but poor
Builders. But we Read, The Wall was Built, for they had a mind to work, or a
heart to work, Neph. 4.6. So such as have a heart to build, may build so as to
reach Heaven themselves, and build up others for it. God will say as Jehu to
Jonadab, If thy heart be as my heart, then come into my Chariot of Glory.

Yet when I say God requires the Heart and Will, I do not say only but
principally, and yet so only that if a man could do no more it would be
accepted. If he have the Heart, all other things required follow proportionably
ordinarily, and if they do not it will be excusable: For then the defect is a
cannot. If the Heart lead, all that have no Impediment follow. All the Members,
and Powers, and Faculties in a man, say to the Heart and Will, as the People to
Joshuah, Cap. 1. v. 16. All that thou command us, we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us we will go, only the Lord be with thee.

USE, 6th.
HOw encouraging is this to all to come to God, to return. We Ministers in
Christ's name, and Christ by us require nothing of you, but what you can do,
was there but a willing mind. If there be any thing you cannot do, which some
others can, we will tell you, you need not at present, and yet shall be
accepted, and God will in time upon doing what you are able, enable you to do
more. Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? that is, to bring
Christ down from above; or Who shall desecend into the deep? That is, to bring
up Christ again from the dead: But what says the Gospel, the word of Faith?
The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
That is, be not perplexed, as if some difficult impossible thing was required
of thee now to Salvation, that thou can not perform if willing; this is to
deny Christ's Death and Ascension. What did he dye for, if some impossible
thing be required of us notwithstanding his Death? Men will entertain none, nor
give wages to any, but to those that can do much, to those fit for their
service. When to hire a Servant, a Master asks, What can thou do? If a
Servant should answer, I can do nothing, I have no Skill or Ability, I have not
been used to work; but I am willing, I will do what I can: Who would entertain
such a Servant? But if any should say thus, and that heartily to God, I am very
unfit for any good Work, I have not been used to do any Good, but I will now do
what I can; if I fail, it shall be my greatest grief, and against my will. God
will accept it; this is all that he requires to obtain the great Wages. Oh
Riches of Grace! Is this the manner of man, O Lord? 2 Samuel 7.19.

The last Invitation to Sinners in Scripture is this, Whosoever will, let him
come, and take of the Water of Life freely; Which virtually comprehends, that,
He that has no money come, that has nothing of any worth or value.

If the Prophet had required some great thing, Would thou not have done it?
We have not any thing to do for Satisfaction of Gods Wrath and Justice; yea,
nothing but what you can with ease and delight do, was there but a willing
mind. Say but, and be Hearty in it, Wherein have I done Iniquity, I will do so
no more. I will, this is the voice of true Repentance; With the Heart and Will
man believes and Repents.

Why stand you here all the day Idle? You cannot reply. You have no strength,
ability; do but what you can, and it will be accepted; You will not tell me,
however you dare not tell God; You have no mind, no Will to work: Though this
is it, if you do not what you can. You cannot say, None has hired us, we had
as good sit idle, as work idle, as work without receiving Wages. I am sent to
hire you this day, to assure you of Wages, You shall have your Penny though you
come in late.

Let none excuse themselves from Duty by the meanness of themselves and Duties.
Art thou sensible thou art good for nothing? yet give thy self up to him, thou
shall be accepted. Is thy Gift mean, yet offer it: They that had but little,
offered little to the Tabernacle, and yet were accepted. Some it may be have
this Temptation; What should I pray for others for? It Is too much for me to be
accepted for my self. Yet, sin not in ceasing to pray for others, God will hear
thy Prayers sooner it may be than theirs that have better thoughts of their
Prayers. Give that little when thou have but little to give. Weak Abilities you
see do not exempt you from Gods service, because not from his Acceptance.

Will God accept of what you have, if there be a willing mind, and shall a
willing mind be wanting? Will he accept of the Heart and Will, and shall he not
have it? God will excuse the want of any thing else, but will by no means
excuse your want of Heart and Will: For all other Powers in a man may be
suspended from doing their Offices, but only the Will. But this cannot be
suspended so as to excuse while a man has any use of his Reason; Therefore God
will excuse all other Defects. The Blind cannot serve God with his Eyes, or
Dumb with his Tongue, or Deaf with his Ears; yet such are accepted of God,
while he has their Hearts.

USE, 7th.
HOw humbling may this Doctrine of man's Ability and Power (in this right sense)
to good, be to us; Yea how necessary is it to a right Humiliation? And how
influential to make the World guilty before God, that we and they could have
done otherwise, not only in Adam (as some weakly speak) but when we sinned? Do
not say, This discourse lifts a man up. Thou make ill use of it, if it have
such an effect on thee; it is to glory in your greatest shame, it is like being
set on fire, with having Water poured on thee. No Doctrine can possibly tend
more to the debasing and humbling of men. This should abase us in our own eyes,
and stain our pride; for it demolishes, and even pollutes all our Sanctuaries
of Refuge. Many are apt to say, Alas, What can we do? What can poor fallen
Creatures do? Do you blame us? Our Disability is only true, in a sense wherein
it may lay load on us; and in that sense wherein we are a shamed to own it; but
not in the sense wherein it may excuse.

If any should say, This Doctrine takes off too many things from being sins:
Methinks others might answer for me, that if the man be in an Error that way,
yet he seems to recompense it, by laying greater load then ordinary on those,
which all agree to be sin.

We are wonderful prone to fly to excuses ever since Adam and Eve did so before
us; yea, and to such excuses as would lay the fault ultimatly on God: but this
lays us naked to our shame.

But if any will say, It is not from wicked willfulness that they continue in
their sins, let this try. I call you this day, saying with Jeremiah, Jer 18.12.
Return every man from his evil ways, and make your ways and your doings good.
Now what will you Answer? Either you must answer, we will with all our hearts
do what we can, and then God will accept you, if real, in this; or you will
answer, as they in the following verse, We will walk after our own devices, and
we will every own do after the imagination of his evil heart; or as they
answered such a call, Jer. 44.16, 17. As for the word which thou have spoken
unto us, in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: But we will
certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, etc. You see you have
no color to pretend it is from a weakeness, distinct from voluntary
wickedness. And if you will yet go on in your neglect of God and his ways,
whereas Christ said; Father, forgive them, they know not what they do, I might
be provoked to say, Father forgive them not, they know what they do. But God
forbid I should so say; God was wrath with Moses for speaking unadvisedly with
his lips, when he said, O ye Rebels!

You that have a desire to fear God's Name, and in the main are a willing
people, did you think it was from want of will to do otherwise, when you
committed any known sin, or omitted any known duty? Did you think you had so
much wilfulness left, and so little Will to those things you have a Will to,
and complain of the neglect of? and so much Will to those things you complain
of the doing of? When you complain of sinful weaknesses, are you not apt to
think of them in such expressions as Natural weakness, and not as being in part
wilful wickednesses, though they are so far as formally sinful?

Some have said (but I think (...) not universally true) that Omne voluntarium
est involuntarium, that every voluntary act is in part involuntary. But we may
say it of almost all, if not of every of the duties we perform; Cry out, oh our
wilfulness to evil! Oh our wickedness! Oh our unwillingness to good! Those
things we have a Will to, we have but little Will to. How many duties do we
perform with a half-heart, and with a sinful indifferency? who counts it their
meat and drink to do the Fathers Will? Christ went more willingly to suffer for
us, than we to do any thing for him. When we are doing God's Will, how seldom
can we say, We delight to do thy Will? we go forward it may be, and dare not
turn back, but how often like Lot's Wife do we look back? we go forward like
those kine that carried the Ark, lowing as they went; we do, and suffer for
God, murmuring, repining, dicis gratia as the phrase is.

If any shall reply, You seemed to grant that a man casting his goods
overboard to save his life in a Tempest, cannot but do it in part unwillingly.
No man can with his whole will (says Aristotle) thus cast a way his Estate.

I Answer; I grant it is so in such a case, because the man in that case is to
be a great loser, and to have no reparation. But suppose the Merchant had been
required to cast away his goods to save his own life, by a Prince that had
given him those goods, and all he had beside; And one able and willing, and
faithfully promising to make up that loss; yea, promising that if he cast them
away, he should be recompensed an hundred fold; would it not then be strangly
irrational to cast away his Merchandise, murmuring, and with such an half Will?
Was your obedience and self-denial required by one that had never done much for
you, and was there to be no reward of your self-denial, I could not tell how to
answer you in saying, How should we but deny our worldly and fleshly interest,
very unwillingly? But when God has done, and Christ done and suffered, so
great things for you, and made such promises; then to do duties repining, and
like that Passenger in the storm that Erasmus represents, who cast away his
goods multa mala precans and Superis and In inferis, What a shame is it? We
should say as the people, when they offered so willingly, Of thine own have we
given thee, for all things come of thee; and should suffer with joy the
spoiling of our goods, knowing we have in Heaven a more enduring substance, and
rejoice we are counted worthy to suffer for his Name. But Did not Abraham go
more willingly to offer up his Son, than we our sin? He arose early in the
morning to go about it, we put off.

I grant, In the sense I have before explained, a good man would do more good
and cannot. But yet this is a great truth, and is to be the great charge
against your selves. That you can do more good than you do, and will not; You
can avoid more evil than you do, and will not.

Friends, though God will pardon you while there is a willing mind in the main,
notwithstanding your great unwillingness, while your willingness is the
prevailing, countenanced bent of your Soul; yet you must not pardon your
selves. Pardon not your selves in this unwillingness, as you would have God
pardon you.

USE, 8th.
HOw convincing is this discourse to wicked men! how may we hence urge
Impenitent Sinners till they be ashamed!

Sirs, Will you not this day give up your selves to the obedience of Faith? why
will you not? There is all the reason in the world you should be willing to
comply with the Gospel. He made us of nothing, Redeemed us when worse than
nothing; has made and continued us yet rational Creatures with freedom of
will, in the sense explained; we have yet a mind to know, and ability to choose
the Good, and refuse the Evil; and God has made preparations of Heaven for us,
and offers it to us on reasonable and easy terms, and has set Life and Death
before us; So that nothing can undo you but your wilful Refusal, as the
Scripture every where testifies, Jer. 13, 17. If you will not hear, my Soul
shall weep in secret, etc. He does not say, if you cannot, nor Scripture say
any where, men cannot; in a sense different form a will-not. verse. 27. O
Jerusalem, Will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? Mat. 23.31. How
often would I have gathered you, and you would not? Isa. 1.5. Why should you be
stricken any more, you will revolt more and more? prove. 5.20. Why will thou my
Son, etc? Prove. 1.29. They hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord, they would none of my Counsel, and despised all my Reproofs. Ezekiel. 3.7.
But the house of Israel will not hearken to thee, for they will not hearken to
me; for all the House of Israel are impudent and hard-hearted.

Let me plead with you from that Scripture, Isa. 5 3. And now, O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard. verse.
4. What could I have done more to my Vineyard? These words are not well
Translated, for in the Hebrew it is (...) Quid faciendum adhuc? What was there
yet to do? What was there more to be done? Implying, they could plead nothing
wanting on Gods part, that he ought to have done, they themselves being
appealed to as judges. Quid est quod debui ultra faccre. So the Syriack,
Arabic, and almost all Translations; I find no Translation akin to ours. The
words in the Original are the same, 2 Kings 4.13, 16. What shall be done for
her? And Hester 6.6. What should be done to the man whom the King delights to
honor? Not, What could be done? Yet our Translation has afforded occasion to
some Learned Men of our own, to affirm with some color from hence, that God
does as much as he can with fitness or Justice for every one; whereas, had it
been well Translated, it had altogether disowned such an Inference.

These Words are Gods appeal to men about his Justice, What should I have done
more? What have I not done, that lay on me to do, to prevent your Ruin?
Wherein have I been wanting to you? How came this about, That when I looked for
Grapes, it brought forth wild Grapes? Was there any reason for it, that you can
stand to? Have not I done enough, so as you must say, Your Destruction lies on
your selves, and not on me?

He calls the men of Judah and Inhabitants of Jerusalem to judge between him and
his Vineyard; and, by his Vineyard, means the same Inhabitants of Jerusalem. So
that God hjere appeals to the Men themselves against themselves, which he would
not do, if he did not know that he had a Compurgator within them, that their
Consciences must restifie for him against themselves, that they had all things
naturally necessary.

Now, you I am speaking to, judge you. You are it may be apt to say, If God had
done his part, I had done mine. God has done his part, so as there was nothing
wanting at first to keep adam from falling, that he ought to have done.

But to let this go, and to take things now as they are in this degenerate
condition, and Hope brought-in a second time; there is nothing now wanting on
His part, that you may lay your second Perishing on him, and not on your selves.

Many are apt to think or say, we will justify God because we fell in Adam,
but take things as they now are, and he has not done enough; things are not
brought a second time to our choice, else we and others had not so gone on in
our sins, and therefore, if we do ill, let him blame himself and not us.

Do not now fly to other Countries, or such as cannot understand what is
spoken, I could speak something of them; But my business is to you that hear,
and can understand what I say. And I shall show you that he has so done enough
for you, that if he had done less for you by many parts, or not waiting so
long; yet you could lay your Perishing nowhere but on your selves. God has
done a great deal more than he needed for you, to make you inexcusable in
perishing the second time.

Now bring forth your strong Reasons, What should he have done more? What
Iniquity have you found in him? Jer. 2.5. And if I can easily answer you, how
easily can God and your own Consciences;

Obj. 1. If you shall say, There is something besides wilful refusal in men's
perishing: For this second perishing cannot be laid on many that perish, for
Christ never dyed for them.

Answ. If this was so, I confess neither I nor any else could answer you. But
Christ has so far Dyed for you, as by his Death to obtain this, That if any
man turn he shall live; and this law of Grace is made in his blood. He is able
to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. No man shall
ever be Condemned because no price was paid for him; but only for refusing that
which was purchased for him, on the Terms whereon it was offered. The Scripture
no where lays the perishing of Sinners, on the want of a price paid for them;
but every where on their refusal. You will not come to Me that you might have
Life. These Words imply that there is Life enough in Christ for you: and if you
miss of it, it is because you will not have it. If Christ had so left out any,
that he had not purchased, That if they believe they shall be saved; then you
might charge ministers with Falsehood, as well as you might if they should
Preach, If the Devils should repent and believe they should be saved, whom
Christ never purchased this for.

Would Christ bid his Ministers Preach the Gospel to every Creature, He that
Believes shall be saved, etc. if it was not true? Would he bid them make such
Offers, and invite such multitudes of Guests, if he was not sure there was
Provision enough for them all? Else this should excuse, and they might say, If
we perish this second time for want of a Savior, it is no fault of ours; this
would be their Misery and Calamity, but not through their refusal of Mercy that
they perished. You might else say at least, There is some other Reason why men
fall short of Happiness, and not only because of their unbelief; Nay, their
unbelief would be no reason at all of this Perishing: The not taking Physic
was no reason at all of a man's dying at such a time, if it would not have saved
his Life if he had taken it, no more than his taking any thing else, that is
acknowledged to have no tendency to his Health. And it is in vain to say, For
any thing, they knew, they might have been saved; or, They and others thought
in the judgment of Charity, (as some speak) that if they had believed, they
might have been saved: for this is nothing, if the Truth was otherwise; and at
last in Hell they will know the Truth was otherwise, and then not befool
themselves for not doing it.

Suppose a man thought a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem would have saved him, and
others thought so too, but in truth it would not; Can you say, if he did not
go, he perished because he went not that Pilgrimage? And will he befool himself
when he understands it was to no purpose to have gone? If a man could persuade
them in Hell, Christ never Dyed for them, never purchased for them, that, If
they had turned they should have lived; he would take off a great part of their
anguish by persuading them not to befool themselves for refusing Grace and
Mercy. The Rich man in Hell is represented by that Expression, Send Lazarus to
my Brethren, as one that thought that men on Earth, that are in danger of going
thither, and that will do so, if they go on, may prevent their coming thither.
And when Abraham answers, They have Moses and the Prophets, it implies his
thoughts, that men have all things necessary, and nothing is wanting toward
their Salvation but themselves.

This of Christ's dying for all so far, is so apparently proved by Scripture,
by almost any that have attempted it, that could any of ordinary abilities
obtain of themselves to read such, they might easily be satisfied: So that I
think I may say, He that is ignorant of this, let him be ignorant still for me.

The only colorable Objection (that is not virtually answered in what I have
said) that I can call to mind, is only from John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray
not for the world; Therefore surely (say some) he would not shed his blood for
the world, for whom he would not pray. But would any be at pains to read that
Chapter, he may see that Christ speaks of himself, what he did in that
particular prayer at that time: And that particular prayer to verse 20. was
only for the Apostles; or at most for them that were then actually believers.
And verse 20. he prays for them that should afterward believe through their
word; and so all that he prayed for there were actually Believers, or looked on
as such; and the substance of the petitions there can agree to none else, as
keeping them in truth and unity, etc. and there is not one word in that prayer
for God to cause any to believe: so that we may as well argue he never prayed
for the Conversion of any, because he did not in that prayer, and so never shed
his blood for the Conversion of any. But can any think that Christ that wept
over Jerusaem never prayed for it; or that there were none but Elect that
Crucified him, when he prayed for his Crucifiers. May we not with greater
reason argue contrary thus. Surely he did at other times, though not in this
particular prayer, pray for the world, since he shed his blood for it. All
other objections are reduceable to this common one, That it would be no
kindness to dye so as to purchase for any, but the Elect that actually would
believe, That if they believe, and turn, they shall live; because none else
have the Natural power to turn, to perform the condition, but they that he
actually causes to turn, and so it would be but to mock them. Ans. I grant if
this was true, it would be but to mock, as to say to a Lame man, If thou will
run, I will give, (let his lameness come which way it will); but you see men
have the Natural power to perform the condition; and though they will fall
short of the benefit through their wickedness, it does not follow it was no
kindness: and cannot any one see, it would as much follow according to your
way, that, it would be no justice in God to punish men for not performing the
Gospel-condition.

2. Obj. Some may say, But there is something beside Will in it; for Natural men
cannot understand the Gospel, and Scriptures, and Will of God; Carnal men
cannot know, them, because they are spiritually discerned.

Answ. Not to trouble you with an interpretation that some make very probably
the meaning of one of these places.

First; The utmost that can be pretended to be drawn from these and such
Scriptures, is; Either that they could not know such things by their reason,
except they had been revealed to them by the Scripture; or that Natural men do
not love or approve and savor the things of God.

Secondly; If it was so that men Could not understand his Will, this would
excuse, and God would never require such to know and obey his Will. As for
example, If the Scriptures were written in such a Language as you could not
understand, and none that could would translate or interpret them to you; or if
there be one that is a fool, and has not the Natural power to understand what
is obvious in them, or if you had the competent use of Reason, but the
Scriptures were written so obsurely, that you could not with your greatest
endeavor understand them. I do believe there are some things so obscure in
Scripture, that no man can understand them. Now though it be desirable to
understand such things, yet I do not think it a man's fault he does not, and so
not his duty: But only so far his ignorance of them is sinful, as it comes for
want of Will, and so of Industry. Nay further, I do not think that every man is
bound to bestow that great pains whereby he might understand those difficult
passages, which yet he might understand with great pains: but only so much
(supposing he have a competent knowledge of what is necessary) as is well
consistent with his other duties.

Thirdly, The Scriptures are plain in the great things necessary, and have been
made so plain to you, that either you do or might have understood them. One
once said to a Lady that was maintaining the Scriptures were to be neglected,
because difficult to be understood; Madam, What can be plainer then this, Thou
shall not commit Adultery? They are so plain that young People may understand
them in things necessary. Timothy understood the Scriptures from a Child. A
Young man may cleanse his way by taking heed thereto according to this Word.
They are written to give to the Simple, and young man, Knowledge and
understanding. There is none of you here but it is likely you know so much
already, as would you be faithful to that little, and endeavor after more, God
would accept you.

Let me ask every of you, Do you not intend to Repent hereafter, and turn to
God, and Christ? If not, thou art a more wicked Wretch than ordinary; if thou
do, thou confessest by that, that thou know what is the main required of
thee; and yet art so in wicked thou will not yield.

Fourthly, Are you not willingly ignorant of such things? Like those 2 Pet.
3.5. Such as do not like to retain God in your knowledge? such Fools as hate
Knowledge and Instruction? Such as say, Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Such as those Psalm. 82.5. Who know not, neither will
understand. God offers you the help of his Spirit, and Ministers, but you
refuse. Your Ignorance so far as it partakes of Will is formally Sinful, so far
as you do not enough dislike it.

Fifthly, But are you indeed ignorant and cannot Read? I will not say it is
your Duty this day to Read, because you cannot: But it is to be lamented as a
Fruit of sin that you cannot, if you had opportunities to Learn, and lose them
carelessly. Yet it is thy Duty to Learn to Read; if it be probably attainable by
thee, by the help thou can get in the Circumstances wherein thou art. But
suppose it not probably attainable by thee, so that a prudent man would think
it not thy Duty to endeavor it. Get others to Read to thee, and use such means
as a man would use that has a willing mind to Learn, and do his Master's Will;
and be Faithful to the knowledge thou have, and it will be accepted. How many
have gotten a good Knowledge that could never Read? How many are now in Heaven
that could never Read? Without doubt, the greatest part of them in Heaven could
never Read, when we consider how few could Read in the Primitive times of
Christianity, yea, and till almost this Age.

Obj. 3. But I cannot turn from sin to God, I cannot leave my sinful ways.

Answ. If thou be one that speaks this by way of Excuse, as the most do that
use this speech, being one that go on in thy sins notwithstanding rebukes; I
dare confidently say, thou Lie, when thou say I cannot in the properest
sense of the word, and in the sense wherein it can by a rational man be brought
to excuse; that is, if thou mean any thing else by it, than I will not; Thou
should, say as the Truth is, I will not. If thou say, I cannot will it;
either thou speak falsely, meaning I have not the Natural Faculty; or I can
answer, The more wicked and inexcusable Wretch thou! For thou meanest, I will
not Will it, I choose I may not, I will not for all that God and Man can say to
me, my Wickedness is so great. Would thou speak plain, it would appear to
thy self and all the World to be no Excuse, and this makes thee hide thy
meaning in dark Words. Speak out plainly, and this is it, I am resolved to
please my Flesh and Senses, come what will of it. I have such a chosen
Aversness to God and his Ways, and such a Love to the ways of sin, that
though the Minister should lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, and speak and
sound as terribly as the Trumpet will at the last day, I will go on.

Obj. 4. But I really would leave some sinful ways and cannot, and would do
better and cannot.

I would speak here warily. If thy meaning be only this, I would do such
things, and would have such graces, if I could attain them without much Trouble
and Self-denial and difficulty to my Flesh; or I have some sudden unconstant
desire of such things, sometime arising from some sudden Passion or
extraordinary Occasion; or I have some little velleity, some motions of the
will, but these come not to the countenanced prevailing Choice and Resolution:
But notwithstanding all these, the prevailing bent of my Will, and that which I
most choose, all things considered, is to go on and please my flesh: If this be
all thy meaning, I may say, So has any, or almost any Thief or Robber to leave
his course of Life, and would do it, could he but tell how to live in such, or
some little less, competent Ease or pleasure as he esteems this course affords
him without it: But since he cannot, his prevailing will is to follow on his
course.

But if thy meaning be, It is the prevailing bent of my will; my darling choice
is the better part, so as that it is my greatest grief that I fall short. I had
rather have a good Heart then the greatest Estate. And though I be frequently
guilty of many Omissions and Commissions (though not of very gross sins): Yet
there is no sin but fain I would overcome it, and no Duty but I would fain
perform it; so that I have respect to all Gods Commandments: God will accept
this. If one should say, as I heard one that was much in that Duty once
complain; I would Pray, but the Words are taken out of my mouth: If this should
be really so, that it do not proceed from want of will, God would accept it
without words. But take heed of deceiveing your selves: If there be a Will in
the prevailing degree, the Deed will follow if there be Ability and
Opportunity; else it is but that which we call Wishing and not Willing in the
ordinary sense. If thou art real, thou do perform the Christian Duties in
some weak measure, and lamentest thy performing them no better. A real
prevailing Will is accompanied with Holy Endeavors, and earnest strivings in
the use of means. Do not deceive your selves, God will not be mocked; He will
try whether you be real or no. Say as Jacob, My Father will feel me, therefore
I will be careful I seem not to him as one that mocketh, lest I bring on me a
Curse and not a Blessing. I cannot contradict you if you say, I would, but
cannot, of many things in this sense; I can only say it is true in Thesi, if a
prevailing willing mind be presented, God will accept what ever failings there
are besides. I can only give you rules how to try whether this be the
prevailing bent of your Soul or not, and would do it here more largely, but for
swelling this Discourse too much.

Obj. 5. But there is something else in it than my wilfulness; for God does not
give me grace to Repent, and turn from my sins to God.

If you mean he does not give means enough naturally necessary to work this
change, I have showed you it is false: God gives thee abundance of objective
Grace through Christ, as, his Gospel-Promises, Threatenings, and also many helps
and motions to leave such ways and turn, so that nothing is wanting but thy
own will.

But if you mean, as you seem to do, that God does not actually prevail with
you to leave your sins, this is very true, if you do go on in your sins. But
may not every Thief and criminal Offender say the same, God did not give me
grace to leave these courses. But will this excuse before any wise Judge?

Obj. 6. But God could turn me if he would.

It is very true. Any man that commits any sins may say, God could if he
would with his efficacious will, have hindered me from that sin. Yet we are
sure, this does not excuse; it was not therefore no Fault, no sin because he
did not; else there could not possibly be any sin in the world. You see many
going on in all Villainy, God could turn them if he would, but do you think they
are in no fault because he does not? God has wise Reasons and ends why he will
not with some go any further, but sets bounds to his Will. You seem by such an
Objection to wish, He would rule you as Bruits, in a natural way not consisting
with Promises and Threats, with Rational and Moral government of rational
Creatures.

Obj. 7. Then he does not will my Conversion and Salvation, or that I should
abstain from such a sin, if he does not actually Convert me, or actually hinder
me from such a sin, since he can.

Ans. It does not follow. It only follows, he sets such bounds to his will for
wise ends; and will's it no further than is consistent with such bounds: he
will through Compassion set Life and Death before you, and warn you by his Word
and Ministers, and strive with you so far as to be a forehand with you; Has no
pleasure in your Sins and Death.

But your Conversion is amiable and desirable to him. He will be able to say
of them that perish, I would and you would not; and can you rationally demand
the Governor of the World should do any more, whatever he may do arbitrarily
to some?

Obj. 8. But God does give Grace to some as bad as I, and some way that I know
not of makes them willing of unwilling.

I grant he does so. But suppose he did not, would thou then be inexcusable?
How can this then alter the case? Would it excuse all the Highway men in the
Land, if the King should some way extraordinary prevail with one or more, not
to go on in such courses? What if he do more for some while he does enough and
more than enough for thee, and is far before hand with thee? The Pelagians
granted, that God did something extraordinary for the Conversion of thee As the
Author Hypognosticon tells us. Lib. 6.
Apostles, and some few others, in a way agreeable to their free Will and
Humanity. Would it not have been a ridiculous attempt for any, to have gone
about to have confuted them with this Argument, viz. That none then are to
blame in the World, that go on in their sins, that God did not this for.

Obj. 9. But God will require no more than he gives.

Ans. If you mean that God will require no more of you than he gives you
Ability and means to do, it is true. But if you mean, He will require no more
than he gives you actually, so as to cause you actually to do it, It is false;
else, there would be no sin in the World chargeable on men. He will require
the use of his Talents, and this faithful Improvement, as with good reason he
may. He has given thee time, space, and means to Repent; he has given thee an
Understanding, and Will to know and choose the good, and refuse the Evil in the
natural sense. Those Israelites fell short of the good Land, because of their
Unbelief or Disobedience; and yet it is said in the Moral sense, God gave them
not a Heart to Understand, and a Mind to see.

Obj. 10. Sure you will grant that no man can Repent, and Return, without that
special Grace of God that actually causes him thus to Repent and Turn.

Ans. I do and will grant it, provided you mean no more by it than this, That
no man will return without that special Grace that actually prevails with him;
else it is notoriously false. A Robber had the power or faculty of leaving his
ways, though God did not make him actually leave them.

Obj. 11. But I would have had him made me willing to part with my sins, and
turn to God, though I was unwilling.

Answ. This is false, yea a Contradiction. This is to say, you would have him
do what you would not have him do for you (I mean, it is a Contradiction,
taking willing, in both clauses, for the prevailing choice) and to say, You
would have him do it against your will. While unwilling to part with your
sins, you loved Darkness, and would not be disturbed with Light. You did not
choose the fear of the Lord. You said to the Almighty, Depart from us, we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways. You loved to have it so, as it was with them,
Jer. 5.31. You said, Jesus let us alone, torment us not; and would not have
this Man to rule over you. Their eyes have they closed, lest at any time they
should see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts and be Converted.
Did you not make provision for the Flesh to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof?
And was this like one that would have his Lusts dye? Did you not seek occasion
to sin, and to avoid Conviction and Reproofs? Did you not rather choose to part
with your Soul than your sins, when Life and Death were set before you on the
Gospel terms? Did you not say, If God will not save me in such ways as are
consistent with my present ease and pleasure, I will not be saved?

You would have had him save you in your sins, but not from your sins. It may
be you would have had the Father so draw, as that you might ride in a Chariot
of Ease and Idleness; you would have him so draw, as that you might sit still;
But, you said not, Draw that I may run. Draw me and we will run after thee,
Cant. 1.4. You would have been drawn to Heaven without your running.

Have you not opposed his drawing, Refused to hearken, and pulled away the
Shoulder, snuffed at his Word, hardened your heart as an Adamant? Zach. 7.11.12.
Turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways, Job 34.27. May
not he say, I called and you refused? Did you not keep strong Holds and Forts
against his Grace, besieging you to over come you? Did you not labor to build,
and set up strong Holds, and high Reasonings against the ways of God, and
labor by a wicked industry, to get off all sight and thoughts of God, that you
might be without God in the World? We may say, God forsakes none in time but
those that forsook him first, and for their forsaking him; And if so then he
willed to forsake none but those that would first forsake him; And also willed
and decreed from Eternity to forsake none, but those he foresaw would first
forsake him; And all this is well consistent with special Grace, and
consequently Election; provided we say not that he will, and does forsake all
after the same manner and measure. He is before hand with every man, and will
be so.

Has he not knocked as though he would have beat down the house, and thou
would not open? Have you not opposed the lower Actions and Motions of the
Spirit, and VVarred against him in his first assaults, and rebelled and vexed
his Spirit in his first approaches, and resolved to go no further in ways of
Religion; If now he take not such internal or external Pains with thee as
formerly; may he not say like that, My People would not hearken to my Counsel,
Israel would none of me, (Heb. had no liking of me) so I gave them up to their
own hearts Lusts. How long did he stretch out his hands to disobedient and
gainsaying Souls? Light came and thou loved'st Darkness, and drew'st the
Curtains to sleep, and now it may be, he says, Sleep on, as once to his
Disciples; And yet this very Providence is an awaking providence, and should
awake thee as it did them; They slept no more after Christ said in anger, Sleep
on.

Obj. 12. But however, I would have had God have saved me notwithstanding my
sins, though not form my sins.

Ans. Very likely! But would you have Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid.
Would you have God an unholy Governor of the World? Would you have it as well
with the Wicked as with the Righteous? Would thou have God never call men to
an account that oppress thee, wrong thee? May he not glorify his Justice on
wilful Sinners, choosing their own Destruction, and fitting themselves for it,
notwithstanding his striving with them to reclaim them; as well as glorify his
Mercy on repenting, returning Sinners? Would you not have God threaten Sinners?
Or would you have him not execute threatenings, and so rule the World by
Deceit? He told men what to hold to and expect, if they go on in their sins;
and they choose, rather to suffer the Eternal Penalty (so they may have the
short pleasure of sin) than Happiness on the reasonable terms of it.

Obj. 13. However, I would have had him have threatened a lesser Punishment.

Ans. You may rather say, He threatened too little; and that it was rather fit,
if it could have been, that he had threatened more: For you would not forsake
your sins for those threats. This is virtually to say, it is not fit and right,
to make severe Laws against those courses that men are not willing, or resolved
not, to leave, or cannot find in their hearts to leave. They shall know whose
words shall stand, mine or theirs, Jer. 44.28.

Obj. 14. But it is almost incredible that men, all men should be so wicked, so
insuperable wicked, with proper voluntary wickedness distinct from weakness, as
not some of them to do without this extraordinary and unnecessary (as to the
making men inexcusable) Help from above, what they can do (in the sense
explained) without it. If this was so, God would be just indeed in their
severest Condemnation, though he do not give them this extraordinary help that
actually causes their Conversion.

Ans. It is almost incredible indeed, and will be looked on hereafter as a
Devil's-miracle, if I may so speak. And it is to have unworthy Thoughts of God
to think, that that-refusing Mercy on the terms of it which is the Condemning
sin, will not appear some wonderfully culpable thing that men will befool
themselves, and wonder at their wickedness, with astonishment, for; And to
think, God will not appear most clearly just in their severest Condemnation.
This should rather incline you to assent to what I have spoken, than be looked
on as a considerable objection against it.

Obj. 15. But yet it is a thing very unaccountable to us, and almost
unconceiveable, that God should be so gracious as to do more for any; however,
that he should fix on such and such persons in particular, that were as guilty
of such provocations by their wilfulness for a time as others?

Ans. It is so. This is a depth that no man can give a reason of. It would be,
to pretend to be wiser than the Apostle, Romans 11.33. Yea, or Christ himself
while he was in this World, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21. And to be wise not only
above, but contrary to what is written, Not to confess our selves at aloss and
only admire this. And they that will give Reasons, like reasons of such
Counsels, as if they had been God Councillors; I dare confidently say, shall
give such as would, if entertained practically, destroy all Religion.

I do think that they do best, that granting and holding such things do least
busy them selves about them, but only in admiring such his ways as above
their reach; And I also think that a plain unlearned man, that has heard
little of Learned men's debates about these Controversies of Free Will and
Special Grace; What austin speaks concerning Tempus, may be applied to this
Adjutorium gratiae, and many other things. Quid est ergo tempus? Si nemo ex me
quaerat; scio, si quaerenti explicare velium, nescio; fidenter tamen dico scire
me, etc. Confess. lib. 11. cap. 14.
That lives a Holy thankful Life, wondering at Gods mercy, in every good
Motion of his Spirit for help and restraint; and in every providence promoting
his souls welfare, as being such special Mercy, that it was bestowed on him,
when denied others as good and better than he; that I say, such a one has
better, and righter apprehensions though he know not how to explain them; than
I, yea or then almost any that have much studied these things. And I would not
have entertained so many searching Thoughts about these things (which I confess
yet have not been very many) had it not been in hope to convince them that, I
apprehend, are in dangerous extremes. And though I think I have, or however I
could more fully demonstrate, that these things are in the main, as I have here
spoken; yet I cannot but look upon my self as speaking very unsatisfactorily of
the manner How.

Obj. 16. It does seem plain, that man's Destruction will be of himself; for it
does not ly on Gods being wanting to man: yet we are loath it should altogether
lie on man; therefore we will suppose, It may be it will lie on neither, Why
may it not be laid on the Devil only? It may be, God is no way wanting, so as
that we can tell what he should have done more to save them; But it may
possibly be laid on the Devil, or the World, or Flesh.

Ans. If these could sorce men's Wills against their Wills, (which is a
Contradiction) or take away the Natural power of VVilling, or deprive of Power
to do the Imperate acts, this would so far excuse. And to say that God would
condemn a man in such a case, would be to lay a man's Condemnation on God, as
not having done enough for us. This would be to charge God, if not directly and
expressly, yet obliquely, and by Involution, as it is commonly said, These words
were to charge God obliquely, since they were made use of as an excuse. viz.
The Serpent beguiled me; And the Woman which thou gave me, etc. Satan, the
World, and the Flesh cannot hinder us from Duty without our own consent, or
against our will: For if such a thing should happen, it would be no Duty
formally; they can only tempt. Will this excuse a Thief before a Judge? Such a
one-tempted me, or the Money tempted me; But if another had forced him to that
Act against his will, it would have excused before the Judge. Why has Satan
filled thy heart? These words were spoken by way of Reproof for a Fault, which
would not have been if Ananias could not have helped it. The meaning thereof
is, Why did thou, why would thou, give way to that his Temptation?

Obj. 17. But it may be God has decreed to, and so will, Condemn me, do what I
can.

Ans. Abhor such an Opinion or Thought. This, all sides disown: The utmost that
is pretended by any moderate men, about this we are now speaking, is, That
there is a positive Decree to permit some to undo, or not hinder them from thus
undoing themselves. And this I shall not deny, but wish them, that are better
able to Judge, to consider (since such Conceptions are only to help our
Understandings, that our imperfect Notions may be in some measure rationally
consistent) Whether it be necessary to conceive, and so to affirm any such
positive Decree to permit; whether a conception of a mere Negation of a Will
in him to hinder, a not decreeing to hinder, be not enough: For you use to
found this Positive decree Not to hinder, upon his foresight of what men would
do if not hindered; now if they would do it without, and antecedently, to such a
positive Decree, what need is there? nay is it not to conceive a vain positive
Act, to affirm such a positive Decree to permit that which men would do without
such a positive Decree to permit, if he do not positively decree to hinder? But
to let this pass, and suppose such a positive Decree (he giving men means
enough, and more than enough) not to go any further in hindering them from
going on in their Impenitency.

How comes it about, that men make stops and Exceptions about the Decrees of
God in reference to their Soul-concernments, and never make such questions
about them in other concerns, wherein Learned men that differ about these
things, seem better agreed about positive Decrees? Men Plow and Sow, and never
question whether God has decreed, whether there shall be any Increase. When
yet God has reserved to himself a liberty here, and may, for any thing they
know, blast all their Corn, and does sometimes (and therefore decreed it)
notwithstanding their good Husbandry. Yet none here says, I will neither plow
nor sow; for if he have decreed a good Crop, I shall have one, if not, I shall
not have it; But this satisfies men here, Though God, it may be, will blast
all, do what I can; yet God uses to succeed diligent Endeavors. But here, in
the case in hand, you have far more reason to be confident: For God has
reserved to himself here no liberty to blast at all. All agree in this, that
none shall fail, or not find who heartily seek, and so continue; nor shall so
choose, and pursue this better Part, and miss of it. He that comes to him, he
will in no wise cast off.

All agree, that there are no Decrees but what are well consistent with the
Truth of these Promises, and all Notions of Decrees really inconsistent with
such Promises are false: As also all those Notions of Decrees that are not
consistent with his threatenings, as, He that repents not, shall perish. But
one may perceive how it comes about, that men fly to Decrees here, and not in
worldly Concernments. Men are more hearty for worldly Concernments; but have a
mind to go on in their sins, and would fain find out some excuse for their
sloth, and to lay the fault on God that they perish.

But it would be a wiser, and easier course, To be making your Calling and
Election sure, than be making Objections from such things as you do not
understand, to hinder you. You in vain expect to be carried to Heaven, or to
escape Hell without diligent Endeavors of your own. Had those now in Heaven,
continued while they were here on earth to make such Objections, so as to be by
them hindered from giving up themselves to the obedience of Faith, they had
never come there.

18. Obj. I wish I had heard, or considered such things sooner: you now speak
too late. For I may answer, as they answered the Prophet, when called on to
turn and live, Jer. 2.10. cap. 18.22. No, say they, there is no hope, for we
have followed after, etc. They meant, Past cure, and so past care, The case is
now desperate. We have so long accustomed our selves to sin, that there is no
possibility of our becoming better; or we have so long provoked God, as that
there is no hope we should find mercy. So am I hardened in sin by custom, that I
cannot Repent and Turn. I have indeed been wanting to my self, and not God;
therefore I must say, My destruction as of my self, and is of my self, from
those former sins, when I would have done otherwise; but it is not now of my
self this day that I hear this, in that I do not turn: for now something else
hinders; I cannot now, with a Cannot distinct from a Will not.

Answ. It is apparently otherwise, concerning any duty that is now required of
you. Do not you know that you sin against God, in not turning form sin to God
this day? Then you can turn, or God would not be offended at you for not now
turning. Do you think God is angry at you for not turning to him this day, and
can you think it would not be better for you to turn, or that he will not
receive you if you do thus turn?

I dare considerately say upon good ground from Scripture, you can go this day,
and do that which would be accepted of God. I do not say, you can go this day
and so rejoice in God and his ways as some others, or that you can have such
passionate and sensible workings of affections as others; or that you, that
have not been accustomed, can perform duties in such a manner as others, though
you was never so willing; and if so, I dare say, it is not your duty at
present. But you may do that this day, which would be accepted by God, would
you do what you can this day in obedience, and resolve by Gods help to go on,
and never to turn aside, and God will cause thee in time to be more Christian
like; And if for thy former great sins God should never make thy life here so
comfortable as others, yet if you thus cleave to the Lord, with full purpose of
heart, as one resolved as an honest man in integrity, that wherein you have
done iniquity, you will do so no more; and that you will not live in the
neglect of any known duty, but will do what you can in every thing, with the
utmost of your ability, and continue thus doing, you should be saved. But yet
this is certain, That (though you have this Natural power) you are so wicked,
that this you will not do, that is Morally Cannot, without the Fathers drawing.
And therefore if you do thus Will, and do actually, it is from this drawing of
the Father, and from the gracious operation of the Spirit, not only giving the
power, but some way causing the very act Willing of distinct from giving the
power of Willing and nilling, which every sound man, I mean every man in his
right Wits, has.

Let every one now make have, and say, has he not waited long enough knocking,
while I refused to open? Do not say, I can when I will in this life, turn and
be accepted by your Doctrine, therefore I may delay. I have indeed showed, you
can when you will; but I have also showed, you cannot in a sense explained,
obtain of your self to Will it, without extraordinary wonderful help from above.

If I maintained, as some do, that God only gives men the Power of Willing and
Nilling (let it come from Nature or Grace, that makes no difference in the
case) and that this is that Power, without which men could not sin, or, which
is all one, could not be inexcusable in not turning to God, and that God did
not, nor ever will go farther with any that are, or ever were converted; This
would indeed be to maintain that you have no Impotency in any sense, but that
you can for any Impotency whatsoever Repent and turn, as well as any that ever
did turn, and also that this you will have constantly while you are a man bound
to repent and obey the Gospel. This indeed would have some color to maintain
your presumption; for then I could not tell, nor any else, how to calm your
presumption in delaying, but only by these two considerations, you may die
soon, or be sooner deprived of your Reason and Understanding; But beside these
considerations I could not tell what argument to use to persuade men (who are
apt to have as good conceits of themselves, as of others that are no more
helped and enabled) why they may not have a conceit, they may at any time,
while continued sound men, quit themselves as others that had no more help or
assistance from Heaven, and no more Impotency to Good then they will have, and
yet did quit themselves well, after great neglects and long delays. But I can
tell you, and have told you, that by delaying and neglecting the means, and
helps, and assistances he affords, you increase your Moral Impotency, and may,
and do provoke the Spirit to deny his help to work in you to Will, while you
have the power of Willing, being sound men; And if the Spirit do not help you
in this extraordinary way, you will as certainly, as what is most certain, go
on even till Death, through your morally insuperable wicked wilfulness; And can
no more in the moral sense explained, thus Will, Believe and Repent, without
this extraordinary help which you provoke him to deny you, than a dead man can
arise in a Natural sense without a Miracle.

Quest. What may we do to be made willing, to obtain and subserve this drawing
of the Father, and help of the Spirit to make us thus willing?

Answ. Some have scarce any remiss will or desire at all of turning to God, and
so have as little desire to ask or use directions. Some may be almost willing,
but not altogether in the prevailing degree, as for example, some are willing
to part with many sins, but it is not yet their prevailing will to part with
all. Some again are almost willing to give up themselves to God in every thing,
but there is an aestuation or fluctuation of their Will, are waveringly
willing, off and on; but are not come to a point, to the settled firm choice
and resolution which is only the prevailing bent. This drawing of the Father is
frequently thus gradually; at first a more wavering willingness is produced,
and at last a more fixed and settled.

First, Pride not your selves, nay, rest not satisfied as if safe, for you are
not, in such begun willingness, in your willingness in part to do some things,
yea many things as Herod, yea all things like that young man in the Gospel, who
went away sorrowful, as having some little willingness to what he refused, but
not a prevailing choice. But yet own and bless God and his Spirit for such
beginnings, if you desire they should grow and increase. Know that these come
not from your own wicked hearts of themselves.

Secondly; Desire others to pray for you.

Thirdly; Pray for these things as you are able.

Fourthly; Meditate much on such things as may make you thus willing; The
vanity of the world; Excellency of God; the Love of God and Christ; what he
has done and suffered for you, etc.

Fifthly; When almost willing, unconstantly willing, endeavor to engage your
selves, to tie your selves fast. It is Gods way, and you may expect his
blessing on it, so to engage your selves as you may say to temptations, I have
opened my mouth, and cannot go back; I have sworn and will perform.

Sixthly; Let all take this advice. Attend on his Ordinances. He gives the
increase, while Paul plants, and Apollo waters, Zach. 14.16. It shall come to
pass, that whosoever will not come up of all the Families of the carth to
Jerusalem, to worship the King the Lord of Hoasts, on them shall be no rein.
Keep in his Church, this is the way to expect raining on. Irenaeus Lib. cap.
Sicut arida terra, si non percipiat humorem, non fructificar: sic and nos
lignum a ridum existentes primum nunquam fructificaremus ad vitam, sine
superna, voluntaria pluvia, etc. Qua propter necessarius nobis est ros Dei, ut
non comburamur neque infructuosi essiciamur, etc.
calls the Spirit, The Heavenly voluntary or arbitrary Rain; And also compares
it to the dew, and the Church to Gideons Fleece, on which the dew fell. Keep in
the way and road of the Spirit as you expect raining on. Rejoice to stand
within Jerusalem's Gates, Psalm. 122. The Church is Gods Vineyard, it is good to
be in it. It lies more especially in the influences of the Sun, and there fall
the watering showers of Grace. It is a fearful thing to run away from his
walks; And to get out of the reach of those weapons which are mighty through
God. Do not say, Let ordinances alone till men be converted, let Reading,
Hearring, Praying alone. Faith comes by hearing, beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord (even in the glass of the Gospel) we are transformed into his
Image by the Spirit of the Lord. God opened Lydia 's heart in hearing Paul,
Act. 16.14. She heard us, and God opened her heart to attend to the things
spoken. Let even them come that attend not; God may open their hearts, as hers,
to attend and consider. They are said to reject the Counsel of God against
themselves, that refused to comply so far as to be baptized of John, Luke 7.29,
30. It is a desirable thing for men to, and dreadful for them not to, frame
their doings to return unto the Lord, Hos. 5.4.

Now upon a Review of what I have said concerning Natural and Moral Impotency,
I add this. It would not much displease me for any to deny what I have said in
going further then my great design in this discourse, which is to show that men
amongst us have no Impotency but the Moral to the performing the
Gospel-condition. Let any man enjoy his own thoughts for me, that thinks there
may be some Natural Impotency that does not excuse from sin, so he do but grant
there is no Natural Impotency on us to the performing the Gospel-condition,
that is, to the doing what must be done, or we undone; for he destroys not by
such an opinion, the Gospel Grace, since he held there is a remedy brought to
men's choice. Though yet if he grant it true of the Gospel-condition, I think
unless he go as far as I have done, his notions will not be possibly
consistent. And let any man also differ about what is said of them that enjoy
not the Gospel, so he do but grant there is no Impotency on us that enjoy it
(but what I have mentioned) that can hinder our Salvation: for this is of less
concernment to us. And these are both things that I would have excluded out of
this discourse, if I could well have told how, and have kept up a consistency
of other things of the greatest moment to our selves.

ERRATA
PAge 31. line 10. for after, but, read the Moral. p. 109. l. 5. f. there r
these. p. 33. l. 24. r. settling. p. 48. l. 13. s. inveterate, r. radicated.

An APPENDIX to the Discourse of Natural and Moral Impotency.
BEcause in the Discourse of Natural and Moral Impotency I said nothing
concerning the manner of the traduction of Sin, and that designedly as
resolving to Speak only of things that I thought I could Speak Satisfactorily
about, and knowing I should Speak less Satisfactorily concerning that as both
opposite parties seem to do, and especially knowing that it would be no way
helpful to clear the great controversies there spoken to; because, one sort of
Impotency, come which way it will, does excuse, and the other not; and so the
difference of them lies not at all (whatever has been pretended to the
contrary) in one sort coming one way, and the other another, but in the
essential difference of their Natures; now because of this supposed neglect,
some that have nothing else to object (so far as I can understand) pretend as
if nothing was said except. I speak of this thing wherein both differs amongst
themselves, and which I never yet saw fully cleared to my mind, and wherein I
can puzzle my self. I shall here only mind such of those things that I have
thence made more fully apparent.

1. I have made this, or nothing, apparent, viz. That that sort of Impotency
which being upon a man would excuse from the future obedience that he has the
Impotency to, if he did not bring it upon himself, I say, that sort of
Impotency would excuse equally from such future obedience if a man did bring it
upon himself, as Lameness, Madness, want of an object, yea, all natural
Impotency as I have explained it.

Yet take notice, that when I speak of natural Impotency excusing though a man
bring it upon himself, I only say it excuses from future Obedience. For I
grant that by bringing it upon himself, he may be said interpretatively to be
guilty of all the consequent failings of Service and Obedience that follow upon
making himself so Impotent. As an Apprentice or Servant that voluntarily Like
the murci or Murcenarij, the Italian Soldiers that Anntian, Marcel. Lib. 15.
Speaks of, that Cut off their Thumbs, that they might be freed from material
Service, called, as he faith, Joculariter Murci.
Lameth himself, or makes himself drunk, and so disenableth himself for his
masters Service, is not only formally guilty of wounding himself, or
drunkenness (as he would be was he sui juris, and not Servant to any man,) but
is also in so doing interpretatively guilty of the following neglect of his
Masters service and commands, that he by so doing renders himself Impotent to
perform. Only I mean he is so far made excusable in his following neglects,
that we cannot say he is guilty of a new fault in not serving his Master when
he cannot, and it would be irrational in his Master to be angry at him or
punish him, only for his former fault in making himself so Impotent, but also
for his not serving him when he knows he cannot. For the whole malitia or
culpability of such after disservice is to be ascribed only to the former
disinabling himself, because he did or might probably foresee that such loss to
his Master would follow. I said probably; For I scarce think that such
interpretative guilt reaches all possibilities that are very remote or
improbable. I do not think that if a man being ignorant whose he was, or of his
Masters affection, had Stolen Lipsius's darling Dog Which he makes Verses on.
Lipsy Epist. Page. 104. and 294.
Saphirus, he would have been Interpretatively guilty of Murder, though Lipsius
had dyed with grief for the Loss.

Now if this be true, that that sort of Impotency which would excuse from
Obedience if a man did not bring it upon himself, would also excuse equally if
a man did bring it upon himself; then he must be very stupid that cannot hence
see, that the determining which way one of these Impotencies came, and which
the other, will neither help nor hinder in the putting an end to the great
Controversies of this Day, nor can be any account why one excuses, and the
other not. Though yet I grant that both the Natural Impotency which will
excuse, and the Moral which will not, came on us from Adams sin and our own,
and so no Reason can be fetched hence from this concession of one excusing, and
the other not.

2ly. I have also made apparent, that the moral Impotency, or the culpable
impotency which the Scripture speaks of, come which way it will, does not
excuse from future Obedience; and that this is no Reason why it does not
excuse, because of its coming one way or an other, for it is essentially
culpable and inexcusable, but the Reason is because not-withstanding this
Impotency, a man has the natural faculty and power to do what he has this
moral Impotency to.

And indeed let any man consider it, and he will be as sure as he can be of any
thing. That whatsoever divine command a man has the natural Power to obey (I
mean that the man is no Child, or Fool, that has not the faculty or ability to
know, and choose the good, and refuse the Evil,) so that he is no way hindered
but by his own wickedness (or by that which we call a vicious habit of the
Will, be it what it will)) I say such a man is bound to obey such command, so
that his wickedness though never so great will not excuse him; And this every
man is sure of, however some can make a shift to puzle themselves with the
undistinguished words of can or cannot.

Take the wickedst man in the World, that is most accustomed to do evil, and
has the greatest aversation of will to good, and so one that cannot in the
moral Sense explained do well, nor obtain of him-self to leave his evil ways
without wonderful help from Heaven, yet we are sure he is bound to leave off
his wickedness and turn from his sins, and is blameable in not turning from
them this day, that he has this moral Impotency, though God do not such
wonderful things for him; And is not only blameable interpretatively, because
he made himself thus morally Impotent, and brought this wicked aversation of
will upon himself, but is blameable formally this day in not obeying and
turning to God, because he has this day the natural Faculty and Power of
obeying such commands: For if he had not, but was made by his sins (as I
suppose some have been) a natural Fool, so that he had not the natural Power to
understand and choose the good and refuse the evil, it would not then be his
duty this day so to obey and turn.

3ly. I have also showed that one sort of Impotency, the greater it is, the
greater is the Fault; and the less it is, the less is the Fault; in not doing
what a man has the impotency to do; And that the other sort of Impotency the
greater it is, the less is the Fault; and the less it is, the greater is the
Fault; which manifests these two kinds of Impotency to be quite different in
their own Natures, and that the difference of one excusing, and the other not,
cannot arise from one coming one way, and the other another.

4ly. To make this further apparent, if such a thing can be made more apparent,
consider that (which I have also in part spoken of) Christ's humane Nature had
such an abundant effusion of the Holy Spirit as caused in him a morally
insuperable Holy Rectitude of Will; And we are yet sure notwithstanding this,
that his doing good and eschewing evil, was morally laudable, because this
Holiness of will did not take away his natural Power and Faculty of doing
sinfully, no more than men's morally insuperable wickedness and eversation of
will to good, takes away their natural Power and Faculty of doing Well. Now we
may with as much Reason deny the one as the other, viz. deny that Christ's
Obedience was laudable bcause of the Spirits causing this Holiness, though he
had the natural Power to do otherwise, as deny that a man is culpable in not
obeying god that has the natural Power to obey, because of his morally
insuperable wickedness, come this wickedness which way it will. Yea, let
intelligent men consider, and they will see that if some manichaean malum
principium should make a man wicked, just as the most wicked man now is, though
he can give Reasons why God would not permit this to be, and however not
without some great Provocation of mankind, yet such a man though he would not
be to blame formally to be so made, yet he would be to blame to continue wicked
as he is, and it would be his fault not to obey God; while he has,
notwithstanding this wickedness, the natural Power to put off such wickedness
and to obey God; that is, while he is not a natural Fool, that has not the
faculty to know and choose the good, and refuse the evil.

Now to conclude, though a man that will not distinguish, may puzle and
confound his own Notions, and may be puzzled by others by the words Can, and
Cannot; as in such Speeches as these, viz. Can a man obey without Grace? Can he
actually obey without Grace? Can he actually without Grace obey spiritually or
acceptably? Can he without Grace actually find in his heart to obey? Which
Questions are to be answered affirmatively while by the word Can is meant the
natural Power and Faculty; else it would not be men's duty so to obey: But such
questions are to be answered negatively when the meaning is, has he not such a
wicked aversation of will as will certainly hinder him, except Grace overcome
it. Now, I say, though such a man as resolves to be in the dark by not
distinguishing, may thus be puzzled, yet I think no man of competent abilities
can easily be puzzled, so as to be dubious about the substance of what I have
spoken concerning one impotency excusing, and the other not, would he but
consider when the words Can or Cannot, are objected before him, whether the
opposers mean by those words, the want of the very natural Faculty and Power or
necessary object, or only a Cannot in respect of his being hindered by his
wickedness or vicious habits.

Thus you see that what I have spoken in the Discourse of Natural and Moral
Impotency, can (as I there said) stand on its own Legs, though I should not
know how to speak a wise word concerning the propagation of the Soul and sin;
And though I incline to the Souls coming ex traduce as seeming to me the way
most agreeable to Scripture, and the best to answer difficulties by; and I can
almost as easily puzle my self about the Soul of Beasts being ex traduce as
men's; yet my design is especially till things I have spoken, be better
considered, not to speak such things as may occasion differences, when my
design is to put an end to them. Nor to give occasion to any that have a mind
to reflect on what I have spoken, to run from the question and things well
intelligible, to things less intelligible, and no way helpful to decide the
important controversies of free Will, Election, and special Grace.

Finished

