A TRUE RELATION OF THE Late Kings Death.
ON Monday, being the 2d. of February, the King rose early, saying, that he had
not slept well the last Night: And about seven of the Clock, coming from his
private Devotions, out of his Closet, fell down, (and scarce any sign of of
Life remaining in him for the space of four Hours) of a Fit of an Apoplexy,
but with the loss of sixteen Ounces of Blood, and other Aplications, came again
to his Senses, and great Hopes were of his Recovery, till Thursday one of the
Clock; so that at five, the Doctors being come before the Council, declared
that the K -- was in great Danger; and on Friday, a quarter before twelve, he
departed this Life. God have Mercy on his Soul.

P. M. A. C. F. came to the D. upon the Doctors telling him of the State of the
K. and told him that now was the time for him to take care of his Br. Soul,
and that it was his Duty to tell him so: The D with this Admonishment went to
the K. and after some private Discourse, the K. uttered these Expressions, Oh
B. how long have I wished -- but now help me; withal declaring that he would
have Mr. H. who had preserved him in the Tree, and now hoped would preserve his
Soul. Mr. Hud. was accordingly sent for, and desired to bring all Nessisaries
for a dying Man, but he not having the blessed Sacrament by him, went to one of
the Q. P. and telling him the Occasion, desired his Assistance to procure it,
and to bring it to the back Stairs. The K. having notice that Mr. H. waited at
the Door, desired to be in private, whereupon the Bps. and all the Nobles
withdrew, the D. catching fast the Door, the Lords P. B. and F. were going out
also, but the D. told them that they might stay. The K. seeing Mr. H. cried
out, Almighty God, what good Planet governs me, that all my Life is Wonders and
Miracles? When, O Lord, I consider my Infancy, my Exile my Escape at Worcester,
my Preservation in the Tree, with the Assistance of this good Father; and now
to have him again to preserve my Soul: O Lord, my wonderful Restoration, my
great Danger in the late Conspiracy; and last of all, to be raised from Death
to Life, and to have my Soul preserved by the Assistance of this Father, whom I
see, O good Lord, that thou have created for my Good. The D. and Lords withdrew
into the Closset for the space of an hour and half, then entering again the
Room, the F. asked the K. whether he would be pleased to receive; he answered,
If I were worthy of it -- Amen, Amen. The F. remaining comforting and praying
with him, he said, Father if I am worthy of it, I pray let me have it? The F.
said it would be brought to him imediately, and asked his Leave to proceed with
extreme Unction. the K. replied, with all my Heart, the D. and Lords assisting
at the time. Mr. H. was called to the Door, where he received the blessed
Sacrament, and desiring the K. to compose himself to receive, he would fain
have arose (but was persuaded to the contrary) saying, Let me meet my heavenly
Father in a better manner than lying on my back. But being overruled, they
continue in Prayer: Amongst others, the Father repeats an Act of Contrition,
desiring the K. to repeat it word by word after him: Having made an end, the K.
received with the greatest Expressions of Devotion imaginable: This being
ended, they go on with the Prayers de Anime; that being done, the K. desired
the Act of Contrition to be again repeated, saying, O Lord, good God, when my
Lips fail, let my Heart speak these Words Eternally, Amen. The Bishops and
Lords enter again the Room, and desire the K. to remember his last End, and to
endeavor to make a good End; he said he had thought of it, and hoped he had
made his Peace with God; they asked him whether he would receive, he said he
would not; so persisting in Extolling the Q. and D. saying he was not sorry to
leave the World, leaving so good a Brother to Rule behind him.

FINIS.

