The Truest Nevvs From the SESSIONS, OR, An Exact Account of the TRIAL and
CONDEMNATION OF Mr. William Burnet, a Romish Priest, Condemned to be Hanged,
Drawn, and Quartered. Mrs. Ann Petty, to be burnt for Cliping of money. As also
of Joseph Foster, Robert Harrison, John Clarke, Henry Robertson, Edward Lancet,
Elijah Arnold, and Bartholomew Jennings.
Sentenced to be Hanged for their several and respective Offenses herein
particularly specified. At Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, the 12 th. of December,
1674. Being a more perfect Narrative published for general satisfaction.

Printed in the Year, 1674.

NEVVS From the Sessions At the Old-Bayly, the 12 th. of December, 1674.
AT this Sessions of Oier and Terminer for the City of London, and County of
Middlesex, holden at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, begun the Ninth, and
continued till the 12 th. of this Instant December, 1674. Several Bills being
found by the Grand Jury, or Inquest, Amongst many others, two Indictments were
exhibited against one William Burnet, by birth (as is said a Scotchman but
educated at St. Omers, Dorway, or some other foreign Seminary) by the first he
was charged to be a Romish Priest, having received orders beyond the Seas, and
that contrary to the statute (in that case made and provided) he had presumed
to come into England, and so incurred the Penalties of High Treason. By the
second, he was indicted for perverting and seducing several of his Majesty's
good Subjects, and reconciling them to the Church and See of Rome.

The prosecution being grounded upon several statutes, as those of the 23. Eliz
Cap. 1. 3. Jac. Cap. 4. etc. whereby it is enacted. That to absolve, persuade,
or withdraw any subject from their obedience to the King, or to reconcile them
to the Pope; or to draw them to the Popish Religion, or move them to promise
obedience to any other state, or procure, Counsel, or aid them that do it,
shall be connted and punished as High Treason. Vide. Lamb. 220. 226. 412. and
Dalt. 232.

Upon the first of these Indictments no sufficient Evidence being produced, the
Jury could not thereupon bring him in Guilty; as to the second there was full
proof that he had often endeavored to reconcile diverse of his Majesty's
Protestant subjects to the Romish Church, and had actually perverted several to
embrace the Roman Catholic Religion, and assert and maintain the Popes
supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, etc.

To all which he had very little to object, only alleged, that if it were a
Crime so Capital in him to persuade People to the Roman Catholic Religion,
(which he was verily persuaded was the only true one) then it must be the same
offense in Quakers and other different persuasions, since they as well as he
made it their endeavor to draw people from the Church of England to their
particular party. But to this was easily answered, that the very Words of the
Law had expr^ssed the Roman Catholic religion or Popery, but no such thing of
any orher Faction, and that Recriminations were no excuse, much less
Justification; Whereupon after a full hearing, Debating, and weighing of the
matter, the Jury brought him in guilty of High Treason upon the last
Indictment, and accordingly on Saturday he received sentence, To be Hanged,
Drawn, and Quartered; which he received with a modest Generosity, saying these
words, Gloria in Excelsis deo, etc.

The next Criminal we ought to mention for the likeness of their offense in its
nature and punishment, though of Different sex and manner, was Mistress Ann
Petty, Widow, a person of above sixty years of age; she lived lately near
Holbourn Conduit, but formerly in the Green-yard in Leaden Hall, her Husband
some Years since, in a very melancholy Discontented humor upon I know not
what provocations went and hanged himself, since whose decease this woman has
followed several indirect courses, but more especially for Clipping of money,
for which purpose she held a Correspoddence with some wild Apprentices,
Servants, or Casheirs to eminent Citizens, who it is said) brought her sums of
large lawful money which she clipped and returned, allowing them five pound in
the Hundred more or less, and yet got considerably her self for her own pains,
as she then apprehended, though now she is like to pay dear enough for it: for
she was here indicted, and Evidence came in that saw her at the Clipping trade,
and others that had bought diverse quantities of silver melted down of her,
besides the violent suspicion for that some of her tools were taken in the
house, together with Fileings and Clippings to a good considerable value; upon
which she was brought in guilty of high Treason, and sentenced to be Drawn on
an Hurdle or Sled to Smithfield (the usual place for such Executions) and there
to be burned to Death: A Youth her Son was also Indicted, but not being proved
to be any way concerned in his Mothers ill practses was acquitted.

Edward Lancet, Elijah Arnold, and Bartholomew Jennings were arraigned for
Felony and Burglary; For that they on the Lords Day had broken unto a
Merchants house in Crutchet Friars, when no body was at home but a poor honest
Maid-servani, whom they immediately took and bound and gagged her so that she
was not able to utter a word: they took away there in Plate and Money to the
value of two hundred pounds or thereabouts; but diligent informmation being
given out and Enquiries made upon the sale or disposal of some of the things
they were seized, and now Indicted, Convicted, and Condemned, (being old
Malefactors) to be Hanged for the same.

Robert Harrison was arraigned, found guilty and condemned for killing a person
in White-Cross-street, which he endeavored to show was done by misadventure or
in his own defense, but the proof was Evident, and he for it condemned to be
hanged, as in such cases of Felony and murder is accustomed.

Joseph Foster was convicted for Burglary and Felony, though he did not steal
above the value of thirty shillings, yet being a notorioos offender that had
often commenced in Newgate University, and but a Sessions or two ago got off by
pleading a pardon, he now received sentence of Death.

John Clark was likewise condemned for Burglary or House-breaking; three more
were concerned with him, but he only was as yet taken, though it is not doubted
but we shall very shortly have an account of the rest.

Henry Robertson a person often free of this Corporation was condemned for
Jilting or stealing several pieces of Plate, he had both been burnt in the
haud, and transported (as it is said) before, but now it is thought must
receive a Passport into another world; being with the rest condemned to dye.

Besides these nine ordered to receive Capital punishment, there were nine
others that got off by the benefit of the Clergy, and carried away the Law in
their own hands. Twelve that prayed and obtained the favor of Transportation,
and four sentenced to Shove the Fumbler, or receive the correction of the
gentle Lash, for several crimes respectively no less tedious, than impertinent
here to be recited.

There were likewise diverse Romish Recusants Indicted for not repairing to
their respective Parish Churches, and the Bills found against them according to
the statvtes in that case made and provided.

Discite Justitiam moniti, et non temnere Leges, Felix enim quem faciunt, etc.
FINIS.

