Friendly Advice TO THE Gentlemen-Planters OF THE East and West INDIES. In
Three Parts. I. A brief Treatise of the most principal Fruits and Herbs that
grow in the East and West Indies; giving an Account of their respective Virtues
both for Food and Physic, and what Planet and Sign they are under. Together
with some Directions for the Preservation of Health and Life in those hot
Climates. II. The Complaints of the Negro-Slaves against the hard Usages and
barbarous Cruelties inflicted upon them. III. A Discourse in way of Dialogue,
between an Ethiopean or Negro-Slave, and a Christian that was his Master in
America.


By Philotheos Physiologus.

Printed by Andrew Soul, in the Year 1684.

A Brief TREATISE Of the Principal Fruits and Herbs That grow in Barbados,
Jamaica, And other Plantations in the West Indies. The First Part.
THis short discourse of the Qualities of the Fruits which that gallant Island
of Barbados yields, I thought would not be improper, as well for that I do not
know that any has hitherto distinctly spoken thereof, as also because they
being for the most part the same with those produced, not only in the Western
Plantations, but also in Guinea, the East Indies, and most hot Countries, one
and the same pains will serve to describe the Properties of them all; or at
least to give such a general Philosophical Account, that whatever you meet with
in th^se Reigons neighboring to the Sun's more near and direct Beams, you may
be well able by this Specimen, and from the Form, Taste, Color, Smell and
Signature of each Vegetable, to understand its Nature, Use and Operation.

In the first place, we must in general observe, that all Fruits in hot
Climates are better, as being as by Nature prepared to an higher degree of
Maturity, than in Cold; for the Sun making his nearer visits with auspicious
Beams, and an innocent and complemental Warmth both better disposes the Earth's
teeming Womb, and by a most excellent Chemistry, refines the ripening Fruits
from their gross dull phlegmatic Juices; Winter, Snows, Frosts and other
Excesses, are there only remembered and talked of, not known; and that Sol's too
ardent kisses may not be offensive, Nature provides always delicate cooling
Briezes and refreshing Gales of Wind, which not only relieve the Inhabitants
from the ill effects of an excessive Heat, but much conduce to the melioration
of the Fruits. Which being thus brought to its full and absolute perfection,
before gathered, may much safer be eaten in those warm Countries, than in Cold,
where they have not Sun enough to digest their Rawness into a Temperature so
fit for Food. And as it is not fit for Man or Beast to labor so much and so
hard in hot Regions, as in cold; therefore the wise Creator has by his
Handmaid Nature given them food prepared to their hands, that they might have
no such need of Toiling, there being there no Winter to consume what Summer
brings forth, but a continued Spring or perpetual Harvest of most excellent and
never-failing Vegetations, some of the chief of which we shall proceed to speak
of in particu^ar.

Of Pine Apples.
THis incomparable Fruit deservedly claims precedence for its delicacy and
excellency; for when full Ripe, its Taste is so exquisitly delightful and
pleasant, that it seems to exceed all others that the Earth produces; whence
it is reported, that when some of them, by great care, and the favor of a
speedy Voyage, were brought into England, (for very rarely can they be
preserved so long) and presented to King James, he was so ravished with its
charming deliciousness, that he said, It was not fit to be tasted by a Subject,
but only proper to Regale the Gusto of Princes, inured to the highest
Delicacies. The four grand Qualities, whence all perfect Tastes do proceed,
viz. the Astringent or Saltish, the Bitter, the Sweet and the Sour are herein
so equally mixed and compounded by Gods Handmaid (Nature) that it is hard to
distinguish which of them does predominate; but the truth is, the most
delightful Moderator and King of all Tastes, viz. the Sweet does a little
exceed all the other three, so that there is nothing appears but an inviting
Beauty, delightful Redolency, and ravishing Taste, that feasts in the highest
degree, all those Senses at once.

For it must be noted, That all the various and numberless Tastes of things,
both in the Annimal, Vegetable, and Mineral Kingdoms do all proceed and arise
from the four grand Qualities aforesaid, (at large described in my Way to
Health, and The Good House-wife made a Doctor, etc.) so that there are but four
perfect Tastes, they being the Radix of all others, as the seven Notes are the
Basis or Foundation of all Musical Harmony; and according to the Equality of
those four, or the weakness or predominancy of each, such a Taste does carry
the upper dominion in all things, and accordingly is the same more or less
grateful to the Palate and Stomach, and homogeneal to the Body.

But though our Pines are one of the best sorts of Fruits in the world, they
stand the Inhabitants of those parts, and the Eaters of them, but in very
little stead, being by our English chiefly eaten after or betwixt Meals, to
pleasure wanton Appetite and depraved Senses; for which cause their genuine
nature and operation is hardly known to those that devour the most of them;
however, their excellent Taste, pleasant Smell, and curious Shapes do declare
their noble Virtues, being either eaten alone, or with Bread on a well prepared
Stomach; for they moderate, cool, comfort and refresh the Spirits, cleanse the
Passages, remove Obstructions that fur the Pipes, and also purge away and help
to digest all slimy and sharp Juices that offend Nature, being light of
Concoction, and if eaten full Ripe, on an empty stomach, it powerfully purges
by Urine.

It makes a good breakfast or supper with the help of Bread, it being clean and
easy, that the natural Heat can easily overcome and digest it at pleasure, and
Bread does dry up the humidity of the Fruit, and renders the Nourishment more
firm. But note likewise, that this rare Fruit is only good Raw (as we usually,
but improperly call it) that without any other Preparation, than what Nature,
and the Sun's digestive Heat gives it; and entire and alone (except only a
little Bread eat with it) it is so complete, that it will not admit of any
alteration or composition, since they cannot add to its Virtues, or raise
Nature to an higher degree, as in many other things may be done; but here,
whatever humane Art is used, or things intermixed, it is still for the worse,
because Nature (the Art of God) has already cook't it to the sublimest
Perfection, it being the best and most fragrant Fruit the West Indies do bring
forth, most wholesome and healthy to be eaten now and then, viz. two or three
times a week to make a Meal or part of a Meal with it; for the God of Eternal
Wisdom has appointed all things to be used with Sobriety, Temperance and
Order, for which end he has given all these brave comforts unto the Sons of
men: This is a Fruit highly dignified with Celestial Energy, being under the
Sun and Venus, in the Sign Leo.

Of Plantains.
THis is a brave noble Fruit, pleasant and grateful to the Senses, if not
gathered till full ripened on the Trees, they afford a Nourishment of a middle
nature, but not so quick nor brisk on the Palate and Stomach, nor so easy of
Concoction as Pines, because in these the Lunar Property does predominate, and
the four Qualities or Tastes are not so equaliz'd; yet it must be acknowledged
a good and wholesome Fruit, especially for such as live easily, and work but
little; for hard Laborers ought to have food that affords a Nourishment more
firm and substantial; and therefore such should eat Bread, or some other dry
Food with them.

It is a general custom to gather them before they are ripe, and let them ripen
off the Trees, which is both contrary to Reason and Nature; for thereby the
purer brisk spirituous parts are as it were totally destroyed; so that the true
lively Virtues and Sweetness become of a dull heavy nauseous and unpleasant
Taste, and harder of Concoction, affording a much worse Nourishment. Nor is
this Fruit good being any way prepared as by Art, though it be customary for many
to make Tarts with them, and compound them with several Ingredients, which is
not commendable; for Nature has already advanced them to the highest degree,
provided you let them alone long enough, viz. till they are full Ripe; and all
alteration then is for the worse, and not for the better. But the Women must be
doing something, though it be Mischief, as Mother Eve has given them an Example.

But if when it is full Ripe it be eaten temperately, either alone, or rather
with some Bread, it is wholesome and profitable to Nature; but be advised not to
eat them in wantonness on full Stomachs, or between Meals, as the custom of the
English is, but not without great prejudice to Nature; for they are naturally a
little* dull and heavy, and therefore they require a brisk Appetite and well
prepared Stomach, and store of heat to concoct them. This Fruit is under the
dominion of the Moon, and the Sign Pisces; as to heat they are moderate, viz.
rather cooling than hot; when full ripe they gently open Obstructions of the
breast, being eaten with Bread in a Morning; but unripe they are binding, and
if baked with Sugar, Spices, and the like, lose their natural operation, and
thereby become hot, and apt to obstruct the Passages, and tire the Appetite and
Stomach, generate evil Juices, dull Spirits and thick Blood, and therefore so
prepared are no commendable Food.

Of Bonnanoes.
IT is a Fruit much of the nature with Plantains, but somewhat sweeter, or more
Venereal, and easier of Concoction, very pleasant and delightful to the
Palate, Stomach, and Senses, Nature having likewise prepared this to the
height, so that whatever alteration Mrs. Housewife makes, proves improper and
hurtful; the best way of eating them is like the rest before, either alone or
with Bread; and so they cleanse, open and remove Obstructions, gently loosen
the Belly, being of a middle Quality, neither hot nor cold in Excess; a Meal of
them now and then will be not only grateful, but also healthful; but if they
are eaten green, or ripned off the Trees, then their nature and operations will
be altogether contrary, and have many ill effects; for before Fruits arrive to
their full Maturity, the Astringent, Bitter and Sour Qualities do too violently
predominate, and all such things must therefore prove hurtful to the Body;
whereas when full ripe, the sweet balsamiak and pure spirituous Qualities do
tincture the Saturnine and Martial Properties, and as it were captivate their
poisonous fierce hot Natures, that they can scarce be felt or tasted, the
powers and virtues of Sol and Venus being become more strong. Besides, ripening
of Fruits off from the Trees is unnatural, and opposes her method in the
highest degree, as is before declared.

Of Cocoe-Nuts.
THe Kernels of this Fruit are of a full strong sweet and delightful Taste to
the Palate and Stomach, but apt to stop and fur the Passages, if eaten alone,
or in Quantities. and ut on the contrary, if Order and Temperance be observed,
it makes a brave sublime Food, very profitable for all Ages and Constitutions,
affording a clean pure Nourishment, easy of Digestion, breeds good Blood, and
pure fine brisk Spirits. Besides, this Fruit contains a thin or milky
Substance, of a Cordial nature, if eaten with some dry Food, as Bread, and the
like. But neither this nor the Kernal is not to be eaten alone on full
Stomachs, or between Meals, as English People are apt to do in all places where
they come, accounting nothing food but Flesh and Fish; whereas Herbs, Seeds,
Fruits and Grains do far transcend them, as to brave firm substantial
Nourishment, as I have elsewhere in several Treatises demonstrated, viz. in my
Way to Health, long Life and Happiness, -- The good Housewife made a Doctor,
etc. These Cocoe-Fruits are under the Sun and Venus, and the Celestial sign
Libra, but its outward shell or covering is Martial and Saturnine.

Of G^ovars.
THis Fruit is under the dominion of the Moon and Mars, and the sign Scorpio;
it has its harsh Taste from Mars, its Sweetness from the Moon. If eaten unripe
or green, then it binds the belly, but when full ripe, it is a good wholesome
pleasant Fruit, may be eaten raw at Meals with bread and other food, as Milk,
or the like: They are of a moderate cooling opening Quality; but there are two
sorts, one that are white within, and the other Red, which last are the best of
the two.

Of Sour-Sopps.
THis is a good Fruit, agreeable to the Stomach if full ripe, and it lie not
too long after it be gathered before it be eaten; it is endued with a grateful
pleasant Taste, very easy of Concoction, if eaten moderately, especially with
Bread, or some other dry food; if a Meal be so made now and then, it will prove
very profitable to the breast, by cleansing and removing Obstructions that lie
in those Passages; it also moderately cools and allays Drought, and gently
loosens the belly, and if a Glass of White Wind, allayed with Water, be drank
after it, or other proper Liquor, it will bravely cleanse the passages of the
Uriters, and cause plentiful evacuation of Urine; but if they lie too long
after gathering, before you use them, much of the good Qualities and natural
Virtues will be abated, and it will be apt to have a contrary operation; it is
cold in Quality, and therefore proves most profitable to the Chollerick and
Sanguine Complexions, but not so good for Phlegmatic Bodies. Mercury and the
Moon have dominion over it, and it is to be attributed to the sign Taurus.

Of Prickle-Pears.
THis is a pleasant delightful Fruit, very grateful to Nature, and may with
safety be eaten both in health and sickness, being easy of concoction, it
quickly passes away, digesting and moving the Obstructions that offend the
Passages, if eaten on an empty Stomach, either alone or with Bread, or some
other food, it is moderately cooling, and good against the Stone and Gravel, if
eaten alone in a Morning when fasting, and a glass of White Wind, allayed with
Water ( viz. one third part Wine and two Water) drank after it. Mercury governs
it, and the Sign Aries. But neither this nor any other fruit ought to be eaten
in wantonness, nor for state or vain pleasure, as between Meals and after
Dinner, our Creator never intending them for such uses, but for the support and
health of mankind, and those that abuse them otherwise, commit a very great
Evil, of which they ought to Repent, and forsake all such superfluities.

Of Papaes.
THis is an innocent, yet noble Fruit, of little Taste taken as it grows, and
that which it has not very delightful; but it has a wonderful, and as it
were, Paradisical and most ravishing. Virtue that internally lies hid, which
being awakned and raised up by the skill of the good Housewife, and proper
Ingredients, it makes various sorts of most delightful food, but more
especially Pyes or Tarts, there being no other fruit in the West Indies (nor
perhaps elsewhere in the world) comparable for that purpose; for it has no
manifest Taste or Quality that does too manifestly predominate, (as most other
fruits have, that are used for such foods) and thereby it is capable of being
raised to what degree of taste or pleasantness the Cook or good Housewife
pleases, by mixing and adding proper Ingredients, which cannot be done with any
fruits or things wherein any of the four Qualities do too violently overruled;
for such things as are unequal in their Properties or Qualifyings, or where
unripe things are joined with ripe, can very rarely be altered for the better.
This fruit being so unparrallel'd a thing for the use aforesaid, the good Dames
of the Western Plantations have no reason to desire or long after other
improper Fruits or Mixtures; for this being aptly prepared and made into Tarts,
may yield the nicest Pallates most ample satisfaction: It is under the dominion
of the Moon and Venus, in the sign Taurus, but the Moon predominating in its
governance, hides the pleasant Qualities of Venus; but when other Ingredients
are mixed with it, then the sleeping or captivated Virtues of Venus appear in
their splendour or ravishing Tastes: They are of a cooling opening Nature and
Operation of themselves, but when mixed, are varied according to the nature of
the Ingredients. I know no other fruit in the West Indies that can be altered
to so good advantage as this. And as the Pineapple is the King of all Fruits
to be eaten Raw; so on the other side this is the best and properest to be used
in variation or further prepared.

Of Water Melons.
THis is a most delicious Fruit, very pleasant and delightful both to sickly
and healthy People; if eaten moderately it is very profitable for hot Chollerick
Complexions, and such as are subject to be feverish, or fumes flying into
their Heads; it is of a cooling cleansing Property, easy of Concoction, and
dis-burthens the Passages of all gross offensive Matter, if eaten ^asting in a
Morning with a little Bread; also, it powerfully cleanses the Reins and
Melancholy, purges by Urine, and therefore the frequent use of them moderates
the astringent harsh Quality in such Constitutions as are liable to the Stone
and Gravel, for which it is one of the best Remedies in the World. But if you
mix Sugar, Wine, or the like Ingredients, then you cannot perceive nor feel its
genuine virtue or operation; for thereby its nature and effects are changed,
just as a Painter does alter one Color into another, by adding other Colors,
which ought seriously to be considered by all Compounders of food or Medicines,
and the natural Reason to be well understood. This fruit is under the Moon and
Venus (but Luna has the greatest share in Government) in the sign Libra,
whence it is that they gallantly purge by Urine. There are two sorts, Red and
White, but the Red are the best.

Of Musk-Melons.
THere are two sorts of these, one about as big as our ordinary Pumkins, the
other smaller, not much bigger than those in England; of the two, this last
sort are the best, though the other are very good in their kind, and to be
preferred before any our Northren Climate produces. The best way of eating them
is with Salt and Bread, which renders them more warming and grateful to the
Stomach; nor do they gripe, except it be for want of the bodies being used to
them. They gently loosen the belly, and moderately purge by Urine, if eaten for
a breakfast with a glass or two of White Wind, or White Wind and Water mixed* or
plain Water drank after them: They may be eaten by all Ages and Constitutions,
but are best for young People, and especially for Chollerick hot Complexions;
for they allay drought, and gently cool the whole body, but they may not be
often eaten as food, because they afford not so firm a Nourishment, but between
whiles it will be very profitable to make a whole Meal of them now and then
with only Bread and Salt.

Of Pumkins.
PUmkins that grow in the West Indies, are much of the nature of those we have
here with us in England, but not altogether so cold, being brought to an higher
degree of Maturity by the powerful Influences of the Sunbeams, who caress them
with nearer Embraces; yet still, this Fruit is of a cold phlegmatic Nature,
but eaten stewed with warming Ingredients, makes an indifferent good food,
taking store of Bread therewith, its Nourishment is not firm, but easy of
concoction, loosens the belly, is not proper for cold phlegmatic Complexions,
but very profitable to be used now and then by the Chollerick: It also gently
purges by Urine, as indeed most of the fruits in the West Indies do; and it is
a great Error in our Northren People, settled in those parts, especially such
as are obnoxious to the Stone, Gravel, and the like, that they do not accustom
themselves more to the use of those noble fruits; for if they did, they would
not be so subject to those torturing Diseases as they are; for all foods, be
they fruits or other things, and also Drinks, that moderately cool the body,
and are of light concoction, do naturally prevent the generation of those cruel
Diseases; as on the other side, such as heat, and are of an astringent nature,
do generate them in all Complexions, but especially in those that are
inclinable thereunto. The Celestial Regiment of this fruit is to be attributed
to the Moon, and to the sign Pisces.

Of Squashes.
THese are of a mild gentle nature and operation, being briskly boiled and
eaten with Bread, Butter, Vinegar and Salt; they afford a good Nourishment, but
not very firm, cool the body, and are quick of Concoction, cleanse the
Passages, are good against the Obstructions of the breast, gently loosen the
belly and purge by urine, especially if a whole Meal be made of them without
flesh, and only eaten as aforesaid. They are under the dominion of the Moon and
Cancer.

Of Potato's.
THis is a very brave noble and more excellent Root than any other the
West Indies bring forth, of a friendly temperate Quality, somewhat windy if
eaten hot or whilst the fiery Atoms or Vapors be in it; therefore they are
far better and wholsomer cold, as many other of the like nature are: They
afford a brave firm substantial Nourishment, surpassing therein all other
Roots, but not comparative to that of Bread; they are Restorative, of a most
pleasant Taste, comfort and strengthen the body, of a warming nature and
operation; so that they are a good food eaten alone, or with Bread, Butter,
Flesh, or the like.

The common ways of preparing or dressing them are diverse, but the most common
are Stewing, and Roasting them in the Embers, the last of which is most
commendable, but being more tedious than the other, is not so frequently
practiced: either way they make a good Dish, being eaten when through cold with
Oil, Vinegar, Salt and Bread, or Butter instead of Oil, to such as do not love
it, or cannot procure it. As to Temperature they are of a middle Nature, but
rather warm than cold, easy of Concoction, and the drier they are prepared,
the warmer and firmer Nourishment they yield.

Likewise, they make a good sort of Drink, but it will not admit of much age,
being apt then to become acid, sharp and keen; it may be made either stronger
or smaller, according to the Quantity of Potato's allowed, and Water put to
them. There are various sorts, but the driest and yellowest are best. They are
under Sol, in the sign Taurus. The young and tender Leaves are a pretty good
Sallet boiled* they cleanse the stomach and loosen the belly; being eaten with
Butter* Vinegar, Salt and Bread, a fine Mea^ may be made of them.

Of Yams.
THis also is an excellent Root, temperately hot, and more dry than moist, of a
lovely white Color, and pleasant innocent Taste, which demonstrates their good
Virtues; they afford an harmless, clean, and yet pretty substantial
Nourishment, neither much bind nor relax the belly, but of the two, rather
loosen. They are easy of Concoction, and if they be well prepared according to
Art, make a brave friendly pleasant food, dressed with Butter, Vinegar and Salt,
and eaten with Bread: They are good for every Age and Constitution, rarely
disagreeing with any; they are very useful to be eaten with Flesh, a little
Flesh and good store of Yams. They are under the government of Venus and Luna,
and the sign Libra.

Of Cusado-Bread.
THis Bread is of an innocent nature and operation, yet affords a strong
substantial Nourishment, far beyond what most People suppose; for being put
into any kind of Pottage, Milk, or the like; it dissolves its self into
gellious substance, which is a token of its strength, as its pure white Color
and innocent Taste demonstrates its innate Virtues and Equality of Parts: The
four grand Qualities (at large described in my other Treatises) whence the four
perfect Tastes do proceed, being so equally mixed, that by its Taste it can
hardly be distinguished which does carry the upper dominion, under which
simplicity lies hid the most sovereign Virtues of Nature; it is most pleasant
when new, but not then the wholsomest; it is a good Ingredient to be eaten with
Butter, Cheese, Herbs, Milk, or any kind of Pottages, as also with Flesh, and
will alone sustain Nature; for a man may live as long without being tired, and
be as well supported, as to health and strength, with it, as with the best
Wheaten Bread; and being once familiariz'd through a little custom and use, it
becomes pleasant to most Ages and Constitutions. I remember a Master of a Ship,
that assured me, That being by stress of Weather kept out at Sea much longer
than they expected, so that all their Provisions were spent, but Water and
Cusado Bread, of which they had plenty; he and his Ships Crew lived thereon for
many days, without any other Sustenance; and though at first (being used to
variety of other Foods) they thought it somewhat hard, yet after some days it
became most pleasing; and they were so far from complaining of their strength
being diminished, that they found themselves more than ordinary brisk and
active. As for the Temperature of this Bread, it is rather hot than cold, and
is of easy concoction; it is under the government of Saturn and Venus, in the
sign Scorpio. Its poisonous Liquor which is pressed out of the Root when it is
made into Bread, is Saturnine, and the white flowery substance or matter, is
Venereal: Nor is it strange to those that understand Nature's course, that
Poison and most wholesome Food should proceed from one and the same Vegetable
diversely prepared; for such do know that in all things, (as well as in this)
there are lurging Poisons that are the Root of every Life, and without which
there could be neither Vitality nor Vegetation.

Of Ginger.
THis is an excellent Spice, of an hot dry tart Nature, endued with a stronger
and more durable heat than Pepper, and every way more efficacious, so that
wherever this Spice is, there is no need of Pepper; it is chiefly good for
cold and moist Stomachs, and such as are troubled with cold windy Diseases; for
it discusseth and helps Digestion, and in some degree consumes crude
phlegmatic Humors: good especially for aged People in cold and moist Seasons
of the year. But neither this sort of Spice, nor any other, is good to be used
in hot Seasons or Climates, except in a Physical way, as I have elsewhere
demonstrated. Particularly, in Young People and Chollerick Complexions the
frequent use of such things does heat, dry and consume the purer Spirits and
Radical Moisture and inflame the Blood, and in some Constitutions makes it
sharp and keen; they are also injurious to the natural Heat of the Stomach and
digestive Faculty, whence the Scurvey, Ioynt-Aches, and many cruel Distempers
proceed, and assist not a little to the generation of the Stone, wherever
they meet apt matter for that purpose. The same is to be understood of all
other things in which heat and dryness do too violently predominate; the
frequent use of which is like the common drinking of Brandy; when once the
Stomach is accustomed to them, it cannot digest its food without them; and yet
the Remedy is as bad as the Disease, for as the natural heat is more
debilitated, so more Brandy is craved for, till People utterly destroy
themselves.

Of Oranges.
THere being various sorts of this Fruit, differing in their Temperature and
Nature, they are to be considered according to the sweetness, sowrness and
tartness of them; the sowrest sort are the coldest, most sharp and penetrating,
and therefore are not so good and profitable as those called Sevil, which is a
mean between the sour and the sweet; and therefore is best for sauce, and far
more acceptable to the Palate, but especially to the Stomach, than either the
sweet or the sour, which being full ripe fresh gathered, do not only make the
best Sawces to most sorts of Food, as Herbs both raw and boiled, Flesh, etc.
far exceeding all Vinegars made with Wine or other Liquors, but they also prove
profitable in many Diseases, especially to allay Drought in Fevers, and
prevent the putrefaction of the Humors; for they cool and refresh the Stomach,
and are good moderately used in times of Health for Chollerick People; but eat
them not too frequently, for they astringe or bind the belly, and are not
proper for Phlegmatic or Melancholy Complexions; and as the moderate use of
them for Sauce in food, does excite and sharpen the Appitite, so on the
contrary the frequent custom of eating them is apt to hurt the digestive
Faculty by their cold dry astringent Qualities, they being Extremes in Nature,
and therefore cautiously to be used.

The Sweet Oranges are not good for Sauce, for they naturally dull or subvert
the Appetite; nevertheless they being of a middle Nature or temperate Quality,
are good and very grateful to well-prepared Stomachs to be eaten alone, or with
some Bread or other dry food after them in time of Health, especially for Young
People, and the Phlegmatic and Melancholy; but still they ought to remember
their sure friend Temperance, else they will prove injurious, and hinder
Concoction.

Of Lemmons.
AS these are sharper and more sour then Oranges, so they are colder, more keen
or piercing, but they make a Sauce that does wonderfully cool, and for the
present stir up the Appetite, comfort the Stomach, and are good against
Vomiting, very grateful to such as have weak dull or flat Stomachs, they cut
and attenuate gross Humors, allay Thirst, and are refreshing to such as have
hot Livers; but on the other side, if not very moderately used, their
astringent, sharp or keen Quality will by simile awaken the Saturnal and
Martial Fires in the Body, and instead of allaying heat they inflame the Blood,
and irritate the natural Spirits, which proves fatal as to Health; for as all
such Fruits are unequal in their parts, so they by simpathy cause an unequal
operation in the Humors, which is the Radix of all Distemperatures.

Of Limes.
LImes are an Immature Fruit, in which two extreme Properties do predominate,
viz. the Saturnal and Martial Poisons, because the Sun and Celestial
Influences, have not had Power to raise or awaken the balsamic or friendly
Virtues of Nature, or bring the Properties into an equal operation, as is done
in other Fruits; for these two fierce Qualities are so powerful, as indeed
being the very Radix of the Fruit, that the friendly Property or good Virtue is
wholly hid or captivated by them, so that it cannot be tasted or felt; hence
the Juice of this fruit does contain (as I have elsewhere declared) a Saturnine
churlish fire, which is of an hard coagulating astringent or binding nature and
operation, like the raw cold saturnine Air of Winter, which does congeal the
Water, and harden all things. 2 dly. A sharp keen Martial Property, of a sour
harsh fretting nature and operation. Now these two Extremes meeting together,
do render it very hurtful to the genuine nature of the Stomach, and generate
bad Blood, stir up the original Poisons by simile, and the Saturnine Property
does draw together and congeal the Excrements in the Bowels; and the Martial
Fires are forth-driving, and cannot endure to be bounded, from whence proceed
various Diseases, as Gripes, Collicks, Illiacal Passions, or cruel Belly-Akes.

For this cause, our English, and others, that use these Juices in their
Voyages to the East Indies, and other parts, are sorely vexed with many
Diseases, which they contract (though they little think it) from their
Punch-Bowls, rather than the disagreeableness of the Climate. Moreover the
sharp cold Juices of Oranges and Lemmons, which in hot Countries they are
greedy of, and do eat too freely, do prove very pernicious as to their Health;
for the truth is, it is not the Climate, whether hot or cold, that causes so
many Diseases, but Peoples Intemperances and taking wrong Measures; for the
Natives both of the East, South and West are as healthy and long lived as those
of the North; and these our frequent Distempers when we travel into those
parts, do but declare our Intemperances, and that the Meats and Drinks we so
much desire are not proper for our Bodies in such Climates, where not our own
irregular Fancies, but the usages of the Natives of each Country ought to be
our Guides and Examples, both as to Meats, Drinks and Exercises, and then each
Country would soon become as natural and wholesome to us as our own, our Bodies
being assimulated thereunto.

Of Pinpillow-Pears.
THis is a Fruit that is not much in use, being somewhat troublesome to procure
by reason of their Martial Weapons or Prickles; they are of a sharp brisk
Taste, their Juices quick and penetrating, they cut Phlegm, beget Appetite and
help Conoction, being of a cooling Nature, they may be eaten with a little
Sugar with safety, but they are chiefly good for Chollerick and Sanguine
People, and are under Mars in Aries.

Of Pepper, commonly called Guinea-Pepper
OF this there are two sorts, one great the other small; but both are much of
the same nature and operation, only the smallest is rather the hottest. They
both contain three extreme Qualities; viz. 1. An astringent Sulpher, or
stupifying Poison from Saturn; 2. A fierce bitter keen sharpness from Mars; And
3. An hot penetrating Poison from Mercury.

In this Vegetation all friendliness and pure Virtues are captivated, and the
original forms of Nature do predominate, there being in it no kind of Equality
or Harmony, but all is out of Tune, and the four grand Qualities, whence all
Tastes proceed, have here their operations in Discord, and confusedly combat
one another; therefore whatever any may pretend, the frequent eating of it must
needs prove pernicious to Health; for those forementioned fierce poisonous
Qualities do by degrees as it were insensibly prey upon and violate the natural
Heat, and hinders the way of the Spirits, as if men designed to mortify their
natural Legs, on purpose to use Wooden ones or Crutches; so they destroy the
genuine innate heat of their Stomachs, and vainly endeavor to procure a false
and adventitious one, that may better (forsooth) supply Nature. The truth is,
this hot fiery Sauce does powerfully stir up or beget Appetite, and warms the
Stomach, which does entice many to eat it with their common food, but they
never consider the mischiefs it brings unto Health, being like Brandy, a dram
of which after a full Meal of heavy Victuals, will help Concoction, and ease
the burdened Stomach, but the frequent use of it will so destroy the natural
Heat, that the Stomach will not be able, after a little time, to digest its
food, neither with it nor without it: So this Spice being too much eaten,
wounds Nature to the very Heart; for by degrees it debilitates the proper Heat,
infects the Blood with a salt sharp keen Quality, partches up and consumes the
sweet Oil and Radical Moisture, suffocates the pure Spirits by wholesale,
causing the Blood (their limpid Fountain and natural habitation) to become
wheyish and watery. Especially, if Chollerick or Sanguine Complexion'd People
shall accustom themselves to the eating of such Sawces, it will much sooner and
more deplorably vitiate the Tone of their Stomachs, than of such as are
Plegmatick; but they are not good nor natural for any whatsoever, except now
and then in a Physical way for very cold dull heavy Phlegmatic People, and
they must eat it sparingly too; but the mischief is, whoever shall accustom
themselves to these Sawces, cannot forbear from Excess therein, without great
trouble and constraint upon themselves: The very same is to be understood of
all other Extremes, as Brandy, Tobacco, and the like.

Besides, all such things are far more pernicious, and bring greater danger to
Health in hot Countries, than in colder Climates, as many have found by woeful
Experience, because there the central Heat is nothing so strong and powerful as
in colder Regions, and consequently the pure Spirits and Radical Moisture
weaker, and more apt to be wounded, suffocated or evaporated, as all do know
that have Eyes that can see into the Arcana of Nature.

But to return to our Guinea-Pepper, it is such an Extreme in Nature, viz. so
hot and poisonous, that if the bigger sort be dried, and the Cods cut and the
Seeds scattered amongst Clothes, Hats, or the like, that are to be packt up, it
proves the best Preservative from the Moth, and other Vermin that is known;
for its excessive keenness destroys all Generation, even in the very bud.
Likewise, if it be burnt in a Room, the Doors and Windows being close shut, it
will destroy and kill all Buggs, Fleas, or the like, and you too, if you do not
get out in time, its fumes are so hot, poisonous and penetrating, when once the
fire has opened its body, and manifested what before internally lay hid.

This bigger sort our English do commonly pickle, and so preserve it for a
common Sauce to eat with Flesh: Now this pickling of it with Salt and Vinegar
does still add to its heat and sharpness; For Salt is of an hot harsh sharp
Nature, and if it be not moderately eaten, dries, heats and is of a partching
operation, very inimical to Health, but a Ringleader to the Scurvey and other
Diseases, and Vinegar is also of an hot keen fretting Nature, especially when
joined or incorporated with such high fires and things of unequal Natures:
Therefore the frequent use of this sort of Swace is to be accounted very
injurious to Health, especially in such hot Climates, where the continual
influences of the Sun do more exhale and draw forth the Radical Moisture,
thereby weakening the central parts, which ought therefore rather to be refresht
and cherisht by proper Foods, than annoyed and prejudiced by such hot violent
things, as do yet further depress and debilitate them.

Of Occora, or Grommer.
THis is a brave Noble Fruit, and being boiled, they make a gallant substantial
Food, affording a good firm Nourishment, being eaten with Butter, Vinegar, and
Bread. Some will boil and eat them with Flesh, but they do not eat so well as
many other sorts of Herbs and Roots do in that case; for they being in
themselves of a jellyous Nature, do not seem so proper to be eaten with Flesh:
But they make an excellent Pottage, which if well prepared, and proper
Ingerdients added, afford a brave strong firm Nourishment, and yet easy of
Concoction. If the intrinsic Virtues of this Fruit were understood, the Food
made thereof would be had in far greater estimation than it is; for both the
Fruit it self and the Pottage made thereof are of singular Virtues and use for
weakly People, and such as are inclinable to Consumptions, weak Heats and
Obstructions of the Breast, far more excellent than Mr. Doctors Ielly made of
Hartshorn, and the like, as being much more natural and agreeable to the
Stomach.

Which way ever you dress them they are not only delightful to the Palate,
when a little innur'd to them, but also easy of Concoction, gently loosing the
Belly, of a moderate or middle Nature as to heat, and may by all Ages and
Constitutions, healthy or sickly, be eaten with safety, and to the advantage of
Health and Strength; and we do advise all the English to eat of it more
frequently, and then they shall assuredly find more Virtues therein than is
here set down.

Of Aguma.
THis is an Herb of a bitter Nature, but when boiled, that Martial Taste is
much allayed, and it becomes a brave noble Salad or Food, being boiled in
plenty of good Water, and eaten with Butter, Venegar, Salt and Bread, or with
Flesh; for it powerfully opens the gates of Nature, and the obstructions of the
Breast and Stomach, it moderately relaxes the Belly, cools and refreshes all
the internal parts, affording brisk lively Spirits, pure Blood, and a good
Habit of Body, if Temperance be observed by the eaters thereof, which does give
the greatest Credit and Reputation to all sorts of Meats and Drinks; for the
best and most Natural cannot but prove burdensome and harmful, when Sobriety
is wanting. The excellency of this Herb does chiefly reside in the distasteful
or bitter Quality, which at first eating is somewhat unpleasant, but a little
custom will make it friend- and more delightsom than others that are less
bitter; for all Herbs are the most grateful to the Stomach, and easiest of
Digestion, in which the Bitter Quality or Taste is a little predominant, for
this property is lively, and the cause of Motions quick and penetrating; for
which cause the wise Ancients have noted, and not without sufficient ground,
all or most bitter Herbs to be good against most kinds of Stoppages and
Obstructions. And therefore on that account, this Herb is to be preferred
before those of a sweeter milder Nature, because all sweet things are heavy and
more flat on the Stomach, and harder of Concoction, and nothing so brisk and
lively; for which reason the Natives in Guinea, have a certain Root or Fruit
called Tantarobois, which is full of bitter Seeds, and them they mix with their
Foods, which proves very profitable to their Healths, so that they live strong
and lusty to very great Ages. This herb Agumma, is under the Government of
Mercury and Mars, in the sign Gemini.

Of Red-weed, or Catterpillars.
THis is an Herb of a mild gentle friendly Nature and Operation, easy of
Concoction, cleanses the Stomach, and gently loosens the Belly, and is very
profitable boiled in plenty of Water, and eaten with Butter, Salt and Bread, as
also with Flesh, but especially with salt-Fish; for by its mild friendly Nature
it allayes the harsh stubborn fierceness of such Flesh, and the heat of the
Salt, which if frequently eaten without store of either Herbs or Roots to
qualify them, proves very prejudicial to Health, especially in hot Countries.
The truth is, this is an excellent Herb, and ought to be increased and planted
for general use; for it ought to be held in greater estimation than either
Mutton or Beef, or indeed any other sort of Flesh, it being an allayer of all
immoderate heat: It is under the Dominion of Jupiter, in Pisces.

There are also a great Number of brave Herbs in the West Indies, which are
transplanted from the more Northern Climates, and thrive very well there, viz.
Sage, Rosemary, Thyme, Winter and Summer Savory, Mint, Pennyroyal, Parsely,
Charvil, Onnions, Lettice, Sorrel, Beetes both white and Red, Spinnage,
Cabadges or Colworts, Comfry, and many other gallant wholesome Herbs, and they
are all or most of them by the Celestial influences and continual enlivening
Beams of that Fountain of heat, the Sun* rendered far more fragrant and
salutiferous than in colder Regions, and so do make most excellent Sallads,
which being mixed with Oil or Butter, the Juice of Oranges and Salt, warm the
whole Body, and more naturally and pleasantly exhillerate the Spirits than any
sort of Wine drank in Moderation.

Some brief Directions for the Preservation of Health, and Life in hot Climates.
IT is a very common conceit amongst the Europeans, that of late are come to
Inhabit in Plantations of America, that by the Nature of the Climate or by
reason of the unusual Heats, People there are not so long-lived as in the more
cold Northren parts of the World; and for this they appeal to Experience; Do
not we see (say they) how men are cut off by Diseases in the prime of their
Years, and very few attain to old Age? Whence it is a common Proverb amongst
them, Soon Ripe, Soon Rotten, as if this were the very Nature of the Climate;
but this is all Mistake; they blame the Climate, when themselves are only to
blame: It Is their own Intemperance, not that of the Heavens, which shortens
their days: The wise and merciful God has ordered so providentially all parts
of this habitable World, that his Creature [ Man] may thereon live comfortably,
if he please: 'Twas the Error of the Ancients when they divided the Earthly
Globe into five Zones, to imagine two of them uninhabitable, one of which they
called the Frigid Zone, through excessive Cold, and the other Torrid Zone,
through extremity of Heat. But Experience has confuted their guessing
Philosophy, and shows us, that both these are commodious enough to dwell in, if
Discretion and Sobriety be used; Is one Region cold? God has given its
Inhabitants strong Constitutions, great Stomachs, gross suitable Food, and
Furze wherewith to defend them. Is another very hot? Here are refreshing
Briezes constantly employed by Nature, to fan and divert them, rare delicate
Fruits, easy of Digestion, to supply all the necessities of Nature, and
support them in Strength and Health. But such is the Perversity of men, that
being depraved by custom, they pursue and take quite contrary measures to those
that Nature dictates, and in the hottest Climates gorge themselves with the
grossest Foods, various Dishes of Flesh, Fish and Fowls, whereof they daily eat
to Gluttony, and the strongest Liquors, as Madera Wines, Brandy and Punch; so
that where they need the least, finest and lightest Meats and Drinks, they cloy
and oppress Nature with the grossest and strongest; And is it any wonder that
they are then afflicted with Diseases, or cut off by immature Deaths? If a man
will turn the top of his Candle downwards, and extinguish it by excess of
Tallow, how unjustly does such an one blame the Winds for putting out its light?

The sweet Influences of the Coelestials, and especially the heat of Heaven's
bright Eye (the Sun) does in hot Countries prepare all sorts of Vegetations and
Fruits, so as that they become more wholesome and proper for the Body, than in
colder Regions, thereby pointing out which is the most natural food in such
Climates; of which the Natives (though by us esteemed Barbarous) are so wise as
to take notice; for they in most hot Countries do more incline to eat Herbs and
Fruits (though not so much as they ought, nor do they prepare many of them so
well as they should) yet thereby, and by being strangers to Riot and
Intemperance, they retain an undisturbed Health to very great Ages; So in the
East Indies, where the food is chiefly Herbs, Fruits and Grains, and their
Drink only Water, to meet with Persons of One Hundred Years of Age, is common;
nay, it is credibly reported, that some of those called Brachmans, who do
wholly abstain from eating either Flesh or Fish do lengthen out their days to
One Hundred and Twenty, and One Hundred and Fifty Years: And in Guinea, though it
be a very hot Country, and generally the Constitution of the Air accounted very
unwholsom, yet you shall see the Ethiopians frequently live One Hundred and
Twenty Years in great strength and vigor. By all which it is plain, that the
fault is neither in the Soil, nor the Climate, but it is Intemperance both in
Quantity and Quality, is the main cause of the grievous Distempers and short
Lives of our English that travel into hot Countries, and also of the Weakness
and untimely Death of so many of their Children. For Prodigious in the Excess
they commit, such as cannot rationally be imagined of any that had not a mind
wilfully to destroy themselves: for to omit their Extravagances in ordinary
Diet, the vast Quantities of Flesh and Fish which they unnecessarily devour, I
have heard it credibly related and affirmed, That there has been the Quantity
of One Thousand or One Thousand Two Hundred Bottles of Wine, Madera and Claret,
consumed at one Feast, made by a common Plants of Barbados; and that the like
Superfluity (as if they would vye for Luxury with the old Romans, in the
declining Age of their Empire) is not infrequent in that and other Western
Plantations.

Now let all the World judge, if men will thus seek Death in the Errors of
their Lives, how is the Country to be complained of? He that takes his share of
three or four such Treats, will have little reason to accuse the heat of the
Weather for casting him into a Fever. If our English, and others, that travel
to and live in those Westenr, Eastern or Southern Regions would be but so
obedient to Nature, and kind to themselves as to observe a proper Order and
right Method of Living, they would not only live long, but healthy. And for
their furtherance and benefit therein (I mean, such as have not absolutely
forsworn hearkening to any Remonstrances of Reason, nor betrothed themselves to
Madness and ruinating Debauchery) I shall here add a few general Rules or
Directions for the Preservation of Health, very necessary to be regarded by all
such as live in Hot Climates.

1. Flesh ought not to be eaten at all, or very sparingly; for Flesh in hot
Countries is nothing so firm, good and wholesome as in cold (though the eating
thereof may well be spared in both) but on the other side, Herbs, Roots and
most Fruits are abundantly more excellent for Food in hot Climates than in
Cold; The same is to be understood by Fish, as experience has taught the
Natives of all such places, who therefore do more incline to eat Herbs, Fruits
and Vegetations; and for want of this Prudence, have not many of our Northern
People after a full Meal of Flesh or Fish in those hot parts, been suddenly
surprised with various cruel Diseases, as Fevers, Fluxes, and the like.

2. Full and Liberal Eating of any sort of Food, proves of more dangerous
consequence to Health, especially if the Foods be gross, fat and succulent,
because the natural and central Heat is by the great Power of the Celestial
Influences continually exhaled, and so becomes more external, which does in a
degree debilitate the Digestive Faculty; for which cause a man's Stomach and
Appetite is rarely so sharp and strong as in cold Countries.

3. Great Drinking, especially of strong exhilerating Liquors, as Wine, Brandy,
or other Spirits, is very pernicious; for all such Drinks, if not cautiuosly
used, and well allayed with Water, proves of fatal consequence, and wounds
Nature to the very heart, as daily Experience does testify, and does sooner
destroy Health than in cold Countries, though bad in both. I know this is
contrary to the Vulgar Notions, but it is agreeable to Truth, Experience and
Reason; only People, by a vicious Inclination, had a mind to debauch themselves
with strong Liquors, and the Devil, to humor them, suggested that such Liquors
(forsooth!) were necessary, and most to be used in hot Countries; and so they
got a color for their Excess, and continue the Maxim and now plead, They must
be Drunk if they mean to be Healthy, etc. But Nature, as well as Christianity,
will read them another Lesson; for in hot Climates, the natural or central Heat
being not so strong, by reason of the forcible Influences of the Sun,
powerfully exhaling the Radical Moisture, opening the Pores, and too violently
evaporating the Spirits, the Stomach and Digestive Faculty thereby become weak,
and the inclination to drinking is increased; for which reason many desire hot
spirituous Drinks, finding a present Refreshment; for such Liquors do
powerfully awaken the internal or central Spirits by Simile, which makes the
Drinkers quick, lively and brisk, during the time of their operation, which is
but for a Moment, but afterward they find themselves heavy, dull and
indisposed, their Stomach more feeble, cold and raw than before, which inclines
them to take the other Dram; and still, the more the worse, till Nature be
debilitated to the utmost Extremity. The same operation have all Wines and
other Drinks, if Temperance be wanting, but not so violently as the former;
therefore in all hot Climates there ought to be double the care and temperance,
as in cold, both in Meats, Drinks and Exercises; of which, the Natives of hot
Countries may be our Examples; for they do, for the most part live temperately,
their Drink Water, or Wine allayed with Water; their Food mean, or more simple
and innocent than ours, whereby they are better preserved in Health; the
Constitutions of all People in hot Climates being not so able to bear or endure
great Meals and superfluous Drinking of strong Liquors, as in cold. Therefore
most of those that in such places accustom themselves to the frequent use of
those strong spirituous fiery Drinks, and the common course of gormandizing on
Flesh and Fish, become very obnoxious to the Dry Belly-Ake, or Griping of the
Guts, Dropsies and the Gout. For all such Foods and Drinks too violently stir
up and consume the natural Heat and Moisture, whereby the digestive Faculty of
the Stomach is rendered incapable to concoct or make any perfect separation,
whereby the body grows oppressed with a Mass of Crudities and noxious Juices,
that sometimes fall into the Joints, infeebling and tormenting them; and this
is the original of that Rich Evil, called, The Gout. In other Complexions these
and the like Disorders prey upon the sollid parts, and waste the Flesh, taking
away natural strength and vigor; so that such Persons pine and languish under
such a load of daily ingested Aliment; for nothing is more usual in Nature,
than for Extremes to generate or occasion each other, and these you call
Consumptions. In others, for want of Heat and Moisture the Excrement in the
Bowels, is contracted into so hard a substance, that it cannot freely pass; and
this is that which the learned call, The Illiacal Passion, and the Vulgar, The
Plague in the Guts, for which most cruel Disease there is scarce a Doctor that
has yet found out a certain Remedy.

Now in these our Western Plantations all these tormenting Diseases are much
increased by the frequent Tippling of that pernicious Drink called Punch, the
Nature and effects of which I have herein before hinted, but more fully
demonstrated in my Treatise, entitled, The Country-Man's Companion, page 110.

In some other Constitutions the central Heat and Humor Radicalis being wasted
by such unfit Meats and Drinks so received, is turned into a flux of Humors,
both windy and watery, which swells the lower parts of the body; and this is
the generation of your Dropsies.

But as the Lord our bountiful Creator is always good, and his Handmaid
(Nature) an indulgent Mother; so they have, as it were, chalked out the means
of preventing these Evils, and prescribed proper Diet and Drinks in every
Country and Climate to its Inhabitants, by the natural Productions of each
respective Region, would men be so wise to follow those Dictates; for all hot
Climates, (as is before intimated) do furnish their Inhabitants with wonderful
variety and plenty of brave noble, and most fragrant Herbs, Fruits, Roots and
Grains, and most pure Water, far exceeding those of cold Countries, both in
Quantity and Quality; for in those hot Regions, Heaven's bright Lamp, that
central Fire of the Universe, the SUN, has greater power, strength and virtue
to fit and prepare all things for our use; and if our English, and others,
would be so prudent as to accustom themselves to those harmless natural simple
Food and moderate Drinks, then the forementioned Distempers would hardly be
known amongst them.

4. They ought likewise to have regard to the proper Times of their eating, or
Meals, that is to say, to eat about Eight or Nine a Clock in the Morning, and
then again at Four or Five 'ith Afternoon; for the common time of Dinner about
Twelve or One, is neither Rational nor Natural, because the Sun is then near
the Meridian, and does then so powerfully draw forth, exhale, and weaken the
Natural and Centeral heat of the Stomach, that it indisposes the whole Body,
more than at any other time of the day, so that then Nature is not so well able
to perform her Kitchin-work in the Stomach, by a perfect Concoction or
Separation of the Meats and Drinks, and so all the Senses are dulled, and the
Intellect stupefied, and not a few seeds of diseases are thereby sown
throughout the Body. Besides the long Mornings Work or Exercise, has by that
time pretty much wearied, dulled, or evaporated the brisk lively Spirits, which
are always the main supports of Concoction and Digestion, and so Nature is
still rendered the more incapable of doing her work with ease. But in the
Morning, after Nocturnal Repose has recovered the wasted Spirits, and made them
Brisk, Airy, and full of Life, the digestive faculty is fortified, and rendered
able to digest the same quantity of Food, with much more ease and safety. The
same is to be understood in the Afternoon, or toward Night, for then the heat
of the day being over, and the Body becomes Cool, Airy, and full of Life, and
being a sufficient time before sleep, as at Four or Five a Clock, such Suppers
will not Incommode Nature, nor hinder Rest, as late eating is apt to do,
especially in hot Countries, and still the more in maturer Age, or such as
begin to be stricken in years, to whom such Meals are most injurious.

5. Such as have due regard to their Health and Strength, ought for the reasons
aforesaid to Rest from Eleaven a Clock till Two in the Afternoon, which will
wonderfully recover their Spirits, and render them much better able to go
through with their Labor with a lively Vigor, and to do more (...)
preparation of each of them; together with the Nature and Operation of various
drinks, as most sorts of Wine, Ale, Beer, Syder, each spoken to distinctly by
themselves, etc.

8. They ought to avoid the frequent eating and drinking of all Foods or
Liquors in which the Sweet Quality is too highly predominant; for sweet Foods
are of far more dangerous consequence as to Health, than most People imagine;
for all Sweet things when fermented in the Stomach do turn to the highest
Sowerness, viz. into a keen sharpness, which does not only spoil the digestive
faculty, but infects the Blood with a Mangie, Scorbutic Humor, causing
stoppages in all the external parts, whence proceed Indispositions, and akeing
Loins, and feeble Joints. For the same cause it is, that such as eat much Sugar
or sweet food, are extremely troubled with rotten decayed Teeth and Gumes; for
those dullified foods cause such a sour acid Quality as generates putrefaction,
which centers on the Teeth and between the Gumes, and so destroys them: And it
were far better and more healthy for People, if they would accustom themseves
to Foods and Drinks in which the Bitter and Sower Qualities were more
predominant, especially in hot Climates where most sorts of Fruits are
sweetish, for the Root of all Motion, Opening and Cleansing, consists in the
Bitter Quality; for which reason the Sophys or Wisemen, both of the Southern
and Eastern Countries have taught the People to moderate all or most of their
foods with Herbs and Fruits that are of a Bitterish Quality, which does
wonderfully support Nature and preserve Health, whereby they attain to very
great Ages, as we noted before of those in Guinea, and the same may be observed
elsewhere; for those Patriarchs whose Longevity we find Recorded, did all of
them live in very hot Countries: But their Temperance supported Nature, and so
it will (in a proportionable degree) all that practice it. And therefore if
these Rules of Health be seriously regarded and followed, those causeless
scandals on the Climate, the Heat, etc. of these happy Western, Southern and
Eastern Regions (not inferior for Health or Pleasantness (if rightly
understood) to any in the World) will cease, and the English Traders or
Inhabitants may there extend their lives in Comfort to as good an old Age, as
they would have promised themselves in their Native Country: But without
Discretion and Temperance in Diet, Drinks, Exercises and Affections of the
mind, Diseases will certainly attend us, wherever we reside; and an immature
Death be apt to seize us: There is no Region so happy, no Elevation of the Pole
so temperate, no Air so salubrious, as to keep People in Health whether they
will or no, and those that obstinately violate Nature, and wilfully pursue
courses absolutely destructive, may justly be rank't amongst the number of
Self-Murtherers; for it matters not much whether a man kill himself all at
once, or by repeated Acts and degrees, only the latter seems less excuseable,
since it has not the pretext of a sudden Temptation or Passion, but seems a
more deliberate design of destroying both his Body and Soul, against all
Cautions and Arguments from time to time offered to him, both by Reason and
Experience to the contrary: Those therefore that would avoid the Brand of being
Felo's-de-se, let them before it be too late abandon Riot and Excess, and
embrace Temperance and Sobriety, so shall they have Health of Body and Strength
of mind, and length of days here, and a blissful Eternity hereafter.

A Caution.
LEt no sober well minded men, nor any that profess the honorable name of
Christianity be so frequent in those places of Debauchery, viz, Taverns and
Alehouses, the first whereof being the only places of all manner of
wickedness, where all the high lofty state of Superfluity is practiced, being
the haunts of evil Spirits, and where their chief work is done, Women are
defloured, and Estates spent, the Soul made incapable of Salvation, the Health
destroyed; in a word, the whole Macrocosmical man ruined, and is ^he very Radix
of devilish Fewds and cruel Murders: Therefore let no good Christians dare to
be seen in any such places; for tell me, I pray, what pleasure or delight can a
sober well-minded man take in being amongst such a devilish Crowd, where there
is all kinds of wicked lewd Behavior, as Swearing, Lying, baudy Songs, drunken
Healths, and roaring Huzza's, where a man can hardly hear himself spoke, like
the fiery unequal operations of the Elements, or Sea-Tempests and Storms. Now
if Christian men scruple the wearing of needless O naments and Garments, with
other things of Gallantry and State, wherefore should they not shun and avoid
the greater Evils: And although it be lawful to drink Wine in a Tavern, and Ale
in an Alehouse, in cases of necessity, as Traveling or the like, ye^ they
ought in Cities and Towns to avoid drinking or frequenting such places, whereby
you will discountenance the Evils thereof, and preserve your selves Harmless
and Innocent.

2. All sober People ought to refrain drinking between Meals, especially all
Gentlemen, Merchants, Shopkeepers, etc. who are the men that drink the brave
noble exhilerating Liquors in Superfluity; which a little custom would make
most pleasant and easy; besides, it would free the Passages, and disburthen
the Stomach from all superfluous matter, by which the Blood would become fine,
and cause it to circulate freely, whence will proceed pure brisk lively
Spirits, which will also render the whole Body and Mind lightsom, Strong and
Healthy; besides it would cut off all Superfluity and Wantonness in the bud,
and gain time, which being well improved becomes a great Blessing.

3. Not only abstaining from Wine ought to be minded but also in Foods, great
care must be observed; for those People that live mostly upon clean innocent
Foods, are brisker, more lightsom and Airy, and their minds better disposed,
and there does naturally arise in them Praises and Thanks to God for what they
have, be it never so mean, As I remember one assured me, that after a little
time of living on mean Foods, was more apt to give praise in his Heart to God,
for a piece of Bread, than before for the highest delicacies.

4. Whenever any Persons of Quality, or men of Estates shall in private
Quarrels commit Murder, or kill a man; if the Friends of this Murderer shall
obtain a Pardon from the Prince or Governor of the place or Country, then let
it be a custom for his whole Estate (if Childless) to be forfeited and given to
the Poor, and a good part of it to the use and Children of the killed Person;
but if the Murderer have Children, then but one half of his Estate. By which
means in a few years there would be yearly Revenues for the Poor, Old, Blind
and Lame of most Countries and Cities; besides, it would in some degree put a
stop to such vile Practices, and render such Savages incapable of committing
the like offense for the future.

The End of the First Part.
THE Negro's Complaint OF THEIR Hard Servitude, AND THE CRUELTIES Practiced
upon them By diverse of their M^sters professing Christianity in the West-Indian
Plantations. The Second Part.
COmplaints and Lamentations are the natural Language of the Miserable. It Is
some kind of Easement to Hearts swelled with Grief, and almost broken with the
Rigors of Oppression, to tell the sad Stories of their Woes, and when they have
lost all other Liberty, to bemoan themselves with Freedom: More especially,
since Nature does not so readily furnish us with Tears, (the usual Expressions
of Sorrow) we hope we may be allowed to make our Groans articulate, and declare
in words how intollerably we suffer by the deeds of unreasonable men.

But alas! what Language is suitable for such a purpose? What Expressions will
be able to equal our Afflictions? Or to whom shall we address our mournful
Appeals? If to our Countrymen, the Inhabitants of those Lands where we first
sucked in vital Air, and unhappily saluted the Light, they are too remote to
hear us, as well as unable to help us; nay more, many of us owe the original of
all our Miseries to some of their unnatural Cruelty, Revenge or Avarice: Shall
we present our dolesom Narratives to Strangers? They will scarce be able to
credit us when we set forth nothing but certain Truths and woeful Experiences;
such superlative Inhumanity amongst Nominal Christians will surpass all Belief,
and the Extremity of our Calamities making them seem Romantic, debarrs us even
of Pity and Commiseration, those general Slaves of helpless Misery: Shall we
then fling our selves at our Masters feet, and with universal Cries importune
them to Compassion and Charity? Alas! those Virtues are Plants that scarce grow
in these Islands; nothing thrives here so fast as po^sonous Tobacco and furious
Pride, sweet Sugar and most bitter ill Nature: A false conceit of Interest has
blinded their Eyes and stopped their Ears, and rendered their Hearts harder than
Rocks of Adam^nt, more Remorseless than hungry Bears or Tigers in the Hercanian
Wilderness: To Sigh they interpret to Rebel, and if we do in the least
complain, it is with them a sufficient cause for addition of Stripes, and
increase of ill Usage.

Beset thus with thick-coming Sorrows, and without Prospect of Help or Relief
from men, to whom can we apply our selves, but to the Fountain of Mercy and
Goodness, from whom we and all other Creatures derive their being?

To thee therefore, O thou Eternal and Infinite unknown Parent of Angels and
Men! who numberest the Sands of the Shore, and did pour forth the Ocean-Sea,
who formedst the glorious Sun, and endued all the Stars with their Luster, in
comparison of whom Princes are Vanity, and Kings but animated Shadows, who art
gracious in thy Goodness to the Poor and Oppressed, and whose Vengeance shall
be terrible to the Proud and the Cruel. To thee, the only Refuge of the
Distressed, we direct our Complaints! By thy holly Power, Heaven and Earth, and
all things therein, were made, and by the same preserved and sustained! Thou
have formed Man in thy own Likeness, and given him dominion and government, not
only over the inferior Creatures, but also over each other, in Clemency and
Well-doing; but instead thereof he has turned away the Eye of his Mind from
thy Counsels, and has precipitated his Imagination into the Center of Wrath
and Fierceness, thereby defaming his Noble Birth, and depraving that innocent
Paradisical Estate he was created in: So that whereas he was made a sociable
Creature and intended for the well-ordering of the inferior Beings, and the
help and comfort of those of his own Species by mutural Acts of Benovelence,
Courtesy and Charity; he is now become a Tyrant, a Plague, a professed Enemy,
Hunter, Betrayer, Destroyer and Devourer of all the Inhabitants of Earth, Air
and Water, and to those of his own kind no less fierce and cruel; so instead of
cherishing, assisting, and relieving one another, they fight and tear each
other like Tigers, and he is the bravest Fellow that can invent the most
mischievous Weapons and Engines of Destruction: The stronger and more subtle
murder, enslave and oppress the weaker, and more innocent and simple sort at
their pleasure, and pretend they have a Right, because they have got Power so
to do. Nor is this only amongst us, and those People called Heathens, but even
those who call themselves by thy Name, and boast the Title of Christians, are
no less active in these Exploits and Practices than any other.

We find and feel by sad Experience the fatal consequences of this Apostasy
from the Dignity of the humane Nature: We had never been snatched from the Lands
of our Nativity* never traversed Liquid Mountains, nor journied through the
Hazards of vast Seas, to be cast away on Land; never been brought in Fetters
into new Worlds, nor made perpetual Slaves in Regions which neither we nor our
Forefathers ever heard of before, if we had not first forsaken and violated
that Law of our Creator which he had planted in us, and entered with our Wills
into the Root of Bitterness and the fierce Wrath, whereby the Savage Nature got
the dominion in the hearts of us, and our Ancestors, so that Fury, Revenge,
Covetousness, Pride, vain Glory and Intemperance is never satisfied; Hence
Fewds and Wars are set on foot in our Native Countries, and those that are
strongest and most numerous, kill, slay and murder the other at their pleasure;
and as for those that they save alive, it is not out of pity or kindness, but to
gratify their own Covetousness, by making Merchandise of them, and exposing
them to Slavery, far worse than Death.

For then we are hurried from our nearest and dearest Relations, the kind
Husband from his loving Wife, the tender Mother from her helpless Babes, and
Youths (the comfort and joy of Age) snatched from their mourning Parents, and
that without any hopes of ever seeing one another again. Thus are we sometimes
driven many Miles by Land over partching Deserts, and through howling
Wildernesses, down to the Seacoasts, and and Factories being all the way
miserably abused by our unmerciful Drivers, and wearied and spent with
Over-Travel, Hunger, Drought and excessive Heat* which puts a period to many of
our sweet Lives; but the same, when it happens, is reckoned an happiness; for
thereby that greater and long lasting Misery is prevented, which those that
survive must endure; for no sooner are they arrived at the Seaside but they
are sold (like Beasts) to the Merchant, who glad of the booty puts us aboard
the Ship, claps us under Deck, and binds us in Chains and Fetters, and thrusts
us into the dark noisome Hold, so many and so close together, that we can hardly
breathe, there are we in the hottest of Summer, and under that scorching
Climate without any of the sweet Influences of the Air, or briezing Gale to
refresh us, suffocated, stewed and parboyled altogether in a Crowd, till we
almost rot each other and our selves.

Nay, many times not only our professed Enemies, but our Treacherous Friends
betray us to these intolerable Miseries; for so far is the Root of bitterness
irritated, and such an Ascendent it has got over us, that for vain trifles our
paltry Parents, shall sell their Children, and Husbands their Wives into
perpetual Slavery; Nor let any Christian Tyrants for this upbraid us; for if it
be (as in truth it is) a most unnatural wickedness in our People to sell them,
is it not upon the matter almost as bad in the Christians to buy them? Nay,
rather is not the chiefest Crime in them, since they are the Tempters and
Occasioners of it? for they allure our people to it, by offering them several
sorts of Goods which they find they have most mind to? And is not this a fine
employment think you, for Christians, to run to remotest Regions, to get their
innocent Fellow Creatures and make Slaves of them?

Whilst we are thus mewed up in the Ship, besides the inconveniences of heat,
and danger of suffocation, and the Torture of our Chains, we also run the
hazard of being half starved; for the Ship-Masters out of Covetousness, and for
their own Lucre, will not allow us fit or competent Meats or Drinks, but just
enough to keep Life and Soul together, and that corrupt, decayed stinking and
unwholesome, by which all our Healths and Lives are destroyed or impaired; for
often times half or more of our wretched Number dye in the Voyage, and others of
us, of more sturdy Spirits and Tempers, when they see themselves thus Captived,
scorning to preserve a Life that thenceforth would be only advantageous to
others, and burdensome to them, by refusing all Sustenance, have shortened
their days.

As for the rest we are so generally wounded in our Healths by the ill ^sage we
receive on Shipboard, that we seldom recover our strength, and when we come on
Shore we find no ^etter fare nor Treatment from our ^ew Christian Masters, most
of them proving as sharp and Tyrannical as our ^wn Heathen Fathers and Brethren
(as ^hey call them) for when we by the Ship-Master and Seamen have suffered so
many violent Miseries and sore Op^ressions, that we are thereby as poor, weak
and feeble as Death, so that we ^an hardly either stand or go, which ^endring
us not capable to answer ^he Covetous ends of our new Masters, our Afflictions
are thereby doubled; for when our strength fails us, the inconsiderate and
unmerciful Overseers make nothing to Whip and Beat us, and the best words they
can afford us, ^re, Damned Dogs, Black ugly Devils, ^dle Sons of Ethiopean
Whores, and the ^ike.

Alas! we expected another sort of Treatment from the Christians, who boast
themselves the Sons and Favorites of the God of Love and Goodness, and who (we
have been informed) are, or ought to be endued with the Spirit of Meekness,
Innocence, and doin unto all as they would be done unto. We understand that to
be a Christian is to live under the Government of the Divine Principle of
Benignity and Well-doing, from whence all good Virtues are derived, as streams
from a Fountain: But verily we find little, very little, or scarce any sign at
all of this excellent Spirit to reign in the hearts of our Masters or
Overseers; but on the contrary, find them overruled and filled with
Devilishness, Cruelty and Oppression, which are so extreme that we can as
hardly bear them, as the Israelites of Old could the grievous and unreasonable
Burdens of Egyptian, Pharaoh, and his Taskmasters, which did force them to
cry unto the Lord for ease and deliverance from those cruel Bonds and
Slaveries, even as we do at this day.

To enumerate the miseries we endure by a particular Bill of (...), would be
too tedious, we shall Instance in some few of the most Insufferances, that all
knowing Power, to whom our Cries are directed, knows all the several
aggravations of them, and the Consciences of our Masters, cannot but witness to
the Truth and Justice of our Complaints.

1. Though we acknowledge man is born to Labor, and had not hands only given
him to put Victuals into his Mouth, but first to use them in tilling the Earth,
and getting Food and all other things requisite for humane Life, yet certainly
the merciful God never intended that any of his Creatures should be forced to
Labor beyond their natural strength, nor have burdens imposed on their weary
Shoulders, greater than they are able to bear: Labor was undoubtedly enjoined
as an exercise to preserve Health and Strength, and prevent Sloth and Idleness,
not as a perpetual Plague to destroy Nature, and make Life a Torment, and Death
a Courtesy; yet our Flint-hearted Tyrants, not content with diligent Industry
and pains, force us to unreasonable Labors, both for toil and continuance,
beyond the power of Nature; and whereas a good man is merciful even to his
Beast, they extend no Compassion to us, who are of the same Species with
themselves, but slave us on in continual drudgery, till our Heart Strings
crack, and our Nerves are enfeebled, and our Marrow is exhausted, and our Bones
fall under their Burdens, and our Spirits are consumed, and our Souls in
Weariness and Anguish; wish for Death rather than Life.

The end of all Natures Motions is Rest, nor can she perform any of her
Operations without Refreshment; Ground always plowed yields little increase,
but must lie fallow now and then, if you expect a Crop: A Bo^ always bent will
hardly send an Arrow to the Mark, but our inconsiderate Masters regard neither
the voice of Nature nor Reason, but with Cruelty compel us to Labor beyond our
strength, and allow us no competent time of Rest or Refreshment, in so much
that oftentimes we are forced to work so long at the Wind-Mills, until we
become so Weary, Dull, Faint, Heavy and Sleepy, that we are as it were deprived
of our natural Senses, or like men in a maze, that we fall into danger, and often
times our Hands and Arms are crushed to pieces, and sometimes most part of our
Bodies; and though sometimes these evils do befall us through Carelessness, yet
often times they come by the means aforesaid.

So also we are forced to stand and work at the Coppers, in the hot sulpherous
Fumes, till Nature being overcome with weariness and want of proper Rest we
fall into the fierce boiling Syrups, and in these disasters little or no pity
is taken of us, for though some indeed profess a superfinal sorrow for our
mischances, it is chiefly for their own sakes, not ours, because thereby they
have lost the worth of so much Money as we were reckoned at, not for the loss
of our Lives, which yet to us are as precious, and of as much value as those of
our proud and haughty Masters; and so also they are in Thy sight, O our
gracious Creator! for we likewise are the work of Thine hands, and endued with
equal Faculties, both Sensitive and Intellectual.

As in the excess of Labor, so also (...) the hours of working, our Christian
and European Masters do commit great Errors, compelling us to work ^ll day in
the scorching heat, till our Spirits are thereby exhaled, and our Radical
Moisture dried up, which is the fountain of Life; they seldom conside^ing the
nature of hot Climates, wherein no Mortal can endure so many hours severe
Labor as in colder Regions. For, 1 st. The Constitutions of men in hot
Climates, are naturally weaker than in cold: 2 dly. They come to Maturity in
fewer years: 3 dly. The continual Heat of the scorching Sun opens the Pores,
and at those innumerable Sally-ports powerfully draws out and steals away the
sweet Oil and Radical Balsom of Nature, which causes a dull faintiness and
wearisom Indisposition to attend the whole Body with great Drought, which
proves very injurious to Health and Strength: 4 thly. All sorts of Foods are
here of a weaker or more unfirm Nature than those of cold; and as they sooner
arrive to Maturity, so consequently they sooner perish and corrupt.

For all which reason, it is unreasonable to expect men should constantly and
without due intermission undergo such Labor and Travel in torrid Climates, as
in those more temperate and refrigerating. Do not hot Countries presently set
open all the Gates and secret Passages of Nature, even to the very Center?
which weakens and evaporates the pure subtle or volatile Spirits, whence
follows excessive Sweating, Drought and Faintiness; whereas on the contrary,
cold Climates shutting up the external Passages, drives the natural heat
inward, and makes it more central, which occasions strong natural Heats and
Stomachs, able to digest the firmest Foods, and in great Quanties, whence
Persons there become strong, hardy and healthy; likewise most sorts of Food in
cold Countries is of a firmer, stronger Nature, and generates a more vigorous
Nourishment, and firmer Flesh and Fat, and their Fruits will generally keep
longer good: Nor did the All-wise Jehovah intend or require men to work and
labor so strenuously much and long in hot Climates, having in his natural
Providence made no such occasion for it, because there is there no Winter, nor
sharp saturnal Airs to cut off and destroy what the Summer brings forth, but
Nature here is always pregnant and teeming, and displays her self in all
Seasons of the year, with pleasant and fragrant Fruits, and prepares them to an
higher degree, and fitter for present Food, though not so firm and lasting.
Besides, People in hot Regions have not need of so many things, there is no
occasion for their Houses being so close nor furnished with so many
Circumstances of Beds and Bedding, continual Fires, and the like Provisional
Accommodations to be laid up beforehand, either for Man or Beast; as also half
the Clothing will furnish Nature; and the same is to be understood of Foods;
for all things necessary to the Maintenance of Life are far easier, and with
half the Labor procured in hot Countries. But these things our Masters never
lay to heart, but lay burden upon burden, till we utterly sink under the
weight of their Oppressions; though many of them cannot but be sensible, that
they themselves, though they do little or nothing but eat and drink of the
choicest Meats and Drinks, and sleep their fill without disturbance, yet they
are here nothing so strong or able to endure Labor and robust Exercises, as
they have been and would be in cold Countries; which Reflection, if they had
any Bowels of humane Sympathy and Compassion, should incline them to moderate
our Servitude, and grant some Allowances of respit and Refreshment unto us,
such as might enable us both more cheerfully and effectually to serve them.

It is a custom amongst many of the great Dons of Masters, to allow their
Servants little more than only a small piece of Ground to raise their whole
Food and Sustenance from; and though this be hard, yet that which renders it
worse, is, that they will not allow us any sufficient time to manure it, but we
must abate it out of that little time which is permitted us to rest in,
otherwise, it must be done upon their Sabbath day, whereon we are allowed to
rest from our ordinary Labors for our Masters; but if then we must work as
hard to manure our small pittance of Ground, or else starve, I do not find what
great advantage we have of that day more than another.

It is also an order or custom in some Plantations, where the Christians
inhabit, to allow their Negroes two hours Rest at Noon, viz. from eleaven of
the Clock till one, which is a wise and righteous Law* but few there are that
will admit us above half that time, but hurry us again to work, which proves
very injurious to our Healths; for then the Sun (which is the central heat of
the Universe) draws near the Meridean, which does powerfully open the Pores,
especially of those that labor hard in the scorching beams thereof, and
exhales the Radical Moisture, which weakens and indisposes the whole body and
mind, and renders us unfit for the After noons work; for he that shall rest
from eleaven till woe, which is three hours, shall thereby be rendered so lively,
lightsom and brisk, that he shall be able to perform more labor than another
man of the same natural strength, that is kept to it all day long, or allowed
but one hours rest only, and with much less prejudice to Nature.

This is a thing worthy to be considered by our Masters; for it would add much
to their Profit and our Health, which is also their Wealth; for pray tell us, O
you brave and swaggering Christians! who exercise this strange and severe
Mastership over us, who sport your selves in all manner of superfluity and
wantonness, and grow fat with our Blood and Sweat, gormandizing with the fruits
procured by our Slavery and sore Labor; set by your Rum-Pots, your
Punch-Bowls, your Brandy-Bottles, and the rest of your Intoxicating
Enchantments for a while, and stand still a little, and suffer the cool of the
day to overshadow you, and the long obstructed Fountain of Reason in your
Hearts to send forth its streams, and then you will be able to tell us what
heart or life, strength or courage any man can have that goes to his sleep
late, with half his Belly-full, and it may too what he did get, was but of
little Nourishment, and that unfirm, and then to be called out again as soon as
it is light, and work hard till a eleaven or twelve a Clock, and to have neither
Mistrisses nor Maids to provide you any Breakfast, and at Noon to have but one
Hours rest, and a poor sorry Dinner, nothing but a few Potato's or Yams, and
these without either Butter or Bread, and as soon as you have got a few of
these into your Belly, to be hurried again to work in the scorching Heat, until
it be dark: Tell us, I entreat you, what Liveliness or Briskness would you have
if you were under such Circumstances, not for a day or two, but from Week to
Week, and Month to Month, and Year to Year? Or would you be willing to be
thus treated and dealt with, if you were in our condition? No, no, I am certain
you would count it hard, very hard measure, and complain loudly of Cruelty and
Oppression; and will you, can you be offended and angry with us for doing no
more than what you cannot but acknowledge you would do your selves?

It may be you will say, That Potato's, Yams, and the like, are a brave
nourishing Food; And indeed so they are, yet give me leave to tell you, that
they afford but a weak unfirm fading Nourishment, in comparison of many other
things that are to be eaten alone, especially to People that have nothing else,
and continually work hard: And for you that so cry up the Excellency of these
things, which of you all would be contented to live with such Food only for one
quarter of a Year, and sometimes to want that too, as you know we often do?
I Will warrant you would then think it miserable fare, and be ready to Swear you
should be starved, and yet you might much better support your selves therewith
then we, because you live easy, or rather idle ^ives in comparison of us; for
you ^ie on Beds, and as long as best plea^eth your selves, and scarce do an
Hours work in a Month; and if you got but to your next Neighbors ^o smoke and
drink, you must have in Horse to carry you, and a Slave to attend you; and
during all the hot time of the day, you take your Rest, or keep out of the
torrid Beams of the Sun; and if you with all these Advantages cannot live on
bare Yams and Potatoes, how do you think we can go through with our continual
hard Labor, with no other Provisions?

The truth is, our Slavery, hard Usage and Burdens are greater than we can
bear; and yet if we complain, our Remedy is like your going to Doctors, when a
man is sick, or wants his Health, viz. worse than the Disease; How often are we
compelled to carry heavy Burdens five, six, seven, eight, nine or ten Miles,
viz. an hundred Weight, or more, with one to follow as with a Whip and a Spur,
until our very Hearts ache, and our Limbs fail to bear us, and when we come to
our Journeys end, there is no Breakfast, no Mornings-Draughts, no Refreshment
provided for us, but only Water, where we can find it, so that we are forced to
pilfer Sugar, Malassus, Poultrey, Corn, or any thing of that kind, and sell it
to buy a little sorry stinking rotten Fish, or Flesh, to give our Herbs and
Roots an Hogo or Taste; And then we have so many Miles to travel back, and
there no Rest, but presently to work again till Night, and when we have thus
moil'd and toil d al^ day long worse then Horses, our Accommodation is worse
than theirs too, for we have no Meat, no Provinder provided (...) but have our
Suppers not only to dress and cook, but to get, which often times we hazard our
Lives to procure.

For our Masters and Governors make strict Ordinances, That it shall be lawful
for any that take us a stealing Hens, or any other Fowls or Provisions, not
only to beat and whip us at their pleasure, but also to kill us, and yet at the
same time some of these godly Lawmakers will force us, that is, put us upon an
unavoidable Necessity, to steal Provisions from our Neighbors, by not allowing
us any thing near sufficient Quantities of Sustenance, to support and relieve
the Necessities of Nature, or answer the continual expense and waste of Spirits
by such grievous Labors as they compel us to undergo. And yet though they make
such severe Laws against us, it seems they themselves do not account Stealing
in it self any Evil, for besides their daily practice of overreaching one
another in Bargains, which is but a civil way of Stealing, we remember that not
very long since, six or seven of our Countrymen, who were Slaves to a great
man, were taken stealing of Provisions from one of his Neighbors; he that took
them did not use the rigor of the Law, that is to kill them upon the place,
but very Neighbourly brings them to their Master, and complains, who ordered
the Overseer to whip them soundly; which being executed accordingly, the Master
commanded them to be brought before him, and there complemented them in this
manner; You Rogues! I beat and whip you not so much for Stealing, as for that
you suffered your selves to be caught. Is not this rare Christian Equity, to
beat us unmercifully for that which they themselves do but Laugh at, and make a
Jest of? Does this savor of the true Christian Spirit? Nay, certainly, but of
the depraved Hellish Nature. This more than savage Cruelty and Oppression,
proceeds without any Compassion to Age or Sex, for they have no regard to the
Weaknesses, Diseases or Infirmities of our Women, nor of our dear and tender
Infants, they make our Wives, during the time of their Pregnancy, work equally
with the rest, even until the very day of their delivery, or Birth of their
Children, which we can scarce call their Lying-in, for, alas! they have no
monthly Nurses, nor groaning Cheese, none of the Comforts of Ale, or Wine, or
Caudles, or rich refreshing Suppings, but must be content with a few dry
Potatoes, and a Caudle made with stinking Mackarel, or Broths of unwholsom
putrified Flesh, and glad if they can get it; for in truth they allow them
little or nothing more than at other times, and but two or three days Rest;
and then they must out again into the Field with their young and tender Babes,
and leave them sprauling on the Ground, which is their only Nurse and Cradle;
nor can they expect any Rocking, unless God to punish our Masters Inhumanity,
should send an Earthquake; Nay, when they cry for want of the presence and
tendence of their Mothers, and for lack of Sustenance, our rough and churlish
Overseers will hardly allow time to give them Suck.

If our Women be disordered by the natural Infirmities attending their Sex, or
by the frowardness and crying of their Children, which have broken their and
our short Hours of Sleep; No body comes and asks, Forsooth! how have you rested
to Night? Nor cries, Pray keep no Noise, she has not slept well to Night; No,
no, let the case be how it will, as soon as the Gray-ey'd Morning draws the
Curtains of the Day, and the Light begins to peep from behind the Mountains of
the East, the blustering Overseer blows his Horn, or Sheal, and then presently
all Excuses set apart, we and our Wives must turn out with our tender Children,
whether we or they be well or sick, disposed or indisposed, it matters not, to
Work we must go, under the Whip and the Spur, and the Sun's scorching Beams all
the day long, and none comes and desires them to eat a bit and drink before
they go out, to prevent the Wind; but on the contrary, if our Wives never so
truly plead their Inability to labor thus, they find no Ears open to hear them
with pity, but severe Hands and lusty Whips ready to lay on cruel Stripes upon
their tender and fainting Backs, and so they are forced to carry their Children
with them into the Work-field, and suckle them there, when they can get an
opportunity all day, and so lug them home again at Night, and have no
refreshing Drinks, nor proper Foods to supply them with dry or moist
Nourishment. These things, though our hard hearted Masters regard not, yet
methinks, our Mistrisses, if not out of Christianity or good Nature, yet out of
respect to Woman-hood, and their own Sex, and by a Compassion raised from their
own experience of the diffiulties of Childbearing, might be induced to prevail
with their Husbands to be more tender in such cases, but so far are even these
counted of the softer Sex, from any such ^ommiseration, that where they alone
have the sole command, as when they are left Widows, or the like, many of them
are more fierce, dogged, pinching, oppressing and severe than the men
themselves.

But we are not only with unreasonable Beating, made to labor beyond our
strength and abilities of Nature, but many of our Masters will not allow us
Food that is sufficient, either in quantity or quality, to support and maintain
Health, Strength and Vigor; so that being pined with want as well as worn out
with excessive Drudgery, we often times perish, or at least become poor, lean,
feeble, and hardly able to go. For as when they do allow us Ground to plant for
our Nourishment, the same is so little, as not to be half sufficient for that
purpose, and so much the worse, because they afford us no time to Till and
Improve it; So when they pretend to buy us any Food, more than our
Plantation-Provisions, viz. either Fish or Flesh, they will go to all the
Merchants in the Town, and diligently inquire out, and buy the worst they can
lay their Hands on, viz. stinking decayed Flesh and rotten Fish, and cry, It is
good enough for Negro's, they care not how bad it is, so they can buy it cheap;
Some of them indeed are so free that they will allow us one salt Mackarel or
two a Week, but others will afford us none, which lays us under a necessity
either to Starve or Steal; for we are reduced to such Extremity, that if a
Horse dye, and is buried several days, if some of our People come to know it,
they will dig up the putrified stinking Carrion, and make good Cheer of it;
others will eat all the Cats, Dogs, Rats and Mice they can lay their Hands on;
So that through Necessity, and the depravedness of our Minds, with evil
Customs, we are immersed into all the Beastiality and Uncleanness, which the
Christians have never endeavored to regulate, or prevent, but rather the
contrary.

By these, and variety of other the like Miseries and Oppressions, many of us
have been brought to despair, and choose a miserable sinful Death, rather than
such a wretched Life, whence some have Hanged, others Drowned themselves, some
cut their own Throats, and procured to themselves the like violent Deaths; but
our Blood is of no value in the sight of our Masters, which yet we doubt not
but will cry unto thee. O thou most just Creator and Governor of men! for
Revenge upon those that have been the prime occasions of all these Evils.

For these hard Usages and Cruelties do terribly awaken the central Wrath and
sleeping Poisons of the Original Nature, by which means and provocations we
become sullen, dogged, malicious, envious, angry and revengeful, all which
devilish Dispositions are occasioned, or much increased in us by the harsh
Tyranny of our Masters; Hence many times we neglect our Labor, run away, spoil
our Business, and in the anguish of our souls continually curse our Masters and
their Posterity; And thence on the other side, our Masters take occasion to
redouble their Cruel Usages toward us, and be-labour themselves to Beat and
Whip us, and hang us up by the Hands, Feet, and the like, and so Bastinado us
till our Bodies become like a piece of raw Flesh, and we are just ready to give
up the Ghost: For though we are, O Great Creator! the Work of thy Hands, and
were made in thine Image, and endued with rational and immortal Souls, yet we
are nothing more in many of our Masters esteem, than their Money, and if some
of them could find out a way to torment and plague us ten fold more, they would
do it, provided we might still be but able to perform our Drudgery, to maintain
them in Superfluity and Gluttony.

For our precious Lives are reckoned no more than those of so many Dogs, though
they cannot gratify their Pallates and Paunches, nor maintain themselves in
their Luxuries, and sinful Vanities, but merely by our Labors, yet on any
irregular Passion or devilish Humor, some of them will sacrifice our Lives to
their Fury, and neither count it Murder, nor any Sin, neither did we ever hear
that their Law in such Cases made Inquisition for Blood, or punished those that
committed such Murders, otherwise than by a Fine, or ordering them to pay so
much Sugar for the business; as if there were any Equality, Proportion or
Adequateness between such a Crying Crime, and such a triffling Punishment. Do
not your Plantations which have drank up our innocent and unrevenged Blood, cry
unto the Lord, the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, for Justice and
Retaliation? For diverse of our Countrymen have been Butchered this way, and
little more notice taken of it than if we were Fleas or Gnats, or Wolves or
Bears.

Nay, some of us have been Burnt for running away (and yet we were therein
justified by the Law of Nature, for who would not escape, if he could, out of
Slavery?) and this too, although their Mistrisses and Masters might have sold
them, to be transported elsewhere; but their Envy, Passion and Revenge was so
great, that they preferred it before their Gain; one Widow Woman above all the
rest, (as we have heard) burned her Negro for running away, and saying, that,
Wherever he met her, he would Kill her: So when she caught him, she was
Judge, Jury, Executioner, and all, though at the same time she might have sold
him to be Transported to Mevis.

Here was (as doubtless it is true) Revenge in the highest degree! If she had
only threatened him, as he threatened her, she had been even with him, but
nothing would satisfy her Malice but to Roast him. O thou most just and
eternal Lawgiver, and Perswader of all Creatures! Do these things taste or
favor of Christianity? Have they any such Examples left them by thy Primitive
Servants? Or did thy eternal Son, the Savior of the World, preach any such
Doctrine, or set any such Example in his meek and holy Pilgrimage on Earth? If
not, by what Authority, or by what Dispensation against his divine Law do you
practice these things? Is it not from the power of the Serpent and the Dragon,
viz. the devilish fierce wrathful hellish Nature? Undoubtedly if they Repent
not of these their cruel Crimes, though they call themselves Christians never
so much; the Christ of God will say unto them, Depart from me, I know you not,
ye bloody Workers of Iniquity.

By what right, or on what pretensions is it, O you nominal Christians! that
you take upon you to make us your Slaves, to over-labour, half starve, beat,
abuse and kill us at your pleasure? Is it because we are not of your Religion
and Belief? Has God any where given a Commission to those that profess
Christianity, that they may, when they list, fall upon any Persons, whom they
call Heathens, and dispossess them of their Lands, or lead them away Captive,
and make Merchandise of them, and use them in all respects as Beasts, or rather
much worse? This was not sure the way by which Paul and Peter, and the other
good men of Old, (whom we often hear you speak of and practice) did convert our
Heathen Ancestors to your Faith: We have heard some of our Christian Masters
say, That Christ, (whom you pretend to follow as your Prophet, Lord and King)
is Son of the Eternal and most Merciful God, his Right Hand, and his eternal
Love, in which he reconciles himself unto mankind, even all those that shall
live in this Love-Principle, from which proceeds nothing, either of Wrath,
Anger, Violence, Malice or Oppression, but altogether the contrary, as
Patience, Courtesy, Good Will, Compassion, Charity, and the like, to all the
World: This, if we mistake not, is the true Christian Doctrine, which most of
you do acknowledge in Words. But how does this consist or agree with the
Violence, Injustice and Oppressions which you exercise upon us? Or is your
Religion one thing in profession, and another in practice? This we are sure of,
though, your Tongues may be Christian, your Hands are Heathen; nay, most times
your very Language is contrary to your beforementioned Pretensions, for how
else comes it to pass that you Rant, and Rave, and Swear, and Curse, and call
devilish Names so fast upon the least thing, wherein we displease your Humors.

But perhaps you will say, That not by virtue of your Religion, but by some
super-excellent or higher Dignity of Nature above us, you claim a Right to make
us your Slaves and Vassals. But pray, have you this Prerogative from your
Descent or Pedigree? Or from some different Fabric of your Bodies? Or from
your extraordinary Endowments of Mind? As for the first, do not the Oracles of
your Religion oblige you to believe, that the great God created the Man whom
you call Adam, and that from him came all the People that ever since were, or
are in the World? And if so, are we not of as good Parentage, as ancient a
Family, as noble a Descent as the best of you? Ought you not then to love us as
your Brethren, descended from the same common Father? or at least respect us as
your Kinsmen, and of the same Lineage.

Are not our Bodies of as proportionable a Frame, and as well furnished with
useful Limbs? Are not all our Senses as good and quick as yours? Nay, are we
not naturally obnoxious to fewer Diseases than you, though now indeed by your
harsh usage our Days are often shortened, and our Health impaired; but this is
not the fault of our Constitutions, but of your Severities, which bring upon us
those Weaknesses and Disorders, which we were never before acquainted with* For
any Exercises of Running, Leaping, Swimming, and the like, which of you can
equal us? As for the blackness of our Skins, we find no reason to be ashamed of
it, it is the Livery which our great Lord and Maker has thought fit we should
wear; Do not you amongst Furs, prize pure Sables as much as Ermins? Is Iett or
Ebony despised for its Color? Can we help it, if the Sun by too close and
fervent Kisses, and the nature of the Climate and Soil where we were Born, has
tinctured us with a dark Complexion? Have not you variety of Complexions
amongst your selves; some very White and Fair, others Brown, many Swarthy, and
several Cole-black? And would it be reasonable that each sort of these should
quarrel with the other, and a man be made a Slave forever, merely because his
Beard is Red, or his Eyebrows Black? In a word, if our Hue be the only
difference, since White is as contrary to Black, as Black is to White, there is
as much reason that you should be our Slaves, as we yours.

Lastly, as to our Souls, you dare not deny but they are Immortal as well as
yours, consequently capable of as much Bliss and Happiness, being as well as
yours, created in the Image of God, and of an heavenly Original: Have we not
the same Faculties, Understanding, Memory and Will? Are we not endued with a
reflex Power, whereby to condemn or approve our own Actions as they are either
good or evil? Are we not, if we had the advantages of Education, altogether as
docible, and apt to learn Arts and Sciences as any of you? witness Averves,
Avicenna, and others of our Countrymen* who were famous Physicians,
Philosophers, Astrologians, and the like. For in us as well as you, are
contained the true Natures of all Elements, the Seeds of all Sciences, and an
hidden Epitom of the four Worlds, Intellectual, Rational, Elemental and
Sensitive.

It Is true, we are not so ready at Words, nor so nimble to express our
Conceptions, but we can more than guess at what is Just, and Fit, and Honest,
and Seemly, and know what is agreeable to the dignity of humane Nature, and
what not, though the Christians despise us by the Name of Heathens; we must
acknowledge that we are not so well acquainted with the wordy and notional
matters of Religion, nor do talk so much of it, nor keep so much ado about it,
as many of the Christians do, for we do not Wrangle, nor Fight, nor Backbite or
Hate one another for, or touching the Worship of God: Nor do we Kill, Burn or
Imprison any for not agreeing with us, or being of our Intellectual
Complexions, because God in his Wisdom has made all things to differ; many
there are whose Eyes are open see into the truth of these things.

As for our Faith, touching God and Eternity, we have not much to say, neither
do we ever use many Words; For we have only one Book, viz. Our selves, in which
is contained the true Nature and Property of all things, both Internally and
Externally, and happy is he that can read but the Christ-Cross-Row in his own
Book, it is more profitable to him than a multitude of Books, cried up and
admired by the World: And this we do know and acknowledge, that there is a good
and an evil Spirit or Principle within us, one which prompts, and invites, and
leads us to Good, and the other drawing us to Evil; and by the light of the
good Principle, we distinguish between what is Right, and the contrary; and
whenever we do Evil, we are convinced and reproved for it by this good
Genius, whereby we are sensible that Lying, Swearing, Adultery, Idleness,
Disobedience to our Masters, Burning of Houses, Murder, and the like, are Sins
against God; and when at any time we commit any such things, we are accused and
condemned for the same in our Hearts, though our Masters, nor any Creature else
know thereof.

In short, the main Differences between the Christians and us, seem to be no
more than these, that they are White, and we Black, because they are born in
one Climate, and we in another; they have Learning, as Reading, Writing,
speaking of various Languages, and we have none of those Ornamental Advantages;
but they may please to remember that the more Paint Glass has upon it, the more
it keeps out the Light; They are educated under certain Rights and Forms, and
taught diverse Notions of Religion, which we are not skilled in: But the grand
point of Religion, To do as we would be done by, we understand as well as they,
and are sure they practice it less than we. What then do they talk so much of
the Leaves, when we can see no Fruits? let us feel their Christianity, and see
it, as well as hear of it, and no doubt then we shall be more in love with it.

These, I say, are the chief Differences; for as to the natural ^roperties of
the Body and Soul, there is but very little, setting aside Custom and
Education. For as I said before, as to the Members of the Body, and inward
Faculties, we are alike in all particulars; neither is there any difference as
to the Soul and Spirit, they are as much subject to Passions, Lusts, and
irregular Affections as we, as also to Sicknesses, Mortality, and all other
Misfortunes; And as your Prophet has said, God (whose wonderful Works we both
equally are) is no Respecter of Persons, but every one that fears his Name,
and works Righteousness, (according to the Measure and Gift he has endued
every one with) whether Bond or Free, Jew or Gentile, is accepted of him. And
it is not the Name that will justify, but a living in the Nature and Power of
well-doing, according as the Creator has dispensed his Gifts to each Person:
And let Christians know this as a certain truth, that neither before, nor at
the great Day of Reckoning, and when Accounts must be given, good Words, nor
long formal Prayers will stand them in stead, except they have lived in the
Nature, Power and Operation of the good Spirit, which we pray, and wish they
would do; and that they would Act what they Talk, and then both they and we
should find the Benefit, to the Praise and Glory of God, and our own Comfort:
For this is without dispute, that since Christians do know more of God and of
the heavenly Mysteries than we do, then there is the more required of them; and
how they discharge themselves in their Practice we cannot see; for surely they
do very little or not at all live in, and under the Christian Spirit; for that
leads all that are guided by it, to love even their Enemies, to take
Compassion, and do unto all as they would be done unto, and also endues it
Followers with the Virtues of Meekness, Humility, Self-denial, Temperance and
Purity, and to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts.

But instead of these dictates of thy most holy Religion, O thou great
Preserver of men! they enslave and oppress thy poor unworthy Servants, and are
drunk with our Blood and Sweat; We rise early, and lie down late, and labor
beyond our strength, whilst our luxurious Masters stretch themselves on their
soft Beds and Couches, they drink Wine in overflowing Bowls, and set their
Brains a-float without either Rudder or Compass, in an Ocean of other strong
and various Drinks, even till they are Drunk, and vomit up their Shame and
Filthiness, whilst we are allowed nothing but Water, and now and then a little
Cowou: They feast themselves with the fattest Lambs, and variety of rich costly
Foods, and live in all Uncleanness and Gluttony: They have their Menservants,
and their Maids, their Coaches and Horses to wait on them, whilst we groan
under the over-grievous Burdens, and excessive Labor which they impose upon
us: They wantonly consume the Increase and Product of our heavy Pains in Riot
and Voluptousness, in Superfluity, and all kind of extravagant Vitiousness;
their chief Study and Philosophy being to gratify their liqourish Palates, and
insatiate Paunches, and to enslave us with many intolerable Burdens; so that
their Lamps are ready to be extinguished by their Superfluity and Excess of
Oil, whilst they make frequent and solemn Feasts, (that is, offer Sacrifices,
and celebrate Festivals to their Idol Belly-God-Paunch, the Divinity which they
chiefly adore) and invite our rich Masters and Dames, and there they sit Eating
and Drinking, (whether they have any Appetites or no) in a formal way, perhaps
two or three Hours, enticing each other to Gormandize and Guzzle down great
Quantities, and variety of rich Food and strong Cordial-Drinks, not only beyond
the Necessities, but even the power of Nature; and yet not therewith content,
when they have thus already exceeded all bounds of Temperance, they yet proceed
to gorge themselves with Wine, various sorts of brave noble Fruits, Tarts,
Sweetmeats, and a thousand Novelties brought from foreign Regions of
themselves, more than sufficient for a sober and temperate Meal, not
considering the Injuries they thereby do both to their Bodies and Minds, nor
regarding in the mean time, the starving condition of us their poor Slaves,
that would be glad of the Crumbs that fall from their overspread Tables; and
yet it is from our sore Labor, and grievous Sweat, and pinched Bellies, that
what they thus wickedly waste upon their pampered Lusts, is extracted.

Alas! how few of our Christian Masters, do ever consider or endeavor to put
into practice either Abstinence or Sobriety, though their own Prophets and
Apostles commend those Virtues as the surest Bulwarks and Fortifications
against Temptations and Viciousness, and such as render the Body pleasant and
healthful, fit to discharge all its Functions, and prepares the Mind to be the
Temple of the Lord. But these are things too sublim for our gorbellied
Christians to consider of, when a number of them gather themselves together to
the Burial of a Swine, which they will Roast (or burn) it whole, and then bury
it in their ungodly Paunches, and make them swim in their foolish Hogshead,
accompanied with drunken Healths, and roaring Huzza's, where one or two of
these Epicurean swearing roaring Christians will destroy in Superfluity as much
as an hundred of us poor Vassals can get with our hand and sore Labor.

But why, O ye Christians! do you thus violate the Commands of our Creator, and
withstand, and walk contrary to the pure innocent Laws of Nature, and by your
Intemperances and Oppressions contemn the great Law of Love, and doing unto all
their fellow Creatures as they would be done unto: Consider these things
impartially, and count us no longer Dogs, nor hide the Pearl any longer in your
ungodly Earth, and be as studious and careful to look for it, and find it, as
you have carelessly lost it, and you shall see and know the Errors of your
ways; and above all, know this, that every Master must give an Account of his
Stewardship to the grand Master of Heaven and Earth, and that there must be
Retaliation made, either in this World, or the World to come.

But alas! what likelihood or hopes are there of our Relief, Ease, or
Refreshment from those Oppressions and Burdens under which we languish, when
these we complain of are become so unnatural, that they deal as hardly and
cruelly with their own Seed, even the Fruit of their own Loins, as with us? For
do not our Masters, to gratify their raging Lusts, sometimes take our Women,
and make them their Concubines, viz. either our Wives, or our Daughters, which
best pleases them, (For Adultery is accounted no greater a Crime amongst many
of them than Fornication, and both of them but Venial Sins, Tricks of Youth, or
Modish Gallantries) upon whom they beget mungril Children, that are neither
White nor Black, but between both, which therefore are called Molatto's, and
when these poor Women in compliance with such their brutish Heats, have
conceived by them, and brought forth, yet the Fathers, being without natural
Affection, though they are their own Seed, do expose them, and make them
perpetual Slaves, both they and their Posterity. Now what can be more hellish
Cruelty, or greater Baseness, then for men to afflict their own Seed, to beget
Children in their Drunkenness and Paroxisms of Lust, and then not to care what
becomes of them; nay, to make themselves Authors of their Miseries as well as
of their Being, and instead of providing for, and well Educating them, to
enslave and tyrannize over them, and leave them in that wretched condition to
all Generations: There cannot sure be a greater Sin against Gods pure Law in
Nature; Do not the whole Hosts of the four Worlds condemn this? and will not
the very Beasts of the Earth rise in Judgment against such vile hard hearted
Wretches, and Nature disown and spue them out as abominable?

For as the Cruelties and Oppressions of our Masters are our Plagues at
present, so they will certainly draw down Judgments on themselves in time, if
not prevented by Repentance and Reformation; for their Violence awakens the
center of dark Wrath, both in the internal and external Nature, and by a secret
and sympathetical Power these awakened poisonous Properties do strongly excite
the malignant Influences of the Coelestials, and attract their Male
Configurations; for every particular Quality in Nature has a Key in it self to
open the Gate of its own Principle, whence proceed many Calamities, according
to the degree of the Sin or Evil committed, there being a certain Secret (by
powerful sympathy) between the Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, by and
through whose evil Influences mutually working on each other, Plagues and
Vengeance, and Calamities are engendered; as on the other side, by their benign
Influences sweetly clasping and embracing each other in Harmony, Peace and
Plenty, Health and Security do proceed.

For this cause it is in point of Self-Interest, a thing of dangerous
Consequence for our Christian Masters to be so severe toward us; for the
groaning of him that suffers Pain and Torment, is the beginning of Trouble
and Misery to him that is the cause thereof. And it would be well for them, and
happy for us poor Vassals, if our Masters would but be so sober as to consider,
and be sensible of this Truth, that their fierce Wrath, Violence, and
Oppressions to us, do clearly demonstrate that the poisonous Wrath is awakened,
and does predominate in them, so that let them call themselves by what name or
title they please, His Servants they are whom they obey; the dark fierce Spirit
has overcome the good Genius in their Soul, and all the pure Virtues, as
Temperance, Compassion, Fellow-feeling, Courtesy, Humanity, Justice, and
Charity, are clapped under Hatches, just as we were when we were brought Captive
out of Guinnea, into the Land of Bondage. And then this irritated Wrath, or
poisonous Spirit, does powerfully penetrate all Elements and Bodies, and
wherever it finds matter capable or disposed to receive its malignant Rays
they incorporate: For the All, wise Creator has endued every thing in all the
four Worlds with an attractive and influential Virtue; and therefore the Sons
of men by their Uncleanness, Violence and Oppressions do first awaken and stir
up the wrathful Spirit in themselves, which kindles the Wrath in the Celestial
Bodies, and attracts their ill Influences; and if whole Nations or Countries
live in the irritated Wrath, then there are showered down Epidemical Diseases,
as Pestilence, War, Famine, and the like, all according to the nature of the
Evils committed, or Properties of Nature that were awakned.

The same is to be understood when any particular Person or Family has awakned
the poisonous Wrath, it does powerfully attract the male Influences, whence
Sickness, waste of Estate, and many other great Troubles and Miseries, both to
the Body and Mind follow; the truth of this daily Experience does testify; how
many of our great Masters have by their Vitiousness, Uncleanness, Intemperance,
Violence and Oppressions both to Man and Beast, whom they have had the
Government over, fallen into great Disorders, Distempers, Losses, Crosses,
Troubles and Vexations, so that their Children that were kept so fine and
choice, that they would hardly suffer the Air to blow on them or their Legs to
carry them whilst they lived in Prosperity, are many of them come to nothing?
some forced to work hard for their Bread, others have taken worse Courses, and
have been immaturely cut off.

It Is true, the Evils both private and public are sometimes more tolerable,
also the good Life and Prayers of some sober People that live in a Town or
Country, do interpose, and in some degree withstand or mittigate the poisonous
kindled Wrath, so that the Judgment is sometimes deferred, and withheld, as
for two or three Ages, according to the degrees of the awakned Evils, and the
intermingled Virtues.

Therefore since we have obtained the favor to plead our own Cause, we will be
bold to tell our Masters, that these things cannot be otherwise, it being the
eternal Law of God in Nature, that whatever Evil, Violence or Oppression is
committed, either by Superior or Inferior, if not repented of, there must be a
time of Retaliation either in this World, or that to come, according to the
Nature of the Evil; for as there is such an Affinity between man and man, that
they can move each other either to Love or Hate, so there is a proportionate
Similitude between him and the Celestial Bodies and Elements, Man being not
only the Image and Likeness of God and Nature, but the Horizon of both Worlds,
in whom the superior and inferior Natures are conjoined, and have their
Intercourse; for he is the Offspring of the Stars, as well as the Sun of the
Earth.

Therefore let us praise and magnify the Lord, Creator of this wonderful
Nature, which is surpassing humane Understanding and Number; For there is no
Religion or form of Worship in the World so noble and well-pleasing to him, as
for mankind to imitate him by living in, and under the power of the eternal
Principle of his Light and Love, which will lead all that hearken to the Voice
of Wisdom into all Innocence and Well-doing, and thereby as naturally attract
or draw down the sweet and pleasant Virtues out of all things, as the Loadstone
does Iron.

But on the contrary, our Masters have built their Babel, and fortified
themselve; with the Poisons of Saturn, and Fierceness of Mars, and made
Gluttony their Trade, and Violence their Study, whence proceed all our Miseries
and Oppressions, which at long-run recoyl back upon themselves with Interest,
destroying all their peace of Mind, health of Body, and outward Estates. For
are not most of those that thus violate our Creator's Law in Nature, miserably
afflicted with many cruel Diseases, as the Stone, Colic, windy Distempers,
Palsies, Cramp, Leprosies, Kings-Evils, Gout, dry Belly-Aches, Dropsies,
Consumptions, and an hundred other Evils of this Nature, which they also intail
on their Prosterity; so also are they plauged with Vexations and Discords
between Man and Wife, and with disobedient and rebellious Children; Rot and
Murrain amongst their Cattle, their Crops blasted or spoiled by unseasonable
Weather, Losses and Disappointments in their Trading, even to the consumption
of their Estates; All which are the Judgments of God, and just Rewards that
follow Oppression* Violence and Cruelty, and of spending the Blood and Sweat of
their poor Slaves in superfluous Wantonness; for they make nothing to squander
away Talents in Courtly Vanities, and value not Money in the way of Gluttony,
then it shall go by whole Sale: But if a poor Slave breaks but a Glass* or
miscarries in any little inconsiderable thing, then presently the livid Poison
of Saturn is raised, and the flaming Thunderbolts of Mars are let fly in the
greatest Fury and Fierceness imaginable, and the best word that comes out of
their Mouth, is, Dog, Devil, damned Dog, Bitch, and the like hellish
Expressions, not to mention their horrid Oaths, Curses and Execrations, which
lewd Words are followed by inhumane Blows; for they fall upon us with Whip and
Spur till the Blood come, and we are almost killed with their Cruelty.

And though they boast, and speak excellent things of the Christian-Religion,
and contemn us for being ignorant of it; yet it is plain they never design that
we should know and embrace it; for why else do they make it loathsome in our
Eyes, by acting so contrary to its Genuine Nature and Principles? Why do they
dress up that which is the greatest Beauty, and the most amiable thing in the
World, in the shape of a frightful deformed Hag, or terrible Fury, that seems
good for nothing but to Bite and Scratch, and Prog for its Paunch, and wallow
in Uncleanness like a Swine? Were they in earnest, or desirous to make us
Christians, and save our immortal Souls, they would remove out of our way all
Stumbling Blocks of Scandal, and draw us with the Cords of Love and Meekness;
they would set us Examples by their blameless Lives, and holy Conversations,
they would be at pains and charge to teach us the Foundation Principles of
Christian Religion, and to read the Bible, and would in those, and other
Exercises of Virtue and Piety bring up our little Ones: But so far are they
from any of this, that they act the direct contrary, and desire and endeavor
to keep us Heathens, that we may continue their Slaves, and thereby are Guilty
not only of oppressing our Bodies, but (as much as in them lies) of damning our
Souls.

But our God is more merciful, and expects a Return but proportionable to the
Talent he has entrusted; his Ways are the Paths of Love, and all his
Outgoings are Compassion; he has not left us without a guide, even a Light
shining in a dark place, to the conduct whereof, if we give heed, we shall do
well.

Nor do we in this Complaint intend to tax all our Christian Masters, for we
must acknowledge that there are some few of them more Just and Merciful unto
us; for though under them we labor hard, yet we have our Food in some order,
both as to Quantity and Quality, and have tolerable Rest, which gives us Life
and Vigor in our occasions; neither do they lay upon us Burdens greater than
we can bear; besides, they often speak kindly to us, which chears and comforts
our Hearts and Spirits; they call us no evil Names, which is well liking unto
us; They allow us the usual time each day to rest in, and eat our Food; They
treat our Women more kindly, and allow them better Accomodations, when they
bring forth their young Ones: And though sometimes some of this better sort,
will command our young Women to be their Concubines, yet then in such cases, if
they prove with-Child, they will have some regard to their own Seed, and
respect to the Women: And it is also observable, that all such as deal any
thing gently, and with Moderation and Compassion toward us, are generally
blessed with the Dew of Heaven, and with considerable Profits, and their Men
and Women Servants, and Cattle, do stand to Health, and thrive; for by
well-doing, though it be but as it were by halfs, they attract some of the
sweet Influences, both of the superior and inferior Worlds, and go not without
a Reward; which might teach all our Masters to imitate that course, and use
Pity, Good Will and Equity in their dealings with us, whereby they would not
only preserve a good Conscience void of Offense, which is the greatest and most
durable Riches on this side the Grave, but also might increase their outward
Wealth, by saving them in their Purses one, two, three or four Hundred Pounds
per Year, in the buying of Slaves.

For the Tyranny, ill Usage and Improvidence of the generality may further
appear by the great Numbers of our Countrymen and Women that are brought every
Year to America, and the Isles thereabouts, which shows the vast Consumption or
Destruction that is made of us in those parts; we shall only give one Example;
in the small Island of Barbados there are supposed to be commonly resident,
forty or fifty Thousand of our Country People, that are Slaves; and though we
have our Custom of Plurality of Wives, and are naturally as fruitful as most
Nations, yet our Offspring will not maintain the Number, but they are forced
yearly to bring in by Shipping, several Thousands more of our Countrymen, as
fresh Supplies, and to maintain the old Stock or Number; so that it looks like
the Fields of Mars, where often Recruits are required to supply the place of
the slaughtered Soldiers. Now would not any rational man conclude, that if One
Thousand Men and One Thousand Women, (most of them young, and capable of
Generation) lived in a separated place or Isle, where they want for no
Conveniences, for a matter of ten or twenty Years, who, (I say) could but in
reason expect these two Thousand to be multiplied at least to four Thousand, or
more, and that they would increase so fast as to grow rather Superfluous and
Super-numerary, than that there should be any occasion to purchase more at dear
Rates, from remote Regions: For thus it usually happens in other parts of the
World, as England, (which is the Country of many of our Christian Masters) does
not it spare every Year great Numbers of Men, which of late Years have settled
several Colonies, and peopled diverse Countries and Islands in America, which
are like to become very numerous, and yet still their own Country rather
over-stockt, than wanting of men to carry on their Affairs; besides, there come
thence great Numbers of Young men, as Factors, Seamen, Soldiers, and others
that daily are transported by Troops, many of whom never return again: And how
many Thousands of Women might England spare yearly? of whom many that are fit
and capable of Generation, are never married; and others, through want of good
Husbands in time, or to please their Parents humors, or for base Lucre, marry
Old, and have no Issue, and yet still England wants no People, but (as we have
heard) is able to spare two or three Hundred Thousand on a good occasion; And
why might not we in America increase and multiply proportionably, were it not
for those violent Oppressions, and harsh Usages, which our Masters afflict us
with, whereby we are destroyed before our time? And is it not a strange, and an
unheard of thing, that a fourth or fifth part every Year should dye, and be
made away with, more than there are born? Or can there be a more undeniable
Evidence of the Cruelty exercised upon us, occasioning this extraordinary
Mortality, and the immature Deaths of such great Numbers of us yearly? And
though nothing can be more against our Masters Interests, since their chief
Wealth consists in their Servants, yet the devilish Wrath has such power over
them, that they will not forbear their Oppressions, though to their own
Detriment, as well as our Destruction.

Therefore despairing of Relief from them, To thee, O thou most merciful
Creator! we address our Complaints; it is thou alone who can put a Period to
our Miseries! Let our Cries come unto thee, for we are the Works of thine
Hands, though now become Slaves to unreasonable men: Molify our Masters
obdurate hearts, and endue them with true Understanding and Christianity
indeed, as well as Name, and then shall we and our Posterity have ease from
these intolerable Burdens, and with enlarged Hearts, and loud Songs of Joy in
our Mouths, celebrate thy Praise, who art both our Creator and Redeemer. Amen!
Amen!

A DISCOURSE In way of Dialogue, Between an Ethiopean or Negro-Slave And a
CHRISTIAN, That was his Master in America. The Third Part.
Master. COme hither, Sambo! you look as gravely to day as a Dog Out-lawed, or
a Justice of Peace set in the Stocks; I doubt you have been doing some Rogury;
I called you to make us some Sport, let us see one of your Dances, such as are
used in your own Country, with all your odd Postures and Tricks, for Diversion;
I have heard you are the best at it of all my People.


Slave. Boon Master! If you will have me Dance upon mine Head, or Caper on the
top of the House, I must do it, though I break my Neck; for you are become Lord
both of my Feet, and every part of me, but I fear I shall not be able at
present to answer your Expectation handsomely, I am so much out of humor, and
unfit for Feats of Activity.


Master. Why? What Is the matter Sirrah! I Will warrant, you have been frollicking
so long amongst your Companions, that now you will pretend your are Weary.


Slave. Truly, Sir! this being the only Day in the Week you spare us from hard
labor, and allow us for Recreation, we do a Sundays amongst our selves,
endeavor to forget our Slavery, and skip about, as if our Heels were our own,
so long sometimes, till our Limbs are almost as weary with that, as with
working; But that is not my present case, for I have been walking all alone
several hours upon the Shore, viewing that prodigious heap of Waters, that with
roaring Waves continually beat upon this little Island, and sometimes casting
up my Eyes to that glorious Eye of Heaven, which (they say) at one view beholds
half the World, I could not satisfy my self which was the greatest Wonder; so
that the Contemplation of them both together, has filled my Brains with
abundance of strange Conceits, and made me very Dull and Melancholy.


Master. And what, I pray, might be the Result of our wise Worships
speculations?


Slave. I had a thousand different Notions offered themselves to my Mind, and
amongst the rest, I was thinking, what if the Sun should forget to Rise to
morrow Morning, whether your Man, (our Over-seer) would make him get up, as he
does us, by blowing his Horn? Or else how we should do to work in the Dark? Or
if the Sea should swell a little higher, and wash the tops of your Sugarcanes,
I might not then lawfully swim Home to my own Country, without being beaten to
a Jelly for a Runaway?


Master. Out you Rogue! Are these your Contemplations? nothing but studying
Mischief to your Master? Your Bones shall presently pay for the busy Idleness
of your Brains, and the Sauciness of your Tongue.


Slave. O boon Master! I beseech you be not angry, I meant no harm in the
World: This is a Day on which you do not Work, and therefore I hope you will
not Fight, which I conceive is ten times worse; for I had rather work all the
Sunday, then be beaten once: If you will be pleased to lay by your huge Cudgel,
and vouchsafe to answer me a few harmless Questions, I doubt not but I shall
divert you as much to your satisfaction, as if I had danced two Hours.


Mast. Though you are an Impudent, yet since you seem to be an ingenious
Raskal, I am content (for once) to hear your Prate: What is your wise Question?


Sl. I desire first you would lay that frightful Cudgel a little further off,
and then begging Pardon for the Presumption, since this is the Day you observe
to serve God in, I would crave leave to be a little instructed touching that
Service, and wherein it consists.


Mast. Why? It consists in being Christians, as we are -- But what should I
talk to such a dark ignorant Heathen, scarce capable of common Sense, much less
able to understand things of such an high and mysterious Nature.


Sl. I confess we are poor silly dark ignorant Creatures, and for ought I find,
so are many of the Bacchararo's So the Negro's in their Language call the
Whites.
too, as well as we; but that you may not grudge your Time or Pains, I will
assure you, that I will attend very seriously to what you say, and possibly may
prove somewhat more docible than some of our Complexion; For I was the Son of a
Phitisheer, that is, a kind of Priest in our Country and Way; he was also a
Sophy, and had studied the Nature of things, and was well skilled in Physic
and natural Magic, I have heard him often discourse of a great and mighty
Being, (greater far, and brighter too than either Moon or Sun) which framed
both Land and Sea, and all the glittering Glories of the Sky; and he was wont
to say, Men were the Children of the great King, who if they were good, would
take them up (but I think it was after they were dead here) into spangled
Regions, where they should do no Work, nor endure any Pain, nor Fight one with
another, but remain in Joy and Peace, and Happiness: It Is so long ago, that I
was taken from him and sold hither, that I have forgot much of his Talk, and
yet I remember some of his Skill, whereby I have Cured several of my Countrymen
since I came hither, of Diseases, that your Doctors could not help, either so
surely or so suddenly.


Mast. I have heard something of your suecess that way, and since thou art the
Son of an Heathen-Philosopher, and pretendest to more Wit than the rest of thy
Fellow-Brutes, what is it thou would be at?


Sl. Sir! I desire to be informed, what a Christian is, or ought to be.


Mast. Though I think it will be to as little purpose, as to go about to wash
thy Skin white, to inform such dark stupid Heathens as you are; nevertheless I
shall endeavor to gratify your Curiosity.

1 st; He that is a Christian, ought to believe that God made the World, and
all things therein.


Sl. O then, Master! I am a Christian, for I believe that as well as you.


Mast. Hold your Tongue, there go many other things to make a Christian besides
that; for he must also know and believe, that Man being thus made, did by
transgressing the Law of his Maker, fall from that good and perfect State,
wherein he was made, into a sinful estate, and thereby was liable to the Wrath
of God, and so to be Damned forever, or suffer everlasting Punishment. But God
out of the unspeakable Riches of his Grace and Goodness to his Creatures, thus
become miserable, determined in his own secret Counsel, and in fullness of time
did actually send down his most beloved and eternal Son, Jesus Christ, to take
upon him man's Nature, who after a most unspotted exemplary Life, and laborious
Preaching the good Tidings of Remission of Sins to all that should believe in
him, and enduring many Persecutions and Affronts here on Earth, was at last put
to Death without the Gates of Jerusalem, by the cruel Hands of the Jews, and
being buried, rose again to Life the third day, and ascended into Heaven; by
which Death of his, he satisfied the Wrath of God for the Sins of the whole
World, as the Scripture witnesses.


Sl. If Jesus Christ dyed for the Sins of the whole World, or satisfied God's
wrath for the Sins of All Mankind, then we that you call Heathens may justly
challenge equal privilege with your selves.


Mast. O no, you do not believe in his Name, nor observe his Commands and
Precepts.


Sl. As how I pray?


Mast. You are not Baptized in the Name of the Holy Trinity, nor do believe the
Merits of Christ's satisfaction, or that he has taken away your Sins.


Sl. This is a brave Religion, that by the Death and Suffering of one, all men
that in after Generations believe this, shall have their Sins pardoned, and be
blessed with eternal Happiness.


Mast. Still, Sambo! you are too quick, there is more required then a bare
Faith, or verbal Belief that such a thing was done, Christ is our Prophet to
teach us, and our King to rule us, as well as our Savior to redeem us; They
must yield Obedience, and do a Christian's Duty, that shall have an Interest or
Benefit by his Death.


Sl. I pay then tell me the duty of a Christian.


Mast. The Gospel of Christ, or the Doctrine which he taught, and we profess,
instructs and requires us; 1 st, To fear the Lord that created all things. 2
dly; To be Merciful, and do unto all men, as we would be done unto. 3 dly; To
be Sober and Temperate in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, mortifying the Lusts of
the Flesh, and avoiding all kind of Superfluity, that so we may not waste or
abuse the good Creatures of God. 4 thly; To avoid evil Communication, because
it corrupts good Manners, and vain Words, but especially wicked Ones. 5 thly;
To observe the Rules of Purity, and abstain from all appearance of Evil, both
in Words and Works. 6 thly; To free our selves from Envy, Strife, Malice,
Backbiting and Slander; not to accuse men behind their Backs of what they will
not speak to their Faces, or cannot prove. 7 thly; Not to judge of things we
understand not, lest we be judged; nor condemn those things of which we have no
certain Knowledge or Experience. 8 thly; To be sensible that the Lord by his
all-seeing-Eye and divine Principle, beholds all our Ways, and that to him
there is nothing hidden. 9 thly; To believe and know for a certain truth, that
the Lord will Retaliate and Reward every one according to his Works. 10. To
live according to the Gospel and divine Principle, by denying all Ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, and Uncleanness, as Whoredom, Adultery, filthy Speaking;
yea, even all unchaste Desires, for so our Lord teaches us, That he that
looks on a Woman, and lusts after her, commits Adultery. 11. To regulate
our Passions and Affections, and to abandon all Wrath, Anger, Malice, Envy,
vain or immoderate hopes, as also despair, and all perturbations of Mind; to
shun and avoid Covetousness, (that Root of Evil) Pride, Ambition, and all
Incharitableness; And on the contrary, to walk Humbly, and Meekly toward God,
and toward man, and to practice Patience, mutual Forbearance, Moderation,
Kindness, and Commiseration in all our ways. 12. That we be not too confident,
nor conceited of our selves, or our own knowledge, but to have regard to the
Lord in all our Thoughts, Imaginations and Conclusions, and in every thing to
have an Eye to his Providence. 13. To return God the Praise and Glory of all
the good things we enjoy, as Health, Strength, Food, Raiment, Knowledge,
Understanding, and the like, acknowledging them all to be the free Gifts of his
Bounty; and when we are in any want, trouble, distress or danger to rely upon
the same God for help, succor and relief, and with earnest, hearty and
faithful Prayers, to implore the same of him only. 14. To be merciful to all
the inferior Creatures, and to use them gently, and with Moderation, avoiding
all kind of Oppressions, Violence, hard Heartedness or Cruelty, either to Men
or Beasts.

These, Sambo, are some of the Principles or Rules of the Christian Religion,
the Doctrine which it teaches, and the Practices it requires.


Negro. Master Christian! I give you a thousand hearty Thanks for this account
of your Religion and Philosophy, which no doubt is the best and noblest of all
others: Therefore if these be your Christian Principles, I am already a
Disciple; but I beseech you be in good earnest, and tell me the truth.


Mast. I do assure thee, they are the Principles of our Lord, Christ, the Son
of the living God, that he preached to the World when he was on the Earth, and
which his Apostles recommended, and left them on Record in the Bible; and which
he still continues to Preach by his Spirit in the Hearts of all that are his.


Negr. Since these things are so, I cannot but at once be surprised, and as it
were amazed, with two different Objects of Wonder.


Mast. What are they, prithee?


Negr. First, I admire the Excellency of your Doctrine, and the wonderful
Mystery contained therein; it undoubtedly surpasses all other Religions in the
World, as much as the Sun's Light does that of a Glowworm: It seems to me to
be an open Gate into Paradise, and a Leaf of the Tree of Life; so agreeable to
the Nature and Glory of the great God, so suitable to the condition of weak
Man; no wise Person can make any scruple of the things you have delivered, they
command assent; for they proced from a true Root.

But then I cannot but also much wonder and admire that you Christians live and
walk so wide from, and contrary unto all those undeniable Truths, and holy
Rules, so that what you preach with your Tongues, you pull down with your
Hands, and your daily Conversation gives the Lie to your Profession.


Mast. You now grow Saucy thus to upbraid us; we have indeed our Failings, but
I hope we do not walk so Retrograde as you talk of: What Instances can you
produce to maintain so general a Charge?


Negr. I intended not to upbraid you, but to satisfy my self, for perhaps you
may have some Reason that I do not know of, why you act contrary to what you
teach; nor do I say that all, and every Christian does so, there may be
Hundreds and Thousands that I am not acquainted with, and there are some that I
know, of whom I cannot say, but that in a very great measure they live
according to that righteous Doctrine; but for the generality or major part, I
must say, That in all, and every of the aforesaid Points by you mentioned, the
whole Tenor of their Ways, and the continual Practice of their Lives, is
directly contrary to the same: And since you command me to instance
Particulars, I shall endeavor it in some of the chief.

1. You say, that Christian Religion teaches to Fear the Lord, that created
Heaven and Earth: The truth of this we make no doubt of; but how can we
believe, that very many who go under the Name of Christians do obey this Voice
of Wisdom, since they so lightly and vainly use the Name of God in their
Triffling, and wicked Talk, and boldly Swear by it (and that for the most part
falsely too) in their ordinary Conversation, contrary to his express Commands;
nay, not a few, will commonly challenge the great God to Damn or Confound them,
with diverse other Blasphemies; And do you call this Fearing the Lord?

2. To be Merciful, and do as you would be done by, you in the next place
assign, as a grand and important point of Christianity; but where shall we find
it? We cannot perceive any thing of Mercy to dwell in your Hearts; for you
commit Oppression with Violence; and that which you call Trade or Traffic (as
it is managed amongst you) is little better than an Art of Circumventing one
another; and you practice all sorts of Cruelty, not only on the inferior
Creatures, but also on those of your own Kind, else what makes us your Slaves,
and to be thus Lorded and Tyrannized over by you? In a word, not only We, but
the whole Creation groans under your heavy Burdens; and yet you tell us of
your Mercy and good Nature, and boast of your Christian Charity.

3. You acknowledge, this divine Religion requires of you to be Sober in Meats
and Drinks, etc. and not to indulge Nature with things Superperfluous: But does
it not appear by your Conversation, that you never regard its Counsel, since
your Ways are directly opposite? Do not we see it a common Practice amongst
the Christians, to drink to Drunkenness, and eat to Superfluity and Gluttony?
and even of those that seem most reserved, scarce any, that have wherewithal,
but will indulge themselves great variety of rich compounded Foods, and
Cordial-Drinks, that contain too great Nourishment, beyond not only the
Necessities, but even the Power of Nature, and the digestive Faculty of the
Stomach, which produces many evil Effects; for besides the waste of the good
Creatures, and a most Ungrateful abuse of the Creator's Mercies, it heats the
Blood, makes it thick, hot and sharp, and causes all the Members to glow with
an unnatural Heat, makes both the Body and Mind uneasy, and disables each of
them from performing its Offices as it ought, and also sets open the Gates of
Venus to many lewd Practices: And thus in defiance to the Laws of your
Religion, and to his own Personal hurt, one great overgrown Christian shall
spend as much in one Day, to gratify his Lusts or Vanity, as an Hundred or Two
of his poor Slaves can get by their sore Labor and Sweat. And as for
Exercises, there is rarely here in this Island any of the Christians that will
labor, except pure Necessity constrain them to it, but you lay heavy Burdens
on us, and as your most illuminated Prophet, says, will not touch them your
selves with one Finger. So that you make it a Genteel Quality, and honorable,
to break and violate that great Command of the Creator in the beginning, which
I have heard is recorded by a most famous Prophet of the Jews, and whom you
also receive, viz. That Man should get his Bread by the Sweat of his Brows;
which yet amongst the more Noble Christians, as you call your selves, is
counted a poor, low, Base and shameful thing.

What Heathen People (as you call them) are there in the whole World, that more
pamper their Carcasses, and indulge themselves like you, with things that are
not needful, nor convenient? Do you not invent an hundred Superfluities and
needless Toys, to gratify your own, and your Childrens Pallates and
Sensuality? the Wind, forsooth! must not blow upon them; and as if the Earth
were not good enough to bear them, nor their Legs made to carry them, you
provide Horses and Coaches for them, or we poor Slaves, must lugg them about,
who are as well able to go as we. For your Garments, Houses, Furniture, etc.
who can exceed your Pride, and Vanity? One of your Women shall wear at once as
much in value as would clothe an hundred poor People in modest Raiment, each
far better than hers, to defend them from the Injuries of the Elements, which
is the chief end of Clothing: Add to this, your great Palaces, and sumptuous
chargeable Buildings, and all kind of rich superfluous Ornaments, and
Knick-Knacks in your Houses, wherein you study to out-try and exceed each
other, merely for State, Pride and vain Glory, and to be honored of men; which
extravagancy is attended with another sore Evil, for that it cannot be
maintained but chiefly by great Oppression of Men and Beasts; for those that
spend Talents daily, must lay about them for a continual Supply, so that rather
then they will be without those chargeable Vanities, they care not how cruelly
they use their Servants, and inferior Creatures; They will scourge their Slaves
for a Penny, and kill their Beasts with over-labour, and at the same time spend
Pounds in base depraved Wantonness, and feasting of the Rich, etc.

4. You mention the avoidance of Evil Communications, as another duty of your
Religion, which we Heathens do acknowledge, and therefore we have a Proverb
amongst us, when any use lewd Discourse, to bid them, Wash their Mouths with
Water; but we have observed, that amongst the Christians there is nothing more
frequent than Evil Communications, whenever any Number meet together, are not
your Discourses vain, idle and frothy, and oft-times such as no modest Ear can
hear without tingling forth Horror and Indignation? Most of it tending to
Debauchery, or injuring the good Name of Persons absent, Jesting, Lying,
Vapouring, or speaking of Things and People they understand not, nor have any
thing to do withal; Nay, a man cannot pass the Way or Street, but his Ears
shall be grated with horrid Swearing, and ungodly Speeches, so that it is
evident you walk in the greatest opposition imaginable to his command.

5. You say, You are required to observe Purity, and the natural Rules of
Cleanness, and to avoid all appearance of Evil: Which indeed is no
inconsiderable point in Nature and Religion, but as far as we have been able to
observe, you practice the quite contrary; for not only your Words are very
unclean for the generality, but also in your Foods and Drinks you make no
distinction, but rich provoking Food in excess, and all strong intoxicating
Drinks, you desire with greedness, which over-heats the whole Body, and
irritates the fierce wrathful beastial Nature, whence all wanton, vain and
unclean Thoughts and Imaginations are generated: Also, you make as little
distinction between clean and unclean Beasts as we, nay, not so much as some of
our Countrymen; and you eat Blood, though I have been told there is not any
one thing more frequently, expressly and plainly forbidden in all your Bible
than that; besides, you make no distinction of the Times and Seasons of the
Year, when Beasts are subjects to Surfeits, and other Uncleanness; neither
are your Preparations and cooking of your Food so clean, proper and natural, as
they ought to be; and instead of abstaining from all appearances of Evil, we
see you court and improve them on all occasions; For do not you appoint set
Meetings, and make great Feasts? to which you invite the Rich, that will invite
you again, where you drink to Drunkenness, and eat to Gluttony, roaring all the
while like mad Bulls, and mixing your Food with horrid Oaths, and vain
Discourses, the fear of the great Creator being banished from your Hearts, nor
any pity shown to us your poor Vassals, that endure the Heat of the day, and
are ready to fall and faint under those heavy Burdens laid upon us, and would
rejoice to partake of the Crumbs that fall from your Tables, which you will not
afford, and yet spend our Sweat, and the Labors of our Hands, in all kinds of
Wantonness and Superfluity, by which many of you contract such grievous
Diseases, both to Body and Mind, that they become themselves more miserable
then us their poor Slaves.

6. You say that the next great point of Christian Doctrine, is to free your
selves from Envy, Strife, Malice, Backbiting and Slander; which is also
contradicted by your general practice; for what is more frequent amongst you
than Envy and Revenge? And though in your Prayers you formally use those Words,
Lord forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, yet
at the same time Envy lies lurking in your Hearts, and the very next moment
shall erect it self; for do not many of you keep your Neighbors and Brethren
in loathsome Prisons for some very little offense, or in truth for none at all,
but only to show your Power, and gratify your devilish Fury: And as for the
Gentleman called Strife, he rides the Fore-horse, and is Quarter-master-General
amongst you; what Fighting, Swearing, Damning, Railing, etc. is there in every
House between Fathers and Children, Brothers and Sisters, Relations and
Neighbors, ready to destroy and murder one another, and all about Things, not
worth a wise man's Thoughts? What swarms of Lawyers, Clerks, Pettifoggers and
Idle-men, does your Strife, and unjust Contention maintain? And how many are
yearly with their Families utterly ruined thereby? I Will not leave him worth a
Groat, cries one: I Will make Dice of his Bones, swears the other: Let him not in
Goal, says a third. This is your Christian Charity, and Remission of Injuries.

And for Backbiting and Slandering, even Eating and Drinking, is scarce more
universally practiced amongst you; almost every man speaks Evil or slighting of
those that are not present, though to their Faces he Complements and Flatters
them. Calumny is the Sauce at your great Feasts, and Reproaches and scandalous
Stories the Entertainments of your Clubs and Visits, so that scarce any honest
man is free from the Lashes of your envenomed Tongues, or from having large
Furrows plowed upon his Back, his good Name wounded, and his Reputation
unjustly blasted or called in question, by your false Stories and malicious
Suggestions, whereby many are daily ruined, there being nothing more base and
unmanly than these whispering Doemons; nor is there any Practice that more
opposes Christianity, and the pure simple Law of God in Nature, and therefore
is a Sin to be condemned forever, and banished the Society of all good men.

7. Not to judge and speak of things they understand not, is a very excellent
Precept, yet nothing is more common among many Christians than to judge,
censure, and condemn Things and Persons, though they understand them no more
then a blind man can distinguish Colors, or the Deaf judge of Music; but
right or wrong without any true sight or comprehension, they will pass their
Verdict, and shoot their Bolts, for they count their Tongues their own, and
think they may say what they list, and so call Evil good, and Good evil, and
abuse their own Consciences, and their Neighbors, so greatly are many of the
Christians depraved.

8. The eighth Point you mentioned, was, That the Lord beholds all men's Ways
and Doings, and that unto him, and his Divine Eye there is not any thing hid:
Which without all doubt, is a most certain truth, which neither Christian nor
Heathen dare to deny; for as your own Prophet says, It is he that searches
the Heart, and tries the Reigns. But how can we persuade our selves, that you
do in truth and in earnest believe this, since we daily find that you stand
more in awe of Men's seeing, or knowing your Wickedness, than of God's
beholding, and revenging of it; and therefore you love to seem, and be counted
Honest, and Just, and Merciful, but scarce a Soul of you seriously endeavors
to be so; it is the Name and the Credit you look after, not the Thing, which
shows that you seek to please, and be well spoken of by Men, but regard not the
righteous Judgment of God, who looks through the Fig Leaves, and requires Truth
and Purity in the inward parts: This Hypocrisy of yours is notorious, and
every one almost taxes his Neighbor for it, and yet all generally practice it,
and each huggs himself therein, as one of your own Poets complains; If my
foul Deeds of Darkness may
Be wrapped in Clouds as black as they;
If being ugly I can Paint,
And act the Devil, yet seem a Saint*
Cheat and Oppress, Forswear and Lie,
Yet escape the Law and Infamy,
I mind no further Honesty.


9. On the contrary, to believe and know (as you say) That the Lord will
Retaliate every man according to his Work, is a most true and necessary
Principle; but if Christians did so, surely they could not, nor would do as
they do; For what kind of Rewards and Returns do or can you expect for all your
Oppressions to us your poor Vassals? For do not you oppress us at your
pleasure, beat, whip, over-labour, and half-starve us, and many of you scruple
not to Kill us for a small Offense, and possibly for none at all, but in your
Drunkenness to satiate your fierce devilish Passions? Nor do our tender
Children, and dear Wives escape your Violence. Now if Retaliation be one point
of your Christian Doctrine, and every man shall be rewarded according to his
Works, then what a sad Reckoning will you have to make, when God shall arise to
visit for these things? And you would not certainly adventure upon those
things, which you must pay so dear for, either in this World, or that which is
to come, if you were sufficiently sensible of the Compensation that must be
made for the same.

10. It Is a noble Truth, that men should walk according to the divine
Principle, and forsake all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts: But the generality of
Christians take contrary measures for the Gospel of Truth, neither inwardly nor
outwardly does teach any to compel others by outward Force to believe, and do
as they do, be it right or wrong; but advises all to do as they would be done
by; and to let their Moderation be known unto all men; and to bear with one
another in Love: Whereas you impose upon one another, and tie up other men to
your own Conceptions, and without any Compassion or Charity* fall upon such as
will not go your way, and do as you do, though you have nothing to object
against their Lives and Conversations. And whereas you acknowledge the Doctrine
of Christianity, wherever it is entertained in the Love thereof, will bruise
the Head of the Serpentine Nature, that is, of Lust and Uncleanness, and all
Ungodliness, yet we see you daily wallowing in all those Pollutions; so that
you do not only contradict this holy Doctrine, which you boast so much of, but
some of you do also severely persecute others for obeying the same and
submitting to its guidance; And as for brutish Uncleanness, Adulteries,
Whoredoms, etc. they are but your Sports and Pastimes, things that many of you
glory in; and to be Chaste and Modest, is to be an object of your Scorn and
Derision.

11. How well you regulate your Passions (which is another thing you say
Christian Doctrine teaches you) all the World sees, and we often feel; the Sea
when agitated with contrary Winds, it throws up Dirt and Sand from the bottom
of the Deep, and spits its froth up toward toward Heaven, is not more
disorderly or dangerous to come near, than you are, when the least thing
happens contrary to your Minds, your Souls are in a perpetual Tumult, your
Lusts duel one another, Covetousness fights with Luxury, Wantonness jostles
Ambition, and Revenge is opposed by Cowardice; Sense gets above Reason, the Man
is ridden by the Beast, and when in this hurry, Conscience gets leave to be
heard, then presently there is nothing but Furies and Despair: Is not all this
as contrary to that Calmness and Stillness, that Peace and Serenity of Mind
(which true Christianity, both requires and gives, and is delighted in) as
Light is to Darkness?

12. It Is as great point, and as true that men should not be too resolute,
confident or conceited of their own Wisdom or Knowledge, but ought to have
regard to the Lord in all their Thoughts, Imaginations and Conclusions, and to
eye the divine Hand of Providence in all things, it being better to Fear, than
to Boast. But tell us, O Master! who do violate this Rule more than the
generality of Christians? Do not many of your learnd Ones boast of their Lights
and Knowledge, and count all others little better than Brutes in comparison of
themselves? And does not every one fancy his own Opinion to be the only Truth,
and condemn the Sentiments of others, how well grounded soever they may be? And
do not many endeavor to spread their Notions by Violence, Fighting and
Oppression, and by Cruelty, to force all to be of their Complexion in
Understanding? Which self-conceited Proceedings are a true token and
demonstration, that they love to contradict the whole course of God and Nature;
for he has made all things to differ, and by that difference the Universe is
sustained; and from those various Notes proceed the sweetest Harmony? Is it not
for want of this Spirit of Humility, that you wrangle, fight, contend, punish
and imprison each other, for not thinking as others do, or because they have
not all one colored Hair? For alas! men's Minds and Understandings are as
different and various, as their Complexions or Visages; wherefore then are you
angry with your Creator, because he has not made you all alike? If you were
not blind and ignorant, and yet very presumptuous and Self-admirers, this could
never be amongst People that believe all in one Prophet, and one God: I
perceive therefore it is not about true Virtue that you make all this ado in
the World; it is for your own Conceits, your own Inventions, your own Dreams,
that you thus contend and disquiet your Neighbors.

13. Your thirteenth Point of Christianity was to return God the Glory of all
your Enjoyments, and rely solely upon him in your Distresses and this you
observe no better than the rest; to give God the glory of your Health,
Strength, Wealth, etc, is to use the same soberly and discreetly, and employ
them as he has required* for the benefit and advantage of our fellow
Creatures, and our own Happiness both here and hereafter; but you only swagger
and vapor and domineer with them, as if your own right hand had made them,
your own Wisdom and Power had procured them, and not as given, or rather lent
you by the Lord, for the good ends before mentioned; whereas you use and bestow
them only for Pride and Ostentation, for Vanity or Luxury, to accomodate your
Lusts, or gratify your Revenge; this is sure very far from a true Christian
improvement of what you enjoy.

Lastly, Whereas you say, your Christian Doctrine enjoins you to be merciful to
all the Inferior Creatures, and to use them with Compassion, and avoid all kind
of Oppression and Violence to those of your own kind: How contrary most
Christians act hereunto, our own woeful Experience has too sadly informed us,
that there is little or no Mercy or Compassion dwells in your Hearts; for on
every small occasion you will not only beat and oppress us, but some of you
count it no more Sin in their drunken fits to Murder us, than to kill their
Horse, or their Dog; but let them know, we are humane rational Souls, and as
much the Image of God as themselves, and want none of the noble Faculties,
therefore our innocent Blood will equally call for Vegeance, and as powerfully
as if you had killed one of the pretended Christians. The Voice of God in
Nature is the same; and it is not your custom of Killing will make it the more
lawful or excusable in that day, when Accounts and Retaliation must be made,
every Principle then apprehends and comprehends its own Children; those that
have immersed, or precipitated themselves through Violence, into the fierce
Anger and wrathful Principle, shall be therein captivated even to Eternity: It
is not good Words, long Prayers, and fair Speeches, that will break or untye
the wrathful Net, which men all their Lives have been tying; but look what
Principle has carried the upper Dominion in the Heart, to that Kingdom you
belong.

As for the inferior Creatures, they groan under your Cruelties, you hunt them
for your Pleasure, and overwork them for your Covetousness, and kill them for
your Gluttony, and set them to fight one with another till they dye, and count
it a Sport and a Pleasure to behold them worry one another; whereas the same
should be matter of Grief to you, to see the Gate of Wrath thus opened amongst
the Creatures, and that you your selves have been the original Cause thereof,
by violating the Law of your Maker.

Thus, Master Christian! have I briefly showed, that in all the particulars by
you mentioned, the generality of you Christians do act the clean contrary; what
then do you boast of, and wherein are you better than we? Only that you pretend
to understand more, and do less, and so deserve the greater Condemnation. Will
you make us believe, that those men have any Religion, who have no God? or have
they indeed a God, who prefer their Lusts, or Wealth, or Honor, or any thing
in the World before him, and his holy Commands; Can we think that you know what
it is to believe that there is a God, and a Life to come, and to renounce the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and give up your selves to a Savior, and a
Sanctifier, when we behold you persuing after Vanity with outstretched Arms,
and committing all kind of Wickedness with greediness? Can you your selves
think, whilst you are awake and sober, that Perfideousness will avail you, and
Rebellion save you? or that the God of Wisdom, Holiness and Justice, will
accept you for a perjured Profession to be, and to do that which never came
into your Hearts? Is Hypocrisy a Virtue? Or will Lying and Dissembling bring a
man to Heaven? Christianity (by that very Description you have given of it) is
such a blieving in Christ, to bring us unto God and everlasting Glory, as
makes the Love of God become the very Nature of the Soul, and thankful
Obedience its Employment, and an heavenly Mind, and an humble, pure, harmless
and holy Life, to be its Constitution, and constant Trade; and the Interests of
fleshly Lusts, and the Pomps and Vanities, the Riches and Honors of the World
to be truly esteemed but as dross and dung; Now tell us in good earnest, is
this the Life which you live, or which you hate? Why will you profess a
Religion you abhor? Or why will you abhor and despise a Religion which you
profess? Why will you glory in the part of a Parrot, or an Ape, to say over a
few Words, or move your Bodies into such Forms and Ceremonies, whilst you
detest the humane and divine part, to know, and love, and live to God? Do you
profess your selves Christians only for Self-Condemnation, to be Witnesses
against your selves in Judgment, that you wilfully lived Unchristian Lives?
What is there in the World that you are so averse to, as to be seriously that
which you profess to be? That is, to walk uprightly and sincerely in all those
fourteen Particulars by you enumerated. Whom do you hate more than those that
are that in Heart and Life, which you call your selves in customary Words? or
that are serious in the Religion which you your selves say, You hope to be
saved by. Call us Heathens as long as you will, I am confident Christ has not
more bitter Enemies in the World, than some of you that wear his Livery; We
Blacks are more gentle to you, than you Christians are to one another; and I
have been assured, that all the Heathens in the World have shed less Christian
Blood, than what Hypocrite Christians themselves have greedily let out, or
occasioned to be destroyed: Thus you honor dead Saints, and abhor the Living,
and would gladly make more Martyrs, whilst you keep Days in Commemoration of
those that others made. Can any thing be more preposterously absurd, more
foolishly wicked, than these interferring Contradictions? Were it not better to
be what you call your selves, or to call your selves what you are? If you
approve of these Christian Doctrines, why do not you square your Conversations
accordingly? If you think them needless Notions, why do not you disown them? Or
why do you so much cry up and magnify them? Be either Christians indeed, or
cease to upbraid us for being Heathens; for such shuffling Hypocrisy is more
abominable to God and Man, than the most ignorant Paganism.


Mast. I have given you, Sambo, a large liberty of Prating, and you have used
it very confidently: How come you so wondrous Wise? How dare you upbraid us
that have the Light of the Gospel? Or indeed why should we mind any thing such
Heathens as you can say or talk of?


Negr. We boast not of Wisdom; what I have said, arises from plain matter of
Fact, which no Person whom our Creator has endued with a rational Soul, can be
ignorant of, if he do not wilfully quench and extinguish in himself that Light
which enlightneth every man that comes into the World, and which one of your
own Prophets calls, The Candle of the Lord. Nor are we altogether such ignorant
dark Heathens* as you call and suppose us; for many of the Christians do not
esteem, nor look on us any otherwise, or better than Dogs; for tell me, I pray
boon Master! what difference has our Creator made between you and us? Has he
endued you with any particular Quality or Property more then we are furnished
with? The Members of our Bodies, the Faculties of our Minds, our Senses and all
the Furniture of Nature, are equal, and the same in us as in you: We are not
Beasts, as you count, and use us, but rational Souls, and in us is contained
the true Nature and Properties of all Elements, and created things; Nor do we
contemn or flight the Light of the Gospel; as you call it, but we wonder at you
that so much talk of it, and so little practice the good Rules of Life
contained therein. Besides, since you are pleased to grant us the Liberty to
plead our own Cause, we might tell you, that we have the same Gospel that you
so much talk of, written in our Hearts, and doing by Nature the things that are
written in the Law, being without the Law, are a Law unto our selves, as one of
your illuminated Prophets speaks: And if we do the things that are right in the
sight of God, and walk in his innocencent Law in Nature, according to our
measure and understanding, we have so far discharged our Duty, and we doubt not
but the goodness of our Creator will accept thereof, and pardon our involuntary
Misprisions, and Failings; and if you have a larger Manifestation of the
eternal Light and Love of God, which we have no reason to doubt, then the more
is required of you, and therefore the greater and more sore will your
Condemnation be.


Mast. And do you black Heathenish Negroes then dane compare your selves with
us brave white Christians? Does not your very Hue, that sooty Skin of yours,
serve for an Emblem of the darkness of your Minds? You eat all unclean Foods,
Carrion and Vermin without scruple; you have no Order nor decent Ceremonies at
your Marriages; you go naked, and have not wherewithal to cover your Shame; in
a Word, you are in most particulars the very next Door to Beasts, and therefore
we have hardly so much care and esteem for you, as we have for our Horses, or
other Cattle; Are you not altogether unlearned, and can neither spue Latin,
nor sputter Greek, nor understand the Hebrew Rabbis, and the Talmud; your
Discourses are not trimmed with Flowers of Rhetoric, nor can you chop Logic,
nor make Syllogisms, and run down both Truth and Sense with Mood and Figure,
and the Magic of a concluding Ergo: What Divines or Clergymen, what cunning
Lawyers have you to boast of? Though you pretend to do Cures, yet you never
read Galen nor Paracelsus, nor have any Apothecaries to make a Trade of the
Materia Medica, nor Chemists to tell you the Medicinal Virtues of Minerals; you
have very few Persons of Honor amongst you (except your Kings) and but a few
Misses, and no Theaters or Playhouses for the Education of your Youth; your
Women are not so nobly arrayed, nor have those charming Arts, to invite men to
love and dote upon them, as ours daily study; neither do you drink Wine in
Bowls, nor understand the genteel mystery of quaffing of Healths with an Huzza!
or to Swear Modishly with a boon Courage! All these things We enjoy, and make
sumptuous Feasts, where we spend as much in a few Hours, as two or three
Hundred of such Wretches as you can earn in some days: We have all forts or
War like Weapons, and murdering Engines to use at our pleasure: We eat and
drink of the fattest Foods, and richest Liquors, and take our ease, and clothe
us in costly Attire, and study new Fashions for our Garments, to render us more
honorable and admired, and many other great Privileges we have, which you are
destitute of.


Negr. These, Sir! are brave things indeed to vapor with! Is it possible that
rational men, much less such illuminated Christians, as you account your
selves, should thus be taken with things that are so much below the Dignity of
humane Nature, to boast of your Evils, and glory in your Shame? As for our
Complexion, it is the Livery of our Creator, the property of the Climate and
Soil, wherein his good Providence disposed of us to be born and bred; we made
not our selves Black, nor do you make your selves White; wherein then have you
any thing to brag of above us? If for this cause you despise us; you at the
same time despise that adorable Power, which is the Maker both of us and you:
And thought White be an Emblem of Innocence, yet there are whited Walls filled
within with Filth and Rottenness; what is only outward, will stand you in no
stead, it is the inward Candor that our Creator is well-pleased with, and not
the outward; have a care therefore that you be not found as black within, as we
are externally.

You upbraid us with eating unclean Foods, Carrion, Vermin, etc.. But I pray,
is it not your Cruelty, in not affording us what is sufficient to support
Nature otherwise; that makes us do it? This is first to make us Cripples, and
then beat us with our Crutches for being Lame. As for our poor Coverings, or
going Naked, as long as Man remained in the innocent State, he wanted no
Garments; and you are forced to Rob several sorts of Creatures to cover your
Shame; nor do you bring into the World any greater Ward robe with you, than we
do; nor have you occasion to carry out any more. But how depraved and
dishonorable does it look, for that noble Creature, [Man] not only to be glad
to borrow of his inferior Creatures to hide his Shame, but also to grow Proud
of those Ornaments, which are but the Spoils, or the Labors, and many times
the Excrements of Beasts and Flies, or Insects, and the like lower Graduates?

As for Order in Marriages, we have as much as you; for though Plurality of
Wives is contrary to your Custom, it is not to ours; and he is no wise man that
admires or contemns the various Customs of different Regions, any further than
they contradict Nature: Now this Custom of ours, as it is be friended with
Examples amongst the ancient Patriarchs, and the Laws of many Nations so
renowned for Civility, as to esteem all others Barbarians, so it seems somewhat
to agree with the Law of Nature, and to prevent Outrages against Nature, it
being not fit, nor natural for Men to meddle with their Wives when they are
Breeding, or great with-child: However, these any things are more of Custom,
than any thing else, and we our selves esteem that man most happy that contents
himself with one Wife: But you, although your Customs and Laws forbid Poligamy,
and Adultery, yet whilst you comply somewhat in the former, do make nothing,
many of you, to violate the latter, as often as you can meet with an
opportunity.

When you say, You hardly esteem of us so well as Beasts; we have Reason to
believe you, from your cruel Usages, and not allowing us what is necessary for
Food and Rest, which yet is to be wondered at, since if we are not worthy
(forsooth!) to be your Brethren, we are however your Money. So that -- this
Cruelty toward us, does savor more of Envy, than of Christianity or
Frugality. It is also true, that we have no Lip-learned Doctors, nor are
confined to the old musty Rules of Aristole or Galen, nor acquainted with the
new Fancies of your modern Fire-working Chemists, or Vertuosi, nor will we
compare our selves to you in those things; but we have so much understanding,
as not to content our selves to see with other men's Eyes, and put out our own,
as many of your learned Rabbis do; nor want we amongst us those that God and
Nature have endued with Gifts of knowing the Virtues of Herbs, and that can by
genuine Skill, administer good Medicines, and perform greater Cures, than your
famous Doctors with their hard Words and affected Methods. Neither will the Art
of Chemistry advantage us; for since God has hid all sorts of Meettals in the
deep Bowels of the Earth, and on the contrary adorned its Surface with so many
noble and salutiferous Herbs and Plants, we conceive he intended the latter,
not the former, both for the Food and Physic of man; And also we observe, the
most who have hazarded their Healths and Lives, to get them out of these
Subterranean Caverns, have done much hurt by the use of them in the World Yet
in our own Country we have in diverse parts the best Metals near at hand, viz.
Gold, which too many of the Christians make their God. Our Women, it is true,
have no other Ornament than what is Natural, which is more than abundance of
yours have, for they want the great Ornament of that Sex, Modesty; for though
ours go naked, yet they are not so impudent as your Misses, who make a Trade of
Lasciviousness and Filthiness.

We drink not Wine in Bowls, nor without; and it would be much better and more
becoming Christianity, if you did not too; for does it not heat our Blood,
irritate the central Heat, set the whole Body into an unnatural Flame, and
precipitate the Mind into Fury and Madness, and excite the Senses to
Uncleanness and Beastiality? For pray, good Master! tell me, how many Villainies
of all sorts do some nominal Christians commit against God, and his pure Law in
Nature, by reason of their Excesses in that kind? And what grievous Diseases do
such Debauches occasion both present, and for the future? Nay, to the further
shame of Christians, have you not by lewd Examples defiled and debauched us
Ethiopeans, and the Indians amongst whom you converse? So that instead of
learning us Virture, and courting us to your Faith and Religion by Sobriety and
Godliness, you set before us destructive Presidents, and make us more the
Children of the Devil than we were before; which has forced many of your
Religion to make strict Laws, that no Christians shall suffer Indians to drink
strong intoxicating Liquors, or sell the same unto them; so that we must needs
say in that respect, you have been kinder to us, than to your selves; for
seeing the great Inconveniences and Hurt the drinking thereof does do us, you
endeavor to prevent the same, and yet you continue and increase the evil
Practice thereof your selves, and so long as the Christians thus trade in
Debauchery and Superfluity; there is no likelihood or hopes that they should
draw any considerable Number of us, or the neighboring Indians to embrace
their Religion, though undoubtedly it is the most excellent Doctrine that ever
was communciated to the World: But the vicious Lives of its Professors, their
saying, and not doing, cuts off in the Bud, and wholly destroys the growth and
increase of those sublim Truths, and makes the World despise both the
Christians and their Doctrine; for it is not your good Words, and long Prayers,
(and indeed some are short enough) that are pleasing to our Creator, or
edifying to us; It must be your good Works that shall convince any of the
Truth, and beget Love and Amity in all men.

But instead thereof, you spend your time in Riot, Excess, Vanity, or wicked
Plays, whereof evil Demons were the Inventers, whilst we sigh and groan under
your heavy Burdens. But our Cries are slighted by you, and your Ladies too,
who many of them will Swagger, and Curse, and Rant, and equally oppress, and as
much abuse us as your selves, which Fierceness and Cruelty looks more monstrous
in them, though bad in both Sexes, and wherever practiced, must of a certain
truth be retaliated. I have heard some of our Master Christians talk of, and
cry out against the Tyranny of the Turks, and the Slavery they impose on what
Christians they can get into their Cluches at Algier; Is it not strange that
you should Practice the very same thing your selves, that you so much Condemn
in others? Nay, you do ten times worse than they, both because you profess your
selves Christians, which is a Religion of Love, Sweetness and Beneficience to
all the Creation; and for that you use us worse than the Turks do their
Servants; and especially in this, that you rather hinder, than promote our
embracing the Christian Faith, whereas amongst the Turks any Christian Slave
may turn Mahumetan, and is encouraged thereunto, and thereby gains his Liberty.


Mast. The World is come to a fine pass, that such ignorant Slaves and Heathens
as you are, that do neither know nor worship the true God, should presume
either to instruct, or condemn us. Do not you know, that most of the hard usage
you so much complain of; is occasioned by your selves, for if we should not be
severe, and rule you with a Rod of Iron, you are so stubborn and disobedient,
that there would be no governing of you; therefore we are forced to beat you
into Obedience and good Manners, you are so morose, surly and inhumane; so that
you are the first cause of those Miseries you endure: Have not you made several
Attempts to Rise, and cut off the Christians Root and Branch, and make your
selves Masters of all that we have? And do not such Offenses require a strict
Hand, and severe Punishments? What greater Crime can there be, than for you to
betray your Masters?


Negr. True it is, the World is come to that pass, and men's Wickedness is
arrived to that height, that good Advertisements, and wholesome Counsel, either
of Christian, Jew or Gentile, will not be entertained, let it come from whom it
will, if it tend to Virtue, be sure it shall be withstood with various
Pretenses. Whereas you accuse us of evil Carriage, and that the same has been
the Original of all our Griefs and sore Oppressions, there is a certain Truth
therein, though not as you intend it, for if we and our Forefathers had not
violated the innocent Law of Nature by Violence and Transgression, we had never
fallen under your Yoke, nor been carried away Captives out of our own Native
Country; but now we have by the divine Justice been retaliated, for ours, and
our Princes Transgressions; However, though we acknowledge this is but just
from God, yet that does not concern you, nor can you from thence justify your
Oppressions, which could not be occasioned by the Miscarriages you speak of,
because they had long been practiced upon us, before any of us made any of
those ill Attempts you mention; 'twas your Cruelties put us upon those
extravagant courses: And since Oppression (according to the Doctrine of your
most holy wise Prophet) makes Wise Men mad, 'twas no wonder if some of our
silly Countrymen were thereby so far transported, as to seek by unjustifiable
means, to gain their Liberty, or a Melioration of their wretched condition.

Besides, if we had indeed offended you, yet you ought not to retaliate Evil
for Evil, since on the contrary your Christian Doctrine enjoins you to return
Good for Evil, and to love even your Enemies; how dare you then in the Light of
this holy and everlasting Gospel, to talk and act after this manner? Do you
indeed dream that your Cruelty, and ruling us with a martial Rod, and barbarous
Fierceness, will make us Tractable and Friendly, or to love our Masters, and do
our Labors with willingness? Alas! we imagined you to be greater Seers into
the Mysteries of God, and his Law in Nature, than to entertain such vain and
impossible Conceits; For how contrary is this not only to your Christian
Principles, but also to Reason, and the common Sense and Experience of all
mankind? With the Froward thou shall learn Frowardness, says your own Prophet.
And again, Did ever the Wrath of Man accomplish the Righteousness of God? Or
Tyranny beget Love? If those who have the government of generous Horses, or go
about to tame wild Beasts, and endeavor by gentle Usage to make them
tractable, and fit for Service, rather then by Cruelty and Beating; much more
those who have the command of Men* should bring them to Order and Discipline by
the mildest and fairest means, and all the Arts of Sweetness and Persuasion;
not treating them worse than Gardiners do those wild Plants, which by careful
looking to, and good Usage, lose the Savageness of their Nature, and in a
little time come to bear excellent Fruit.

In vain therefore you go about to excuse your Tyranny and Oppression toward
us, by making the World believe, that you are as it were constrained, or forced
to be cruel to us; Though yet the same be true in one Sense, viz. you are
irritated there- unto from you own innate awakened Wrath, which does
predominate in your Hearts and Souls, and then those fierce Arrows of Mars, and
Poisons of Saturn, which you let fly at us, do by simily stir up the original
Venoms, and wrathful Qualities in us: And this, and this only, is it that has
occasioned some of the worser sort of our Countrymen to Curse you and your
Posterity, and to endeavor to kill and destroy you, which is a crying Sin,
which we neither justify, nor can execute, since it is condemned by God, and
his Law in Nature; And all that have attempted such savage Mischiefs, ought not
to go unpunisht, neither will they; for the just Law of Retaliation will take
hold them; but will you therefore punish the Innocent for, or with the Guilty?
because some called Christians commit Murders and Treasons, must all of that
Profession be cut off by the Ax, or the Gibbet? If you will deal ingenuously,
your own Hearts will tell you, that the occasion of these Evils committed, or
endeavored to have been committed, arise from your Sins, and the great Abuses
wherewith you have from time to time afflicted us, viz. your Murdering us at
your pleasure, and no Account or just Compensation rendered for the same.
Therefore does our innocent Blood call for Vengeance on you, and (without
serious Repentance and Amendment) must be reckoned for. Consider well these
things, and then tell us; Do you think, or can you in Reason, but expect, that
the great Tyranny, Injustice, and cruel Usages you have practiced upon us, will
in due time be brought back upon you and your Land or Posterity, if you do not
atone for these Evils, and give us Ease and Refreshment? And though we are
never so submissive, can not the kindled Wrath raise up other Enemies to
destroy you and yours in a Moment? Therefore be entreated to bethink your
selves in time, for undoubtedly the Cup of Wrath is almost full.


Mast. I have considered what you allege, touching the severe Usage, which we
have and do daily offer to your Countrymen; and I must confess, I cannot well
seehow the same can be reconciled to the Doctrine of our holy and harmly
Christian Religion: But alas! What would you have us do? If we should leave off
these Practices, how should we live at the Rate we do? fill our Tables daily
with variety of costly Dishes, and swill our selves and numerous Visitants with
rich Wines, and other strong Liquors: How should we maintain our Grandeur, and
our Pomp, and raise great Estates for our selves and Children, and leave our
Posterity great, and rich, and honorable in the World? We consider nor your
Labor, Weariness, Disorders, Sickness, Hunger, Drought, want of due Rest, or
convenient Food, nor any the like Hardships that you suffer: If we can but live
in State and Abundance, and make vast Quantities of Sugar, or other Commodities
yearly, which is our chief delight, and the highest good we desire; and he that
does thus do, how hard soever he uses his Slaves, is counted a brave Husband,
and a good Christian too, a very notable man, fit for others to make Examples
by, and imitate his prudent Conduct.


Negr. But all this time you look not into the Radix, nor consider the
lamentahle Oppressions and Violences that cleave fast to this your good
Husbandry (as you call it) that your Houses are cemented with Blood, and all
your Dainties and your Riches accompanied with the dolorous Complaints, Sighs
and Groans of your poor Vassals, which are continually sent up to Heaven
against you.


Mast. No, no, we expel all such Melancholy Thoughts with a plentiful Glass of
Wine, Jovial Company, or other sensual Diversions.


Negr. Those Arts you use to lay your Reason and Consciences to sleep, will in
the end both hasten and aggravate that Vengeance which must necessarily follow
all Injustice and Oppression. As for maintining Pride, Superfluity, and other
Evils of that nature, I am of your mind, that they cannot be supplied without
Oppression and Violence; for all Extremes beget their Likenesses: But sure you
Christians above all others, ought not to regard such Vanities, but relinquish
and detest all Superfluity, Pride, Gluttony, and other the like Intemperances,
since they are so diametrically opposite to your Profession and Religion.
Besides, you abuse your selves and Posserity, by thinking to raise great
Estates, or derive any lasting Temporal Happiness to you or them, by
over-charging us with labor; For does not Reason and Experience let you know,
that Houses built with mouldering Stone and rotten Timber, will not long
continue; and that Estates heaped together by Violence, carry along with them a
Curse and are blasted from the Radix, so that at most they seldom descend to
the third Heir, and rarely outlive the first or second Generation? What are
become of all the Glories of the Nimrods, and the Caesar's, and the Alexanders?
of all the mighty Tyrants, and spreading Monarchies of the Assyrians, Medes,
Persians, Macedonians and Romans? Are they not all long since crushed to pieces
by one another, because their Foundations were laid in Violence and Spoil,
Injustice and Oppressions? The Spaniards, who baptized the New World in Blood,
murdered many Hundred Thousand Indians, on pretense of propagating the
Christian Religion, when in truth it was only to get Gold and Empire; Have they
not met with Retaliation? Have they not decreased in Power ever since those
Cruelties, and instead of grasping an universal Monarchy, (which their Ambition
promised themselves) are now scarce able to defend their own ancient Patrimony,
or keep off an Enemy from the Frontiers of Castile? If all these mighty Men of
War have Shipwrackt by steering this Course, how hope you with your petty
Pinnaces, and tottering Skiffs, to avoid the like Tempests? If just Vengeance
has overturned whole Empires and Kings, that called themselves Invinceable,
for their Cruelties and Oppressions, how shall your private Fortunes be
established, that have no other Foundation but the like Violence and Injustice?

On the other side, I pray observe, there are many honest, compassionate, and
truly Christian-spirited Men amongst you, that do not willingly oppress either
Man or Beast, and yet you see how they are blessed, and prosper, and enjoy more
true Content and Happiness in one Week, than you whose Minds are continually
distracted with greedy Desires, or anxious Fears, do in all your Lives; Nor are
any of your Estates so firmly established, as those whose Possessors use Mercy
and Gentleness in all their Doings; for Virtue and Welldoing will as naturally
attract the Influences, and favor both of God and Man, and of the Coelestials,
as well as inferior Creatures, as a Loadstone does Iron: And whosoever
endeavors sincerely to live according to the innocent Law of God in Nature,
shall be filled with good things, but those that study to grow rich by
Wickedness and Oppression, shall be sent empty away, and both their Estates and
their Hopes be scattered like Leaves before the Wind.

Nor is your Practice herein less Impudent than Ungodly, all Wickedness being
indeed the height of Folly, and Piety and Virtue evermore the best Policy. For
why should you oppress us, by whose Labors you are sustained? And our Ill is
your Loss, are we not your Money? And what a small matter more than you allow
us, might plentifully supply us? As suppose such Masters as have Fifty, a
Hundred or two Hundred Negroes, if they would add to our Allowance, Fifty, or
one Hundred, or two Hundred Pounds per annum, it might maintain us in lively
Strength, and sufficient Vigor to go through with our Labor with cheerful
Spirits, and brisk Dispositions; then should our Souls (instead of Cursing, and
calling for Vengeance upon you) Bless you, and serve you cordially and
willingly, with all our Power. For those that are wise amongst us, matter not
their Freedom so much, provided they might but be admitted such necessary
Supports, Privileges and Accomodations, as our bountiful Creator by his
Handmaid, Nature, has plentifully provided for all his Creatures, and
especially for the race of Men: And then would you have Peace in your own
Houses and Spirits, whereas now you are always filled with Contention, Anger,
Strife, Jealousy or Suspicions; nor need you ever then fear our Rising up
against you, to cut you off, or any other Invasion; for nothing does so much
disarm the Rage of the fierce Wrath, as Well-doing and Innocence; these being
the surest Bulwarks both against inward and outward Enemies.


Mast. I cannot deny the Truth of what you have said, nor know I how to make
any further Objections, therefore I think it will more become us to amend our
Practices, than to study Arguments to cloak or defend them.


Negr. I am overjoyed, good Master, to hear these Words from your Mouth; they
sound well in our Ears, and make most pleasant Music; nor will you, I dare
promise you, ever have cause to Repent of these merciful Resolutions, for the
only way for you to have good Servants, is for you first to be good Masters;
and though some of our Countrymen are untractable, sullen, morose, cruel and
revengeful (more especially by reason of the Oppressions beforementioned) so
others of them have notwithstanding given you strong Motives to believe their
Integrity and faithful Honesty toward their Masters, and Christians in
general, for many of us at several times, and on sundry occasions, have givem
most clear and demonstrative Testimonies of our Faithfulness, in discovering
several horrid Plots and Conspiracies, which some of the worst of us had
designed against our Masters; And how little do many of us value our dear
Lives, to save our Masters? And how ready are we to go, run, work, watch and
defend our Masters* and to preserve their Rights? So that many of our Christian
Masters have been heard to say, That they would as soon, and willingly trust
their Lives with some of their Negro Slaves, as with the most trusty Christian
Servants they had. And I doubt not, but if our Masters deal justly, and with
tenderness preserve us, by allowing us such suitable Food, Drinks and Rest as
are needful for the support of our Lives and Health, and suitable to the
Climate, we should all in general become more tractable, obedient and diligent,
and thereby not only perform our Labor much better, but secretly attract the
sweet Influences of God and Nature on their Heads, and then twenty of us would
dispatch as much Work and Business as thirty do, or can do, that have neither
Food that is proper, either in Quantity or Quality, nor due Rest, for want of
which, the whole frame of the Body, and all the Members grow heavy, dull, weak
and heartless, and the Mind indisposed and averse from, as well as unable for
Work or Business, which can never go on well, and to satisfaction, where the
chief motive is Whip and Spur, Fear on the one side, and Cruelty on the other.

Besides, if we and our Wives were kept in good Heart, we should be able to get
not only more strong and healthy Children, but more in Number, which would
supply your Business far better, than for you every Year to be at that great
Charge of buying such Numbers of new Negroes, of whom many fail, and many dye
upon the change of Climate; For by reason of the Hardships used to us, and
especially the Cruelties toward our Wpmen, during their Pregnancy, they so
often Miscarry, that we upon the Island cannot keep our Number, but decrease so
fast, that you are forced every Year (at vast charge) to fetch about ten
Thousand (as I have heard) new Ones; whereas there is no doubt to be made, but
if we were conveniently supplied with Food and competent Rest, and some due
Respect or Commiseration had to our Wives when they are big, then every of our
Masters Families would so increase by his own Bread, that there would be no
more occasion for buying of new Ones, which would wonderfully enrich you; so
that if either you regard the Rules of your Holy Religion, and will not justly
be branded for Hypocrites or Atheists; If you have any respect to Humanity,
common Honesty, and that universal ^rinciple (but almost universally neglected)
to do as you would be done by; or lastly, if you would avoid divine Vengeance,
in Retaliation for your Oppressions, and would justly increase your Estates by
such ways, as they may be a comfort to your selves, and continue to your
Posterity: If all or any of these thing, I say, have any weight with you, then
speedily leave off your Severities, and let your usage of us be such as is fit
for Men to practice toward Men, let us see the excellency of the Christian
Religion, by the goodness of your Lives that profess it, by your Meekness, and
Charity, and Benignity, and Compassion toward your fellow Creatures,
especially those of the same Species with your selves, and who have no less
rational and immortal Souls than the best of you: If these things you do, we
and our Posterity shall willingly serve you, and not count it any Slavery, but
our unspeakable Happiness; Peace shall be in your Dwellings, and Safety shall
surround your Island, for Innocence is a better defense than Forts and
Citadels, than Armies and Fleets, than Walls of Brass, flankt with Towers of
Adamant: In a word, you shall have Satisfaction within, and Security without,
and enjoy the Blessings both of Time and Eternity. But if neither the Voice of
Religion, nor Nature, can be heard; If neither Humanity nor Self-interest can
prevail with you, be assured, that although you are wilfully Deaf, our great
Creator will be ready to hear our Cries; and you must certainly one day make
Retaliation to the uttermost Farthing.


Mast. Sambo! I have hearkened attentively, and well considered your Discourse,
which carries with it such Evidence and Reason, that I must acknowledge I am
convinced that our former Conduct toward you, has not been agreeable to our
Religion, or common Equity; therefore for my own part, you shall see by future
Usage, what Impression your Words have made upon me, nor shall I be wanting to
acquaint others with what you have offered -- It grows late, therefore you were
best be gone, and betake your self to Rest.


Negr. Boon Master, I return you a thousand of Thanks for the freedom you have
given me of speaking to you: And I am overjoyed to hear, that you have thereby
received some satisfaction; I shall now return to my fellow Servants; and as I
have used some Arguments to you to be kind to them, so I shall on all occasions
press them with Arguments to be obedient, humble, just and respective to all
their Masters.


Mast. Therein honest Sambo! you will do very well, and so good Night to you.


Negr. Good Night, my good dear Master!


FINIS.

