Healths Grand Preservative: OR THE Women's best Doctor.

A TREATISE, Showing the Nature and Operation of Brandy, Rumm, Rack, and other
distilled Spirits, and the ill consequences of Men's, but especially of Women's
drinking such pernicious Liquors and smoking Tobacco.

As likewise, Of the immoderate Eating of Flesh without a due observation of
Time, or Nature of the Creature which has proved very destructive to the
Health of many.

Together, With a Rational Discourse of the Excellency of Herbs, highly
approved of by our Ancestors (...) former times. And the Reasons why Men now so
much desire Flesh more than other Food.

A Work highly fit to be perused and observed by all that Love their Health,
and particularly necessary to the Female Sex, on whose good or ill Constitution
the Health and Strength, or Sickness and weakness of all Posterity does in a
more especial manner depend.

By THO. TRYON.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Lang Curtis near
Fleet-Bridge, 1682.

Healths Grand Preservative: OR THE Women's best Doctor, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nature and Operation of Brandy, Rumm, and Rack, which of late years are
become as common Drinks amongst many as Beer and Ale, not only in England, but
also in all the West Indies where the English inhabit, and of the evil
consequences that do attend the Drinkers thereof.

BRandy, R^mm, Rack, and other distilled Spirits, are all very per^icious and
hurtful to the Health of the Body, if not sparingly taken on extraordinary
occasions in a Physi^^^ way; for the Intention of all such Chemical
preparations, when first Inr^^ted, was for Medicinal uses, and not to be used
as Common drink, as of late years indiscre^tly they are, to the destruction of
many Thousands, the frequent use of them contracting such (...) and stubbo^n
D^seases, as for the most part are incurable.

1. All such Spirits as are drawn by common Distilla^^^, through those cruel
Sulphuro^s Fires, where the Air has not its free egress and regress, their
(...) har^h fiery Spirit or Brandy. The same you shall have if you distill
Sugar, only it yields a stronger Spirit, for the more Bal^amick the Body of any
thing is, the stronger and fiercer is its Spirit, when that Balsamic body and
the pure Volatile Spirits are destroyed or separated from it. Now here you will
see, that the Volatile Spirit and (...) Cordial (...) or Body, both in the Sack
and also in the Sugar, are destroyed, and there does remain, as is said before,
only a fierce harsh Brimstony Spirit, void of all the wholesome qualities Sack
and Sugar did contain; for the Volatile Spirit or Tincture is the Essential
Life of every thing, and its the maintainer of its Color, Smell, and T^st. Now
these pure Spirits will not endure any violent Heat or harsh Fire, but through
the fiery heat, and want of the free Egress and Regress of the Air, they
presently become Suff^cated, and then the sweet Balsamic body is turned sour;
for this sweet Balsamic body is the pleasant Habitation of the Volatile
Spirit, and this pure Spirit is the true Life of that Balsamic body; they are
inseparable Companions, the one cannot subsist without the other; destroy
either, and both Dye.

Therefore all such Spirits so drawn, do loose their Balsamic body with all
their Cordial Virtues and Tinctures, put what Herbs or Li^u^rs you will into
such Furnaces, they are presently P^^ndeted of their Natural Color, and run
off white, whereby it appears, that this Common way of Distillation destroys
the pure Natural Virtues and Tincture, for from the Tincture proceeds all the
Variety of Colors, both in Vegetables, Minerals, and Annimals, so that such
Spirits do only contain a harsh fier^e Fiery Nature, and for that reason, if
they be frequently Drink, do ^rey upon the Natural Heat, and by degrees weaken
it, destroying the very Life of Nature, by way of Simile; for every Like works
upon its likeness, whence it comes to pass, that in those who addict themselves
to the Drinking of these high Fiery or Brimstony Spirits, their Natural heat
grows cold and Feeble, and their Appetites are weakened, they destroying the
Power of the Digestive Faculty of the Stomach, so that many such People after
Eating are forced to Drink a Dram to help concoction; all other Drinks proving
too cold for them, which constrains them to continue ^ooping of such Liquor; a
sad Remedy, when we go about to help a mischief by increasing the application
of the same ill means which first occasioned it^ for these wrathful Spirits
have awakened the Central Heat, which is the Root of Nature, that ought not to
have been awakened or kindled, for if the Central Heat be stired up by any
unnatural Meats or Drinks, or other violence done to Nature, then presently
follows the Consumption of the Radical Moisture, and the pure Spirits and
Lively Tinctures become Suffocated, wherein consists the Essential Life of
Nature. And as in the before mentioned Example, the pure Spirit and Balsamic
body in Sack will not endure those cruel harsh Sulphurous Fires, where the Air
has not its free Influence, but presently becomes Suffocated or destroyed, and
the most pleasant Sweetness thereof turned into a Stink, so neither will the
Radical Spirits and pure Oil in the Body, endure those Sulphurous Flames, and
Fierce Spirits, without sustaining the like prejudice; for that pure Virtue or
Essential Principal, which the Lord in the Creation endued every thing with,
(which is the true Life thereof,) will not endure any violent motion or harsh
Fire to touch them; especially if the circulation of the Air be wanting, as it
is in all such Distillations, for these Spirits are so pure and subtle, that
when any Injury is offered to them, they either evaporate or become suffocated;
for this Essential Powder or pure Life, is the moderator or Friendly Quality in
all Minerals, Vegetables and Animals, which does mix and Qualify the harsh
Fiery dark Principal, and does allay and moderate the cruel harsh Nature of the
Dark-Fire, as does plainly appear in all the forementioned Liquors, and also in
Charcoal, for before the Sack or any Balsamic Liquor, was put into the Still
and drawn off, those very same Fiery harsh sulphurous Spirits were essentially
in the Wine, or whatever else it be, for it is the Root of Nature, and the
Original to every Life, but being mixed or incorporated with the Balsamic body
and pure spirit, the fiery fierce sulphurous spirit is thereby swallowed up,
and as it were hid and moderated; for in what thing soever the pure Balsamic
body is predominant, there this dark furious spirit is hid or captivated; an
Example whereof we have in Sugar, where when the sweet Balsamic body is
potent, there also this fiery sulphurous Spirit is strong, but not manifest;
but as soon as this Essential Spirit and Balsamic body are separated or
destroyed, this dark Fiery Brimstonie Spirit appears in its own form, and
becomes like a Mad furious Devil in Nature, its clothing being the Dark-Fire;
for this Spirit has lost its Sweat Water or Friendly Life in its Separation,
which before did Qualify its harsh Fierce Fire, it also loses its pure
Color, or bright native Shine, because the Essential Oil is consumed, in that
Separation, so that there does remain no true Life nor Light in it, but being
set on Fire, its Flame ^s of a (...) that the dark wrathful Properties of
Sat^^^ and Mars, and their Fierce Fires are predominant in all such (...) or
Spirits.

This is further (...) in (...), (as was hinted before) which is made of Wood,
but in the making thereof the pure Oil or sweet Wat^r, which is the Essential
Life of the Wood, is suffocated or destroyed, for from that Friendly Quality,
the Wood had its bright Shine or Fl^^e, which is of a Benevolent refreshing
opperation^ Now this pure Oil or Balsamic body, is the Essential Life and
moderator of all harsh Fiery dark Fumes or Qualitys in the Wood, which being
suffocated or totally destroyed in the making it, whereby the Original dark
Sulphurous Fire becomes strong and raging, giving greater and stronger Heat
than the Fire of Wood, but its Flame is not bright, clear, and refreshing as
that of Wood, but it is of a dimn B^^^^ony color, sending (...) strong fulsome
Fumes and Vapors very offesive to the pure Spirits and Health of those that
are near it; for having lo^t its pure Spirits and Oil of Life, in its making
into Charcoal, there does only remain in it, the Fierce dark original Fire, an
untameable devou^ing Spirit in Nature; for every Quality in Nature has power
only to kindle and awaken its likeness; therefore all such things as have lost
their pure Spirits and Balsamic body in the Separation or preparation* must
needs Endanger the Health, because they do awaken by Simile their own, or like
Poisonous Properties in the Body; and if it were not so, a little Poison taken
into the Body, would not destroy the Life; but Poisons taken in, do by Simile
join or Incorporate themselves with the Internal Poison or destructive
Principal in the Body, which before laid hid, or as a Man may say, was
moderated or Captivated by the sweet Body and pure Spirits, even as the Fiery
Spirits of Brandy are in Sack or Sugar; but so soon as the ou^ward Poison that
is taken in, Incorporates it self with the inward Poison in the Body, it does
so pow^^fully Strengthen and awaken it, that in a moment it overcomes the pure
Oil of L^fe, and the pure Spirits become Suffocated, and then the Natural Life
is a^ an end, for every property in Nature (both in the Evil and also in the
good) does with highest diligence see^^ out its likeness, and wheresoever it
finds its Simile, there it joy^s Forces and (...) wel^are of the Body.

Nor is it otherwise in all sorts of Food and other Drinks, if the pure Virtue
thereof be Separated or any way destroyed, for then forthwith the dark
Brimstony-Spirit is set at Liberty, which before the Separation, the Ba^^amick
body and pure Spir^ts did Qualify and hold Captive, that it could not mannifest
its-self in its own Nature, but being Separated from the good Properties and
Friendly Principal, this dark Fiery Sulphurous Spirit, becomes of a Furious
Nature and Operation, endeavoring to bring all in Subjection to it self;
Therefore such Liquors or Spirits frequently taken, b^^h up the Radical
moisture and Natural Heat, and are greedy devourers of the Sweet Oil in the
Body, whence proceeds General Obstructions, Crude Windy humors, Consumptions,
unna^ural Heats and Flushings, Loss of Appetite, Retchings to Vo^^it, and many
other disorders; And if those of the Female Sex take to Drink such Spirits, as
of late years they do too frequently, the Evils are doubled unto them.

2. In all the before mentioned Spirits that have passed through those cruel
harsh Fires where the Air has not its free Egress and Regress, the pure Spirit
and sweet Body is totally destroyed, which is the^Root of Motion and
Fermentation; therefore such Spirits will not work or Ferment as all other
Drinks and Liquors will, even Water it self; but you may put what quantity of
Sugar you will to Brandy, Rumm, or any other Distilled Spirits, they will
continue a strong Fire, void of Motion or Fermentation; this does further
declare that all the good Principals and Ver^^es are destroyed by the
preparation, and that there remains only a strong fixed Fire, which has its
uses in Physic, as is mentioned before, but not otherwise.

3. Such Spirits being frequently Drunk do generate various Diseases, according
to each Man's Nature and Constitution, and the Climate whether hot or cold, for
they do powerfully Prey upon the Natural Heat, consuming the sweet Oil and pur^
Spirits; for the Balsamic body and pure Spirits of all such Liquors being
destroyed, in the preparation, they become an Extre^^, which Nature in its
simplicity hates, and for this cause such Liquors cannot Administer any Propper
or Agreeable Nourishment to the Body, or to the pure Spirits, it cannot give
that which it has not, it has only power to awaken the Central Heat o^ Fire,
which ought not to have been kindled; and this it does by a Simpathetical
opperation, for all Meats and Drinks have power in the Body to awaken and
strengthen their likeness; for this reason all Wisemen skilled in the Mysteries
of Nature have commended Simple Meats and Drinks, because most such things are
as it were equal in their parts, having no mannifest Quality that does
predominate Violently over the other, but yet contains a sufficient Nourishment
for the Body, and also for the Spirit^ For Meats and Drinks ought to be equal
in their parts, the Spirit ought not to be Separated from the Body, nor the
Body from the Spirit, but both ought to be Administered together; For the Body
without the Spirit is of a gross heavy dull or dead Nature, and the Spirit
without the Body is too Violent and Fiery, but the Health of Man's Body and
Mind, does chiefly consist in the equal^ity of both; do not all Meats and
Drinks wherein any Quality or Property of Nature is extreme (whether it be in
Virtue, or harmfulness) if not sparingly taken, certainly discompose the
Harmony both of the Body and mind? for every Quality bege^s its likeness, and
so on the contrary, Concord and Harmony are maintain^d by their Likenesses; if
there be not a Sympathetical agreement between the Stomach and the Meats and
Drinks, both in Quality and Quantity, the unity and Concord of the Properties
of Nature are immediately broken, whence proceeds various Diseases according to
the Degrees of the Disorder.

This every one ought to understand, or else they may unadvisedly lay heavier
Burdens than Nature can bear; for most Diseases are generated through
surplusage of Nourishment. For unto weak heats there ought to be administered a
proportionable Food, but stronger heats will admit of stronger Foods and
greater quantity, which all persons might know, if they would but observe the
opperation of their own Natures; for no Health nor Harmony can be continued
where the parts do disagree amongst themselves. What Harmony can the most
skilful Master of Music make, if the strings of his Instrument be some too
sharp, and others too flat; even so it is in the Elements of the Body, and also
in the Mind.

4. For Man is the most Beautiful and Perfectest of all Gods Creation, and his
Image, called by the Ancients, the lesser world; for in him is contained the
true Nature and Properties of all Elements, Numbers, Weights, and Measures,
therefore man is both capable of, and liable to receive all Impressions, and to
be influ^nced by all things he communicates with, or joins himself unto, as all
sorts of Meats, Drinks, Employments, Communications, and what ever else he
suffers his will or desires to enter into, the same things have power
r^^pectively to awaken their Similes, therefore all (...) are perilous to the
Health: If Men and Women were but sensible of the danger, and terrible Diseases
that are contracted by the frequent eating and drinking of those things that
are unequal in themselves, as Brandy, Rumm and other Spirituous Drinks and high
prepared Foods, they would not so eagerly desire them. Do not all or most that
do accustom themselves to such things quickly spoil their Healths? Nature is
Simple and Innocent, and the Simplicity thereof cannot be continued, but by
Sobriety and Temperance in Meats and Drinks that are Simple and harmless, which
will not only gratify Nature, but contribute both due and moist Nourishment,
far beyond all lushions Fat, compounded Dishes of the Richest Food, and
Spirituous Drinks, as it appears by many hundreds of Poor People who are
constrained by pure necessity, not by Wisdom, to Live for the most part on
Simple Food and mean Drinks, their Labor hard, Clothing thin, open Air, cold
Houses, small Fires, hard Beds, standing on Earthen Floors; by all which means,
they are not only preserved in better Health, but also enabled to endure Labor
with more ease and pleasure, then the Intemperately Superfluous can lie a Bed
or sit by the Fire. O then how excellent are the ways of Temperance and
Sobriety! they free the Body from pain, and the mind from perturbations,
sweetning all Gods Blessings, and giving the opportunity of time, which being
well Employed, affords many benefits both to the Body and Mind; for what
advantage is it if a Man possess the whole World, if his Body be full of pain
through Intemperance, which for the most part no less affects and indisposeth
the Mind.

5. Brandy, Rumm and all strong Spirituous Drinks are far more dangerous in hot
Climates and Countries then they are in cold, and do sooner there destroy the
Health, tho they be bad in both, except taken in a Physical way; I know this is
contrary to the Vulgar Notion, but it is agreeable to Truth, Experience and
reason; for in hot Climates the Natural Heat is not so strong by reason of the
forcible Influences of the Sun, which do powerfully exhale the Radical
moisture, open the pores, and too violently evaporate the Spirits by continual
Sweatings, which dulls the edge of the Appetite, weakening the Digestive
Faculty of the Stomach, whereby the Inclination to Drink is increased, for
which reason many desire hot Spiritual Drinks, because they find a present
refreshment, for all such Drinks do powerfully awaken the Internal Spirits by
Simile, and make Men quick, lively and brisk, during the ^^me of their
Opperation, which is but for a moment, afterward they find themselves heavy,
dull, and indisposed, and their Stomach feeble, cold, and raw, which does
entice all that do a^custome themselves to such Drinks, to take a Hair of the
same Dog (as their Phrase is) and so they Drink more, and are conti^ually the
more weakened, for all such Fiery strong Drinks do not only Prey on the Natural
Spirits, but also too violently do evaporate them. The very same Opperation
have all strong Drinks, as Wine and the like, if Temperance be wanting, but not
so violently as the former. Therefore in hot Climates there ought to be double
the Care and Temperance in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, as in Cold; of which
the Natives of most hot Countries might be our Examples; for they do for the
most part Live very Temperately, their Drink being generally Water, or Wine
allayed with Water, their Food mean, or more Simple then ours, whereby they are
better preserved in Health; for the Constitutions of all People in hot Climates
are weaker, or at leastwise not so able to endure great Meals of Food, and
Superfluous Drinking of strong Drinks, as they are in cold. For cold Countries
make Men hardy, strong, and able to endure Intemperance, for which cause it is
observed that most of the North^rn Climates are very Intemperate in Drinking
and Eating, and in Hott, they are the contrary. And therefore our English are
much Distempered and many Dye when they Travel into the West and East Indies,
because they take wrong measures, continuing the same disorder and Intemperance
as they did in their own Country, or rather increasing it, which Nature cannot
bear without manifest prejudice.

6. It is to be noted that those that do acoustome themselves to the frequent
Drinking of the forementioned Fiery Spiritual Drinks in all the Plantations in
the West Indies, and also the Common eating of Salt-Fish and Flesh, which are
all great Extremes, do thereby become very obnoxious to the dry Belly-Ache, or
Griping of the Guts, Dropsies and the Gout, for all such Food and Drink does
violently stir up and consume the Natural Heat and moisture, whereby the
Digestive Faculty of the Stomach is rendered unable to Concoct or make any
perfect Separation, either of the Food or Drink, which oppresses the whole
Body, whence are generated Evil Juices that fall into the Joints, Infeebling
and Torturing them, and this is the Original of the Gout in other Comp^^^^ons,
these disorders consumed the a^ry Flesh of the Bones, taking away their natural
Strength and vigor, so that they Languish away by degrees, and these you call
Co^sumptions, in others for want of Heat and moisture, the excrement in the
Bowels is Contracted into so hard a Substance, that it cannot pass, and there
is hadly a Medicine found that will Cure it, this is that which the Learned
call the Iliacal Passion, and the Vulgar, The Plague in the Guts, being one of
the most Tormenting Diseases in the World. And in other Bodies the Central Heat
being wasted by such unfit Meats and Drinks, so that great part of the Food
turns into a Flux of Humors, both Windy and Watery, which swell the lower parts
of the Body, and this is the Generation of your Dropsies; but as God is always
good, and his Handmaid Nature an Indulgent Mother, so they have as it were
chalked out the Means, and prescribed a Diet whereby these Diseases may be
prevented, would Men but be so wise as to observe and follow it; for all hot
Climates do furnish the Natives with wonderful variety and plenty of Herbs and
Fruits, far exceeding cold Countries therein, both in quantity and quality; for
in those hot Regions, the Sun has greater power to prepare all such things:
And if our English would but accustom their selves to such harmless natural
simple Foods and moderate Drinks, the forementioned distempers would hardly be
known.

7. It is also to be noted, and much to be pitied, that of late years many
English Women have betaken themselves to the drinking of Brandy and other
Spirits, and have invented the Black-Cherry Brandy which is in great Esteem, so
that she is no body that has not a Bottle of it stand at her ^lbow, or if ever
so little Qualm or disorder be on the Stomach, or perhaps merely fancied, then
away to the Brandy Bottle; so that when such people come to be Sick, which most
of them are very sub^^ct unto, the Physicians do not know what to Administer,
they having in their Health used themselves to such high ^^ery drinks, that
their Cordials seem like water to them: Besides, there are many fatal
inconveniences attend the Female Sex more than the Male in drinking such
drinks, most of which are not so proper to be publicly mentioned in this
place, and therefore I shall forbear, but some I cannot but instance in; and
though perhaps some Women too much addicted to the D^lights of the Bottle, may
be offended with me for telling them the Truth, and endeavoring to wean them
from the Beloved Dra^^, yet to do them good, I shall venture the Hail-shot of
their Tongues, and hope they will in t^me grow so wise, as not to indulge a
foolish so^tish humor, when it ^ends apparently to destroy, not only their own
healths, and shortning of their Lives, but likewise In^alls diseases and
destruction on their poor Innocent Children; for it is not only against the
Feminine Nature to drink strong Drinks, but also destructive to the Generation
of Mankind; It makes them Masculine and Robustick, filling them with Fury and
Madness, and many other Indecencies, which are no less pernicious then shameful
in a Woman. It also Distempers them by causing Fumes and Vapors to Fly into
the Head, generating Wind in abundance. Therefore the Wise Ancients did account
it a Crime for Women to Drink strong Drink or Wine, tho their Countries did
afford Wine in abundance; and good reason they had, for the whole preservation
of Mankind resides chiefly in the Temperance and Government of the Women; if
they are Intemperate, the Radix of Men is corrupted; are we not like to have
very Fine, Hopeful, Healthy Children, when the Mother by excessive Pampering
her unweildy Car^ass, has Contracted more Diseases then an Hospital? or when
they are put out to some Drunken Nurse, that instead of affording them wholesome
Natural Milk, Suckles them up with the unconcocted Dreggs of that Brandy with
which she daily overcharges her filthy Stomach?

The Nature of Women will not bear Excess in Meats and Drinks, as Men's will,
without mannifest danger to their Healths, and also to the Health of their
Children; most Windy Diseases both in Women and Children, being caused by their
Intemperance both in quantity and quallity. They overcharging their Nature with
Food containing too much Nourishment, and Drinks that are too strong. This is
chiefly observable amongst wanton Citizens and the Richer sort of People, who
pay dearly for the Lickerishness of their Pallats, by the Diseases that thence
arise, they being much more Distempered then the ordinary Pains-taking People.
I confess there are hardly any Women in the World so Intemperate and such great
Lovers of their Bellys as the English, no^ is there any Nation more Subject to
variety of Diseases; and therefore they are afflicted with diverse Distempers,
which Women in other Countries know nothing of. And as our Children are
generally weak, puling, Rickety, and Sickly, so the occasion thereof is too
evident, since they are almost made Gluttons from the very Cradle, their
Mothers gorging and Feeding them till they loath their Victuals, and often cast
it up again; and when they have been Cramming all day, the good Woman
entertains her Gossips with Stories, what a little Stomach her Child has, and
that she can get it to eat nothing, and She wonders how it Lives, and indeed so
she may, but for a quite contrary reason, for this oppressing Nature with
Excess in ^^^uth, is not only the cause of the Death of many, but in others
^^^ows such Seeds, and lays Foundations for Distempers, that they (...) scarce
ever out-grow them, also many Women out of the like ^^olish Fondness give their
Children strong Drink which is very ^^structive to their Health.

Nor is it become unfrequent, for Women not only to Drink ^^andy but also to
Smoke Tobacco, which two things have a great ^^finity, Tobacco being an Herb of
Mars and Saturn, it has its ^^ery Quality from Mars, and its Poisonous fulsome
attractive ^^ature from Saturn; the common use of it in Pipes is very Inju^^ous
to all sorts of People, but more especially to the Female Sex, ^xcept it be
taken very sparingly in a Physical way, for some ^atery and windy Diseases, but
the usual taking of it destroys the ^hysical virtues and Opperation thereof;
only the daily Smoking (...) may be profitable to Gluttons, and those that Eat
and Drink to ^uperfluity of Rich Food and strong Drink, and live Idle Lives,
(...) such want Evacuations, but Exercise and Temperance were ^uch better for
their Health.

Tobacco and Brandy are certainly utter Enemies to Women and also to their
Children, for their Spirits and Balsamic Body, (...) hence their true Life
Shines, is more volatile and tender then Men's, and their natural Heat is not so
strong, for this cause Women cannot bear or endure any extremes, either in
Meats, Drinks, or Exercises, without mannifest danger to their Healths, they
being generally more Sanguine then Men, and their Central Heat ^eaker,
therefore all kind of Inequality makes deeper Impression ^n them, and they are
sooner moved to all kinds of Passions: ^or Women in their Radix are Compounded
more of the sweet ^riendly Sanguine Nature, their dignification being chiefly
from ^he Element of Water, but the Root of Men's Nature is from the ^trong might
of the Fire. And for the same cause Women are more Chaste then Men, and of
colder Natures, tho many Men do believe the contrary, but they are greatly
mistaken in this particular, having no true understanding of Nature; they have
^udged thus hardly of Women, because many of them are so easily drawn into
inconveniences by the pretended friendship of Men, but I do affirm, that their
being so easily overcome, is not from their unchaste desires, but chiefly from
their Friendly Courteous effeminate Natures, being of a yielding Temper, which
is essentially in the Root of their Lives, and when a Man has once awakened in
them the Love-String, which is quickly done, he may comm^^ them as he pleases;
now finding them comply, they imagine the of them which they find in
themselves: Not but that some W^^ men are as Unchaste as Men, but then such,
through the power^^ their depraved Free-wills and wanton Imaginations, have
forc^^ Nature out of her simple Innocent ways, compelling her often (...) do
that which she perfectly loath^.

The wise Ancients understanding this Nature and Constitution (...) Women, and
considering that the whole welfare and health of Man kind depended chiefly on
their Temperance and discreet Conduc^ did therefore direct them to an higher
degree of Temperance, an^ thought it requisite, and so absolutely necessary,
that both the drin^ allotted for Women in most Countries, was, and is to this
day (...) Water, and their Food as Innocent and Natural; they eat Fle^^
sparingly, living much on raw and boiled Herbs, Fruits and Grai^ which is a
most sublime Diet. And by this means their Women an^ Children are not afflicted
with such a number of cruel Diseas^ There is no Country in the World where
there Children and You^^ people are so generally subject to the small Pox,
King's Evil, Join^ Aches, and many Leperous and languishing Diseases; how many
(...) them yearly Die with Convulsions and Windy D^^stempers, which ge^ nerally
they receive from their Mothers? How many miseries an^ aching hearts do Women
endure with their Sickly Children? an^ what Woman is free from Vapors and
Windy Diseases, fainting Fits, weak Joints and Backs, their Blood corrupted,
breaking out (...) small Spots in the Flesh of several colors, their Stomach
cold, and their Natural heat not able to digest their Food without a Dram^ etc.
For all which Evils, there is no Remedy so long as our Women do continue the
frequent Eating of fat gross Flesh (without Herbs and other sweet high prepared
Food, and drinking strong Liquo^s as Brandy, etc. and taking Tobacco, for these
things do continually heat the whole Body, thereby awakening the Central heat,
which is very injurious to Women, for it presently sends sumes and vapors into
the Head, and the fierce Fires with venomous Particles do penetrate the whole
Body, drying up, and consuming the pleasant moist cool Airy Vapors,
suffocating the pure Spirits, which otherwise would replenish the whole Body
and sharpen the Appetite; it also dulls the Senses, and possesses the Blood
with a sharp fretting Humor, and hinders its free Circulation, causing the
pure natural Spirits, whose habitation is in the Blood, to become impure,
whence ar^ses a general indisposition over the whole Body. Therefore all that
Love their own Health, or the good of their Children, ought to ^e^rain such
hurtful Food, and learn to know, that Brandy, Tobacco, and all such things, are
to be taken sparingly and no otherwise than as people take Physic.

CHAP. II.
Of Flesh, and its operation in the Body, and also on the Senses. That the
continual Eating thereof without due distinction of proper Times and Seasons,
does darken the Spirits, and distempers Nature. Likewise of the excellency of
Herbs, Fruits, and their inward operation on the Body and Mind.

THe eating of Flesh was not allowed or practiced in the first and purer Ages,
when Men gave themselves to the Study of Wisdom, viz. To the knowledge of
themselves, and were partakers of Gods secrets in Divine and Humane things, and
enjoyed Health and long Life drawn out to the Age of many hundred years. For
thus the Holy Scripture tells us, Genesis 1. The Lord said, behold! I have given
to you every Herb bearing Seed, which is upon the face of all the Earth, and
every Tree in which is the fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, to you it shall be
for Meat. And in another place it is said, Flesh with the Blood thereof, you
shall not eat. It is not said, That the Lord made all Creatures for Man to Eat,
as I have heard many affirm, but he made them for his own Glory and eternal
Honor, and for the manifestation of his Wonders, and that Men should have
Dominion over all Creatures and created things, which Man has lost by
suffering his desires and imaginations to enter into the Bestial nature, which
do by degrees captivate the Noble parts in Men. But the wise Ancients for
diverse Ages of the World, did know but little of the variety of Flesh and
strong Drinks, or of compounded Dishes of 20 sorts of things, most of them of
disagreeing Natures: No, their Food was simple and natural, easy to be
procured without oppression to themselves or to any of Gods Creatures, as
Herbs, Fruits and Grains, and pure water for drink, which things are endued
with a most simple nature and operation, which neither du^leth the Head by
fumes, nor stup^^^s the Senses by surplusage of nourishment, but being well
prepared and eaten moderately, do nourish by way of Simile its like qualities
in the Body, being of lighter digestion, and of a more A^ery operation than
Flesh, being also void of all Inclinations, Senses, or passions of Love or
Have, whose original is more clean and nearer the unity in nature; therefore
the Philosophical Ancients in former ages encouraged the eating of Herbs,
Fruits and Grains, but on the contrary, made Laws against the common eating of
Flesh without distinction, The great and most illuminated Prophet Moses did not
admit the Children of Israel to eat any Flesh during their forty years March
through the Wilderness: It Is true, when the people did Murm^^, the Lord being
provoked, gave them Flesh in his Wrath, and aft^rwards when they were admitted
to eat Flesh, it was with such distinctions, and with so many circumstances as
could not be performed but by abundance of labor and trouble, and other
inconveniences, by which Laws and observations many of Gods Creatures became
of little or no use in the Creation, as Swine and the like, if indeed they had
only been made for Men to eat. But the Lord never commanded his People in any
Age to abstain from any thing, but it was always for their preservation; for
Abstinence^ Cleanness, and Sobriety in Meats, D^inks, Exercises, and
Communications, do work wonderful Effects, and have a sympathetical operation
both on the Body and Senses, rendering the observers thereof Healthful, with
brisk powerful Spirits, watchful, prudent, of good forecast, able to give
Council, and for matters of Learning, they do easily grow to an excellency in
the knowledge of themselves, and in all other things whereunto they do apply
themselves^ And as for Prayers, Medi^ations and Contemplations, they do perform
them with great Facility, Pleasure and Spiritual delight, being always fresh in
their minds, and free from Diseases in their Bodies.

By this way of Sobriety, Cleanness and Temperance many of the Ancients became
admirable both in Divine and humane Wisdom; it is well known how Scrupulously
the Pythagoreans (one of the most Learned and Mysterious of all the Sects of
Gentile Philosophers) abstained from Flesh. The Divine Writer and great Prophet
Moses, testifies that God made Man in his own Image^ and that he should have
Dominion over all things or Creatures, not that he should eat all things, or
hurt himself by devouring them, nor suffer his desires to enter into them, nor
theirs into him, for Man is a Prince in this World, and in him is contained the
true Nature of all the Inferior Creatures; for if it were not so, (...) could
not be their Prince, nor be sustained by them. And the Man was made greater
then any other Creature that is visible^ and to be Lord over all, yet
nevetheless he having a Simile with the Nature of all things, is thereby
rendered capable to be wrought on by every inferior thing he shall suffer his
desires to enter into, and by degrees he is liable to become captivated unto
that thing, be it either Good or Evil; for every like (as I told you before)
works on and awakens its likeness; This was the reason why Moses commanded that
unclean Beasts should not be eaten, that the human Nature might not mix or
incorporate in its self the Beastial qualities; for every individual Man has
essentially in him the true Natures and Essences of all the Beasts of the
Field, and Fishes of the Sea, as also of all Herbs and Fruits, Stones and
Minerals, and whatsoever else can be thought of; for if this were not so, then
Man would not be subject to be wrought on by all, neither would the various
sorts of Food agree with him or nourish him.

The wise Ancients understanding this, and that every thing had power to
attract unto it self such matter out of all things, as is capable to nourish
its own Body, therefore in those days the eating of Flesh was not in such
Reputation as of late years it has been; especially as it is in England, who
do make it their chief Food, All Vegetables and Fruits being in themselves of a
clean Simple Nature and Opperation, which being well prepared and temperately
eaten, have only power to waken their Similes in the Body and Senses as
aforesaid. But on the contrary, all Beasts, especially unclean Beasts, are
endued with all kind of Beastial Passions, as Anger, Revenge, Covetuousness,
Love and Hate, which dispositions and Passions of the Flesh, but especially the
Blood, does retain after such Animals are Killed; and for that reason it was,
that the Blood of all sorts of Beasts was so strictly forbidden, for the
Essential Spirits dwell in the Blood, and in the Blood and Spirits lie hid all
the dispositions and Inclinations the Creature was endued withal, and therefore
all sorts of Flesh that were permitted to be eaten were to be well Purged from
the Blood. And also this same Blood was either to be consumed by Fire, or an
hole made in the Earth and the Blood cast into it and covered, that the
wrathful Spirits and Vapors thereof might not defile the Air, which is
continually Breathed into our Bodies; for when any Creature is Killed, the
great pain and Agony they endure does so powerfully awaken the Center of the
wrathful Fire, and also the Internal Poisons which are the Root of every Life,
that the said Fierce Poisonous Spirits seize the Blood on their right Fountain
of pre^rvation, so that the Blood does not only contain all the natural
^ispositions, passions and Inclinations, but also the awakened Poisons and
irritated Spirits which were violently stirred up by Deaths stroke. For when
the natural Life is in danger (the continuation of which is so sweet unto all
Creatures, and they do so unwillingly part with it, especially when the
Creature is in perfect Health and Strength) what a strange fear and dread must
needs attend the Creature in this condition? and how strongly and violently are
all the Centers and Powers of nature stirred up? and then are awakened the
revengeful Spirits, which do contain the Blood, for that is their Habitation,
which in this Agonous condition does often spread it self through the whole
Body, and makes the Flesh look red, but this is generally drawn back again by
the drawing away of the Blood where the wound is made. Now if this Blood be
exposed to the open Air, these fiery dark wrathful Spirits do by degrees
evaporate, and incorporate themselves with the Air, and so de^^les it, and
renders it pernicious.

The very same is to be understood in all other Uncleanness, and these are
the chief Reasons why the Prophet Moses commanded the Blood either to be Burnt
on the Altar, or Buried in the Earth, tho there does remain somewhat more to be
said why he commanded the Blood to be consumed on the Altar by Fire, which I
shall forbear, and speak of it in its proper place; for those fiery wrathful
Spirits that do evaporate themselves into the Air, being continually breathed
into the body by such people as do communicate near such places, as
Slaughter-houses, and the like, and more especially those that are of killing
Employments, those awakened wratchful Spirits do enter them, and powerfully
incorporate themselves with their Similes; for this cause all Butchers and
others, that do use such Trades, are more fierce and cruel, sooner moved to
wrath than others; killing is as easy and familiar to them as Plowing the Land
is to the Husbandman; and in a word, they are far more inclined to violence
than men of other Employments are.

The same is to be understood in all other Trades, and also (...)
Communications^ as those that are brought up and have their (...) versations
amongst Horses, are not most of them Robustick, Pro^^ Bold and Surly, like the
Creatures they communicate with; the same is likewise to be understood in many
other other hard work^in^ rough Trades and Employments; are not most of them
rash, head strong, scarce endued with common Humanity. There is nothin^ so
good, or so bad, but Man is capable of being captivated to it from this Ground
it is that weak Inclinations, that a Man in him self is hardly sensible of, may
either by Employments or Commu^^cations be made strong, which is one Reason why
Men's Inclinations and their Love and Hate alters and changes, according to
time, place, business, and communication, as some Men have declared, that they
did not fear being overcome with Drink, Women, or the like Evils, because at
that time they found no Inclinations to such things, nevertheless, time,
opportunity, communications, and other circumstances concurring, many of them
have been overcome by those Vices they so little stood in fear of, though also
Astrologick Configurations and Influences have a share in altering and changing
Men's inclinations, and more especially when other causes concur: For this cause
the most prudent in all Ages have advised all Men to avoid evil occasions, and
the Apostle Paul says, That Evil Communication corrupts good Manners, the
truth of which no Man will or can deny. Now if Employments, Communications,
Labors, Words, and all kind of outward business, have so great power of
changing and altering Dispositions and Inclinations, increasing them, and the
contrary, how can we imagine but Mea^^ and Drinks received into the Body, will
have the same or greater power and operation, as those that feed much on
unclean Flesh, as on Swine, and that have their conversation amongst Animals,
are not many of them much like those Creatures, of so^^ish, dull, heavy, sordid
dispositions, yet subtle and cunning in a Beastial way? And on the contrary,
those that drink Wine, and feed on the highest food, have not they Spirits
accordingly? also those whose Conversation is amongst Men, as Citizens and
Merchants; have they not higher and greater Spirits, being more tractable and
humane, fair and ingenious in all their dealings and conversations: For all
things have a sympathetical operation, whether it be Employments, Meats,
Drinks, or Communications, every thing does secretly awaken its like property,
which do often captivate the spirit of a Man before he is sensible of it, being
ignorant of the nature and sympathetical operation all things have with his own
Nature. It Is true, most Men believe that evil Company corrupts manners, and
will acknowledge that some sorts of Employments do by degrees dispose people to
Inhumanity, Violence and Cruelty; but if you tell them there is the same
possibility and greater in Meats, to vary not only Men's bodies, but also their
Inclinations and Minds, they shall Laugh at it as a ridiculous Dream, though in
truth it is a most certain Truth, and daily experience (if we would but hear
her Voice) bears witness unto it. Why did Moses prohibit his people the eating
of Swines flesh, seeing Swine are not serviceable unto mankind any other way,
but by being killed and eaten; and besides, a Swine is a Creature, that being
well ordered, becomes as wholesome Nourishment, as some other Animals that are
counted clean, though there is somewhat to be said against the grossness of
that sort of Flesh; But the chief thing the Spirit of God in that great Prophet
reguarded, was, no doubt, the Spirit of that ^reature whose original and
predominant quality stands in the dark wrath of Nature, which is manifested by
their shapes, cries, and tones, which Spirit the h^man nature ought not to join
it self unto, lest it partake of its Nature. Every thing having power to join
it self with its likeness, and to strengthen its own property. Does not Wine
and strong drink precipitate men into Fury and Madness by simile; that is, the
Spirits in Wine do incorporate themselves with the natural Spirits, and
violently awaken them, making them burn too fierce, which sets nature into a
Rage, awakening the central Spirits till all parts of the body burn like fire
till the Oil be consumed, and nature begins to languish, becoming dull, heavy,
and stupid. The very same operation have all food in the Body, and on the
Spirits and Senses, but more slowly and hidden; for great Meals of Food makes
dull when first eaten, for all the time Nature is a digesting, and making
separation, (which is 4, 5, or 6 hours a doing) and then Nature begins to be
brisk and lightsome; for what the Stomach and natural heat do perform, as to
Fermentation and Separation with the Food, is done to Natures hand by Art in
all sorts of strong drinks, therefore all such fermented strong drinks have a
present operation, but let drink be ever so strong, if it have not passed
through Fermentation and Seperation^ it will lie heavy on the Stomach, and send
dark and dulling fumes into the Head if a quantity be drunk: Therefore great
Meals of strong rich food do endanger the Health more than proportionable
drinking of strong drinks, especially in hot Countries, and in Summer time in
colder Climates. That dispositions and inolinations are changed and altered by
Food, may further appear in all or most unclean creatures, are they not made
much fiercer if raw Flesh and Blood be given them, their wrathful unclean
Nature being thereby enraged and made stronger? And is not the very flesh of
those Creatures men feed on, altered either for the better or worse, according
to the nature of their Food; what a vast difference shall there be as to the
goodness or badness, wholsomness or unwholsomness of the Milk of the very same
Cow, when she feeds upon fresh delicate Grass, Herbs, and Flowers, and when she
is kept on course Brewers grains or the like? The Elements of Man's body and
natural spirits are compounded of the same matter as other Creatures are, and
in respects subject to the same or like alterations; only the Holy Light and
Grace of God, which enlightneth every man that comes into the World, if
obeyed, is sufficient to subdue most natural Inclinations, and to keep them
within the bounds of Temperance; indeed this gift is the only power by which a
man may overcome the Evil and deny himself.

2. Flesh is not so clean a Food as Herbs, Seeds and Fruits, for all sorts of
Animals are Subject to various Passions, but on the contrary all or most
Vegetables have a more Simple and Innocent Original, therefore their Opperation
on the Body and Senses is as Simple having no power to awaken any property in
the Body but what is like themselves. Furthermore we see that no Creatures that
are clean will eat Flesh, except they be taught it, and brought to it by
degrees; on the other side, all such Animals as naturally will eat Flesh, are
by all means counted unclean, as Dogs, Cats, Bears, Wolves, Foxes and many
others both in the Sea and Land, and most Men will avoid the eat^ng of such
Creatures, as being unclean in the Root of their Natures. Therefore they desire
such Food as has affinity with them, for every Creature rejoices in its
likeness. The Prophet Moses well understood this when he commanded that unclean
Creatures and Blood should not be eaten, because the Blood (as is mentioned
before) does not only contain the Spirits, but the very Humor, Dispositions
and Inclinations of the Creature, therefore it was to be Killed and dressed
after such a manner by which the Blood and Superfluous matter was extinguished,
and if Flesh should now be prepared after their way, we should not account it
to have half the Virtue as it has in our way of preparation. Indeed the way of
Killing and preparing of Flesh and Fish, that the Lawgiver prescribed to his
People, was to cleanse the Flesh from all Blood in which stand the Spirits, and
all the dispositions and Inclinations of the Creature lie hid. By this means
the Uniting of the Bestial Nature with the humane was in a great measure
prevented; and for no other reason all unclean Beasts, Fouls and Fishes were so
severely forbidden. All Created things have but only Ground and Original. Every
particular Creature contains the true Nature and properties of the whole, only
the Qualities are in several degrees, one having one Quality strong, and
another the Center. For in every Creature one of the forms or properties do
carry the upward Dominion, and the other Quallities lie as it were hid, but
some times do manifest themselves, but that property which is weakest may be
awakened and made strong by its Simile, as often comes to pass.

From this very Ground proceeds all Sympathy and Antipathy, concord and discord
in this World. For all those whose predominate qualities stand nearest and have
affinity each to other, such are Friendly one to another, but those whose
predominate Properties have Antipathy each to other, such slight one another,
and if the Grace and Holy Light of God do not restrain them, they are very apt
to Speak Evil and Backbite one another. The same is to be understood in the
Divine Principal of Gods Love, those that through the Blessing and Favor of
the Lord, have obtained the holy Gifts of the Spirit, be it more or less, all
such People have affinity and bear good will each to other; except the false
Prophet Opinion gets in amongst them, which is a Ravening Woolf? every thing
rejoices in its likeness, and the contrary in its Death, therefore it is
highly convenient, for every Man to consider the variety and the possibility of
his own Nature, and that in himself is contained the true Nature of every thing
in the Visible and Invisible World, and that he bears a Simile with all things,
and is both capable and liable to be drawn either to Vice or Virtue by every
thing he joins himself to, whether Meats, Drinks, Communications, or whatever
else a Man suffers his will or desires to run out after or enter into, the same
thing has power to awaken its likeness, and for this cause all the Wisemen and
Prophets have advised to cleanness and sobriety, and to the reading of good
Men's Books, which do stir up the good Faculties in the Soul, for all Books do
bear the Image and Spirits of him that Wrote them, and so by simile do awaken
the like Spirit and desire; and so on the contrary, if young or old give
themselves to the reading of Plays or Books of Romances, they will powerfully
awaken by simile the vain wanton Nature, which before lay as it were hid,
Therefore it was said in the Revelations, Come out from amongst them, and be ye
separated, lest you partake of their Evils.

3. The Reason why most people love and so much desire Flesh more than either
Herbs, Fruits, or Grains, is not because it does afford either better
Nourishment, or is pleasanter to the Palate or Stomach, but it chiefly is
because Man is departed in his Mind and desires from the Innocent ways of God
and Nature, and through his Free Will has awakened the dark wrathful powers in
himself, which have more Affinity with the Bestial Nature, than with Herbs or
Fruits: For the Beasts are endued with the very same Passions in all respects
as Men, if it had not been so, the Commandment had not been so strict against
eating of Flesh, for the Radix of Beasts and Men have a greater Affinity, and
the more ignorant and sottish people are, the more they desire to eat Flesh,
and the more Flesh they eat, the more Sottish, Ignorant, and Brutish they
become. Also, the more the dark poisonous wrath of God and Nature is stirred
up, and the more it does predominate in Man, the more does Man desire Food that
has a proportionable Nature. From this very ground it is that some sorts of
Creatures esteemed Unclean, (whose predominent quality stands in the wrath of
Nature) do so much desire unclean Food, because it has unity with their
Natures; the very same is to be understood of those Creatures which we call
clean, they do as much on the contrary desire clean Food, viz. Fruits and
Herbs, because such things have the nearest Affinity with their Natures; and if
Men had not departed from the Innocent ways of God and Nature, and suffer their
Wills to enter into the Wrath and Beastial Nature, they would not so much
desire Flesh; for Flesh cannot be eaten without violence done to Nature, for
the Lives of all Beasts are as sweet to them, and they as much desire to
continue them as Men do, and as unwillingly part with them. And the Groanings
of these Creatures that suffer Oppression and Pain, do awaken the Wrath in them
that do it, which is a certain Retaliation or Reward; for all kind of Cruelty
does stir up and awaken the Wrath of God in Nature. And so on the contrary, all
Love and Concord does powerfully beget its likeness.

Does not every evil word, which does proceed and is formed from the Principal
of Wrath and Passion, carry the Power of its principal with it, and awaken its
Simile in those to whom such words are directed? on the contrary, do not soft
and pleasant words pacify wrath by awakening their Simile? every principal and
property in Nature must have its own Food, or else it loses its power and
Strength. Men's coveting to eat so much Flesh is too plain a Sign, that they are
departed from that Innocent and Simple Life for which they were made, and
en^red into the contrary; for if the wrath of God in Nature were not awakened
beyond its proper degree, and did not predominate over the Simple Innocent
Life, then People would no more desire Flesh then our holy Ancestors in the
first Ages of the World. It is a token we are in Egypt, when we hanker so much
after the Fleshpots* As long as men were partakers of and followers of the
true knowledge of Gods works, and lived in the Simple path of Nature, which led
to Health and long Life, Herbs and Fruits were in as great esteem as Flesh is
now; It was a shame in former Ages for a Man to be seen to buy Flesh, or to
have carried it openly in the Streets of Cities, but now the best Citizens
count it the contrary, and make nothing to go openly to the Elesh-Markets in
their Plush Coats, and load a Porter two or three times a Week, with the Spoils
of their Slaughtered Fellow Creatures; and if a Man comes to their Honses after
Dinner, there he may behold a very unpleasant sight, viz. Greasy-Platters,
Bloody-Bones, and pieces of Fat Flesh lie up and down the Kitchen, thereby
rendered next door to a slaughter House. And this Trade is drove every day in
the Week, but more especially on the day they call their Sabbath, tho in truth
they do not make it so, but rather a day of Feasting, a day wherein they Bury
the dead Bodies of Slaughtered Beasts, and a day on which our English
Belly-Slaves and Gluttons make their Servants do more work then any other day
of the Week, as to dressing of Food. A day likewise whereon most People Cloth
themselves in all their bravery, and the Women go to Church to take notice who
has the Finest Clothes and the newest Fashions, etc. but why do I blame the
Women, the Men have been the occasion of all this and much more.

If those of each Sex did hearken to the Voice of God and Nature, they would
forsake such sinful Vanities, and not thus seek Death in the Error of their
Lives* I have drawn the Curtain, and given them a brief view of Natures School,
wherein the Sons of^ Wisdom learn to obey her Dictates, and by their prudent
Conduct and Temperance, avoid those many torturing diseases of Body, and
distracting pertu^bations of Mind, to which the rest of the world necessarily
enslave themselves by their perverse ^olly. What I have delivered, is the very
Doctrine of Nature, approved by Religion, justified by Reason, and confirmed by
Experience; Those that wilfully slight so many Monitors, will scarce deserve
Pity in their Misery.

FINIS

