A COPY of a LETTER WRITTEN To a Gentlewoman Newly Seduced to the Church of
ROME.

By the Reverend J. T. D. D. late Bishop of Down and Connor.

IMPRIMATUR, Guil. Needham.

June 3. 1687.

LONDON, Printed for L. Meredith at the Angel in Amen Corner. MDCLXXXVII.

Price Two Pence.

A Copy of a Letter written to a Gentlewoman newly seduced to the Church of
Rome.
M. B.
I was desirous of an opprtunity in London to have discoursed with you
concerning something of nearest concernment to you, but the multitude of my
little affairs hindered me, and have brought upon you this trouble to read a
long Letter, which yet I hope you will be more willing to do, because it comes
from one who has a great respect to your person, and a very great charity to
your soul: I must confess I was on your behalf troubled when I heard you were
fallen from the Communion of the Church of England, and entered into a
voluntary, unnecessary schism, and departure from the Laws of the King, and the
Communion of those with whom you have always lived in charity, going against
those Laws in the defense and profession of which your Husband died, going from
the Religion in which you were Baptized, in which for so many years, you lived
piously and hoped for Heaven, and all this without any sufficient reason,
without necessity or just scandal ministered to you; and to aggravate all this,
you did it in a time when the Church of England was persecuted, when she was
marked with the Characterism of our Lord, the marks of the Cross of Jesus, that
is, when she suffered for a holy cause and a holy conscience, when the Church
of England was more glorious than at any time before; Even when she could show
more Martyrs and Confessors than any Church this day in Christendom, even then
when a King died in the profession of her Religion, and thousands of Priests,
learned and pious Men suffered the spoiling of their goods rather than they
would forsake one Article of so excellent a Religion; So that seriously it is
not easily to be imagined that any thing should move you, unless it be that
which troubled the perverse Jews, and the Heathen Greek, Scandalum crucis, the
scandal of the Cross; You stumbled at that Rock of offense, you left us because
we were afflicted, lessened in outward circumstances and wrapped in a cloud;
but give me leave only to remind you of that sad saying of the Scripture, that
you may avoid the consequent of it; They that fall on this stone shall be
broken in pieces, but they on whom it shall fall shall be grinded to powder.
And if we should consider things but prudently, it is a great argument that the
sons of our Church are very conscientious and just in their persuasions, when
it is evident that we have no temporal end to serve, nothing but the great end
of our souls, all our hopes of preferment are gone, all secular regards, only
we still have truth on our sides, and we are not willing with the loss of truth
to change from a persecuted to a prosperous Church, from a Reformed to a Church
that will not be reformed; lest we give scandal to good people that suffer for
a holy conscience, and weaken the hands of the afflicted; of which if you had
been more careful, you would have remained much more innocent.

But I pray, give me leave to consider for you, because you in your change
considered so little for your self, what fault, what false doctrine, what
wicked and dangerous proposition, what defect, what amiss did you find in the
Doctrine and Liturgy and Discipline of the Church of England?

For its doctrine, It is certain it professes the belief of all that is written
in the Old and New Testament, all that which is in the three Creeds, the
Apostolical, the Nicene, and that of Athanasius, and whatsoever was decreed in
the four General Councils, or in any other truly such, and whatsoever was
condemned in these, our Church has legally declared it to be Heresy. And upon
these accounts above four whole ages of the Church went to Heaven; they
baptized all their Catechumens into this faith, their hopes of Heaven was upon
this and a good life, their Saints and Martyrs lived and died in this alone,
they denied Communion to none that professed this faith. This is the Catholic
faith, so says the Creed of Athanasius; and unless a company of Men have power
to alter the faith of God, whosoever live and die in this faith, are entirely
Catholic and Christian. So that the Church of England has the same faith
without dispute that the Church had for 400 or 500 Years, and therefore there
could be nothing wanting here to saving faith, if we live according to our
belief.

2 For the Liturgy of the Church of England, I shall not need to say much,
because the case will be very evident; First, Because the disputers of the
Church of Rome have not been very forward to object any thing against it, they
cannot charge it with any evil: 2. Because for all the time of King Edw 6. and
till the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, your people came to our Churches and
prayed with us, till the Bull of Pius Quintus came out upon temporal regards,
and made a Schism by forbidding the Queens Subjects to pray as by Law was here
appointed, though the prayers were good and holy, as themselves did believe.
That Bull enjoined Recusancy, and made that which was an act of Rebellion, and
Disobedience, and Schism, to be the character of your Roman Catholics. And
after this, what can be supposed wanting in order to salvation? We have the
Word of God, the Faith of the Apostles, the Creeds of the Primitive Church, the
Articles of the four first general Councils, a holy Liturgy, excellent Prayers,
perfect Sacraments, Faith and Repentance, the Ten Commandments, and the Sermons
of Christ, and all the precepts and counsels of the Gospel; We teach the
necessity of good works, and require and strictly exact the severity of a holy
life; We live in obedience to God, and are ready to die for him, and do so when
he requires us so to do; We speak honorably of his most holy Name, we worship
him at the mention of his Name, we confess his Attributes, we love his
Servants, we pray for all Men, we love all Christians, even our most erring
Brethren, we confess our sins to God and to our Brethren whom we have offended,
and to God's Ministers in cases of Scandal, or of a troubled Conscience. We
communicate often, we are enjoined to receive the holy Sacrament thrice every
Year at least; Our Priests absolve the penitent, our Bishops ordain Priests,
and confirm baptized persons, and bless their people and intercede for them;
and what could here be wanting to Salvation? what necessity forced you from us?
I dare not suspect it was a remporal regard that drew you away, but I am sure
it could be no spiritual.

But now that I have told you, and made you to consider from whence you went,
give me leave to represent to you, and tell you whither you are gone, tht you
may understand the nature and conditions of your change: For do not think your
self safe, because they tell you that you are come to the Church; You are
indeed gone from one Church to another, from a better to a worse, as will
appear in the induction; the particulars of which before I reckon, give me
leave to give you this advice; if you mean in this affair to understand what
you do; it were better you enquired what your Religion is, than what your
Church is; for that which is a true Religion to day, will be so to morrow and
for ever; but that which is a holy Church to day, may be heretical at the next
change, or may betray her trust, or obtrude new Articles in contradiction to
the old, or by new interpretations may elude ancient truths, or may change your
Creed, or may pretend to be the Spouse of Christ when she is idolatrous, that
is, adulterous to God: Your Religion is that which you must, and therefore may
competently understand; You must live in it; and grow in it; and govern all the
actions of your life by it; and in all questions concerning the Church, you are
to choose your Church by the Religion, and therefore this ought first and last
to be enquired after. Whether the Roman Church be the Catholic Church, must
depend upon so many uncertain enquiries, is offered to be proved by so long, so
tedious a method, has in it so many intrigues and Labyrinths of Question, and
is (like a long line) so impossible to be perfectly straight, and to have no
declination in it when it is held by such a hand as yours, that unless it be by
material enquiries into the Articles of the Religion, you can never hope to
have just grounds of confidence. In the mean time you can consider this; if the
Roman Church were the Catholic, that is, so as to exclude all that are not of
her communion, then the Greek Churches had as good turn Turks as remain damned
Christians, and all that are in the communion of all the other Patriarchal
Churches in Christendom, must also perish like Heathens, which thing before any
Man can believe, he must have put off all reason, and all modesty, and all
charity; And who can with any probability think that the Communion of Saints in
the Creed is nothing but the Communion of Roman Subjects, and the Article of
the Catholic Church was made up to Dispark the enclosures of Jarusalem, but to
turn them into the pale of Rome, and the Church is as limited as ever it was,
save only that the Synagogue is translated to Rome, which I think you will
easily believe was a Proposition the Apostles understood not. But though it be
hard to trust to it, it is also so hard to prove it, that you shall never be
able to understand the measures of that question, and therefore your salvation
can never depend upon it. For no good or wise person can believe that God has
tied our Salvation to impossible measures, or bound us to an Article that is
not by us cognoscible, or intends to have us conducted by that which we cannot
understand; and when you shall know that Learned men, even of the Roman party
are not agreed concerning the Catholic Church that is infallibly to guide you,
some saying that it is the virtual Church, that is, the Pope; some, that it is
the representative Church, that is, a Council; Some, that it is the Pope and
the Council, the virtual Church and the representative Church together; Some
that neither of these, nor both together are infallible; but only, the
essential Church, or the diffusive Church is the Catholic, from whom we must
at no hand dissent; you will quickly find your self in a wood, and uncertain
whether you have more than a word in exchange for your soul, when you are told
you are in the Catholic Church. But I will tell you what you may understand,
and see and feel, something that your self can tell whethr I say true or no
concerning it. You are now gone to a Church that protects it self by arts of
subtilty and arms, by violence and persecuting all that are not of their minds,
to a Church in which you are to be a Subject of the King so long as it pleases
the Pope: In which you may be absolved from your Vows made to God, your Oaths
to the King, your Promises to Men, your duty to your Parents in some cases: A
Church in which Men pray to God, and to Saints in the same Form of words in
which they pray to God, as you may see in the Offices of Saints, and
particularly of our Lady: a Church in which Men are taught by most of the
principal Leaders to worship Images with the same worship with which they
worship God and Christ, or him or her whose Image it is, and in which they
usually picture God the Father, and the holy Trinity, to the great dishonor of
that sacred mystery, against the doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church,
against the express doctrine of Scripture, against the honor of a Divine
Attribute; I mean, the immensity and spirituality of the Divine Nature; You are
gone to a Church that pretends to be Infallible, and yet is infinitely deceived
in many particulars, and yet endures no contradiction, and is impatient her
children should enquire into any thing her Priests obtrude. You are gone from
receiving the whole Sacrament to receive it but half; from Christ's Institution
to a humane invention, from Scripture to uncertain Traditions, and from ancient
Traditions to new pretenses, from prayers which ye understood to prayers which
ye understand not, from confidence in God to rely upon creatures, from entire
dependence upon inward acts to a dangerous temptation of resting too much in
outward ministeries, in the external work of Sacraments and of Sacramentals:
You are gone from a Church whose worshipping is simple, Christian and
Apostolical, to a Church where Men's consciences are laden with a burden of
Ceremonies greater than that in the days of the Jewish Religion (for the
Ceremonial of the Church of Rome is a great Book in Folio) greater I say than
all the Ceremonies of the Jews contained in Leviticus, etc. You are gone from a
Church where you were exhorted to read the Word of God, the holy Scriptures
from whence you found instruction, institution, comfort, reproof, a treasure of
all excellencies, to a Church that seals up that fountain from you, and gives
you drink by drops out of such Cisterns as they first make, and then stain, and
then reach out: and if it be told you that some Men abuse Scripture, it is
true, for if your Priests had not abused Scripture, they could not thus have
abused you, but there is no necessity they should, and you need not, unless you
list, any more than you need to abuse the Sacraments or decrees of the Church,
or the messages of your friend, or the Letters you receive, or the Laws of the
Land, all which are liable to be abused by evil persons, but not by good people
and modest understandings. It is now become a part of your Religion to be
ignorant, to walk in blindness, to believe the Man that hears your Confessions,
to hear none but him, not to hear God speaking but by him, and so you are
liable to be abused by him, as he please, without remedy. You are gone from us,
where you were only taught to worship God through Jesus Christ, and now you are
taught to worship Saints and Angels with a worship at least dangerous, and in
some things proper to God; for your Church worships the Virgin Mary with
burning incense and candles to her, and you give her presents, which by the
consent of all Nations used to be esteemed a worship peculiar to God, and it is
the same thing which was condemned for Heresy in the Collyridians, who offered
a Cake to the Virgin Mary; a Candle and a Cake make no difference in the
worship; and your joining God and the Saints in your worship and devotions, is
like the device of them that fought for King and Parliament, the latter
destroys the former. I will trouble you with no more particulars, because if
these move you not to consider better; nothing can.

But yet I have two things more to add of another nature, one of which at least
may prevail upon you, whom I suppose to have a tender and a religious
Conscience.

The first is, That all the points of difference between us and your Church are
such as do evidently serve the ends of Covetousness and Ambition, of Power and
Riches, and so stand vehemently suspected of design, and art, rather than truth
of the Article and designs upon Heaven I instance in the Pope's power over
Princes and all the World; his power of Dispensation, The exemption of the
Clergy from jurisdiction of Princes, The Doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences
which was once made means to raise a Portion for a Lady, the Niece of Pope Leo
the Tenth; The Priests power advanced beyond authority of any warrant from
Scripture, a doctrine apt to bring absolute obedience to the Papacy; but
because this is possibly too nice for you to suspect or consider, that which I
am sure ought to move you is this.

That you are gone to a Religion in which though through God's grace prevailing
over the follies of men, there are I hope, and charitably suppose many pious
Men that love God, and live good lives, yet there are very many doctrines
taught by your Men, which are very ill Friends to a good life, I instance in
your Indulgences and pardons, in which vicious men put a great confidence, and
rely greatly upon them. The doctrine of Purgatory which gives countenance to a
sort of Christians who live half to God and half to the World, and for them
this doctrine has found out a way that they may go to Hell and to Heaven too.
The Doctrine that the Priests absolution can turn a trifling repentance into a
perfect and a good, and that suddenly too, and at any time, even on our
Deathbed, or the minute before your death, is a dangerous heap of falsehood,
and gives license to wicked people and teaches men to reconcile a wicked
debauched life, with the hopes of Heaven. And then for penances and temporal
satisfaction, which might seem to be as a plank after the shipwreck of the duty
of Repentance, to keep men in awe, and to preserve them from sinking in an
Ocean of Impiety, it comes to just nothing by your doctrine; for there are so
many easy ways of Indulgences and getting Pardons, so many con-fraternities,
stations, privileged Altars, little Offices, Agnus Dei's, amulets, hallowed
devices, swords, roses, hats, Churchyards, and the fountain of these annexed
Indulgences the Pope himself, and his power of granting what, and when, and to
whom he list that he is a very unfortunate man that needs to smart with
penances; and after all, he may choose to suffer any at all, for he may pay
them in Purgatory if he please, and he may come out of Purgatory upon
reasonable terms, in case he should think it fit to go thither; So that all the
whole duty of Repentance seems to be destroyed with devices of Men that seek
power and gain, and find error and folly; insomuch that if I had a mind to
live an evil Life, and yet hope for Heaven at last, I would be of your Religion
above any in the World.

But I forget I am writing a Letter: I shall therefore desire you to consider
upon the premises, which is the safer way. For surely it is lawful for a Man
to serve God without Images; but that to worship Images is lawful, is not so
sure. It is lawful to pray to God alone, to confess him to be true, and every
Man a liar, to call no man Master upon Earth, but to rely upon God teaching us;
But it is at least hugely disputable and not at all certain that any Man, or
society of Men can be infallible, that we may put our trust in Saints, in
certain extraordinary Images, or burn Incense and offer consumptive oblations
to the Virgin Mary, or make vows to persons, of whose state, or place, or
capacities, or condition we have no certain revelation: we are sure we do well
when in the holy Communion we worship God and Jesus Christ our Savior, but
they who also worship what seems to be bread, are put to strange shifts to make
themselves believe it to be lawful. It is certainly lawful to believe what we
see and feel; but it is an unnatural thing upon pretense of faith to disbelieve
our eyes, when our sense and our faith can better be reconciled, as it is in
the question of the real presence, as it is taught by the Church of England.

So that unless you mean to prefer a danger before safety, temptation to
unholiness before a severe and a holy Religion, unless you mean to lose the
benefit of your prayers by praying what you perceive not, and the benefit of
the Sacrament in great degrees by falling from Christ's institution, and taking
half instead of all unless you desire to provoke God to jealousy by Images,
and Man to jealousy in professing a Religion in which you may in many cases
have leave to forfeit your faith and Jawfull trust, unless you will still
continue to give scandal to those good people with whom you have lived in a
common Religion, and weaken the hearts of Gods afflicted ones, unless you will
choose a Catechism without the second Commandment, and a Faith that grows
bigger or less as men please, and a Hope that in many degrees relies on men and
vain confidences, and a Charity that damns all the World but your selves;
unless you will do all this, that is, suffer an abuse in your Prayers, in the
Sacrament, in the Commandments, in Faith, in Hope, in Charity, in the Communion
of Saints, and your duty to your Supreme, you must return to the bosom of your
Mother the Church of England from whence you have fallen, rather weakly than
maliciously, and I doubt not but you will find the Comfort of it all your Life,
and in the Day of your Death, and in the Day of Judgment. If you will not, yet
I have freed mine own Soul, and done an act of Duty and Charity, which at least
you are bound to take kindly if you will not entertain it obediently.

Now let me add this, that although most of these objections are such things
which are the open and avowed doctrines or practices of your Church, and need
not to be proved as being either notorious or confessed; yet if any of your
Guides shall seem to question any thing of it, I will bind my self to verify
it to a tittle, and in that too which I intend them, that is, so as to be an
objection obliging you to return, under the pain of folly, or heresy, or
disobedience, according to the subject matter. And though I have propounded
these things now to your consideration, yet if it be desired I shall represent
them to your eye, so that even your self shall be able to give sentence in the
behalf of truth. In the mean time give me leave to tell you of how much folly
you are guilty in being moved by such mock-arguments as your men use when they
meet with women and tender consciences and weaker understandings.

The first is; where was your Church before Luther? Now if you had called upon
them to speak something against your Religion from Scripture, or right Reason,
or Universal Tradition, you had been secure as a Tortoise in her shell; a Cart
pressed with sheaves could not have oppressed your cause or person, though you
had confessed you understood nothing of the mysteries of succession doctrinal
or personal. For if we can make it appear that our Religion was that which
Christ and his Apostles taught, let the truth suffer what eclipses or
prejudices can be supposed, let it be hid like the holy fire in the captivity,
yet what Christ and his Apostles taught us is eternally true, and shall by some
means or other be conveyed to us; even the enemies of truth have been
conservators of that truth by which we can confute their errors. But if you
still ask where it was before Luther? I answer it was there where it was after;
even in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; and I know no warrant for
any other Religion; and if you will expect I should show any society of Men who
professed all the doctrines which are now expressed in the confession of the
Church of England; I shall tell you it is unreasonable; because some of our
truths are now brought into our public confessions that they might be opposed
against your errors; before the occasion of which there was no need of any such
confessions, till you made many things necessary to be professed, which are not
lawful to be believed. For if we believe your superinduced follies, we shall
do unreasonably, unconscionably, and wickedly; but the questions themselves are
so useless abstracting from the accidental necessity which your follies have
brought upon us, that it had been happy if we had never heard of them more than
the Saints and Martyrs did in the first ages of the Church; but because your
Clergy have invaded the liberty of the Church, and multiplied the dangers of
damnation, and pretend new necessities, and have introduced new Articles, and
affright the simple upon new pretensions, and slight the very institution and
the Commands of Christ and of the Apostles, and invent new Sacramentals
constituting Ceremonies of their own head, and promise grace along with the use
of them, as if they were not Ministers but Lords of the Spirit, and teach for
doctrines the commandments of men, and make void the Commandment of God by
their tradition, and have made a strange body of Divinity; therefore it is
necessary that we should immure our Faith by the refusal of such vain and
superstitious dreams: but our faith was completed at first, it is no other than
that which was delivered to the Saints, and can be no more for ever.

So that it is a foolish demand to require that we should show before Luther a
systeme of Articles declaring our sense in these questions: It was long before
they were questions at all; and when they were made questions, they remained so
a long time; and when by their several pieces they were determined, this part
of the Church was oppressed with a violent power; and when God gave
opportunity, then the yoke was broken; and this is the whole progress of this
affair. But if you will still insist upon it, then let the matter be put into
equal balances, and let them show any Church whose Confession of Faith was
such as was obtruded upon you at Trent: And if your Religion be Pius Quartus
his Creed at Trent, then we also have a question to ask, and that is Where was
your Religion before Trent?

The Council of Trent determined that the Souls departed before the Day of
Judgment enjoy the Beatifical Vision. It is certain this Article could not be
shown in the Confession of any of the ancient Churches; for most of the Fathers
were of another opinion. But that which is the greatest offense of Christendom
is not only that these doctrines which we say are false were yet affirmed, but
that those things which the Church of God did always reject, or held as
uncertain, should be made Articles of Faith, and so become parts of your
Religion; and of these it is that I again ask the question which none of your
side shall ever be able to answer for you: Where was your Religion before
Trent? I could instance in many particulars; but I shall name one to you, which
because the thing of it self is of no great consequence, it will appear the
more unreasonable and intolerable that your Church should adopt it into the
things of necessary belief, especially since it was only a matter of fact, and
they took the false part too. For in the 21. Sess. Chap. 4. it is affirmed,
That although the holy Fathers did give the Sacrament of the Eucharist to
Infants, yet they did it without any necessity of salvation; that is, they did
not believe it necessary to their salvation, which is notoriously false, and
the contrary is marked out with the black-lead of every man almost that reads
their Works; and yet your Council says this is sine controversia credendum; to
be believed without all controversy: and all Christians forbidden to believe
or teach otherwise. So that here it is made an Article of faith amongst you,
that a man shall neither believe his reason nor his eyes: and who can show any
confession of Faith in which all the Trent doctrine was professed and enjoined
under pain of damnation? and before De Potest. Eccles. cons. 12.
the Council of Constance, the Doctrine touching the Popes power was so new, so
decried, that as Gerson says, he hardly should have escaped the note of Heresy
that would have said so much as was there defined: so that in that Article
which now makes a great part of your belief, where was your Religion before the
Council of Constance? and it is notorious that your Council of Constance
determined the doctrine of the half communion with a Non obstante to Christ's
institution, that is, with a defiance to it, or a noted, observed neglect of
it, and with a profession it was otherwise in the Primitive Church. Where then
was your Religion before John Hus and Hierom of Prague's time, against whom
that Council was convened? But by this instance it appears most certainly that
your Church cannot show her confessions immediately after Christ, and therefore
if we could not show ours immediately before Luther, it were not half so much;
for since you receded from Christ's Doctrine we might well recede from yours;
and it matters not who or how many or how long they professed your doctrine, if
neither Christ nor his Apostles did teach it; so that if these Articles
constitute your Church, your Church was invisible at the first; and if ours was
invisible afterward, it matters not; For yours was invisible in the days of
light, and ours was invisible in the days of darkness. For our Church was
always visible in the reflections of Scripture, and he that had his eyes of
faith and reason might easily have seen these truths all the way which
constitute our Church. But I add yet farther, that our Church before Luther was
there where your Church was, in the same place and in the same persons; for
diverse of the errors which have been amongst us reformed, were not the
constituent Articles of your Church before Luther's time; for before the last
Councils of your Church a man might have been of your Communion upon easier
terms; and Indulgences were indeed a practice, but no Article of Faith before
your men made it so, and that very lately, and so were many other things
besides. So that although your men cozen the credulous and the simple by
calling yours The old Religion, yet the difference is vast between Truth and
their affirmative, even as much as between old Errors and new Articles. For
although Ignorance and Superstition had prepared the ore, yet the Councils of
Constance and Basil, and Trent especially, were the forges and the mint.

Lastly, If your men had not by all vile and violent art: of the World stopped
the mouths of dissenters, the question would quickly have been answered, or our
Articles would have been so confessed, so owned and so public, that the
question could never been asked; but in despite of all opposition, there were
great numbers of professors who did protest and profess and practice our
doctrines contrary to your Articles; as it is demonstrated by the Divines of
Germany in Illyricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, and in Bishop Mortons
appeal.

But with your next objection you are better pleased, and your Men make most
noise with it. For you pretend that by our confession, salvation may be had in
your Church; but your men deny it to us; and therefore by the confession of
both sides you may be safe, and there is no question concerning you; but of us
there is great question, for none but our selves say that we can be saved.

I answer, I. That salvation may be had in your Church, is it ever the truer
because we say it? If it be not, it can add no confidence to you, for the
proposition gets no strength by our affirmative. But if it be, then our
authority is good or else our reason; and if either be, then we have more
reason to be believed speaking of our selves; because we are concerned to see
that our selves may be in a state of hope; and therefore we would not venture
on this side if we had not greater reason to believe well of our selves than of
you. And therefore believe us when it is more likely that we have greater
reason, because we have greater concernments, and therefore greater
considerations.

2. As much charity as your Men pretend us to speak of you, yet it is a clear
case our hope of your salvation is so little that we dare not venture our
selves on your side. The Burger of Oldwater being to pass a River in his
Journey to Daventry, bad his Man try the Ford; telling him he hoped he should
not be drowned, for though he was afraid the River was too deep, yet he thought
his Horse would carry him out, or at least, the Boats would fetch him off. Such
a confidence we may have of you, but you will find that but little warranty, if
you remember how great an interest it is that you venture.

3. It would be remembered that though the best ground of your hope is not the
goodness of your own faith, but the greatness of our charity; yet we that
charitably hope well of you, have a fullness of assurance of the truth and
certainty of our own way; and however you can please your selves with Images of
things as having no firm footing for your trifling confidence, yet you can
never with your tricks outface us of just and firm adherencies; and if you
were not empty of supports, and greedy of bulrushes, snatching at any thing to
support your sinking cause, you would with fear and trembling consider the
direct dangers which we demonstrate to you to be in your Religion rather than
flatter your selves with collateral, weak, and deceitful hopes of accidental
possibilities, that some of you may escape.

4. If we be more charitable to you than you are to us, acknowledge in us the
beauty and essential form of Christian Religion; be sure you love as well as
make use of our charity; but if you make our Charity an argument against us,
remember that you render us evil in exchange for good; and let it be no brag to
you that you have not that charity to us; for therefore the Donatists were
condemned for Heretics and Schismatics because they damned all the world, and
afforded no charity to any that was not of their Communion.

5. But that our charity may be such indeed, that is, that it may do you a real
benefit, and not turn into Wormwood and Colloquintida, I pray take notice in
what sense it is that we allow salvation may possibly be had in your Church. We
warrant it not to any, we only hope it for some, we allow it to them as to the
Sadducees in the Law, and to the Corinthians in the Gospel who denied the
Resurrection; that is, till they were sufficiently instructed, and competently
convinced, and had time and powers to out-wear their prejudices and the
impresses of their education and long persuasion. But to them amongst you who
can and do consider and yet determine for error and interest, we have a greater
charity, even so much as to labor and pray for their conversion, but not so
much sondness as to flat them into boldness and pertinacious adherencies to
matters of so great danger.

6. But in all this affair, though your men are very bold with God and leap
into his Judgment Seat before him, and give wild sentences concerning the
salvation of your own party and the damnation of all that disagree, yet that
which is our charity to you, is indeed the fear of God, and the reverence of
his judgments; we do not say that all Papists are certainly damned; we wish and
desire vehemently that none of you may perish; but then this charity of
judgment relates not to you, nor is derived from any probability which we see
in your doctrines that differ from ours; but because we know not what rate and
value God puts upon the Article; It concerns neither you nor us to say, this or
that man shall be damned for his opinion; for besides that this is a bold
intrusion into that secret of God which shall not be opened till the Day of
Judgment, and besides that we know not what allays and abatements are to be
made by the good meaning and the ignorance of the man; all that can concern us
is to tell you that you are in error, that you depart from Scripture, that you
exercise tyranny over Souls, that you leave the Divine institution, and
prevaricate Gods Commandment, that you divide the Church without truth and
without necessity, that you tie Men to believe things under pain of damnation
which cannot be made very probable, much less certain; and therefore that you
sin against God and are in danger of his eternal displeasure; but in giving the
final sentence as we have no more to do than your men have, yet so we refuse to
follow your evil example; and we follow the glorious precedent of our Blessed
Lord; who decreed and declared against the crime, but not against the Criminal
before the day. He that does this, or that, is in danger of the Council, or in
danger of judgment, or liable, and obnoxious to the danger of hell fire, so we
say of your greatest errors; they put you in the danger of perishing; but that
you shall or shall not perish, we leave it to your Judge: and if you call this
charity, it is well, I am sure it is piety and the fear of God.

7. Whether you may be saved, or whether you shall be damned for your errors,
does neither depend upon our affirmative nor your negative, but according to
the rate and value which God sets upon things. Whatever we talk, things are as
they are, not as we dispute, or grant, or hope; and therefore it were well if
your men would leave abusing you and themselves with these little arts of
indirect support. For many men that are warranted, yet do eternally perish, and
you in your Church damn Millions who I doubt not shall reign with Jesus
eternally in the Heavens.

8. I wish you would consider, that if any of our men say salvation may be had
in your Church, it is not for the goodness of your new Propositions, but only
because you do keep so much of that which is our Religion, that upon the
confidence of that we hope well concerning you. And we do not hope any thing at
all that is good of you or your Religion as it distinghishes from us and ours:
we hope that the good which you have common with us may obtain pardon directly
or indirectly, or may be an antidote of the venom, and an amulet against the
danger of your very great errors, so that if you can derive any confidence from
our concession, you must remember where it takes root; not upon any thing of
yours, but wholly upon the excellency of ours; you are not at all safe, or
warranted for being Papists, but we hope well of some of you, for having so
much of the Protestant: and if that will do you any good, proceed in it, and
follow it whithersoever it leads you.

9. The safety that you dream of which we say to be on your side, is nothing of
allowance or warranty, but a hope that is collateral, indirect and relative; we
do not say any thing whereby you can conclude yours to be safer than ours, for
it is not safe at all, but extremely dangerous; we affirm those errors in
themselves to be damnable, some to contain in them Impiety, some to have
Sacrilege, some Idolatry, some Superstition, some practices to be conjuring
and charming and very like to Witchcraft, as in your hallowing of Water, and
baptizing Bells, and exorcizing Demoniacks; and what safety there can be in
these, or what you can fancy we should allow to you, I suppose you need not
boast of. Now because we hope some are saved amongst you, you must not conclude
yours to be safe; for our hope relies upon this. There are many of your
Propositions in which we differ from you, that Thousands amongst you understand
and know nothing of; it is to them as if they were not, it is to them now as it
was before the Council, they hear not of it. And though your Priests have taken
a course that the most ignorant do practice some of your abominations most
grossly, yet we hope this will not be laid upon them who (as St. Austin's
expression is) cauta sollicitudine quaerunt veritatem, corrigi parati cum
invenerint: do according as they are able warily and diligently seek for truth,
and are ready to follow it when they find it; Men who live good lives, and
repent of all their evils known and unknown. Now if we are not deceived in our
hopes, these Men shall rejoice in the eternal goodness of God, which prevails
over the malice of them that misguide you; but if we be deceived in our hopes
of you, your Guides have abused you, and the blind leaders of the blind will
fall together. For,

10. If you will have the secret of this whole affair, this it is. The hopes we
have of any of you, (as it is known) principally relies upon the hopes of your
repentance. Now we say that a Man may repent of an error which he knows not of;
as he that prays heartily for the pardon of all his sins and errors known and
unknown; by his general repentance may obtain many degrees and instances of
mercy. Now thus much also your Men allow to us; those who live well, and die in
a true though but general repentance of their sins and errors even amongst us,
your best and wisest Men pronounce to be in a savable condition Here then we
are equal, and we are as safe by your confession as you are by ours. But
because there are some Bigots of your faction fierce and fiery who say that a
general repentance will not serve our turns, but it must be a particular
renunciation of Protestancy; these men deny not only to us but to themselves
too, all that comfort which they derive from our Concession, and indeed which
they can hope for from the mercies of God. For be you sure we think as ill of
your errors as you can suppose of our Articles; and therefore if for errors (be
they on which side it chances) a general repentance will not serve the turn
without an actual dereliction, then flatter not your selves by any thing of our
kindness to your party; for you must have a particular, if a general be not
sufficient. But if it be sufficient for you, it is so for us, in case we be in
error as your men suppose us; but if it will not suffice us for remedy to those
errors you charge us with, neither will it suffice you; for the case must needs
be equal as to the value of repentance and malignity of the error: and
therefore these men condemn themselves and will not allow us to hope well of
them; but if they will allow us to hope, it must be by affirming the value of a
general repentance; and if they allow that, they must hope as well of ours as
we of theirs: but if they deny it to us, they deny it to themselves, and then
they can no more brag of any thing of our concession. This only I add to this
consideration; that your men do not, cannot charge upon us any doctrine that is
in its matter and effect impious; there is nothing positive in our doctrine,
but is either true or innocent, but we are accused for denying your
superstructures: ours therefore (if we be deceived) is but like a sin of
omission; yours are sins of commission in case you are in the wrong (as we
believe you to be) and therefore you must needs be in a greater danger than we
can be supposed, by how much sins of omission are less than sins of commission.

11. Your very way of arguing from our charity is a very fallacy and a trick
that must needs deceive you if you rely upon it. For whereas your men argue
thus: The Protestants say we Papists may be saved; and so say we too: but we
Papists say that you Protestants cannot, therefore it is safest to be a Papist;
consider that of this argument if it shall be accepted, any bold Heretic can
make use, against any modest Christian of a true persuasion. For, if he can but
outface the modesty of the good man, and tell him he shall be damned; unless
that modest man say as much of him you see impudence shall get the better of
the day. But it is thus in every error. Fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem in
immediate succession were circumcised, believing it to be necessary so to be:
with these other Christian Churches who were of the uncircumcision did
communicate: Suppose now that these Bishops had not only thought it necessary
for themselves but for others too; this argument you see was ready: you of the
uncircumcision who do communicate with us, think that we may be saved though we
are circumcised, but we do not think that you who are not circumcised can be
saved, therefore it is the safest way to be circumcised: I suppose you would
not have thought their argument good, neither would you have had your children
circumcised. But this argument may serve the Presbyterians as well as the
Papists. We are indeed very kind to them in our sentences concerning their
salvation; and they are many of them as unkind to us; If they should argue so
as you do, and say, you Episcopal men think we Presbyterians though in errors
can be saved, and we say so too: but we think you Epistopal men are Enemies of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and therefore we think you in a damuable
condition, therefore it is safer to be a Presbyterian: I know not what your men
would think of the argument in their hands, I am sure we had reason to complain
that we are used very ill on both hands for no other cause but because we are
charitable. But it is not our case alone; but the old Catholics were used just
so by the Donatists in this very argument, as we are used by your men. The
Donatists were so fierce against the Catholics, that they would re-baptize all
them who came to their Churches from the other: But the Catholics, as knowing
the Donatists did give right Baptism, admitted their Converts to Repentance,
but did not re-baptize them. Upon this score, the Donatists triumphed, saying,
You Catholics confefs our Baptism to be good, and so say we; But we Donatists
deny your Baptism to be good; therefore it is safer to be of our side than
yours. Now what should the Catholics say or do? Should they lie for God and
for Rellgion, and to serve the ends of T^^th say the Donatists Baptism was not
good? That they ought not. Should they damn all the Donatists, and make the
rent wider? It was too great already. What then? They were quiet, and knew that
the Donatists sought advantages by their own fierceness, and trampled upon the
others charity; but so they hardened themselves in error, and became evil,
because the others were good.

I shall trouble you no further now, but desire you to consider of these things
with as much caution as they were written with charity.

Till I hear from you, I shall pray to God to open your heart and your
understanding, that you may return from whence you are fallen, and repent, and
do your first work: Which that you may do, is the hearty desire of

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, JER. TAILOR

FINIS.

