A True RELATION Of what is Discovered concerning the MURDER Of the Archbp of
St. Andrews, And of what appears to have been the Occasion thereof.
ONE Lovel of Cunuchie, being Vassal to the Bishopric of St. Andrews; the late
Archbishop, upon the account of some few duties resting to him, did gift to his
own behoof, the Escheat of Lovell of Cunuchie, in prejudice of his numerous
family and many Creditors. One Haxstoun of Rachillet being one of these
Creditors, and at that time a Favorite of the Archbishops, prevails with him
upon his giving Bond to the Bishop for 1000 l. Scots, or thereby, to assign the
gift in his Favors. Thereafter the Archbishop conceiving prejudice against
him, Registrates Haxstouns Bond, surprises him at St. Andrews; having called
for him, takes him with Caption, and keeps him Prisoner in St. Andrews for
several months, until one Mr. Falconer a Conform Minister obtains his liberty.
But Haxstoun having stronger resentments of his Imprisonment, than of the
liberty to which he was restored, at his liberation in presence of witnesses,
Vowed and Swore, God dam him if ever he went to Church as long as there was a
Bishop in Scotland; And that if he lived he should be revenged on the Bishops
person.

This Haxstoun was a vile person, had nothing of good in him, and was scarce
admitted to the Society of Sober-men; He was not once only a Favorite, but
servant of the Bishop, having Collected part of his Rents. However now the
Archbishop (who was enemy to any thing that had interest in Haxstoun) Commands
Captain Carstairs, Garret, and one Scarlet a Tinker, to apprehend John Balfour
of Kinloch, brother-in-law to the said Haxstoun, (no Presbyterian, though an
enemy to the Bishop, upon the injury done to Haxstoun his brother-in-law) who
resisted the said Carstairs, and wounded some of them; And thereupon was cited
before the Council, (though Carstairs had no Warrant to apprehend him, only to
gratify the Bishop), where not daring to appear, he is denunced and
intercommuned, and made a stranger to his own House for two Years; wherewith,
and with the robbing and spoiling committed by Bailiff Carmichel, the secret
Councils Sheriff depute in Fife, The said Haxstoun and Balfour, being enraged
and inflamed with the desire of revenge upon the Archbishop, they did upon the
third of May instant, with eight or nine other Ruffians, (three of them called
as they say, Balfours) wait his return from Edenbrough to St. Andrews, and
there near a house called Magus, in an open Muire, and within two miles or
thereby of St. Andrews, they pursue him; the Coachman and Postilion perceiving,
advertises him, and drives with all their might to escape; So that for near
three quarters of a mile they could not overtake them. At last Balfour and
Haxstoun being better mounted than the rest, Balfour comes up with the
Postilion, commands to stop, and he refusing, strikes him over the face with
his Sword, dismounts him, and disorders the Coach-horse; Haxstoun comes to the
Coach and Fires several Pistols at the Bishop; but none of them, although they
hit his body, did pierce him; they pierced through his Clothes, but left only
blunt marks upon his body, somewhat like to burning.

Whereupon Haxstoun drags him out of his Coach, strikes him over the left Eye
with a deep wound, who thereupon fell, and gave him several other mortal
strokes upon his head, and cuts in his arms, rifles his pockets, and his
Daughters (who was with him in the Coach) of their Gold Watches and Papers,
disarms his servants without hurting any except the Postilion, who was wounded
at first; and that his Daughter received a wound on her thumb, grasping to save
her Father; and then flee all together.

This is the account both of the persons, the occasion of their wicked act, and
the circumstances of the act it self: Which is discovered and made known by the
Examination of the Bishops own servants upon Oath, and a servant of the house
near the place where the fact was done, where Haxstoun and Balfour left their
Coats before they attacked the Bishop; and after it was done, came and brought
them away.

The Bishops servants depone, That a man mounted on a bay House stroke the
Postilion and turned the Coach; and that he mounted on the white, dragged the
Bishop out of the Coach, and killed him with his Sword.

And the servant in the House depones, That it was John Balfour of Kinloch was
mounted on the bay Horse, and Haxstoun that was mounted on the white. That
these two persons had a personal spite and hatred at the Bishop for the causes
before, all know, and the Records witness. That the Bullets did not pierce his
body, was seen by the Chyrurgeon, William Borthwike, who was sent by the
Council to view his Body.

FINIS.

