AN ENDEAVOR TO RECTIFY SOME PREVAILING OPINIONS, Contrary to the Doctrine of
The Church of England.

By the Author of The Great Propitiation; And, A Discourse of Natural and
Moral-Impotency.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Robert Clavel, in Cross-Keys Court, in
Little-Brittain. 1671.

THE Author to the Reader.
I Published about two Years since, some Sermons called, The Great
Propitiation; and thereto Added a short Discourse concerning the Apostle Paul's
meaning by Justification by Faith, without Works. About half a Year after,
there came forth a Learned Book, called, Harmonia Apostolica, written by Mr.
George Bull, which quite crossing the Interpretation I had given of Saint Paul,
I was Occasioned by some Occurrences, which it concerns not the Reader to know,
to Write the substance of these Reflections upon it, which were Written within
less than three Months after it is coming forth, without any Design of Printing
them. And since I had Written this, there is Published a Discourse of Mr.
Charles Gataker (Thomae (...) Filii) wherein he signifying his dislike of Mr.
Bull's, Propounds a third way to Reconcile the Apostles, Paul, and James. What
my thoughts are of Mr. Bull's way, you will here see. I think he has in the
main, spoken right concerning the sense of Saint James; But I think Mr.
Gataker, has given the right Interpretation of neither, and judge that I have
said enough in my Book forementioned, to make it appear, and so has Mr. Bull
in his.

I grant, and lament it, that many Important Doctrines of the Reformed
Churches, are frequently by too many grossly Explained, so as to have ill
Consequences following from them; which if rightly Explained, would be found
not to Patronize, but to disown such Consequences. And hence many Learned men,
seeing the Intolerableness of such consequent Opinions, and not being able to
Extricate themselves, deny Important truths, and maintain such Opinions as
these following (which are the Foundation of the greatest part of Mr. Bull's
Book opposed, and would make an intolerable change in the very substance of the
Body of Divinity) viz. First, That there is no Law that threatens Future-death,
or promised Future-happiness, but the Gospel or Law of Grace. Secondly, That
the Jewish Law, or Law of Moses, had only Temporal Promises and Threats, and
required only External Obedience. (Which yet, you will see, I grant in one
Limited sense of it, to be true.) Thirdly, That no Law of God whatsoever
requires perfect Obedience, and so no man is bound to live perfectly, or free
from sin. Fourthly, And that for this Reason, because no man is bound to do
what he cannot do. (Which Reason is only true in a sense, nothing to the
purpose; but it is dangerously false, to deny a man is bound to do what he
cannot do, in another sense, viz. Upon the account of his Morally insuperable
wickedness, as I have elsewhere at large showed.) Fifthly, That, for any
Evidence we have from Scripture to the contrary, men after Conversion, or after
the receiving of the Gospel, do live perfectly or without sin, or do as much as
any Law of God requires from them. Sixthly, That the effect of the Grace of the
Spirit is something, that if denied to men enjoying the Gospel, they would be
excusable or blameless, in not obeying the Gospel.

Also, These following Expositions, would alter the very substance of the sense
of most Important parts of Scripture. First, That the Apostle Paul, does not
dispute against Justification by perfect Obedience to the Law, as being
impossible to man in this Life. Secondly, That our Lord in the 5th. of Matthew,
does not vindicate the Law from corrupt Interpretations, but adds to it, making
that the meaning of it, that never was so before. (Take notice, I charge not
this last mentioned Exposition, as maintained by Mr. Bull, though it be by many
others; and though it must follow by consequence, if what he maintains be true,
viz. That Moses's Law had no Internal Precepts.)

I judge, what I have here written, may be of use for the clearing of those in
Dispute, and many other passages of Scripture, and for the Confutation of many
dangerous Opinions, or I should not have permitted it is Publication. I shall
not here needlessly use Protestations concerning my Fidelity, in representing,
by a Translation, Mr. Bull's Discourse, since it is commonly accounted a sign
of Guilt, to clear one's self before accused. If any should suspect me of
Disingenuity herein, let me desire them to read the passages here replied to,
out of Mr. Bull's Book it self. And to encourage (so far as my word will pass)
them that have it not, to procure it; I shall say, that much of it is well
worth Reading; and that I am far from passing that censure on the rest of the
Book, which I do on the parts here replied to. May but what is here written be
so read and considered, without prejudice and passion (which may well be
expected from ingenuous Lovers of Truth) that it may have free Influence upon
men's understandings according to the evidence it brings: I shall not much doubt
of it is good success, in composing many differences in Opinion; Which is the
Prayer of the Author.

ERRATA.
PAge 27. Line 17. Read so speak, Marg. r. Heavenly. p. 34. l. 16. after here,
r. in. p. 67. l. 23. instead of also, r at Sinai. p. 75. l. 17. after fatuus,
r. of a new Covenant. p. 90. l. 5. for was, r. as. l. 6. r. on us, p. 108. l.
25. after ask, r. as I would ask. p. 125. l. 20. for Arguments, r. Argument. p.
168. l. penult, r. exiguum. p. 171. l. marg; 20. r. Adulterio. p. 208. l. 15
for to, r. do.

An endeavor to Rectify some prevailing Opinions.
THe Learned Author's design is very commendable, viz. To reconcile such
seemingly contrary Expressions of the Apostle Paul, and James, as these [You
see therefore that a man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.
24. We conclude therefore that a man is justified by Faith, without the works
of the Law, Romans 3. 28.] which Scriptures he sets down before his discourse, as
the Chief, or Exampla^s of the chief Places he designs to reconcile.

He divides his whole Discourse into two Dissertations; The first whereof is
about the meaning of the Apostle James in such Expressions as that cited, and
is so short as not to take up a fifth part of the Book; The second about the
sense of the Apostle Paul in his seemingly contrary Affirmations, taking up all
the rest of the Book.

His whole first Dissertation concerning the sense of the Apostle James, in
affirming Justification by Works as a condition, is Acute, Solid, and Cogent;
yea, and so is all generally in his second Dissertation to the 5th. Chap. and
part of it; he spending those Chapters in discovering the weakness and
falsehood of the attempts of many designing to reconcile such places, and in
proving the Apostle Paul, means not one single virtue by Faith, but the whole
Gospel-condition, the whole duty required for Salvation, or the obedience of
Faith. And I judge thus much of it (which is near one third part of the Book)
highly worth the Reading of any that have any other apprehensions of the
meaning of James, or that are not satisfied that the Apostle Paul by Faith,
means the whole necessary duty of a Christian.

But Quantum mutatus ab illo. Hectore qui redit exuvias indutus Achillis.
now when he begins at the 6th. Chapter of the second Dissertation, to tell
positively what the Apostle Paul means by excluding Works of the Law from
Justification, and what he means by Works, and by the Law; The sense he fastens
on the Apostle is quite remote from his meaning, and would not only make the
whole discourse of the Apostle, about denying Justification by works, a vain
useless Speculation; but also would bring in such intolerable Opinions as these
following, at least by evident consequence, viz.

First, That no man sins while he lives a truly Christian life, sincerely
obedient to the Law; and so needs no pardon, or Christ's satisfaction for
such failings as are consistent with true Christianity.

Secondly, That there is no such thing as pardon of sin possible as to Eternal
punishment, or punishment after this Life; neither did Christ satisfy for the
breach of any Law as to any Eternal punishment, or punishment after this Life,
but only for Temporal. Not that I affirm that the Author holds this Opinion
(for it is apparent he holds the contrary) but this follows by undeniable
consequence from his discourse, though he see it not, but will deny this
consequence.

Thirdly, That there is no possible Argument against Popish perfection or
meriting, so far as to need no pardon, from those passages in Paul's Epistles,
that deny Justification by Works; but merely such a vain useless Speculation as
this, That good Works done without knowledge of, or respect to a future
recompense of reward, do not merit; and works done by one that has in no sense
any ability to do them, do not merit.

These four things following seem apparently to be the (...), the first great
Mistakes; and the occasion of all his Yea, these also seem to be the causes of
the mistakes of many other very learned Autho^s, much of his Judgment, in the
pa^ticulars, here endeavored to be Rectified.
other mistakes of the Apostle Paul's sense, in denying Justification by Works.

1. His denying, that there is any such thing, as any Law of God (setting the
Gospel it self aside) made with Mankind to this Tenor or Purport: That he that
does not every thing that God requires of him whatsoever, whether by the Light
of Nature, or the Writings of the Old and New Testament, shall be subject to
Eternal misery, or misery after this Life; and if men do all that God requires
of them; by any way making his will known, they shall be eternally Happy, or
Happy after this Life; but he thinks, There is no Law of God that threatens
future misery, or promises future happiness, but only the Gospel it self, which
is reveaed in the Old and New Testament: And that any Law threatening future
misery (I mean after this Life) or promising future Happiness, is the Gospel it
self, whereby men always were and are justified and saved.

Now to prove against this, and that we must hold a Law threatening future and
Eternal misery to all sinners, and that all are condemned and none justified by
this Law, and that this Law is distinct and quite different from the Gospel,
let these things be considered.

1. If there be no Law distinct from the Gospel, threatening future misery, or
misery after this Life, then Christ never satisfied for the future misery that
was threatened to any; never died to free any from the wrath to come; from the
eternal or future Curse of any such Law; but only from a temporal Curse, or
Curse of this Life. The consequence is apparent, because he knows not what he
says, that should affirm, that Christ was made under the Gospel, to free us
from the Curse of the Gospel; for the Gospel either threatens nothing (as many
hold, but I judge them to err) or, which is apparent, it threatens nothing
except to them that perform not its condition, viz. To them that Believe not,
and Repent not in this Life, and it is certain Christ died not to Redeem
finally Impenitent Unbelievers.

Christ's Satisfaction was made to the Law, and not to the Gospel: to free them
that perform not the condition of the Law, viz. perfect Obedience; but not to
free them that perform not the condition of the Gospel. There was indeed a
satisfaction made to the Law, that God might with Justice and Honor, with
safety to the Law make this Act of Oblivion, this Law, of Grace, the Gospel:
Therefore surely that first Original-Law did threaten eternal death to sinners,
and not merely Temporal punishment, else there cannot possibly be any
satisfaction for sin, as to Eternal punishment at all, because the first Law to
which the satisfaction was made, did not threaten it. Suppose a Law in force
that every Felon shall be sold to work in the Galleys, and the King's Son paid
a great price, and, by this, obtained of the King this conditional Act of
Oblivion to be made, that if such Offenders will serve his Son in the Wars,
they should be Acquitted, but if they shrink from such Service, they shall die.
Here indeed was a price paid to free them from being Gally-slaves, but none
paid to free them from Death; because the first Original Law that was
transgressed by their Felony did not threaten Death, but only Slavery. And you
cannot say, that the price was paid to free them from the Penalty of the Law of
Grace, or Act of Oblivion, which does threaten Death, but the satisfaction was
made to the first Law only; though indeed the Act of Oblivion or Remedying Law,
was made upon the account of the price paid in satisfaction for the breach of
the first Law.

2. If there be no Law threatening wrath to come, or future misery but only the
Gospel it self, then no man can be pardoned, or can need pardon by the Gospel,
or the Blood of Christ as to the wrath to come; for the Gospel affords no
pardon to its transgressors, that is, to men continuing to death in Impenitency
and Unbelief. The Gospel indeed affords pardon to transgressors of the Law;
yea, and to transgressors of the Commands of the New Testament, so far as they
are transgressions of the Law (and threatened by that general Law, Cursed is he
that does not all, any way revealed to be his duty) provided they perform the
Gospel-conditions; but the Gospel affords no pardon at all to them that fall
under its curse, by not performing the Gospel-condition. Suppose a Law made
threatening every Felon with Death, and suppose a conditional Act of Oblivion,
or Remedying Law made, that if the Felon read, he shall not die; the pardon is
only as to the first Law and Breach of it; for there is no pardon as to this
second Law, and Breach of it, for if he do not read, which is the condition of
the second Law, there is no pardon for his failing therein. So that if the
first Law never threatened Eternal death, there can be no pardon as to Eternal
death.

And which makes it still apparent, is this: Pardon must be by some Law, (else
it may be Forbearance, or Reprieve, but no Pardon) and no Law can possibly in
any case whatsoever, afford pardon of Offenses against it self; it is a
contradiction to say it may. For, (to answer an objection that may be in your
mind) suppose a Law made, threatening the Offenders only conditionally; as
threatening death except a man abjure the Realm, or pay a sum of Money; in this
case if the person either abjure or pay the Money, here is no pardoning any
thing the Law threatened, for the Law never threatened his death absolutely. So
that you see there cannot possibly be pardon of a transgression from the Law it
self, but only from another Law, a Remedying Law, or Act of Oblivion. Therefore
the Gospel which is an Act of Pardon, or Oblivion for those that are guilty of
the breach of another Law, cannot possibly pardon an offense against it self,
which is failing in the performing the condition of it, by dying in Unbelief:
For any that will affirm pardon in the failing in the condition of this Act of
Oblivion, he must affirm some new Law made (for a Remedying Law to one cast by
the Gospel) to this effect, That if men die impenitent they shall be saved,
provided they or others for them, perform the condition while they are in an
other world, which the Papists affirm something a kin to. Now if the Gospel
afford no pardon to them that perform not its condition, as it is impossible it
should, and no Law else threatens Eternal death, there cannot possibly be any
pardon of sin as to Eternal death. So that you see, whatsoever this Author
says to the contrary, we must hold a Law threatening Eternal death, or Wrath to
come, (which Christ has undergone a punishment for the satisfaction of)
distinct from the Gospel, or the Law of Grace, that was founded upon the
account of this satisfaction; and that all are condemned by this Law; and that
as to Future and Eternal concernments; and that none are Justified by it: Which
if the Author had considered, he would surely have told us better than he has
done, what the Apostle meant by the Law, and works of the Law, which he denies
Justification by.

Yea, and you must hold, that this Law threatening wrath to come to every
Offender is yet in force, and not Abrogated by the Gospel; yea, and that it
threatens men that do perform the Gospel-condition as really as others. I shall
not deny that such a Law seiseth upon men's being sinners, as to the Promissary
part (as a promise made to a man if he shall work all such a week, does cease
after he has failed the first day) but it is actually in Force still with its
penalty requiring perfect Obedience, and not only sincere; which I thus prove.

First, Else we must say, that no man sins or transgresses this Law, so he do
but perform the Gospel condition, so he be but in the main a sincere Christian;
and consequently that no sincere Christian needs Christ's satisfaction or pardon
for such sins as are consistent with Gospel sincerity; which is an Opinion
which I almost dread to mention, though the Author seems very confident in it,
for he maintains, page 108. 112. That, so men do but chiefly mind the best
things, do but observe the main Precepts of the Law, no Law whatsoever requires
any more of them; and also holds, that men after I cannot tell whether he mean
after Conversion, or after the mere Preaching of the Gospel to them; but
however I will ^onstrue it to the best sense.
Conversion, or receiving the Gospel, for any disability on them to the
contrary, may, and for any evidence we have in the Scripture to the contrary,
do, live such lives as not to sin any sin that deserves, or is by any Law
threatened so much as conditionally with Eternal death (and so it follows
consequently, as any one sees, that they need no pardon, or the Blood of Christ
for such sins as to Eternal punishment) though yet he grants (but yet, any one
may see, with some reluctance) That page 117. All do sometime or other of their
lives commit some either sin, or sins, that deserves Eternal punishment, and
consequently needs pardon, and the Blood of Christ. Now if it be true that he
says, that, No Law of God requires any more than that men keep the main
substantials of it, and make Religion their business; then he may safely
affirm, that they do not need pardon by the Blood of Christ, for any so much as
temporal punishment as to those failings that are consistent with true
Christianity. I grant the Gospel requires no more for our Justification and
Salvation, than such sincere imperfect endeavors as he mentions: but I cannot
enough express my dislike, of saying, No Law does require any more.

Secondly, If the Law was abrogated by Christ's satisfaction, and the Gospel, as
to its requiring perfect Obedience under a threatening of the penalty of Eternal
death, of those that continue performing the Gospel-condition; Then we must not
say, that Christ died to obtain the pardon of those sins that are consistent
with Gospel-sincerity, but died to prevent them from being Sins, and
Transgressions of the Law, that would otherwise have been sins; or to prevent
such sins from legally des^^ving, or being threatened with Eternal wrath, and so
to prevent them from being pardoned by his Blood, as to Eternal wrath.

Secondly, Another great Mistake that causes his other Errors, (as any one may
perceive that reads his Book) is this, That he does not understand, or does not
consider the difference between an Original Law, with a Remedying Law, or
conditional Act of Oblivion distinct from the Original Law; and a Law that
threatens a transgressour of it, only conditionally. I shall make my meaning
appear by an Instance which he brings of an Original Law, and a Remedying Law
(though I confess he brings it not under that notion, but speaks something not
right concerning it, and especially he is widely mistaken in making that the
chief, yea, the only Law of Moses that the Apostle speaks against Justification
by in those places, where he speaks against Justification by the works of the
Law, though yet I do think that the Apostle had in some places a main respect
to this Law of Sacrifices now to be mentioned, as Acts 13. 38, 39. Heb. 7. 11.
19. Chap. 9. v. 8. 18. Chap. 10. v. 1. etc. The Instance is this, Page 121,
122. where he rightly tells us; That God did make a Law that concerned the Jews
as a Commonwealth, that every one that transgressed the Law should die by a
violent death, ( viz. Either I suppose by the Sword of the Magistrate if
publicly known, or God would in Judgment cut them off himself) But God in
mercy, that the whole Community might not be destroyed by the death of the
Multitude of Offenders (and also I suppose to Typifie our greatest concernments
in reference to another life) made another Law concerning the most of those
offenses (for some offenses were for great reasons excepted from this Act of
Oblivion, and were to be punished with temporal death without mercy) that if
the Offender offer a Sacrifice, he should be spared, and it should be accepted
in his stead. Now to the matter in hand: Suppose that the first of these Laws
had it self run thus conditionally, that if any man commit any such offense He
shall die a violent temporal death, or some Beast for him. In this case, we
could not have said, that this Law required the Offender's blood, but his or
the Beasts indifferently; neither could we have said if he had offered a Beast,
that he was pardoned; since the Law threatened not his death, but his or the
Beast's, and so there was nothing of remitting, or pardoning any thing the Law
required: We could not say that the Beast died as a satisfaction to the Law,
that the Law might not be executed; for if the Beast died, the Law was
Executed, according to the utmost severity that it threatened without pardon; We
could not say the Beast died to expiate his guilt and obligation to die; for he
never was guilty of Death, never was threatened with death by this Law, but He
was to die, or thus part with his Beast indifferently.

But now, consider this Instance as it was in truth an Original Law, threatening
the Offender's death absolutely, and a Remedying Law distinct; and we here see,
that an Original Law and Remedying Law, are well consistent both in force. We
cannot say, that the Original Law that threatened the offender's death
absolutely, was nulled, or abrogated by this Remedying Law, but it remained in
force; only there was a Remedying Law in mercy, provided to free from the
penalty, that, though due to the first Law, it should not be executed. We
cannot say, the offender's death was not threatened by the Law, or that he was
not guilty of death by that Law; we cannot say, the Beast died to hinder the
man from being guilty of death, so far as concerns the Law: but that, though he
was We read expressly, that in the case of sacrifice for sin, there was guilt,
or obligation to the punishment, and atonement, or exp^ation, and pa^don, or
forgiveness, Lev. 5. v. 1. 4 10. 17* 18, 19. compared. So Chap. 6. v 4 7. And
all these well consistent. Yea, pardon cannot be at all, without a Law in force
obliging to punishment, for the offense pardoned.
guilty by that Law, that he should not be guilty with the reatus redundans in
personam, that it should not be inflicted. You cannot say, the man was not
pardoned as to his death, because the Beast died for him; for he was pardoned,
the Law was not executed; for it threatened his death absolutely: nor, that the
Beast did not die a satisfaction to Justice, that the Law might not be
Executed, by pretending the Law was executed without pardon, by the death of
the Beast. So, that Original-Law, [ Cursed is every one, with a curse after
this Life, that obeys not in every thing,] may be actually in force consistent
with the Remedying Law, the Gospel, That if a man be a sincere Christian, a
sincere Servant of God in the main, he shall be free from that Curse. You
cannot say, If a man be a sincere Christian, perform the Gospelcondition, he
sins not against any Law in force; nor, that the sins that are consistent with
true Christianity, are not threatened with Eternal death; or, that he is not
condemned daily for such sins by that Law; or, that he is not pardoned as to
Eternal death, as to those sins, pretending that no Law in force threatens them
with Eternal death; or, that there cannot be an Expiation for them, they not
being sins, or threatened with any Eternal penalty: You cannot say, that Christ
died not a satisfaction to Justice, that the Law-threat might not be executed,
pretending the Law was executed without pardon; for the Law threatened us
absolutely, and not Christ at all.

Thirdly, Another great cause of his Mistakes, is, his not understanding the
difference between Natural-Impotency (which is when a man has not the Natural
Faculties, or Abilities to do a thing, as being a Natural-Fool, or Deaf, or
Blind, or has not a sufficient proposal of the Object to be known, or
believed; and they that have not this Natural-power of doing a thing, are not
bound by the Law of God, to do what they have this Natural-impotency to, and so
do not sin in the not doing it) and Moral-Impotency, which is wilful
wickedness, and does not in the least excuse men from obedience to the commands
they have only this Impotency to the obeying of. Now the not understanding of
this, causes that Self-contradicting Notion of his, from page 104. to page 114.
where he contradicts himself most fluently, in almost his whole Discourse (I do
not much wonder at this, since every man must necessarily contradict himself in
all he says about such things, that does not keep notions clear and distinct
about this Distinction, which too few do) where he tells us, He cannot be of
the judgment of the most, who hold, that the Law does oblige men, if not
absolutely, yet conditionally, except they fly to the Covenant of Grace, and
that under the peril of Eternal death to absolute Obedience, that is, such
Obedience as excludes all sin. And for this reason, he cannot be of this
Judgment, Because no man can do it. And adds page 108, That therefore he holds,
that the Law threatens only those that do not do all things the Law requires
them to do? What? Is not this perfect Obedience even to Innocence, to do all
the Law requires men to do? If a man do all the Law requires him to do, he does
perfectly obey the Law; he does not sin except he fail in something the Law
requires from him. Strange speech! No Law of God he says, requires perfect
Obedience, because no man can perform perfect Obedience; therefore the Law
requires no more than a man can perform. Is not this to say, That the Law does
only require what a man can do, and yet all a man can do, is not all the Law
requires, is not perfect Obedience. If no Law require a man to be free from
those sins he speaks of, that are consistent with Christianity, then those sins
are lawful; and the doing of such things as are lawful, cannot hinder a man
from being innocent; can be no hindrance to his perfect obeying the Law.

Yea, it is a Contradiction in the very Words, keeping to the same Law (as the
Author does) to say, Any Law does not require perfect Obedience; for it is to
say it does not require all that it does require. We may indeed say, the Gospel
does not require the perfect Obedience of another Law, that is, the whole
condition of the Original Law, which it was made to pardon our failure in;
because sincere Obedience only to that Original-Law, was made the condition of
it: but it is impossible but the Gospel being a Law (it is a Law of Grace,
commanding sincere obedience, with a penalty of our otherwise not having the
benefit offered by it); I say, it is impossible, but that it should require
perfect Obedience to what it does require as it is condition, whereon we shall
attain the pardon offered by it; and this condition is perfectly all that it
does require as a Remedying-Law, or Act of Oblivion: For, if there be any thing
that it does not require of us, so as we should lose the offered Pardon if we
do not perform it; this thing is not it is condition, nor any part of it, which
is required, that we might not so fall short. Also, as was demonstrated before,
No Law either does, or can, remit any thing required by it self. If a man fail
in any thing required by the Gospel, under the penalty of having no benefit by
it, he is Remediless.

Fourthly, Another fundamental cause of his Mistake of the Apostle's sense, is,
want of true notions about the Law of Moses, which he thinks to be a Law that
had only Temporal Promises and Threats, and to be void of Spiritual and
Internal commands; and also that the Apostle only excludes it, and its works,
from Justification. Now because I know not of any that speak exactly, and
satisfactorily of the Law, in the several Notions and Acceptations of it, nor
in all things I mean, not rightly, only because not comprehensibly enough, so
as to include all the senses of it here to be mentioned.
rightly, (however not in my judgment, which in this may possibly differ from
all others); I think it needful to speak here something largely and distinctly
of it; not to destroy the Author's Opinion about the Apostle's sense, since
that may be done in few words: but that I may lay a foundation for the right
understanding, not only of the passages of the Apostles in debate; but other
passages also of this Apostle, and of the Author to the Hebrews, respecting
the Law; where they take it in a different sense from that wherein it is mainly
taken in the places now in dispute. My thoughts are these:

The Law of Moses, or Old Testament-dispensation, may be considered as to
Temporal respects only; or, as to Conscience, or Life-to-come Concernments.

And first, to speak of it as to Temporal concernments only, it may in this
respect be considered, either strictly, or as affording pardon.

1. The Law of Moses may be considered as to Temporal respects, in its utmost
exacting Rigor, I mean in its utmost Rigor, threatening Temporal Punishments;
as Dearth, or Barrenness to their Land; and, by that, Calamity to the
Community; as also by Pestilence and Banishment out of their Land, to be
executed by God: And as the Instrument of the Jewish Polity, or Commonwealth
(for they had no other Temporal-Law of their Land) threatening violent and
untimely Death to all It threatn^d as the Common-wealth-Law, this violent death
to every external visible Breach, whether Omissi^n or Comm^ssion, of every
express Law, either M^ral, Judicial, or Cerem^nial This appears plain enough ^y
that Sanction, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc. The
penalty was threatened to every Transgress^^, and what this penalty was, app^a^s
by its contrary, the Life promised to the Obedient, which all will grant to
contain temporal Life: But it most undeniably appea^s by that of a Beast's
blood being offered in stead of the offender's. I do not think, it threatened as
the C^^m^n-wealth-law, this death to a breach in thought or will, with us any
visible (I mean by this word, that may b^ seen, or Externally perceived, if any
man was by to perceive it) external Om^ssion, or C^mmission; nor to a
not-express, but only by remote consequence implied breach; nor was the
Magistrate bound to infl^ct death on the offender, guilty of such sinful
thoughts or desires, or refusing to offer sacrifice for them, though it some
way came to his knowledge, as by the parties confessing such inward sins to him,
and declaring his resolution, not to ^ffer sacrifice for them: Yea, it seems
apparent, that none of their sacrifices were to be offered for such Internal
sins.
Transgressors of it, to be Executed by the Magistrate; or if secret from him,
or in the Magistrate's neglect or default, by God himself, Lev. 20. 3, 4, 5.
Yea, and it enjoined exclusion from Society, and from the Congregation, for
pollutions, Lev. 15. Numb. 19. Which were, at least most of them, no sins
(though so called figuratively) not being forbidden, being generally altogether
Involuntary; and it might often be, a man's duty to pollute himself; as for
Example, by Burying the Dead. Though yet it was a sin (yea, and might be a
presumptuous sin in the sense of Numb. 15. 30.) to neglect wittingly the
Expiation, or Purgation in that case appointed, and also to come into society,
till the Purgation finished. This would take up too much time to speak more
particularly and exactly of.

I would speak more plain if possible: let me Repeat it in other words, which
may be plainer to some understandings. I say, the Law may be considered in this
External political sense, viz. so far as the Offenses might be Expiated by
their Sacrifices, or were excluded positively by it, from being expiated by
their Sacrifices (for that Exclusion was meant only as to Temporal punishment,
taking no notice of the Future or Eternal): In this sense, it had only, as
Temporal punishments of Offenders, so only Temporal promises of Peace, or
Prosperity, or Long-Life in the Land of Canaan, upon obedience to the Law; and
also had, in this sense, no Spiritual or Internal precepts. Now the Law in this
strict temporal sense, wherein it threatened such calamities to every Offender,
was a shadow of things to come, Punishments to come; a Shadow and Commemoration
of the same (I mean, materially the same) Law's It was a strangely: severe
Common-wealthlaw (even beyond Draco's Laws, that, for their severity, were said
to be writ in blood) and this severity would even appear irrational and
unaccountable unto us, did we not consider its typicalness, and representation
of the great strictness of the same law in a higher sense, cursing with eternal
death, every one not continuing in all, etc. And also. did we not consider that
it was given with a R^med^ing Law, acc^pting the blood of beasts, in stead of a
man's, in most cases.
severe threatenings of Future punishments to every Transgression, either
External, or Internal; And a shadow or pattern of Good things to come, Heb. 10.
1. and of Heavenly things, Heb. 9. 28. of the same (in another sense) Law's
promises of future Heavenly happiness to perfect Obedience; and was much suited
to put them in mind of the great Concernments of the same Law, as pertaining to
Conscience, and the future Life.

2. Still keeping to Temporal Concerns. This amazingly-strict Law as to
Temporal punishment, may be considered as given with, or comprehending in it, a
Remedying-Law, as to these Temporal severities, viz. As affording pardon upon
Sacrifice, as to these threatened Destructions, for the most Transgressions;
(not for all, as one may be apt to wish, for Type-sake; for the community must
not be sundamentally prejudiced to make a Type more full, by pardoning all
offenses as to Temporal punishment upon sacrifice.) And so this Political
Temporal-Law was (I will not say the Gospel it self, for it was not, but), if I
may speak, a little Gospel in reality, a Law of Pardon as to the Temporal
punishment threatened; and a Shadow or I doubt not but the Book of the Law in
the Temporal sense I am now upon, being sprinkled with blood, was a pattern of
the Laws, in the Eternal sense I shall after speak of, being sprinkled with a
better sacrifice, and that the Law in this last sense, was one of those healy
things spoken of, Heb. 9. 19. 23. Though the Heavenl^ things mentioned, do most
immediatel^ denote the more clear Dispensation of the Gospel then in being,
when those words were written.
pattern, or Representation of its own (materially considered) Gospel favor in
admitting Transgressors of it to favor, as to its Obligation to Future and
Eternal punishment, by pardon upon the account of a great Satisfaction to come,
which such sacrifices Typified.

Now it is apparent, that the Law and Covenant, or Testament of Moses, is often
taken in the New Testament in this sense, viz. For the Law under this
consideration, so far as it threatened only what might be remitted by Sacrifice,
or threatened what was denied by it to be remitted upon Sacrifice. Yea, no man
can possibly give any rational account of the meaning of the Author to the
Hebrews, in the places where he speaks of the Law; but by affirming, he takes
it in this sense, as Chap. 7. 8, 9, 10. For the Law, only in this sense was
Typical; and not at all Typical, but the reallity, in the sense I shall after
speak of it in. He shows, the Law made nothing perfect as to Conscience, or
future Concernments; and that Sacrifices did not Expiate any further than as to
the purifying of the Flesh that they might come into the Congregation, and to
the taking off of Temporal guilt and Punishment; but not as to Eternal, or
Future-life punishment; or coming to the Congregation in Heaven; and also shows
that they were a commemoration ((...)) of Sins as to Conscience, and the Future
punishment, but not an Expiation, Heb. 10. 3, 4. And that they did so far (
viz. as to Temporal punishment, and being excluded the Congregation) really
Expiate being offered in the offender's stead: And, else indeed they could not
have been Typical of the great Expiation, if they were not Expiations as to
some things themselves; no more than the Brazen-Serpent could have been a Type
of Christ's Healing or Saving, if it had never healed any. So the Law of Moses
is taken also, Acts 13. 39. By him all that believe, are justified from all
things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses. That is,
from all such great Crimes, as Idolatry, Murder, etc. for which there was no
pardon in the Law of Moses, taken in this sense; but such were to die without
mercy, no Sacrifice being appointed, or accepted in their stead: Though yet
there was pardon for such by the Law of Moses, taken in the sense I shall speak
of it in, viz. In the sense wherein it was the Gospel made in the Blood of
Christ, and in the sense wherein David was, yea, and all others were, Justified
and Saved by it.

For it is apparent, that a man might go to Heaven upon true Repentance by that
Law (taken in the consideration, I shall ere long speak of it in) that Temporal
death without mercy ( Heb. 10. 28.) was due to, by that Law: no Expiation being
allowed for his sin, he sinning contemptuously, or presumptuously, or with a
high hand, in the sense of those words, Numb. 15. 30. (which are Heb. 10. 28.
interpreted by (...), He that contemptuously sinned against, or set-at-nought,
Moses Law, i. e. in some stubborn and vainglorious way;) or he committing
Idolatry, Adultery, or Murder, or some other particular Crime excluded, as
Blasphemy, Witchcraft, Cursing or Smiting his Father or Mother, defiling the
Sabbath, or being a stubborn and rebellious Son. As for Instance, David was
pardoned and went to Heaven, and he never offered Sacrifice for those his
Crimes; for there was none appointed or admitted in such case; for he was by
that Law, in the sense in hand, to Die without mercy; and should have been put
to Death, had there been any Superior Authority on Earth to do it; except some
Prophet had come from God, who, being chief Rector, could dispense with his own
Laws, to tell such Authothority, that God had pardoned him as to Temporal
punishment; or God, had some way notified, he would not have the Law executed
on him. And it is also apparent, that a man might be guilty of no Fault,
threatened by the Law in this sense, but what was fully Expiated by his
Sacrifices, as to Temporal violent Death, and Exclusion from Society; and yet
go to Hell, being no true Penitent, or sincere Servant of God. Because all the
Crimes that a man might possibly be only guilty of, might be Expiable, and
newly Expiated by Sacrifice, so far as their Sacrifices could expiate, though
he never truly repented. It was only in some few cases of Injustice, that there
was Confession to the party, and Restitution to the party wronged, required,
else this Sacrifice was not accepted to Remission as to Temporal guilt, Lev. 5.
5. Chap. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5.

I would have spoken more largely and particularly, of the Law under this
Consideration; and have given an accou^^ here, why the Apostles sometimes take
it only in this sense (which I suppose, I shall do some-where upon occasion,
before I have done) but I am sensible I am something out of my way in speaking
so largely here, as I have done. And now I have thus spoken, I can make little
more than this use of it, should I keep strictly to speaking of the places of
the Apostle in dispute, than to lay it quite, or almost aside; and to make it
appear that the Author had done well, unless he had spoken more exactly of it,
to have done so; and to wish every one would do so, ( viz. would lay it aside)
for interrupting them, when speaking or thinking of the Apostle Paul's meaning,
in most of the places in dispute, viz. Places denying Justification by the Law,
and Works of the Law; since it is apparent, he speaks of Justification as to
Conscience, and Future life, and speaks of Moses Law as referring to
Conscience, and Future life, (which sense I now come to speak of that Law in.)

Secondly, The Law of Moses may be considered as to Conscience (Conscience
essentially respects the Future state) and Life to come-concernments, viz. as
requiring Obedience with a promise of Future happiness, and under the Peril of
Future or Eternal death; and also as Remitting and Pardoning sins, as to Future
misery. Now in this high important sense, this same Law (I mean materially, and
in words the same) must be considered, both as a strict Law, and a gracious Law
or Gospel. What is a Law, but a signification of the Rector's will any way
whatsoever, obliging the Subjects to Obedience, by promising rewards to the
Obedient, and threatening punishment to the Disobedient. Now in this very Law in
this high sense, there are significations of his Will, both of an Original
strict Law, constituting Eternal or Future death due to every Transgressor; and
of a Remedying-law, promising Pardon to Transgressors upon Repentance, and
sincere Obedience: even as in the Temporal consideration of the Law, (already
spoken of) there was a Law requiring the Offender's blood upon his failing in
the least in it; else there could have been no Pardon of him as to violent
death upon a Sacrifice, if the Law had not threatened death to him; and also
there was the Remedying-law of Pardon upon a Sacrifice: So here this
consideration, This very Law given in the same words at Sinai, did Reveal and
Signify these formally-distinct Laws.

First, A strict exacting of Obedience all their lives, to all that he
commanded, under the peril of Future death, or wrath to come; else, as I have
made apparent before, there could be no Pardon as to wrath to come, or
Satisfaction by Christ for wrath to come, due by this Law, as to such sins. And
in this strict sense, the Apostle Paul uses the word Law in the most of those
places in Dispute, which the Author chiefly insists on, to reconcile them to
St. James, viz. the 3d. and 4th. Chapter to the Romans; and Gal. 3. v. 10, 11,
12, 13. And in this sense the Law was no Type or Shadow, nor to vanish away,
but stands in Force unto this day.

Secondly, Also it did Reveal, that though they should sometimes during their
life (which is enough for Condemnation by this Law in the first sense) fail in
obedience to it; yet their condition should not be hopeless, the Punishment
made due to them by this Law should be pardoned, and they should yet enjoy the
promised Future life, upon condition they did Repent, and sincerely love and
serve God, endeavoring Obedience to all his Laws, Moral, Judicial, and
Ceremonial, with the prevailing design, and bent of their Souls. Now in this
sense, the Law of Moses was no Type or Shadow, but the very Gospel, the Word
of Faith which the Apostles Preached, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. And in this sense,
David takes the Law in most of his Encomiums of it, and in this sense
Justification and Salvation, are not denied to it, or the Works of it, by the
Apostle, to them that lived under this Dispensation; nor to us by it: For it
yet continues the same for substance, having the same Sanction, and Condition,
or Precept in the general, viz. That if we sinners repent, and sincerely obey
all his Commands, he will be our God to Bless us, to Justify and Save us from
all our sins; Though many of the former particular Precepts are ceased, and
some new ones added, and the whole Dispensation more intelligible and clear. It
is apparent that the Law of Moses, though it was given designedly (as to the
end of the Revelation of it) as a Covenant of Grace and Pardon, even for the
Salvation of sinners, and not for their Destruction; yet it was given
(subserviently still as to the same end of Salvation) also to Reveal the Law in
its utmost exacting Rigor. For though an Original strict Law may really be,
and so may be Revealed without a Remedying-Law; yet it is a plain impossibility
to Reveal, (however so as Offenders should be sensible of pardon and favor in
it) a Remedying-Law of Pardon (as this from Mount Sinai, mainly as to the
design of it, was) without Revealing and making known the strict Original-Law.
For, without knowing what the Law in its Rigor requires from us, and what it
threatens to them that fail in the least, we cannot be thankful for Pardon
offered on the Gospel-terms of Sincerity, nor know, we stand in need of Pardon
so we be but sincere. Neither can this Author possibly reconcilably to his
Principles (as you will see) tell us how Pardon is either needful to one, or
possibly consistent with, performing the Gospel-condition, since he maintains,
That sincere imperfect Obedience, or the Gospel-condition, is all that any Law
of God so much as requires. Thus you see my Judgment concerning the Law of
Moses, And that I suppose that Threat [ Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things written] had these four significations, or did notify these four
distinct Sanctions, with their distinct Conditions. 1st. Every one shall be
punished with a violent Temporal death, or, such death shall be due to him,
that observes not every External Precept. 2ly. Every one shall remedilesly be
punished with the foresaid death, that offends in the great Instances
exempted from Pardon, or in other faults, and observes not the Sacrifices
appointed for the Expiation of them. 3ly. Future Death or Wrath to come, shall
be due to every one that obeys not every Command, both Internal, and
External. 4ly. This Future-death shall remedilesly befall every such Offender
that shall not repent of his sins, and sincerely endeavor obedience to every
Command, Internal, and External. And to the like extensive Import, mutatis
mutandis, that Promise [The man that does them, shall live in or by them] may
and ought to be Interpreted.

Now you will see these four grand Mistakes which I have here spoken to,
causing the failings of his whole Discourse, in determining what the Apostle
Paul means by Works, and by the Law, in denying Justification by Works, and by
the Law; which Discourse I shall now propound to your View, Transcribing some
of it Verbatim, yea, all that is Argumentative in it, without leaving out any
thing in the least material, and telling you when I leave out any thing that is
not, but may seem, material. Which I thus begin,

The Author having before made it apparent, that though Faith in some other
passages of the Apostle, does mean one particular Grace; yet in those Speeches
where he speaks of Justification by it in opposition to Works, he means by
Faith all required to Salvation, the obedience of Faith: He tells us, Chap. 6.
page 98. That the Apostle does not exclude all Works from Justification, but
Works of the Law of Moses, and that in so doing, in excluding them, he does
also reject the corrupt Interpretations or Opinions, which the Scribes and
Pharisees, had fastened on this Law, or added to it: And also that the Apostle,
though speaking little about it, and on the bie, does implicitly affirm that
Works done according to the Law of Nature, and proceeding from the strength of
Nature, does avail nothing to Salvation.

Chap. 7. He tells us what works of the Laws of Moses in these words, page 101.
This Law consists of two Parts, viz. of Moral and Ritual Precepts: The Apostle
without doubt had respect to them both. For that he speaks also of the Moral
Precepts of the Law of Moses, whatever some say to the contrary, is too
manifest out of his own words, Romans 3. 20. Wherefore by the Works of the Law,
shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the Law is the knowledge of
sin. From whence it may be gathered, that it is that Law by which is the
knowledge of sin, whose works he he excludes; which without controversy is
spoken of the Moral-Law written in the Decalogue. For so the Apostle expounds
himself, Romans 7. 7. citing that out of the Decalogue, Thou shall not Covet. So
Romans 3. 31. Do we destroy the Law by Faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the
Law. Now the Ceremonial-Law, can scarce be said to be established by Faith. The
Law works wrath: For, where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, is
chiefly true of the Moral-Law: For almost, all Transgressions are against the
Moral-Law; therefore the Dispute of the Apostle, pertains also to the Works of
the Moral-Law. In the mean time, I must add this, that the Works of the
Moral-Law, are not simply excluded by Paul from Justification; but only so far
as they were prescribed in the Mosaic-Covenant, and were made part of the
condition annexed to this Covenant. It is certain that no man could come to
true Justification by the Mosaic-Covenant, by Works of the Moral-Law, though
they were rightly, yea, and exactly performed, according to the Rule of the
Law; because, it promised no true Justification at all, That is, Justification
joined with Eternal-Life. For, that great Benefit comes only from the Covenant
of Grace, made in the Blood of the Mediator. So that, if you respect the
Mosaic-Covenant, even the works of the Moral-Law, are together to be excluded
from Justification, and are indeed excluded by the Apostle.

I know you are at a loss about the Author's meaning; what he means by this
Mosaic-Covenant, that no man could be justified by, as to Future life, though
free all sin, and perfectly obeying the Moral-Law; because, this
Mosaic-Covenant, promised no Justification as to Eternal life, upon any terms
whatsoever. Now because you will not understand what he says here, on the two
Arguments he brings in the next words, which he pretends are only the Apostle's
Arguments against Justification by this Mosaic-Covenant, and that this is all
the Law and Covenant, that the Apostle proves against Justification by; I will
bring together here, all that he says, to tell us what he means by the
Mosaic-Covenant, that there is no Justification by, as he says, as to a Future
life, though there was as to this Life; and you will see it apparent, that he
means by it only that Law, or Laws, which I before cited out of him, by the
name of an Original-Law, and Remedying-Law, which threatened a violent Temporal
death to the Transgressors of the Law; and promised, upon offering a Sacrifice,
they should escape such violent Temporal death; but promised nothing of
Happiness in a Future life, if they offered such Sacrifices; or Pardon of those
sins as to a Future life: He apparently either means this Remedying-Law only,
or both together; the Original-Law, as it threatened a violent Temporal death,
and the Remedying-Law freeing from a violent Temporal death, upon the death of
a Beast: And he thinks, that the Law taken in such a sense as to threaten
Eternal death, or promise Eternal life, was the Gospel it self, and that Paul
does not dispute against being Justified by any such Law; And that the Law
given from Mount Sinai however had no Promises or Threats of a Future life, not
so much as obscure ones; and he builds the sense he gives of the Apostle Paul
upon this Foundation. You have seen this passage already, where he says, it
promised no Eternal life-Justification, to any whatsoever, though Sinless, and
perfectly keeping the Law, Page 208. The Promises and Threatenings of the Law,
were only Temporal and Earthly, Page 210. And the Precepts did wonderfully
accord with the Promises Page 212. He speaks largely to prove this. The Apostle
does in many places tax this defect of the Mosaic-Law, that it had no promise
of a Future life. And hither some refer that Text, Romans 8. 3. where it is said,
The Law was weak through the Flesh, i. e. say they, It contained only carnal
Promises: But I choose rather the common Interpretation, viz. of Flesh, for Sin.
The 5th. verse of the foregoing Chapter, is more apposite, where the Law is
called Flesh; for those words, When we were in the Flesh, must be expounded,
When we were under the Law, as is manifest from the Antithesis, which they have
to Verse. 6. and also from the scope of the whole Chapter. And the Mosaic-Law
seems to be called Flesh; not only because the most of the Precepts were carnal
only, and External, but also because the Promises with which this Law was
enforced, did not look beyond this Carnal life. To the same sense Grotius
expounds the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. where he calls the Law, a Ministry
of Death, because all its Promises were ended with Death, without any hope of
Restitution. So v. 6. The Law of Moses is said to kill, viz. as the same
Grotius notes; As the Hebrew word to make alive, is used of him who did not
kill a man, Exodus 1. 17. Judge. 8. 19. So, that is said to kill, which leaves a
man to die, and does not free from Death. But that I may confess the truth, I
rather believe these Phrases [to Kill, and a Ministry of death] to signify
something else, viz. the written Law of Moses, to make men Obnoxious to Divine
anger, and Eternal death, if it be alone, and destitute of the Spirit; not
through its It is well, he here grants it is through the default of the Man,
and not from the Law; but this destroys his cause; and He a few Lines after,
contradicts this.
own fault, but through the infirmity of the Flesh. The Apostle's words, Gal.
3. 13. seem more clear. The Law is not of Faith, but he that does them, shall
live in them: That is, the Law neither requires Faith, neither does it promise
those things which require Faith or Belief, properly so called ( which is the
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. Romans 8. 24.) because it promises only
good things of that sort, which are things of Sense, and belong to this visible
World, but says not a tittle concerning a Future life: It excites us not to
Piety, with any promises of this sort; but requires that we do its commands,
not adding any such promise to excite us: Only saying, Thou shall live here a
prosperous and fortunate life, as appears, Lev. 18. 5. but that place, Gal. 3.
21. is most clear: If there had been a Law which could have given life, verily
Righteousness should have been by that Law. The Law is said to give, or do,
what it promises. The sense thereof is, If the Here He lays the fault on the
Law, and denies it virtually to be the fault of the Man, unsaying what he had
said before,
Law had had promises of life, ( viz. Eternal) then men could have attained by
the Law, true and perfect Righteousness, or true and perfect Justification;
that is, Justification conjoined with Eternal life: But the matter was far
otherwise, the Law contains only promises belonging to this Life.

Being no better supplied with proofs, than with these out of the Apostle Paul,
he brings some out of the Author to the Hebrews; and might have brought many
more, and clearer, to show, that Author means by the Law, the Law of
Sacrifices, which Sacrifices did only expiate Temporal guilt, as real
propitiatory Sacrifices; and not at all guilt as to Eternal punishment, but
only Typified that which did.

Page 215. Quest. Is there no promise of Eternal life, extant in the Old
Testament? Answ. Either you mean by the Old Testament, the Covenant made in
Mount Sinai; or all things contained in Moses, the Hagiography, and the
Prophets. If taken in the latter sense, it may perhaps be granted, there are
some, not obscure, hints of a Future life, though not a clear and express
Promise of Eternal life. But these hints, such as they were, were only
Praeludiums, and Anticipations of Gospel Grace. They did not belong to the Law.
For the Law as it is considered by the Apostle in his Disputations with the
Jews, does properly denote the Covenant made in Mount Sinai, Gal. 4. 24. And
that, had earthly Promises, and earthly only. It is true indeed, that those
earthly Promises, added to the Law of Works, were signs of those good things
which did follow the Law of the Spirit, and those were comprehended in them, in
the intention of God himself. It is also true, that there are extant some
general Promises, or Promises made in general terms, in the Law it self, in
which it is manifest, that Eternal life not only might be, but was contained in
Gods Intention, As [ I will be thy God, and I will Bless you]. For, who doubts
but in these Promises thus generally pronounced, there might be contained every
sort of good things, yea, those which come only after Death? For God to be
willing to be one's God, what is it else, then God to be willing to embrace a
man with Divine good Will? Now Divine good Will, or Benignity worthy of God,
What is it else than the highest Benignity, and than which there can be no
greater, or further? And therefore with a Benignity most long in duration, that
is Eternal; most powerful in Operation, and therefore freeing from Death and
Destruction. For, it is manifest by the Interpretation of Christ himself, and
his Apostles, that Life-eternal in the Intention of God, was comprehended in
these words, see Mat. 22. 31, 32. Heb. 11. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. compared
with Chap. 7. 1. Rev. 21. 3. 7. But these things do not suffice that we may
say, that Life-eternal was promised in the Mosaic-Covenant. For, Promises
annexed to a Covenant, ought to be clear and express, and such as may be
understood by either Party: but it was almost impossible that any one should
understand these Typical, and general Promises, without some adventitious
Interpretation. Again, this Eternallife shadowed with Types, and comprehended
in these general Promises, was not given to the external Righteousness required
in the Letter of the Law; but to that spiritual Purity and Piety, of which this
other External, was only a shadow. For, even as Eternal good things lay covered
under the bark of Temporal good things; so also the Bodily-Religion prescribed
in the Law, was a Shadow and Type of Spiritual-Righteousness, to be revealed
more clearly in the Gospel. In a word, the Law considered Carnally, and
according to the Letter, neither required Spiritual-Righteousness, nor promised
Eternal-life; but being considered Spiritually, was the very Gospel it self,
neither does the Apostle move any controversy about here it, being so taken.

Pa. 232. He again largely tells us what Law it was, that the Apostle only
meant when he exclude's the Law, and Works of the Law, from Justification;
where denying the Spirit to be given by that Law, he thus speaks.

If by the Law, you understand the Covenant made in Mount Sinai, and given to
the Israelites, Moses being the Mediator, which I have even now said, is the
most proper and genuine Acceptance and Notion of it in Paul's Epistles, it is
manifest it contained no Promise of the Holy Spirit. But in other Books of the
Old Testament, yea, and in the writings of Moses, though not in the
Mosaic-Covenant it self; we may find a Promise clear enough, of giving the
Grace of the Holy Spirit to the Israelites, as that, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy
God shall circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, etc. Now this cannot be done, as all that differ from
Pelagius confess, without a great force of the Holy Ghost. But this did belong
to the Gospel-Righteousness, which first Moses himself, and after other
Prophets, did show to lie under the Bark of the external Rites and Ceremonies;
for the Righteousness of Faith which is manifested in the Gospel, was in times
past, testified by the Law, and the Prophets, as the Apostle expressly affirms,
Romans 3. 21. Yea, I will show you further, that this was part of the New
Testament promulgated by Moses. For, that the Covenant made with the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 29. and 30. in which these words are found, was plainly distinct from the
Covenant made in Mount Sinai; and also does contain a Renewing of the Covenant
made with Abraham, that is, of the Gospel Covenant, then more obscurely
Revealed, may be Demonstrated by many Arguments.

First, It is expressly said, Deuteronomy. 29. 1. that the words which there It is not
said the words which follow] I rather think that the Expression [these are the
words of the covenant] meaning the laws or Precepts of the Covenant, has
reference to the Laws before recited in this Book of Deuteronomy, rather than
to the words following in this Chapter; And that this Verse, if a right
division had been made, should rather have ended the former Chapter, than have
begun this.
follow, were words of the Covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to make with
the Children of Israrael, in the Land of Moab, besides the Covenant which he
made with them in Horeb. They weakly trifle, who here understand Such an
Interpretation is not so weak and trifling, but, had I no other evasion, I
would fly to it rather than affirm here, as this Author does, a new Covenant on
Gods part, having quite different Precepts, Promises and Threats.
a renewing of the Covenant made in Mount Sinai, and do contradict the most
plain words of the Text. Neither can the words of the Covenant made in Mount
Sinai, repeated and renewed, in any sense, be called the words of the Covenant,
which God made besides that he had made in Sinai.

Secondly, It is expressly said, It is only said, That he might be to them a God
as he promised them, meaning from Mount Sinai; and also had sworn it before to
Abraham, etc. as appears, Lev. 26. 45, 46. and from many other places, Exodus
19. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 26. 15. 18, 19.
that this Covenant is altogether the same with that which God made and
confirmed by Oath, with the Israelites Ancestors, to wit, with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, v. 12, 13. which Covenant, was the very Gospel something obscurely
revealed, as Paul says, Gal. 3. 16, 17.

Thirdly, Paul cites some words of this Covenant, as words of the So Paul does
cite these words, Lev. 26. 12. I will walk among you, and will be your God, and
you shall be my people (which words we^e spoken at Mount Sinai, as appears by
v. 46.) as a Gospel-promise, as indeed they were, 2 Cor. 6. 16. and begins the
following Chapter thus, Having these Promises, let us cleanse our selves, etc.
Gospel Covenant, which holds forth the Righteousness of Faith: see Romans 10. 6.
etc. compared with Deuteronomy. 30. 11. I am not ignorant, that some determine these
words, to be accommodated to the Righteousness of Faith, only by way allusion:
But I cannot believe them, since Paul manifestly alleges these words, as the
very words of the Righteousness of Faith; that is, as the very words of the
Gospel Covenant, in which this Righteousness is revealed. And, that I may
confess the truth, I have always esteemed these Allusions (to which some fly,
as to the holy Asylum, or Sanctuary of their Ignorance) for the most part to be
nothing else, then manifest abuses of the Holy Scripture.

Fourthly, All the things contained in this Covenant, do wonderfully fit, or
agree, to the Gospel.

1. As for the Precepts, there are only commanded here, There are no particular
Laws recited, not so much as the Ten Commandments, in these two chapters, which
he will have to contain this whole Covenant.
things belonging to Manners, and which are in their own nature Honest, there
being no mention here made of those Rites whereof the whole Legal-covenant is
almost full, which being considered according to the words, may seem childish;
and further, the whole obedience which is here required, may be So may equally
all Covenanted by the people, at Mount Sinai, or required of them by God.
referred to a sincere and diligent endeavor to obey God in all things, Chap.
30. 10. 16. 20.

2. As for the Promises, God here promises full Remission of all sins upon
Repentance, even of the most So he does as fully from Mount Sinai, Lev. 26. 40,
41.
heinous, Cap. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4. which favor was never granted in the Legal
covenant; And further, the Grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby the hearts of men
may be circumcised, that they may love the Lord with all their hearts, and
souls, is clearly promised, v. 6. How far is this from the usual vein of Moses
writings.

Fifthly, That Covenant which Jeremiah foretold, Jer. 31. 31, 32. etc. was a
Gospel Covenant, as all Christians grant, and the Author to the Hebrews
expressly teaches, Heb. 8. 8. Now all those things which the Prophet foretells
of that Covenant, do Allusions being too much built on, may be Illusions.
exactly answer to this Moabitishcovenant. Jeremiah calls his Covenant, a new
Covenant, altogether different from that which God plighted with the Ancestors
of Israel, going out of Egypt; Moses says the same of the Moabitish-covenant:
Jeremiah gives this cause why God would make a new Covenant, viz. because they
brake the Old, wanting Gods powerful Grace; The same reason Moses gives here,
of making this new Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. Jeremiah's, promised circumcision of
heart; so this: That promised Remission of sins, Jer. 31. 34. So this, Deuteronomy.
30. 1, 2, etc. Jeremiah speaks of the clearness, and facility of the Precepts,
which are contained in the New Covenant, that they might know and obey them,
without much search and labor: So does Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12. compared with
Romans, 10. 6. All these things seem very clear to me. I have dwelt something
long upon these things; Both that it may be manifest hence, that all things in
the Mosaic-writings, do not belong to the Mosaic-Covenant properly so called;
And to show how necessary it is to restrain the old Law, properly so called,
only to the Covenant made in Mount Sinai. And also, chiefly that the Wisdom of
God might appear, in dispencing the Covenant of Grace. God had made that
gracious Covenant with Abraham, many years before the giving of the Law, to
which Covenant, it afterward pleased him to add another Covenant, made up of
many painful Rites and Ceremonies; by which he might keep in their Duty; that
is, restrain from the Idolatrous-worship of the Heathen, the rude and carnal
posterity of Abraham, lately brought out of Egypt; and so, too much addicted
to Paganish Rites, and Superstitions. But the most wise God foreseeing, that
this People of a foolish, or hard-heart ( obtusi pectoris) would not understand
his purpose; after he had made this carnal Law, He commanded Moses, that he
should promulgate a New Covenant to the Israelites, or rather, that he should
renew that Old-covenant, which he many years before had made with Abraham,
which did chiefly require spiritual Righteousness, and was full of Grace and
Mercy. That from hence the Jews might know, that the Abrahamatical-covenant was
yet in force, even after the Ritual-Law was made; and also was to be accounted
for the Covenant, by which only their Salvation was to be attained, see Gal. 3.
17. Who would not here cry out with the Apostle? O^ the depth of the Riches,
and Wisdom, and Knowledge of God!

Since this here recited, has some dark show of proof, I shall before I go any
further, manifest that the Author is notoriously mistaken, in affirming that
the Covenant made in the Land of Moab, was not the same for substance, repeated
with that made at Horeb, or Mount Sinai; but a Covenant having quite different
Promises, and Precepts, the one carnal and earthly, the other Spiritual and
Heavenly; and also in thinking that these two Chapters, 29th. and 30th.
comprehended the whole Covenant made in the Land of Moab. Let these things be
considered.

A Covenant in the strictest propriety of the Word, is a mutual Engagement of
Parties, two at the least. If one side promise, his part is not a Covenant,
except both do. So that, that transaction between God and the people at Sinai,
was properly a Covenant, Exodus 19. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. though God had not yet
told the People what Laws he would require Obedience to in particular, for
Moses come's with a message to the people from God, and tells them, that if
they will obey his Voice, and keep his Covenant, i. e. his Law, they should be
a peculiar Treasure unto him, and a Kingdom of Priests; that is, He would be
their God to bless them, if they would be his people to obey him. This was Gods
Promise in this Covenant; the people give this answer unanimously, We consent,
we will obey God in all his Commands, be they what they will, though they were
not told yet what his Commands should be. But this, though a Covenant, was but
in order to the great Solemnization of this Covenant, which was, Exodus 24. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Where having given the Moral-Law, the Ten Commandments, and some
Judicial and Ceremonial Laws; Moses comes down from God, and relates them to
the people. And the people answered, All that the Lord has spoken, We will do;
meaning, all that he has, or shall speak; for the addition of new commands,
did not make so many New-covenants. Well, Now God has promised on his part to
be their God, if they will obey his Law. Moses writes these Laws that are
rehearsed in the 20, 21, 22, 23, chapters, and consecrateth some young men to
offer Sacrifice (for Aaron and his Sons were not separated, till the year
after) He made the people confirm their Covenant by Sacrifices, as we do by
Sacraments; He read the Book of the Covenant, that is, the Book comprehending
the Laws forementioned, and he sprinkles the Blood of the Sacrifices on the
people, and says, Behold the Blood of the Covenant which God has made with
you, concerning all these Words, that is, all these Commands. Thus the word is
used most properly of such a Transaction, God has engaged himself to bless
them, if they would serve him; and they have engaged themselves to serve him.

Sometimes the word Covenant, is used for the Promise of one of the Parties
only, as Gods conditional Promises, that if we will in sincerity Love, Serve,
and Obey him, he will be our God to bless us. This is not a Covenant in the
strictest sense, but a conditional Promise; yet is so called frequently in
Scripture, because it is Gods part of the Covenant, yea, all God's part of the
Covenant of Grace, and all that he Seals or Promises; and when we do in
sincerity promise our part, these together make it actually a Covenant; He
engaged actually to bless us, and we to serve him. Yea, if we promise only
hypocritically, yet we are engaged so as we are guilty of Covenant Breaking;
though God is not engaged by his conditional Promise, we not being real in
performing the condition.

So our promising, engaging to obey, may be called our Covenant, because it is
our part of the Covenant; and all required of us, is, so to engage, and be real
in it.

But most frequently in Scripture, the Laws of God, the Precepts themselves are
called the Covenant; being the Laws that God has made Promises to the
obedience of, and that the people by their engagement are bound to observe,
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Sometimes the word is used in other senses, as for an absolute
Promise, as that of destroying the World no more with a Flood; but these
significations before named, are all that I shall have occasion to make use of.

Now to make it appear, that the Promises and Precepts, of the Covenant made in
Mount Sinai, and the Land of Moab were the same; Consider,

This Book of Deuteronomium, signifying the second Law, is so called, as all
agree; because it contains a repetition of the Laws formerly promulgated,
almost all of them were made at Mount Sinai, above thirty nine years before
this Deuteronomium (this Repetition of the Law) was Spoken, or Written. The
occasion of which Repetition of the Law (which may well be called, the Prophet
Moses's Fare-wel Sermon) was as follows: That actual Covenanting that was made
at Mount Sinai, or Horeb, was in the first year, yea, within two months after
they came out of Egypt, Exodus 19. 1. And all the people that were Twenty years
old at their numbering, which was in the second year after their coming out of
Egypt, are now dead, for their murmuring, except Caleb, and Joshuah, and Moses;
and so there was great need to cause this new Generation of people, to enter
actually into Covenant, to keep Gods Laws, which Joshuah caused them to do
again after, at less than half that distance of time.

The appointed time of the end of the forty years, drew near, for the peoples
entering the good Land, and Moses must not bring them thither, nor enter
himself.

Now Moses, well knowing all these things, and that his departure was at hand,
for he died within a Month after his beginning this Repetition of the Law to
the people; for he began it the first day of the Eleventh Month, in the
Fortieth year, and died in the end of that Month, for the people mourned for
him Thirty days, viz. the whole Month after, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. and Chap. 34. 8.
compared. I say Moses foreknowing this, and earnestly desiring to tie the
people (that he was about to leave) fast to God, and his Laws; he begins, in
the hearing of the people, in the Land of Moab, a Month before he died ( Deuteronomy.
1. 3. 5.) to take an effectual course, to inform them in the knowledge of God's
Laws, and to engage them to Obedience, by reciting, and Summing up the
Transactions of God, toward them in the Wilderness, and all the Laws Moral,
Judicial, and Ceremonial (yet leaving out for the most part, those Judicial and
Ceremonial commands, that concerned the Priests Office, or were not of ordinary
Practice) and adds some commands, especially concerning things to be done by
them, when they come into the Promised Land: And affectionately exhorts them to
obey these commands, with all their Heart and Soul, ever and anon intermixing
discourses of the Blessings would come on them by their obedience; and Miseries
by disobedience. This is the Sum of his Discourse to this, Chap. 29. He that
shall think, that all the Promises, and Threats in this Book hitherto, do only
mundum sonare, are only Temporal; sure a vail is upon his Eyes, and Heart, in
reading the Old Testament. And then, in this Chap. 29. Having thus far prepared
them to do what they do knowingly, and affectionately, He engages them in a
Covenant (even with an Oath which was more than was done in Sinai) to keep all
these Laws. He begins his Prologue to this actual Engagement, as at Sinai, with
these words, [ You have seen] v. 2. v. 9. keep therefore the words of this
Covenant (that is, the commands that I have repeated unto you) that you may
prosper in all that you do, v. 10. You stand here this day all of you, before
the Lord your God, your Captains, your Elders, your little Ones, your Wives,
that you should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath
which the Lord makes with thee this day; that he may Establish thee to day,
for a people to himself; that He may be unto thee a God, as he has sworn unto
thy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, i. e. to give their Seed this good
Land. And tells them, If they forsake God, and God bring on this Land the curse
of the Covenant, written in the Book of this Law, and make it like Sodom, and
Gomorrah; and men shall say, What means the heat of this great Anger? It shall
be answered, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their
Fathers, which He made with their Fathers, when he brought them out of the Land
of Egypt (that is, which he made almost Forty years since with the Fathers of
this Generation at Sinai) v. 21, 25. And He spends the next Chapter, (which the
Author makes part of his New Covenant) partly in telling them God would, when
cast out of their Land for their sins, yet, admit them again to it, if they
repent and turn, as He told them before; also (what ever this Author says of
that admitting no Repentance) as you may see apparent, Lev. 26. 40, 41, 44, 45,
46. Yea, this place of Leviticus, which is said expressly to be spoken at Sinai,
v. 64. is rather more express for Repentance, being accepted, than this the
Author so much insists on. And partly in telling them, that he has told them
plainly, what the Laws of God are, which if they observe they shall live, and
need not go beyond the Sea, to enquire what they may do to be happy; and partly
in warning them to keep these Laws.

The whole contents of this Book of Deuteronomy, to the end of this Thirtieth
Chapter, was not only spoken to the people within a Month before his Death,
which is apparent; but it is very probable, within a few of the first days of
the Month, the latter part of the Month being taken up, with his writing it,
Chap. 31. 9. And giving a charge to the Priests and Levites, and in his
presenting himself with Joshuah, before the Lord in the Tabernacle, that God
might give Joshuah a charge, Chap. 31. 9, 10, 14, 15. and in Speaking and
Writing the Song, called Moses Song, and teaching the people it, v. 22. And in
blessing the people, Chap. 33.

And observe, This Deuteronomy, this Farewell Speech of Moses, all of it,
(however to the 29th. Chapter) was, when Moses had written it, given to the
Priests with a command that it should be Read, in the hearing of the people met
together, every Seventh year, as being very sutably Penned for their
Instruction, Chap. 31. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And it is commanded, that when they
should have a King, that he shall in the beginning of his Reign, Write out a
Copy of this Book, Chap. 17. 18. The last Chapter of this Book, was added by
some other than Moses, as is apparent; It Is likely by Joshuah. You see now,
there is no color to pretend, that the Covenant spoken of, Deuteronomy. 39. 1. means
only that Chapter, and the following; much less that these Two Chapters only of
all Moses writings, have only Spiritual commands, and Spiritual promises; and
give way and make Promises to Repentance. For, as for the Spirituality of the
Laws in this Chapter, it does not Recite the Laws they were here engaged to
obey, not so much as the Ten Commandments, whereof some are sure Spiritual
commands, and the sincere observing of them, is certainly the condition of the
Gospel, but show plainly, This Covenant obliges them to keep all the Laws given
at Mount Sinai. And for the Promises, and Threatenings, they are expressed in as
Terrene Expressions here, as in most other places. And as for this of
Repentance, see Lev. 26. 40. When they shall be in Ages to come, almost
destroyed with Judgments threatened for their sins; if they shall confess their
Iniquities, and the Iniquities of their Fathers, v. 41. And if their
uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then accept the punishment of their
Iniquities; I will not cast them away, but will remember their Land, v. 45. I
will, for their sakes, remember the Covenant of their Ancestors, whom I brought
forth out of the Land of Egypt, (that is, This at Sinai, for none other of
their Ancestors were brought out of the Land of Egypt) v. 46. These are the
Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws which the Lord made between him and the
children of Israel, in Mount Sinai. So Deuteronomy. 4. 29. If ye shall be scattered
for your sins, amongst the Heathen, being driven out of your own Land, and
shall there serve other Gods of Wood and Stone; If from thence thou shall seek
the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, v. 31. For the Lord thy God, is a merciful God, Exodus 34. 6.
He proclaimed himself thus from Sinai: The Lord, the Lord, gracious and
merciful, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, etc.

As for Deuteronomy 29. 1. [ These are the words of the Covenant which the Lord
commanded Moses, to make with the Children of Israel, in the Land of Moab,
beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb]. It seems apparent to me,
that this verse has reference to the Laws, and Precepts before Recited by
Moses, in his past Oration to the people, and the meaning of the words is this:
These fore-Recited Commands, are the Laws which the people covenanted to keep;
which covenanting of the people, the Lord commanded Moses to require from them,
in the Land of Moab, beside that covenanting, which Moses required from the
people in Horeb. Which I will make plain, in Reciting these words again, with
the sense they are used in, in other Scriptures.

These are the words (that is the Laws or Precepts, for so words is used
apparently, v. 9. and 2 Kings 23. 3. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Exodus 24. 28. So also the
Ten Commandments, are called the Ten-words, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and Chap. 10. 4. And,
the Words, ( Exodus 20. 1.) of the Covenant (By Covenant is here meant, the
peoples promise to obey, the peoples actual Engagement; so the word Covenant is
used, 2 Kings 12. 17. and Chap. 23. 3. and 2 Chro. 15. 12.) which (that is,
which Covenant, which actual Promise, not which words, for that the Hebrew word
(...) used appropriately for making a Covenant, will by no means bear; So that
it is an apparent Error in the Septuagint to read (...), refering to (...) The
meaning is, I had written this before Mr. Pool's Elab^^tate, and useful
Synopsis, was published; and upon ^eading the Cri^icks, and some others, could
find none concurring with me, but now in his Book, I find P^sca^or interpreting
the words [beside the Covenant] thus, Praeter actionem illam qua foedus fuit
pactum, which can mean nothing but the peoples Engagement.
which actual promise of the people) the Lord commanded Moses to make with the
children of Israel; (that is, which the Lord commanded Moses, to cause the
children of Israel to make; for so this phrase and word is expressly used, Josh.
24. 25. Joshuah made a Covenant with the people that day, that is, caused the
people to promise obedience to the Lords Commands that day: The like sense the
word has, so far as concerns the Covenanting of the people, (2 Kings 11. 17.)
in the Land of Moab, beside the Covenant (that is, beside their actual
promising) which Moses made with them (that is, caused them to make) at Horeb,
or Sinai.

But suppose this Verse should have reference only to the following Verses, in
this Chapter and the following; his meaning can only be, These are the words
whereby he engaged the people in a Covenant, distinct from the words whereby
Moses engaged them in a Covenant to the Lord formerly. We find Joshuah, a
little before his death, again engaging the people in a Covenant, to obey Gods
Commandments; and uses Words and Exhortations, different from these in this
Chapter, in engaging them. Suppose we had read such words as these, viz. These
are the words of the Covenant, which Joshuah made with the people, besides the
Covenant which Moses made with them at Mount Sinai, and in the Land of Moab.
This might import, that it was a distinct Engaging of the people, from the
other two; but not that it was another Covenant of God, having other Promises,
and Commands, and Threats. We find the people in Nehemiah's time, Nehem. 10.
29. entering into a Covenant; But, it was into the Mount Sinai-Covenant; It was
to walk in God's Law, which was given by Moses, and we may see there, it was
also to observe Ceremonial and Judicial commands. It seems they had not
observed this New Covenant of this Authors, in these two Chapters of
Deuteronomy.

Object. But may not this whole Book of Deuteronomy, being spoken in the Land
of Moab, comprehend a new Gospel Covenant, distinct from the Old at Sinai, and
so that be serviceable to reconcile those passages of the Apostle Paul in
dispute, the Author's way.

Answ. No: For the Apostle Paul cites, ( Gal. 3.) two Passages out of this
Book, for words of the Law.

And again, There are, by far, more Promises and Threatenings in this Book,
expressed in a Carnal Temporal and Terrence style, than in all the Law of Moses
beside in Exodus, Leviti. Numb.

I am sensible, this Ignis fatuus, has led me out of my designed way; for I
designed here, only to bring in those Passages together, (without any
reflection upon them) where the Author tells us, what he supposes the Apostle
Paul means by the Law, which he disputes against Justification by, and by the
Works of; even a Law, that either has, or at least in the sense the Apostle
opposes Justification by it, has neither Spiritual-promises, nor Threatenings,
nor Precepts. There is only one place more, and that is ( page 122, 123.) where
he explains the Apostle's meaning by the Law; but because I have been long in
Reciting these, and that w^ll methodically be brought in, in another place, I
shall bring it in there, and so shall return now to the place where I left off,
viz. At the end of page 102. and shall begin at the top of page 103. where he
tells us, The Apostle uses two Arguments against Justification by Works; which
two Arguments this Author only prosecutes; and so largely, that the Setting
down, and Proving, and Explaining these, takes up almost two third parts of his
whole Book: Take his own words.

Page 103. The Arguments whereby Paul opposes the Law, may be divided into two
sorts; one into those which belong to the whole Mosaic-Covenant; the other,
into those Arguments, which chiefly respect the Ceremonial Law.

This latter sort of Arguments, which chiefly respect the Ceremonial-Law, he
leaves till near the end of his Book, and then spends but few Lines about them,
as not being (as he says) controverted by Christians.

The Arguments of this first sort, whereby the Apostle fights, are especially
two; and those are taken from a double defect of the Mosaic-Covenant, viz. From
the want both of pardoning Grace, and of helping Grace.

The first Argument of the Apostle respecting the Mosaic-Covenant, is drawn
from the defect of Pardoninggrace, or Remission of sins, which that Covenant
wanted: Where the Apostle shows the Universal guilt, as well of the Jews, as of
the Gentiles; and that all are guilty of those sins, that there is no true and
perfect Remission to be hoped for by this Law. It is clear, that this is the
scope of Paul, in the third Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. For there,
after a long Catalogue of sins, charged both on the Jews, and Gentiles, by the
Law, v. 10. etc. At length, ver. 20. he inferrs this conclusion, Wherefore by
the works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight, viz. in the
sight of God. And also, the things which the Apostle disputes in the 3d. Chap.
of Gal. are to be referred the same way; where he proves also by this Reason,
That all who are under the Law, are under a Curse; because it is written,
Cursed is every one, that shall not continue in all things written in the Law,
to do them, v. 10.

But here I am sensible, that upon the very Threshold, I am cast upon a great
difficulty. For it may be doubted here, whether this Argumentation of the
Apostle, does not lean upon this Foundation; that he determines, The
Mosaic-Law, as it was given to the Jews, was a Law requiring Obedience wholly
perfect, and so impossible to be performed; and also, whether the Apostle
conclude, that upon this account, all men are sinners by this Law, and by, and
for their sins, guilty of eternal Death, and Malediction; and so, that no man
can be Justified by this Law. Thus indeed the most think, affirming that the
Law of Moses did oblige (if not absolutely, yet Conditionally is no good word
here; For though we may properly say, Men shall perish for their sins
conditionally, except they repent, for this is no more than to say, the Law
that threatens death absolutely, shall be executed except they repent; yet we
must not say, that the Law threatens death conditionally except they repent;
but we must hold it threatens death absolutely repent or repent not, and that
the Gospel is a distinct Law, a Remedying-Law. For if God threatened death by
the Law, only conditionally, except they perform the Gospel-condition, it would
follow that no man is pardoned that performs the Gospel condition, it would
also quite destroy Christ's Satisfaction. Though I know many mean well that use
such speeches, and however far better than the Author, that denies any such
Lawthreat, either absolute or conditional.
conditionally, viz. unless they fled to the Gospel Covenant) all those to whom
it belonged, and that under the peril of Eternal death, to most absolute
obedience, that is, such as comprehends all manner of sinlesness; yea, and that
perpetually, and did forbid all Imperfection, Inadvertency, and Infirmity
through the whole course of their lives. But I cannot be persuaded to the
opinion of these, for Reasons which I shall presently give. In the mean while,
that you may more rightly understand the state of this Controversy; keep this
exactly in your mind, that these two things do widely differ, viz. A man to be
accounted by God, unworthy of the reward of Righteousness and Eternal life: And
a man to be accounted of God, worthy to be punished with the punishment of
Eternal death. For the first, For a man to be judged unworthy of Eternal Life,
it suffices that he is not altogether Sinless; for God may, and that
righteously, deny him the reward of Eternal Life for the least Imperfection.
For God might deny that infinite Gift of Eternal Life to a man obeying
perfectly, if such a one could be found; because it is a free Gift, and cannot
be due to the Merit of any Creature: But for that last, That one should be
accounted by God, worthy of the punishment of Eternal death, it is necessarily
required, that he did not perform that Obedience which he could perform. Hence
it follows, that no man can righteously be adjudged guilty of Eternal death,
for the defect of perfect Righteousness, since this Righteousness is simply
impossible to a man in this Life. And it is manifest, that the Apostle in the
Dispute of which we speak, does prove all Jews, and Gentiles, without
difference, for not obeying the Law, not only to be unworthy of the reward of
Eternal life, but obnoxious to Divine anger, and Eternal death, That every
mouth might be stopped, Romans 3. 19. that is, that all Jews and Gentiles, may be
without excuse, Romans 1. 20. and 2. 1. And what is more unlikely (that I may use
here, the words of Episcopius) that the Apostle would charge men to be guilty
of Death and Condemnation, for violating, or not keeping a Law which he judged
it impossible for them to keep: Neither is it likely, that Paul had any
Adversaries but what would grant, that no man could keep the Law so exactly, as
not to offend in the least, and so no man to be justified in that sense by the
Law; And who would not also object to him, that men were ill accused to be
guilty of Punishment, when it is certain, they could not avoid the fault. The
foundation of all here said, is this, That it is repugnant to Divine Justice,
that any should be bound to Impossibilities, Page 106.
especially under the peril of Eternal death.

He here make's out, That, that-usual pretense of some, is very absurd, that
men have lost their power to do what God requires of them, and so God may
justly require what they cannot now do; which I grant, and have elsewhere
proved to be so absurd, as no way to answer that difficulty. He thus proceeds,

And to come to the Mosaic-Law, it is far more unlikely, that it was a Law
requiring perfect Obedience. Which that I may make manifest, It is diligently
to be observed, that the Old Law (as Grotius de Satisf. cap. 10. notes) may be
considered This ^^numeration is not near large ^^ough, nor any thing to the
pu^pose.
two ways, as having a double relation, or (...). First, Carnally, and
according to the Letter, as it was an Instrument of the Government of the
Jewish Polity, or the Commonwealth. Secondly, Spiritually, as having a shadow
of good things to come, Heb. 10. 1. Now in this last (...), or Habitude, since
the Law was nothing else but the The Law, as it had a shadow of good things to
come, was not the Gospel it self: Again, so far as it was an Instrument of the
Jewish Polity, it was a shadow of good things to come. And so far as it was the
Law of Grace, the Gospel of Salvation, it Typified nothing.
Gospel it self, shadowed with, or shadowed under Types; no man in his right
wits, will say, it was a a Law, requiring perfect obedience, viz. In that sense
wherein the Law was meant in this Controversy, to require perfect Obedience.

It remains therefore to be affirmed, that the Law of Moses required perfect
Obedience under the former consideration [ viz. As the Instrument of the Jewish
Government.]

But to affirm this, would be wonderfully * It did threaten death in this
consideration, to the least failing in this Political-Law.
absurd. Because,

First, Because we read expressly, that God by It was not by that Law formally
considered, but by the Remedying-Law different from it.
that Law, commanded Sacrifices by which the offenses, which were not done in
contempt of the Law, and with a high Hand were expiated, as may be seen, Number.
15. from the 22d. to the 29th. v. Now The just contrary is true. For there can
be no pardon of the want of perfect obedience, but where perfect obedience is
required.
where any pardon of sin is granted, there the requiring of Perfect-bedience
cannot have place: For these are inconsistent.

Secondly, The Mosaic-Law, was so far from requiring Perfect-obedience from the
Jews, that it is too manifest, that some things were in that Law The doing
things permitted by a Law, is no breach of that particular Law, nor hinders a
man from perfectly obeying that Law.
permitted to them for the hardness of their hearts, which things cannot be
excused from being sin, as Polygamy, and License of divorcing for leight
causes, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. and compared with Mat. 19. 3. etc. I conclude therefore,
that since by the Mosaic-Law, carnally considered, many sins were remitted to
the Jews, and some things (which at least to us Christians, are accounted sins)
were expressly permitted; It ought to be granted without controversy, that this
Law, so considered, did by no means require perfect and exact Obedience.

Yet there are not wanting Arguments, by which some endeavor to prove this
Hypothesis to be true; and that thence, Paul gathered the impossibility of
Justification by the Mosaic-Law. We will weigh these Arguments exactly, to try
if they have any thing of Solidity, which ought to prejudice so plain a truth:
They bring two chiefly.

Their first Argument, is taken from that place fore-alleadg'd by me, Page 108.
viz. Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under a Curse:
For it is written, Cursed is every one, that does not continue in all things,
etc. Where, say they, it is manifest, that the Apostle gathers the
Impossibility of Justification by the Mosaic-Law, from thence that by this Law,
no man is free from a Curse, who has not obeyed all the commands of this Law
perfectly.

I answer, It is not necessary, nor convenient, in the cited place this phrase
[ continue in all things] should signify most Perfect-obedience, or quite
sinlesness; since such Obedience is impossible to man encompassed with Flesh;
neither does it seem consentaneous to Divine equity, that any one for the
defect of it, should be obnoxious to Eternal Malediction. Therefore the sense
of the Testemony cited, is this; That every man is Accursed; that is, is
Execrable and Obnoxious to the Punishment threatened by the Law, who does not
do, and observe perseveringly Is not this perfect obedience to a Law, to do all
the Law requires to be done?
all those things which the Law prescribes to be observed. And he is reputed
to do all things, who does not err from the end of the Law; who keeps safe the
essenal parts of the Law, or (as others speak) who keeps all those Precepts of
the Law, which contain the substance of Life; of which sort are all those
Commands which are expressed by Moses, in the Curses, Deuteronomy. 27. In a word, who
admits nothing into himself knowingly, and wittingly against the Law of God,
although he fails in something, either out of Ignorance, or Inadvertency.

That place, Jam. 2. 10. being Twin-brother to this, gives great light to this
place, Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet offends in one point, is guilty
of all: That is, is obnoxious to the Punishment threatened to the Transgressors
of the Law, v. 10. For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not
kill, etc.

Here he gives the true and ordinary Interpretation of this place so largely,
as to take up page 109. and half page 110. which is this, He that knowingly
allows himself in the knowing Transgression of any one Law, is as far from
Salvation, as if he kept none; for such a one does not act sincerely in
Obedience to any Law, since all Divine Laws have the same Author and Authority:
Therefore he that knowingly neglects one Law, does not keep other Laws, because
of Gods Authority in Commanding, or because of Gods Command, but because he
has not that list through Temptation to break them; for if he had as much list
through Temptation to break them, such a one would break the other Laws. He
goes on:

But one may perhaps reply. Grant it, let that place of James be so expounded,
Page 110.
yet the same Interpretation will by no means agree to the Apostle's scope in
that place of the Epistle to the Galatians: For since the Apostle does prove
all who are of the Law, to be under a Curse, only by this reason; because it is
written, Cursed is every one, that does not continue in all things, etc. he
does manifestly hint, that no man can continue in all things, or that the Law
does require such perfect obedience, as none can perform.

Answer, I altogether deny that to be hinted, or employed in the Apostle's
Argument: Which, that it may be made apparent, I will reduce it to a
Syllogistical form: Thus,

He is accursed who does not continue in all thing, which the Law commands. But
whosoever are of the works of the Law, do not continue in all those things:

Ergo, They that are of the works of the Law, are under a Curse.

The Apostle speaks expressly of Page 111.
those who are of the works of the Law, v. 10. That is, who seek Righteousness
in the Law being ignorant of, or despising the Grace of the Gospel, whom he
opposes to them that are of Faith, v. 9 That is, who believe the Gospel and
embrace it is Grace; and who have attained the Promises (or thing Promised) of
the Spirit, whereby they may fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, and so avoid
the Curse of it, v. 14. Of the first sort indeed he hints, that they neither
continue, nor Then they a^e not, according to his Argument, bound to continue
in all, etc. and so are free from the Curse, though they continue not in all,
etc.
can continue in all things written; but of the second sort, he by no means
affirms it. In a word, The Apostle ^^ver spoke word against man's being able to
fulfill the Law, in all things by Gospel Grace, so far as it was a Law; that is,
under the penalty of Eternal death, is imposed us, or ever was imposed upon
Mankind, since the fall of the first man; yea, he often acknowledges this
possibility, as we shall see hereafter.

There remains another Argument of the Adversaries (of which they boast, as
being most unconquerable) taken out of that famous place, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength. You may see here, say they, that the highest and perfectest
love of God, is required of all in the Law.

Answer, They who fight with this Argument, do kill themselves with their own
Sword. For, since God requires no other love, than what is done with all the
Heart and Mind, and with all the Strength; it is manifest, that nothing is
required of us beside, or above our strength (our strength, I mean, helped with
that measure of Grace which God communicates to every one of us in this Life,
or is certainly ready to communicate.) Now it is certain, that we can with all
our Page 112.
strength obey God, because it would be a It is no contradiction, but a great
truth. It is appa^ent, that a man's culpable Impotency to good, is an Impotency
of doing something, that we have the natural power and strength to do; And
whosoever does not understand this, must necessarily talk ridiculously about
such matters as these in hand.
manifest contradiction, to say we cannot do the thing we can do (or cannot do
a thing according to our strength.)

The truth of this Answer, is established firmly with these following Reasons.
First, Because God promises that he will give to his people, that which he
requires, viz. To circumcise their heart, to love him with all their heart,
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Secondly, Because God himself witnesses, that there were some
that loved him after this manner; so it is said of Asah the King, and all the
people, that they sought the Lord with their whole heart, 2 Chro. 15. 2. We
read of David, that he followed God with all his heart, 1 Kings 14. 8. But that
is a famous Testimony, which the Holy Ghost gives concerning Josiah the King,
That he turned to the the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his strength, according to the Law of Moses, 2 Kin. 23. 25. viz. That
is said to be done with the whole heart, and whole strength, which a man
imploys his chief Thoughts and Endeavors about; even as we say, A man is totus
in literis, wholly in studies that makes them his chief business.

I shall as soon as I have recited all he says of this nature, answer the
substance of all; But this of loving God with all the Soul, being something out
of the Road, I will answer it here. The command of loving God with all the
Heart, and Soul, and Strength, must be considered either strictly (as I said at
the beginning) as a Law with it is penalty; And so it requires the utmost of a
man's natural Ability (and no more, not as much as an Angel's ability reaches
to) so that if he fails in the least degree of this, he fails so much of love
due to God by this Law, and is under its curse. It is essential to a Law, as a
Law, that it require perfect Obedience to it self; and to deny this, would be
to deny that every Law requires all that it does require; any thing short of
this, is not all the Law requires. If a man do not love God in as high a degree
as this law in this sense requires, he is from under its Blessing, and under
its Curse and Condemnation, and cannot possibly be Justified by this Law in
this sense, nor be pardoned by it; for no Law can possibly pardon an offense
against it self. But he may be pardoned by another Law, a Law of Grace. In this
strict sense no mere man in this life, not Josiah himself, ever loved God with
his whole heart so highly as he ought, so high as the Law in this sense
required; however, me thinks, he should not have pretended it of all the people
of Israel in Asa's time, but have sought some other sense at least for those
words, and that might have brought him to the sense I shall now speak of.

Secondly, These words may be considered as the condition of the Remedying-Law
made with them for the Merit of Christ, then to come; as taken with this Gospel
lenity, that if they love God with the prevailing bent of their Souls, or above
all other things, they shall be pardoned, escape the curse of the Law in its
Rigor due. And in this sense, a man loves God with all his Heart, and Soul, as
far as God by his Remedying-Law, requires for his Salvation, and so obeys the
Law taken in this sense perfectly; that is, loves him so much as it requires,
as necessary to his Salvation; that does it thus prevailingly, though he fail
in the degrees, he ought to love God by the strict Law, and so needs pardon.
The meaning is not, that Asa loved God as much as any Law required from him,
and so needed no pardon, or Christ's satisfaction, for failing in any degree of
love due to, or required by God.

But to proceed with the next words of the Author.

I will add this for a Conclusion to Page 112.
this Dispute; This my Opinion of the possibility of fulfilling the Law, so far
as it ever was imposed by God, upon men as a Law, is not a new upstart Opinion,
but an Opinion approved by the common Vote of all the Ancients, who wrote
before the Pelagian Controversy had muddied the Rivulets of the more pure and
primitive Doctrine. Yea, and Austine himself, though otherwise too hot in this
unhappy Controversy, did not doubt to confess, that God commanded possible
things; and, in this sense, only what all particular Believers are able to
fulfill. Here he cites some Ancients for this Opinion, that God does not require
what men have no power Page 112, etc.
to do; which takes up page 112, 113, and 114. almost.

I grant, it is apparent they did hold, as I also do, that God requires no more
than men have the Natural power to do. But yet I dare challenge any to name
one, accounted no Heretic, that held this Opinion (that follows by evident
consequence from the Authors Opinion): That every man (for that follows by
consequence,) or that every man by that measure of Grace which God communicates
to him, or is ready to communicate to him, may for any Impotency in him to the
contrary, so live as not to fail in any thing the Law requires, so far as to
stand in need of pardon, or Christ's satisfaction for such failings. Yea, or
this Opinion which he expressly holds, as you will presently see more fully,
viz. That after the receiving of the Gospel, or Conversion, men may, for any
Impotency on them to the contrary, so live as not to sin at all, as not to fail
at all in obedience to the Law; or so, as not to do any thing that deserves, or
is by any Law threatened with Eternal death.

He goes on.

From the things which we have Page 114.
already spoken, I suppose it to appear plain enough: That the Law of Moses did
not require most perfect Obedience, that is, all manner of sinlessness in the
highest degree, under the peril of Eternal death, and so that the Apostle's
Argument is not built upon that Supposition. It remains, that we consider, by
what Reason the Apostle proves his Conclusion. Therefore I judge (saving honor
to better judgments) this Argumentation of the Apostle, to lean upon two
foundations chiefly.

First, That all, both Jews and Gentiles, were guilty of heinous sins, and so
obnoxious to Judgment, and Divine anger; this is hinted concerning the Jews
chiefly, and also of all who did seek Righteousness in the Law (as I said
before, in my answer to the first Objection) in that place, Gal. 3. 10. But the
same is largely demonstrated of all without difference, Romans 3. Where he
charges many heinous sins, both upon the Jews, and Gentiles. But that the
Context of the whole place may be rightly understood, two things are chiefly to
be noted, one belonging to the Accusation, another to the Persons Accused.

First, As for the Accusation it self, it is to be Noted, that it is not of any
kind of sins, but they are accused of sins more properly so called; that is, of
heinous sins, and worthy of Eternal death. This is clearly manifest; First, out
of the words by which the Position, [or Affirmation] of the Apostle (which was
proved in the former Chapter, and is in this Chapter further Demonstrated) is
expressed, v. 9. We have before proved, that both Jews and Gentiles, are all
under sin. Where that Phrase [ to be under sin] manifestly signifies to be
under the dominion of sin, or to be addicted to heinous sins; whosoever is such
a one, is said by the Apostle, to be sold under sin, Chap. 7. 14. Secondly, It
is apparent out of the whole Context of the Apostle, in which all the sins that
are enumerated, are of a more The Apostle indeed does instance in heinous sins,
and so the import of his Argument, Romans Chap. 1, 2, 3. seems this, viz. If so
be that sins scarce to be named, were to be found frequently, almost
universally polluting even those learned Gentiles, Chap. 1. 22. that excelled
all other Ge^t^les in knowledge, where the study of Divine and humane Knowledge
abounded, and were great Professors of Wisdom; And if amongst the Jews, even in
the best times, the days of David, horrid wickednesses were to be found very
frequent, so that even in a manner, the whole body of the people were guilty of
such heinous sins; it may be well and facilly gathered, that all are sinners,
and cannot be justified by the Law, that is, without pardon of sin.
heinous sort, as will easily appear to any one, viewing the place.

Secondly, If you enquire concerning the Persons charged by him, they are as
well Gentiles, as Jews, v. 9. 19. 23. but both considered as they were before,
and without the Grace of the Gospel, which is even manifest from the scope of
the Apostle, whose purpose it was to stir up both Jews and Gentiles, convinced
of their guilt and misery, to seek and embrace the Grace of the Gospel.
Therefore Paul contends, that both Gentiles and Jews considered in this estate,
to be all under sin. You will Object, But there were some, at least amongst the
Jews, who lived a holy and unblamable life, before the Faith of Christ [or,
their faith in Christ] and a life most alien from the Vices which the Apostle
here reckons up, and from all of the like kind; such as were Zachary,
Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, and others.

I answer: I confess it; yea, I do not doubt, but amongst the Gentiles I dare
not affirm this: For then I must hold their Salvation, whereas I read,
Salvation is of the Jews; and that the Gentiles were without hope, without God
in the world. Neither yet da^e I say, that none did thus sincerely.
also there were some who abhorred the Vices here mentioned, and also did
sincerely, and from their hearts, love and follow ( Coluerunt) Virtue and
Righteousness, so far as it was known to them: And both right Reason, and St.
Paul himself persuades me to be of this Opinion, who does not obscurely teach
it himself, Romans 2. v. 14, 15, 26, 27. But because the Objection is made only
concerning the Jews, I will answer only concerning them, leaving it yet to the
Reader, to accommodate or fit the same Answer to the Gentiles (mutatis
mutandis) changing what is to be changed.

I say therefore, that First, These Pious men amongst the Jews were very few,
and, being compared to others, as a drop in the Sea; and therefore the Apostle
was to take no great notice concerning them: But it was reasonable, that the
great scarcity of good men should (as one speaks) give its testimony to the
numerosity of the wicked. And certainly, universal speeches of this sort that
the Apostle here uses, do often occurr in Scripture; which yet it is certain,
are That is, all put for the most. This then is to say, that the most men are
guilty of sins deserving Eternal death, and needing pardon by Christ; but he
contradicts this sense after.
Hyperbolical, see John 3. 32. Isa. 66. 23. Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17. Psalm. 14.
23. and 145. 14, 15. Phil. 2. 21. etc.

Secondly, Those few that were Righteous under the Law, did not receive their
Righteousness from the Law, but they owed it to Gospelgrace, which even before
the Promulgation of the Gospel, did (indeed more sparingly and rarely) put
forth it is force through all past-Ages. In a word, they were led with the
Spirit of the Gospel, and not of the Law, and so deserved to be accounted with
those who are not of the Works of the Law, but are of Faith. Whence the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, shows that all the works of Pious men, who shine
in the History of the Old Testament, proceeded not from the Law, but from
Faith. Thirdly, It is Sure this is too easy a word, that it is likely such did
commit such a sin, as to deserve Eternal death, so as to need Christ, and
Pardon.
likely that those few did not so carry themselves through the whole course of
their lives, but that they some time fell into some sins, or into some more
heinous sin, and worthy of death; Yea, this is to be accounted for certain;
This does not prove his Opinion, for though these did not, yet it is probable,
Some did live without any heinous sin, in his sense, in the whole course of
their lives, and so did not need pardon as to Eternal guilt, by his opinion.
because it is expressly read concerning those very men to whom in the Old
Testament, an unblamable and perfect observation of the Divine Law, is
ascribed; That sometimes they fell into some sins, and those enormous ones, and
most worthy of Death, as of Asa, 2. Chron. 16. Of David, 1 Kings 15. 5. Of
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 22. And I think, that which follows with the Apostle, v.
23. must be interpreted to this sense, viz. All have sinned and come short of
the Glory of God. That proposition seems plainly Universal, so as to except
none; implying there is no man who has not been guilty of some sins, or of
some more heinous sin; either some one time, or for some time [ Sive aliquando,
sive aliquandiu.] And this seems to be that very thing which the Scripture in
many places asserts; as for Example, 1 Kings 8. 46. For there is no man who
does not sin, 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us. Which speech, that it ought to be understood of sins
properly so called; not only of lighter faults, and also that it is Universal,
the very matter shows, and the things which are after Page 118.
added in that Epistle. Chap. 2. v. 12. wherein also that is to be noted, that
St. John speaks in the Praeter-tense; If we say we have not sinned, viz. before
the knowledge of the Gospel; that is to say, The holy Apostle, would have the
Christians to whom he writes, diligently to take heed to themselves, of the
fault of an ungrateful mind; And that they would not attribute this, that they
are purged from Vices, either to themselves, or the Law of Moses or Nature, but
only to Gospel Grace. Otherwise, he does not seem to deny, but that after the
knowledge of the Gospel, and its Grace received, some could be without sin; so
as the word Sin is taken by him, not so as it should signify mere Ignorance,
or sudden Motions; but those evil acts, which have ( tractum) a continued
course (as Grotius speaks) and do not go before deliberation; yea, he does not
obscurely hint that this is possible, 1 Epist. 2. 1. Where he does seriously
exhort Christians not to sin. Perhaps, one may reply, that the Apostle in the
aforesaid Chapter, v. 3. does use the Present tense. If we say, we have no sin,
etc. Therefore he implies, That no man even after the Faith of the Gospel, is
free, or can be free from those sins more properly so called. But the answer is
easy, for, to have sin, and to sin, or to do sin, do not signify the same.
Because to have sin (as Grotius says rightly) is not now to be in sin, but to
be guilty, or to be made guilty for sins formerly committed, as does most
manifestly appear from John 9. 41. and 15. 22, 24. The sense therefore is; If
we say that we have not hainously sinned before the knowledge of the Gospel,
and, because of those sins, to have been guilty of Eternal death, and so yet to
be guilty, unless the Grace and Mercy of the Gospel should Relieve us, we are
plainly Liars, and basely ungrateful toward the Gospel, and that Truth which we
profess. What need of many words? John himself is a manifest Why may not both
Speeches be true? Or why may not the latter Speech as well be Expounded by the
former? I could show that these words were spoken against such as pretended
Perfection, and that Grotius's interpretation is not right; but that would
require too many words. It is a shorter way to refer you to other Scriptures,
speaking in the Present tense, Jam. 3. 2. In many things, we offend all. He
puts himself into the number, and says not we have offended, Eccles. 7. 20.
There is not a just man upon the Earth that does good, and sins not. 1 Kings
8. 46. There is no man that sins not. If it should be replied, Such are not
properly sins, I shall ere long answer that.
Interpreter of himself; when afterward he Expounds, not by, we sin in the
Praesent tense, but, we have sinned in the Praeter tense, that which before he
had said, viz. We have no sin. But let us return to Paul.

It appears from what we have spoken, that this is the Sum of the first
Hypothesis, the Apostle's Argument leans on, viz. That both Jews and Gentiles,
if you consider the far greatest part of them, were plainly under the dominion
of sin, enslaved Page 119.
to most filthy Vices. And they who were the best, and most holy of either
Nation, had not so ordered their life, but at some time they had fallen into some
sins, or at least into some But they all according to his great Argument could
have lived without all these sins. or without that grievous sin worthy of
Death, and consequently, so as to have no need of Pardon, or Christ's death, to
free them from Eternal death, else no Law could require them to live free from
such sin; and consequently would be guiltless in committing that Act, and not
need pardon for it, and consequently not need pardon, or Christ's death at all.
one, more heinous sin and worthy of death. And so all, both Jews and Gentiles,
without difference, and without acception, were guilty before God, Romans 3. 19.
were obnoxious to Divine wrath, and Eternal death.

Thus he, verbatim.

His great Argument against the ordinary Interpretation of the words of the
Apostle Paul, viz. That no Law of God requires any more than a man can do
(which I grant to be true, but not in his sense) in the sense that he uses, it
will do strange feats. By the same Argument that he proves, that God does not
require his people to be free from their daily failings ( viz. Because no man
clothed with flesh, can live without such) he may prove that any man for any
Impotency on him to the contrary, may be free from standing in need of Pardon,
or the Blood of Christ: thus.

Whosoever can live free from any great sins, deserving or threatened with
Eternal death, can live without need of pardon, or Christ's satisfaction:

But all men can live free from any great sins, deserving or threatened with
Eternal death. Ergo. The consequence is apparent: He may prove his Minor thus.
If there was any man that could not live without any great sin threatened with
Eternal death, then he is not bound, no Law requires him, to live without such
sin:

But, the Law of God requires him to live without such sin: Ergo. Yea: And he
might produce Aquinas, and others affirming, that though a man may live a
little while without Venialsin, though yet not long; yet he may live without
Mortal sin, all his life. Yea this Argument will as well prove, the Heathen may
live perfect and without sin, as any else. If they do what they can do, what
they can do. And it is a contradiction (he says) to say otherwise. The
consequence he may prove still thus: That no Law requires any man to do more
than he can.

As for such words [Properly sins, Improperly sins, Less properly sins, sins
not deserving Eternal death;] and then sometime again, saying [no Law requires
a man to live without them.] It is such slippery Discourse, off, and on; That I
can but ask Questions, to have him clear his meaning in Answering; and such
Questions I would ask, a man speaking obscurely about Venial-sins (amongst
which some reckon Fornication.) Are these, Things, or Entities (that are
consistent with truth of Grace, or Sincerity, those peccata quotidianae
incursionis, as they are commonly called) forbidden by any Law of God, or not?
If you shall say, as Lombard, Aquinas, Bellarmine, that they are not, then they
are not Transgressions of the Law, are not sins at all, and no punishment
whatsoever can be due to, or deserved by them, being no faults, and a man is
perfect notwithstanding them. Bellarmine says, There is no way possible to
maintain the Catholic Doctrine of man's ability, perfectly to keep the Law, but
by denying Venial-sins, to be forbidden by the Law. Lib. 4. de Justif. Chap. 14.

Again, may a sincere Christian seriously ask Pardon for these sins of daily
Incursion? Then they are Sins, and Transgressions of a Law, or they could not
be pardoned, neither could Christ be a Sacrifice for them; and then they are
threatened with, and deserve Eternal death; for a man cannot with understanding,
ask pardon for that punishment which God cannot in Justice inflict. There can
be no Pardon but of Grace, and Mercy, and Favor, and whatsoever God does of
Grace and Favor, He might justly not have done it, and so might in strict
Justice not have pardoned, but have condemned us for these.

Shall a man be condemned for these, except he repent of his other sins?
Aquinas and Bellarmine, maintain that men should be punished with Eternal
death, for their Venial-sins (that do not, they say, deserve death Eternal)
except they repent. Then they do deserve Eternal death; for He may not so much
as punish a man except he repent, for those things which do not deserve the
Punishment; for he may not do unjustly, though men do not repent.

Will any say, though they be not contra legem, against the Law; yet they are
pr^^ter, besides the Law, as many say concerning Venial-sins? I would only say,
What do you mean? Do you mean that they are neither commanded to commit those
sins of daily Incursion, nor forbidden; then they are (as some say the
Ceremonies are) merely things indifferent.

If they be not merely indifferent, will you say that the abstaining from such
things is commendable, though not commanded? And so say, as this Author rightly
tells us, the Pharisaical Jews held; that those Commands that required
Spiritual and inward Holiness, as the Tenth Command, were not Commands, but
Counsels. If so, then the abstaining from such Sins, is a work of
Super-erogation; And then indeed, the failing in not doing works of
Super-erogation cannot be pardoned, nor need Christ's satisfaction.

It is but casting a Mist before the Readers Eyes, so often to put in the word
Eternal-death; saying, they do not deserve Eternal death. Will he grant that
God may justly punish such sins with Temporal death, or any Temporal
punishment? I see, he will not. His Opinion, and his and Episcopius's Argument,
that God cannot justly require what men cannot do; areas much against their
deserving any punishment at all. If God do not, as he affirms, require them by
any Law to be free from such sins, then they are not sins, nor deserve any
Penalty. It would then be Injustice in God, to make any man's finger or tooth to
ache for them. Whereas the Popish Schoolmen themselves do grant, that they do
deserve Temporal punishment. Though the Scripture indeed allows no ground for
any such distinction, but either threatens (and be sure it would not threaten
what sin does not deserve) death; yea, Eternal death or nothing. The wages of
Sin is death, the Sting of death is Sin, and the strength of Sin, the Law. And,
Cursed is he that continues not in all, etc. Which curse the Author (as you
will after see) affirms, to signify Eternal wrath.

But to go on with his words.

The other thing which the Apostle supposes in his Argument, is this, viz. That
there was no true and perfect Remission of Sins, or deliverance from Divine
Anger, or Eternal death due to sins, promised in the Mosaic-Law. It is manifest
enough, the Apostle had respect to this, ver. the 20th. of the foresaid Chapter
(viz. Romans 3.) Where having drawn his Conclusion only from the first
Hypothesis, ( viz. that all are guilty) he presently subjoyns this other
(without which, his whole Argumentation would have been infirm) in these words;
For by the Law, is the knowledge of Sin. Which sentence, is, without doubt, to
be understood exclusively, thus, By the Law is only the Methinks, This very
place, viz. Rom 3. 20 (which this Author insists on, to prove the Apostl^, by
the Law, meant a Law having only Temporal threa^s, and External commands)
should have convinced him; that he meant by it a Law that had Future threats
and Internal commands, even the Law in the strict Conscience-sen^e^ since it is
hard to imagine how there should be much conviction or knowledge of sin and its
danger, by a Law, that had no Spiritual, or Internal commands, nor
Future-life-threats: And the Apostle's Argument here is this, viz. We cannot be
justified as innocent, by the Law that convi^^ces us we are sinners.
knowledge of sin, and not Remission: Now I said expressly, that the Law of Moses
did contain no true and perfect Remission of sins. Because I well knew that
there was given in the Law of Moses some kind of Pardon, such a slender one as
it was, to Sins; and that to voluntary and heinous sins. For though the Sins
which were done by Pride, notorious Rebellion; or, as the Scripture speaks,
with a high-hand, could be expiated with no Sacrifices, but were punished with
death without Mercy or Pardon, except the special Mercy of God did intervene,
as Numb. 15. 25, 26. is to be read: Yet, they are not all to be accounted
amongst these sins (as the most Learned This is the common observation of
Learned men.
Episcopius has most highly well observed) which are done voluntarily, or are
done Spontaneously, or, in some measure, on purpose; but they only which are
done with an impious contempt of Gods Commands, or with the stubbornness of a
wilful mind. And so, they are They, to which the Punishment of Death was
appointed by God. It is plain, that they that think otherwise, are in a
manifest Error; as appears from that, that we see, God appointed sacrifice
for such sins as these, viz. Not restoring a Pledge; The taking away something
from another by Force; The denying of what one found of another's; yea, and
that with an Oath, Lev. 6. 2, 3, 4. Therefore there was granted Remission in
the Mosaic-Law, to heinous sins. But what a kind of Remission? Why, External,
Civil, Temporary, and which belonged only to this Carnal life.

For the Law, as it was an Instrument ordained for the Political Beatitude of
civil Society, did promise long Life to those who lived according to the Law,
Lev. 18. 5. and, on the contrary, did threaten violent death to the
Transgressors of it, as we learn out of Exodus 20. 7.

But the highest Lawgiver, the merciful GOD, that all the people might not be
exstirpated with the punishments of their sinning, appointed that some most
atrocious offenses indeed (that did wage open war against the Life, and civil
Converse of men, and this Political Theocracy, or Government of God, for the
defense of which, the Mosaical-Law was instituted; such as Idolatry, Murder,
Adultery, etc.) should only be expiated with death; But, Sacrifices were slain
for men unclean, or defiled with Sins less heinous. Therefore the Punishment of
Temporary death, which the men deserved, was transferred upon a Beast.
Therefore the Mosaical Sacrifices, did afford only a Carnal Redemption, in as
much as they did, by Divine appointment, free a man indeed from a violent and
immature death; but they did afford no remedy against death it self. In a word,
they did not afford such Remission as is conjoined with the giving of Eternal
life: There being no mention, in the Law of Moses, nor Promise, made of it.

The divine Author to the Epistle to the Hebrews, had respect to this, Chap. 9.
Where having spoken of the Sacrifices prescribed in the Law, He denies they
could make the Sacrificer perfect according to Conscience, v. 8. that is, Free
the man from Internal, and Eternal guilt of Sin, in the sight of God; but they
availed only to the Purgation of the Flesh, v. 13. that is, That a man might be
Externally freed from Punishment, and Corporal death.

Then he brings in these places, Heb. Chap. 7. 11. 19. Chap. 10. 1. Where it is
affirmed, The Law made nothing perfect, and thus proceeds.

In which place, by Perfection, he chiefly understands Full and Perfect, that
is Eternal, Absolution, not only from leighter faults, but from most heinous;
which he most deservedly denies to be afforded by the Law of Moses. It cannot
but be manifest to him that rightly understands these things, wherefore it is
that the Apostle denies Justification to the Law, viz. Not because it requires
perfect, and so impossible Obedience as the condition of Justification, but
rather because it grants no Justification at all (that is conjoined with the
Donation of Eternal life) upon any condition whatsoever.

Out of these Premises, therefore, the Apostle at length draws his Conclusion,
viz. Neither Jews nor Gentiles (which be comprehended under these words, no
Flesh,) can be justified by the Law of Moses, [ in the sight of God,] Chap. 3.
20. Which words are added by way of Emphasis, because he was to grant some kind
of Justification by the Law, viz. [Before men, and such as would stand a man in
stead for Temporal felicity only, but not to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven.]

Therefore this whole Argumentation of the Apostle, may be comprehended in this
Syllogism.

No man can be justified by the Law of Moses, in foro Dei, in the sight of God,
who is guilty of those Sins to which no Remission, in the sight of God, is
granted by this Law:

But all (as well Jews, as Gentiles) are guilty of those Sins, to which no
Remission in the sight of God, is granted by the Law of Moses:

Therefore no man ( Jew nor Gentile) can be justified by the Law of Moses, in
the sight of God.

I confess I am Puzzled, and at a Loss, where to b^gin here to answer this
Discourse, there are so many things to be Objected against this Argument: I
will in short mention some few.

First, Here is an Arguing per saltum, by a great Leap, by supposing things,
according to this Authors way, impossible, viz. That all men are obliged to
Eternal Condemnation for their sins; whereas there is no possibility of this:
For if thus obliged, let it be asked, By what Law? Now there is no Law,
according to him, either promising Future happiness upon Obedience, or
threatening Future misery upon Disobedience, but only the Gospel it self. If it
shall be replied, that all were obliged to Eternal punishment for their sins by
the Gospel, by the Law of Grace, and Pardon revealed in former times amongst
the Jews and Heathens: It is so absurd, that I shall speak no more to it than I
have. Christ was sent to Redeem us from the Curse of the Law, and not of the
Gospel.

Secondly, It is apparent, that the Apostle, in such places as this Author
makes it his business to Reconcile to the Apostle James, speaks of
Justification, so as to deny Justification by a Law that did promise Eternal
life, and threaten Eternal death, and required inward and spiritual Obedience;
and therefore he did not speak of the Jewish Commonwealth-Law. By the deeds of
the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight, For by the Law, is the
knowledge of sin. He tells us, None can be justified by that Law, that Christ
bore the Curse of; surely then, that Law threatened Eternal death, else Christ
had born, and freed from, only a Temporal Curse. He speaks of a Law that the
Apostles established, Do we make void the Law by Faith, yea, we establish the
Law. Surely they did not establish this Commonwealth-Law. And says, the Law is
Spiritual, and did not by those words, mean, the Gospel is Spiritual; but
opposes the Law, to the Gospel.

Thirdly, But suppose all men guilty of Eternal death without any Law, and
suppose the Apostle do speak of the Jewish Common-wealth-Law; yet this Argument
that he ascribes to the Apostle, would be intolerably faulty, and inconclusive.

For, suppose some, in Charity to the Author, should think he meant, that the
Apostle's supposition is this; That all men, Jews and Gentiles, are guilty of
such sins, as there was no temporal Remission upon Sacrifice allowed to, by
that Law; but all, guilty of them, were without mercy to be cut off by the
Magistrate: Then this Supposition would be false; for, without doubt, there
were many among the Jews, not guilty of such sins. And again, The Argument must
mean only the denying of Temporal Justification; and the denying of Eternal
here, would not be sense, and is also against the Author's intention.

Or secondly, The meaning is, (which is apparently the Author's mind) All are
guilty of such Sins, as there is no Eternal Justification promised from, by
this Law, because it promises no Eternal Justification at all upon any terms
whatsoever. And then, methinks, the Author being a Disputant, might have had a
strong tentation to think, he could have told the Apostle how to prove his
great design easier, even by leaving out, and without making use of one of the
Hypotheses, or Foundations of his Argument, which is this; That all are Sinners
(and especially since this Author finds it such a difficulty to maintain that
all are Sinners, and deserve Eternal wrath by some Law, that he could not
maintain it if there should be found, some man that never committed a very
gross sin in all his life, and therefore supposes that every man has committed
one at least.) And so by arguing thus: No man, be he guilty, or innocent, can
be justified as to Conscience, or as pertaining to Eternal life, or death, by a
Law that neither promises Eternal life to the Obedient, or threatens Eternal
death to the Disobedient:

But the Law of Moses, neither promised Eternal life to any man Obedient, nor
threatened Eternal death to any Disobedient:

Ergo. No man, Guilty or Innocent, can be justified as to Conscience, or
Eternal things, by the Law of Moses.

The Minor, might according to the Author, thus be defended: It is true, there
are, it may be, some Expressions in the Mosaic-writings, that command Spiritual
obedience, and promise Eternal life upon Obedience, and threaten Eternal death
for Sin: But these are the Gospel it self, comprehended in Moses Writings, and
men might be, and were Justified as to Conscience, by this. And that is not it,
that is meant by the Law in these Disputes, of denying Justification by the
Law, but only the Jewish Common-wealth-Law.

And indeed, if this be true, that the Law the Apostle speaks of, promised no
Justification as to Eternal, or Future concerns, upon any terms whatsoever; the
Argument would not only have run easier and better, without any mention of all
being Sinners: But such mention, in that case, would be vain and idle (yea and
false, if given as a reason why they were not Justified by such a Law as to
Conscience): For the Sinfulness of men, could not be in the least any reason at
all, why men are not Justified as to Future life, by a Law that promised no
such Justification if they had obeyed; But the Law's not promising it, is all
the cause possible.

But to go on with the Author.

Hence moreover the Apostle infer's, that the Jews and Gentiles ought to flee
to another Covenant of greater Mercy, viz. that Covenant established in the
Blood of Jesus Christ, in which there is promised, not only Temporal, but
Eternal Redemption, and Salvation, Heb. 5. 9. and 9. 12. and a most full and
perfect Remission of all Sins, even the most heinous, conjoined with the
donation of Eternal life, to all those who shall from Faith in Christ, repent
heartily of those sins, and give up themselves to God, and a holy Life. And
here the Apostle does urge that upon both Gentiles and Jews, which other-where
he had seriously pressed upon the Jews chiefly, in these words, Acts 13. 38,
39. Be it known therefore unto you Brethren, that by him there is is Preached
to you the Remission of sins; And by him every one that believes, shall be
justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. Where the Apostle seems to affirm two things, viz. Not only, that
Spiritual Remission of Sins (which the Law granted not at all) was Preached
through Jesus; But that every Believer should be Justified by him from all
sins, from which no man could so much as carnally be Justified by the Law of
Moses. Hitherto, concerning the first Argument of the Apostle.

He might have said, Hitherto of all that has any show, that he says of the
Apostle's meaning. And I will add hitherto, I have translated him, since I
begun with his Argument, almost at least, verbatim; But in going forward, will
bind my self to do it no further, since this first Argument is all the
Arguments he brings, that can with any fairness, be pretended to be the
Apostle's Argument, to exclude Justification by the Law, and works of the Law.
I will relate the substance of his other Arguments, which is all he pretends to
be the Apostle's, and the relating and expatiating upon which, takes up the
rest of his Book almost wholly, I will also relate all such Passages, as have
any considerable show, to support his Exposition of the Apostles words in such
places, as this Book is Written to Reconcile to Saint James.

The other Argument of the Apostle, which equally has respect to the whole
Law, whereby the Apostle clearly proves the Impossibility of Justification by
the Mosaic-Law, is taken from another defect of this Covenant, from the defect
of Helping, or Auxiliary Grace; even as the Old Law indulged no full and
perfect pardon to past sins, so neither did it supply sufficient aid for the
avoiding of Future sins. The Apostle is much in this Argument, showing the Law
was very Infirm in it self, and plainly destitute of strength, whereby
miserable men might be drawn from the dominion of sin, and from an inveterate
Custom of sinning, to true and saving Righteousness, or Holiness.

First, This Argument from a disability of the Law, to sanctify men (suppose
it true, which is indeed true of the Law, as the Common-wealth-Law, but not
when the Law is used in the sense wherein it was the Gospel, or Law of Grace;
for then this Disability can only be affirmed, at the most, comparatively to
this clear Dispensation since Christ) and consequently that Sanctification must
be by some Grace and Favor of the Spirit; would by no means prove
Justification to be of Gospel Grace, or Favor, or by Pardon. For suppose that
God should by his Spirit, take some effectual course, to preserve a man wholly
free from sin; this Sanctification of a man would be free, and of Grace, and
Favor, but not his Justification; but that would be of Works, and the Law in
the strictest sense of it, so as not to be of the Gospel, or of Mercy and
Pardon. The Sanctification of the humane Nature of Christ; was of Grace and
Favor, and by special Dispensation: but his Justification was of Debt by the
Law, and of Justice in the strictest sense, and not of Grace, or Mercy, or
Pardon, or by Imputation of Righteousness, to one unrighteous.

Secondly, The Apostle does not anywhere, to my remembrance (though it may have
a true meaning in a very remote sense) much less in any of the places
propounded to be reconciled to St. James, make use of this Argument: That
Sanctification is of Grace and Mercy, therefore Justification is so, and not of
Works, or Debt. So that whether it be a good Argument or no, it is not the
Apostle's Argument.

Thirdly, The Author seems now in the prosecution of this Argument, not to keep
Justification, or Sanctification, or the grace and favor of Justification, and
Sanctification, distinct, as he has done hitherto; one being the working a
real change (I mean real in opposition to a Law, or relative change) in the
Soul; and consisting in the favor of Converting a man: The other being a
Law-Act, and consisting in acquitting, or absolving a man from an Accusation.
He seems to forget that he had page 8, 9. well and convincingly confuted the
Opinion of Grotius, who herein Symbolizing with the Papists, affirm's that the
Apostle Paul by Justification, means not in a Law-sense absolution from sin,
but Sanctification, or Purging from Vices; whereas there is not one place where
the word, (...), to justify, is used where it so signifies, except Rev. 22.
11. He that is righteous, (...), let him be further justified still: And
concerning this place, the Author says it is probable, and it is also affirmed
by Grotius himself, that it should be there read, according to some ancient
Manuscripts, (...), let him do righteousness still. Now, as I said, this Author
seems to forget this in the whole prosecution of this Argument, as, for
Example, when page 253. he will have the meaning of those words [ Tit. 3. v. 7.
That being justified freely by his Grace] to be, that being enabled by the
Grace of the Holy Ghost, to do those things to which Justification is promised:
Which is, in effect, to say, being justified by the Grace of Sanctification;
or, being justified by the gracious operation of the Holy Ghost in Sanctifying.
Which also is an Interpretation alien from the meaning of those words. The
meaning whereof is, as may appear to any, perusing the words foregoing; That,
having the Gospel-condition wrought in us, by the operation of the Holy Ghost,
being Regenerated, we might be justified by his Grace, that is, by his Grace in
Pardoning; not by the gracious Operation of the Spirit in Sanctifying. For
though the Grace and Favor of Sanctifying, be ascribed frequently to the
Spirit as it is peculiar operation, yet not the grace and favor of
Justification; but is peculiarly ascribed to God the Father, as Judge and
Rector, being a Law-Act. It is GOD that justifies, who is he that condemns?

The Law had a defect of strength to Sanctify men: Why? Because it wanted
External help, necessary to work true Sanctification; and Internal help,
necessary to work true Sanctification. It wanted an External help, necessary to
work true Sanctification, viz. it wanted a promise of Eternal life, to
encourage men to obey it: It wanted an Internal help, necessary to work
Sanctification, because it wanted the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

First, As to the first, It wanted this External help, to work true
Sanctification, in that the Promises, and Threatenings of this Law, wherein the
strength of every Law lies, were only Temporal and Earthly, and men might
easily contemn these. Those Earthly good things, would not much move the mind
of an intelligent man. Yea, the Law of Moses upon that account, that it
contained only Earthly Promises and Threats, was in it is own Nature apt to
beget in men a base and sordid Temper; yea, a Temper plainly alien from true
Piety. The chief parts of Piety, are the denying of self, bearing the Cross,
daily Prayer, Meditation on the Life-tocome, and a moderate and a sober use of
the good things of this Life. But how could it be that this Law, that bound
their minds only to Earthly profits, and worldly delights, should work such
Piety in men? And hence it comes to pass, that the Precepts of this Law, were
much a Kin to the Promises of it, viz. Earthly.

He then brings-in Scripture, to prove this defect, but none of them out of
places where the Apostle speaks against Justification by Works, and by the Law,
but these two (which I cited before, to show his meaning by the Law,) Gal. 3.
13. The Law is not of Faith, but he that does them, shall live in them: And
gives this as the meaning; The Law did not promise such things, as that a man
did need Faith, which is the evidence of things not seen, to believe them, viz.
It promised only things of Sense, not of Faith, Gal. 3. 21. If there had been a
Law which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by that
Law. And supposes the meaning to be, that the fault was in the Law, not in the
Men; for if the Law had promised it, men would have attained Life by that Law.
Whereas the very next words of the Apostle, are, But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, etc. implying, it was through sin, and men's default
they did not attain life by that Law; which could not be if the Law there
spoken of, promised no such thing to the Obedient.

And he after tells us, that in the sense wherein the Law had any Spiritual
commands, or Threatenings, or Promises of a Future life, it was Ipsissimum
Evangelium, the very Gospel it self: And that the Apostle never made question
about it, taken in this sense; which is in effect to say. That the Apostle
never spoke against Justification by the Law in any sense, wherein it threatened
Eternal death, or promised Eternal life; Nor, in any sense wherein man's sins
hinder his Justification by it: And also it is to say, that no man is, or ever
was Condemned by the Law, as to Eternal condemnation, in any sense wherein the
Law is distinct from the Gospel; And that Christ never satisfied for the breach
of any Law different from the Gospel, that threatened Future death; much less
for the breach of any Law, that required Spiritual, or Internal obedience: And
also, That no man is pardoned, by Christ and the Gospel, the breach of any Law
that threatened Future death. But I have already, even in the beginning of this
Discourse, showed both the inevitableness, and absurdity, of these Consequences.

Yet because many maintain this Opinion of the Author for substance, viz. That
the Promises, and Threats of the Law, were only Temporal and Earthly, and so
could not work in men true Piety. As Episcopius, Doctor Hammond, Doctor Tailor,
etc. Though in something disagreeing from this Author in the way of I confess
Doctor Tailor seems not careful to evade difficulties at all, but seems
peremptory in denying any but Temporal promises, till Christ's time. Vnum Neces.
page 2. and 3.
their evading the difficulties their Opinions are cumbred with, and because it
is a growing Opinion, and seems to me very dangerous, I will here speak largely
against it.

First, I grant, The Law of Moses had no Spiritual commands (meaning by
Spiritual, as this Author does, obliging the inward man, the Thoughts, and
Affections) nor Threats, or Promises, of Life-to-come Punishments or Rewards,
as it was the Jewish Political-Law, or the Instrument of the Jewish Polity. But
this cannot be meant by the Law in those Passages in debate, to be reconciled
to James: For it is apparent (and this Author grants it) that men's sinfulness
is given by the Apostle, as the cause, why men are excluded from Justification,
as to Future life, by the Law: But men's sinfulness, could be no cause why none
were Justified as to Conscience, and Future-life by the Law, in this Political
sense; since it would not have Justified any as to Conscience, and Future-life,
had they been altogether innocent.

Secondly, How notoriously contrary it is to David's, and Paul's expressions,
concerning the Jewish Law, to deny, it had, in any sense, Spi^itual Commands,
or Promises, or Threats of Life-tocome Reward or Punishment? Psalm. 1. 2. The
Godly man's delight, is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate
day and night. Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul. The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: He meant not
only wise for this world* ver. 8. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes; True and
Righteous altogether, more to be desired than Gold (whereas Gold was worth a
Temporal Inheritance in Canaan) sweeter than the Honey, and the Honeycomb. By
them is thy servant warned, and in keeping them, there is great reward: He
means greater than this world can afford, or else it was not very great. Psalm.
119. 18. 20. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
Law. My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy Judgments at all times.
Ver. 111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as a heritage for ever, for they are the
rejoicing of my heart. That these things were spoken of the Law of Moses, is
apparent; nothing else, that could pretend to the Name of the Law of God, being
then written; And it is equally apparent, These things could not be truly
spoken of a Law that had neither Spiritual Precepts, nor Future Promises, or
Rewards. And sure, none will pretend that David's working-Fancy, conceited such
things of the Law, as was not true of it; for then he would have been too
blame: And also these phrases, David says, and, The Holy Ghost says, are used
as Equipollent terms, Heb. 3. 7. and Chap. 4. 7. compared, Psalm 16. Thou will
show me the Path of Life; in thy Presence, is fullness of Joy, and at thy right
Hand, there are pleasures for evermore. David, that thus speaks, tell's us, He
learned his Wisdom and Understanding, from his Meditation on the Law. Further,
lest any should conceit, that David was a man wonderfully panting after the
Word, and delighted in the Law only, upon the account of worldly Promises,
therein made to the Righteous; Let it be considered, that Psalm. 17. 14. he
allows wicked men to have great things in this life, calling them, Men of this
world, which have their portion in this life, whose belly thou fillest with hid
treasures, they are full of Children, and leave the residue of their substance
to them. In the following Verse, he distinguishes himself from these, as
appears by the Antithesis, ver. 15. [as for me] saying, As for me, I will
behold thy Face in Righteousness. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy
Likeness. So Psalm. 49. 6. They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves
in the multitude of their Riches, Ver. 14. Death shall feed on them, etc. Then
follows by way of Antithesis, ver. 15. But God will redeem my soul from the
power of the grave, for he shall receive me. The Apostle Paul says, The Law is
Holy, Just, and Good. The Law is Spiritual, but I am Carnal. Call's it the
Commandment that was unto Life, and means Eternal life. I delight in the Law of
God, after the inward man. How unlike are these Encomium's to the reviling
Language, this Author gives to the whole Mosaic-Dispensation.

Thirdly, If the Promises, etc. were only Carnal, and Temporal, and so men
could not possibly be drawn to true Piety by them; Then no man was bound to
true Piety by that Law: For no man is bound to natural Impossibilities; Then it
was not men's fault that they were not made truly Pious by that Law. For it is
naturally necessary as a Foundation of true Religion, as to believe that God
is; so to believe that He is a Rewarder after this life, of them that
diligently seek him here.

Yea further, If the Law, as this Author says, was apt in it is own Nature, to
beget in men a sordid Temper, and Minds alien from true Piety; then the Jewish
people were bound to have such Tempers, and Minds alien from true Piety: And if
the Law did bind men's minds to earthly Profits, and worldly Delights, they did
well in suffering themselves to be thus bound by it: For they ought to yield to
God's Laws.

Fourthly, God would not have been angry with the people for not being w^ought
to true Piety by the Law: For they would have been fully excusable.

Fifthly, No man would have been obliged to Future misery, or wrath to come by
that Law, that had no threatening of Future misery; and also Christ never bare
any Future-life curse, or any thing by way of Satisfaction, as to a Future-life
curse; Nor could any be pardoned their Transgressions of the Law, as to Future
punishment, when the Law threatened no Future Punishment.

Sixthly, These Threats, and Promises concerning a Future life, were at least
so plain, as that people might understand them; else what I have said, equally
follows, viz. That no man was bound to true Piety by them, nor could be justly
Condemned, for not being wrought to true Piety by them, for they would be in
such a case excusable. No man is bound to know, what he has a natural
Impotency to the knowing of. None will say, God can justly be angry at, or
condemn the Heathen, for not knowing, and understanding the Doctrine of Christ,
that they had not the means naturally necessary to understand. Yea, the Law of
God was so plain, that the simple, Psalm. 19. (even plain ordinary people, that
were no Rabbis) and young men, might, with such helps as God afforded them,
understand it; else they, at least, had been excusable, and could not be
condemned for not being truly Pious.

Seventhly, The Jews ordinarily did believe the Law, promised Future life, and
threatened Future misery, as appears by all the old Jewish Their Talmud, naming
three sorts of men, that should have no portion in the World to come, names
them for one sort, that shall say; The Resurrection of the Dead, is not taught
by the Law. In Sanhed. Perch. Helek*
Writings extant. Yea, the Sadduces were accounted by them as Heretics, or
Atheists, that denied Future happiness to the Obedient, and misery to the
Disobedient. Targum Onkelos, on Lev. 18. 5. paraphraseth the place thus. If a
man does them, he shall live in them, with Eternal life. Targum Jonathan, thus,
Which if a man do, he shall live with Eternal life, and his portion shall be
with the Righteous. Search the Scriptures, therein you seek to have Eternal
life, Acts 24. 14, 15. I believe all things written in the Law, and the
Prophets, and have hope toward God; which they themselves allow, that there
shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just, and Unjust. The Sadduces
error, in denying a Future life, was occasioned (as Christ tells us) by their
not understanding the Scriptures, meaning the Old Testament, then only written,
Mark 12. 24. which could not be said, if the Scriptures revealed no such things.

Eighthly, The Law had promises of Future-life Happiness. Let any tell me, What
a promise of Future-life is, if this be not one, viz. A notification of Gods
will, to make them happy after this life, that shall serve and obey Him. Now,
it appears, That this was signified to them, Psalm. 31. 20. How great is thy
Goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that to come. Where is the
Promise of this life, and that to come, to be found? It Is apparent, he means in
the Old Testament, Tit. 1. 2. In hope of Eternal life, which God that cannot
lie, promised, (...), before ancient Times, or many Ages since, or Long since;
for so it should be Translated; since it is not reconcilable to Truth or Sense,
to speak of Promises (though true of Decree) before the World began, Ephesians. 2.
12. It is said of the Gentiles, aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, that
they were without hope (that is, of Future happiness) being strangers to the
Covenants of Promise, which the Jews had. Which at least implies, 1. That the
Jews had promises of a Future-lifehappiness. 2. That they had clearer promises
of a Future life, than the Gentiles. And 3. What they had more of this Hope,
was to be ascribed to the Covenant of Promise, revealed in the Old Testament,
Romans 9. 4. The Israelites had the Covenants, the giving of the Law, the Service
of God, and the Promises. And else, What advantage had the Jews, in having the
Oracles of God committed to them? And wherein did God do more for them, in
giving them his Statutes, and Judgments, than for any other Nation? Many in the
world, had greater Temporal Profits, and Pleasures, than however, the most of
the Jews in Canaan. Luke 16. 28. Where, to the Rich man in Hell, desiring to
have Lazarus sent to his Brethren, to tell them of the Future misery of the
wicked, and the Future happiness of the Obedient; it was answered, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; and if they will not hear them,
neither would they be persuaded, if one should rise from the dead; which could
not have been said, if the Old Testament-Scriptures had revealed no such
things: Yea, they would have been excusable in not being moved with Moses, and
the Prophets, to seek Future-life, and to escape Future-death, if there was no
such thing revealed, so as they could understand it by the helps, that were
Ministered to them, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Timothy from a Child (by the help of his
Mother, and Grandmother) understood the Scriptures of the Old Testament (so
far, without doubt, as was necessary to Salvation, and then be sure, so far as
to know there was a Future reward promised to the Obedient) which were able to
make him wise unto Salvation; and not merely wise to attain a Temporal reward
in this life, ver. 16. All Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for
instruction in Righteousness: That the man of God ( i. e. a Minister) may be
perfect, thoroughly instructed to every good work; this is spoken of the Old
Testament-Scripture.

Christ, and his Apostles, do Interpret the Life promised to the Obedient in
the Law, as reaching to Future life, Lev. 18. 5. The man that does these
Commands, shall live in them. Ezekiel. 20. 11. I gave them my Statutes, which if a
man do, he shall live in them. Gal. 3. 12. The Apostle cites these words: and
by Life, takes it as a thing granted, that they meant Eternal life. Also Romans
7. 10. The Commandment that was unto life: Mat. 19. 16, 17. The young man asks,
What shall I do to inherit Eternal life? Christ answers, If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments. Which show, that Life, and Eternal life,
signify the same, Psalm, 16. ult. Thou will show me the way of life, in thy
presence is fullness of joy; and, at thy right hand, are pleasures for evermore.
Life here also signifies the Future life.

There are frequent Promises, That if they will keep his Commandments, He will
be their God. The Apostle cites, Lev. 26. Where it is said, If you will walk in
my Statutes, and keep my Judgments, and do them; then I will be your God, and
you shall be my people, Ver. 3. 12. Which was Gods part of the Covenant, his
Engagement made to the people at Mount Sinai, as appears, Ver. 46. Now the
Apostle having cited this Promise, amongst others, 2 Cor. 6. 16. adds, Having
these Promises, let us cleanse our selves, etc. Which shows, That he understood
these words, of Gods being one's God, to extend to Future happiness. So Mat.
22. 31, 32, 33. Have you not read concerning the Resurrection of the Dead? I am
the God of Abraham, and Isaac: Now God is not the God of the Dead, but of the
Living. So Mark 12. 26. By the words translated, Resurrection of the dead, in
Mat. and Rising in Mark, seems to be meant Immediately, and Primarily, only See
Doctor Hammonds Annotation, Mat. 22. 31. well clea^ing this.
subsisting, and being in a Future-state after death. And this was that which
the Sadduces denied (as well as other things, consequential thereto, and of
less concernment, to support this Opinion): And this was a most wicked Tenent,
subverting virtually all Religion, which cannot be said of an Opinion only
denying the Resurrection of the Body, provided a man did but hold a
Future-state of being, or subsistence of the Soul in happiness, or misery,
according to a man's works in this life: But such an erroneous Opinion might
possibly be held, (for any thing I can see to the contrary) in those more dark
times, consistent with this foundation of true Religion; that God is a
Rewarder, in a Future life, of Obedience in this; and Punisher of Disobedience.
And further, I do not think that the Resurrection of the Body, was so clearly
delivered in the Old Testament, as that one, believing all the Books of it to
be Divine, might not yet hold it a disputable Point; considering the
difficulties that Oppugn it, and the obscurity of the Scriptures affirming it;
Though none of competent understanding, believing the New Testament, can now
doubt of it. Now our Savior's Argument drawn from these words, I am the God of
Abraham, and of Isaac, etc. since this was spoken to Moses, and therefore after
Abraham and Isaac were dead; is cogent to prove (against the main foundational
wicked Opinion of the Sadduces) viz. That Abraham and Isaac were then in being,
and also in Being in happiness; for, had they been utterly extinct, or in
being, but in no estate of happiness, He could not have said, I am the God,
but only, at the most, I was the God of Abraham. He is not so much as the
Sustainer, as the God, in such a low-sense, of the dead, viz. of men totally
extinct; but of the living, viz. of men in actual being. And He cannot be
called the God (which implies some wonderful, great, and infinite favor) of
men, being indeed, and subsisting after their death, but being in misery, and
dead in the sense wherein the Law threatened Future death; But only can be
called a God to such men departed, as are in being, and also are in great
happiness, and so are alive in the sense, the Law promised Future life.

Also Saint John, Rev. 22. 3, 4, 7. cites that very Scripture forementioned,
viz. Lev. 26. 11, 12. Where God promises from Mount Sinai, that if they would
obey his Voice, he would be their God (It appears, He refers to this very
Scripture, by the foregoing words in both places, of setting his Tabernacle
amongst them.) And he interprets the meaning of those words, of God's being
one's God, by expressions, denoting Life-to-come happiness, As wiping away all
tears; And death being no more, ver. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, and I will be his God. And also, the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 11.
14, 15, 16. explain's this phrase, of God being one's God. All these dyed in
the Faith, not having received the Promises, but, having seen them afar off,
were persuaded of them; and declared plainly, by confessing themselves Pilgrims
and Strangers, that they sought a Country, and that not merely Canaan, an
earthly Country, but a Heavenly: Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called
their God; For he has prepared for them a City (meaning Heaven, of which
Canaan and Jerusalem, were but Types:) Implying, that if that phrase of being
their God, had meant no more than giving them temporal good things in Canaan,
it would have been a shamefully too high a word, for so low a thing, and that
giving only such low things as temporal Mercies are, would have been unworthy
of that Appellation, of God being their God: So that God might have been
ashamed of using so Emphatical a Speech, in such a low signification. But he is
therefore not ashamed of so high a profession of Friendship as those words
import, since He builded for them a City, not made with hands, Eternal in the
Heavens.

These following, are the only colorable replys made by some, or that can be
made here, that I can call to mind.

First, It would be to no purpose to reply, The Old Testament had no Promises
or Threats, of Life-to-come happiness, or misery; but, it typified Promises and
Threats, of Life-to-come happiness, or misery:

For first, I suppose I have sufficiently proved, it had Life-to-come Promises
and Threats.

Secondly, In the sense wherein it did typifie such Life-to-come good, or evil
things, it had no Life-to-come Promises or Threats; else, it would typifie
Promises of such F^ture-good things, in promising those Future-good things,
which would be ridiculous to affirm.

Thirdly, In the sense wherein it did typifie Life-to-come things, it was
neither the strict Law of Works, requiring perfect obedience, under the penalty
of Future misery, and promising Future happiness thereon; Nor the Law of Grace
or the Gospel, promising Pardon as to Conscience, and Future happiness upon
repentance and sincere Obedience, but the Jewish political Law. And it is a
palpable mistake, though common to say otherwise.

Secondly, The Reply, That God intended Life and Death eternal, by the words
used in the promises and threats, but the people could not so understand them,
though they used their utmost integrity and diligence, Is already confuted: For
then they would have been excusable, and it would not have been said, they have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, etc. And I have made it apparent,
the people did so understand them.

Thirdly, It is irrational to reply as some. We grant the ancient Jews did
believe, God would give Eternal life to the obedient, but God never promised it
to them: Thus Socinus.

For first, Then they were to blame to believe it, if God never made any
Notification of his Will, that it should be so, It was then an Irrational
foolish act for them when tortured, not to accept deliverance, that they might
obtain a better Resurrection, Heb. 11. 35.

Secondly, We read they believed and embraced the Promises of Futurelife
happiness. So that, they had such Promises, Heb. 11. and there was no more in
their Faith, than in the Divine promise; no more in their Subjective, than in
their Objective faith; than in the Revelation.

Thirdly, This is to affirm, that if they did well in thus believing, That they
gave God, what was none of his own; gave to God what they had no power or
ability from him to do, in believing what God never said, and hoping for what
God had never promised. This would be, To Supererogate in Faith and Hope, if it
was but well done of them. But, to avoid such Supererogation, we must say, that
such doing would not have been acceptable to God, but a foolish, sinful,
irrational act: As it would be in a man now, to believe, and hope that if he
serve God here, he shall have a fair House built in the Moon, to dwell in for
ever, when God has made no Revelation, or Promise of any such thing.

Fourthly, The most rational and probable reply possible of them that deny
Life-to-come Promises, in the Old Testament-Writings, would be this: (though
apparently false, and I know not of any that use it) That the Jews before
Christ, had such Promises of Future-life happiness, and so were obliged to
Piety; but they were revealed only by the light of Nature, and Providence, and
not in the Scriptures. And that the Jews erred in looking for Eternal life from
the Scriptures; For the Old Testament Scriptures were only written for the
Commonwealth Temporal-Law, and to typifie Soul and Conscience-concernments;
but did not so far intermedle with Conscience-concernments, as to threaten
Future misery to any sin; or to promise Eternal, or Future happiness, on any
Terms whatsoever.

But 1. I have proved, they had such Promises in the Scriptures.

2. They had need of their Reason and Faculties, and of the Light and Law of
Nature, and of all helps they had to understand these things in their
Scripture; as we have also yet, to understand the Writings, both of the Old and
New Testament.

3 I do hold, and could prove it apparently from the Scripture, That there
were, and are, some discoveries by the Light of Nature, and Works of
Providence, not only of the strict Originallaw, making Future misery due to
every sin, and Future happiness to perfect Obedience; But also of the Gospel,
or Law of Grace, viz. that God was placable, and that there was place for
Repentance, and that God would receive sinners to Future favor and happiness,
by pardoning their sins upon Repentance and sincere Obedience. It is apparent,
The Heathens did ordinarily maintain this; and without doubt it was not their
Error. And this they might gather from their beholding the present goodness of
God to them, notwithstanding their incorrigibleness in great sins, in giving
them Rain, and fruitful Seasons, and filling their Hearts with Food and
Gladness. Yea, they had so much Light, as to make them Inexcusable, and
Condemnable in not Repenting; which could not be if there was no Notification
of his Will to receive them to Future-life favor upon Repentance; but rather
(as some hold) were bound to believe that there was no forgiveness with him, no
Future reward or happiness Notified by such goodness of God, in his Providence
to men that were sinners, and did need Repentance. Though I think the Scripture
offers us ground to believe, That this way of Revelation, enough for their
Condemnation, did not, (yet through their own wickedness) effectually prevail
to turn any man thoroughly from sin to God, or to cause such Repentance to Life,
as in its own Nature it dictated; any man I mean, that had no more or further
Revelation from God. Now if they had such Discoveries, these are as properly
Promises of a Future-life, and threatenings of Future-death as those written.

Fourthly, It is apparent, that there was more clear and convincing Discoveries
of Future-life happiness to the Obedient, and miseries to the Disobedient, in
the Old Testament-Scriptures, than in the Law of Nature, and Book of
Providence. The Law was given that the Offense might abound, and does not only
discover Duties, and Sins known by the light of Nature more clearly, but the
great danger of sin, and happiness that comes by obedience, more convincingly:
yea; this discovers the Future-life happiness, so much the more clearly; that
the Discoveries made to the Heathen of this, was no discovery comparatively,
which is implied at least in those words, Aliens from the Covenants of Promise,
without hope. And those words, they have Moses and the Prophets, etc. teach us,
that there they were taught Future misery due to sinners, and Future happiness
to the Obedient, as convincingly, as if one rose from the dead, to tell them of
them. The Apostle Paul also speaks of the written Law, and therefore of the
Old Testament-Law, as the norma judicii, as the rule of the Future judgment to
them that lived under it, Romans 2. 12. As many as have sinned without Law
(meaning, written Law) shall perish without Law; And as many as have sinned in
the Law, shall be judged by the Law; (viz. at the Future judgment, as appears
by the following words) Judged, that is, Justified or Condemned at the last day
by the Law, which could not be, if the Law promised no Future-life, or
threatened no Future-death. Also, by the Law, he means, the Law of Moses, as
appears by the following words, ver. 17. Thou art called a Jew, and restest in
the Law; and by the words [ until the Law;] And [ until Moses] being used as
equivalent terms by this Apostle, Romans 5. 13, 14. compared.

Fifthly, It would be in vain for any to reply here, as the Author of the Book
called Friendly Debate does, who having said, Part 1. page 26. That the
difference between the two Covenants, is this, That the old Covenant made with
the Jews, had Temporal promises; But the Gospel, Eternal. And one in Answer to
this Book, replying, that this is contrary to the seventh Article of the Church
of England, which says. They are not to be heard, who say, the Fathers looked
for no more than Transitory promises, (Meaning things Promised.) In his
Appendix to the third Part, page 150. He rejoyns, I never thought that the
Fathers looked for no more than Transitory promises; but, that it was not by
virtue of the Covenant made with Moses, that they looked for more; I did, and
do affirm. A great many of the Worthies mentioned, Heb. 11. lived before the
Law was given; and the rest that followed them, built their Expectation on the
same ground they did. Which also seems to be Doctor Hammond's opinion, viz.
That there were Promises of Future-life made to the more Ancient Patriarchs,
but none in the Mosaic-Dispensation.

For, First, Almost all the Arguments I have used, do convincingly prove this,
That the Law of Moses to the Jews, promised Future-life, as well as threatened
Future-death. Now whether this Author holds the Law of Moses threatened
Future-life-death to any sin, or not, I know not, but think I have proved both
sufficiently. Also, the Threats of Moses Law, are expressed in as temporal a
style, as the Promises: so, it would be irrational, to affirm it threatened
Future-death, but promised not Future-life.

Secondly, The promises made to Abraham, were made in as temporal a style, as
those in the Mosaic-Law, if not in a far more temporal.

Thirdly, If it shall be urged (for I know, the misunderstanding of such
passages, occasions this mistake) that those Promises made to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, are Interpreted in the New Testament, as apparently reaching to a
Future-life. I answer, So are the Promises of the Law of Moses made with the
Jews, Romans 7. 10. Chap. 10. 5, 6, 7, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12. And also
the Threats.

Fourthly, It seems apparent to me, that that Dispensation of the Law from
Mount Sinai, and the Land of Moab, was a clearer Dispensation of Threatenings of
Future-death to the Disobedient, and Promises of Future Soul-life to the
Obedient, than that to Abraham.

Sixthly, You cannot with any color reply, It is true, there are Promises of
Future-life, and Threatenings of Futuredeath (as this Author somewhere grants,
but virtually, and often unsays it again) in Moses writings, but not in the Law
of Moses, for these Promises and Threats were Gospel, in Moses writings.

For, First, I have spoken against this Opinion enough already.

Secondly, Some you see, deny any such Promises in the Jewish Law, And some any
such Promises or Threats, in the Scriptures of the Old Testament.

Thirdly, If this was true, it would follow, That Christ never satisfied for
any more, than a temporal Curse of the Law: For I have showed the obsurdity, of
saying that he satisfied for the Curse of the Gospel in Moses writings
threatened.

Fourthly, The Apostle speaks of the Law, in a sense distinct from the Gospel
in Moses writings, wherein it had Spiritual commands, and that to Life, meaning
Eternal-life, and also Future life Threats; saying, Christ has born the Curse
of the Law for us. So Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: For by the Law is the knowledge of sin.

So, that I may conclude from what has been here said, that the utmost that
can be said in derogating from the Law, is:

First, That the Law of Moses, as it was the Commonwealth Law, had no Eternal
Promises, or Threats, or Spiritual Commands. And in this sense are many
Scriptures, produced by this Author to be understood.

Secondly, That the Law of Moses, and the Old Testament-Law dispensation, taken
in the Important sense, as refering to Conscience, and Soul-salvation, or
damnation, both in the sense wherein it was the Original-law of Works; And also
in the sense wherein it was the Gospel, or a Law of Grace and Pardon, has no
such clear and distinct Promises of Eternal-life, and threatenings of
Eternal-death, as are in the New Testament-Scriptures. And in this comparative
sense, may some places of Scripture speaking in extenuation of the Law-promises
be understood, as being no Spiritual promises, or Promises of Heaven,
comparatively to these in the New Testament: And multitudes of Instances may be
brought, of Scriptures denying possitively, and yet to be understood only
comparatively.

As for Instance: That place, 2 Timothy 1. 10. where we read, that Christ has
brought Life, and Immortality to light, through this clearer Dispensation of
the Gospel, must be understood comparatively (as this Author grants, though he
destroys his whole Argumentation by granting it:) And may possibly be
understood only of bringing them to light among the Gentiles, who are said to
be without hope, being aliens from the Covenants of Promise: For he says in
the verse following, He was made a Teacher of the Gentiles, viz. in these
things. Now, though the light of Nature and Providence, taught them Future-life
happiness to the Obedient, and Future misery and death to the Disobebient; yet
they taught these things so obscurely and faintly, That they living wickedly,
and contrarily to the Light they had, and so making it their interest, to wish
there was no Future-life, might with ease stiffle and bafle such natural
Sentiments, so far as to hope there was no such Future state; or however, to
make it a disputable Point, as it was amongst them: I mean, more easily than
the Jews, that had the Law given in a dreadful manner, testifying these things,
and credibly, and convincingly brought down to them by Irrefragable testimony;
and more easily by far, than men now.

But it is probable also, this Scripture is to be understood comparatively, to
the Jewish dispensation of the Law and Gospel, by Moses and the Prophets. And
indeed, though it is so apparent, that the Jews were taught a Future-life of
Retribution by the Scripture of the Old Testament, else those Scriptures could
not have taught the Foundation of Religion, and they did so understand the
Scriptures: That it is a wonder, so many Learned men should incline to any
Notions contrary; yet, the evidence they had of these things, was very obscure,
to what this open-fac'd Dispensation of the Gospel affords; and especially, as
to the exact manner of the great Judgment by Christ Jesus, Acts 17. 31. And of
Bodies being raised, and made glorious like Christ's Body, etc. And also,
without doubt, the best of them had very little particular hope and assurance,
ordinarily comparatively to this clear Gospel Dispensation; That they
themselves in particular, should enjoy the Future blessed state: For they that
knew but little of Christ's satisfaction as comparatively to us, they did (which
being now with open face known, answers such perplexing difficulties, as they
were ordinarily perplexed with, and made subject to Bondage through fear of
death) could not ordinarily but be much perplexed, thinking, though it is
apparent by the Testimony of God himself, he will pardon sinners, yet every
truly Pious person might be ready to say, he will surely hardly pardon such
great sins as mine are: How can he with safety to his Justice?

Now further, to enable any to answer many Scriptures, which this Author
brings, to maintain his extenuating Expressions of the Law (Though such
Scriptures are not immediately serviceable to discover the Apostle's meaning,
where he ascribes Justification to Faith, in opposition to Works, else I would
have taken more particular notice of them) Remember what I spoke before, that
sometimes, not only the Author to the Hebrews, but this Apostle in speaking of
the Law, understands by it; the Jewish Commonwealth Law threatening Violent,
Immature, Temporal death to all External visible sins, and in some cases,
allowing Sacrifices, in the stead of this violent death, in other cases not.
And the occasion of the so using the word, Law, (which you may possibly think
very Improper, when speaking of Conscience-concernments) is this; It was the
common, yea, almost Universally professed Opinion of the Jews, sometime before,
and about those days of the Apostles, taught them by all their Rabbis, As this
Author also affirms, page 306. That the Law did not threaten Future punishment
to any sins, but to those that it, as the common Law of the Land, threatened
Temporal violent death to, to be Executed by the Magistrate: And that the Law
required no more to Future salvation, than so much as was made necessary by it,
to escape violent death; And also, that the expiation of their Sacrifices
(which were for faults, granted by them to be sins threatened by their Law with
Future death) reached so far as to expiate, and absolve them from sins as to
Future punishment; which Opinion, the Author to the Hebrews at large opposes.
And since they could not but grant, that there were commands of inward
Holiness, forbiding Heart-adultery, and Heartmurther, and mere inward coveting,
as the Tenth Commandment, and commands to fear and love the Lord, and walk in
his Ways, and keep his Commandments with all their heart and soul, Deuteronomy. 10.
12. Chap. 11. 13. And it would not be Sense, or it would be Remiss sense to
say, that keeping the Commandments (as for example, of not doing Murder, or not
committing Adultery) with the whole heart, was only to abstain from the outward
Fact, without avoiding the occasions, beginnings, or causes thereof; They held
these were not properly Commands, that any penalty of Exclusion from Heaven, or
that Future-life death was threatened unto; But that these Precepts, were only
Councels recommended to them that had a mind to do the best, and that it was
commendable, and men did well to observe them; but the refusing to obey these,
was not sin by their Law, nor punishable with any Future misery. And the
Scribes and Pharisees, the wicked Doctors of this, and some former degenerate
Ages, making it their study almost unanimously to excuse themselves and others
from inward Piety (which they were resolved against, as being the most
difficult part of true Religion, and most ungrateful to flesh and blood) might
have this pretense from the Law it self, to maintain their Flesh-pleasing
exposition of the Law, to quiet their own and others Consciences in the neglect
of inward Purity, viz. There is no violent penal Temporal death threatened to
such sins, to be inflicted by the Magistrate, as there is to all External sins;
therefore it is likely, there is no Eternal, or Future punishment threatened by
the Law for such; there are no Expiations appointed for such sins, surely
therefore they are no sins, and need no Expiations.

These Pharisaical Doctors did hold, their Law promised Future-life, and
threatened Future punishment; but I showed you at the beginning, four true
senses of the Jewish Law, all intended by the Lawgiver. But the Pharisaical
Jews maintained a fifth sense, and that a false and pernicious one, viz. That
their Law promised the Future-life happiness, to their observing the: Law
Politically and Externally.
taught the people that if they were but justi ad legem (righteous according to
the Law, in the sense that Seneca uses the word; saying, Exignum est ad legem
bonum esse,) that is, Righteous so far as the Law of the Land was to compel
them by Temporal punishment, as all those were that had committed none of those
Crimes, that were excluded from attaining Temporal pardon by Sacrifice, and had
offered Sacrifice for their other External faults; they were as perfectly
righteous before God, as their Law in any sense required them to be. So because
the Law, as the Law of the Land, appointed no punishment for one that put away
his wife for any light cause, so he did but set her wholly at liberty by a Bill
of Divorce to marry another, they were taught it was no sin so to put away a
Wife, Mat. 5. 31. Also, because the Law, as the Commonwealth Law, gave men
liberty to require an Eye for an Eye, and Tooth for Tooth, and if they so
required it, the Magistrate was bound to Inflict it, Deuteronomy. 19. 21. They were
taught, it was no sin to seek this revenge in any case. And so, that the
Commands of forgiving Injuries, were but Counsels, as Prove. 24. 29. and Chap.
20. 22. Say not, I will do to him, as he has done to me, Lev. 19. 17, 18. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall not avenge, nor bear any
grudg, etc. But shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Rev. 25. 21. If thy enemy
hunger, give him meat, etc. Exodus 23. 4, 5. If the Ass of thy enemy wander, or
be fallen under his burden, bring him back, or help him up: Which Opinion of
theirs, Christ confutes, Mat. 5. v. 21. You have heard, that it has been said,
by them of old, or to them of old, thou shall not Kill, and whosoever shall
Kill, shall be in danger of the Judgment.

That is, you have been told it as a Tradition, taught by the Ancients, or to
the Ancients, by some Ancient Rabbis, that you break not any Law of God, nor
incur danger of Future torments by anger, hatred, or approbrious speeches; but
only he that actually kills, shall be in danger of Future punishment; of the
Court of Judgment, the (...), which literally signifies, is in danger of the
Court of the 23 Elders, that sat in the Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Chap. 19. 11, 12.
Gates of the City, and put Offenders to death by the Sword. Now, since
Murderers in Fact were to be put to death only, and not they that only hated
or reproached another, the Damnat Christus in Pharisaeis quod legis Doctrinam
ad Politicum or dinem transtulerant, ut sufficeret externis officiis defungi.
Ita fiebat ut se ab homicidio absolveret quisquis hominem manu non occiderat.
Se purum and castum putaret coram Deo quisquis Adulteria corpus non polluerat.
H^c vero erat minime ferenda Legis profanatio, quum certum sit spiritualem Dei
cultum a Mose requiri, and Deus cordibus non minus quam manibus and oculis
loquutas est: Reus erit judicio. Hoc membrum confirmat qu^d diximus, vitium
illud reprehendi, quod lex Dei quae regendis animis tradita fuit, in Politiam
conversa erat. Calv. in Loc.
Doctors hence gathered, and taught the people by this Argument, that none else
was threatened by the Law, with Future punishment. And so that the Commandment
reached no further than to prohibit the External act, under a Future penalty;
and that such speeches as, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart. And,
Be not hasty in thy spirit, to be angry: Anger rests in the bosom of Fools,
Eccles. 7. 9. were but Counsels.

Now ver. 22. Christ teaches them the true meaning of the Law, and since their
Rabbis used the word, the Judgment, to signify Future punishment, he does so
too. But I say unto you, that he that is angry with his brother without a
cause; though his anger do not proceed so far as to kill him, nor to any
outward Expression, is yet guilty of Murder in the sense of the Law, and so
obnoxious to the Future death signified by you to be due to the External act,
and meant by the Word, the Judgment, in the former Speech; which primarily
signifies, putting to death with the Sword.

And he that shall proceed so much further in causless anger, as to use only
some lesser words of reproach, as Racha, shall be yet in danger of a greater
punishment in the Future-life, shall be in danger of the (...), The Council; of
the Jerusalem-Court of Seventy; that is, of a severer Future-death, answerable
to the Punishment which used to be inflicted by the Sanhedrim (which word came
from (...)) who ordinarily punished Offenders, with stoning to death.

But whosoever shall, though not kill his Brother, yet proceed so far in wrath
as to say, thou fool, i. e. to use the most Villifying and Approbrious
expressions, shall be punished hereafter with death Christ's Speech could
proceed no fu^ther in keeping to the Metaphor, expresssing Future punishment by
Jewish courts, since no other but the two forementioned inflicted the
punishment of death. And though it may be Objected, that one of these Cou^ts
also put to death by burning, however in two cases, viz of a Priests daughter
committing whoredom, Lev. 21 9. And of a man lying with his Wives Mother, Lev.
20. 14. Yet these were, it is probable, crimes seldom happening, so that the
ordinary punishment of the highest Court was (as it is commonly agreed)
Stoning: And however this would no way have served to have carried on the begun
Metaphor, which expressed the Gradation of punishments by several Courts, since
this was a punishment by the same Court, and rarely used. Now since the Court
of Judicature is put in this speech, to signify immediately the punishment of
the Court, it was most consentaneous to rational Speech, to signify by it the
ordinary punishment of the Court: And so he expresses the third Degree of
Future punishment due to the third and greatest Offense mentioned by him, by a
burning to death in Tophet, that was often used by the Jews to express Future
punishment.
answerable to the being put to death with fire, in the Valley of Hinnom; which
was a more cruel death than by the Sword, or Stoning; and the meaning of it
well known to the Jews, though no judicial death; and used often by them, and
sometimes by the Scripture, to signify Future torments. And the word should
have been thus Translated, viz. Shall be in danger of the fire of the Valley of
Hinnom or Tophet: For as it is Translated, it is apt to minister a doubt to the
Vulgar, as if the two former sort of offenses were not by Christ accounted to
be threatened with Hell; whereas had it been Translated according to the Words,
it would have been more easy, and occasioned no such doubt; the Judgment, the
Council, the fire of Hinnom, all equally signifying Future death and
punishment, and only here used to denote Degrees of punishment in Hell. Yea,
and Christ here assigns as great a Future punishment to the least offense, viz.
Anger, as they did to actual Murder.

Now it will appear to you, no great unlikelyhood, that the Jewish Doctors gave
such a loose Interpretation of the Law, if you consider, that it is a growing
Opinion at this day, taught by some of our own Doctors (as well as by Socinus)
that no more was commanded to the Jews; however, not under the penalty of
Future death, but only such External obedience. And if perhaps, there were any
Commands in the Old Testament-Scriptures, requiring such Internal obedience, as
is required by Christ in his Sermon on the Mount, they were glimmerings of the
Gospel, and not Universally commanded to all under threat of Eternal
punishment, but only recommended to them that will do what is best, Pract. Cat.
page 141. Though now, since Christ's Sermon in the Mount, they are acknowledged
to be Commands, which not to do, is a sin; and not only Counsels of Perfection,
which to do, is to do better, page 142. But Doctor Tailor (if I can understand
him) holds, that now no Law threatens Hell to the neglect of them, but that
they are yet Counsels left to a man's choice. Unum Neces. page 48, 49.

You may find this Opinion maintained by many, who pretend that Christ's
oppositions, Mat. 5. to what has been said by others, were however in several
of those sayings referring to the Ten Commandments, really Additions to the
Law; and not vindications of the right true sense of it against false
Fleshpleasing expositions: And that the Law till Christ made those Additions to
it in his Sermon in the Mount, did not as a Law, require any, however not with
any Threat of Future punishment to abstain from Heart-Adultery, or
Heart-Murder, provided it proceeded not to the External fact. Now I look upon
my self as bound, here to answer the Arguments for that Opinion, viz. That that
is a true notion of the Jewish Law, as referring to Conscience, and the Future
life-state. For if this be so, All that I here speak thus largely, and make
apparent chiefly from this Chapter (which you will at last, I hope, see the
necessity of, for the Interpreting many Scriptures of the New Testament that
speak derogatory to the Law) will fall to the ground. The strongest Arguments
by which they prove their Opinion, are such as these. Pract. Catech. page 136.

First, The most of the Fathers (especially of the Greeks) before St. Austines
time so held.

Answ. 1. I could easily, I think, make it appear, that the most of them held
the contrary. 2. The most of the Citations produced, may be made appear, either
not to prove that to be their Opinion, but are capable of another Construction,
or they might be forced to that Exposition, to maintain now-acknowledged
Errors frequent in those days, as that it is unlawful under the Gospel to
Swear, or War, in any case, though it was not unlawful by the Law of Nature, or
the Moral Law.

Secondly, The Fathers give these two reasons for this their Opinion. 1.
Because Christ under the Gospel, gives either higher or plainer Promises than
he did before. 2. Because he gives more grace now to perform them ( viz. the
Commandments) than before he had done. The Law given by Moses was a Carnal Law,
that is, weak, not accompanied with strength to perform what it requires; but
the Gospel of Christ, the Administration of the Spirit, i. e. a means to
Administer the Spirit to our hearts, to enable us to do what he commands us to
do.

As for the first Reason said to be the Fathers. 1. I cannot see it is Cogency.
2. The Heathens knew by the Light of Nature, that Heart-adultery and Murder,
and that taking Gods Name in vain in Swearing customarily, or Lusoriously, or
Idle, were sins; surely, then the Jews had Light enough to make them
inexcusable in these things, before Christ's Sermon in the Mount, and so such
were sins in them.

And for Answer to the second Argument, I can neither understand the Cogency,
nor the Consistency of it.

First, It is apparent to me, that men are not one jot the less obliged by the
Law, because of God's not giving them Grace to obey it, because I do not think
that giving the Natural ability to Obey, is to be called giving Grace, or an
effect of Grace, but of Justice, so as men could not in Justice be obliged to
obey the Law without it.

Secondly, The Law of the Ten Commandments (for that is it the Doctor speaks
of, and only pretends Christ's addition to) was not in the true Conscience-sense
a Carnal Law, but a Spiritual, Romans 7.

Thirdly, If the Jews had no strength to perform what this Law required, it
must be granted, that they were not obliged by the Law to avoid Heartsins, and
Thought-sins.

Fourthly, Methinks this undo's all, to give this as a Reason, why the Jews
were not forbidden such Inward-sins as are under Dispute, viz. Because they had
no ability to perform what the Law commanded: For it is to grant, the Law did
command them to abstain from such things, which this Argument is brought to
prove, it did not forbid till Christ made that Addition.

Thirdly, The word Translated, fulfill (ver. 17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law, or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill them)
signifies to perfect, and fill-up that which was imperfect before.

I Answer, It cannot be denied but the word is used in diverse significations.
But setting aside what other things may be opposed to that sense of the Word, I
shall only say this: The surest way to know the sense of the word (...), to
fulfill, in this place, is by the word here opposed to it, which is (...), to
dissolve, or destroy the Law. Now it is apparent, that by Destroying, is meant
Enervating, and Evacuating the Obligation of the Law, by a too favorable
Exposition, which is called in the Verse following, breaking the Commandment,
and teaching men so to do; Therefore by the word fulfill, must be meant to
assert, and maintain it is strictness and obligation, to vindicate it from such
evacuating Expositions. The meaning of the Verse, is, Think not, etc. i. e. You
will be deceived, if you shall suppose that I am come to Teach (as your
Doctors) that are in the greatest Repute, do, who make it their great business,
to gratify you in making the Law to be of very little extent, so as not to
forbid Heart-sins, but to allow those, and many evil practices. I am not come
thus to dissolve the Law, but to fulfill, i. e. to vindicate it to it is true
sense, from such Evacuating glosses.

Fourthly, That these words [ you have heard] signifies, you have been taught
out of the Books of Moses; and [It has been said by them of old time] should
be read (according as the Margent also of our Bibles translates them) it has
been said to them of old time, that is to the Jews your Ancestors by Moses.

Answer, 1. The words may be read, either it has been said to them of old, or
by them of old, without any inconvenience or alteration of the sense, for if
said by them of old; then be sure, to them of old; and if it was said to the
Ancients, then by the Ancients. 2. The meaning seems to be, These Expositions
of the Law, have been taught you with a pretense of their Calv. in Loc.
Antiquity, as being taught the Ancients, by the Ancients, i. e. that is, some
Generations since by Rabbie's. 3. But that the meaning should be, These things
were taught you by Moses in the Ten Commandments; But I now either add, or
oppose this Interpretation, to what was the true former meaning, seems
wonderfully unlikely by this (to say no more) That this is not the usual phrase
of Christ, or his Apostles, in citing Scripture, viz. you have heard it has
been said; neither is this Calv. in Loc.
manner of Speech, or any akin to it, ever used in this sense; and therefore
seems to be a way of citing Traditional Expositions. When Christ cites
Scripture, he uses to say, You have read, Mat. 12. 35. Mark 12. 26, Luke 10.
26. Not as here, You have heard: And he uses to say, It is written, Mat. 4. 4,
6, 10. Luke 2. 23. and 10. 26. John 8. 17. Chap. 10. 38. Not as here, It has
been said.

Fifthly, In these words, [ Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees; that is, which they think themselves obliged to,
and teach others that they are obliged to, you cannot enter;] Sure, Christ does
not pitch on the names of the Scribes and Pharisees, as those that were the
greatest Evacuators of the Law, by their own hypocritical Practices, or false
Glosses in some particulars; but as the most exact and learned Sect, as those
that sat in Moses Chair, i. e. taught there truly the Doctrine of the
Mosaical-Law, in that manner as others were obliged to perform it.

Answer, 1. Then Christ does not bring in these Names here, as he is wont to
do, for he uses to charge them with making void the Law through Traditions.

2. It seems apparent, he means by the Scribes and Pharisees, the same that he
does by those that break the Commandments, and teach others so to do.

3. I grant they had generally the repute of the strictest Teachers, and
Livers, as to External and less weighty matters of the Law; but yet they
generally are charged to make void the Law by their Lives and Doctrines, as to
Internal obedience, and most weighty concernments. Surely it is not all one as
if he had said, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of Moses,
Joshuah, Samuel, and David, (which they taught other, and thought themselves
and others obliged to) you cannot enter; which yet seems to be the Doctors
meaning.

4. The people were to hear them, and also to take heed how they heard, and
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. They were to embrace their Doctrine only
so far as they sat in Moses Chair, and taught Moses's Doctrine truly.

Sixthly, Christ expresses the saying opposed, or added to by him in the very
words of the Ten Commandments: Therefore to say, he speaks by way of
Opposition, and not of Addition, would be to say, he opposes the very
Commandments.

Answer 1. He does so only in one place of this Chapter, viz. ver. 27. Thou
shall not commit Adultery.

2. Any one may yet perceive, by his following Opposition, what it is he meant
by those words, and what it is he opposed, viz. Not the very Law, or the true
sense of the Law, but that Exposition of the Law, which laid the stress on the
word commit, as if it meant only commit with the outward Fact, and forbad
nothing else: And it is apparent, the Scribes and Pharisees so taught.

The Doctor gives us another Argument, taken from a saying of Saint John,
which carries so little evidence in my opinion, that I would not have here set
it down, but that he seems to lay so great stress, not only on this his
Interpretation of Christ's Words, as being (as he says) A foundation of a great
and weighty Superstructure, but also upon that Scripture, as being (as he
says) a remarkable place to prove it. The words are these, 1 John 1. 5. God is
Light, and in him is no darkness at all. The meaning whereof, he says, is
this, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all in respect of his Law
and Commandments, the rule of men's lives; and implies, that these had before (
viz. Christ's teaching) some indulgence for some sins; and where they had not
so, yet they had some mixture of Imperfection, but now they have none; they had
before some Vacuities in them, which are now filled up by Christ.

Answer 1. I see no evidence or probability, that this is the meaning of these
words.

2. We read, The Law of the Lord is perfect, i. e. without Imperfection; and is
Light, i. e. without darkness, and this was spoken of the Law before Christ's
Teaching.

3. I cannot understand the consistency of these words, That the Law and
Commandments, the Rule of men's lives, had before Indulgence for some sins; If
no Law forbad them, they were not sins, or if it did not forbid them under the
penalty of Future-death, then they were not sins: For, I have, I suppose, made
it appear, it threatened Future death to all sins, and else none were pardoned
those sins as to Future death, because they did need no such Pardon.

4. Nor can I understand the words following. That where the Law, the Rule of
men's lives, did not allow Indulgence for some sins, yet it had some mixture of
Imperfection. I cannot imagine how this appears; for none will surely say, it
appears in this, that it did not require some thing the Law now requires, as
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, for that will no more prove the Law imperfect
then, then that the Law of God is now imperfect in not requiring circumcision;
whereas the Law did then, as it does now, require all to obey whatsoever he
should any way whatsoever command them, and that under the penalty of
Future-death.

5. You may see by what has been said, That the Law, not as referring to
Conscience, and Future-life; but as the Jewish Commonwealth Law, did allow or
indulge some things; that is, so far as not to threaten violent death to them
at all, and so in this Commonwealth sense, did not forbid such Practices at
all; which yet the Law in the most Important and Conscience sense did forbid,
and so were sins threatened with Future-death. As for example: The putting away
a Wife for any cause, and Heart-murther, and Heart-adultery.

Also, I have made apparent, that the Scribes and Pharisees, the Jewish Doctors
taught, and it was an Opinion ordinarily received amongst the Jews, in the days
of Christ and his Apostles, that if men were but justi ad legem; that is,
righteous so far, as to be free from such things as Temporal death, was by the
Law of the Land remedilesly threatened to, and had offered Sacrifice for such as
the Law allowed it for, they were either as righteous as any Law of God, in the
utmost rigor; required them to be, or however, at the least, as righteous as
the Law of God in the indulgent Gospel-sense required them as necessary to
their Future salvation; And that Christ opposes in this Chapter, the common
Jewish conceit, taught by their Doctors.

And without doubt, there was no Jew ever saved by that Law of Moses, taken in
the Gospel-sense, as all good men that lived under it were, that did not more
than was required by that Law in the strictest sense, as the Law of the Land
threatening violent death to be Executed by the Magistrate. As for example, that
did not love and fear God, and endeavor inward Holiness, and the repressing of
the inward sins, which the Law in the Political sense required not. And again,
All saved by that Law, did far less than was required by that Law, as the
Original strict Law under the penalty of Future-death, For all saved, were
pardoned as to Future-death, as to some Heart-sins; which could not be, if such
sins were not Threatened with Future-death.

Now upon this false foundation ( viz. That the Law of God as to Conscience,
required no more than it required as the Law of the Land) was without doubt
built that Interpretation of the 18. ver. of Psalm. 66. given by the Ancient
famous Rabbi, David Kimchi, who upon the words, which are these [ If I regard
iniquity with my heart, the Lord will not hear me,] gives this as the meaning,
viz. Though I shall see Iniquity in my heart, which I am forward to execute in
fact; Though God do see it, yet he will not hear it (meaning he will not impute
it to me for sin:) For God does not charge a wicked Thought, for a wicked Act,
except only a wicked Thought against the Faith and true Religion, so as to
worship Idols: For this, such Doctors did hold to be sin threatened with Future
punishment, though it proceeded not to the Fact, but not any other wicked
Thought or Intention.

And it seems apparent, the Apostle Paul took the Law in this Vulgar sense,
when he says Phil. 3. 6. He had been a Pharisee, and touching the
righteousness which is of the Law blameless. That is, he had lived without
fault, so far as the Law required in that sense, wherein the most Jews then,
and he himself formerly (being so taught by his Master Gamaliel) understood it,
viz. in this external Political sense. And though he had formerly accounted
that perfect Obedience to the Law, or however all required to his salvation;
yet now he looks upon such Righteousness as insignificant as to Future
salvation, and understood the Law was truly Spiritual and required more, yea
more necessarily for salvation, even Internal Piety; and so could not have
spoken after that manner, of his Righteousness according to the Law, in the
true important sense of the Law.

And hence it comes to pass (since the Law was used by most of the Jews in
those days, in this external Political, and Ritual sense.) That the Author to
the Hebrews, does almost (I think altogether) constantly use this word, the
Law, in this sense, but confutes their erroneous Opinion, that held that in
this sense it availed to Salvation in a Future-life; and shows it in this
sense, made none perfect as to Conscience, or Future-life concern's, but only
as it threatened violent death, and exclusion from Society; so the Sacrifices
for Expiation, reached not to Expiate sins as to Future-life concerns, but only
to free from the Temporal punishment of Death, and Exclusion from the
Congregation.

And hence also it comes to pass, that the Apostle Paul often uses the word,
the Law, in this Political sense, Though it is apparent he does not so, when he
denies Justification by the Law as to Future-life, by reason of men's
sinfulness; as it is apparent he does in those places, that seem opposite to
St. James. (And this Author also confess it) For man's sinfulness, could not
possibly be any reason why men were not Justified as to Future-life by the Law,
in that Political sense, wherein it neither promised Future-life, nor threatened
Future death.

You must observe diligently, as you desire to understand the Apostle Paul in
many places, that he often passes from the Conscience strict sense of the Law,
opposed to the Gospel, to the Commonwealth sense of the Law, as Gal. 3. and
often runs them together, as Romans 7. using the word sometime, in one of the
senses, and intermixing passages that agree to it in the other; which I could
give you, I think, a satisfying account of, and would endeavor by reciting the
particular places; but that I am sensible, I speak more largely than is
suitable for such a short Discourse as I intend.

Now, to draw to a conclusion of this long Digression, designed to help you to
understand many Scriptures. Since so many took the Law in this low sense, as
requiring so short an obedience, and foolishly promised themselves that Eternal
happiness, in the observance of it so far, which it never promised them; It is
no wonder that you find so many extenuating Expressions of it, in this sense.
Not that any such Expressions extenuate it as the Commonwealth Law; for it was
an excellent one imposed by the only Wise God, and fitted to the temper of the
Jewish people, and to Typifie the great things; But they extenuate it: 1. As a
way of Salvation, for it promised no such thing, made nothing perfect as to
Conscience and Eternal life, though observed with the greatest exactness.

2. It is not extenuated as a shadow or resemblance, Typical of the great
things, for it was a wonderful perfect Shadow and Type; But it is extenuated as
being but a Shadow (which the the Jews would have to be the very substance, the
way of Salvation it self) of the great concernments; a poor and beggarly
Rudiment, or I could, I think, give satisfying Reasons, that the Law in this
sense only, is by the Apostle called a Schoolmaster, to teach the first
beggarly Letters, or Elements, and so to cea^e its employment, and not at all
in the strict Conscience sense.
Element, or rude first Draught, or representation of the great Realities.

3. As that which was but Temporary, and to vanish away as this Typical
Commonwealth Law was to do, at the fuller Exhibition of the things it was but
a Type of.

4. This is called the Letter; the very outward Letter of the Old Testament for
the most part (though yet frequently otherwise) holding forth the Law in this
Commonwealth sense, with the rewards, prosperity in Canaan, and the threats,
Temporal death. And in its being called the Letter, it is opposed to the
Internal and Spiritual meaning of that Law, as it was the strict Law and the
Gospel; and to this cleerer Dispensation of both the Law and Gospel under
Christ, and called the Oldness of the Letter, being the Old common way they had
been taught by their Doctors, and educated in. For the Gospel, and more
Spiritual way of the Mosaic-Law, was New, and strange to them (as you may
perceive by John the Baptist's Doctrine of Repentance for the Remission of
sins, being rejected by the Pharisees) as well as this clear Dispensation under
Christ, though that was the true way of Salvation from the beginning ever since
man's fall.

5. The Law in this sense, is said to kill, and to be a Ministry of
condemnation, though not only in this sense, I suppose, but also in this sense
taken in Conjunction with the strict Law of Works revealed in, by, and with
this Law. It is said to kill, and condemn: 1. Because this Law did condemn with
Temporal violent death, every one that did neglect any such external Work
whatsoever. But did not justify to a prosperous life in Canaan, any but they
that observed every puntilio of it. 2. Or rather, since the Apostle uses
sometimes to run the Law in the strictest sense, exacting perfect Obedience,
and the Law in this Political sense together. The Law may be said to condemn,
and to be a Ministry of condemnation, because the Law did as the Original
strict Law of Works in reality, though not in their Opinion, condemned every
man that did not all whatsoever required; yea, that failed in obedience to any
Internal command, and did also condemn as to Conscience, all External failings,
which they also held, but did not quicken, or revive, or justify any as to
Future-life; Not the Political Law, through it is own weakness and default,
having no such Promises to any performances whatsoever: Not the Law in the
strict Consciencesense through man's default, because all are sinners. 3. This
Law taken still conjunctly, may be said to condemn, and kill men in another
respect; Taken politically, it condemned men, and killed them as to Eternal
death by occasioning men, or rather, men taking occasion by it, to go on in all
Internal wickedness securely, even to condemnation by the Law in a higher
sense; because the Law in this Political sense, never forbad those sins, that
is, did not forbid them with its penalty of violent death, and they took
occasion hence, to think such inward Impiety was not forbidden by the Law in
any sense, nor such inward Piety required to their Salvation, (which may be the
meaning of Romans 7. 8, 11.) and so fell under Eternal condemnation, through the
neglect of such Piety. It proved to them a Ministry of condemnation in the
event, through their own fault, they abusing this ^itual Political dispensation
against the end and aim of it.

6. The Law also in this sense, is said to be-get Bondage and Baseness, and
Servility of Spirit, even disingenuous and unfilial Tempers; yet through their
abuse of this Political Law, making all that it required in this sense to be
all required of them. As for instance, How is it possible but the Popish
Doctrines believed, should produce and foment such servility of Spirit, that
place all necessary to Salvation in Externals, in the opus operatum, in
Penances, and saying so many Prayers though by way of penalty, and undergone by
them as ungrateful Penances; That teach, it is no matter for loving God, as
some do expressly; or Teach, as generally they do (which amounts to the same)
That Attrition is enough for Pardon, and Salvation, without contrition,
provided they have but the Priest's Absolution joined to their Attrition;
explaining Attrition by trouble or affrightment for sin, upon the account only
of danger to our selves by it, without any sorrow for sin as an offense of a
good God. So here we may without doubt say, that they that understood the Law,
as requiring only such External Obedience without Love, or any Internal, and so
did perform the External without any Luke 11. 42. The Pharisees tithe Mint,
etc. and pass ever Judgment and the love of God. Observe, this Love is called
Faith, Mat. 23 23. And by both, Faith and Love, is meant Internal worship.
love to God, which makes his Commands for being grievous, were void of filial
ingenuous Dispositions.

Though I grant some Scriptures of the like import, may possibly be aplicable
to the whole Mosaic-Dispensation, even as it was the Gospel, as being a more
servile and burthensom way, by reason of the multitudes of the ritual commands
which they were bound by it carefully to observe universally, which had no
Intrinsical goodness in them to command them to right reason, and ingenuous
lovers of God and Holiness. But merely the Authority of the Lawgiver, and so
the motive to perform such, could not but be comparatively to this Dispensation
we live under, more eminently from fear in good men, as doing them because they
must do them; and not because the doing them was that which a gracious heart
would choose through Religion, and love to Holiness, to promote and increase
Holiness, the Image of God in his soul; which may be said of almost all the
Precepts under this present clear Dispensation of the Gospel; and so some such
Speeches may be understood comparatively, as I said before, though I incline,
you see, to Construe them positively and absolutely in the most places.

But now to conclude: First, There was a sense wherein the old
Testament-Dispensation, and Law of Moses was really, or held out really the
strict Law of Works as to Eternal concernments, threatening Future death to
every sin; And the Apostle indeed excludes any from being Justified, and
affirms all to be condemned by it in this sense, because all are sinners. But
this is not said to vanish away, for it remains in force unto this day; yea,
and for the substance of it will do so to all Eternity. This is never affirmed
to be Carnal, but is Spiritual; This indeed gives no life, though it was a Law
to life; but that it gives none, is not through its own want or default, but
through no man's performing the condition. This was no Shadow, or Type, or
beggarly Element.

Secondly, There was a Sense, yea, and this was the chief Important sense,
wherein the Old Testament Dispensation, or Law of Moses, was the Remedying-Law,
or the Gospel-promising Pardon as to Future-life, of all Transgressions of the
Law, in the strict sense, upon Repentance and sincere Endeavor, to obey all
Gods Commands, Internal and External. The Apostle never speaks against the Law
in this sense (however no way except comparatively to this cleerer
Dispensation) but call's it the Promise, the Righteousness of Faith, which He
and other Apostle's Preached; The Promise, which was Yea, and Amen, in Christ.
This is not said to vanish away, but is made more clear in the Dispensation of
of it under Christ. This was no Shadow nor Type, but the very Gospel or Law of
Grace, and Pardon it self. The perfect Law of Grace converting the Soul, and
giving life to men converted. This was the Law of Grace, that Moses, Samuel,
and David, yea, and the same for substance, that Abraham was justified and
saved by: For it was this, That if men did sincerely repent of their sins, and
believe Gods Testimonies, and Love, and Fear, and Serve God, and endeavor to
do all God required of them, without alowing themselves in any known sin, they
should be saved notwithstanding their sins, and the Future punishment due to
them by the Law in the strict sense; And this is the substance of the Gospel,
or Law of Grace now.

If it should be asked, How comes it to pass, that the Author to the Hebrews
should use the words [The Law of Moses, first Covenant-Testament and Law] in
this Political, and not in this Conscience-sense? The account is easy, Because
his business in that Epistle, was against those Judaizers, that would impose it
on Christians, to comply so far with the Jews (however to avoid Persecution,
For the Jews in those days, were the chief Promoters of all their Persecutions)
as to keep the Law of Moses in the sense wherein it was now ceased, and they
were not to keep it: Therefore he takes no notice of the Law in the
Conscience-sence, wherein it was agreed by both (or however known to be held by
him) to be incumbent on Christians for the substance of it; but he in speaking
against the Law of Moses, means, the Law of Moses in that sense wherein it was
ceased, being but a Shadow, and shows that in this sense it had only Temporal
promises, and advantaged only to the purification of the Flesh, and escaping
Temporal calamities. Now to reply, it had also another sense, would be true,
but nothing to the purpose, since it had not in this sense wherein he opposed
it.

I suppose you now see, that it is far from Truth which this Author affirms,
viz. That the Apostle Paul charges the whole Mosaic-Dispensation, with the
defect of having no Promises of a Future-life.

I have taken liberty to speak largely of these things, because I know of none,
that in my weak opinion, do speak satisfactorily or truly of them; And I have
much confidence that none can give any true tolerable Interpretation of such
Passages of the Apostle's used in Derogation to the Law, without such Notions
and Distinctions of the Law, as I have here described and explained; and also I
hope, that any one of ordinary abilities for such things, may, holding to these
Notions of the Law, give a rational and satisfactory account of the most
Scriptures of such derogatory import.

And now to go on with the Words of the Author, who having before told us, that
the Apostle's Argument against Justification by the Mosaic-Law, was from the
double defect of the whole Mosaic-Law, or Dispensation to sanctify men: First,
from an External defect, that it promised no Future-life. Now he comes to speak
of the Internal defect.

Secondly, Another defect of the Law, or Mosaic-Dispensation, is, that it did
not afford the Internal help of the Holy Spirit. And it was indeed impossible,
that men should be brought to Spiritual righteousness, or Holiness by that Law,
which neither gave, nor promised any aid of the Spirit.

I will not speak much here in answer to this, because I have said enough
already, either here, or in another Discourse.

First, This is not an Argument made use of, as is here pretended.

Secondly, If they had no ability to perform Spiritual righteousness, without
the Spirits help, which was denied them, they were not bound to perform such
Spiritual obedience, since no man is bound to Natural impossibilities.

Thirdly, It is a weak manner of speaking, though common to talk of it, being a
defect of a Law not giving ability to perform it; no Law does so, not that to
Adam, or of Moses, or of Christ, for every Law supposes Ability (I mean the
Natural ability) to obey it, or it could not oblige to Obedience, and so could
be no Law to such.

Fourthly, This is to say, that men could not sin without the Grace of the Holy
Spirit to enable them. For this Author grants, as well he may, that none are
bound by any Law, to do what they have no power to do. But I have at large
showed in another Discourse, the absurdity of this Opinion, and that the
gracious opperation of the Spirit, and the effect of it is something that men
can sin without; And therefore, that men have the Natural power to obey some
other way, and not from this, though not the Moral, but have this Moral power
from this Grace of the Holy Spirit.

It cannot be pretended here, that this Author means, the Mosaic-Law afforded
not the Spirit, to free men from the Moral impotency, of doing what they had
the Natural power to do: For this would be to overthrow the thing he is
pleading for, viz. The Impotency, and and Insufficiency of the Law and
Dispensation; Since Moral-impotency is nothing else but voluntary wickedness it
self; and would be to grant, there was no defect in the Mosaic-Law to
Sanctify, or Justify, but it had all necessary naturally for these ends; but
only the men were in fault, the men were so wicked they would not yield to, and
obey it; and the Spirit did not actually make them willing of unwilling,
obedient of disobedient. But I refer such as do not understand what I here say,
to my Discourse of Natural and Moralimpotency.

At last, the Author comes (having made, as he supposes, apparent, what the
Apostle's Arguments were, against Justification by the Law) to show more
expressly what Works of the Law they only were, that the Apostle excluded from
Justification, in these words, and the following.

Whosoever shall understand these things which we have spoken, ( viz. In the
prosecution of this Argument of the Apostle) he may easily see, that the Works
which Paul simply excludes from Justification, are such as are performed by
men without Gospel Grace, by force of the Mosaic-law or Law of Nature: For the
things by which Paul disputes against the Mosaic-Law, do more strongly
militate, as we have noted somewhere, ( viz. page 120. before recited) against
the Law of Nature. Now this is an evident Consectary from what is before said.
The Apostle fights with this Argument, chiefly against Justification by the
Law of Moses, or Nature, that both these Laws are purely destitute of those
helps, by which a man may be drawn to true Holiness worthy of God, and grateful
to him. It manifestly hence follows, that only that Holiness, and those Works
are excluded by the Apostle from Justification, which proceed from a man's weak
ability, [ ab infirmitate humana] who is in the state of the Law or Nature.

First, Then no man was bound to true Holiness acceptable to God, by the Law of
Moses, or the Law of Nature; and consequently no man did sin in not performing
Obedience acceptable to God, since it was this defect of these Laws, neither of
them either promising Future reward, or affording ability to perform true
Godliness.

Secondly, I cannot understand, how this is consistent with what this Author
says, page 116. before recited; where he affirms, that, Some Heathens did
sincerely and heartily love and follow Virtue and Righteousness, so far as it
was known to them. Unless he will say, that no Virtue and Righteousness
pleasing to God, was known to them (which would be to make his concession
insignificant) or that these Heathens did super-erogate, or did more than they
had ability to do; or than the Law of Nature required from them.

Thirdly, This is to say, that the Apostle has Copiously, and Elaborately,
proved only these two things, viz. 1. That there is no Justification by good
Works performed by men, provided there be no promise of Future reward made to
them, or at least provided men to perform them without respect to Future
recompense of reward. And 2. That no man is Justified by doing such Works, as
men have in no sense any ability to do. Now can any imagine, that any of the
Jews Pharisaical Teachers taught them, that they might be Justified by such
Works.

If it shall be replied, No: For their Teachers taught them, that they might be
Justified by the Works of the Law of Moses or Nature, which Works really had no
promise of a Future-life reward, and they had really no ability to perform
these Works: But their Pharisaical Teachers taught them, That such Works of the
Law of Moses had a promise of Future-life reward, and that they had ability to
do such Works.

I shall let many things pass, that I might here rejoyn to show the
Inconsistency of this Reply, with the whole discourse of the Apostle, yea, and
with the Argument, he strives to fasten on the Apostle; And also to show how
improbable it is, that men should fancy themselves to have, or believe others,
telling them they have power to do things they have an Impotency to do; (taking
Impotency as this Author apparently does, for the proper natural Impotency,
distinct from wickedness, for a cannot, distinct from a will not.) For it is
not ordinary for Multitudes to fancy this, nor to believe them that should tell
them so, nor for any but wonderfully weak and fanciful men: Though I know it is
too common for men, to have better thoughts of themselves than they should, in
reference to their Morals, and so to think they are not so wicked as they are;
and that they have no Moral-Impotency (which is wicked Obstinacy) to the doing
those good things, they have the Natural power to do. I say, letting these
things pass; And also, letting pass what I could say, to prove that the Apostle
would never have contradicted these Opinions, viz. That men might have been
Justified, had they done all the Law of Moses, or Nature, required of them; so
as only wicked wilfulness (which is the Moral-Impotency) hindered them; because
neither those, nor any other Laws whatsoever, required more than men have the
Natural ability to do: And also passing by his mentioning of it as a defect in
Moses Law, and the Law of Nature, that they gave no ability to perform what
they required: Whereas every Law supposes ability to obey it, or it could not
be a Law, or Obligatory, and therefore no Law giveeth or promises the proper
Ability to obey it self.

I say, setting these things aside, I shall only mind you how Inconsistent with
themselves (as well as with one another) both these Arguments are, which he
pretends, are the Apostles two main (if not only) Arguments against
Justification by Works of the Law of Moses. I have showed before, (in speaking
to it) the Inconsistency of the first Argument with it self, which he says,
leans on two Foundations, viz. 1. That all men are guilty of great sins, so
that they cannot be Justified as to Conscience, by the Law of Moses. 2. That
the Law of Moses promised no Justification as to Conscience, on any terms
whatsoever; whereas one of these can only possibly be a reason, why they were
not Justified by the Law of Moses. For if that Law promised no Justification on
any terms whatsoever, then their being sinners, can be no reason why they were
not Justified by that Law; And again, if their sins were the reason why they
were not Justified by the Law of Moses, then the Law did promise Justification
to them, on condition of their being free from such sins: So this second
Argument which he ascribes to the Apostle ( viz. That none could be Justified
by the Law of Moses, because of two Internal defects of the Law, which are,
that it had no promise of Future-life Justification, and that they had no
ability to do the things it required for their Future-life Justification)
labors with the same (...); For if they had no ability to do the things it
required for their Future-life Justification; then their disability was the
only cause of their not being Justified by that Law, and not the Laws not
promising it: And again, if the Laws not promising it, was the reason why they
could not attain Future-life Justification by that Law, then their disability
to perform what it required, could be no cause of their not being Justified by
it.

If any should reply, their disability was the cause why they could not perform
true Piety; which true Piety was required by some other Law, for their
Future-life Justification. Setting aside the Illogicalness, and Incoherency of
Discourse, which this would fasten on the Apostle, in many particulars; I will
only ask one so replying, By what Law was true Piety required of them? This
Author tells us by the consequence (though possibly not expressly) it was not
required by the Law of Moses or Nature; neither of them, as he says, promising
Future happiness; and both being purely destitute of those helps, whereby men
might be drawn to true Piety, and consequently by his Argument, none were bound
to true Piety by them: If it shall be answered according to this Author, and
some others, that true Piety was only required by the Gospel: I have said
enough against this already, in showing this Opinion would inevitably destroy
Christ's satisfaction, for any (though Partial, or Temporary) defect of true
Piety. I shall further ask, Had the Jews under the Law of Moses this Gospel
that required true Piety? Or had they it not? If they had not this Gospel,
either they then had ability to perform the true Piety required, or had not; If
they had ability to perform it, then they had no need of this Law of Moses, to
promise Future-life Justification, or to give them ability for true Piety: If
they had no ability to perform true Piety, which the Gospel required of them.
This is to say, the Gospel required of the Jews what they had in no sense any
ability to do; which this Author denies (as well he may, taking Ability in the
strictest sense) any Law of God to require. Yet, this Author here (forgetting
himself I suppose) has run himself into such straits, in affirming, the Jews
could not perform true Piety without the Spirit, and that this Spirit was
denied them; which is to say, they could not at all perform true Piety; That he
must grant this of the Gospel, or some Law, that it required what they had in
no sense any ability to do, (which without doubt is false) or he must deny,
that God required any true Piety of them, by any Law whatsoever; which Evasion
I suppose, he will not make use of.

From the whole Series of the Apostles Disputation, it is made manifest, that
he only rejects such works from Justification, which if admitted, may seem to
yield to men matter of glorying, and boasting themselves before God, Romans 3.
27. and 4. 2. Ephesians. 2. 9. And who does not see, that that can only be spoken
of Works, which men do by their own ability, without the help of Grace. For it
is manifest, that the Works which men perform through the assistance of Grace,
are owing to God, and their glory redounds to Him, as the highest and chiefest
Author. These good Works which we perform, are not so much our Works, as the
Works of God himself in us. And no man can rightly boast of that thing which he
ows to God.

I shall ere long take notice of this.

Page 271. Since Abraham, in the 4th. Chapter to the Romans, is considered by
Paul, as the Father of the Faithful, and the great Exemplar of the
Justification of all justified ones; It is impossible but the speech of the
Apostle concerning his Justification, should give great light to this whole
Dispute concerning Justification.

This is well observed, therefore I shall diligently attend to this.

This Author begins to give largely the meaning of the first Verses of the
fourth to the Romans, page 264. which speak of Abraham's Justification; And
proceeds well for substance to ver. 3. only he affirms that these words [
according to the flesh] in the first Verse, and [ by the Law] in the second
Verse, (which he grants do both signify the same thing) do signify Works done
by a man's own power (that is, without a promise of Future reward, and without
the help of Gods Spirit) which I see no evidence of, but have told you my
thoughts, that these words signify perfect and unsinning Obedience, or
meritorious Works.)

But now ver. 3. For what says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted (or imputed) to him for Righteousness. (Here says he well.) This
Citation of Scripture is brought to prove the words in the verse before, viz.
That Abraham in the business of Justification, had nothing to boast of before
God; And the Apostle gathers it thus, That the reward was imputed to Abraham
not of debt, as a reward uses to be given to workers, but of mere Grace; And
therefore Abraham had no cause to boast before God, of any thing in the matter
of his Justification. Thus far well. He goes on verbatim thus:

But how does the Apostle gather this Page 264.
from the words cited. I answer: Some think that this Argument is placed in the
word (...), was accounted, or imputed, as if the word signified graciously
accepting, or accounting according to Grace and Favor; and that it signifies
accounting or rewarding according to Debt, either never, or very Improperly.
Whence Erasmus Interprets the word, acceptum fert; adding, Est autem acceptum
far, pro accepto habere quod non acceperis, quae apud Jureconsultos,
nifallor, vocatur acceptilatio. That is, the word imputed it self, signifies
such a Law acceptance, as when one grants he has received a thing, and
acquits as if he had received it, when indeed he has not received it. Many
most learned Page 265.
Interpreters, follow this Interpretation of Erasmus, thus forming the Apostles
Argument.

If the reward had been given to Abraham of debt, it would not have been said,
God Imputed Righteousness unto him: For Imputation denotes gracious and free
Donation. But the Scripture says, God Imputed Righteousness to Abraham. Ergo,
etc.

But this Interpretation does not please me, since it is manifest from the
Scriptures, that the word (...), used in the Old Testament, and also the word
(...), used by the Apostle in the Greek, and which answers to the Hebrew
word, are used concerning the Imputation of a thing to (or for) sin, 2 Samuel 19.
19. which every one will grant is Imputation in Justice; yea, and the same word
often signifies in Scripture, a true and just Estimation, and Judgment of a
thing, Deuteronomy. 2. 11, 20. And it is too manifest, that the Apostle himself in the
very next verse, ver. 4. uses this very word, for rewarding according to debt.
Therefore this Argument of the Apostle whereby he infers from the Text cited,
that the Justification of Abraham was merely Gracious, cannot lean upon the
naked signification of the word (...), that is, Accounted, or Imputed, or
Reckoned.

Since this Objection has a colorable show, and the right Interpretation of
this Chapter, Romans 4. does depend wholly upon it (as I have showed in a short
Discourse of the Apostles meaning) and since many Learned men are perplexed so
with this difficulty, as to be driven to Interpret this place otherwise than
right, thinking the very word does not signify Accounting of Grace and Favor,
and so that the Apostle's Argument cannot lean on this word; And since none
that I know of, have attempted to Answer it, I shall speak largely in Answer to
this, that I may speak satisfactorily.

I know the Hebrew and Greek words in dispute, are Polysema, have diverse
significations; (just as the English word Account also has) For they signify
properly, and in the first sense, merely the immanent Acts of the
Understanding, as to Think, Esteem (as also the immanent acts of valewing,
computing Sums together, devising, inventing, though not so primarily:) Now
when these words are used in this sense, they may be according to the reality
and truth of things, or not according to the reality or truth of things. If
there be an Accounting, or Esteeming, in this sense, not according to the
reality and truth of things, it is an error of the Understanding, and a fault
or weakness (though it can neither be an Act of Kindness, or Severity) and so
cannot be ascribed to God; his Judgment, and counting, and valuation in this
sense, being always according as things are.

But the words cannot have this proper sense here, as is apparent, for imputing
Righteousness, is either an Act of Mercy, or Justice: For Acts of Justice and
Mercy, belong not to the Understanding, nor are Acts of that; for they proceed
from the Will; and are not neither mere immanent Acts of the Will, but
transient Acts proceeding from it, and caused by it. Therefore let this proper
and most common use of the words pass, as not capable of being meant in such
Speeches.

Sometime these words are used, not for Acts of the Understanding, as I said;
But for the Rectoral transient Acts of Rewarding, or Punishing, of dealing
Kindly, or Severely; Graciously, or Justly. For these words, when used of such
transient Acts, are capable of either of these significations; and which of the
significations they have in particular places, is known readily by seeing
whether it be some good or evil, that is reckned, or imputed, or whether it be
some good or evil thing that is not reckned or not Imputed. But, let these
words, when used in this Rectoral Law-sense, be used in whether of the senses
they will, ( viz. of doing Justly, or Mercifully; Severely, or Graciously) yet
this is true of them, that they always signify the accounting or imputing
something that is not in reality the thing, that it is accounted or imputed
for; but only by a kind of Law Construction, or Acceptilation; or the not
accounting, or not imputing the thing that is that in reality, which it is not
accounted, or not imputed for. Now if this be true, (which I shall after make
appear, by producing all the places of Scripture, where the word is used in any
sense, different from a mere Act of the Understanding) then it follows, that
when ever we read of Imputing, or accounting to a man, a thing that is a good
thing (as here Righteousness or Reward) then it is an act of Grace or Law
acceptilation and kindness, and that God might justly have done otherwise;
because the word Implys, a man had not that Righteousness, that perfect
Innocence, that was accounted to him; And also when ever we read of God's not
Imputing, or not accounting that which is evil to a man (as Sin, Iniquity) then
it was an act of Kindness, or Grace, because the very word Implys, the man had
that sin, had done that evil, that was not accounted to him.

Now to make it appear, that these words when they do not signify a mere
immanent Act of the understanding, but are used in the sense of doing good or
evil, kindly or severely, yet they always signify the accounting something
that is not, or not accounting something that is the thing respectively, as I
have said.

First, Let these Scriptures be considered, wherein the words are used in the
Penal, or Inimical sense, and not in the Benign, rewarding favorable sense,
Lev. 7. 18. Where, speaking of a man's Peace Offering, It is commanded, that he
eat all he eats of it in two days, and burn the rest with fire; If any of it be
eaten by the man on the third day, the Offering shall not be accepted, neither
shall it be imputed to him that offers it. That is, though he did offer
indeed this Offering; yet, this Offering for an offense committed three days
after, shall be null and void, for any benefit coming to the man by it, even as
if he had not offered it at all; not that Godwill account that in reality, he
did not offer it. So Lev. 17. 4. If any man kill a Beast in Sacrifice, and
bring it not to the door of the Tabernacle, Blood shall be imputed to that man,
he has shed Blood, and he shall be cut off from among the people. That is, he
shall be accounted in Law a Murderer, Murder shall be Imputed to him, viz. He
shall in judgment of Law, be accounted a Murderer, so far that the same
punishment shall be due to him, and Inflicted on him that would have been due,
if he had committed Murder; not that he had in reality, or was esteemed in
reality to have shed Humane blood, Philemon, verse. 18, 19. where there is a
word near akin to this, but not altogether the same. If he have wronged, or
owes thee any thing (...), Impute it, Account it to me, I will pay it. Not
that he did owe it, or had wronged him; or that he would have him count that in
reality he had wronged him, or ought it to him; but require it of me: I put my
self into that state in reference to Law, as if I did owe it, or had wronged
thee.

Secondly, Consider these following Scriptures, where these words are used in
the favorable Rewarding-sense, 2 Timothy 4. 16. I pray God this (viz. fault) may
not be imputed, or accounted to them. That is, I pray it may be pardoned, that
it may be accounted as if it had not been committed) not that he pray's God, to
think really that they never committed the fault; which would be to admit an
error into his understanding; but that he would graciously pardon it, and
consequently no more punish it, than if he judged it not committed, Numb. 18.
27, 30. This your Heave Offering shall be accounted or imputed to you, as the
Corn of the Threshing-floor. That is, whereas the people are commanded to offer
their Tithes, and their First Fruits to God, or they cannot without Sin and a
Curse, enjoy the rest; Now says he to the Levites, If you pay this part, the
giving of this shall by Gods favor be available in Law, to your benefit and
comfort, in freeing you from a Curse, in employing all the rest to your own
use, as if you had given such Tithes, and First Fruits of your own Husbandry,
as the people do. Not that God would account it really the Corn of their own
Threshing-floor, the First Fruits of their own Husbandry, Romans 5. 13. Where a
different word is used, but next akin to this. Sin is not imputed where there
is no Law. That is, could one suppose per possibile vel impossible, that there
should be sin committed by a man without a Law, it would not be Imputed, he
would not be guilty, obliged to suffer, would not be treated as an Offender,
Romans 4. 11. That Righteousness might be imputed to them (viz. the Gentiles)
also. That is, That though they be sinners, and so have not Innocence and
Righteousness in reality, yet it shall upon their becoming Christians, be
Imputed to them, Romans 2. 26. If the uncircumcised keep the righteousness of the
Law, his uncircumcision shall be accounted for circumcision. That is, though a
man be not Circumcised, and so be one that you much despise, yet if he live
holily, he shall be respected by God to all intents and purposes, as if he had
been Circumcised, Romans 4. 8. cited out of Psalm. 32. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord will not impute iniquity, implying there is iniquity, but he will
pardon it, and not impute it; Interpreted by that, his sin forgiven; therefore
it Implys there is sin, but not Imputed. Not that God accounts he never
committed it.

These words are also used in the Scriptures following, but are used in
something a different sense from the words fore cited; because, as you may
observe, they are not capable of being Translated by the word Impute, as these
above mentioned all are, viz. Job 33. 10. Chap. 19. 11. Chap. 13. 24. He
counts me for his enemy, Genesis 31. 15. Are we not accounted of him strangers,
Job 19. 15. My Maidens accounted me for a stranger, Hos. 8. 12. I have written
to them, the wonderful things of my Law, but they were accounted strange
things, Psalm. 44. 22. cited Romans 8. 36. We are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter. Now this may apparently be said of these Scriptures, that either the
word signifies a mere Thinking, a mere immanent Act of the Understanding
without any thing of favor, or disfavour, as one may Interpret some of these
places; or if not, they apparently imply, as any may perceive upon considering
the places, that the thing was not so in reality as accounted. It would be too
high in me to say, I am certain (upon so little pains as I have taken to
examine) these are all; yet, I am very confident these are all the places of
Scripture, where the Hebrew or Greek words, are used in any sense distinct from
a mere immanent Act of the Understanding, except that of Phineas executing
Judgment, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness, and the same words
repeated again by this Apostle, and by Saint James, which are plain to this
sense; and the two Scriptures which this Author cites, that I shall now take
notice of.

This Author refers us only to two Scriptures, where the words do not signify
mere thinking, to prove that the words are used for accounting, according to
Justice, and not Grace, or according to the reality of things: But they both of
them prove evidently against that which he produces them to prove.

The first is that saying of Shimei, 2 Samuel 19. 19. Let not the King impute
iniquity to me, neither do thou remember what thy servant did perversely. Here
says he, Imputation of sin is of Justice and not of Grace. Answ. He forgets
there is a Negation in this Speech. It is not, let my Lord impute iniquity to
me; But, let not my Lord impute iniquity. Now, not to impute Iniquity, is the
very same thing with imputing Righteousness, as the Apostle shows in this
Chapter, ver. 6, 8. compared. Imputing Righteousness without Works, that is,
without a man's being Righteous; and not imputing Iniquity where there is
Iniquity, are the same. Shimei's meaning is, though I have committed a great
fault, and in truth am guilty, and unrighteous in this respect, yet impute
Righteousness to me through Grace by pardon, as to this fault; or do not impute
Iniquity to me; put me into that state in reference to Punishment for this
fault, as if I was Righteous, or Innocent as to this fault; as if the fault had
never been committed. He did not mean, do thou really account I never did that
fault, or do thou in Justice, and not in Favor, not impute sin to me.

The other Scripture which he brings, is as manifest against him as this is,
which is this, viz. ver. 4. the very next verse after this; Abraham believed,
and it was accounted to him for Righteousness. Now to him that works, the
reward is reckoned of debt, and and not of Grace. Here, says he, the Apostle
himself uses the word reckoned, for reckned of Debt: And therefore, the word
reckned, does not signify reckned of Grace, of it self.

Answ. It is so apparent, that any one may see it by perusing the place; That
these words [ Now to him that works, the reward is reckned of Debt, and not
of Grace] are an Argument to prove something said before, as appears by the word
(...), Translated, Now; and do lean upon this implied Foundation, to make them
Argumentative, viz. That so the word reckned cannot signify, when he says,
God accounted it to him for Righteousness, but signifies accounted it of Grace.
The Apostle's Argument, is this. If the reward had been given to Abraham for
his Works, as being a righteous man in the strict sense, free from all sin, or
failing in obedience; it would not have been said, that God imputed
Righteousness to him, which implies his being destitute of it: And he proves
the consequence thus, For to him that works, that is, that Meriteth, or is
Righteous by his own works, the reward is accounted of Debt, and not of Grace;
and so it leans upon this, as being a thing apparent in it self, that so the
word Accounted cannot signify, but signifies accounted it of Grace and Favor,
imputedrighteousness to one not righteous, like not imputing sin, to one which
implys the man a sinner. And the Apostle in the following verse shows, that it
is all one as if it had been said, Abraham believed God, and upon his
believing, God did not impute sin to him. And says, that if the Idolatrous
unrighteous Gentiles believe as he did, Righteousness shall be imputed to them,
or sin shall not be imputed to them. Suppose we had read expressly these words [
Shimei repented, or confessed his fault, and David imputed it to him for
Righteousness] would it not have been all one as to say, David did upon the
Repentance, or Confession of Shimei, not impute sin to him; And would it not be
the same as to say, David pardoned Shimei upon his Repentance or Confession;
and would not all these words [ imputed Righteousness, imputed not Sin, and
Pardoned] equally imply Shimei was a sinner, or one unrighteous, and
consequently an Act of grace and savor, in David so to do.

The Author having, as you have seen, given us his reason why he cannot be of
their mind, that say the word implys reckoned of Grace. He in the next words
tells us, how the Apostle gathers out of that Scripture [ Abraham believed God,
and it was counted or imputed to him for Righteousness] that the reward was not
imputed to Abraham of Debt, as a reward is given to Laborers, but of Grace.
Thus,

I judge therefore, that the Collection Page 265.
of the Apostle, whereby he infers out of that Citation; That the Justification
of Abraham was merely Gratuitous, does not lean upon the naked signification of
the word [ was Imputed]; But partly upon the nature of the thing, which is said
to be Imputed to Abraham for Righteousness, and partly on the former state and
quality of the person, Abraham; to whom it is said to be Imputed.

First, The nature of the thing, Page 266.
The thing which is said to be Imputed to Abraham for Righteou^ness, was Faith
and Obedience springing from it. Now the obedience of Faith, does exclude, all
Merit all together in its own Notion: For the obedience of Faith, supposes a
gracious Revelation of God, first made to the Believer, and so such Promises as
do by their own excellency, strongly excite a man believing them, to perform
that obedience to God, by which, as by the condition, the good things Promised
are to be attained, and such Promises as do not only equal, but far excel the
whole labor (though very great) which is undertaken through the belief of
them. So it was plainly in the Example of Abraham. He indeed believed God, but
first God had revealed himself to him in a gracious extraordinary manner, Acts
7. 2, 3. He had obeyed the Divine command, in calling him to a long perilous
Journey; but God had added Wings to his Journey, promising such huge good
things, which might even fill a decriped old man with youthful strength, and
might animate him to bear any trouble cheerfully. Whatsoever therefore Abraham
did worthy of praise, he ought to ascribe it to the gracious Revelation, and
the liberal Promises made to him by God of his mere Mercy, therefore there was
no occasion for Abraham to glory, No Merit.

The Apostle seems to have respect to this, ver. 5. where, when that which was
denied of one working, ( viz. the reward to be given him of Grace) This is his
mistake, and not the Apostle's
was to have been repeated in the following Opposition, and to have been
affirmed of one believing thus, [ but to a man believing, the reward is reckned
of Grace:] But the Apostle does quite otherwise, says he, to one believing his
faith is imputed for righteousness, as if he should say, upon that very account
that his faith is imputed for righteousness, his Justification is merely
gracious, since Faith in it self sounds forth Grace, and excludes Merit.

Here now I must (but as on the Page 267.
bie) a little dwell upon the words of the Apostle, ver. 4. To him that
works, the reward is not reckned of Grace but of Debt. Which place, that it
may be the better understood, two things are to be enquired. 1. What the word
working signifies? 2. What the word Debt signifies? For the first, He that
works, denotes him that works of himself, and by his own strength, being
assisted with no Divine aids. For he that works by the Grace of God, he does
not so much work as the Grace of God in him, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Gal. 2. 20. And the
Context of the place confirms this; For beside that the Apostle (as we have
seen) does professedly dispute of the works of Abraham, which he performed
according to the flesh, in the beginning of the Chapter; That is also chiefly
to be observed, that he that works, is opposed to him that believes; that
is, that from the belief of the Divine Promises, and so whose works are to be
ascribed to the Divine Grace, which stirred him up to work with most great and
liberal Promises, also adding a great efficacy of his Spirit, which also is
received only after and by Faith.

Now in the second place, to speak of these words [ of Debt] no reason permits
that they should be taken rigidly and There is all reason to take words
strictly and properly, when it can be done, and not to fly to this Authors
expression* [ it may seem as it were of Debt.] And had this Author given the
true sense of this Chapter, he might have taken the words strictly; thus, If of
perfect obedience to the Law, then of Debt, and not of Grace, meaning by Grace,
Forgiveness; and if of meritorious Works, then of Debt, and not of Grace, in
any sense.
strictly. For the reward of Eternal life, cannot be said properly to be owing
to any man, though working most perfectly, and also from the mere strength of
Nature. Neither could that be ascribed to the first man if he had stood in
Innocence, and had never violated the Divine Covenant with any sin; for the
reward of Eternal life being Infinite, exceeds infinitely the works of any
Creature. Therefore it is most certain, that these words of the Apostle, [ But
to him that works, the reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt,] are not
to be understood absolutely and simply, but comparatively: So that, the Apostle
signifies, that the reward is not given to him that works on that manner, as
I have expressed, out of such mere and pure Grace, as to one that believes;
that is, to one working from Faith. Therefore, this is the sense of the words.
If the reward of Eternal life should be given by God to him that works; that
is, that obeys God, and works righteousness by his native strength without
the Grace of God: That may really seem as it were to be given as of debt, and
there would be to one working, at least some show of boasting. But when the
reward is imputed to him that does not work, but believes; that is, who works
nothing of himself, but from Faith, and after his believing of God graciously
revealing himself. Here appears Divine Grace illustriously; boasting is
excluded, all merit is cast off: Yea, here is seen double Grace of God. 1. That
he works in a man the obedience of Faith by his. Grace, preceding all Merits of
his; and also, that he imputes for Righteousness, the same obedience to a man
which he wrought in him, and Crowning it with a great Reward, no otherwise than
if the man had performed it of himself.

Whereas this Author pretends, that the stress of the Apostles Argument in Romans
4. leans upon this, viz. That if men should do things they have in no sense any
ability to do; and that in sensu composito, while they have no ability to do
them: If men should do that by their native strength, which they have no
strength to do; this would Merit, or have some show of Merit. As if Abraham had
believed before God had promised, had believed without a Testimony or
Revelation, or had obeyed before he had any ability to obey; this would have
Merited, or have had some show of Merit: But God promised first before Abraham
believed, and afforded him strength and all things naturally necessary to
produce obedience before he obeyed, and so there was no Merit in his Faith and
Obedience. I confess I am dubious whether I should grant this to be true, or
not; or if I should grant it true, whether I should deny any such Suppositions
may be allowed in Argumentation, since it would require many words exactly to
determine this Logical dispute, and would also require more Logical acuteness,
than he or I in these disputes seem to make use of, or is fit in this
Controversy to trouble the Reader with. But to be short, I will grant, but it
shall be only conditionally; That this would Merit, or have a show of Merit,
because it would be to do what God gave him no ability to do; yea, it would be
to do what all generally grant that the Diety cannot do, viz. a formal
Impossibility. But I will grant it, as I said only conditionally, viz. on
condition that he will grant the contrary, follows from the same Supposition,
viz. That if a man should do what he has no ability to do, it would have no
Merit, or no show of Merit, because it would be so far from Merit, that it
would be an absurd, irrational, and foolish act; it would be so far from any
show of Merit, that it could no way be commendable. And because some may think
strange of such a conditional concession, let it be considered, that from a
naturally impossible Supposition (as this of his is) contradictory Consequences
may equally follow, as I could make appear, in almost any Instance: Take these,
Si scirem me mortuum esse essem mortuus: And, Si scirem me mortuum esse non
essem mortuus. If I truly knew I was not, I should not be: And if I truly knew
I was not, I should be.

So, Si bestia intelligeret esset homo: Si bestia intelligeret non esset homo.
Therefore, what Irreverence is it, at the least, for this Author to fasten such
an Argument on the Apostle, as that either nothing can be concluded from it, or
the contrary may equally be concluded from it? e. g. If Abraham had been
Justified by Works, that is (according to this Author) by doing such works as
he had in no sense any power to do, he might glory, or he had Merited; when it
might as well at least be concluded, he could not have gloried, he could not
have Merited. But yet to prevent the Antinomian Extreme, who use to say, we
must not so much as Suppose things, or Argue from Suppositions, though only
Morally impossible; remember I put in the word [ Naturally,] saying, [
Suppositions Naturally impossible.] For it is apparent, there may be rational
Arguing from a Hypothetical proposition, which is not Naturally impossible, but
only Morally. As for Example, in such Speeches as these; If a man not Elected,
or to whom God did not Decree to give converting Grace, should Believe and
Repent, he should be Saved: If a man accustomed to do evil, should do well, he
should be Saved: If a man had turned from sin to God, before God converted him,
it would have prevented many sad Thoughts of Heart. Yea, this may so evidently
be supposed, that men's Hearts may and do reproach them, that they did not turn
to God before God did actually turn them; or did give them such Grace as would
actually prevail with them; because, before God did thus turn them, or give
them the Grace of Conversion, they had the Natural ability to Convert and turn
to God, and only their Moral-Impotency, which is voluntary Wickedness, hindered
them; else it would not have been their duty so to turn, or their sin not to
turn. So, Paul says, If an Angel of He^ven should Preach any other Gospel, he
should be accursed. And Christ said, John 8. 55. If I should say, I know him
not, I should be a liar like to you: And these are rationally allowable
Suppositions; because an Angel in Heaven has, and Christ on Earth had, the
Natural power to Speak or Teach falsehood; though yet joined with such a Morally
insuperable holy rectitude of Will, that they could not obtain of themselves so
to Speak or Teach. And this is not like doing what they have not the Natural
ability to do; And the contrary does not here follow from these Suppositions:
For you cannot say, If a confirmed Angel from Heaven should Teach error, he
should not be accursed; or if Christ should have denied he knew God, he would
not have been a Lya^; which yet might have been said, if this had been, To do,
what they had not the Natural power to do; because then, so to Teach or Speak,
would neither have been Laudable nor Culpable, and so not formally a Lie, nor a
cause of being accursed. Neither can you say, if a non-Elect man had believed,
he had not been saved. My discourse of Natural and Moral-Impotency, will make
what I here say, more plain to you.

This Author speaks often, and particularly here of the necessity of Grace, and
of man's Disability to do any good, without the Grace of the Holy Spirit; which
may much puzle men not versed in such Discourses: And the knowing what he means
by the word GRACE, would do much to show further the Inconsistency of the
Argument, from a defect of Internal Grace, which he pretends the Apostle makes
use of. Now, though the Author speak not much Explicitly, to tell us what he
means by this Grace, and what the effect of it is; yet thus much is apparent
from the constant Tenor of his Discourse, that he goes the common Remonstrant
way, and holds that the Effect of it is, The giving that Internal power or
ability, that men could not be inexcusable in not obeying the Gospel without:
and whosoever does so, may be forced (by a little Argumentation, as I have
elsewhere made apparent) though against his will, to confess, that he means no
more by it, than God's giving men that enjoy the Gospel, the very power or
faculty of freewill in actu secundo; without which, they could not sin, or be
sound men, or men in their right wits. Yea, all that ever I have read of that
way, do apparently mean no more by Grace, (not so much as those by some-admired
Letters of Doctor Hammond, in answer to the Lord Bishop Sanderson, excepted;)
though some pretend a great satisfactoriness in the Scheme there propounded, as
if it avoided the common inconveniences that Way is Clogged with. For there the
Learned Doctor, though he seems cautelous to hide his meaning, in calling it a
Supernatural power to believe and obey the Gospel; yet it will appear plain
enough, that he means by it no more than the very Power and Faculty of
Free Will, to any Intelligent man that shall consider these his Assertions
following concerning it.

First, He holds, that if this Grace of the Holy Spirit, or this Grace of
Conversion was denied men that enjoy the Gospel, they would be excusable, page
34. that is, They could not be guilty of sinning against, or disobedience to
the Gospel (for nothing that is truly sin is excusable.) Yea, he supposes still
consonantly to this, that if it should be denied any man in this life, enjoying
the Gospel, as he thinks it was to Pharaoh, such a one would be as one
naturally dead; even from under the command of Obedience to the Gospel: For his
non-obedience in this case, would be imputable to God, page 94. 95.

I grant, that if God had totally deprived Pharaoh of the Natural power of
obeying his Calls, viz. By depriving him of the right Natural use of his
Faculties, by making him a Natural Fool; then his Non-conversion, and
Non-obedience to the Divine Command after such deprival, would, as the Doctor
says, have been imputable to God; and therefore his Non-obedience in such a
case, would have been no sin, but wholly excusable; because imputable to God.
But that a man having the faculties to understand, and do Gods Commands, should
not be to blame in not doing such Commands, except God give him the Internal
grace of his Spirit, is strange Discourse, though too common.

Secondly, He affirms, that Grace does not give To will to any, or take away
unwillingness or resistency of will from any, any fa^ther than by merely giving
Power or Ability to comply with the Gospel, page 55. And expresses his dislike
of it, as a mere conceit for any to hold, that, Grace causes actual
willingness, or takes away unwillingness to good, any further than by merely
giving power to the Will to obey and comply with the Gospel, which Grace gives
to all enjoying the Gospel.

Thirdly, If it should be granted, that God does any more toward any man's
Conversion that enjoys the Gospel, than give this Power without which men would
not be Inexcusable in not obeying it, which he calls sufficient Grace, (as he
supposes God may do some singular External thing providentially for some, as by
afflicting them, though no singular Internal thing by his Spirit) he then
supposes, that what is done more for any man, than this degree of Grace
sufficient to render men inexcusable, is not an effect of Grace properly so
called, or to be said to proceed from Supernatural grace. Whereas I should say,
that giving that ability without which men could in no sense obey the Gospel,
is to be called an effect of Justice, and not of Grace; so that God cannot in
Justice condemn men for not obeying the Gospel, if he did not give them so much
power as to make them inexcusable in not obeying it; which if true, there would
be nothing left to be called Internal-grace, in the conversion of one enjoying
the External or Objective evidence, the Gospel, according to his Principles.

Moreover, the Doctor affirms consentaneous to the same Principle, That Man's
resisting, and refusing to comply with the Gospel, is the only reason of the
difference of men that enjoy the Gospel, that one is Converted, and another
not, and not Grace any further than by graciously giving this power of willing
to obey, or power of not resisting the Gospel, which is given also to those
that are not Converted: And he pretends, that he yet keeps up the honor of
Grace in Conversion, by saying, that though one man's choosing when others refuse
to comply with the Gospel, comes only from the former well-disposedness of the
man, and his preceding willingness to do Gods Will, which the other wanted; yet
this choosing the good, when others refuse, cannot be ascribed only to
Free Will, because this well-disposedness of the man proceeded from former
preventing Grace. Now, cannot any man that is not of a forlorn understanding
see, that this does not avoid the Consequence he pretends it does avoid? while
he makes this preventing Grace the same; or however no more than the
Subsequent, by holding that neither Preventing, nor Subsequent Grace, do any
more toward Conversion, than merely give the power, and do not in the least
cause the well-disposedness of any man, any further than merely by giving a man
a power so far to obey the Gospel, as to be able to be wrought on to this
well-disposedness, which also was equally given to others? And to hold, that
God did cause this Towardliness, and good Disposition, and Malleableness, and
Willingness to obey the Gospel, (which he so much insists on) by doing for such
men more than he did for others, that have no such Temper wrought in them,
would be but, at the most (if so much) a running the Controversy a little
further, by running a little way from the Anti-Remonstrant, and then standing
still and yiedling to him; by yielding, that God by his Spirit does more in
Conversion, than merely give ability to the will to choose or refuse, and does
actually cause the difference; And that the cause of to be ones thus differing
from another, is ascribed to some special Grace and Favor, consisting in doing
something for one he did not for the other, and that unconditionately, or
without respect to any precedent less illness, or more goodness of his; which
is the thing these Letters mainly oppose. And if it appear, that God does thus
in time, it will readily be granted by him, he decreed to do so from Eternity,
as appears fully by his Orthodox and judicious Letters, annexed to these
concerning Praescience.

And whereas he grants, that if this well-disposedness of the man (which he
says is the only reason of the Conversion of one enjoying the Gospel, when
others go on Unconverted) was not wrought by Grace, this would be to ascribe a
man's Conversion so to Freewill, as that it would be g^osly prejudicial to the
Grace of God, page 45. 58. Cannot any one see, that this Concession was unwary,
and that he would presently have fallen into this guilt, had he answered without
Tergiversation these Questions? viz. Whether God did any more in order to the
working in such a man this Malleableness of heart, and willingness to obey,
than by giving him that ability to be wrought on by the Gospel into this good
Temper, which ability he also gave equally to others, that were not so wrought
on? And whether Free Will then, here, did not so cause the difference, as to be
prejudicial to the Grace of God? And why it would be more prejudicial to the
Grace of God, to ascribe man's Conversion to Free Will, and the goodness of a
man's Temper; than to ascribe man's being made (to use his own words) Malleable,
and willing to obey God, to man's Free Will, and the goodness of a man's Temper?
Or if he will ascribe this Malleableness and willingness to obey, to another
Malleableness and willingness to obey; and that to another Malleableness and
willingness to obey, and so forward; why he may not as well heartily ascribe
the first named Malleableness, to Free Will, as the last? For since to ascribe
any such effect to a special Favor and Work of God, is the great thing
opposed, the making the difference must be ascribed to Free Will at last, or to
Chance, or to Nothing.

Yet the Doctor says; That it is a posing Question to him to answer, What
exception can possibly be stated against this his Scheme, and that he ascribes
nothing to man himself, but all the good a man does to Supernatural Grace. Yea,
he would seem, page 52, 53, 56. with high words (though of low Import) to
out-go his Lordship, in extolling Grace, charging him as over cautious in
saying, [That in the Conversion of a sinner, though Freewill cooperate, yet
the Grace of God had the main stroke and chiefest operation.] And would have it
rather said, (and says, all the Remonstants herein, concur with him) That the
Grace of God in Lapsed man, is the one sole principle of Conversion,
Regeneration, Repentance, and every other Evangelical Virtue; and all that can
justly be attributed to our will in any of these, is the obeying the Motions,
and making use of the Powers, which are bestowed upon us by that Supernatural
principle. For (says he) God's Spirit gives us the power, which all the good
we do is imputable to; And when we read of God's working in us to will, and to
do; the meaning is, he gives us power to will, and do. But if this be the
Opinion of the Doctor, and all the Remonstrants, as he says here, at least
Implicitly; it is, viz. That obeying the Motions, and making use of the Powers,
which God bestows upon men, may justly be attributed to the Will, so, as not
to any special operation of the Spirit, he only giving us the Power, and wholly
leaving it to men to make use of it, without doing any more by his Spirit, to
cause us to make use of it; I shall say, Sit anima mea cum
contra-Remonstrantibus, in this particular. Though still I grant, that in a
sense, though in a very remote sense; he that gives the Tallent or Power, may
be said to be the cause of the Improvement of it, though yet in no other sense,
than by giving the Tallent or Power. But why then do any pray God, to cause
them by his Spirit, to improve their Tallent, and make use of their power, if
he do no more than merely give the Tallent or Power, which he does to all?

But if this be the Import of all these great words, as apparently it is,
concerning Grace, and Supernatural-grace, given to all that enjoy the Gospel,
viz. That Supernatural-grace gives them the very Power of Free Will, or that
Power (call it what you will) without which, men could not be Inexcusable in
not obeying the Gospel; and God goes no further by his Spirit with any in
order to their Conversion; and this Power does all in Conversion, and in
causing the difference; therefore Supernatural-grace does all good, and nothing
is Imputable to the man in the whole work: I say, if this be the meaning, it is
an empty sound, and exalts Gods special Grace and Kindness no more in, and
oblidges a man no more to, special Thankfulness for, the work of this
Conversion; than if it was said, God by his Supernatural-grace made us Men,
endued us with Understanding and Will; And man does all in Improving the Gospel
to his own Conversion, therefore God does all: Or, God by his common
Providence, causes men to have Free Will, and Freewill does all, therefore God
does all. Neither does it denote any more any more or less of Kindness in God,
or engage men any more or less to Thankfulness, to say, God by his ordinary
Providence gave Free Will, or the Power (be it what it will) without which he
could not be Inexcusable, in not obeying the Gospel; than to say, God by his
Supernatural-grace, gave Free Will, or the Power aforesaid; while it is only
Free Will, or the Power without which men could not sin in not obeying the
Gospel, that is said to be given either way. Neither would it any more or less
hinder a man's boasting, That although he received the Power from God as others
did, yet, that he differs from them, or made good use of the Power, he owes to
himself and Free Will. Neither would this be a Dispute of any Importance in
Divinity to be determined, whether Supernatural-grace caused this Power, or
common Providence (though it would be a gross Impropriety to say, Men could not
sin without Supernatural-grace.) Yea, it is all one, as to Religious Concerns,
whether you call this Power, the Remote and Fundamental Power (to use the words
of the Doctor and others) or the Proximate power of Free Will, while there is
meant by it only that Power, without which, men that enjoy the Gospel could not
sin; or which is all one, be Inexcusable in not obeying it, and which is given
to all that enjoy the Gospel.

Now it is so apparent, that it is a wonder that any should have the
understanding of men, and not acknowledge it; That Grace actively taken for
God's Act, or passively for the effect of this Act, in men's Conversion, sieth
not in God's causing, or man's receiving the very Power or Faculty of Free Will;
or the Power without which men could not culpably sin, or be inexcusable in not
obeying the Gospel; but it lies in Gods doing or giving, and man's receiving
some thing from him, that man has the ability to choose the Good and refuse the
Evil, or to Obey or Disobey the Gospel without; else a man could not pray for
Grace for himself or others, to keep them from sinning against, or disobeying
the Gospel, if they had no ability to do so without it. It lies in God's
giving, and men's receiving something, that God is not bound in Justice to give,
or to hold men excusable for not obeying the Gospel; or, which is the same, it
lies not in giving that, which if he gave not, he could not in Justice condemn
men for not obeying the Gospel: Whereas God is bound in Justice to give the
Natural Power or Faculty of obeying the Gospel, or he could not in Justice
condemn men for not obeying of it; because in such cases, they would be wholly
excusable from such Obedience, as Infants, and Idiots are. And therefore the
Power, without which men would be excusable, being an effect of Justice, is not
to be accounted as the Doctor calls it, an effect of Supernatural-grace, nor of
Grace or Favor, or Kindness at all: Do not mistake me, I mean only; It is not
of favor or kindness to give this Power, or not condemn men for not doing what
they had not this Power, which makes inexcusable, to do: For I know, it is a
Favor and Kindness, and a great one too, to give men ability to choose the
Good, and refuse the Evil; because, without it, they would not have the very
Natural power of obtaining the Promised great good Things; and he might justly
deprive all men of this Power, as he does some, even natural Fools; provided
that when he does so, he does not require them to choose the Good, and refuse
the Evil: But yet upon Supposition, that he will require them to choose the Good
and refuse the Evil, it is necessary in justice, that he give them so much
ability, to choose the Good and refuse the Evil, as may make them Inexcusable in
not doing it; and only so much as he does for them more than this, in order to
the overcoming their wickedness, and Aversation to Good, and causing them to
choose the Good and refuse the Evil, is of Grace, and Favor, and Kindness;
being more than is due in Justice to be done, to free them from Condemnation
for the not doing it: All which, is Diametrically opposite to the Doctor's
Notion of Grace, who maintains the just contrary.

I am sensible, I may be thought to have let my Pen ramble here too far, in
opposing these Letters of the Doctors; but I was Induced to it by such Reasons
as these.

First, Because, though it will be apparent to any Intelligent considering man
that reads this Author's Book, that he has the same common Notions with Doctor
Hammond, about Grace; yet they lie more remote from vulgar Apprehensions; he
speaking so little ex professo, to declare what he means by it.

Secondly, Because I look upon this Opinion, maintained in the said Letters, as
destructive to all true Piety, if Practically held; for no man that holds such
Principles, can seriously with his Heart, pray or praise God for the Conversion
or Sanctification of himself or others (as I have showed Irrefragably
elsewhere) not so much as in the words of the Common Prayer. If any doubt of
this, let them but take the Book and read such Prayers, and see if they can
think the meaning of such Prayers, is, that God would give them and others,
only that Power to obey, which he is bound in Justice to give them, whether
they pray or pray not for it, or could not condemn them for not obeying, as is
apparent of that Power without which men would be excusable.

Thirdly, Because those Letters are commonly pretended to be Unanswerable, and
they that are not competent Judges, may have this probable account to think so,
because there is no Evidence (that I know of) of any Reply made by his
Lordship, nor Intimation of his being unsatisfied with them, when as Doctor
Hammond highly pretends his Lordships concurrence with him. For my part, though
I should judge that his Lordship (having as himself confesses, not much studied
such things) had not very clear Notions about these Controversies, if his words
be set down to the best Advantage by Doctor Hammond; as appears by his
granting, that the effect of the Grace of the Holy Spirit is something, that if
denied to men they would be excusable. Yet, I think it almost as easy a matter
to Vindicate what he says in the Main, in the important Points of special
Grace, and unconditionate Decrees, against Doctor Hammonds Exceptions, as to
Write so much Paper. And I cannot but highly commend to consideration, that
sober Sentiment of his Lordship, who confessing his own Disability, to
reconcile the consistency of Grace, and Free Will in Conversion; and being
sensible they must both be maintained, tells us: He ever held, and still does
hold it the more pious and safe way, to place the Grace of God in the Throne
where we think it should stand, and so to leave the Will of Man to shift, for
the maintenance of its own Freedom, as well as it can; than to establish the
Power and Liberty of Free Will at the height, and then to be at a Loss how to
maintain the Power and Efficacy of Gods Grace. Though Doctor Hammond expresses
his dislike of this Saying, and that he thinks it no great difficulty to
Reconcile them; but that this way of his does it satisfactorily, and is easy
of Conception, (and it is indeed too easy of all conscience to be the truth.)
The Result whereof is, that God by his Spirit and Grace, gives only the Power,
without which men enjoying the Gospel would not be Inexcusable, which is indeed
no other than the proper Natural power of Freewill, whatever can be pretended
to the contrary: And though he has some Expressions that one unwary, or not
versed in such things, would think sounded something more, as Grace, being
operative and moving; yet it is apparent, he means, it no otherways moves, than
by giving this Power of not resisting the Gospel, without which men enjoying
the Gospel, would be excusable in not oheying it, which is given to all; and to
say otherwise, would be to overthrow his whole Fabric, as will fully appear to
any one that will but read considerately, and suppose those Questions put
concerning any such Dubious words, which I have put, page 65, 66, 67, 68. of my
Discourse of Natural and Moral Impotency, to force the Explaining of such
words; and also consider what would be answered to them.

I judge that one great cause of Doctor Hammond's mistakes under debate, as well
as of this Author's, was chiefly their want of distinct Notions about Natural
and Moral Impotency, as appears by their affirming, as both of them do, and the
Doctor particularly, page 86. that, It is a direct contradiction to hold a
Power in one sense, and a want of Power in another sense, to the same Act; to
hold, That a man has a Moral impotency, to do what he has a Natural power to
do: And consequently, also his not distinguishing between Natural and Moral
Irresistibility. It is also apparent, that another great ^ause of his mistakes,
is, his forgetting, or not considering that men are Universally wicked; else he
would not sup^ose it Irrational to hold, (as he does page 36. and 38.) that no
one man that h^d power enough to obey the Gospel, sufficient to render him
Inexcusable in not obeying it, (as I think all have that have the Gospel, and
are not Natural Fools) did ever obey the Gospel, without the addition of some
further Supereffluence of Grace, to make him Willing of Unwilling. Now if this
be not to forget, or deny that all men are wicked, so wicked that their Enmity
and Aversation of will to Good, will never be overcome but by the Grace of the
Holy Ghost; I know not what is. And I grant, that except men were Universally
wicked, it would be Irrational to suppose that of such Multitudes, none should
obey without such Grace.

But I think, I have said enough in my Discourse of Natural and Moral
Impotency, to show the Danger, and Inconsistency of such Opinions, as these
Letters of the Doctor's are written to maintain; (though I living obscurely,
had not seen those Letters when I wrote that Discourse.) And if yet any
intelligent man shall satisfy me, that I have not said enough there to this
end, or that there is any thing said in those Leters, that needs a more
particular answer, I may probably say more: For my great Aversation to such
Principles, will much incline me upon an easy call to oppose the Prevalency of
them, till I shall see some sitter man of our own Church and Language, where
they prevail (as I doubt not but there are many, whose Abilities and
Circumstances make them far more fit) willing to undertake it, and save the
Labor of my weak Endeavors.

But now to attend the Author after this large Digression, who still goes on to
give the meaning of Romans 4.

The Apostle also in this his Argumentation, considers the former state and
condition of the Person, viz. of Abraham, to whom this Faith was imputed for
Righteousness. He was ungodly, and guilty of grievous sins, and therefore the
Apostle says Emphatically, that Abraham believed in him who justifies one
ungodly: By that, implying that Abraham before the Divine vocation, was so far
from deserving any thing from God by any good Works, that on the contrary, he
was guilty of the greatest sins; So that the Mercy of God was wonderful, both
that he had revealed himself in so singular a way to so great a sinner, and had
called him to his Service: And also, that he not only blessed with the Pardon
of his great sins, but also rewarded with the greatest Rewards, Abraham
believing him, revealing himself to him. But you will say, What was this
Impiety of Abraham before he was called? I answer, Idolatry, the greatest of
Impieties, as the Scripture it self plainly testifies, Joshu. 24. 2, 3. etc.
where God says in the plural Number, That the Fathers of the Hebrews served
other Gods: And he expresses whom he means, [ Thareh, the Father of Abraham,
and the Father of Nachor,] so that he puts those three, the Father with the
Children, in the same Predicament. Also, after he had said [ they served other
gods,] he adds; [ And he took your Father Abraham,] ver. 3. evidently denoting,
that this is commemorated amongst the kindnesses to the Israelites; that when
their Ancestors, viz. the Grandfather of Israel, both by his Father and
Mother, Abraham and Nahor, living with their Father in Chaldea, worshipped
other gods; God of his mere Mercy, without any merit of his, took Abraham, and
gave to him a Heir, and an Inheritance: Also the Apostle seems in these words [
of justifying the ungodly,] by a tacit indeed, but yet by a strong Argument, to
check the Arrogance of the Jews, who did abhor the Sinful and Idolatrous
Gentiles, Gal. 2. 15. though Converted to the true God, by Faith in Christ, and
Repentance, and new Obedience; And would by no means admit them to the favor
of Justification, unless approved by a long and continued working, or at least
purged by Circumcision and Sacrifices. For the Apostle shows in these words,
that Abraham their Father (and so they in him) was called in the same manner
from Idolatry, and the worship of false Gods: And was, immediately after his
belief of the Promises, and Obedience given to the Divine vocation (yea before
he was Circumcised, as is a little-after showed) accepted of God. Who would not
here admire the divine wit of the Apostle! Furthermore, this belongs to all
Justified, since there is none that is not guilty of heinous sins before Grace
received, and so who does not need Pardon, and Divine Remission. Which the
Apostle well proves by a Testimony out of David, ver. 6, 7, 8. And afterward
the Apostle passes to the Controversy concerning Circumcision, ver. 9.

The Author here indeed gives the true sense of many verses in this Chapter,
Romans 4. But the fault is, he faineth the Apostle to bring them in Desultorily,
or as Ropes of Sand without any coherence; as when he says, [The Apostle also
considers the former state of Abraham,] whereas the Apostle in this Chapter,
brings it in Argumentatively; and, had the Author given a right Interpretation
of the Verses before, he might readily have seen how this of Abraham's being
ungodly, comes in most rationally to prove, that Abraham was not Justified by
Works, but by Righteousness Imputed to him, and that his Justification was of
Grace, and not of Debt. So, whereas he tells us, that [the Apostle does
afterward, viz. verse 9. pass to the controversy of Circumcision] there is no
passing to a new Controversy; but the Apostle there draws an Argument from
that, that Abraham was Justified upon his Believing and Obeying God before he
was Circumcised; to prove that Abraham was not Justified by Works, in the sense
wherein he opposes his Justification by Works, as I have elsewhere made
apparent.

Now he comes to give us the Result of his thoughts, how his sense of this
Chapter, tends to Reconcile the two Apostles.

Hence there clearly shines forth an Agreement between James and Paul, when
from the same Example of Abraham, one concludes that a man is Justified without
Works, the other by Works, viz. Paul considers Abraham according to the Flesh;
such as he was before his calling; but James considers him as now being already
favored with Grace and Divine Vocation. One denies his Justification by works
done before Faith; the other ascribes his Justification to his works proceeding
from Faith. And so, there is no contradiction here between the Apostles.

This is (if I may borrow a phrase from Referente Origene, lib. 6.
Celsus) like casting Lots what to say, to Reconcile the Apostles. And this is
the common Evasion of the Papists, when an Argument is brought against them
from such passages in Paul's Epistles, to prove that no man is Justified by the
Merit of Works, or perfect Obedience.

Further, It is notoriously false, that Paul here considers Abraham as he was
before the Divine calling, and his believing. For,

First, He speaks expressly of him as believing, and having such a strong Faith
as overcame great Oppositions; and of his being Justified by such Faith.

Secondly, He proves, that when he Believed and Obeyed, he was not Justified by
Works, in the sense wherein he excludes his Justification by Works, viz. by
perfect Obedience, or Jewish Observations, or Meritorious Works.

Thirdly, He as equally excludes Works done after Faith, as before, viz. such
works as he excludes.

Fourthly, The Apostle brings this Circumstance, to prove he was not Justified
by Works, viz. That he was Justified before Circumcision, ver. 16. which he
could not have done, had he in speaking of him considered him as he was before
the Divine Call, so as to deny his Justification by works done before it. For
had this been his meaning to deny his Justification, only by such works done in
his estate of Heathenism; it would rather have furthered this denial, and have
added force to it by way of Argument, could he have showed that Abraham's
Justification was not till after his Circumcision, and Receiving the Seal of
the Covenant.

Fifthly, The Pharisaical-Jews which the Apostle there opposes, would not, be
sure, pretend that Abraham was Justified while he lived in Heathenish courses,
before the Divine Call, that the Apostle should need to oppose it. Yea, it was
their Interest, if they would maintain their first Opinion, of Excluding the
Uncircumcised Gentiles from Salvation and Justification, to Plead (though
false) that Abraham was not Justified, till Circumcised; or, (which is true)
that he was not Justified while he lived in Heathenish courses, as they might
pretend (though falsely) the Uncircumcised Converted Gentiles did. But for the
true meaning of this whole Chapter, since I would not needlessly repeat the same
thing: See my short Discourse of the Apostle Paul's meaning.

Thus I have set before you all considerable, that our Author says concerning
the only two Arguments, that he tells us, the Apostle Paul makes use of,
against Justification by the Law, and Works, that concern the whole Body of the
Mosaic-Law, containing in it (as he says) the Moral-Law. He next proceeds,
viz. Chap. 14. to tell us how the Apostle opposes the Ritual, and
Ceremonial-Law, but he spends but few Lines about it; saying, there is no
dispute about that among Christians.

Chapter 15. is spent in Citing out of some Authors, some sayings of the Jews,
in Defense of the Power of Free Will, without the Grace of the Spirit, which he
speaks against, though many of them may be capable of no ill Construction;
possibly meaning no more, than that men have the natural Power of Free Will
(without which they cannot be men, or guilty of sin) from common Providence:
And not that the Will is not Morally insuperably wicked without Grace.

Chapter 16. He well shows out of Jewish Authors, that it was a common error
amongst them, to think they perfectly obeyed the Law, and did all it required;
if they didbut some few External things, thinking those Precepts that required
Inward-Holiness, and Heart-Obedience, were only Counsel, and not Commands; and
so, in stead of bringing up their Lives to the Law, they maintained such
Opinions as brought the Law down to their Lives; as, that it required no more
than an External partial Obedience.

But I cannot but wonder at his Corollary which he draws hence, and makes use
of as an Argument against others; which is this: Page 318. Hence it is
manifest, that they do widely Err from the Scope of the Apostle, that hold that
he disputes against perfect Obedience to the Law, as a defended and received
Opinion amongst the Jews; for it is manifest out of what I have said, that they
were so far from this persuasion, that they were content to stand still within
the bounds of too Imperfect Obedience.

Is this Author serious? Let me ask a few Questions seriously. Whether is it
more likely, that this Author should maintain Perfection in this Life, and that
a man may be Justified by the Law, without the Gospel, and Pardon; that holds
there is not any Law of God, that requires more than Christians that are
sincere, ordinarily perform? Or he that holds, that God is so Holy, and his Law
so Exact, that though he believes God will accept his weak Endeavors, yet
thinks, he falls short every day in many things, so as to need Pardon, and the
Blood of Christ for such failings?

Whether is a Protestant that holds he falls short of his Duty in every thing;
or a Papist, that holds that God's Law requires so little, that he can
super-erogate, and do more than God requires, likelier to hold Perfection?

Whether is a man that holds, that God's Law requires him to Love and Serve God
with all his Heart, and Soul, and Strength, likelier to hold Perfection in this
Life, or a man that holds, that Luke-warmness is no sin? As a great Doctor
Doctor Tailors Ret. of Prayer, Sermon. 5. page 46.
does in these words: There is but one thing in the world that God hates beside
Sin, and that is Indifferency, and Luke-warmness, which although it has not in
it the direct Nature of Sin, yet it has this Testimony from God, that it is
Loathsome and Abominable; And excepting this thing alone, God never said so of
any thing in the New Testament, but what was a direct Breach of a Commandment.

This Author takes much pains ( page 327. etc.) to prove, that the Church of
England in the Eleventh Article of Religion, by these words, viz. [We are
accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own works or deservings. Wherefore,
That we are Justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full
of Comfort.] I say, by these words, does not attribute any Efficacy or Dignity
to Faith, more than to other Virtues, in the business of Justification. Now, I
dislike not this attempt at all, and so shall say nothing here.

To conclude, The Reader may hence see how Improbable that is, which he tells
us in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Reverend Lord Bishop of Gloucester; saying.
He did nothing in putt^ng out this Book, but having f^^^t consulted him, and
that it was put out with his Aid or Assistance ( ausp^ci^s) And that the Bishop
read delibera^^ly every Chapter of either Dissertation, and approved them with
his Vote, and adorned them with his Praises.

Some of this Book is indeed commendable; and his Lordship, might commend that;
But it may be observed, that we have only this Author's word, for this
over-high Commendation of his Book, and every part of it; Who also cannot but
be suspected, to have had great Temptation to pretend it, to gain Repute to his
Opinion, by so great a Name of so Reverend a Prelate, and Learned a Writer.

FINIS.

