JVS FILIZARII: OR, THE Filacer's Office IN THE COURT OF King's Bench. Setting
forth.

The Practice by Original Writ, with several Precedents and other Matters
relating thereunto; and also a Presentment of the Fees of all the Officers in
the said Court.

Very useful for the Filacers, and all other Practicers in that Court.

By JOHN TRY, of Gray's-Inn, Esquire

Quod per Recordum probatum
Non debet esse negatum.
LONDON, Printed, by the Assigns of R. and E. Atkyns, Esquires, for Richard
Tonson within Gray's-Inn Gate next Gray's-Inn Lane. 1684.

TO THE Right Honorable, FRANCIS, LORD GVILFORD, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT SEAL
OF ENGLAND.
MY LORD,
SInce that by the hand of divine providence and the favor of our most
gracious Sovereign deservedly conferred upon You, You are arrived to the highest
Sphere in the high and honorable Court of Chancery, that Officina Justitiae in
which all Original Writs whatsoever are framed, and out of which they issue
forth, and are returnable in all the Courts of Common Law, whereby Process
thereupon are made (amongst others) in this His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench, I could not imagine with my self where to find a more fit, just
and honorable Patron than Your Lordship, under the umbrage of whose Protection
my weak Endeavors might be admitted shelter, being very sensible what hazard I
run in this most critical and sensorious Age without the affluence of Your
Lordship's favor, which I do humbly beg; imploring your pardon if I have
offended by this my too great presumption, in regard I have not been so happy
as to be so well known to Your Lordship as in the least to expect it. It is a
subject that I do not find has been ever treated of (as to the Court of
King's Bench) by any Pen whatsoever, and the pathway to it therefore being
very rough, hard and uneasy, can never be made plain either to my self or
others except it meet with Your Lordship's good opinion, wherever you find the
matter in it, to be centred between Truth and Justice; for both which I am most
fully assured You are and will be a devoted Advocate.

My Lord, I am the humblest of Your Lordship's Servants, JOHN TRY,

To the Impartial Reader.
AS Time is the Mother of all things, out of whose vast Womb all matters and
proceedings in Law whatsoever are formed and fashioned, so after long
continuance either through interest, wilfulness or ignorance of some Practicers
both in this and other Courts of Common Law, many things therein are so altered
and changed from what they were originally, that they seem rather to have been
Abortives than to have had a mature and timely production; And thus, I may say,
it is now with the practice by Original Writ in this Court, for through all or
some of the aforementioned causes, it is (as it were) grown obsolete, and the
proceedings by Bill has almost thrown that by Writ out of this Court; I wish
that by Bill all the happy success imaginable, and do only hope that this by
Writ may be continued in this Court, where it has been formerly much used; and
(as the Returns of such Writs import) be as a shadow following its substance,
our now Sacred Majesty and his Successors, wheresoever He or they shall be in
England, in which that He may long live and have a happy Reign, is not only
the hearty desire but daily prayer of

John Try.
Gray 's-Inn, March 27. 1684.
THE PREFACE.
BEFORE the several Matters in this Treatise come to be handled, it will be
convenient to say somewhat, First, To the Etymology of the word Filacer, or
Filizer; Secondly, To the nature of his Office; and Thirdly, To the antiquity
of it.

And First, As to the word Filacer, or Filizer, it is observable that Cowell in
his Interpreter, and the Book called, The Terms of the Law likewise, speaking
of such Officers in the Court of Common Pleas, say that it comes from the
French word Filace, i. e. a Thread, on which, as in that Court, so in this, it
may be very well thus paraphrased, That it is a Thread indeed, without which
anciently, in this Court as well as in that, there could have been no web or
work made for the dispensing and administering of Justice and Right to all, and
a Rule that leads all Persons, Plaintiffs in this Court, so directly to their
Rights, that it will force the Defendants at last to appear and plead: And
although these Books do take notice only of such Officers in the Court of
Common Pleas, yet (as will appear hereafter in this Treatise) former Statutes,
and those very ancient, have, and do make mention of such Officers as Filizers
in this Court: Or perhaps, and most likely, he was heretofore so called for
that it may be, he did not only make out diverse Writs and Process in his
Office, but did also thread or file up the same, as the Custos Brevium of this
Court now does, before ever there was any such Officer in this Court; and being
the King's Clerk in Court, is always admitted into his Office by the Lord Chief
Justice of this Court, for the time being, and by no other Judge thereof, by
delivery of a Parchment Roll of such his admission to him, as Livery and Seizin
of his place, after that he has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and this Oath following; viz. A. B. You shall swear well and truly to The
Filizer 's Oath upon his admission.
exercise the Office of a Filizer for the County of C. and also truly and
diligently to extract all Fines, Issues and Amerciaments due to our Sovereign
Lord the King arising in your Office, during the time you shall so remain
Officer; So help you God. By which it appears, that in his Office he is bound
to serve the King as his Clerk, and from him, for that his service he has time
out of mind had a privilege to write or style himself Clerk to our Sovereign
Lord the King assigned to inroll Pleas in this Court before the King himself,
being so styled in Cokes Book of Entries, fol. 20. in a Case between Hughs a
Filizer Plaintiff, and Keme Defendant, and entered in this Court in Trin. 7
Jacobi Regis rotulo 1490. and also in Hilar. 20. ejusdem Regis rotulo 5. int.
Gosnold a Filizer Plaintiff, and Dereson Defendant; which said privilege has
also lately been allowed by this Court to be such, upon Pleas in abatement,
unto Declarations filed against them, in which these words (ad Placita in Cur.
Domini Regis coram ipso Rege irrotuland. assignat.) have been omitted; And in
his Office he has a Freehold for life granted him, as may appear by the Entry
of an admission of a certain Filizer on record; and might be proved by diverse
other Precedents, but one may suffice; and may serve for other Entries in the
like nature when granted upon a Surrender of the then present Filizer, and if
it be not upon Surrender, yet with a little variation it may also serve upon
admission into any vacant place; It is entered in this Court, Termino Paschae
An. 33 Elizabethae, upon one Hilsdons a Filizer's Rolls, at the beginning of
the Rolls thus,

Memorandum quod cum W. L. genesis seit. The Entry of his admission. Sile. Paschae
38 H. 6. rot. 73. and Mich. 26 and 27 Eliz. rot. primo and Mich. 8 Car. primi
rot. primo.
existen. de and in officio Filizar. pro Com. B. and B. idem W. die, etc. prox.
post, etc. isto eodem Termino coram Domina Regina apud Westminster. in propria
persona sua ven. and ex mera and spontanea voluntate ipsius W. sursum reddidit
in manus C. W. Mil. Capitalis Justic. dominae Reginae ad placita coram ipsa
Domina Regina tenend. assign. Officium Filizar. dictor. Com. B. and B.
praedict. Et idem C. W. adtunc and ibidem praedict. Officium Filizar. dictor.
Com. B. and B. Thomae Hilsdon. genesis tunc praesent. in Cur. dedit and concedit
and ad dictum Officium Filizar. Com. B. and. B. praedict praefat. T. H. adtunc
and ibidem admisit, Habend. Tenend. Occupand. and Exercend. sibi ut liberum
Tenementum suum, etc. cum Feod. vad. and proficuis eidem Officio incumben. and
de antiquit. debit. and consuet. Et dictus T. jurat. est.

Secondly, As to the nature of his Office; you see by his Oath aforesaid, He is
bound truly and diligently to extract all Fines, Issues and Amerciaments due to
our Sovereign Lord the King arising in his office, and so he is also bound as
the King's Clerk, in Term-time to attend the Grand Jury for the body of the
County of Middles. where the King's Court of his Bench is now resident, or
wherever else it shall be in England, to draw the Inditements that they are
to present, and (if occasion) to ingross them; but it has been usual of late
years for such Filizer, to whose lot it falls (being appointed thereunto by the
Court) to get one of the Clerks of the Crown Office (being always ready in
Court) to attend and perform this service for him: And for a farther account of
the nature of his Office, it will not be amiss here to set before you a Copy of
a Narrative delivered me by a late Cap-officer of this Court, which was
heretofore (as is conceived) addressed by one Edgar, Filizer of London in this
Court, and other the then Filizers thereof by way of Petition to the then
Judges of this Court about the year of our Lord 1630. And some short time
before that, the said Presentment (in the Title page mentioned) was made of the
Fees of all the Officers of this Court, and taken by virtue of his then
Majesty's Commission under his great Seal of England, a part of which
Commission, together with a Copy of the said Presentment you may find placed at
the end of this Treatise; In which Narrative or Petition rather it was thus
then declared and set forth,

That the Filizer is the only immediate Clerk and sworn Ministerial Officer in
this Court for the King's assured and true service therein; By whose duty
through continual and constant use, and former practice in the Law diligently
performed great increase of profit has been in all former Ages in a very great
measure augmented yearly unto the Crown of England, until of late years; and
now, that the Statutes de An. 2 H. VI. cap. 10. and 5 and 6 Ed. VI. cap. 16.
are so neglected, as that through gross ignorance, daily abuses of right
Entries and Proceedings upon Original Writs, have so changed and altered the
right institution of the Law in that Point, (to the scandal and slander of the
Law) that the wonted yearly profit of the Crown of England is thereby stopped
and diverted, and the People of England much grieved and oppressed, all which
happening through the innovated, incroached and intermixed practice illegally
of the Servants of the Chief Clerk, who being no immediate Clerks of the King,
nor sworn for performance of true Service to him, and having neither Offices to
be seized, or places to be fore-judged of, they corrupt, usurp, and abuse the
process, practice and Offices of the said Filizers, by making process to, and
of Outlawry, in the name of the Filizers, without their privity or consent; and
afterward never file the Writs of Exigent, by which Fraud the King's Majesty
is deeply prejudiced both in the real and personal Estate of the Party outlawed
by common Bayls taken by consent of such Servants or Clerks to the Chief
Clerks; And there is or ought in Law to be, the King's Clerk, (the Filizer)
constituted upon oath to perform and do these Services for the King and
People, for every City and County of this Kingdom upon forfeiture of his
Office, if found in any Fraud committed; All which, with diverse other
Enormities and Abuses, the then Filizers offered, and were ready to make appear
to the said Court.

Upon which it appears, that the then Filizers did satisfy the then Judges of
this Court of the nature and duty of their Offices; And what it was then, it
continues so still, being since that, never altered by any Act of Parliament,
or any other due course of Law; And (that as formerly) so now much profit will
accrue to the Crown of England by proceedings grounded upon Original Writs (and
therefore ex debito Justitiae ought to be encouraged in this Court) is very
plain and obvious. And seeing it is the duty of every loyal Subject, of what
degree soever, to advance the Revenue of his Prince as much as he can, by
discovering all legal ways and means by which it may be obtained; so, much more
of him or them that are not only Subjects, but also Officers of the Court
under him as is before said the Filizers of this Court are. And first of all,
great profit would accrue to the Crown of England by such proceedings in
respect of the great number of Original Writs that would issue out of the
Highcourt of Chancery yearly more than now do, whereby the Seals in that Court
would much increase. Secondly, in respect of the many Fines, more than now are,
that would be paid upon such Originals yearly, whereby his Majesty's Fines in
that Court would be also much increased; And thirdly, in respect of the great
number of Writs that would be sealed in this Court of King's Bench by his
Majesty's Green-wax Seals, more than there is at present; whereby the yearly
Revenue thereof would likewise be much augmented, for if any Defendant be
arrested by a Writ of Capias ad respondend. upon an original returnable in this
Court, then indeed one Writ serves, but if the Plaintiff cannot thereupon
arrest him (as commonly it falls out so) then is he forced to take out, an
alias Cap. and after that a plur. Cap. and if he cannot arrest him upon either
of these two last, then he takes out an Exigent and Proclamation, and all this
is in the Law a favor to the Defendant to cause him to appear if he will, and
if he will not, then upon returns of the Exigent, an Outlawry goes out against
him; So that in many actions there are five Writs commonly sealed in this
Court, in one cause before the appearance of the Defendant, and after
appearance, in each cause a Supersedeas, and for non appearance, an Outlawry,
and diverse other Writs, All which matters (duly considered) would certainly as
much augment the Revenue of the Crown of England, as it has done formerly when
this practice by original Writ flourished in this Court.

Thirdly, As to the antiquity of his Office, It is evident, (and will be so) to
any person that will take the pains to search the Records of this Court in the
Reign of Edward the Third, that there were then such Officers as Filizers in
this Court; For that at the bottom of the Plea Rolls of this Court are set
their Names, as so many several. Or chief Clerks.
Prothonotaries to such Writs and Issues and other proceedings as they then
entered, and it is possible to prove it also before that time; but this being
above 300 Years since may be thought sufficient, and for above 200 Years past,
it appears by the Statute of the tenth year of the Reign of Henry the 6th. Cap.
4. and the 18th. of the same King Cap. 9. (where in both those Statutes the
Filizers and Exigenters of this Court are mentioned, that there were then such
Officers in this Court, and to go much farther if it were necessary it is
rational to presume that there were such, before the Norman Conquest; For that
my Lord Coke in his Preface to his third Report says, That Writs of Assise and
other Original Writs were returnable into the King's Courts before the
Conquest, and that (as Justice Fitzherbert says in his Preface to his Book
called Natura Brevium, that seeing they be (speaking of such Writs) the Rules
and Principles of the Science of the Common Law) they do manifestly prove that
the Common Law of England, had been time out of mind of man before the
Conquest, and was not altered or changed by the Conqueror. And therefore
certainly if such proceedings then were by original Writs, it is no Foreign
presumption to believe there were such Officers as Filizers who made out such
Writs. Also under the name and Office of a Filizer in this Court is
comprehended the Exigenter, The Clerk of the Supersedeas, the Clerk of the
Outlawries, and the Clerk of the Jurours, and therefore it will be necessary to
consider all these places apart, and distinct the one from the other, and to
observe what they do in these several Capacities.

And First, As Filizers they have and 1. As Filizers.
do, and of right ought to make out and enter upon all Actions brought by
original Writ, all Writs and Process whatsoever, some whereof are these, viz.
all Cap. Als. Plur. Testat. Cap. Distring. in Trespass and trespass on the
Case, and in every suit, qui tam. etc. in every Rapt. Custod. in every trespass
contra formam ordinationis, in every ejectione firm and such like special
Actions, every Cap. Als. Plur. in appeal of Murder, Robbery, and Maihm. every
Resummons Habeas Corp. and Distring. in Attaint. and Writs of Withernam, Second
deliverance and retorn. habend. and venir. fac. subpoena Distring. Jur. and
diverse other such like Writs, They likewise take and enter all appearances
general or special, wherein good bail is required, upon original Writs they
enter all general and special Imparlances, they make Copies of writs of
Attaint, and they give Rules ad narrandum ad placitandum ad replicand and the
like, and enter Nonsuits for want of declaring, and these things and the like
they do as Filizers.

Secondly, As Exigenters, they make 2. As Exigenters.
out and enter in the actions before mentioned and such like actions, all and
every Writ or Writs of Exigent and Proclamation, Allocat. Exigent. post Cap.
Scir. fac. sur. general. ou special pardon le Roy, and such like Writs.

Thirdly, As Clerks of the Supersedeas, 3. As Clerk of the Supersedeas.
they make out and enter upon the Exigent roll in the said actions and such
like, all Writs of Supersedeas, quia improvide or otherwise; all Writs de non
molestando and other such like Writs, both as well upon appearance of the
Defendant to the Exigent, as after that the Defendant is outlawed, and either
his Body taken by a general Cap. Utlagat. or his Lands or Goods by a special.

Fourthly, As Clerk of the Outlawries, 4. As Clerk of the Outlawries.
they make out and enter in the said actions, all the said Writs of general and
special Cap. Utlagat. and deliver them of Record, and transcribe such special
Capias and Inquisition when returned into the Exchequer, and make out likewise
the Cap. pro Fine Regis sur. capiat, and other such like Writs, and if such
Outlawry be reversed they enter up such reversalls.

Fifthly, As Clerks of the Jurors, They 5. As Clerk of the Jurors
likewise make out and enter in the said Actions, all Distring. Jur. or Habeas
Corpor. and deliver them of Record and (as is said before) attend in Term-time
the grand Jury for the County of Midd. or in whatsoever other County the Court
of King's Bench shall sit. They are Attorneys of this Court as soon as they are
admitted Filizers, and do practice (if they please) as Attorneys by Writ or
Bill, but they cannot enter any thing by Bill on the Prothonotary or chief
Clerks rolls, but one of his Clerks must enter for them. Their Writs and
Process are always filed with the Custos Brevium, and not with the said
Prothonotary or chief Clerks, and they do many other things belonging to their
said Offices, too long here to insert, and are therefore here spared, because
more of this matter may be found in the Copy of the presentment before
mentioned placed at the end of this Book. In the Court of Common Pleas the
Process to the Outlawry runs through diverse Officers or Clerks hands, but in
this Court it is all in one person the Filizer, which is such a sole and
absolute Officer, and his Office was and is much after the same manner
executed, as the Prothonotary's Office of Monmouth, and there was no more but
one such Officer in this Court to all the ends and purposes aforesaid, both
before and in the time of Henry the 6th. (nor since) in which time the practice
by original Writ in this Court was greater than that by Bill. Let this suffice
(by way of Preface) to show what Writs and Process do belong to the Filizers of
this Court to make out and enter. It is most certain, and I make no doubt but
that it will be granted me, that all the supreme Courts of Common Law at
Westminster, through length of time have very much entrenched the one upon the
other, (as might easily be made appear, but that being nothing to the matter in
hand shall be passed over) and that it is as difficult to reduce their ancient
practice into its right and due course, as it is to divert the water of Thames
from running in its now Chanel; but yet certainly it is not so hard a task for
any of the said Courts to set to rights the different practice within the same
according to its ancient use and Custom, and thereby hinder one Officer from
intrenching upon another, which brings me to the first matter intended to be
handled, which is as follows.

THE FILACER'S-OFFICE IN THE Court of King's Bench.
That the Practice by original Writ, is First.
of very great antiquity in the said Court.
FOR the proof whereof it is necessary to observe that heretofore and now at
this time also, there are three several ways of proceedings in this Court, that
is to say by original Writ, by Bill, and by Attachment of privilege.

The First, Grounded upon a Writ issuing out of the high Court of Chancery
returnable in this Court.

The Second, Grounded upon the Custom of the Court.

The Third, Grounded upon the grace and favor of the Court, besides diverse
other proceedings upon Actions removed out of inferior Courts by Writs of
Recordare, Certiorari, Habeas Corpus, and the like into this Court; and
although my Lord Coke in his Preface to his eighth report says, that all the
four supreme Courts at Westminster, be all the King's Courts, and have been
time out of Memory of Man, so that no man knows which of them is most
ancient, yet without doubt it may be easily known what was the original
practice in this Court, for the said Lord Coke, treating of this Court, in his
4th. Institutes Cap. 7. says that if a Writ be returnable coram Justic.
nostris apud Westminster. it shall be returnable in the Common Pleas, but if it be
returnable in this Court it must be thus, coram nobis ubicunque fuerim. in
Anglia, and takes no notice of any Writ returnable in this Court, at a certain
place; and farther he says in the same Chapter, that in former times some ill
disposed Clerks of this Court, because they could have no original Writ out of
the Chancery for Debt returnable in this Court, they would sue out an original
Writ in an action of trespass (a mere feigned action) and so proceed to the
Exigent, whereas in truth the cause of Action was for Debt, and when the
Defendant appeared, etc. all the former proceedings were waved, and a Bill
filed against the Defendant for Debt, This he there says is an unjust practice
in derogation of the dignity and honor of this Court, and worthy of severe
punishment according to the Statute of Westminster. the First, Cap. 29. when it is
found out. And now in these times, although some Clerks and Attorneys of this
Court do not the very self same thing, yet they come very near to such
irregular practice, for that they do very often proceed by original Writ in
such actions as they may justly proceed in as far as the Exigent; and when the
Defendant appears thereunto by Supersedeas, then is there a Bill filed or
Declaration delivered in Debt or any other action by consent of the Attorneys
on both sides, supposing the Defendant to be in Custod. Marescalli, etc. as if
he had been arrested by a Bill of Middles. or Latitat (that supposes a Bill) in
this Court, and so waive the whole former proceedings by original Writ and
proceed on to Judgment by Bill, a matter certainly worthy to be taken notice of
by this Court, as an abuse put upon the ancient proceedings by original Writ
therein, and not only against a known rule or maxim in Law expressly, Quod
omnis brevis Judicialis sequitur suum. Originale, but also may prove very
prejudicial to the Plaintiffs in such actions, if the same should happen to be
taken notice of, there being nothing in Court as a foundation to warrant such
proceedings by Bill, and so all as it were coram non Judice. And it seems that,
that great and learned Lawyer looked upon all Writs whatsoever, returnable in
this Court to be returnable coram nobis, that is, coram Domino Rege ubicunque
tunc fuerit in Angl. this Court being moveable with the King's Person, (and not
local as the Common Pleas is,) and therefore called the King's Bench, and that
this is the natural and genuine style of this Court may be gathered from hence,
that several of the former Kings of England have sat personally in this Court,
as the said Lord Coke says in the same Chapter, and as Speed in his Chronicle,
fol. 595. observes that, Henry the Third sat in person with his Justiciars
upon the Bench at the Arraignment of Peter de Rivallis and others, and that he
gave Sentence against him and sent him to the Tower. And also Sir Richard Baker
in his Chronicle, fol. 205. says, that Edward the Fourth sat in
Michaelmas-Term, in the Second year of his Reign, three days together publicly
with his Judges in this Court, to acquaint himself with the orders of the
Court, and to observe what needed reformation in it, either at Bench or at Bar.
The former of these Observations, together with some other matters in the like
nature, are reported by Mr Sergeant Rolls in the first part of his abridgment,
fol. 535. And I believe it to be the hearty desire and affectionate wish of
every Loyal Subject, especially of the long Robe, that his now Majesty would be
graciously pleased (once in his Reign at the least) to honor this his peculiar
Court with his most glorious presence, a sight certainly that would be in its
self so transcendently excellent, that it would parallel if not exceed that of
his Coronation. But to come more close to the matter proposed, It appears as is
said before, (if the most ancient Records may not possibly be by some against
usual practice (as they have lately been) esteemed the weakest evidence,) that
in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Sixth, which is now above two
Hundred and Twenty years since, and are the oldest Rolls now remaining in the
upper Treasury of this Court, and long before that time also by Records in
other places, and from that time until about the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, The proceedings in this Court were more by Original Writ
than by Bill, The several Terms and Number Rolls, and the years in which they
are being too numerous here to insert, and would have made this Book larger
than intended, and therefore it is left to the Judicious Reader (if he pleases)
for his own satisfaction at his leisure, to search the same Records which are
very well worthy the labor and trouble of any that desire to be acquainted
with antiquity of this nature; And this may be sufficient to show that the
Practice by original Writ although now much decreased from what it was at first
has been very anciently used in this Court.

That it prevents in a great Measure the Secondly.
delay of Execution, after Judgment had and obtained.
IT is very well known to all Practicers (I presume) in this Court, that in all
actions brought by Bill in this Court, in which after the Plaintiffs have
recovered and are ready to take out Execution, that a Writ of Error may be
brought thereupon by the Defendant returnable in the Court of
Exchequer-Chamber, and very easy at all times to be purchased, but in all
actions brought by original Writ and Judgments thereupon had and obtained, no
Writ of Error lies thereupon, but must be returnable in the high Court of
Parliament, and that not so easy to be purchased, the charges thereof being
very great, the Fees being most or all of them double over and above what those
are of Writs of Error returnable in the said Court of Exchequer-Chamber, and
upon the affirmation of such Judgment in Parliament, there is always very great
costs awarded and taxed to the Defendant in the Writ of Error who is Plaintiff
in the action for delay of his Execution occasioned by such Writ of Error;
besides no Writ of Error can be obtained in such case but when there is a
Parliament in being, for no Writ of Error can or ought to be returnable ad
proximum Parliamentum, in regard it would be so great a prejudice and delay to
the Subjects Plaintiffs in such actions, the times of convening of Parliaments
being so uncertain, and only lying in the King's power as Supreme, (it being
his Royal Prerogative) to Call, Prorogue, Adjourn and Dissolve them when he
pleases: So that for the reasons aforesaid, Writs of Error are seldom brought
upon such Judgments as are recovered upon actions brought by original Writ, Nay
yet farther also after all this, when such Judgments before obtained by Bill,
are affirmed upon the Writ of Error in the Exchequer-Chamber, yet may a Writ
of Error per Stat. de Anno. 27. Eliz. Cap. 8. be brought returnable as
aforesaid in the said high Court of Parliament to the intolerable delay and
vexation of the Plaintiffs in such actions, a thing which the common Law of
England in its own nature abhors and detests, it being Festinum Remedium, and
its property such as (in some reasonable time) suum cuique dare, and therefore
it is certainly the best way so to bring actions and after such a manner
(especially where Titles of Land are concerned, or great damages likely to be
recovered) that so after Judgment had, Execution may not long be delayed, which
is for the good and interest of the Subjects who are Plaintiffs in such actions.

That against some sort of Persons, and in Thirdly.
some sort of Actions, there is no other way to proceed in the said Court, but
by Original Writ.
BY the Law of this Land, no Peer First, as to Persons.
thereof ought by his Body to be taken or arrested by virtue of any Writ or
Process in any Civil Cause whatsoeever. But although he may not be arrested,
yet may an Original Writ of Pone, in the nature of a Summons, as the Case
requires, issue out of the Highcourt of Chancery to cause him to appear at the
return of such Writ in this Court, there to answer the Plaintiff in such Writ
named, to his Complaint therein mentioned, and if the Sheriff, to whom such
Writ is directed, do thereupon return that he has taken Pledges of such Peer
to appear in this Court, according as by the said Writ he was commanded, and he
do not appear accordingly, Then upon such return, there may be had from the
Filizer of the said County a Writ of Distring. directed to the said Sheriff,
commanding him that he distrain such Peer by all his Lands and Chattels, etc.
in order to cause him to appear, and if he do not thereupon appear, and such
Sheriff return issues thereupon ad valentiam, etc. Then the said Filizer may
make forth an Alias distring. and also upon return thereof a Plur. distring. ad
infinitum, until such Peer do appear; and it is the usual course for such
Sheriff to increase or double the issues upon every return; but if he return
but small issues, the Plaintiff (if he pleases) may move this Court that such
Sheriff may return better Issues (that is to say) greater Issues; all which
Issues must be by the Plaintiff's Attorney brought into the Filizer's Office,
who made out such Distring. and from thence estreated into the Court of
Exchequer, there to be levied upon such Peer's Lands and Chattels, by way of
forfeiture to the King, for his not appearing as aforesaid; And upon a nichil
habet returned by the Sheriff upon such Distring. there may go out a Testat.
distring. into another County where such Peer has Lands or Chattels, and be
proceeded upon as aforesaid. But if in case that such Sheriff do return
likewise a nichil habet upon such Writ of Pone beforementioned, then the
Attorney for the Plaintiff may have an alias, or rather a Testat. Pone from the
said Filizer, directed unto the Sheriff of that County where such Peer lives
and has sufficient, and upon a return of Pledges taken as aforesaid, the said
Attorney may proceed thereupon by Distring. ad infinitum, in form aforesaid;
And besides such honorable Persons as Peers, who for their honor are said to
be a Latere Regis, and are protected by Law from attaching or arresting by
their Bodies in all Civil Causes, as is before said, There are other Persons,
that in their politic capacity cannot be arrested or attached, such are all
Corporations and Societies of men that act all under one Common Seal of their
Corporation, as the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of any City; The Dean and Chapter of
W. The Master, Wardens and Fellows of a College, and the like, and any Company
incorporated in the City of London, or elsewhere; And likewise all Hundreders
in any County, which are liable to be sued upon the Statute of Huy and Cry,
where Robberies are committed, and Felons escape; such Bodies of Men being very
numerous, and no single Person in his natural capacity bound to answer in any
Action whatsoever; but yet they may be proceeded against to be made appear and
answer in the same manner and way as the Peers of this Realm may by Distring.
ad infinitum, and after Judgment had, any of their Goods and Chattels may be
taken in Execution; and if it be in the Case of Corporations, they must by
their bye Laws apportion the Levari upon the rest, and thereby ease him or them
whose Goods are taken, and if it be in the case of Hundreders, then any Person
or Persons grieved may complain to two of the Justices of the Peace of the
County wherein such Robbery was committed (whereof one to be of the Quorum) who
have full power by the Statute of 27 of Eliz. cap. 13. to tax and rate the said
Hundred for and toward an equal contribution of the damages recovered, that so
the burden of the Execution may not lie wholly upon some few of the said
Hundreders, and thus much as to the Persons.

Now as to the Actions, which lie not Secondly, as to Actions.
in this Court but by Original Writ; no Quare impedit, Writs of Right,
Replevin, and such like, come into this Court, but either by Original Writ
primarily, or else Plaints are entered in Inferior Courts, and removed hither
by several Writs, which are in their own nature as so many Originals, and
returnable coram nobis ubicunque, etc. as Writs of Recordare fac. loquend.
Acced. ad Cur. Certiorar. Writs of Error, and the like; and upon these there
can be no prosecution by Bill in this Court: So that if they could not be
proceeded in by Writ, this Court would lose and want much of the practice and
business it now has, and has long had, and I wish long may have; and the same
or most part of it would be brought in the other Courts of Common Law at Westminster.
And thus you see, that against some sort of Persons in their single Capacities,
and against other sort in their politic Capacities, and against some others,
as men inhabiting in any Hundred; and in some sort of Actions there is no other
way to proceed in this Court but by Original Writ.

That it is most agreeable to the Statute Fourthly.
lately made for setting forth the cause of Action in the Writ.
IT has been formerly the practice in this Court by Bill of Middles. or
Latitat and process thereupon, to arrest in trespass generally not mentioning
the cause of action therein, and yet obliging the Defendants to put in good
Bail to the Plaintiff's Suit, by marking the backs of such Writs or Process for
good Bail, and giving the Sheriff notice to take good Bail to such a Sum
whatever the nature and cause of action was, and by marking the Roll wherein
such Writs and Process were entered for good Bail by drawing a Line under the
Defendant's name, and writing over it, bon. Manucapt. and then the Attorney for
the Defendant ought not to file a common Bail without searching such Rolls. But
this has been thought very inconvenient and unreasonable by a late Parliament,
that Defendants should be obliged to put in Bail to the Sheriff to that of
which they understood not any thing of the cause of action; which made it very
difficult to such Defendants to procure Bail, especially if they happened to be
arrested in places where they were strangers, and therefore ought the rather to
be able to satisfy such Persons, as would be Bail for them, what the matter and
cause of action was for; which in this way of proceedings the Defendants never
knew until they came at the return of such Writ or Process to put in good Bail
above (as it is usually called) that is, before some Judge of this Court; and
then received a Declaration: And if they did not put in good Bail, then such
Bail-bonds as were given to the Sheriff for their appearance were forthwith put
in suit, which mischief being seen and considered of, both in this Court, and
in the Common Pleas, was by the said Parliament remedied by an Act made in the
thirteenth year of his now Majesty's Reign, cap. 2. at the second Meeting of
that Parliament. The words of that Act (amongst other matters) are these, For
remedy and prevention of which so great growing evils and mischiefs, and also
for discouraging all frivolous and unjust Suits and causeless arrests for the
future, Be it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That from and
after the twelfth day of February, in the Year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred sixty and one, No Person or Persons, who shall happen to be arrested,
by any Sheriff, Undersheriff, Coroner, Steward or Bailiff of any Franchise or
Liberty, or by any other Officer, Minister, Under-bayliff, or other Person or
Persons whatsoever within this Realm, having or pretending to have authority or
warrant in that behalf by force or color of any Writ, Bill or Process issuing,
or to be issuing out of his Majesty's said Courts of the King's Bench and
Common Pleas, or either of them, in which said Writ, Bill or Process the Note
the true cause of action is to be expressed particularly.
certainty and true cause of action is not expressed particularly, and for
which the Defendant or Defendants in such Writ, Bill or Process named, is, and
are bailable by the Statute in that behalf made in the three and twentieth year
of the Reign of the late King Henry the Sixth, shall be forced or compelled to
give Security, or to enter into bond with Sureties for the appearances of such
Person or Persons so arrested at the day and place in the said Writ, Bill or
Process specified or contained in any penalty or sum of money exceeding the sum
of forty pounds, of lawful money of England, to be conditioned for such
appearances, and that all Sheriffs and other Officers and Ministers aforesaid,
shall let to bail and deliver out of Prison, and from their and every of their
custodies respectively, all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, by them or
any of them arrested, upon any such Writ, Bill or Process, wherein the
certainty and true cause of action is not particularly expressed upon security
in the sum of forty pounds and no more, given for appearance of such Person or
Persons so arrested, unto the said Sheriff or Officer aforesaid, according to
the said Statute, in the said three and twentieth year of the Reign of the said
late King Henry the Sixth, in that behalf made and provided. I have recited
this part of the Act in his verbis, for that it may be of use to them that have
not the Act at large, and that it may be seen how expressly and to a tittle it
is fulfilled in the proceedings by Original Writ; For it has ever been the
constant practice in such proceedings, to express the true cause of action
particularly in the Original Writ, and in every Writ of Capias alias and plur.
thereupon to arrest, and also to what Sum the Plaintiff lays his damage, that
so the Defendant may procure Bail accordingly. And if it happen (as oftentimes
it does) that such Defendant either is not arrested or does not appear upon any
of the said Process taken out against him, but suffers himself to be so far
proceeded against as to the Exigent; yet still that he may know what he is sued
for, there is mention made at large of the express cause of action, both in the
Writ of Exigent, and also in the Proclamation, directed to the Sheriff where it
is known or supposed the Defendant does inhabit, that so he may take care,
either by himself or his Attorney, to appear thereunto, and thereby prevent, if
he will, his being outlawed. By all which it appears, that the proceedings in
this Court by Original Writ heretofore, were, and now are, such as are
altogether agreeable to the late Statute so made as aforesaid for setting out
the particular cause of action in the Writ.

That the Filizers of the said Court have Fifthly.
not only made and entered on record, Writs and Process by original, but also
entered Declarations, Imparlances, Issues, Judgments, and diverse other
proceedings thereupon, and also have enrolled Indentures, and all this upon
their Filizers Rolls.
IF (as is said before) Records themselves will not with some be looked upon
(as they have lately been a disputable evidence, especially when very ancient)
it is not to be doubted, but that this assertion may be also very easily
proved, and why they should be thought the rather to be so, because of their
antiquity, no more reason can be given for it (that I know of) than that an Act
of Parliament now in force and unrepealed, made two hundred years since, should
have less power to command obedience to it, than one made but twenty years
since; nay, certainly the antiquity of any proof should make it the better: And
should you here have an account (as it is possible to be done, but with great
trouble) of the several Entries that have been made by the Filizers of this
Court upon their own Rolls (for so they are called for distinction sake only,
to differ them from the Prothonotary or chief Clerks Rolls) for most truly and
properly all the Rolls of this Court are the King's Rolls, or Rolls of the
King's Bench, and that for the space of two hundred years and upwards (omitting
the times before that) it would but tire your patience and swell this Volume to
be ten times as big as ever it was intended to be. But as it is easy, Pede
Herculis, to guess at the magnitude of his whole body, so by some few that
shall here be set down, as plainly and as truly as they may be (that they may
be repaired unto if occasion) you may guess at the multitude that might have
been inserted, and therefore some few in each King and Queen's Reign within the
time aforesaid, may be sufficient in all reason to prove this point. And now to
begin with the Reign of Henry the Sixth, being, as is said before, the oldest
Rolls that are in the upper Treasury of this Court, and so to bring it down
(according to the search I have made, to these times. It appears in Paschae
primo ejusdem Regis, In whose An. H. 6.
time the Filizers Rolls were always filed first after the Rotulo primo, which
has usually been a richly gilded Roll with the King's Picture drawn in the
first Letter of the word Placita, sitting, as it were, upon the Bench in Court,
and it sets forth the Person before whom, the place were, and the time when the
pleadings were held; To all which the chief Justice his name is put as a
Witness, and then the Filizer's name that provided that Roll at the bottom of
it; And this ought to be filed in every Term, it being a great ornament to the
Rolls themselves; and it is a great neglect some-where to be charged, that so
many Rolls for some years past have been made up without it: Nay, all the other
Rolls following are nonsensically titled, if such a Roll be not filed before
them; For then follow the other Filizer's Rolls, and then after them the
Prothonotary or chief Clerks Rolls, all with this Title upon them, Adhuc de
Termino, etc. T. etc. whereas if this Rotulo primo be not filed, there is no
Term at all appears unto which the Adhuc can have any relation. And somerimes
in that King's Reign they have been filed promiscuously one among another, but
still the Filizer's Rolls have been filed first. But to return to the proof
(omitting the entering of Process or Writs upon originals, for that is allowed
to be their due of all hands.)

It appears in that Term (omitting also, for brevity sake, the names of the
Plaintiffs and Defendants, and their Attorneys, and the nature of the Action)
in rotulis, 6. 9. 23. 44. 45. 58. 65. that several Filizers of several
Counties, entered several Issues, and their names are upon the bottom of each
Roll; and in Mich. 2. ejusdem the like, in rotulis 10. 14. 16. 18. And in the
Reign of Edward the Fourth, in Mich. 4. ejusdem An. Ed. 4.
Regis in Rotulis 18. 57. 60. 68. the like Entries, and in Paschae 5. ejusdem
Regis, the Rolls not being numbered, but the Filizers names at the bottom, there
are several Issues entered; and as for the Reign of Edward the Fifth it being
not An. Ed. 5.
three months long, and the Reign of Richard the Third not three years long,
An. R. 3.
and very troublesome, they were in this search wholly omitted. In Hilary 2
Henrici 7. Rolls not numbered, several An. H. 7. An. H. 8.
Issues entered; Mich. 3 Henrici 8. rotulis 43. 49. 54. the like both as to
Issues and Judgments by nichil dicit, in Paschae 23. and 24. ejusdem Regis, the
like in both; Paschae 24. and 25. ejusdem, and Paschae 25. and 26. and Paschae
26. and 27. and Paschae 27. and 28. the like in all these Terms; Rolls not
numbered, but are to be found filed at the beginning of each Term; and in Hilary
36. ejusdem Regis, rotulo 14. is the Entry of an Outlawry in an Appeal of
Murder; and Paschae 37. an Issue, and Judgment after a Verdict. And in Hilary
1 and 2 of Edward the Sixth, rotulis An. Ed. 6.
2. 3. 12. and aliis rotulis the like Issues; in Trin. 7. ejusdem, rotulis 2.
8. 11. the like; usque rotulum 20. In Trin. 1 Mariae, rot. 10. 12. 13. 15. and
diverse An. Mariae.
other Rolls the like. In Paschae 1. and 2. ejusdem, several Issues, Trin.
prox. the like, Mich. prox rot. 6. 7. 8. and other Rolls not numbered, the like
and Judgments; Hilary 1. and 2. the like, in rotulis 13. and 16. and in Mich.
the 26 and 27 of Queen Elizabeth, rotulis An. Elizab.
1. 2. 4. 16. 18. 19. and others not numbered, there are two Appeals of Murder
and one of Robbery, and several Issues and special Pleadings; In Mich. 36. and
37. the like as to Issues. In Paschae 44. rotulo 10. a Quare Impedit, between
the Queen and the Bishop of Hereford. And in Paschae, 5 Jacobi, Roll not
numbered, there is An. Jacobi.
an Indenture entered, by Howard a Filizer upon his own Roll; in Trin. 7. an
Issue, the Roll not numbered; in Hill. 9. Mich. 12. Hill. 12. Trin. 13. Hill. 13.
the like Issues and Judgments by Nil dicit and Non sum informat. But all these
Kings and Queens Reigns have not been gradually searched in every Year and
Term, for it would have been too great a labor, but only some few, to show
that there were no Times in which the Filizers did discontinue entering Issues
and other Entries on their own Rolls, as has been unjustly reported of them.
But now, because the later Precedents may be thought the best proof (the former
being looked upon by some persons it may be as obsolete by reason of their
antiquity) these Years following of King James have been carefully and with
great labor and pains searched in order year by year; It appears then in
Paschae 15. ejusdem Regis, one With, a Filizer enters an Appeal of Murder,
and in Trin. 15. a Judgment by defalt, and a Writ of Enquiry of Damages
awarded. Mich. 16. one Shaw a Filizer enters an Issue, wherein one Edmund
Dennye, who was one of the Clerks to the then chief Clerk was Attorney for the
Plaintiff, and afterward was one of the Jury of Attorneys, that made the
Presentment of the Fees, at the end of this Book: And in that Term also, Walker
and Williamson, two Filizers do enter two appeals of Murder. In Hilary 16. the
reversal of an Outlawry pro defectu Proclamationis, and diverse Issues; Trin.
17. the like reversal of an Outlawry and diverse Issues, one of them in
Replevin, and Judgment thereupon by Percival a Filizer, and several Judgments
by defalt; In one of which, one Tetlow was Attorney for the Plaintiff, and in
another, one Tippet, and in others, one Harborn and one Bunce were Attorneys
for the Defendants; all which four last Attorneys were four of them also that
made the Presentment hereafter mentioned. In Mich. 17. nil dic. in cas. In
Hilary 17. Scire facias, and Judgment in Replevin, and several Issues; In
Paschae 18. Special Plea and Issue thereupon, and nil dicit. in Replevin upon a
Writ of Second deliverance; Trin. 18. several Issues and a Defalt, Mich. 18.
three Defalts; Hill. 18. two Issues and two Defalts; Trin. 19. the like; Hill.
19. two nichil dicits and Writs of Enquiry awarded; Paschae 20. Special Plea
and Demurrer; Trin. 20. several Issues; Mich. prox. the like, and Hill. prox.
one Dodd, a Filizer, enters a writ of Right, and other Filizers several other
Entries, of Issues and Judgments in Trin. 21. Hill. prox. and Trin. 22. the
like, Mich. 22. one Seaman a Filizer, enters the Reversal of an Outlawry for
the insufficient return of an Exigent, and to wind up this King's Reign in
Hill. prox. Edgar, Filizer of London, so soon as he was Sworn, enters an Issue
wherein one William Jumper was Attorney for the Plaintiff, who was also one of
those Attorneys that made the said presentment. And now we are come to the
Reign of Charles the First of ever blessed Memory; and because some as I said
before look upon the latest precedents to be the best evidence, I beg leave to
be more prolix in this King's Reign than in the former, for these were all
searched likewise gradually; Some Terms having no such Entries, I have here
omitted. In Trin. 2. and Mich. prox. ejusdem Regis An. Car. Primi.
there are diverse Issues and Defalts entered, and also the Reversal of an
Outlawry, In Paschae 3. the said Edgar enters four Issues in London, Hill. 3.
and Paschae 4. the like by other Filizers, Trin. prox. several Issues and
Judgments, and among them, the said Edgar enters an Issue by Bill after an
Imparlance, Mich. 4. the like Issues and Judgments by others, and one Jumper
aforesaid, At. pro Quer. in one of them; nay in Hilary 4. the said Edgar
enters other two Issues by Bill, (a thing which the now Filizers of this Court
do not in the least pretend unto,) but it seems he thought it was as lawful
and as much his right to enter by Bill, as it was for the then chief Clerk or
Prothonotary to enter by Writ, and was then an occasion of very great
difference between that Filizer on the behalf of all the other Filizers and the
then chief Clerk or Prothonotary who had entered by Writ: And upon good ground
it is believed that the presentment of the Fees hereafter mentioned did settle
the matter between them, being (as is supposed) procured upon the Petition of
the then Filizers to his then Majesty reciting the former narrative, who was
thereupon pleased in a short time after to grant his Commission to inspect into
all the Fees of all the Offices both in this Court and all other his Courts of
Common Law in England and Wales, and to settle the same, but after what manner
the said difference was settled between the then Filizers and the then chief
Clerk is not known, but it seems it was not so settled as to take away the right
of the Filizers to enter Issues on their own Rolls, (as by some has been most
falsely affirmed) For that they did still continue on to enter by Writ, but not
by Bill as may appear by Paschae 5. Issue in Ejectment, verdict and Judgment
entered by Fisher, Filizer of Dorset-shire, in Trin. 5. the aforesaid Edgar
entered an Issue in London, and Clerk, Filizer of Norf. entered two Issues, Hill.
5. Gasnold, Filizer of Suf. entered a cause against two Defendants wherein the
one pleaded and the other suffered Judgment, Paschae 6. nil dic. in Ejectment
by the said Edgar and an Issue wherein John Woodward a very able Clerk of the
then chief Clerk, was Attorney for the Plaintiff, one very well known to some
of that name now in this Court, and the said Clerk was the Filizer* this I
mention more at large (and many other I might) to show that the Filizer did not
enter it as he was Attorney in the cause himself, but for another Attorney, but
if he had, I think it had argued no less a right in himself to enter, than if
he had entered it for another Attorney, and a multitude of those former Entries
I have already mentioned as well as those I am yet to set down, are made for
other persons Attorneys for the Plaintiffs, as may appear by the Records
themselves. In Trin. 6. diverse Issues and Judgments, and Scir. fac. sur. Judic.
in replevin. Mich. 6. Trin. 7. Mich. 7. the like, wherein Merefield the then
Filizer of London enters an Issue, for one Creme, (one of the Clerks of the
then chief Clerk) Plaintiff, who did not certainly enter it with the Filizer to
have his privilege allowed him, for that he might without doubt have had if he
had entered it with his own Master the chief Clerk, but questionless he did
enter it with the Filizer, for that he thought in his Judgment he ought so to
do, the said Filizer having made out all the former process; and also in that
Term the Filizer of Lincoln enters an Issue upon a special Plea, Verdict and
Judgment, Hilary 7. the like by Merefield and others, Paschae 8. an Issue,
Defalt, and a Demurrer in three several causes, Trin. Mich. and Hill. prox. the
like, Paschae 9. the said Merefield enters an Issue wherein Hatton Berners was
Attorney for the Plaintiff, and Clerk to the chief Clerk and another wherein
the aforesaid Jumper is Attorney for the Plaintiff, who as is said before was
one of those Attorneys that made the presentment, Trin. 9. several Filizers
entered in all 22. Rolls, and in them 23 Issues, general and special; in some of
which, Gilbert Eveleigh was Attorney for the Plaintiff, one that was heretofore
well known unto the now Secondary, he being his Entering Clerk, and filed his
Rolls for him as I am informed, Mich. 9. the like Hill. 9. several Filizers had
27 Rolls, entered several Issues and Judgments by defalt, and one Issue is in a
Quare Impedit between Noy the Attorney General, and the Bishop of Lincoln, So
that you see here the Filizers are not stinted to 20 Rolls, as now it is usual
to leave so many for them, the chief Clerk's Rolls beginning commonly at 20,
but they may go farther if their number of causes do require it. Paschae 10.
Trin. and Mich. prox. several Issues, and Hill. prox. 13. Issues and Judgments
by defalt, and in Trin. 11. and Mich. and Hilary next, the like, In Paschae 12.
two Issues one wherein the aforesaid Merefield enters an Issue in London,
wherein one George Brom was Attorney for the Plaintiff, who as I have been
informed was soon after that Secondary of the Court, and certainly he well
understood what he did, or else he was not fit to be in that place, who was to
give directions to others in Trin. 12. Mich. and Hill. prox. Paschae 13. Trin.
Mich. and Hilary prox. the like, in one of which, to wit in Hill. 12. the
aforesaid John Woodward was Attorney for the Plaintiff, In Paschae 14. Rotulo
7. a replevin special. plita. Judicium sur. inde pro le avowant and breve de
Inquir. agard and Rotulo 12. Williamson a Filizer enters an Appeal de mort.
Trin. prox. six Rolls of Imparlances, Mich. and Hilary prox. several Issues
entered by the said Merefield and one Summers then Filizer of Middlesex and
other Filizers, and Imparlances and Judgments by defalt, and in some of those
Issues, the Plaintiffs themselves were Clerks to the then chief Clerk, Paschae
15. the like, Trin. 15. the like in 14 several Issues and Judgments by defalt,
and in one of the defalts upon which there is a Writ of Inquiry awarded, and
Judgment thereupon, the aforesaid John Woodward was Attorney for the Plaintiff,
and Woodward Senior Filizer, and there also one Rott a Filizer enters process
in appeal de mort. Mich. and Hill. prox. the like as to Issues and Judgments by
defalt, one wherein Harman Atwood one of the Clerks to the then chief Clerk,
was Attorney for the Plaintiff, and as able a Clerk as any was in his time, in
Paschae 16. Rotulo 19. the said Merefield enters as Filizer of London, an Issue
in London in ejectment, inter Lloyd and Hide, verdict and Judgment, Cecill
Attorney for the Plaintiff, and Antrobus (one of the Attorneys that made the
said presentment) for the Defendant who afterward brought a Writ of Error in
Parliament, and the Judgment there affirmed, and the affirmetur entered also on
the said Issue Roll, Trin. Mich. and Hill. the like as to Issues and defalts,
Paschae 17. Trin. prox. the like, and in the last no less than 13, Issues and
one defalt, in Mich. prox. the like, in Hill. prox. Rotulo 20. the said
Merefield entered an Issue int. Hunt one of the Clerks to the then chief Clerk,
etc. Plaintiff and Brough Defendant, breve erroris super inde in Parliamento
and Judicium affirmetur, entered also, The Filizers Rolls then reached there to
number 24, Paschae 19. and Trin. prox. the like as to Issues and Judgments by
nil dicit Hill. prox. Issue in Essex, and tried at the Bar and Judgment entered,
Paschae 21. Trin. Mich. and Hill. prox. the like as to Issues and defalts, and
in the aforesaid Trin. Term a Scire facias and Judgment upon it, Paschae 22.
the said Merefield, Filizer entered a Judgment in case in London, inter Ingram
and Inning Hewson Attorney pro Quer. and Gerg. pro Defendant, two very able
Clerks unto the then chief Clerk, and breve de errore in Parliamento super inde
and affirmetur, entered likewise, Trin. and Hill. prox. several Issues Paschae
23. Rotulo 19. the said Merefield entered an Issue in London inter Finch and
Wallis, Hoddesdon Attorney pro Quer. who was afterward Secondary of the Court,
and certainly knew what he did, Trin. prox. and Trin. 24. the like as to Issues
and defalts, in the last of which Rotulo 16. Wooddeson Filizer of Yorkshire
enters two Issues, wherein one Henry Thompson was Attorney for the Plaintiffs,
and one William Livesay for the Defendants, I cannot say it was the now
Secondary, although I never heard of any other about that time of that name,
but I presume it was not he, because I believe he would have informed the
Attorney for the Plaintiff that he ought not have entered it on the Filizer's
Roll, and in Mich. and Hill. 24. diverse Issues and defalts.

And now having passed through the Reign of that glorious Martyr, let us see
what was done and practiced in this case in the troublesome times of War,
Anarchy and Confusion when all things were in disorder and turned upside down.
It appears that in Trin. 1649. and Hill. following, there were An. Dom. 1649.
the like Issues and defalts entered, In Paschae 1651. Rotulo 19. the same
Merefield, enters a defalt for one Holworthy, Plaintiff who was one of the
Clerks to the then chief Clerk, this was the Term in which the Law suffered so
great a change as to have all the proceedings of it in English, yet then it
suffered no mutation as to the entering with the Filizer, so in Trin. Term
following, Ironmonger, Filizer of Bedfordshire, entered two Issues, wherein one
Blincoe was Attorney for the Plaintiffs, he was one of the Clerks of the then
chief Clerk, and kept the Files of Writs in the then Kings-Bench-Office. In
Hill. 1651. Rotulo 19. T. Stone a Filizer inrolls an Indenture inter Whittle and
Whittle, and the Filizer of Essex likewise an Issue in ejectione firmae, inter
Wilks and Hill. Brickwood Attorney for the Plaintiff, and William Livesay for
the Defendant, whether this was the now Secondary of the Court or not I know
not. Trin. 1652. the like, inter Garret and Parker, An. Baker Attorney for the
Plaintiff, a very able Clerk, and one of the Clerks to the now chief Clerk, and
is yet living, and in Hill. prox. Rotulo 16. the aforesaid Wooddeson entered a
Judgment in replevin with Retorn. habend. and a Cap. in Withernam, In Paschae
1655. Rotulo 18. an Issue and Rotulo 19. another Indenture enrolled, In Hill.
next, Rotulo 12. F. Gregg, Filizer of Derbyshire (and at the same time one of
the Clerks to the now chief Clerk) enters special pleadings in replevin, non
pros. super inde cum retorn. habend. Paschae 1656. Roll 17. another Indenture
Hilary 1656, Rolls, 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. several Issues, and a defalt, Paschae
1657. and Trin. following the like, Paschae 1658. Rotulo 19. the said Merefield
entered an Issue, wherein John Brewster was Attorney for the Plaintiff, and now
living, and a Clerk to the now chief Clerk, and one Coxe for the Defendant, it
was in London; Non assumpsit inter Hardman and Hayes, Trin. and Mich. prox. the
like, Hill. 1658. several Issues, one that the said Merefield entered for one
Peter Naylor Attorney for the Plaintiff, and Clerk then to the then and now
chief Clerk, as able and knowing a man in Clerkship as any of his time, fit to
have made a Secondary of, and after the Plea, a relicta verificatione signed by
the then Secondary, Trin. 1659. Roll 12. 13. 14. an Issue and two Indentures,
Mich. prox. Roll. 13. 14. 15. three Indentures entered. And now we are come to
the times of the happy restoration of his now most Sacred Majesty, let us see
therefore what has been the practice lately for these twenty years and upwards
last past. It appears in Mich. 12. Caroli Secundi Rotulo 19. that an Indenture
is there by Stone the Filizer entered, Paschae 14. Rotulo 18. Summers Ann. Car.
Secundi.
Filizer of Middlesex enters a special Imparlance for Thomas Jekill, Attorney
for the Plaintiff and late Secondary of this Court, Paschae 21. another Filizer
enters the like, Hill. 21. and 22. another Indenture, Paschae 23. Rotulo 16.
Judicium in replevin, cum retorn. habend. averia elongat. and Cap. in Withernam
agard, Hill. 25. and 26. Rotulis 18. and 19. defalt in case, Scire facias super
Vtlagar, and an Indenture, Trin. 26. Rotulo 19. Paschae 28. Rotulo 19. Hill. 28.
and 29. three several Indentures in each Term one, Mich. 29. Rotulo 19. Nihil
dicit in casu, Hill. 29. and 30. Rotulo 19. an Issue, Paschae 30. Rotulo 18. and
19. an Issue and defalt. Hill. 29. and 30. Rotulo 19. an Issue, In Paschae 30.
Rotulo 18. and 19. an Issue and defalt, Hilary 30. and 31. Rotulis 10. 18. 19.
another Indenture, nihil dicit and non assumpsit, Mich. 32. Rotulo 17. breve
erroris sur. Judicium in regno Hiberniae and Judicium affirmetur intrat. and
Rotulis 18. and 19. two Indentures, Paschae 33. Rotulo 19. another Indenture,
Trin. 33. Rotulis 18 and 19. several Issues and Judgments, Mich. 33. Rotulis
18. 19. 20. two Indentures and a Distring. awarded against a Peer, Hill. 33 and
34. Rotulis 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. several Issues and defalts, and Rotulis 17 and
19. two Indentures, Paschae 34. Rotulo 18. an Issue, Trin. 34. Rotulis 18 and
19. an Issue and a defalt, and in Mich. 34. Rotulis 18 and 19. the like, and in
Hill. 34 and 35. Rotulis 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18 and 19. the like as to
Issues and defalts, together also with two Indentures.

And now I do heartily beg the Reader's pardon, that I have tired his patience
with so many particular proofs in this nature, and truly I would not have done
it but have saved my self and him much labor herein, but that it lay upon me
to make out this matter; In which he may remember there are several Appeals of
Murder, Robery, and Mayhm said to be entered, which puts me now also in mind of
appealing to him, and not to him only, but unto all that shall read this
Treatise, whether they think the Filizers of this Court have not had a right to
enter Issues and other proceedings grounded upon Original Writs, if so, when,
where and how did they loose it? was it either by Act of Parliament, or by any
other due course of Law? and he that can tell me this, erit mihi magnus Apollo.
And thus much (if not too much) I hope may suffice, to prove that the Filizers
have a right to enter Issues brought by Original Writ, and other proceedings
thereupon on their own Rolls as Filizers.

Some directions in the way of practice by Sixthly.
Original Writ in this Court.
AND first, to proceed either to the arrest or to the Outlawry, you may
remember it has been said before, that this Court proceeds in its practice
three several ways; that is to say, by Original Writ, by Bill, and by
attachment of Privilege; and in that by Writ, this Court has not used to
proceed in some sort of Actions, that is to say, Debt, Detinue, Account and
Covenant; but in all other personal Actions it does. And as is elsewhere said,
The Original Writ issues out of the High-court of Chancery, to obtain which,
the Attorney for the Plaintiff must first consider the nature of his Clients
cause of action, and then draw up a precipe (as it is commonly called) of the
whole matter in the nature of a Count or Declaration, and therein he must be
sure to set forth the Defendants true Christian Name and Surname, together with
the Addition both of his Degree and Mystery as to his Profession and the place
where conversant; for if his Addition be omitted, all the Proceedings are void
by the Statute of Additions made in primo Henrici Quinti, cap. 5. by which it
is ordained and established, That in every Original Writ of Actions Personals,
Appeals and Indictments, and in which the Exigent shall be awarded, in the
names of the Defendants in such Writs Original, Appeals and Indictments,
Additions shall be made of their Estate or Degree, or Mystery, and of the
Towns, or Hamlets or Places and Counties of the which they were or be, or in
which they be or were conversant; And if by process upon the said Original
Writs, Appeals or Indictments, in the which the said Additions be omitted, any
Utlagaries be pronounced, that they be void, frustrate, and holden for none;
And that before the Utlagaries pronounced, the said Writs and Indictments shall
be abated by the exception of the Party, wherein the same, the said Additions
be omitted, Provided always that though the said Writs of Additions Personals
be not according to the Records and Deeds by the surplusage of the Additions
aforesaid, that for that cause they be not abated. And that the Clerks of the
Chancery, under whose names such Writs shall go forth written, shall not leave
out, or make omission of the said Additions as is aforesaid, upon pain to be
punished, and to make a Fine to the King by the Discretion of the Chancellor.
These are the very words of the Statute; So that you see hereby, that (debile
fundamentum fallit opus) which ought to be the Attorny's care to prevent, and
he must also take care to draw up his Precipe so in substance as he will stand
to it; for after the Original is sealed, there is no altering of it, without
new sealing it again, and if it be in Trespass, the form is thus;

Si A. B. fec. etc. tunc pon. C. D. nuper London, vel, Middlesex.
de, etc. genesis de placito quare vi and armis Clm. and Doum. (si in London) Clm.
(si in Middl.) ipsius A. apud, etc. fregit, Et alia enormia ei intulit ad In
Tusgr.
grave dampnum ipsius A. and contra pacem nostram, etc.

Ret. in banco Regis, a die Paschoe in 15 dies ubicunque, etc.

E. F. At. pro Quer.

Si, etc. ut antea, usque de placito quare Middlesex.
vi and armis in ipsum A. apud, etc. insult. fec. and ipsum verberavit,
vulneravit In tusgr. and insult.
and maletractavit, Ita quod de vita ejus desperabatur, Et alia, etc. ut antea;

Ret. ut antea.

Idem At.

Si, etc. ut antea usque de placito quare Middlesex.
vi and armis unum Mesuag. and viginti acras terrae cum pertin. in L. que G. H.
praefat. In ejectione firmae.
A. B. dimisit ad Terminum, qui nondum praeteriit intravit and ipsum a firma
sua praed. ejecit, and alia enormia, etc. ad grave dampnum, etc. Et contra
pacem nostram, etc.

Ret. ut antea.

Idem At.

Si, etc. ut antea, usque de placito quare London ss. In tusgr. sup. casum.
cum, etc. and sic recite le tout cause del action usque ad dampnum ipsius A.
B. Centum Librar. ut dicit, etc.

Ret. ut antea.

Idem At.

Note, that upon such Originals as are in Case, where the Damages do exceed
Forty pounds, there is a certain Fine due for the same to be paid to the King;
which is always received by the Cursitor, as follows, that is to say,

li. s. d. From 40 li. to 100 Marks 00 06 08 The King's Majesty's Fines upon
Original Writs.
From 100 Marks to 100 li. 00 10 00 From 100 to 200 Marks 00 13 04 From 133 li.
06 s. 8 d. to 166 li. 13 s. 04 d. 00 16 08 From 166 li. 13 s. 04 d. to 200 li.
01 00 00 And for every 100 Marks more 00 06 08 And for every 100 li. more 00 10
00

The Original Writ is the Warrant for the suing out of the Capias, and the
return of the Original is usually the Test of the Capias, except the return be
upon the Essoin-day before any Term, and then the Capias is Test the first day
of that Term; because it cannot be Test out of Term (although in Law to some
purposes the Term is begun on the Essoin-day.) And the common course is now (to
regain time) as it is used in the High-court of Chancery, to take out a
Subpoena first, and then after to bring in the Bill. So here to take out the
Capias first, and bespeak your Precipe, and sue out the Original afterward,
although it be supposed in Law to be sued out before; for that the Original
cannot be so speedily sued out at all times in the vacation time, but only
when the public Seals are open in Chancery, except you will get a private
Seal, which you may have, for indeed the High-court of Chancery is said to be
Officina Justitioe semper aperta, and therefore if there be a Precipe, as it is
before called, left with the Cursitor, and the Original made by that Precipe,
and sealed before the return of the Capias, it has usually been taken to be
good enough to warrant such Capias; and if such Precipe be delivered in to the
Cursitor within the first week of any Term, he will (if desired) make the
Original returnable the first return of the precedent Term, but take care to
lay it so as the cause of action may arise before the date of it. And when the
Original is sealed, the Sheriff of the County where the Action is laid must
return it thus; Pleg. de pros. Johannes Do. Richardus Roo. Infra nominat. C.
D. nichil habet in balliva mea per quod attach. potest: Respons. E. F. Ar. Vic.
And the return of the Capias must be always fifteen days or more after the
return of the Original, and so it must be likewise in all the other Process,
between the Test and return of each Writ; and this in all Proceedings as well
to the Outlawry as to the Arrest upon the Capias, except in one return only,
of in Cro. Animar. in every Michaelmas Term; which is made good by the Statute
of 17 Car. primi, Cap. 6. Which says, That all Writs and Process in personal
Actions hereafter to be made out of any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
and having day from tres Mich. until Cro. Animar. shall be good and effectual
in Law, notwithstanding there be not fifteen days betwixt the said quarto die
of the said tres Septimanas sancti Mich. and the days of Essoin of Cro. Animar.
any Law, Statute, or usage to the contrary heretofore notwithstanding; And if
the Action be laid in one County, and the Defendant live in another, upon a non
est inventus returned by the Sheriff of that County upon the Capias, the
Filizer thereof will make you out a Testat. Capias into any other County, and
if you proceed to the Outlawry, the Capias alias and plur. must be thus
returned; Infra nominat. C. D. non est inventus in balliva mea; Respons. E. F.
Ar. Vic. For the drawing of which Precipe to the Cursitor, the Plaintiff's
Attorney, as in other Cases, takes 4 d. per sheet, and after the Plur. is so
returned, he must carry it to the Filizer, and he will make out an Exigent and
Proclamation, and then deliver them to the respective Sheriffs; and at the time
they are returnable, (being both of one test and return, as the Statute
requires) he must call for the returns of them; and if there be not Hustings in
London, or County Court-days in the Country enough between the test and return
of the Exigent, as sometimes it may happen; Then he must carry the Exigent unto
the Filizer, and he will make out a writ of Allocat. for the remaining Hustings
or County Court days, and if upon the return day of it, or upon the Exigent
that went before it, or upon any special Capias to arrest, or any other Writ,
the Defendant do appear; then the Plaintiffs Attorney declares, and for drawing
his Declaration, he takes of his Clyent, 8 d. per sheet, and makes a Copy
thereof, and delivers the same to the Attorney for the Defendant, who pays
him 4 d. per sheet for such Copy, and the same Term he declares in, he calls
for a Plea, after that he has given rules for answer (which have usually
heretofore been given by the Filizer of that County where the action is laid)
and then draws up his Issue either general or special, and makes up the
Paper-Book himself (it being by Original) and be it either Issue or Demurrer,
he delivers a Copy of it to the Defendant's Attorney, and takes of him 4 d.
the sheet for the same, and if an Issue, he gives notice of Trial, (as in
other cases by Bill) then he takes out from the said Filizer a Venire facias,
Distring. Jur. and Subpoena, and then seals the Record of Nisi prius with the
Custos brevium, if it be not in Middlesex, if so, then with the Lord Chief
Justice, and some time before the day in Banck, which is always the Essoin-day
of the next Term after any Assizes if the action lie in the Country, or if in
London or Middlesex, then before the next Essoin-day after the Trial, he
brings the Issue to the said Filizer to be entered upon his Rolls, and in the
aforesaid Venire facias and Distring. there need not to be 15 days (as in other
process before Issue joined) between the Test and return of each Writ, and
this appears by the Statute before mentioned made in the 13th. year of his now
Majestye's Reign; The words of which Statute (amongst other matters) are these.
And whereas very many Suits commenced by Original Writs, have been protracted
and long delayed from Judgment and Execution, by reason of the necessity of
having fifteen days at the least, between the days of the Test, and the days
of Return of Writs now used in personal Actions, and also in Actions of
Ejectione firmoe, for Lands and Tenements; For remedy thereof, and for the more
easy expediting Trials, and the better and more speedy executing of Judgments
for the time to come, Be it farther enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in
all Actions of Debt, and all other personal Actions whatsoever, and also in all
Actions of Ejectione firmoe, for Lands or Tenements, now depending, or which at
any time hereafter shall be depending by Original Writ in either of his
Majesty's Courts aforesaid; after This Court of King's Bench being before
mentioned in this Statute.
any Issue therein joined to be tried by a Jury, and also after any Judgment
had or obtained, or to be had or obtained in either of the Courts aforesaid,
there shall not need to be fifteen days between the Teste-day, and the day of
Return of any Writ or Writs of Venire facias, habeas Corpora Jurator. or
distring. Jurator. Writs of Fieri facias, or Writs of Capias ad satisfaciend.
and that the want of fifteen days between the Teste-day and the day of Return
of any such Writ, shall not be, nor shall be assigned, taken or adjudged to be
any matter or cause of Error, any Law, Custom, Statute, Course or Usage to
the contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding; Provided nevertheless, that
this A Proviso not to extend to a Capias and Exigent thereupon after Judgment,
or to a Capias ad satisf. to make the Bail liable.
Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend or be construed to
extend to any Writ of Capias, whereon a Writ of Exigent after Judgment is to be
awarded, nor to Capias ad satisfaciend. against the Defendant, in order to make
any Bail liable, but that the same continue, and be as if this Act had never
been made. But to return to our former matter, when the Attorney for the
Plaintiff has obtained a verdict, and given rules, and signed his Judgment, he
then enters it up to the Filizer's Issueroll as aforesaid, and takes for his
Fees the like Fees as by Bill; But if the Defendant appear not at all, but
suffer himself to be returned outlawed upon the Exigent or Allocat, then he
brings the Exigent to the Filizer that made it out, or else he fileth such
Exigent himself with the Custos brevium of this Court; and then gets a
Certificate from him that it is filed, and brings it unto the Filizer, and
then he will make him out either a general or special Capias utlagat. And this
is all at present that may be thought necessary in this matter by way of
direction; Only this, let him take notice, that Hilary Term is not so
convenient a Term to begin to sue to the Outlawry in as other Terms are, for
the Defendant will not be outlawed then under four Terms, although the Action
be laid in London, because of the short vacation that is between Easter and
Trinity Term, and in any other he will in three, if the Original be returnable
the first return of the Term. Also to observe in his Writs (if he make them
himself and carry them to the Filizer to be signed) that as a man is always
said to be utlagat. outlawed; So a Woman is always said to be Waviat. waved,
that is to say, derelicta, left out or not regarded, because Women are not by
the Law obliged to be sworn in Leets to the King as Men are. And now, for the
testes and returns of his Process, he is hereby referred to a Modus return.
brevium, placed toward the end of this Book. And farther let him observe, that
if in an action of the Case, where the cause of action is at large set out, the
damage be laid in the Writ of Capias, to arrest to Ten pounds, or above, his
Client ought to have good Bail (but not so, if the Defendant appear upon the
Exigent or Allocat. although it be laid 500 li. damage.) And if such Action be
laid in London, the Defendant will be sooner outlawed in respect of the
Hustings there, than in any County; for that they are held in less time than
the County Courts are holden in; for there must be five Hustings returned upon
the Exigents in London, and five County Court days in the Counties; at which
the Defendant has been called, and has not appeared.

Also how to appear for the Defendant, either upon Arrest, or upon the Exigent,
or upon the reversal of the Outlawry.
AS to the appearing upon the Arrest Appearance upon arrest.
(if special Bail be required) it must be thus; The Defendants Attorney must
come to the Filizer, where the Action is laid, and enter his special
appearance, that is by giving in a note to him of the Bail, who they are, and
where they live, and then the Filizer will go with him before some Judge of
this Court, and put in the Bail before him, and then the Defendant's Attorney
must give in a note of the Bail, and before what Judge put in, unto the
Plaintiff's Attorney; and if he accepts of the Bail, he puts his hand to the
Bail-piece that he does so, and then he fileth it with the Custos brevium of
this Court, and if the Plaintiff's Attorney excepteth against the Bail, the
Defendant must get his Bail to justify themselves before the Judge, and yet if
after that the Plaintiff is not satisfied with the Bail, the Defendant must
either put in other Bail, or else justify the same upon oath in the Term-time
in Court; and then the Plaintiff is bound to accept them. And as to the
Appearance to the Exigent.
appearing on the Exigent there (as is said before) no Bail is to be given, but
only the Defendant is to enter his appearance with the Filizer per Attorn.
suum, and then taking from him a Supersedeas, Quia improvide, suggesting such
appearance in the Writ, which Writ he must deliver to the Sheriff. And as to
the appearing upon the reversal Appearance after reversal.
of the Outlawry, it is thus. The first thing the Defendants Attorney must do,
is, to come to the Filizer of the City or County where the Action is laid, and
know of him when the Plur. Capias was returnable, and then search the Filizer's
Rolls of that Term, and there he will find the Capias alias and plur. Exigent
and Proclamation awarded, together with the return of the Exigent to the Quinto
exact. upon which the Defendant stands outlawed; of all which he must take a
Copy from the Roll, and then come to the said Filizer to enter upon the said
Roll by way of averment, a defect in the proceedings, either against the
Statute of the one and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth, for want of a
Proclamation, or otherwise as the case may require; and then he prepares his
Bail-piece ready, and brings the Bail into Court, together with the
Defendant, and then causes the bundle or file of Writs of Proclamations to be
brought into Court, and by motion of Counsel at the Bar, alleging the want of
a Proclamation; and upon due search of the said File by the Secondary of the
Court, and none appearing to the Court to be filed, the Outlawry is reversed by
the Court, which is always pronounced by the Seniour Judge of the Court, if he
be present, if not, by the next; which reversal, together with the names of
such Bail who undertook that the Defendant shall appear to a new Original Writ
to be brought by the Plaintiff within two Terms against the Defendant, and to
satisfy the Condemnation, if he shall be convicted, is all to be entered by the
said Filizer up to the Process of Outlawry before entered, for entering of which
the Filizer's Fees are 4 d. the sheet. And the Court of Common Pleas have used
to make such Entries as may appear by certain Orders Vide Praxis utriusque
Banci, fol. 108. int. alia.
of that Court, made in the second year of Charles the First; The words
(amongst others) are these, And it is farther ordered, that all Reversals
hereafter made shall be entered upon the same Roll where the Exigent is awarded,
being the most proper and fittest place for the safety and quiet of all Persons
outlawed, and their Executours to find the said Reversal in future times, and
not upon other Terms and Rolls as is now used; Which also, by the several
Precedents of Entries of Reversals beforementioned, may appear to have been
anciently the practice of this Court. And in these and the like Cases, the
Defendants do in the Common Pleas appear by Attorney; But in this Court the
Defendant is obliged to appear in person with his Bail (except this Court upon
motion give leave to the Defendant to reverse per Attornatum.) The reason may
be presumed to be this, because upon all Outlawries in Criminal Causes in this
Court, the Defendants have been heretofore, and now are obliged to appear in
person to answer the contempts of the Law to the King, and thereby they were
immediately taken into custody for such contempts, or otherwise disposed of at
the discretion of the Court; and in every civil Cause likewise it is a great
contempt indeed of the Law, for the Defendant not to appear after so many
several Writs as go out against him before he is outlawed. But yet a late
Parliament thought the appearing in person so great a grievance to the Subject,
that it did receive a debate in the House of Commons upon a Bill then brought
in, but no Act passed thereupon for want of time, as is presumed, and whether
hereafter it may not be a matter fit to be farther debated, I shall leave to
the wisdom of the great Council of this Nation when assembled in Parliament.
But to return, it may be such Defendant has been obliged to appear in person
out of that high respect that ought to be given to the grandeur of this Court
(the King himself, as before is said, being supposed sitting there.) And to be
outlawed formerly in the Reign of King Alfred (and until a good while after
the Conquest) for Felony, as my Lord Coke has it in his First Institutes, Cap.
Villenage, Sect. 197. fol. 128. b. was very dangerous; for such Persons might
have been put to death by any man, as well as a Wolf, that hateful Beast,
might; For utlagatus and waviata Capita gerunt Lupina. But then says he, no
Man could have been outlawed, but for Felony; But you may see there how this
Inhumanity was restrained and altered in the Reign of Edward the Third. And now
our Laws are made more tender of life, though it be of such great Malefactors,
that so they may be punished or discharged by the hand of the Law only, which
nulli facit injuriam; And although then none could be outlawed, but for Felony,
yet, as he says there, that afterward in Bracton's time, and somewhat before,
Process of Outlawry was ordained to lie in all Actions that were Quare vi and
armis, which Bracton calls Delicta, for there the King shall have a Fine; But
since, says he, by diverse Statutes (speaking in general of such Proceedings,
and not of any Court in particular) Process of Outlawry does lie in Account,
Debt, Detinue, Annuity, Covenant; Action sur le Statute de 5 Rich. 2. Action
sur le Case, and in diverse other Common or Civil Actions. But to go on, he
says farther in his Chapter of continual Claim, Sect. 437. That there may be
other Causes of reversal, besides the want of a Proclamation, and that by plea
for matters apparent, as in respect of a Supersedeas variance, or other matter
apparent in the Record; And yet in these Cases (says he) some hold, That in
another Term, the Defendant is driven to his Writ of Error: And farther, if
the Defendant be arrested by a Capias utlagat. he ought not to be discharged
out of custody without a Supersedeas for the same, as appears by the last
mentioned Statute of the 13. of the now King, (the like certainly is requisite
in case where his Goods or Chattels are taken) or else, if he be taken, and
would reverse the Outlawry, then he may have a Habeas corpus to bring him into
Court to reverse such Outlawry; But if all the Process to the Outlawry be well
returned, entered and filed, then there is no way to reverse the same but by
Writ of Error, which comes in the next place to be handled.

How to reverse an Outlawry by Writ of Error.
IT has been a received Opinion that no Writ of Error lies returnable in this
Court upon any Action brought by Original Writ in this Court, but that it must
be returnable in the High-court of Parliament; but certainly that must be
intended where Judgment is had and obtained upon such Action, for every Writ of
Error supposes a Judgment of the Court given, for the words in every such Writ
are (Si Judicium inde reddit. sit) but in this case, where it is no Judgment of
the Court, but of the Coroners of the County against the Defendant for his
contempt, in not appearing upon the Exigent that he be outlawed, there this
Court has a power to reverse that Judgment within themselves by a Writ of
Error which may be called a Writ of Error coram nob. residen. and this
appears by the Register of Writs, folio 133. Title-errour in these words, Rex,
etc. Dilect. and fidelib. suis F. P. Milit. Capital. Justic. nostro and Sociis
suis Justiciariis nostris ad placita in Cur. nostra coram nob. tenend. assign.
Salutem, Quia in recordo and processu ac etiam in promulgatione utlagariae in
T. S. nuper de K. in Com. H. Yeoman in London, nuper promulgat. and coram nobis
ut dicitur retornat. Error intervenit manifestus ad grave dampnum ipsius, T.
sicut ex querela sua accepimus. Nos error. si quis fuerit modo debito corrigi
and eidem, T. plenam and celerem Justitiam fieri volentes in hac part vobis
mandamus, Quod si utlagaria praedicta coram nobis retornat. existit, tunc visis
recordo and processu utlagariae praed. and vocat. coram vobis quos in hac part
fore videritis evocand. ulterius pro adnullatione utlagariae praedictae fieri
facias quod de jure and secundum legem and consuetud. Regni nostri Angliae
fuerit faciend. T. etc. But this Writ of Error is not to be made by the
Filizer although inserted here, but (as all others) does belong to the Cursitor
to make, the which, together with the Return thereof, and all the Process of
Outlawry thereupon must be entered on the Filizer's Rolls of that County where
the Action lies, and Bail must also be given as in other cases of reversal. And
indeed were it that such Writ of Error could not be brought returnable in this
Court but in Parliament (considering their intervals) what great prejudice
would arise thereby to such Defendants against whom all Writs and Process are
duly returned and filed, which the Attorney for the Plaintiff may do if he
think it fit; though it is usual to forbear filing of the Proclamation, thereby
to let the Defendant come in (if he will) to reverse the Outlawry for want of a
Proclamation, by motion in Court, as before is set forth, and so may appear to
the Action. And this short account may suffice as to this matter, it being but
very seldom used to file all the Process, whereby to put the Defendant to bring
a Writ of Error to reverse such Outlawry.

How to proceed to the Outlawry after Judgment.
IT has been made a Question, whether such Process could lie in this Court or
not; and the reason alleged has been, for that after a Recovery of a Judgment
had and obtained (although upon an Action brought by Original Writ) such
recovery is a Debt; and no Action will lie for this, it being grounded upon
matter of Record but an Action of Debt; in which Action this Court has not
used to proceed by Original Writ. But in answer thereunto, in this Case the
Plaintiff does not bring his Action, but only as it were pursues the having of
his Execution; to which end the Attorney for the Plaintiff is to take out from
the Filizer a Capias ad satisfaciendum directed to the Sheriff of that County
where the Action is laid, and upon a non est inventus returned and filed, the
Filizer of that County will make out an Exigent. post Capias; and as is said
before in the said Statute of the thirteenth year of his now Majesty's Reign
(which has made a provision there for the proceedings in such Cases) that
there must be fifteen days between the Test and Return of such Cap. So that if
there were nothing else to prove it but the words of that Statute that were
sufficient in it self. But it may easily be farther proved that several
Filizers of this Court have made out the same for several Attorneys; It appears
by the late Filizer of London's Books, that in 9 Car. primi, he made out one
for one Barnard an Attorney, and the like in the same year for one Woodward an
Attorney; and in the year 1651. the like for one Walpole an Attorney; and in
the year 1662. the like for one Marshall an Attorney; all Attorneys of this
Court, and the now Filizer of Yorkshire has done the like; and also the now
Filizer of London has done the like, and that not only upon Judgments
recovered upon Actions brought by Original Writ, but also upon Judgments
affirmed upon Writs of Error brought upon Judgments given in inferior Courts,
in Actions of the Case, and the like Actions that are usually brought in this
Court by Original Writ. And this Proceeding being very rare and seldom that it
runs to so far a Line, a few Precedents in this nature must serve the turn, and
may be sufficient to prove that it is at the Election of the Plaintiff if he
pleases to proceed as well to the Outlawry after Judgment, whereby the
Defendant is again warned as it were to come in and pay the Plaintiff his
damages recovered, as to bring any action of Debt upon the said Judgment.

Somewhat concerning Imparlances upon Suits brought by Original Writ.
IT is to be presumed the course of this Court in this particular is not
altered since the year of our Lord, 1654. wherein in Michaelmas Term in that
year this Court made several Orders and Rules, and published them in Print
under the hands of the then Judges to wit Henry Rolls, Richard Ask and Richard
Newdigate, and among them these following. For as much as some inconveniences do
some times happen to the Plaintiffs by entering their Declarations in special
Actions, It is therefore ordered, that the Plaintiff in such special actions
shall have liberty to enter Imparlances the next Term following, entering the
same of the first Term with an Incipitur as it has been usual, and that all
other Imparlances be duly entered before any Issues, Demurrers or Judgments
thereupon be entered. That if a Defendant appear the first Term, and give no
rules to declare, the Defendants Attorney may the second Term be compelled to
accept a Declaration with an Imparlance, and the Declaration may be entered as
of that Term with an Imparlance over to the next Term, or in the first Term
with an Incipitur as before as the case shall require. That if the Plaintiff
declare not the second Term, though the Defendant give no Rules, yet a Nonsuit
may be entered at the end of the second Term upon a continuance over by him, by
dies datus, but not the third Term or after. Upon a mere real action, an
Imparlance to be of course. That in Ejectment or any personal Action, if the
appearance be the first return of Hilary or Trinity-Term no Imparlance without
consent or special rule, In causes (other than London or Middlesex) if the
appearance be before Crastin. Martini or Mensem Paschae, no Imparlance without
consent or special rule, but if upon or after those returns an Imparlance of
course. In London or Middlesex if the appearance be before Chrastin.
Ascensionis Domini, or before the last return of any other Term no Imparlance
without consent or special rule, but the Defendant to plead as of that Term
within 14 days after the end of the Term upon rule given to answer, but if of
Crastin. Ascensionis or the last return then an Imparlance of course. If a Writ
be returnable Quinque Paschae, or the last return of any Term, the Defendant
giving rules and calling for a Declaration, if it be not delivered four days
before the Essoin-day of the ensuing Term or more, a Nonsuit to be entered; And
likewise in the Court of Common Pleas by their Orders made and printed in the
year of our Lord, 1672. If the Defendant appears upon an Arrest upon a Clausum
fregit (which is a general Writ, and may be said to be the Common Pleas
Latitat) he must have an Imparlance of course, but if the Writ whereupon he was
arrested be special according to the truth of the action, and returnable the
first or second return in any Term, so as a venire facias may issue forth,
there the Defendant ought to answer the first Term in all personal and mixed
actions, but in real actions the Defendant shall have one Imparlance of course.
So that it appears by this order of the Common Pleas, that the true reason of
the Defendant's having an Imparlance is grounded upon his not knowing by such a
general Writ, what he is arrested for; But here it may be objected, that there
will not at any time need such an Imparlance in this Court, because (as is said
before) it has been always the constant course of this Court to set forth the
true cause of action in the Capias or such like Writs, that so the Defendants
may know what they are to appear to, In answer of which (not denying but
agreeing wholly with what is objected) it was the opinion of a very learned
Judge of this Court lately deceased, and who was also formerly a Judge in the
Common Pleas, and so did very well understand the practice of both Courts,
(when an Attorney for a Defendant by Summons appeared before him,) did order
that Attorney to take a Declaration in an action of the case by Original Writ,
although his Client had been sued to the Exigent but in trespass only, and his
reason was that the only end that the Plaintiff had to sue the Defendant to
the Exigent was but in order to make him appear to his suit, and now that he
had appeared it was but reason he should take a Declaration in any other
personal action by Original, that this Court could hold Plea of. And for the
Entering of these Imparlances (as it is in the Common Pleas) so it is in this
Court, there are Imparlance Rolls on which the Declaration and Imparlance are
entered, and Issue rolls on which the said Declaration and Issue are entered, and
if the Imparlance roll be right, and the Issue roll be wrong, the Imparlance
roll is the Warrant to amend the Issue roll by, but if both happen to be wrong,
then they are to be amended by the Original Writ it self, which is the ground
of all the subsequent proceedings.

How to plead an Outlawry, either in abatement or bar of any Action.
THe first thing you are to do, is to come to the Filizer where the action is
laid, and search with him in his Exigent Book to see if such person (as you
look after) be Outlawed, if so, then to bespeak of him a general Capias
Vtlagat. then seal it and affix it to your Plea, for if it be pleaded in
disability of the person it must be pleaded as my Lord Coke says First
Institutes. fol. 128. b.
forthwith sub pede Sigilli, (unless the Record be in the same Court,) But if
it be pleaded in Bar, and it be denied, there must be a day given to bring it
in, and if a man be Outlawed at the suit of any one man, all men shall take
advantage of this personal disability. If a Defendant plead an Outlawry in the
Plaintiff in disability of his person, and the Plaintiff after that purchase a
Charter of Pardon, the Defendant shall answer because the Charter has restored
the Plaintiff to the Law; So note the disability abateth not the Writ, but
disinableth the Plaintiff until he obtains a Charter of Pardon or reverseth
the Outlawry some other way, If the ground or cause of the action be forfeited
by the Outlawry as my Lord Coke says in the place before mentioned then may
the Outlawry be pleaded in Bar of the action, as in an action of Debt detinue,
etc. (but these as is said before this Court has not used to hold plea of by
original Writ) and why it has not, I know no reason but the custom of the
Court, for the Statute of the 25. of Edward the 3. Cap. 17. The title of which
Statute is thus, Process of Exigent shall be awarded in Debt, Detinue and
Replevin says in general (speaking of no particular Court of Common Law) in
these words. Item it is accorded, that such process shall be made in a Writ of
Debt and Detinue of Chattels, and taking of Beasts by Writ of Capias, and by
process of Exigend by the Sheriffs return, as is used in a Writ of account,
Which (as by the Statute of the 52. of Henry the 3. Cap. 23. appears) was
against Bailiffs of Lords, by attachment of their Bodies, so here after the
Exigent returned it is by Capias Vtlagat. But in real actions or in personal
where Damages be uncertain (as in Trespass of Battery, of Goods, of breaking
his Close and the like) and are not forfeited by the Outlawry, there the
Outlawry must be pleaded in disability of the person. And in the aforementioned
Orders and Rules of this Court, among others it is ordered in this case, that
in the pleading of an Outlawry the mean process be not repeated, but the
Exigent and Outlawry joined to the commencing of the suit; The Court then being
very tender and careful of putting the Subject to any unnecessary charge made
the Pleading to be as short as possibly it could. And thus much may suffice as
to this manner of Pleading.

Where Suits by Original Writ ought to be laid, and when the Visne may be
altered.
AS to this matter it lies wholly in the breast of the Court upon motion in
what cases to permit the changing or alteration of the Visne, but generally the
same is never granted but upon some Affidavit, and by the former Orders and
Rules of this Court before recited, It is ordered, that actions upon the Case,
Trespass for Goods, Assault or Imprisonment, arising in any English County, be
laid in their proper Counties, unless they arise where the Justices of Nisi
prius seldom come, and because Trespass and Trover for Goods, Battery,
Imprisonment and Slander must needs be notorious in what County they arise the
Attorney knowingly laying them out of their proper Counties, unless in the
cases before expressed, or for such other causes as shall be allowed by the
Judges of the Court and duly made to be true, to be severely punished. That
although the Declaration be delivered seven days before the last day of the
next preceding Term or after, yet before Plea, upon Oath made the visne may be
changed upon motion in the said Transitory actions the next Term after, and the
Defendant to plead to the new action, as he should have done in the other
without delay. That the visne may be changed upon Oath before, though the
Defendant come in by Exigent. And in Styles his practical Register, fol. 533.
it is said that in Transitory actions, the Plaintiff after the Essoin-day of
the subsequent Term after the appearance shall not alter his own visne though
he would pay Costs or give Imparlance, which seems to imply that he may do it
the same Term of the appearance with leave of the Court upon motion as
aforesaid; But this being a discretionary act of the Court, little else shall
be said, but left to the pleasure of the Judges of this Court, who never do it,
without they see some necessary reason for it.

How to proceed so, as to have a special Capias Utlagat. together with the
Inquisition thereupon taken, sent into the Exchequer, and to get a Lease from
the King of the Defendants Lands.
THe way of this proceeding in this Court is much different from that in the
Court of Common Pleas, For there the Attorney for the Plaintiff bringing in the
special Capias Vtlagat. with the Inquisition thereupon taken annexed, into the
Outlawry Office of that Court and delivering thereof to the Clerk of the
Outlawries there, the said Clerk forthwith makes a Transcript of the Writ,
Return and Inquisition, in a large Exemplifying Character, and sets his own
name to the bottom of it, and then he delivers it to the Attorney for the
Plaintiff who carries it into the Exchequer; But in this Court, the practice
is, and long has been, to go a farther way about, and what the reason is for
it, is not well known, but conjectured to be, either that of the Grandeur of
this Court (as is said before) or else to punish the Defendant the more for
adventuring to run so high a contempt against the King his Crown and Dignity as
not to appear in this Court after so many several Process against him, but to
suffer himself to be Outlawed, and this to be by a pecuniary punishment arising
by the charges of getting a Lease of his Lands from the King, which must all
come out of his Estate at the last; but not to detain you any longer, the way
is thus, The Attorney for the Plaintiff must bring the special Capias Vtlagat.
and Inquisition annexed into that Filizer's Office who made it out, for he (as
is said before) is Clerk of the Outlawries as well as Filizer, and he will make
you a Transcript of the Writ, Return and Inquisition, as is before said the
Clerk of the Outlawries does in the Common Pleas; Then the said Attorney takes
back the same together with the said Transcript, and then fileth the Writ and
Inquisition with the Custos brevium of this Court, and then goes to the
Cursitor of the County where the Lands lie, mentioned in the said Inquisition;
and he makes him a Writ of Certiorari to certify the said Writ, Return and
Inquisition so filed as aforesaid into the high Court of Chancery, which
Certiorari he carries to the said Custos brevium who allows the same with
the Lord Chief Justice of this Court, and then the Attorney delivers the said
Transcript to the Custos brevium who affixeth it to the Certiorari, and then
the Custos brevium seals up the same and delivers it to the Attorney under
Seal, who carries it forthwith into the Petty-Bag-Office belonging to the said
high Court of Chancery, where it is filed of Record, Out of which Office, the
same is sent by a Writ of Mittimus into the Court of Exchequer, into the King's
Remembrancers-Office there, where it is likewise filed of Record, after which
the said Attorney for the Plaintiff, retains one of the Attorneys of that
Office, who will prosecute the matter so in that Court as to gain a Lease from
the King to be granted to the Plaintiff, who shall thereby hold the Lands
demised for the Term therein mentioned, that is to say, for so long time as the
same shall remain in the King's hands; And if after the Outlawry shall be
pardoned or reversed by due course of Law, and the Defendant thereby restored
to all that he has lost by that Outlawry, then the Attorney for the Defendant
applying himself to one of the said Attorneys of the King's Remembrancer's
Office aforesaid, and making the same appear, he will get the King's Hands
taken off the Estate, either by sueing out a Writ of Amoveas Manus, or by
Petition or motion in Court, or otherwise, according to the custom used in
that Court.

Somewhat concerning the drawing of Declarations by Original Writ.
IT has been formerly the practice both of this Court, and the Court of
Common Pleas, to repeat the cause of Action twice in the Declaration; that is
to say, to the Writ, and to the Count, as may appear both by Rastal's and
Coke's Books of Entries; but it is now in some sort of Actions left off in the
Common Pleas, and in this Court also, by the former orders mentioned among
others it was ordered, For avoiding of long and unnecessary repetitions of the
Original Writ in Actions upon the Case, and Personal Actions upon Penal
Statutes, That Declarations in Actions of Trespass upon the Case, or personal
Actions of any general Statute, namely Huy and Cry, Monopolies, or for a Suit
in the Admiralty, and such like, other than Debt, repeat not the Original Writ
but only the nature of the Action, viz. A. B. was attached to answer C. D. in
a Plea of Trespass upon the Case, or in a Plea of Trespass and Contempt against
the form of the Statute; and that for the avoiding of the Common Bar and new
Assignment, the Declaration upon an Original Quare clausum fregit, may mention
the place certainly, and so prevent the use and necessity of it. But by these
Orders it does not appear (none but long Actions being therein mentioned) that
Trespass, and Trespass and Assault, and Trespass and Ejectment, being very
short Declarations are included therein, but left to be declared in as
formerly, both as to the Writ and Count, and so to be laid twice as heretofore
has been used in this Court.

The manner of removing Actions or Plaints out of Inferior Courts into this
Court, and after that how to proceed in them.
AS to removing of Causes by Writs of Error, Certior. Habeas Corpus, or the
like, I shall pass them over as being matters very well known by most
Practisers in this Court, and shall only say somewhat of removing Plaints out
of such Inferior Courts, as County Courts, or Sheriffs Courts, and Court
Barons, or Manor Courts, but more especially of County Courts, and in them
touching Plaints in Replevin there entered, and sued without Writ out of the
Chancery, as it is said in Fitz. Not. brevium, fol. 170. if the Plaintiff or
Defendant will remove such Plaints, he ought to sue a Writ of Recordare out of
the Chancery, directed unto the Sheriff of that County, in whose Court the
Plaint is entered, vide the Writ it self there at large, which I here for
brevity omit; whereby it appears, that the Plaintiff may remove such Plaint
by such Writ of Recordare, without any cause shown in the Writ; but the
Defendant cannot without showing cause for it in the Writ. And the like he must
do in a Writ of Pone, which removes such Plaints, if such Replevin be sued by
Writ out of the Chancery, and both these Writs may be returnable in this Court;
and in the Natura brevium aforesaid you may find several Causes that may be
inserted on the behalf of the Defendant; and when such Cause or Plaint in
Replevin is removed either by the Plaintiff or Defendant, for in Replevin they
are as it were both Plaintiffs in this Court; the Defendant must enter his
appearance with the Filizer of that County, out of which the Plaint is removed,
and give a rule with him for the Plaintiff to declare; and if the Plaintiff
does not declare by the time limited in that rule, against the Defendant, or
if he do declare, and the Defendant avoweth or makes Cognizance, and upon the
Issue tried, or by defalt in the Plaintiff, the Judgment be for the Defendant
or Avowant, then the Attorney for such Defendant may have in such case from the
said Filizer a Writ of Return. habend. and Writ of Enquiry for damages, and
upon the Sheriffs return of this Writ, quod averia elongat. then the said
Filizer will make a Capias in Withernam to take other Cattle of the
Plaintiff's, and if the Sheriff upon that does return, that the Plaintiff has
no Cattle that he can take in Withernam, then the Filizer will make you a
Capias against the Plaintiff's Body; and so proceed to Outlawry. And if the
Plaintiff do declare that the Defendant yet has and does detein the Cattle,
etc. and the Defendant appears, and afterward makes defalt, the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment to recover all in damages, as well the value of the Cattle,
as his damages for taking of them, and his Costs; and to that end, the Attorney
for the Plaintiff may have a Writ of Enquiry of damages from the said Filizer,
the same proceedings in case it be in a Replevin for any dead Chattells, etc.
And if a Replevin be sued by Plaint in the Court of any other Lord than in the
County Court before the Sheriff, as in the Court Barons or Manor Courts, there
it shall be also removed by a Writ of Accedas ad Cur. and the proceedings
therein the same as before is said: And if the Sheriff in any case return a
tarde, there may be an alias and pluries had, and if a Replevin be within any
Liberty or Franch^se, and the Sheriff return upon the Writ of Replevin (if it
be by Writ) that he has commanded the Bailiff of the Franchise, who has given
him no answer, or that the Bailiff will make no deliverance, then the Plaintiff
may have a Non omittas to the Sheriff, commanding him to enter into the said
Liberty or Franchise, and make the return, and if the Sheriff do it not, then
the Plaintiff may have an alias and plur. non omittas, and so a plur. ad
infinitum, etc. But if the Sheriff do not return the plur. replevin
abovementioned, then the Plaintiff may have an Attachment against the Sheriff,
directed to the Coroners of the said County: Vide the Statute de Ann. 17 Car.
Secundi nunc Regis, etc. Cap. 7. made for a more speedy and effectual
proceeding upon Distresses and Avowries for Rents; in which you will find some
former proceedings in Replevin much altered by that Statute.

Some Reasons impartially offered, to show how it has come to pass, that the
Practice in this Court by Original Writ has decreased, and that by Bill
increased; and what has occasioned some Entries of Issues, and other
proceedings to be made, as well on the Chief Clerk's Rolls, as on the Filizer
's Rolls.
THE first and greatest cause or reason (as is imagined) of the increase of the
one, and the decrease of the other has been, and now is, from the settled
residence of the Kings of England at their Palace of Westminster, in the County
of Middlesex, for in that County where they have resided, it has always
heretofore been used in such Actions as were not proceeded in by Original Writ,
to take out a Bill or Precept rather (and more properly) directed to the
Sheriff of that County, to take the Defendant to bring him before the King at a
certain day after a certain Return in the Term, and then that Office of the
Bills of Middlesex was an Office of great profit, although but small Fees
belonging to it, by reason of the great number of them that were then taken
out; and upon a non est inventus returned, there went out a Testatum (which
has since that time gained the name of a Latitat) into any other Foreign
English County; and this was grounded upon a Plaint brought before the King
himself at Westminster; and that it was so heretofore, may appear by several
Files of them now remaining in the former upper Treasury belonging to this
Court; a Copy of such Plaint and Precept I shall here set down as follows;
viz.

Philippus Byrd queritur de Johanne Middles. ss.
Bateman de eo quod ipse decimo die Junii Annis Regnorum Domini Philippi and
Dominae Mariae Regis and Reginae nunc primo and The Plaint.
secundo vi and armis, videlicet gladiis, etc. Clausum ipsius Philippi apud
Hendon in Com. predict. fregit and intravit, Et alia enormia ei intulit ad
dampnum ipsius Philippi Centum Solidorum and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis
and dictae Dominae Reginae nunc, etc.

Pleg. de pros. Johannes Do. Richardus Roo. On the back of which Bill or
Plaint, it is thus written, Ca' r. Jovis post 18. sancti Martini.

Precept. est Vic. quod attach. Johannem Middles. ss. The Precept.
Bateman, Ita quod sit coram Domino Rege and Domina Regina apud Westminster. die
Jovis prox. post 18. sancti Martini ad respondend. Philippo Byrd de placito
transgr. Et habeas ibi tunc hoc precept.

per. Bill.

Coverd.

On the back of which Precept, it is thus returned, Def. infra nominat. nichil
habet in balliva nostra per quod possit attach.

Respons. Thomae Leigh and Johannis Machell, Vic.

Afterward the Latitat followed (as now it is called) but then rather styled a
Testatum into any other County, and I find it differs not at all from the now
present Latitat, but only in a few words in the latter part of this Sentence
following (and although few yet very remarkable) Super quo in Cur. nostra coram
nobis testat. existit quod pred. A. B. latitat and discurrit in Com. tuo mala
quam plurima ibidem perpetrand. as may appear by the Files of Latitat's there
remaining; by which you see, that both the Plaint and Precept thereupon do
suggest a tort or wrong by a Trespass done to the Plaintiff, although possibly
that was not the true cause of Action, and afterward suggesting in the Latitat
a malefeasance, by the Defendant perpetrated in another County; and these
Plaints and Precepts thereupon were so numerous then, and the advantage of
receiving and filing of them of so great moment, that they have been formerly
and are now likewise always excepted out of the grant to the Custos brevium of
this Court by the Lord Chief Justice thereof (as reserved to himself) amongst
other things therein excepted, in these words, (except. factur. Record. de Nisi
prius in Com. Middlesex and Transcript. and certification. super brev. errorum
and reception. and filation. de lez Queriturs and attachiament. in eadem Cur.
and conservat. Record. de Attinct. cum Feod. ad inde pertinen') as may appear
by several such grants now remaining upon Record in this Court; and then always
such Bill or Precept went out first into that County of Middlesex, where the
King was then resident, to take the Defendant, if he might be found therein to
answer the Plaintiff in such Plaint, before there went a Testatum into any
other County; and that which was then really done, as to the taking out of such
Bill or Precept of Middlesex, is now only suggested in every Latitat; So that
when former Kings at any time have adjourned the Terms to any remote place in
any other County, upon any necessitous occasion, as the Plague, or the like,
(as they have often done) there has always been a Bill or Precept taken out in
that County to arrest any Defendant if within that County, and if not, then one
always suggested in any Testatum or Latitat into another County; and so it was
(no doubt) when the Term was adjourned to Reading in Berkshire, in the first
year of the Reign of Charles the First; and so it was likewise (to my own
knowledge) when the Term of Saint Michael, Anno Dom. 1665. was adjourned by our
now Sovereign Lord the King unto Oxford, by reason of the great Plague that
then was raging both in the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs
thereof: For then there was a Bill or Precept of Oxford, to take any Defendant
there.

Secondly, Another reason may be drawn from the constant practice and course of
this Court for many years (as is elsewhere said) to suppose every Defendant
that is sued by Bill in this Court to be in Custod. Mareschalli of this Court,
who really is not; whereby to entitle the Court to a jurisdiction of the Cause,
and whereas the proceedings by Original Writ are, by Capias, Pone or Distring.
and the like, in order to make the Defendant appear before the King in this
Court; the proceedings by Bill suppose him to have appeared, and that he is in
actual custody of the Marshall of the Marshalsey of this Court, which if every
such Defendant so were, the now Prison of the said Marshall would not contain
them, no not if it were ten times as big as it is.

Thirdly, Another reason may be this, because sometimes it happens, that the
Attorneys for the Plaintiffs have not had sufficient instructions from their
Clients how to draw their Precipes to the Cursitor, not knowing the true cause
of Action; and therefore for want of that, have taken out a Latitat de placito
transgr. upon which the Plaintiff might have declared formerly in any Action,
until of late (as is before said) it was enacted, that a Defendant should not
be held to bail, except the true cause of Action were particularly expressed in
the Writ; since which time, there is inserted in the Latitat, not only ad
respondend. the Plaintiff de placito transgr. but also ac etiam billae ipsius
Quer. versus ipsum Def. pro Centum libris de debito secundum consuetud. Cur.
nostrae coram nobis exhibend. Or thus, pro non performation. promiss. and
assumption, ipsius Defenden. ad dampnum ipsius Quer. Centum Librar. secundum
consuetud. etc. and so to vary in the ac etiam according to the nature of the
Action; and this being found formerly, and also now at this day likewise, to be
a more easy and quick way to arrest the Defendant (because it requires not so
full a setting forth of the cause of Action in the Writ of Latitat, as in Writ
of Capias, to arrest by Original) it has gained ground in this Court.

And as to that other matter, how it has come to pass, that some Entries of
Issues, and other Proceedings have been made, as well on the Chief Clerk's
Rolls, as on the Filizer 's Rolls, and this since the practice has been so
much by Bill; the reason of it may be this.
FOR that the Clerks to the former chief Clerks of this Court, for many years
past, have been permitted to practice as Attorneys (who very anciently, as is
conceived, did not.) For the Reader is desired to take notice (as is elsewhere
before said) that there are three sorts of Persons that now have privilege
allowed them in this Court as Practisers.

That is to say; First, The Filizers of this Court, styled (as before) Clerks
of our Sovereign Lord the King, assigned to inroll Pleas, etc. that is to say,
by Original Writ only, they made out all Process thereupon, and entered them,
and all Issues joined thereupon, and practiced as Attorneys, as the Presentment
hereafter mentioned sets forth.

Secondly, The Clerks of the Office, or Clerks to the chief Clerk of our
Sovereign Lord the King assigned to enroll Pleas, etc. that is to say, by Bill
only; and these Clerks had Seats in the Ancient King's Bench Office in the
Temple, which was burnt in the late dreadful Fire of London. The said Office
it self was of so great and large an extent, and the Seats so many in it, that
it looked more like a Church than an Office, and incited Strangers to offer up
their Devotions there, when at first they came into it; it was as long, taking
in some small rooms at each end of it (which served for the Secondary, for the
Clerk of the Rules, for the Clerk of the Declarations, and the Clerk of the
Doggets) as Westminster Hall is broad (which says Speed in his Chronicle, fol.
446. Sect. 31. is 74 foot of Assise) with a proportionable breadth, containing
from end to end four rows of Seats, much like the now Six Clerks Office, and
there did these Clerks to the chief Clerk anciently sit, and were therefore
called sitting, entering Clerks, although of late they have lost that name, and
at this day they are called, for distinction sake, by one of those expressions,
to wit, Entering Clerks; and anciently did only enter for the Attorneys of the
Court upon their Masters the then chief Clerk's Rolls, all manner of
Declarations, special Pleadings, and Issues by Bill only, and Judgments,
Demurrers, Defalts, Confessions, and all other Proceedings relating thereunto,
but did not themselves practice as Attorneys.

Thirdly, The Attorneys of the Court, commonly called, for distinction sake,
Attorneys at large, for that they belonged to no certain Office, but were as it
were at large in their practice, and lived in the several Counties of this
Kingdom, and had always correspondency, and still have, with one of the said
Clerks of the chief Clerk, to sue out, and send them down their Writs; and to
enter their Issue-rolls for them as aforesaid, and these Attorneys were the
only men of business heretofore: And such Entering Clerks as aforesaid, each
Prothonotary in the Court of Common Pleas formerly had, and now has, belonging
to his Office, who (as I have lately been informed by a very ancient Clerk, to
one of the Prothonotaries in that Court lately deceased) did only heretofore
enter for others, and did not practice for themselves as Attorneys; and that it
was so used also in that Court, according to his Information, may appear by the
Orders of that Court made in the eighth year of the Reign of Charles the First
The words (among other Orders) are these, That the Offices of Entring-clerk,
and Attorney should be distinct, and not promiscuously used by one Person; and
that no Clerk of a Prothonotary's Office should hereafter prosecute and defend
as an Attorney of that Court any personal Action whatsoever, upon pein to be
suspended and punished by the Court. This Order among others is printed in
Praxis utriusque Banci, folio 133. and I do believe remains now hung up in the
Common Pleas Treasury, together with diverse former Orders made for entering
Appearances and Issues with the Filizers of that Court (although, it is true as
to the Issues, they do not so now) which I here for brevity sake omit, and
only cite this to show that the Filizers there did enter such Issues, as
appears by Orders made there in Michaelmas Term, in the fifteenth and sixteenth
years of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; printed likewise in the said Book, folio
59. and likewise remaining in the said Treasury; and by some agreement
heretofore and since that time made between the Filizers and the
Prothonotaries, the Prothonotaries now have the Entries of all Issues; but it
is impossible to show any such agreement between the Filizers of this Court,
and any former chief Clerk or Clerks; for if it had been so, how comes it to
pass that they have continued for above 200 years past until now (as has been
before evidently proved) to enter Issues upon their own Rolls? Nay, I have seen
a Copy of a Petition which was presented unto Queen Elizabeth by John Rooper
and Thomas Rooper (then chief Clerks or Prothonotaries of this Court) about the
latter end of Her Majesty's Reign, humbly beseeching Her Majesty not to grant
away any part of their Office as chief Clerks unto one Knyvet, who was then
begging of Her Majesty, the making or marking of the Latitat, and Bills of
Middlesex, and filing of the Declarations in this Court: To which Petition
there was annexed several Reasons, laid down by the said chief Clerks, for
which they humbly hoped Her Majesty would stay the passing of any such Grant;
and among the said Reasons (as their own concession) this was one, That the
Filizers of this Court have used to have the Entries of all general Issues in
Actions brought by Original Writ in this Court; the Copy of the said Petition
and Reasons was heretofore found in the hands of one William Man, Esquire, then
Secondary of this Court; whom I find also was in the fifth year of the Reign of
King James, Filizer of Kent, and the City of Canterbury in this Court, as may
appear by his Admission entered in Michaelmas Term, in the year aforesaid, Roll
393. Whereby it appears that the said Court then thought fit to appoint a
Filizer to be Secondary of the Court. And although the chief Clerks (as is said
before) have heretofore entered some, yet that does not determine any thing of a
right in them so to have done; for it is not wonder at all, that like as Fishes
in the Sea, the great ones devour the less, so the great Officers (especially
backed with interest) the lesser: And all this (as is conceived) has been
occasioned thus, when that heretofore for fear that other Courts of Common Law
should outstrip this in practice, all the three sorts of Persons
beforementioned were permitted to practice as Attorneys promiscuously one
among another; then (and not before) was it that all right Entries were brought
out of order, and drawn out of their true and ancient chanel, and then it came
to pass that Entries of Issues by Original Writ were so frequently entered on
the chief Clerks Rolls by Attorneys that were then Clerks to such chief Clerks,
for that they were obliged to bring as much Grist to their Master's Mill as
they could; so that what Entries have been so made by such Clerks, were made
out of respect to their said Masters, and not ex debito, and it may be
sometimes also for fear of displeasing the then Secondaries of the Court; for
if otherwise, then were twenty nine able Clerks and Attorneys mistaken at
least, (not to say perjured, for nil nisi bonum de mortuis) who made the
Presentment upon oath of the Fees placed toward the end of this Book. And now
after all that has been said as to this matter, I would not be misapprehended
by being thought hereby to endeavor to lessen the practice of this Court by
Bill, and to advance that by Writ, or to detract any thing from the Clerks of
the Office as they are Attorneys (for whom I have a very great respect, and do
verily believe they will not be hereafter guilty of making mis-entries, as the
former Clerks have done, mentioned in the Preface to this Book.) And I do
heartily wish well to the Court in both the ways of practice, and that the
Suitors or Clients therein may do as they shall be advised by their learned
Council, or careful and able Attorneys, and take their Elections which way to
proceed either by Writ or Bill; what I have now said being by way of argument
only and no otherwise (to prove how it has come to pass that some Entries of
Issues by Original Writ have been made on the chief Clerks Rolls) and may
possibly carry a probability of reason in it; It is a Court in which I have had
my Education, and therefore am obliged to desire the prosperity of it, which I
do not in the least doubt of but it will enjoy, under the wise and prudent
management of the practice thereof in both cases by Writ and by Bill, by the
now most Reverend and Learned Judges sitting therein, unto whose great and
profound Wisdom, I do most humbly submit whatsoever I have said in this small
Treatise, having designed nothing herein but for a common good, (although I
doubt I have displeased some by so doing) being importuned thereunto by diverse
Practisers of this Court.

Some Precedents, of frequent use, both of Writs and the Entries thereupon, and
also Declarations, Imparlances, Issues, Judgments and Defalts, and other
proceedings in actions brought by Original Writ, and entered by the Filizers.
ANd First, To begin with such Writs in which you proceed to the Outlawry,
wherein your Capias alias and plur. may be made short, not reciting the cause
of action at large.

Carolus, etc. Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus Le Capias.
vobis quod capiat. A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com. etc. genesis si invent. fuerit in
balliva vestra and eum salvo custod. Ita quod habeat' Corpus ejus coram nobis a
Die, etc. Vbicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend. C. D. de placito
Transgr. super Casum. Et habeat' ibi hoc breve. T. etc. E. F. At.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis Le Alias.
sicut alias vobis praeceperimus quod capiat. etc. ut antea usque finem brevis
del Cap.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis sicut Le Plur.
plur. vobis praeceperimus quod capiat. etc. ut antea usque Finem brevis
delalias Cap.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis Le Exigent.
quod Exigi faciat. A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com. etc. genesis de Hust. in Hust.
quousque secundum legem and consuetud. hujus regni nostri Angliae utlagetur. si
non comparuerit and comparuerit tunc eum capiat. and salvo custod. faciat. Ita
quod habeat' Corpus ejus coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in
Anglia ad respondend. C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. Ut in le original usque
ad Dampnum ipsius C. D Centum Librar. ut dicit. Et unde vosipsi nobis mand. a
die, etc. (Le retorn. del plur.) ult. preterit. quod predict. A. B. non est
inventus in balliva vestra. Et habeat' ibi hoc breve. T. etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Cum vic. nostris L. Le Foreign Proclamatio.
per breve nostrum nuper praecepimus quod exigi facerent. A. B. nuper de, etc.
in Com. etc. Genesis de Hust. in Hust. quousque secundum legem and consuetud.
hujus regni nostri Angliae utlagaret' si non comparuisset. Et si comparuisset
tunc eum caperent and salvo custod. facerent, Ita quod haberent Corpus ejus
coram nobis a die, etc. (idem retorn. cum le exigent.) ubicunque tunc fuissemus
in Anglia, ad respond. C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. (ut in le exigent)
usque ad dampnum ipsius C. D. Centum librar. ut dicit, Ideo Tibi praecipimus
quod per Statut. Anno regni Domini Elizabethae nuper Reginae Angliae Tricesimo
primo inde provis' proclamari fac. prefat. A. B. tribus seperalibus diebus
secundum formam Statuti illius unde una Proclamation' predictar. fiat ad vel
prope maximum usual. Ostium Ecclesiae parochial. ubi est inhabitans quod se
reddat prefat. vic. nostris London, Ita quod habeant Corpus ejus coram nobis ad
prefat. Terminum ad respondend. prefat. C. D. de predicto placito. Et habeas,
etc. Test cum le Exigent.

If the Proclamation be not Foreign but into London as the Exigent was, then
say, Eum vobis, etc. as in the Supersedeas following, and Ideo vobis
praecipimus quod per Statut' etc. usque quod se reddat vobis, Ita quod habeat'
Corpus, etc. Et habeat' etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis Le Allocatus.
quod allocat. ill. quatuor Si in Com. Quatuor. Com.
Hust. ad quos A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com. etc. genesis exact. fuit and non
comparuit prout. Tu ipse.
vosipsi nobis a die, etc. (le retorn. del Exigent) ult. preterit. mand. ipsum
A. B. ad prox. Hust. vestrum London ulterius exigi fac. quousque secundum legem
and consuetud. hujus regni nostri Angliae utlagetur si non comparuerit, etc. ut
in le Exigent, usque ut dicit. Et habeat' etc. Test, le retorn. del Exigent si
soit in Term, Si non, le quarto de post.

Vic. L. Salutem, Cum vobis per breve Le Supersed. quia improvide.
nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod exigi faceretis A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com.
etc. genesis de Hust. in Hust. etc. ut in le breife de Exigent, usque ut dicit,
Quia tamen ante emanationem pred. brevis nostri de exigend. proed. A. B. per E.
F. Attorn. suum comparuit in eadem Cur. nostra coram nobis and quam plur. se
obtulit ad respondend' praefat. C. D. de praedicto placito, Sic que breve
nostrum praed. inde versus eundem A. B. minus rite emanavit, Ideo vobis
praecipimus quod de ulterius exigend' praed. A. B. utlagand. capiend' seu ipsum
in aliquo modo molestand. occasion illa omnino supersedeat. T. etc. Sur le
Test jour del Exigent, ou ascun temps devant le retorn. de ceo.

Vic. M. Salutem, Praecipimus tibi Le general. Cap. utlagat.
quod non omittas propter aliquam libertat. Com. tui quin capias A. B. nuper
de, etc. utlagat. in London die Lunae (le quinto exact.) Anno regni nostri,
etc. (vel ult. praeterit.) ad sect. C. D. de placito, etc. si invent fuerit in
balliva tua and eum salvo custod. Ita quod habeas Corpus ejus coram nobis a
die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad fac. and rec. quod Cur. nostra
coram nobis consideravit in hac part. Et habeas, etc. Si in London, (propter
aliquam Libertat. Com. Civitat. vestrae quin, etc.)

Vic. M. Salutem, ut antea usque Com. Le special. Cap. utlagat.
tui quin per Sacr' probor. and legalium hominum de eodum Com. tuo diligent.
inquir. quae bona and catalla terras and tenementa A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com.
tuo genesis habet seu habuit, etc. (Ut in le genesis Capias utlagat. usque de
placito, etc.) prout Vic. nostri London nobis apud Westminster. ad certum diem jam
praeterit. mand. Et ill' pereor' Sacr' extendi and appreciari fac. juxta verum
valor' eorundem. Et ea quae per Inquisitionem illam inveneris in mannus nostras
capias and salvo custod. fac. Ita quod de vero valor and exit. eorundem nobis
respond. Et illis sit extent. and apperciat. quid inde fac. scire fac. nobis
in, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia distinct. and aperte sub Sigillo
tuo and Sigillis eor' per quor. Sacr' extent. and apperciation' ill' fac. Ac
pro eo quod idem A. B. sic utlagat. latit. and discurr. in Com. tuo in nostri
contempt. and Coronae nostrae prejudicio ut accepimus Tibi praecipimus quod
praed. A. B. ubicunque in balliva tua tam infra libertat. quam extra inveniri
contigerit capias and eum salvo custod. Ita quod habeas Corpus ejus coram nobis
ad praefat. Terminum ubicunque, etc. ad fac. and rec' quod Cur. nostra coram
nobis consideraverit in hoc part. Et habeas, etc.

London ss. C. D. per Attorn. suum obtulit Intration. special. Process de
se quarto Die versus A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com. etc. genesis de placito quare
Cap. alias and plur. Exigen. and Proclam. and utlagaria reversat. Superinde.
cum, etc. and sic recite le tout breife de Cap. usque ut dicit. Et ipse non
ven. Ideo sicut alias praecept. fuit vic. quod caperent eum, etc. Et vic. modo
mand. quod non est inventus, etc. Ideo sicut plur. capiatur quod sit coram
Domino Rege in Crastin. Animar. etc. ubicunque, etc. Ad quem diem coram Domino
Rege apud Westminster. ven. praed. C. D. per Attorn. suum praed. Et obtulit se quarto
die versus praefat. A. B. de praedicto placito. Et ipse non. ven. Ideo sicut
plur. praecept. fuit vic. quod caperent eum, etc. Et vic. modo mand. quod non
est inventus, etc. Ideo praecept. est vic. quod Exigi fac. eum de Hust. in
Hust. quousque, etc. utlagetur si non, etc. Et si, etc. tunc eum capiant, etc.
Et salvo, etc. Ita quod habeant Corpus ejus coram Domino Rege in Octab. Pur.
etc. ubicunque etc. ad respondend. praefat. C. D. de praedicto placito
Praecept. est etiam vic. M. quod per Statut. in hujusmodi casuedit. and provis'
proclamar' fac. pred. A. B. tribus seperalibus diebus secundum formam Statuti
illius quod se reddat praefat. vic. London. Ita quod habeant Corpus ejus coram
Domino Rege ad praefat. Terminum ad respondend. praefat. C. D. de praed.
placito. Et Sciendum est quod breve Domini Regis inde Sexto die N. isto eodem
Termino deliberat' Le Test de le Exigent.
de Recordo Deputat. vic. L. praed. in forma juris exequend. etc. Ad quas
quidem Octab. Pur. etc. coram eodem Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven. praed. C. D.
per Attorn. suum praed. Et vic. L. videlicet S. S. and T. P. retornaver' quod
ad Hust. de placito terrae tent' in Guild Hall Civit' London. die Lunae prox'
post Festum, etc. Anno, etc. praed. A. B. primo exact' fuit and non comparuit,
Et ad Hust' (and sic recite les tout retorn' usque le quinto exact. fuit) and
non comparuit, Ideo ipse idem A. B. utlagat' est, Posteaque scilicet a die
Paschae, etc. extunc prox' sequen' coram eodem Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven.
praed' A. B. in propria persona sua, Et seipsum prisonae Marr' Cur' Domini
Regis hic coram ipso Rege occasion utlagariae praed' reddat and statim dicit
quod nullum breve dicti Domini Allegation quod null. brief. de proclam. emanat.
fuit.
Regis de Proclamatione secundum formam Statut' de Anno tricescimo primo
Elizabethae nuper Reginae Angliae in hujusmodi cusu edit' and provis' versus
ipsum A. B. in placito praed. emanavit, per quod utlagaria praedicta versus
ipsum A. in forma praedicta promulgat' and habit' per Statut' praed. vacua and
nullius vigoris neque effectus in lege existit. Et hoc parat' est verificare
unde pet' Judicium and quod utlagaria praedicta versus ipsum A. in forma praed.
promulgat' and habit' revocetur, adnulletur and penitus pro nullo habeatur Ac
quod ipse ad omnia quae occasion utlagariae praed. amisit restituatur Et
praed. A. secundum formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis' invenit
sufficient' Manucaptor' videlicet B. F. de, Le Bail.
etc. Et W. M. de, etc. Et modo hic ad hunc diem ven' Manucaptor' praed. and
uterque eorum pro seipso cognovit seipsum debere praefat' C. D. Quadragint'
Libras seperatim, Quae quidem seperal. Summae quadragint' Librar' concedunt,
and uterque eorum per se concedit de eorum and utriusque eorum terris and
Catallis fieri, and ad usum praed. C. D. levari sub Condition quod praed. A.
B. comparebit and praefat' C. D. respondebit ad novum breve Original' per
praedictum C. prosequend' pro causa in dicto brevi mentionat' and solvet
Condempnationem quae foret recuperat' Si praed. C. D. sectam suam infra duos
Terminos prosecut' fuerit, etc. Super quo viso praed. brevi scrutatoque filo
brevium de retorno praed. brevis de Exigi facias pro proclamatione praedicta,
eidem Cur' nunc hic manifest constat allegationem praed. A. B. superius pro
exoneratione sua de utlagaria praed. allegat' fore veram, Ideo considerat' est
quod utlagaria praedicta versus praefat' Utlagaria reversat.
A. B. in forma praed. promulgat' and habit' reversetur and quod praed. A. B.
de utlagaria praedicta exoneretur and ea occasion non molestetur in aliquo seu
gravet' sed eat inde quiet' etc. Et quod praed. A. B. ad omnia quae ipse
occasion utlagariae praedict' amisit restituatur, etc.

I do find by the Filizers rolls, that most commonly such reversals of
Outlawries were entered up to the process thus awarded, but sometimes when it
happened that the Filizers had the Original Writs so late brought into their
Offices by the Attorneys that they could not award such process, for that their
Rolls were filed, then I find that they entered up such Reversals to the Entry
of the Exigent by a Dominus Rex Mandavit, etc. and so recited the whole Exigent
in haec verba and the return unto the Quinto exact' and Judgment of Outlawry,
and then to assign the Error' pro Defect' Proclamation' etc. ut antea, etc. but
certainly the best way is to enter it up to the awarding of the former Process
if it may be done.

The form of the Bailpeice must be cut as other Bailpeices are, and the Names
thus inserted.

London, ss. A. B. nuper de, etc. traditur Le special. Bail sur. reversal. del
utlagar. and semper cap. in Cur. and affilat. cum Custod. brev' huius Cur.
in ballium super novum breve Original' post utlagar' reversat' per C. D. infra
duos terminos prox' sequen' impetrand' and ad satisfaciend' Condempnation' si
convict' fuerit,

Scilicet.

R. F. de Paroch' sancti, etc. in Com. M. genesis

Et

W. M. de Paroch' sancti, etc. in Com. B. genesis

Vterque Manucaptor' sub pena Quadragint' Librar' seperatim.

E. F. At. pro. def. ad Sect. C. D. genesis

London, ss. Cap. A. B. nuper de, etc. Le special. Bail Sur arrest. and cap.
coram un' Justic. Cur. and affilat. cum Custod brevium praedict.
ad sect. C. D. de placito transgr. super Casum ad Dampnum ipsius C. D. Centum
Librarum.

Manucaptor' W. S. de, etc. genesis Et H. I. de, etc. genesis

E. F. Att' pro def. Defend. ipse in C. C. l. Vterque Man' in C. l.

Note, This last special appearance, or special Bail, the Filizer of the County
out of which the action arises, enters in his Appearance-Book and (as is used
in the Common Pleas) goes as is said before with the Attorney for the
Defendant, with the Bail before a Judge, and takes his hand to his Book, and
when the Bail is accepted, the Plaintiffs Attorney takes away the Bailpeice
from the Judge, and after it is entered he fileth it with the Custos Brevium of
this Court, with whom all Writs and Process whatsoever, grounded upon Original
Writs ought to be filed; the Original Writs themselves being fileable with him
only and no other, as appears by a vast number of files of such Writs and
Process he has now in his Custody.

Vic. M. Salutem, Cum tibi per breve Supersedeas Sur. reversal. del utlagar.
pro defectu Proclamation ubi bona and Catalla Def. cap. fuer. per breve de
special. Cap. utlagat. devant le reversal.
nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod non omitteres propter aliquam libertat' Com.
tui quin per sacrum probor' etc. (ut in le special' Cap. utlagat' devant) usque
ad faciend' and recipiend' quod Cur' nostra coram nobis consideraverit in ea
part. Et quia nobis in Cur' nostra satis constat de Recordo quod utlagaria
praedicta ob defectu proclamation' juxta formam Statuti in hujusmodi Casu edit'
and provis' reversat existit and quod idem A. B. superinde ven' hic in Cur'
nostr' coram nobis and invenit sufficient' Manucaptor' ad respondend. praefat'
C. D. super novum breve Original' post utlagar' praed. reversat' per praed. C.
D. infra duos Terminos prox. sequen' impetrand' and ad satisfaciend'
Condemnationem si convict' fuerit, Ideo Tibi praecipimus quod si bona and
Catall' praedicti A. B. virtute brevis praed. cepistis eidem A. sine dialatione
redeliberari fac. Praecipimus etiam tibi quod de praefat' A. capiend'
attachiend' imprisonand' seu ipsum occasion illa aliqualit' molestand' omnino
Supersedeas. Et si ipsum A. ea occasion, and non al' ceperis tunc ipsum sine
dilatione deliberar' facias periculo incumbenti, T. etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Cum tibi, etc. ut Aliter ex assensu Attorn. pro Quer. Sur
def. imposition. ballitum coram un' Justick. Cur.
antea usque consideraverit in ea part. Et quia idem A. B. ex assensua Attorn'
praed. C. D. in Cur' nostra coram nobis venit and invenit sufficient'
Manucaptor' ad respondend' praefat' C. D. de praedicto placito and ad
satisfaciend' praed. C. D. omnia Dampna misa and Custag' in ea part
recuperand' si contingat ipsum A. B. in placito praed. convinci, aut se
prisonae Marr' Maresc' Cur' nostrae coram nobis ea occasion non reddere, Ideo
Tibi praecipimus quod, etc. ut antea usque T. etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis Breve de Cap. ad satisfaciend.
quod capiat' A. B. nuper de, etc. si invent' fuerit in balliva vestra and eum
salvo custod' Ita quod habeat' Corpus ejus coram nobis in Crastino, etc.
vbicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad satisfaciend' C. D. de Centum Libris pro
dampnis suis quae sustinuit tum occasion cujusdam transgr' super casum per
praefat' A. eidem C. nuper illat' quem pro misis and Custag' suis per ipsum
circa sectam suam in ea part apponit' unde convict' est sicut nobis constat de
Recordo. Et habeat' ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis Exigent super inde.
quod exigi faciat' A. B. nuper de, etc. de Hust. in Hust. quousque, etc. ut in
all' Exigent usque ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia, ad satisfaciend, etc. ut
in le Capias devant usque sicut nobis constat de Recordo. Et unde vosipsi
Retorn. del. Capias devant.
nobis mand' in Crastino, etc. ult' praeterit' quod praed. A. B. non est
inventus in balliva vestra. Et habeat ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, praecipimus Tibi Exigent post Cap. puis un. recov. pro dampn.
in comm. Banco and affirmetur in Cur. hic Sur breife de error.
quod Exigi facias A. B. nuper de, etc. de Com. in Com. quousque, etc, ut in
al' Exigent usque ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad satisfaciend' C. D. tum
de, etc. quae eidem C. in Cur' nostra de Banco adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis
suis quae sustinuit tum occasion cujusdam transg. super casum eidem C. per
praefat' A. nuper illat' quam pro misis and custag' suis per ipsum circa sectam
suam in ea part apponit' unde convict' est sicut per inspectionem Recordi and
processus inde quae coram nobis nuper certis de Causis venire fecimus nobis
constat de Recordo quam de, etc. quae eidem C. in Cur' nostra coram nobis
adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis mis' and custag' suis quae sustinuit occasion
dilationis executionis Judicii praed. pretextu prosecutionis cujusdam brevis de
error' Et unde, etc. ut supra, etc.

Vic. G. Salutem, Pone per vad' and Breve de Pone Sur. un' breife de Recordare.
salvos pleg' A. B. nuper de, etc. quod sit coram nobis in Octab. etc.
ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend' C. D. de placito quare cepit
Averia ipsius C. and ea injuste detinuit con^ra vad' and pleg' etc. ut dicitur,
Et ad ostendend. quare non fuit in Cur. nostra coram nobis in Crastino, etc.
ult. proeterit. sicut dies ei proefixus fuit, Et habeas ibi Retorn. del
Recordare.
nomina pleg. Et hoc breve T. etc.

Glouc. ss. C. D. per Attorn. suum obtulit Intratio inde.
se quarto die versus A. B. nuper de, etc. de placito quare cepit Averia ipsius
C. and ea injuste detinuit contra vad. and pleg. etc. Et ipse non ven. and
habuit diem hic usque ad hunc diem scilicet in Crastino Retorn. de Recordare.
Animar. coram Domino Rege ei proefixum, etc. Ita fiat ei attachiat. quod sit
coram Domino Rege hic Retorn. de Pone.
in Octab. sancti Hilarii, etc.

Vic. G. Salutem, Proecipimus tibi quod Breve de distring' super Pone praed'
distring. A. B. nuper de, etc. per omnes terr. and Catalla sua in balliva tua,
Ita quod nec ipse nec aliquis per ipsum ad ea manum appon' donec aliud a nobis
inde habueris proecept. Et quod de exitibus eorundum nobis respond. Ita quod
habeas Corpus ejus coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Angl. ad
respondend. C. D. de placito quare, etc. ut in le Pone usque ut dicitur, and ad
audiendum inde Indic. fuum de plur. defalt. Et habeas, etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Proecipimus tibi quod Distringas envers un' Peer.
distring. A. Commit. S. per omnes terr. etc. ut supra usque, Et quod de
exitibus eorundem nobis respond. Ita quod sit coram nobis a Die, etc.
ubicunque, etc. ad respondend. C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. and sic recite
tout le original usque ut dicit, Et ad audiendum inde Judicum suum de plur.
defalt. Et habeas ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Proecipimus tibi quod Testat. Distring. sur nichil retorn.
envers un' Peer.
distring. A. Commit. etc. per omnes terr. etc. ut supra in le brief de
distring. usque de plur. defalt. Et unde Vic. noster M. nobis mand. a die, etc.
(le retorn. de distring.) ult. proeterit. quod proed. A. Comes S. nichil habet
in balliva sua per quod distring. potest, Cum testat. sit in eadem Cur. nastra
coram nobis quod satis habet in balliva tua per quod distring. potest. Et
habeas, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic. M. Salutem, Pone Testat. pone sur tiel retorn. envers un'
Peer.
per vad' and salvos pleg. A. Commit. S. quod sit coram nobis a die, etc.
ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia. ad respondend. C. D. de placito quare cum,
etc. (ut in le original Pone) usque ut dicit, Et unde Vic. nostri L. nobis
mand. in Retorn. del Pone.
Octab. etc. ult. praeterit. quod praed. A. nichil habet in balliva sua per
quod attach. possit, Cum testat. sit in eadem Cur. nostra coram nobis quod
satis habet in balliva tua per quod attach. potest, Et habeas ibi nomina pleg.
and hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis quod Distring. versus un' Corporation' vel
Hundred.
distring. liberos homines Mister' Piscinar. Civit. London comunit. vocat. etc.
vel. sic, si sit envers Hundred Praecipimus tibi quod distring. Homines
inhabitan. in Hundred. de E. in Com. tuo per omnes terr. and catalla sua, etc.
ut antea, etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis quod Un' Special' Cap. ad arrest.
capiat. A. B. nuper de, etc. si invent. fuerit in balliva vestra and eum salvo
custod. quod habeat. Corpus ejus coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc
fuerimus in Angl. ad respondend. C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. and sic
recite tout le Original usque ad dampnum ipsius C. D. Centum Librarum ut dicit,
Et habeas, etc.

London ss. C. D. per Attorn. suum obtulit Intratio inde.
se quarto die versus A. B. nuper de, etc. de placito quare cum, etc. ut in le
brief praed. (sed nota quod in loco Anno Regni nostri in le brief, debet esse
in le Entry Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Angl. etc. iricesimo
quarto) and sic usque ut dicit, Et ipse non ven' Et praecept. fuit Vic. quod
capiant eum, etc. Et vic. modo mand. quod nichil habet, etc. Le retorn. del Cap.
Ideo capiatur quod sit coram Domino Rege a Die, etc. Et breve deliberatur de
Recordo, etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Praecipimus tibi quod Testat. Cap. super inde.
capias A. B. nuper de, etc. si invent. fuerit in balliva tua, etc. ut antea
usque ut dicit pro eo quod vic. nostri London nobis a die, etc. ult. praeterit.
mand. quod praed. A. B. non est inventus in balliva sua, Cum testat. existit.
in Cur. nostra coram nobis quod praed. A. B. latit. and discurr. in Com. tuo,
Et habeas, etc.

London ss. C. D. per Attorn. suum obtulit Intratio inde.
se quarto die versus A. B. nuper de, etc. de placito quare, etc. ut in le
brief devant usque ut dicit, Et praecept' fuit vic. quod capiant eum, and vic.
retorn' quod nichil habet, etc. Ideo capiatur quod sit coram Domino Rege a die,
etc. ubicunque, etc. Et breve deliberatur de Retorn. de Cap.
Recordo, Ad quem diem hic ven. praed. C. D. per Attorn. suum and obtulit se
quarto die versus praed. A. B. in placito praed. Et ipse non ven. Et praecept.
fuit vic. quod capiant eum, etc. Et vic. retorn. quod non est invent. etc.
Super quo testat. existit. hic in Cur. nostra coram nobis quod praed. A. B.
latit' and discurr. in Com. M. Ideo praecept. est vic. Com. M. praed. quod
capiat praed. A. B. si invent. fuerit in balliva sua, Et eum salvo custod. Ita
quod habeat Corpus ejus coram Domino Rege in Oct. etc. ubicunque, etc. ad
Retorn del testat. Cap.
respond. praefat. C. D. de praedicto placito, etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Cum vobis per breve Supersedeas in abatement del brief de
Exigent quia Def. in ill. nominat. Miles quando fuit Miles and Baronettus.
nostrum, etc. ut antea in le brief de Supersedeas quia improvide usque ut
dixit, Quia tamen ante emanationem dicti brevis nostri de Exigend. quidam A. B.
nuper de London Miles and Baronettus (dicend. quod ipse est eadem persona
versus quem praedictus C. D. tulit praedictum breve de Exigi fac. per nomen A.
B. nuper de L. Milit. quodque ipse ante diem impetrationis brevis Original'
praedicti, C. non solum ordinem Militar. super se suscepisset, Sed etiam quod
nos per Literas nostras Patentes creavimus ipsum A. B. Baronett. and modo Miles
and Baronettus existit; Salvis sibi omnibus and omnimod. advantagiis
exceptionibus and allegationibus ad breve praed.) per E. F. Attorn. suum
comparuit in eadem Cur. nostra and quam plur. se obtulit ad respondend.
praefat. C. D. de praed. placito, Sicque breve nostrum praed. inde versus
eundem A. B. minus rite emanavit, Ideo vobis praecipimus quod de ulterius
exigend. praed. A. B. Mil. and Bar' utlagand. capiend. seu ipsum in aliquo modo
molestand. occasine illa omnino supersedeat. T. etc.

Vic. G. Salutem, Cum H. D. nuper Breve de Exigi fac' post un' Pone and Cap.
retornat. fuer. and Def. in Contempt. Domini Regis.
Vic. Com. tui per breve nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod poneret per vad. and
salvos pleg. A. B. nuper de, etc. Milit. and Bar. quod esset coram nobis in
Octab. etc. Anno Regni nostri, etc. ubicunque tunc fuissemus in Angl. ad
respondend. C. D. de placito quare, etc. ut in brief de Pone devant usque
sicut dies ei praefixus fuit; Dictusque H. D. ad diem ill. nobis retorn. quod
praed. A. B. nichil habuit in balliva sua ubi aut per quod attach. potuit prout
per breve illud ei praecept. fuit, Ob quod per breve nostrum nuper
praeceperimus quod caperes praefat. A. B. si invent. foret in balliva tua and
eum salvo custod. Ita quod haberes Corpus ejus coram nobis a die, etc.
ubicunque tunc fuissemus in Angl. ad respondend. tam nobis de Contempt. quam
praefat C. D. de dampnis and injur. ei in hac part illat. Tuque ad diem ill.
nobis mand. quod praed. A. B. non fuit invent. in balliva tua, Ideo tibi
praecipimus quod Exigi fac. praefat. A. B. de Com. in Com. quousque secundum
legem and consuetud. hujus Regni nostri Angl. utlagetur si non comparuerit and
si comparuerit tunc eum capias and salvo custod. fac. Ita quod habeas Corpus
ejus coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Angl. ad respondend.
tam nobis de Contempt. quam praefat. C. D. de dampn. and injur. ei in hac part
illat. Et habeas, etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Cum vobis per breve Breve de Certiorar. Vic. L. pro eo quod
Exigi fac. casualit. perdit. est, super quo Def. fuit retornat. utlagat.
nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod exigi faceretis A. B. nuper de, etc. ut in
brevi de Supersed. devant usque ut dixit, Cumque in Cur. nostra coram nobis
testat. existit quod praed. A. B. superinde utlagat. est, sed breve de Exigi
fac. praed. casualit. perdit. existit, prout ex insinuatione ipsius C. D.
accepimus, Et quia volumus eidem C. D. in action sua praedicta debitum and
festinum remedium adhiberi, vobis praecipimus quod si ita sit tunc Record.
utlagar. praed. cum omnibus ea tangen. tam adeo and plene coram vobis residet
habeat coram nobis immediate post reception. hujus brevis ubicunque tunc
fuerimus in Angl. ut Cur. nostra coram nobis illud facere valeat in praemissis
quod de jure and secundum legem and consuetud. hujus Regni nostri Angliae
fuerit faciend. Et habeat' ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. L. Salutem, Praecipimus vobis Distring. and Proclamation. en un' brief
envers un' Corporation.
quod distring. liberos homines, etc. co' it. voc. Custod. and Comunitat. etc.
ut antea in tiel distring. usque ut dicitur. Et ad audiend. inde Judicium suum
de plur. defalt. Praecipimus etiam vobis quod interim in Husting. vestris prox.
tenend. public proclamari fac. quod praed. liberi homines Myster. praed. ven.
coram nobis ad praefat. terminum ubicunque, etc. praefat. C. D. inde responsur.
si eis viderit expediri and Proclamation. praed. sic inde fact. nobis ad eundem
Terminum scilicet constar. faciat. Et habeat' ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Middlesex ss. A. B. nuper de, etc. attachiat. Intratio de le Imparlance in
ascun action per original.
fuit ad respondend. C. D. de placito transgr. super Casum, Et unde idem C. D.
per E. F. Attorn. suum queritur quod cum, and sic recite tot. narr. usque, Et
inde produc. Sect. etc. and Iunc le Imparlance sic.

Et praedictus A. B. per T. W. Attorn. suum ven. and defend. vim and injur.
quando, etc. Et pet. diem inde ad interloquend. etc. Et ei conceditur, etc. Et
super hoc dies inde dat. est partibus praedictis coram Domino Rege usque in
Octab. etc. ubicunque, etc. videl. praefat. A. B. ad interloquend. Et tunc ad
respondend. etc.

Vic. E. Salutem, Cum Tibi per breve Scir. fac. sur. pardon del utlagar. per
Statut.
nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod non omitteres propter aliquam libertat. Com.
tui quin caperes A. B. nuper de, etc. utlagat. apud, etc. in Com. tuo (tali die
and Anno) ad sect. C. D. de placito transgr. super casum si invent. foret in
balliva tua, Et eum salvo custod, Ita quod haberes Corpus ejus coram nobis in
Crastino, etc. ubicunque tunc fuissemus in Anglia ad fac. and rec. quod Cur.
nostra coram nobis de eo cons. in ea part, Quia tamen per quendam Act. in
Parliament. nostro tent. apud Westminster. in Com. Middles. (tali die and Anno)
utlagar. praed. in praefat. A. in forma praed. promulgat. and habit. eidem A.
pardonat. fuit, Ita tamen quod praed. A. prosequitur in eadem Cur. nostra coram
nobis breve nostrum de scir. fac. ad praemuniend. praefat. C. D. de praedicto
placito, Si idem C. versus eum loqui vellet, Et quia expediens and necesse est
quod praed. C. pro interesse sua in hac part praemunitur priusquam ad
exonerationem praed. A. B. de utlagar. praedicta ulterius procedatur, Ideo tibi
praecipimus quod per probos and legales homines de balliva tua scir. fac.
praefat. C. D. quod sit coram nobis in Crastino Animar. ubicunque tunc fuerimus
in Anglia ad prosequend. versus praefat. A. B. Placitum suum praed. si
voluerit, Et habeas ibi nomina eorum per quos ei scir. feceris and hoc breve,
T. etc.

Ad quod quidem Crastinum Animar. Retorn super inde.
coram eodem Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven' praed. A. B. in propr. persona sua,
Et vic. Com. praed. videlicet J. M. Ar' virtute brevis praed. ei inde direct.
retorn. quod ipse per L. M. and B. F. probos and legales homines de balliva sua
scir. fecit praefat. C. D. essend. coram Domino Rege ad diem praedictum
ubicunque, etc. ad prosequend. versus praefat. A. B. Et praed. C. D. licet ad
eundem diem solempnit. Quer' fec. defalt.
exact. and sic praemunit. non ven' sed. defalt. fec. Ideo ipse and pleg. sui
de pros. scilicet Johannes Do and Richardus Roo, sint inde in Mi'a, etc. Et
praed. A. B. eat inde sine die, etc. Et pardonatio Domini Regis secundum formam
Judic. super inde.
Statuti praed. praefat. A. allocetur, etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Cum A. B. summonit. Retorn. habend. ubi Quer' fecit defalt.
fuit essendi in Cur. nostra coram nobis ad respondend. C. D. de placito quare
cepit averia ipsius C. and ea injuste detinuit contra vad' and pleg' ut
dicitur; Idem C. postea in eadem Cur' nostra coram nobis fecit defalt. per quod
cons. fuit in eadem Cur' nostra quod ipse and pleg' sui de pros. essent in
Mi'a, etc. Et quod praed. A. iret inde sine die, etc. Et quod haberet retorn'
averior. praedictor. Et ideo tibi praecipimus quod averia praedicta praefat. A.
B. sine dilatione retornari fac', Et ea ad querimoniam praed. C. non redeliber.
sine brevi nostro quod de praefat. Judic. expressam faciat mentionem, Et
qualit. hoc praecept. nostrum fuerit execut. nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc
fuerimus in Angl. constar' fac' Et habeas ibi hoc breve, T. etc.

Middles. ss. A. B. per Attorn. suum Intratio inde.
obtulit se quarto die versus C. D. de placito quare ipse praed. A. cepit
averia ipsius C. and ea injuste detinuit contra vad' and pleg', etc. Et ipse
solempnit' exact' non ven' and fuit Querens, etc. Ideo cons. est quod ipse and
pleg' sui de pros. sint inde in Mi'a, etc. Et quod praed' A. eat inde sine die,
etc. Et quod habeat retorn. Averior. praedictor. etc. Quare nomina Pleg', etc.
and qualiter, etc. Vic' constare fac. Domino Regi a die, etc. ubicunque, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' S. Salutem, Cum Retorn habend. alio modo ubi Quer' fecit
defalt. and breve de Inquir' de dampnis.
J. L. sum. esset essendi in Cur' nostra coram nobis ad respondend. T. H. de
placito quare ipse (tali die and Anno) apud O. in Com. tuo, in quodam loco
ibidem vocat' L. cepit averia videlicet duos Juvencos, etc. Et ea injuste
detinuit contra vad' and pleg' ut dicebatur, Idemque J. in eadem Cur' dicti
Domini Regis coram ipso Rege comparens, certa ratione per ipsum in eadem Cur'
dicti Domini Regis coram ipso Rege allegat', ut ballivus E. L. Milit' been
cognovit captionem averior' praed. in praed. loco pro dampnis ibidem factis
fore justam, super quo praed. T. postea in eadem Cur' dicti Domini Regis coram
ipso Rege apud Westminster. solempnit' exact' non venit nec ulterius fuit prosecut'
breve suum praed', Ob quod cons. fuit in Cur' nostra coram nobis apud Westminster.
quod praed' T. and pleg' sui de pros. essent in Mi'a, Et quod praed. J. iret
inde sine die, Et quod haberet retorn. averior' praed', Et etiam quod praed' J.
dampna sua occasion praemiss. versus praefat. T. juxta formam statuti inde
edit. and provis. recuperare debeat, Et Ideo tibi praecipimus quod averia
praed. praefat. J. sine dilatione retornari fac', and ea ad querimoniam praed.
T. non redeliber. sine brevi nostro quod de praefat. judicio expressam faceret
mentionem, and qualit. hoc praecept. nostrum fueris execut', nobis a die
Paschae in quinque septimanas ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia constare fac',
Et etiam per sacrament. proborum and legalium hominum de Com. tuo diligent.
inquiras quae dampna praed. J. sustinuit tam occasion praemis. quam pro mis.
and custag' suis per ipsum circa sect. suam in hac part apposit. Et
inquisition. quam inde fecerit nobis ad praefat. terminum ubicunque, etc.
constare fac. sub sigillo tuo and sigillis eor' per quorum sacrament.
inquisition. illam feceris, Et habeas ibi nomina eorum per quorum sacrament.
inquisitionem illam feceris and hoc breve T.

Carolus, etc. Vic' S. Salutem, Cum Simil. Inquir. de Reddit. aretro and valor.
Averior. capt. post suggestion. Def. in nature. cognition. pro quodam annual.
reddit. secundum Statut. etc. de Anno 17 Car. 2. Regis, cap. 7.
J. M. and J. H. sum. fuerunt essendi in Cur' nostra coram nobis in Octabis
sancti Hilarii Anno, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend. P.
N. de placito quare ceperunt averia ipsius P. and ea injuste detinuer' contra
vad. and pleg. ut dicitur praedictusque P. postea in Cur' nostra coram nobis
fecit defalt. Cumque secundum formam statuti in hujusmodi casu edit and provis'
praed. I. M. and I. H. fecerunt suggestion' in natura cognitionis quod ipsi
ceperunt averia praed. P. praed. ut ballivi I. R. gen' pro quodam annuali
reddit' Novem-decem. libr' legalis monetae Angliae debit. and aretro eidem I.
R. per praed. P. M. per spatium quinque Annor' finit ad festum sancti Michaelis
Archangeli jam ult' praeterit. ac pro quodam mesuag' etc. cum pertin' in tenura
praed. P. dimiss. praed. P. per eundem I. R. per Indentur' geren' dat' tal' die
and Anno, Ideo secundum formam statuti praed. in hujusmodi casu edit. and
provis' Tibi praecipimus quod per sacrament. duodecim probor' and legalium
hominum Com' tui diligent' inquiras quant' denar' fuerunt in aretro eidem I. R.
de annuali reddit' praed. tempore districtionis Averior' praed. and de vero
valor Averior' capt' and Inquisition' quam inde ceperis nobis in Octabis
Purificationis beatae Mariae ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia sub sigillo tuo
and sigil' eor' per quor' sacrament. Inquisition' illam ceperis mittas una cum
hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Si C. D. fecerit Breve de secunda deliberatione.
te secur' de Clamore suo prosequend' ac etiam de Averiis retorn' quae A. B. in
Cur' nostra adjudicat' fuer' ob defalt' ipsius C. Tibi praecipimus quod si
praetextu brevis nostri de retorn' habend' alias tibi inde direct' Averia
praedicta praefat' A. B. retornari fecisti, tunc ea praefat' C. D. redeliberari
fac' Et pon' per vad' and salvos pleg' praed. A. quod sit coram nobis in Octab.
etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend' praefat' C. de Captione
Averiorum praedictor. Et habeas ibi nomina pleg' and hoc breve T. etc.

Vic. E. Salutem, Praecipimus tibi Non omittas.
quod non omittas propter aliquam libertat. Libertatis Villae de, etc. in Com'
tuo quin capias A. B. nuper de, etc. si invent' fuerit in balliva tua, and eum
salvo custod' Ita quod habeas Corpus ejus coram nobis in Octab' etc. ubicunque
tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend' C. D. de placito quare, etc. usque ut
dicit. Et unde Tu ipse nobis mand' in Crastino, etc. retorn' del Cap.
ult' praeterit. quod quoad captionem praed. A. mand. E. F. Ballivo Libertatis
praedictae qui habuit plenum retornum omnium brevium and executionem eorundem
infra libertat' illam cui executio brevis praedicti totaliter pertinuit
faciend' eo quod executio brevis illius extra eandem Libertat' per te fieri non
potuit, Qui tibi nullum dedit respons. Et habeas ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Ebor' ss. C. D. per Attorn' suum Intratio. inde.
obtulit se quarto die versus A. B. nuper de, etc. de placito quare, etc. usque
ut dicit. Et ipse non ven' and praecept' fuit Vic' quod caperet eum si, etc.
and salvo, etc. Ita quod haberet Corpus ejus retorn' del Capias.
coram nobis in Crastino, etc. ult' praeterit' ubicunque, etc. Et Vic' modo
mand' quod ipse mand' E. F. Ballivo Libertatis Villae de, etc. Qui habet plenum
retorn' etc. Et cui, etc. qui nullum dedit ei respons. etc. Ideo praecept' est
Vic. quod non omittat propter aliquam libertat' praed' quin capiat praed' A. B.
si, etc. and salvo, etc. Ita quod habeat Corpus ejus coram Domino Rege in
Octab. etc. retorn del non omit.
ubicunque, etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Praecipimus tibi Distring' Ballivum super Cepi Corpus.
quod distring' I. H. Ballivum nostrum Ducatae nostrae L. in Com' tuo per omnes
terr. etc. ut in al' distring' etc. Ita quod habeas Corpus A. B. nuper de, etc.
coram nobis in Octab. etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia quem per praecept'
nostrum idem I. H. nuper cepit, prout Tuipse nobis apud Westminster. in Crastino,
etc. ult' praeterit' mand' ad respondend' praefat' C. D. de placito quare etc.
usque ut dicit. Et ad audiendum inde Judicium suum de plur' defalt. Et habeas
ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Middlesex, ss. Praecept' fuit Vic. quod Intratio inde.
caperet A. B. nuper de, etc. Si, etc. and salvo, etc. Ita quod haberet Corpus
ejus coram Domino Rege in Crastino, etc. ubicunque, etc. ult' praeterit' ad
respondend' C. D. de placito-quare usque ut dicitur, Et modo hic ad hunc diem
ven' praed. C. per Attorn' suum, Et obtulit se quarto die versus praed. A. B.
de praed. placito, Et ipse non ven. Et Vic. retorn' quod ipse mand' I. H.
Ballivo libertatis nostrae Ducat' Lacastr' in Com. praedict' qui habet retorn'
omnium brevium and execution' eorundem infra libertat' praedict' and infra quam
executio istius brevis per ipsum praed. Vic. fieri non potuit, Qui quidem
Ballivus eidem Vic. hunc respons' dedit quod ipse cepisset Corpus praed. A. B.
cujus quidem Corpus hic ad hunc diem haberet, Et quia praedictus Ballivus
corpus praed. A. B. hic ad hunc diem non habuit, Ideo idem Ballivus est in
Misericordia and amerciat' per Cur' Domini Regis hic ad Quadraginta Solid. Ideo
praecept' est Vic. quod distring' praed. Ballivum per omnes terr' etc. Et quod
de exitibus, etc. Ita quod habeat hic coram Domino Rege in Octab. etc.
ubicunque, etc. Corpus praed. A. B. quem, etc. ad respondend' praefat' C. D. de
praedicto Placito, etc.

Middlesex, ss. Praecept' fuit Vic. Intratio. de languid' in Prisona super un'
Capias.
quod caperet A. B. nuper de, etc. Si, etc. Et eum salvo, etc. Ita quod habeat
Corpus ejus coram nobis in Octab. etc. ubicunque, etc. ad respondend' C. D. de
placito quare, etc. usque ut dixit, Et modo hic ad hunc diem ven' praed. C. D.
per Attorn' suum, Et obtulit se quarto die versus praefat' A. B. de praedicto
Placito, Et ipse non ven. Et Vic. retorn' quod ipse cepisset Corpus praed. A.
B. cujus quidem Corpus in prisona nostra languebat and cum tam multis and
talibus infirmitatibus in eadem detent' est, Ita quod sine magno periculo
mortis itinerare seu abcariare non potuit, Cum testat' est in Cur' Domini Regis
hic coram ipso Rege quod praed. A. B. salutaris and sanus est and ad itinerand'
habilis, Ideo praecept' est Vic. quod habeat hic in Cur' coram ipso Rege a die,
etc. praedictum A B. ad respondend' praed. C. D. de placito praed. etc.

Vic. M. Salutem, Praecipimus tibi quod Habeas Corpus licet languid'
habeas coram nobis a die, etc. Corpus A. B. nuper de, etc. quod per praecept'
nostrum cepisti and in Custod' tua detent, cujus quidem Corpus tam gravit'
languebat in prisona nostra de N. and cum tam multis and talibus infirmitatibus
in eisdem gravat' existit quod sine magno periculo mortis itinerare seu
abcariare non potuit prout Tu ipse nobis apud Westminster. in Octab. etc. ult'
praeterit. mand. ad respondend' C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. usque ut
dicit, Et habeas ibi hoc breve T. etc. Intratio. inde ut in all.

Ad quem diem coram Domini Rege apud Intratio. de amerciament' Vic. pro non
retornand' breve de Cap. alias aut plur' etc.
Westminster. ven' praed. C. D. per Attorn. suum, Et Vic. Com. praed. licet
solempnit' exact' ad retornandum breve praed. non ven. nec retorn' breve illud,
Ideo idem Vic. scilicet, I. S. in Misericordia, etc. and amerciatur per Cur'
Domini Regis hic ad Quadragint' Solidos, etc. Enter this after the obtulit se
upon the Cap. alias or plur' awarded on the Filizers Rolls, the like Entry also
may serve, for amercing the Sheriff upon any other process whatsoever.

Vic. M. Salutem, Praecipimus tibi Distring' nuper Vic.
quod distring' E. F. Ar' nuper Vic. Com. tui per omn' terr' and catalla sua in
balliva tua, Ita quod nec ipse nec aliquis per ipsum ad ea manum appon' donec
aliud a nobis inde habueris praecept' Et quod de exitibus eorundem nobis
respond' Ita quod Corpus A. B. nuper de, etc. per se captum and in prisona
nostra sub custod' sua detent' prout ipse per retorn. suum in Cur' nostra coram
nobis per se alias missum seipsum oneravit habeas coram nobis in Octab. etc.
ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend. C. D. de placito quare, etc.
usque ut dicit, Et ad audiendum inde Judicium suum de plur. defalt. Et habeas,
etc.

Middlesex, ss. Praecept' fuit nuper Intratio inde.
Vic. quod haberet hic ad hunc diem scilicet a die, etc. ult. praeterit. Corpus
praed. A. B. nuper de, etc. quod praed. Vic. cepisset and in Custod. sua
detinuisset ad respondend. C. D. placito quare, etc. usque ut dicit, Et modo
hic ad hunc diem ven. praed. C. per Attorn. suum, Et obtulit se quarto die
versus praefat. A. in placito praed. Et ipse non ven. Et modo Vic. retorn. quod
praed. A. B. non captus fuit per ipsum Vic. sed per E. F. nuper Vic.
praedecessor' suum nec Corpus ejusdem A. eidem modo Vic. deliberat' fuit in
exitu ab officio suo, Ideo praecept' est modo Vic. quod distring' praedictum
nuper Vic. per omnes terras, etc. Et quod de exitibus, etc. Ita quod habeat
coram Domino Rege in Octab. etc. ubicunque, etc. Corpus ipsius A. B. quem, etc.
ad respond' praefat' C. D. de praedicto placito, etc.

Glouc. ss. C. D. qui tulit breve Domini Regis coram ipso Rege de Exigi fac'
Non pros' pro defectu Narr' post comparentiam super Exigi fac'
versus A. B. nuper de, etc. de placito, etc. non est prosecut' breve suum
praed. Ideo ipse and pleg' sui de pros. sint inde in Miserecordia, Quer' nomina
pleg' etc. Et praed. A. eat inde sine die, etc. Consider atum est etiam quod
praed. A. recuperet versus praefat' C. dampna sua occasion praemissor' ad
xxiii s. iv. d. eidem A. per Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic pro mis. and
custag' sui in ea part sustent' juxta formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu inde
nuper edit' and provis' adjudicat' Et praed. A. habeat inde execution' etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic. M. Salutem, Cum tibi per breve nostrum nuper Plur'
praeceperimus Breve de Cap. in Withernam sur' plur' repleg'
quod just and sine dilatione replegiari faceres C. D. averia sua quae A. B.
cepit and injuste detinuit ut dicitur secundum tenorem praecepti nostri
preantea tibi direct' vel tu ipse esses in Cur' nostra coram nobis in Octab.
etc. ubicunque, etc. ult' praeterit' le retorn' del plur'
ad ostendend' causam quare praecept' nostrum tam saepe inde tibi direct'
recusavisti exequend, Tamen tu ipse nobis apud Westminster. ad praefat' Terminum
retorn' quod diu ante adventum brevis praed. tibi in ea part direct' praed. A.
B. averia praed. elongavit partibus tibi ignot' extra ballivam tuam, ita quod
averia praed. eidem C. D. replegiari non possis secundum tenorem brevis praed.
Nos volentes tam magnam injur' obstare and si commissa fuerit quod est justum
fieri praed. C. D. Ideo Tibi praecipimus quod si praed. C. D. fecerit te
securum pros' querelam suam ac etiam pro retornand' Averia sua praed. si
Retorn' inde adjudicat' fuerit, tunc pone per vad' and salvos pleg' praed. A.
B. quod sit coram nobis a Die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad
respondend' praefat' C. D. de Captione and injust' detentione Averior'
praedictor' and tam nobis de contempt' quam praefat' C. D. de dampnis and
injuriis ei in hac part illat' and interim eidem C. D. averia sua praed. sine
dilatione (si possis) replegiari facias, Et si non possis tunc de Averiis
ipsius A. B. in Withernam capias pro praed. Averiis ipsius C. D. and ea eidem
C. D. sine dilatione deliberari fac' per ipsum detinend' quousque ei Averia sua
praedicta replegiari possis, Et habeas ibi nomina Pleg' and hoc breve T. etc.

The Entry of this Writ (and other following Writs) is as the former Entries of
Writs in Replevin or as in any other obtulit se, and framed out of the Writ it
self and therefore here omitted.

Carolus, etc. Vic. G. Salutem praecipimus Breve de adjornament' fact' per les'
Filizers.
tibi quod omnes and singulae brevia, billae and praecepta, tibi deliberat' vel
deliberand' retornabil' in Cur' nostra coram nobis a die sancti Michaelis in
tres Sept' a die, etc. in un' mensem, and in Crastino Animar' prox' sequen'
ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia vel interim a praed. tribus septimanis ad
aliquem diem retornabil' in Custod' tua retines and eos habeas coram nobis in
Crastino sancti Martini prox' sequen' ubicunque, etc. ad veniend' simul cum
executionibus eorundem and hoc breve quod Cur' nostra coram nobis pro
prosecutione Partium tunc fieri causaret quod est justum and secundum legem and
consuetud' regni nostri Angliae fieri debet, Et in prox' Com' tuo abinde
tenend' public proclamar' fac' quod parts in eisdem brevibus, billis and
praeceptis, dies suos coram nobis in Cur' nostra in praedicto Crastino sancti
Martini observant, T. etc.

Virtute istius brevis mihi direct' omnia Le Retorn' per Vic' superinde.
brevia, billae and praecepta unde infra fit mentio in custod' mea retinui and
ea habeo coram Domino Rege infrascript' in Crastino sancti Martini
infraspecificat' una cum executionibus eorundem, ac etiam ad Com' meum tent'
apud N. in Com' meum die and anno infrascript' Qui quidem Com' fuit prox' Com'
meus post le Test vel breife de adjornm
infrascript' decimum diem Octobris proclamari feci, quod parts in brevibus,
billis and praecept' infraspecificat' dies suos coram Domino Rege infrascript'
in Crastino sancti Martini observant prout interius mihi praecipitur

G. H. Miles Vic.

Carolus, etc. Coronator' Com' M. Breve de Distring' versus un' and post un'
Essoin versus al' in un' quare Impedit.
Salutem, praecipimus tibi quod distring' P. C. Ar' Vic. Com' praed. per omnes
terr' etc. (ut in al') ad respondend' W. K. Ar' de placito quod ipse simul cum
P. M. Clerico permittant eundem W. praesentare idoneam personam Ecclesiae
parochial' de A. quae modo vacat' existit, and ad donationem suam pertinet ut
dicit' and ad audiendum inde Judicium suum de Plur' defalt' Praecipimus etiam
tibi quod distring' praed. P. M. per omnes terr' etc. ut in al' Ita quod habeas
Corpus ejus coram nobis ad praefat' Terminum ubicunque, etc. ad respondend'
praefat' W. una cum praed. P. in placito praed. and ad ostendend' causam quare
non servavit diem suum ei dat' per Esson' suam hic in Cur' coram nobis in
Octab. etc. ult' praeterit' postquam ipse attach' fuit and ad audiendum inde
Judicium suum de Plur' defalt' Et habeas ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Monmouth. ss. W. K. Ar' per Attorn' Intratio inde.
suum obtulit se quarto die versus P. C. Ar' Vic. Com' praed. and P. M.
Clericum de placito quod ipsi permittant praedictum W. K. ad praesentand'
idoneam personam Ecclesiae Parochial' de A. quae modo vacat' existit and ad
donationem suam pertinet, etc. Et ipsi non vener' Et praecept' fuit Coronator'
quod attach' praedictum P. C. Et Coronator' retorn' quod ipse attach' est per
pleg' I. D. and R. R. Et ideo sit in Misericordia, etc. Et praed. P. M. habuit
ab inde diem ei dat' per Esson' hic usque ad hunc diem scilicet in Octab. etc.
ult' praeterit' postquam ipse attach' fuit, etc. Ideo distring' eosdem P. C.
and P. M. quod sint coram Domino Rege in Octab. sancti Hilarii, etc. ubicunque,
etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic. M. Salutem, Pone Breve de Pone post Essoine and un'
distring' in consili' casu.
per vad' and salvos pleg' T. B. and W. L. Clericum quod sint coram nobis a
die, etc. ad respondend' I. C. de placito quod ipsi simul cum Johanne Episcopo
E. and R. P. Clerico permittant praed. I. C. ad praesentand' idoneam personam
Ecclesiae de E. quae modo vacat' existit and ad donationem suam pertinet ut
dicit' and ad ostendend' Causam quare non servaver' diem suum eis inde dat' per
Esson' suam in Cur' nostra coram nobis a die, etc. postquam summonit' fuer'
Praecipimus etiam tibi quod distring' praed. R. per omnes terr' etc. ut in al'
etc. usque coram nobis ad praefat' Terminum ad respondend' praefat' I. C.
una-cum praed. T. and W. in placito praed. and ad audiend' inde Judicium suum
de Plur' defalt' Et habeas ibi hoc breve, T. etc.

Middlesex, ss. I. C. per Attorn' suum Intratio inde
obtulit se quarto die versus T. B. and W. L. Clericum and R. P. Clericum de
placito quod ipsi simulcum I. Episcopo E. permittant praed. I. C. ad, etc. ut
supra usque ut dicit, Et ipsi non vener' Et praed. T. and W. habuer' abinde
diem eis dat' per Esson' suam hic ad hunc diem scilicet postquam Summonit'
fuer' etc. Ideo eos attach' quod sint coram Domino Rege in Octab. etc. Et
praecept' fuit Vic. quod attach' praed. R. etc. Et Vic. modo mand' quod ipse
attach' est per pleg' I. D. and R. R. Ideo sit in Misericord' etc. and
distring' quod sit coram nobis ad praefat' Terminum, etc.

Middlesex, ss. Praecept' fuit Vic. quod Le Entry del general' appearance.
caperet A. B. nuper de, etc. si, etc. and eum salvo, etc. Ita quod haberet
Corpus ejus coram Domino Rege in Octab. etc. ubicunque, etc. ad respondend' C.
D. de placito quare, etc. ut in le Cap. usque ut dicit' Et praed. A. B. per E.
F. Attorn' suum pet' quod Comparentia sua ad inde per Cur' hic recordaret' and
recordatur, etc.

London, ss. Praecept' fuit Vic. quod Consile' del special appearance on
special Bail.
haberent hic ad hunc diem scilicet a Die, etc. Corpus A. B. nuper de, etc.
quem de nuper, etc. ad respondend' C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. ut antea
usque ut dicit' Et modo hic ad hunc diem ven' tam praed. C. quam praed. A. in
propr' personis suis, Ac scilicet vener' hic in Cur' D. H. de, etc. and N. H.
de, etc. in propr. personis suis and manuceperunt and uterque eor' per se
manucepit pro eodem A. B. quod si contingat ipsum A. B. in placito praedicto
convinci, tunc iidem D. H. and N. H. concesser' and uterque eor' per se
concessit quod omnia dampna misa and custag' quae praefat' C. D. in ea part
adjudicat' fuerint, de terr' and Catal' suis and eor' utriusque sieri and ad
opus praed. C. D. levari si contingat ipse idem A. B. eadem non solveret
praefat' C. D. aut se prisonae Marr' Maresc' Domini Regis coram ipso Rege ea
occasion non redderet, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic. M. Salutem, Cum Scire fac' versus le Manucaptor' superinde.
D. H. nuper de, etc. and N. H. nuper de, etc. nuper in Cur' nostra coram nobis
scilicet Termino, etc. Vener' in propr' personis and manuceper' pro A. B. nuper
de, etc. quod si contingat eundem A. B. in quodam placito Transgr. super Casum
ad sectam cujusdam C. D. convinci, tunc iidem D. H. and N. H. (ut in le special
appearance usque redderet,) Iamque ex part ipsius C. D. in Cur' nostra coram
nobis accepimus quod praed. A. B. in placito praed. convict. fuit and
Quadragint' Libras pro dampnis mis' and Custag' eidem C. D. adjudicat' fuer'
prout per Record' and process' inde quae in Cur' nostra coram nobis remanen'
before liquet and apparet, Ac idem A. B. eadem Dampna non solvit praefat' C.
D. aut se prisonae Marr' Maresc' Domini Regis coram ipso Rege ea occasion non
reddidit; Ita quod Executio dampnor' praedictor' adhuc restat faciend' unde
nobis supplicavit idem C. D. sibi de remedio congruo in hac part provideri and
nos in hac part fieri volentes quod est justum, Tibi praecipimus quod per
probos and legales homines de balliva tuascire fac' praefat' D. H. and N. H.
quod sint coram nobis in Crastino, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad
ostendend. si quid pro se habeant vel dicere sciant quare Dampna praedicta de
terris and Catallis suis and eor' utriusque fieri and ad opus praed. C. D.
levari non debent juxta vim, formam and effectum Recognit' praed. si sibi
viderit expediri, Et ulterius factur' and receptur' quod Cur' nostra coram
nobis cons' in hac part, Et habeat ibi hac breve, T. etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic. L. Salutem, Cum Sile* sur' utlagar' puis pardon Le Roy.
C. D. nuper in Cur' nostra coram nobis per breve nostrum implacitasset A. B.
nuper de, etc. de quadam transgr. super casum eidem C. per praefat' A. nuper
illat' ut dicit' ac idem A. pro eo quod ipse non ven' in Cur' nostra coram
nobis praefat' C. secundum legem and consuetud hujus regni nostri Angliae inde
responsur' in exigend' poit' fuisset in Com' tuo ad utlagand' and ea occasion
post modum utlagat' existit sicut nobis constat de Recordo, Nosque pietate moti
pardonavimus eidem A. utlagariam praedictam and firmam pacem nostram ei inde
concedimus, Ita tamen quod stet rect' in Cur' nostra coram nobis juxta formam
Statut' nuper edit' de hujusmodi utlagaria, Et quia necessar' and expediens est
antequam praed. A. e Cur' nostra coram nobis quiet recedat quod praed. C.
praemunietur, Ideo Tibi praecipimus quod per probos and legales homines de
balliva tua scire fac' praefat' C. quod sit coram nobis in Crastino, etc.
ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad prosequend' ulterius versus praed. A. de
placito praedicto si voluit' Et ulterius factur' and receptur' quod Cur' nstra
coram nobis de eo cons' in hac part, Et habeas ibi nomina eor' per quos ei
scire feceris and hoc breve T. etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic. L. Salutem, Cum Exigi fac. versus un'des' ubi alter des'
capt' fuit per plur' and comparuit super Cepi Corpus retornat'.
plur' vobis per breve nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod caperet' A. B. nuper
de, etc. and C. D. nuper de, etc. si invent' fuissent in balliva vestra and eos
salvo custod' Ita quod haberet* Corpora eor' coram nobis a die, etc. ult'
praeterit' ubicunque tunc fuissemus in Anglia ad respondend' E. F. de placito
quare cum, etc. ut in le original usque ut dicit, vosque ad diem ill' nobis
retorn' quod Corpus praed. A. B. cepistis, cujus quidem Corpus coram nobis ad
diem and locum praed. parat' habuistis and quod praed. C. D. non fuisset
invent' in balliva vestra, Ideo vobis praecipimus quod Exigi fac' praedictum C.
D. de Hust' in Hust' quousque secundum legem and consuetud' hujus regni nostri
Angl' utlaget' si non comparuit and si, etc. ut in al' Exigent, usque ad
respondend' praefat' E. F. de praedicto Placito, Et habeas ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Carolus, Vic' L. Salutem, Cum plur' Breve de Proclamat' superinde eisdem Vic'
L.
vobis, etc. ut supra in le Exigent usque non fuisset invent' in balliva vestra
cunque etiam similiter vobis per breve nostrum nuper praeceperimus quod exigi
fac' and praed. If the Proclamation be into a Foreign County, then say as in
the first Proclamation in this Book.
C. D. de Hust' in Hust' quousque secundum legem and consuetud' hujus regni
nostri Angliae utlagaret' si non comparuisset and si, etc. vt in al'
Proclamation usque ad respondend' praefat' E. F. de praedicto placito, Ideo
vobis praecipimus quod per Statut' Anno, etc. ut in al' Proclamation usque, Et
habeat' ibi hoc breve T. etc.

Some Directions to the County Palatines and other Jurisdictions, in Writs of
general and special Outlawries, Supersedeas, non Molestan', or the like.

Camerario nostro Com' Palatini nostri Cestr.
Cestr' vel ejus locum Tenenti ibidem Salutem, This Palatinate says my Lord
Coke was created by William the Conqueror.

Reverend' in Christo patri' N. Dunelm' Dunelm.
Episcopo vel ejus locum Tenenti ibidem Salutem, This soon after that.

Cancellar' nostro Com' Palatini nostri Lancastr.
Lancastr' vel ejus locum Tenenti ibidem Salutem, This by Edward the Third.

Locum Tenenti nostro Castri nostri Dover Dover.
seu ejus in hac part Deputat' ibidem Salutem, Praecipimus tibi quod non
omitt' propter aliquam libertat' infra Jurisdiction' quinque Portium and duar'
antiquar' villar' vel membror' eorundem quin capias, etc. But otherwise when
there is a Constable.

Justic' nostris Episcopi Elien' ad Placita Insula Elien.
infra Insulam Elien' tenend', ac Senescallo ejusdem Episcopi infra libertat'
Insulae praed. and eor' cuilibet' Salutem, Praecipimus vobis, ut supra.

The Writs likewise to the County Palatines aforesaid have some alterations in
the bodies of the Writs themselves, and therefore I will here set down one or
two Precedents of the general and special Outlawry, that so the difference may
appear between them and others, that are not to Palatinates.

Carolus, etc. Cancellar' etc. ut in le Le General utlagar' Com' Pal' Lancastr'
direction, Salutem, vobis mandamus quod per breve nostrum sub Sigillo Com'
Palatin' praed. debite conficiend' and Vic' ejusdem Com' dirigend' mandari
facias eundem Vic' quod non omittet and propter aliquam libertat' Com' sui quin
capiat A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com' suo, utlagat' in London die Lunae prox'
post Festum, etc. Anno regni nostri, etc. ad sect' C. D. de placito transgr'
super casum si invent' fuerit' in balliva sua and eum salvo custod' Ita quod
habeat Corpus ejus coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Angel' ad
fac' and recipiend' quod Cur' nostra coram nobis cons' in hac part, Et habeas
ibi hoc breve, T. etc. Et sic in al' Com' Palatin.

Carolus, etc. Cancellar', etc. ut antea Le Special utlagaria eidem Com'.
usque propter aliquam libertat' Com' sui quin per Sacramentum probor' and
legalium hominum de eodem Com' suo diligent' inquirat quae bona and Catalla
terr' and tenementa A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com' suo habet seu habuit in
balliva sua die Lunae, etc. ut in al' usque de placito transgr' super Casum
prout Vic' nostri London nobis apud Westminster. ad certum diem jam praeterit' mand',
Et il' per eor' sacramentum extendi and appreciari faciat juxta verum valor'
eor' Et ea quae per Inquisitionem illam invenerit in manus nostras capiat and
salvo custod' faciat Ita quod de vero valor' and exit' eor' nobis respond', Et
illis, etc. sub sigillo suo and sigillis eor' ut in al' (special Outlawry)
usque accepimus, vobis similiter mandamus quod sub Sigillo vestro in forma
praedicta mandari fac' eundem Vic' quod praed. A. ubicunque in balliva sua tam
infra libertat' quam extra inveniri contigerit capiat, Et eum salvo custod' Ita
quod habeat Corpus ejus coram nobis ad praefat' terminum ubicunque, etc. ad
fac' and rec', ut antea in le general' Outlawry usque T. etc. and sic in al'
Com' Palatin'.

London, ss. A. B. nuper de, etc. attachiat' Narr' in casu semel recitat'
fuit ad respondend' C. D. de placito transgr' super Casum, Et unde idem C. D.
per E. F. Attorn' suum queritur quod cum, etc. and sic recite Tot' Narr' usque,
Et inde producit Sectam, etc.

London, ss. A. B. nuper de, etc. attachiat' Bis recitat' in transgr'.
fuit ad respondend' C. D. de placito quare vi and armis, etc. and sic recite
le breife de original usque ut dicit, Et unde eidem C. D. per E. F. Attorn'
suum querit' quod, etc. Et sic recite tot' Narr' ut antea, etc.

Narr' devant, usque querit' quod cum Narr' versus un' def' quando alter def'
stet utlagat'
praed. A. B. and quidem L. M. nuper de, etc. (Qui quidem L. modo utlagat'
existit) indebitat' fuissent (tali die anno and loco) praefat' C. D. in, etc.
usque Finem Narr'.

Et praed. A. B. per E. F. Attorn' suum Non assumpsit.
ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. Et dicit quod ipse non assumpsit
super se modo et forma prout praed. C. D. superius versus eum querit', Et de
hoc pon' se super Patriam, Et praed. C. D. similiter etc. Ideo praecept' est
Vic' L. quod venire fac' coram Domino Rege a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus
in Angl' duodecim, etc. de vicinet' de, etc. in Com' praed. per quos, etc. Et
qui nec, etc. ad recogn', etc. Quia tam, etc. Idem dies dat' est partibus
praedictis, etc.

Vt antea usque Quando, etc. Et dicit Non Cul.
quod ipse in nullo est inde culpabilis modo and forma prout, etc. ut antea.

Et praedictus A. B. per E. F. Attorn' Nil' dic' in transgr' vel transgr' super
cas' and agard. de breve de dampn' and Judicium superinde.
suum ven' and defendit vim and injur' quando, etc. Et nichil dicit in barr'
sive preclusion' actionis ipsius C. D. praed. per quod idem C. D. remanet inde
versus praefat' A. B. in defens' etc. -- Ob quod idem C. D. dampna sua versus
praefat' A. B. occasion transgr' (vel transgr' super casum) praed. recuperare
debeat, Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic incognit' existit quae dampna
praed. C. D. occasion praemissor' praed. sustinuit, Ideo praecept' est Vic' L.
praed. quod per sacramentum duodecim probor' and legalium hominum de balliva
sua diligent' inquer' quae dampna praed. C. D. tam occasion premissor'
praedictor' quam pro mis' and Custag' suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac
part apposit' sustinuit and Inquisition' quam inde ceperint Domino Regi a die,
etc. ubicunque tunc fuerit in Angl' sub Sigill' suis and sigillis eor' per
quor' sacramentum Inquisition' ill' ceperint mittant una cum breve praed. eis
inde direct' Idem dies dat' est praefat' C. D. hic, etc. Ad quas quidem tres
Septimanas sanctae Trinitatis coram eodem Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven' praed.
C. D. per Attorn' suum praed. Et Vic' L. praed. videlicet T. B. and W. R.
virtut' brevis praed. eis in forma praed. direct' retornaver' quandam
Inquisitionem coram eis capt'* per sacramentum xii. probor', etc. apud
Guildhal' Retorn del Inquisition'
Civit' London Scituat' in poroch' sancti Laurencii in veteri Judocisimo in
Warda de Cheap ejusmodi Civit' (tali die and anno) per quam compert' existit
quod praed. C. D. sustin' dampna occasion praemissor' praed. ultra mis' and
Custag' sua per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' ad, etc. Et pro
mis' and Custag' al' ad, etc. -- Ideo cons' est quod praed. C. D. recuperet
versus praefat' A. B. dampna praed. per Inquisition' praed. superius in forma
praed. Judicium superinde.
compert' nec non, etc. pro mis' and Custag' per suis ipsum circa sect' suam in
hac part apposit' eidem C. per Cur' dicti Domini Regis nunc hic ex assensu suo
de incremento adjudicat' Quae quidem dampna toto se attingunt ad, etc. Et
praed. A. B. (si sit transgr') capiat', etc. (si sit in Casu) in Mi'a, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' L. Salutem, Cum Le breife de Inquir. de dampnis in transgr.
vel transgr' super casum.
A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com', etc. attach' fuit essend' in Cur' nostra coram
nobis ad respondend' C. D. de placito quare cum, etc. ut in le original' usque
ad dampnum ipsius C. december librar' ut dixit, and inde produxit sectam, etc.
taliterque in eadem Cur' nostra, coram nobis processum est quod praed. C. D.
dampna sua occasion transgr' (vel transgr' super casum) praed. versus praefat'
A. B. recuperare debeat. Sed quia Cur' nostrae coram nobis incognit' existit
quae dampna praed. C. occasion praemissor' praedict' sustinuit, Ideo vobis
praecipimus quod per sacr' duodecim probor' and legalium hominum de balliva
vestra diligent' inquir' quae dampna praed. C. tam occasion praemissor' quam
pro mis. and custag' suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit'
sustinuit. Et inquisitionem quam inde ceperit nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc
fuerimus in Anglia, sub sigillis vestris and sigillis eor' per quor' sacr'
inquisition' illam ceperit mittat unacum hoc breve T. etc.

Et praedictus A. B. ut infra in le nil Judicium in ejectione firmae per nil
dicit versus le casual. ejector' ubi dampna sunt remiss.
dicit in transgr' vel transgr' super casum usque indefens. etc. Ideo cons' est
quod praed C. D. recuperet versus praefat. A. B. terminum suum praed. adhuc
ventur' de and in tenementis praed. cum pertin' Et praed. A. capiatur, etc. and
similiter idem C. dampna sua versus praefat' A. occasion transgr' and
ejectionis firmae praed. recuperare debeat, Et super hoc idem C. gratis hic in
Cur' remittit praefat' A. tam omnia hujusmodi dampna mis. and custag' quae
praefat' C. in hac part adjudicentur quam omne judicium and execution' habend.
pro eisdem, Ideo idem A. de eisdem dampnis mis. and custag' sit inde quiet',
etc. Et tantum pet' breve Domini Regis de habere faciend. ei possessionem suam
termini sui praedicti adhuc ventur' de and in tenementis praedictis cum pertin'
sine dilatione deliberari fac' and ei conceditur, etc. retornabile coram eodem
Domino Rege in Octabis, etc. ubicunque tunc Dominus Rex fuerit in Anglia idem
dies dat' est praefat' C. hic, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Praecipimus Venir' fac' sur exit' junct.
tibi quod venir' fac' coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in
Anglia xii. liberos and legales homines de vicinet' de B. in Com' tuo, Quor'
quilibet habeat quatuor libr' terr' tenementor' vel reddit. per annum ad minus
per quos rei veritas melius scir' poterit. Et qui nec C. D. Genesis quer' nec A.
B. nuper de, etc. aliqua affinitate atting' ad faciend. quandam juratam int'
parts praedictas de placito, etc. quia tam idem A. quam praed. C. int' quos
inde contentio est posuer' se inde in jurat' ill. Et habeas ibi nomina jur' and
hoc breve T. etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Praecipimus Distring. Jur. superinde.
tibi quod distring' T. G. de, etc. W. H. de eadem, etc. usque xxiv. jur'
summonit' in Cur' nostra coram nobis int' C. D. Gen' quer' and A. B. nuper de,
etc. per omnes terras and catalla sua in balliva tua, Ita quod nec ipsi nec
aliquis per ipsos ad ea manum appon', donec aliud a nobis inde habueris
praecept', and quod de exitibus eorundem nobis respond. Ita quod habeas corpora
eorum coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia, vel Si in
Land. vel Midd. tunc, Vel coram dilecto and fidel' nostro E. S. Milite Capital'
Justic' nostro ad placita in Cur' nostra coram nobis tenend' assign' si prius,
etc. apud Guildhall London, (vel in Mid. apud Westminster. in Com' Mid. in magna aula
placitorum ibidem per formam Statuti, etc.
coram Justic' nostris ad Assisas in Com' tuo capiend. assign' si prius die,
etc. apud A. in Com' praed. per formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu inde nuper
edit' and provis. venerint ad faciend. quandam jurat' int' parts praed. de
placito, etc. Et ad audiend. inde judicium suum de plur' defalt'. Et habeas ibi
nomina jurator' and hoc breve T. etc.

Carolus, etc. A. B. C. D. etc. salutem, Le Subpoena ad testifican' superinde.
Praecipimus vobis quod omnibus and singulis negotiis vestris and
excusationibus quibuscunque non obstant' sitis in propr' personis vestris coram
Justic' nostris ad Assisas in Com' M. capiend. assign', Si in Land. vel Midd.
tunc ut supra.
die Lunae xiii. die J. apud A. in Com' praed. ad testificand. ea omnia and
singula quae secundum notic' and scientiam vestras sciveritis in quadam action
in Cur' nostra coram nobis jam penden' indeterminat' int' C. D. quer' and A. B.
nuper de, etc. de placito, etc. Et hoc nullatenus omittat' sub poena centum
librar' T. etc.

Recordatur per Cur' (tali die and anno) Intratio del discontinuans del plea in
le Count per Quer'.
quod idem placitum non habet diem continuationis per eundem Rotulum praeterea
quam praed. Octab' Pur', etc. Ideo fiat Placitum praed. ad requisitionem ipsius
Quer' discontinuari, etc.

Angl' ss. Memorandum quod (tali die Irrotulatio Indentur' cognit. coram
Capital Justic' extra Cur'.
prox' post, etc. isto eodem termino coram Domino Rege apud W. E. S. Mil.
Capital. Justic' Domini Regis ad placita in Cur' ipsius Domini Regis coram ipso
Rege tenend. assign' hic recordatur quod (tali die and anno) apud, etc. coram
ipso Capital. Justic' ven' G. H. de, etc. Ar' in propria persona sua and
protulit coram Capital. Justic' praed. tunc ibidem quandam indentur' quam
cognovit esse factum suum, Et petiit quod indentur' ill. ut factum suum coram
dicto Domino Rege de recordo irrotularetur, quam quidem indentur' praed.
Capital. Justic' per manus suas propr' modo deliberavit hic in Cur' in forma
praed. irrotuland. and irrotulatur in hac qua sequitur forma: This Indenture,
etc.

Angl' ss. Memorandum quod die, etc. Irrotulatio ejusdem cog. in Cur'.
prox' post, etc. ut antea usque apud W. ven' G. H. de, etc. Arm', in propria
persona sua, Et protulit coram eodem Domino Rege tunc ibidem quandam Indentur'
suam quam cognovit esse factum suum, Et pet' quod Indentur' ill. ut factum suum
coram dicto Domino Rege de Recordo irrotularetur, and irrotulatur in hac qua
sequitur forma: This Indenture, etc.

And this any Filizer has used to do (as appears by several Records of this
Court before recited) although the Lands in the Indenture mentioned lie not in
such City or County where he is Filizer.

Et praed. A. B. per E. F. Attorn' suum Utlagaria sur' un' Indictm. placit in
bar.
ven' and defend. vim and injur' quando, etc. Et dic' quod ad breve praed. C.
D. respondere non debet, quia dic' quod diu ante impetrationis brevis praed.
scilicet xxiii. die Jan' Anno, etc. praecept' fuit Vic' S. per quoddam breve
ipsius Domini Regis quod exigi faceret praedictum C. D. per nomen C. D. de L.
in Com' S. Gen' de Com' in Com' quousque utlagaretur si non, etc. Et si, etc.
tunc eum caperet and salvo custod. faceret. Ita quod haberet corpus ejus coram
Domino Rege (tali die) ubicunque, etc. ad respondend. dicto Domino Regi de
quibusdam transgr' and contempt' contra formam Statuti de se been gerend.
edit', etc. unde indictat' fuit and unde, etc. ad quem diem scilicet a die
sanc^ae Trinitatis in tres Septim' supradict' J. M. Arm' adtunc Vic' Com'
praed. mandavit coram Domino Rege apud W. quod ad Com' suum S. tent' apud G. in
Com' praed. quarto die Febr' anno, etc. praed. C. D. primo exact' fuit and non
comparuit, Et ad Com' suum S. tent' etc. and sic usque quinto exact' fuit and
non comparuit, Et quia idem C. D. ad null. eorum Com' comparuit, Ideo ipse idem
C. D. per judicium T. M. Gen' and G. L. Gen' tunc Coronator' dicti Domini Regis
praed. Com' S. utlagat' fuit, Quae quidem utlagar' in forma praedicta
promulgat' and habita coram Domino Rege apud Westm' de recordo adhuc in plen'
robore and effectu permanet and existit, Et hoc, etc. unde etc. cum hoc quod
idem A. B. verificare vult quod praed. C. D. in forma praed. utlagat' and
praed. C. D. in narratione praedicta mentionat' est una and eadem persona and
non al. neque diversa, etc.

Posteaque scilicet tali die, etc. ven' praed. Replicatio de general' pardon
al' utlagar' placitat.
C. C. in propria persona sua and reddit se prisonae Marr' Maresc. dicti Domini
Regis coram ipso Rege occasion praed. etc. Et statim dic' quod ipse idem
Dominus Rex ipsum C. occasion utlagar' praed. impetere seu occasionare non
debet quia dic' quod post utlagar' praed. in ipsum in forma praed. promulgat'
praedictus Dominus Rex Angliae, etc. ad Parliamentum suum inchoat' and tent'
apud Westm' tali die anno regni sui, etc. authoritate ejusdem Parliament'
acquietavit pardonavit relaxavit and exoneravit omnes and singul. subdit' suos
and eorum quemlibet de omnibus proditionibus feloniis roboriis offens.
contempt' transgr' injur' deception' malis gestur' forisfact' penalitat' and
proficuis pecuniarum summis penis mort' poenis, etc. Et hoc, etc. unde, etc.

Postea scilicet die Lunae prox' post, etc. Intratio spespecial' pardon'
placit' al utlagar.
coram Domino Rege apud Westm' ven' praed. C. D. in propria persona sua, Et
dicit quod ipse idem Dominus Rex Angliae, etc. post utlagar' praedictam versus
ipsum C. in forma praedicta promulgat' scilicet (tali die and anno) apud Civit'
Westm' in Com' Midd' ex gratia sua speciali ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
suis per Literas suas Patentes sub magno sigillo suo Angliae sigillat', Cur'que
dicti Domini Regis nunc hic ostens. quarum Pardon ostens. Cur.
dat' est apud Civit' Westm' praed. eisdem die and anno pardonavit, remisit and
relaxavit omnes and omnimod. utlagar' quascunque versus ipsum C. solum seu
conjunct' cum aliqua alia persona sive aliquibus aliis personis, Et hoc parat'
est verificare unde pet' judicium and quod utlagaria praedicta versus ipsum in
forma praedicta promulgat' exoneretur and exoneratur, etc.

Et praed. A. B. per E. F. Attorn' suum Abatement placitat' pur' variante enter
le brief de original' and le Count
ven' and dicit quod praed. C. D. ad narr' suam praed. responderi non debet, Et
pet' auditum brevis praed. and ei legitur in haec verba, ss. Carolus, etc.
Quibus lectis and audit' pur ceo que quer' port son brief prout un' Mil. and
Bar' and Count' ut un' Armiger.
idem A. pet' judicium de brevi praed. quia dicit' quod inter praed. breve and
narrationem praedictam superinde habitam manifesta variatio apparet pro eo quod
praed. C. D. protulit breve suum praed. versus ipsum A. per nomen C. D. Mil.
and Bar' and narravit versus eum super breve illud per nomen C. D. Ar' and non
per nomen C. D. Mil. and Bar' prout praed. C. narrare debuisset, Et hoc parat'
est verificare unde praed. A. ob variation' praed. pet' judicium Cur' dicti
Domini Regis hic de brevi praedict', etc,

Et praed. A. B. per E. F. Attorn' suum Utlagar' placit' in abatement ad un'
breve de exigent alio modo.
venit and dicit quod, etc. ut supra Quia dicit quod alias scilicet duodecimo
die Februarii anno regni dicti Domini Regis nunc, etc. xxx. in Cur' ipsius
Regis coram ipso Rege apud Westm' in Com' Midd' ven' quidem L. M. and per
debit' process. legis obtinuisset and prosecut' fuisset quoddam breve dicti
Domini Regis de exigi fac' versus praed. C. D. tunc Vic' London direct', per
quod quidem breve idem Dominus Rex praecepit eisdem Vic' London quod exigi
facerent praed. C. D. per nomen C. D. nuper de, etc. in Com', etc. Gen', de
Hust' in Hust' quousque secundum legem and consuetudinem regni dicti Domini
Regis nunc Angliae utlagaretur si non comparuisset and si comparuisset tunc eum
caperent and salvo custodire facerent, Ita quod haberent corpus ejus coram
dicto Domino Rege in Crastino, etc. ubicunque tunc dictus Dominus Rex fuisset
in Anglia ad respondend. praed. L. M. de placito quare cum, etc. and sic recite
le count usque ut dicit, Et unde iidem Vic' dicto Domino Regi in Octab', etc.
tunc ult' praeterit' mand. quod praed. C. D. non fuit invent' in balliva sua;
praetextu cujus quidem brevis praedicti Vic' videlicet J. H. Mil. and F. L.
Mil. ad praed. Crastinum, etc. eidem Domino Regi apud Westm' mand. quod ad
Hust' praed. tent' apud Guildhall Civit' London tent' (tali die and anno)
praedictus C. D. primo exact' fuit and non comparuit and ad al. quatuor
Husting' ult' praeterit idem C. similiter exact' fuit and non comparuit, and
quia ad null. eor' Husting' comparuit, Ideo idem C. die and anno supradictis
utlagat' fuit. Et idem A. B. ulterius dicit quod praed C. adhuc sic utlagat'
existit and quod utlagaria praedicta in plen' robore and effectu adhuc remanet
minime reversat' seu adnullat', and hoc parat est verificare per Record'
utlagariae prae'd. unde pet' Judicium Cur' dicti Domini Regis hic si praedictus
C. in hac part responderi debeat, etc. cum hoc, etc. ut antea in le utlagar'
sur un' indictment placit' in Bar', etc.

Venit and pet' Judicium de brevi praed. Placit' in abatement quod quer' fuit
covert Baron tempore impetrationis brevis originalis.
quia dicit quod praed. C. D. tempore impetrationis brevis originalis praed.
ipsius C. (scilicet tali die and anno) and continue postea fuit and adhuc est
coopert' de quodam W. B. viro suo, qui quidem W. non nominatur in brevi praed.
Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pet' Judicium de brevi praed. per ipsum C.
per nomen C. D. vid. in forma praedicta impetrat', etc.

Venit and pet', etc. ut antea, Quia dicit Simile pur misnomer in le degree del
quer.
quod praed. C. D. in brevi praed. nominat' est and die impetrationis brevis
originalis praed. fuit Generosus, absque hoc quod est vel eodem die fuit
Armiger, prout per breve praedictum superius supponitur, Et hoc parat' est
verificare unde pet' Judicium de brevi praed. etc.

Venit and pet' licenc' inde interloquend. Excommucatio placit' in abatement
del brief puis imparlance.
hic usque in Crast', etc. and habet, etc. idem dies dat' est praefat' C. D.
hic, etc. Ad quem diem coram Domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praed. C. D. quam
praed. A. B. per Attorn' suos praed. Et super hoc praed. C. pet' quod praed. A.
ad breve and narration' suam praed. respondeat, etc. Et super hoc praed. A.
dicit quod praed. C. ad breve praed. responderi non debet, quia dicit quod
praed. C. post ultimam continuationem placiti praedicti (scilicet) post mensem
Paschae ult' praeterit' de quo die actio praedicta continuata fuit hic usque ad
hunc diem scilicet in Crastino, etc. and ante hunc diem fuit and adhuc
excommunicat' existit; Et protulit hic in Cur' Literas testamentarias Reverendi
in Christo Patris J. providentia divina Cantuar' Archiepiscopi totius Angliae
Primat' and Metropolitan', quae excommunicatio praed. in forma praed. testantur
in his verbis, ss. J. etc. (and sic recite tout les letters de excommunication)
Et idem A. pet' quod Actio praedicta remaneat inde sine die quousque, etc. Cum
hoc quod idem A. verificare vult quod, etc. (ut antea in le placit' del
utlagar' in abatement) est una and eadem persona and non alia neque diversa.

Et praed. A. per E. F. Attorn' suum Placitum in abatement quod breve original'
impetratur contra formam Registri.
ven' and pet' Judicium de brevi praed. quia dic' quod in brevi illo continetur
haec verba, (videlicet) secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni Domini, etc.
nunc Regis Angliae ubi in ordine particular' registri essent haec verba,
videlicet, Secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, Et non sicut
in brevi illo continetur, Et hoc parat' est verificare unde ex qua breve praed.
formatur and impetratur contra formam ordinis Registri praed. idem A. pet'
Judicium de brevi illo, etc.

Vt antea, usque quia dicit quod praed. Abatement placit' pur ceo que fuer'
deux executor per volunt' and brief de original' fuit port in le nosme de un'
eor' tantum.
L. M. le Testator per dict' testament' and ult' voluntat' sua constituit and
nominavit quendam R. S. Executor' simulcum praed. C. D. testamenti illius qui
quidem R. dicto tempore impetrationis brevis original. fuit and adhuc superstes
and in plena vita existit, videlicet apud, etc. in Com', etc. Et hoc, etc. ut
antea, unde pro eo quod idem R. non nominatur in brevi praedicto idem A. pet'
Judicium de brevi illo, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Cum Cap' in Withernam ubi sur' plur' breve de
homine repleg' vic' retorn' Quer' esse elongat.
plur' tibi praeceperimus quod just and sine dilatione repleg' faceres J. S.
quem J. M. and W. B. ceperunt and capt' tenent ut dicitur nisi capt' esset ad
special. praecept' nostrum, vel capitalis Justic' nostri vel pro morte hominis
vel pro foresta nostra vel pro aliquo alio recto quare secundum consuetudinem
Regni nostri Angliae non esset replegiabil. vel causam nobis significares quare
mandat' nostrum alias tibi inde direct' exequi noluisti vel non potuisti, At tu
spretis mandat' nostr' proed. ut accepimus proefat' J. S. replegiari vel saltem
causam quare id facere noluisti vel non potuisti nobis significare hactenus non
curaveris in nostri ac mandat' nostrorum contempt' manifest' and ipsius J. S.
dampnum non modicum and gravamen de quo mirabamus quamplurimum and movem' tibi
adtunc proeceperimus firmit' injungentes quod proed. J. S. replegiari faceres
juxta tenorem mandator' nostror' proed. prius inde direct' vel tuipse esses
coram nobis in Crastino, etc. ult' proeterito ubicunque tunc fuissemus in
Anglia Ostensur' quare mandat' nostra proed. toties tibi inde direct' exequi
contempsisti, Tuque ad diem illam nobis Le retorn' del plur' honine repleg.
retorn' quod proed. J. S. elongat' est per proefat' J. M. and W. B. ad loca
tibi incognit' qua de causa proed. J. S. repleg' non potuisti, Ideo tibi
proecipimus, quod in Withernam capias proefat' J. M. and W. B. and eos capt'
penes se teneas quousque proed. J. S. per ipsos in forma proed. elongat' prout
per retorn' tuum nobis certificasti gratis deliberari voluerit, Et qualiter hoc
mandat' nostrum fueris execut' nobis a die, etc. ubicunque, etc. constar' fac'
ut ulterius inde fieri fac' prout de jure and secundum legem and consuetudinem
regni nostri Angliae fore viderimus faciend. Et habeas, etc. T. etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' L. salutem, Cum Testat' cap' in Withern' sur' plur' breve
de homine repleg' supradict.
Vic' nostro M. per breve nostrum nuper plur' proeceperimus quod just and sine
dilatione repleg' faceret J. S. quem J. M. and W. B. ceperunt, etc. (ut supra
usque) vel causam nobis significaret quare mandat' nostrum alias ei inde
direct' exequi noluit vel non potuit ac idem Vic' spretis mandat' nostr' proed.
ut accepimus proed. J. S. repleg' vel saltem causam quare id facere noluit vel
non potuit nobis significare hactenus non curavit in nostri, etc. (ut supra
usque) movemus; eidem Vic' adtunc proeceperimus firmit' injungentes quod proed.
J. S. repleg' faceret juxta tenorem mandatorum nostrorum proed. prius ei inde
direct' vel ipse esset coram nobis in Crastino, etc. ult' proeterit' ubicunque
Le retorn' del plur homine repleg.
tunc fuissemus in Anglia ostens' quare mandat' nostra toties ei inde direct'
exequi contempsit, Idemque Vic' ad diem il. nobis retornavit quod proed. J. S.
elongat' fuit per proefat' J. M. and W. B. ad loca ei incognit' qua de causa
proed. J. S. repleg' non potuit, Ideo eidem Vic' praeceperimus quod in
Withernam caperet praefat' J. M. and W. B. and eos capt' penes se teneret
quousque praed. J. S. per ipsos in forma praed. elongat' prout per retorn' suum
nobis certificavit gratis deliberari voluerint, Et qualit' istud mandat'
nostrum fuerit execut' nobis a die, etc. Le retorn' del Cap' in Withernam.
ult' praeterit' ubicunque tunc fuissemus in Anglia constare faceret ut
ulterius inde fieri faciamus prout de jure, etc. (ut supra usque) faciend. Ac
pro eo quod idem Vic' noster Midd' ad diem illam nobis mand. quod praed J. M.
and W. B. non fuer' invent' in balliva sua cum testat' existit in Cur' nostra
coram nobis quod praed. J. M. and W. B. latit' and distur' in Com' tuo, Ideo
tibi praecipimus quod in Withernam capias praefat' J. M. and W. B. and eos
capt' penes se teneas quousque praed. J. S. per ipsos in forma praed. elongat'
gratis deliberari voluerit, Et qualit' hoc breve nostrum fuerit execut' nobis
in Octab', etc. ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia constar' facias ut ulterius
inde fieri fac' prout, etc. (ut supra usque) faciend. Et habeas, etc. T. etc.

Carolus, etc. Marr' Maresc' Cur' Supersed' al' utlagar reversat' quando def.
est in Custod. Mar.
nostrae coram nobis salutem, Cum nuper Vic' nostri L. per breve nostrum nuper
praeceperimus quod exigi facerent W. P. nuper de, etc. de Hust' in Hust' usque
de placito quare cum, etc. usque ut dicit praetextu cujus quidem brevis praed.
W. P. utlagat' fuit quae quidem utlagaria certis de causis nobis apud Westm'
specialit' moven' reversat' evacuat' and penitus adnullat' existit, Ideo tibi
praecipimus quod si ipsum W. P. occasion utlagariae praed. and non al. per te
detent' existit tunc ipsum ad largum ire permittas periculo incumbenti, T. etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Praecipimus Cap. in appeal de Mort.
tibi quod capias A. B. nuper de, etc. si invent' fuerit in balliva tua and eum
salvo custod. Ita quod habeas Corpus ejus coram nobis in Octab', etc. ubicunque
tunc fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend. C. D. vid. quae fuit uxor T. D. de morte
praed. T. quondam viri sui unde eum appellat, Et habeas, etc.

Middlesex, ss. C. D. vid. quae fuit Intratio inde.
uxor T. D. per Attorn' suum juxta formam Statuti, etc. op'tulit se quarto die
versus A. B. nuper de, etc. in Comitat' praed. Gen' de morte praed. T. D.
quondam viri sui unde eum appellat and ipse non ven', Et praecept' fuit Vic'
quod attach' eum per Corpus suum, Et Vic' retorn' quod non est invent', etc.
Ideo praecept' est Vic' quod capiat eum si, etc. Et eum salvo, etc. Ita quod
habeat Corpus ejus coram Domino Rege in Octab', etc. ubicunque, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' C. salutem, Praecipimus Cap' cum Proclamatione superinde in
le foreign County ou le appellee nominatur in le brief de original pur Statut'
de an' 8 H. 6. c. 10.
tibi quod capias A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com', etc. Gen' si, etc. and eum
salvo, etc. Ita quod habeas corpus ejus coram nobis a die, etc. ubicunque tunc
fuerimus in Anglia ad respondend. etc. ut in le Cap' supra usque unde eum
appellat, Et si praed. A. B. in balliva tua inveniri non poterit tunc juxta
formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis' ad duos Com' tuos in balliva
tua citra terminum praed. tenend. public proclamari fac' quod idem A. B. sit
coram nobis ad praefat' Terminum ad respondend. praefat' C. de morte praed. T.
D. Et habeas, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Praecipimus Exigi fac' superinde.
tibi quod exigi fac' A. B. nuper de, etc. in Com' tuo Gen' de Com' in Com'
quousque, etc. ut in all. exigent usque ad respondend. C. D. vid. quae fuit,
etc. ut antea in le Cap. usque appellat, Et unde tuipse nobis mand. in Oct.
etc. ult' praeterit' quod praed. A. B. non est invent' in ballivia tua, Et
habeas, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Praecipimus Cap' in appeal de Robbery.
tibi, etc. ut antea in le Capias in appeal de mort, usque ad respondend. C. D.
de roboria ipsius C. and pace nostra fract unde eum appellat, Et habeas, etc.

Carolus, etc. Vic' M. salutem, Praecipimus Cap' in appeal de Maihm.
tibi, etc. ut antea, etc. in le Cap' in appeal de mort', usque ad respondend.
C. D. de Maihemio ipsius C. and pace nostra fract', unde, etc. ut antea, Et
habeas, etc.

Note, That the proceedings by way of Appeal in Murder, Robbery, Rape and
Maihm, and such like, were heretofore much used, as may appear by diverse of the
Year-books, and Judgments of Death have been given in them for Murder and
Robbery as the Law required, as was lately experienced in an Appeal for Murder
brought and tried at Surrey Assizes, and the Appellee executed; and also
Damages have been given in them of Rape and Maihm, and the like; and the
Subjects (as then so now) are at liberty, and may bring their Appeals in all
and the like cases above mentioned.

And because by the Statute of the first of Edward the sixth, cap. 10. it is
provided that Writs of Proclamations, Outlawries and non molestando, and all
other process for or against persons outlawed living in Wales, shall be awarded
and directed to the Sheriffs of the particular Counties in Wales, therefore I
shall here set down the names of the several Counties thereof and the Towns
therein, which are Counties also, and have Sheriffs and their number.

The County of Anglesey, Each of these have but one Sheriff. Brecknock,
Cardigan, Caermarthen, Caernarvan, Denbigh, Flint, Glamorgan, Montgomery,
Merioneth, Pembroke, Radnor,

The Town of Caermarthen, 2 Sheriffs.

The Town of Haverford West, 1 Sh.

By the same Statute it is likewise provided that Writs of Proclamations shall
be awarded to the Sheriffs of the County Palatine of Chester and the City of
Chester.

Some Cities and Towns likewise in England, which are Counties also and have
Sheriffs, and their number.

The City of Bristol 2 Sheriffs. Canterbury 1. Coventry 2. Exceter 2.
Gloucester 2. Litchfield 1. Lincoln 2. London 2. Norwich 2. Worcester 1. York
2. The Town of Kingston upon Hull 1 Sheriff. Newcastle upon Tyne 2. Nottingham
2. Poole 1. Southampton 1.

Every other County in England is known to have but one Sheriff, and therefore
is here omitted.

A Modus for the Testes and Returns of Process by Original Writ.
In Termino Paschae.
Si le Original. sit retornabile, a die Paschae in xv dies, Tunc Cap' ret' a
die Paschae in quinque Septimanas, Test, The first day of this Term. Alias
ret' in Crast' Sanctae Trinitatis, T. The Essoin day of quinque Paschae. Plur'
ret' a die Sanctae Trin' in tres Sept. T. The first day of Trinity Term.
Exigent and Proclam' ret' in Crast' Animar', T. The last day of Trinity Term.
Si a die Paschae in tres Septimanas, Tunc Cap' ret' in Crast' Sanctae
Trinitatis, T. The Essoin day of tres Paschae. Alias ret' a die Sanctae Trin'
in tres Sept', T. The first day of Trinity Term. Plur' ret' a die Sancti Mich'
in tres Sept', T. The last day of Trinity Term. Exigent and Procl. ret' in Oct'
Pur' beatae Mariae, T. The first day of Michaelmas Term. Si a die Paschae in
unum Mensem, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. The Essoin day of
Mensem Paschae. Alias ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres
Paschae. Plur' ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae.
Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres
Paschae. Si a die Paschae in quinque Septimanas, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in
tres Paschae, and T. The Essoin day of quinque Paschae. Alias ret' ut supra in
tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae. Plur' ret' ut supra in tres
Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in
tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae. Si in Crastino Ascensionis
Domini, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. The last day of Easter
Term. Alias ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae.
Plur' ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae. Exigent
and Proclam' ret' ut supra in tres Paschae, and T. ut supra in tres Paschae.

In Termino Sanctae Trinitatis.
Si le Original sit retornabile in Crastin' Sanctae Trinitatis, Tunc Cap' ret'
a die Sanctae Trin' in tres Sept', T. The first day of Trinity Term. Alias ret'
a die Sanctae Mich' in tres Sept' T. The last day of Trinity Term. Plur' ret'
in Crast' Animar' T. The first day of Michaelmas Term. Exig' and Procl. ret' in
Oct' Pur' beatae Mariae, T. The sixth day of November. Si in Octab' Sanctae
Trinitatis, Tunc Cap' ret' a die Sancti Mich' in tres Sept', T. The Essoin day
of Oct' Trin. Alias ret' in Crast' Animar' T. The first day of Michaelmas Term.
Plur' ret' a die Sancti Martini in xv dies, T. Sexto November. Exig' and Procl.
ret' a die Paschae in xv dies, T. The last day of Michaelmas Term. Si in
Quindena Sanctae Trinitatis, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in Octab' Trin', and T.
The Essoin day of Quindena Trin. Alias ret' ut supra in Octab' Trin', and T. ut
supra in Octab' Trin. Plur' ret' ut supra in Octab' Trin', and T. ut supra in
Octab' Trin. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in Octab' Trin', and T. ut
supra in Octab' Trin. Si a die Sanctae Trinitatis in tres Septimanas, Tunc Cap'
ret' ut supra in Octab' Trin', and T. The last day of Trinity Term. Alias ret'
ut supra in Octab' Trin', and T. ut supra in Octab' Trin. Plur' ret' ut supra
in Octab' Trin', and T. ut supra in Octab' Trin. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut
supra in Octab' Trin', and T. ut supra in Octab' Trin.

In Termino Sancti Michaelis.
Si le Original sit retorn' a die Sancti Mich' in tres Sept', Tunc Cap' ret' in
Crast' Animar', T. The first day of Michaelmas Term. Alias ret' a die Sancti
Mart' in xvi dies, T. Sexto die Novembr. Plur' ret' in Octab' Sancti Hillarii,
T. The last day of Michaelmas Term. Exig' and Procl. ret' in Crast' Ascensionis
Dom', T. The first day of Hilary Term. Si a die Sancti Michaelis in un' mensem,
Tunc Cap' ret' a die Sancti Martini in xv dies, T. The Essoin day of mensem
Michaelis. Alias ret' in Octab' Sancti Hillarii, T. The last day of Michaelmas
Term. Plur' ret' in Octab' Pur' beatae Mariae, T. The first day of Hilary Term.
Exig' and Procl. ret' in Crast' Sanctae Trin', T. The last day of Hilary Term.
Si in Crastino Animarum, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in mensem Michaelis, and T.
Sexto die Novembr. Alias ret' ut supra in mensem Michaelis, and T. ut supra in
mensem Michaelis. Plur' ret' ut supra in mensem Michaelis, and T. ut supra in
mensem Michaelis. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in mensem Michaelis, and
T. ut supra in mensem Michaelis. Si in Crastino Sancti Martini, Tunc Cap' ret'
in Octab' Sancti Hillarii, T. The Essoin day of Crast' Mart. Alias ret' in
Octab' Pur' beatae Mariae, T. The first day of Hilary Term. Plur' ret' a die
Paschae in xv dies, T. The last day of Hilary Term. Ex' and Procl. ret' a die
S. Mich' in tres Sept', T. The first day of Easter Term. Si in Octab' Sancti
Martini, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini, and T. The Essoin
day of Octab' Martini. Alias ret' ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini, and T. ut
supra in Crast' Sancti Martini. Plur' ret' ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini,
and T. ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in
Crast' Sancti Martini, and T. ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini. Si a die
Sancti Martini in xv dies, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini,
and T. The last day of Michaelmas Term. Alias ret' ut supra in Crast' Sancti
Martini, and T. ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini. Plur' ret' ut supra in
Crast' Sancti Martini, and T. ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini. Exigent and
Proclam' ret' ut supra in Crast' Sancti Martini, and T. ut supra in Crast'
Sancti Martini.

In Termino Sancti Hillarii.
Si le Original. sit ret' in Octab' Sancti Hillarii, Tunc Cap' ret' in Octab'
Pur' beatae Mariae, T. The first day of Hillary Term. Alias ret' a die Paschae
in xv dies, T. The last day of Hillary Term. Plur' ret' a die Paschae in
quinque Sept', T. The first day of Easter Term. Ex' and Procl. ret' a die S.
Mich' in tre^' Sept', T. The Essoin day of quinque Paschae. Si in Quind. Sancti
Hillarii, Tunc Cap' ret' a die Paschae in xv dies, T. The Essoin day of quind.
Hill. Alias ret' a die Paschae in quinque Sept', T. The first day of Easter
Term. Plur' ret' in Crast' Sanctae Trinitatis, T. The Essoin day of quinque
Paschae, Exig' and Procl. ret' a die S. Mich' in tres Sept', T. The first day
of Trinity Term. Si in Crast' Pur' beatae Mariae, Tunc Cap' ret' ut supra in
Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T. The Essoin day of Crast' Pur. Alias ret' ut
supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T. ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii.
Plur' ret' ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T. ut supra in Quind. Sancti
Hillarii. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T.
ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii. Si in Octab' Pur' beatae Mariae, Tunc Cap'
ret' ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T. The last day of Hillary Term.
Alias ret' ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T. ut supra in Quind. Sancti
Hillarii. Plur' ret' ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii, and T. ut supra in
Quind. Sancti Hillarii. Exigent and Proclam' ret' ut supra in Quind. Sancti
Hillarii, and T. ut supra in Quind. Sancti Hillarii.

But note it is best (if your cause of Action in point of time arises so as
will permit it) to have all Original Writs to be returnable of the first Return
in any Term, for that then the Defendants will be sooner outlawed; Also, take
care no Writs or Process be Test on a Sunday, for dies Dominicus non est dies
Juridicus.

This Modus will serve as to some retorns of the Originals therein, where the
actions are laid in the Counties, as well as where they are laid in London, and
where there is not time long enough between the Test and Retorn of the
Exigent, (as is said elsewhere) there must be an Allocatus except at first you
make the Exigent and Proclamation of a longer return. And it is a received
opinion by some Clerks, that a Term may be skipped or passed over between the
Test and Return of the Exigent as it is in the Modus aforesaid of Hilary Term
in an Original returnable in Octab. Sancti Hillarii, there the Test of the
Exigent is the Essoin-day of Quinque Paschae, and it is returnable a die Sancti
Michaelis in tres Septiman' so that Trinity Term is wholly omitted, but others
I have known and very good Clerks they have been, that have been of another
opinion, and have looked upon it to be a discontinuance in Law to pass over any
Term, and I much question their Logic that by doing otherwise yet pretend it
to be a continuance, for if no adjournment of any Term can be otherwise than
from Term to Term, or from return to return and no proceedings by way of
entering Writs and continuing them to be given in evidence (in causes where the
Statute of Limitations is pleaded) against such Plea, but such continuances
must be always from Term to Term, and the like is always observed in the
continuance of any Elegit, Scire fac. and such like Writs and in all
Imparlances, and also in every Cur' advisare vult, then certainly a fortiori,
no Term in any proceedings whatsoever by Original Writ ought to be omitted but
such Writs always to be made returnable either de retorno in retornum, or de
Termino in Terminum, and if otherwise made may create a Moot Point in Law, and
does wholly frustrate the end of making the Writ of Allocatus, which is
provided to supply the Defect that sometimes happens and falls out between the
Test and return of the Exigent in not having length of time enough between the
same for the Sheriffs to make returns; if in London of five Hustings, or in the
Country of five County Court-days, at which the Defendants must be called and
do not appear, before they can be returned Outlawed. And that these directions
being made for the ease of the Attorneys may not in any sort turn to the
prejudice of the Filizers, whom it may be after such Process is made according
to the Modus aforesaid, may not be applied unto for the signing of such Writs
and Process, and be paid their just and due Fees for the same, give me leave to
present you with this Rule of Court following.

Dies Sabbati prox' post Crast' Ascensionis Domini, Anno 31. Car. 2. Regis.
ss. Ordinat' est quod omnia brevia and Regula generalis.
process. quaecunque super brevia original. emanand. ante comparent' Defend.
signari debent per Filizar' hujus Cur' secundum consuetudinem hujus Cur' ex
motione Magistri Williams.

per Cur'.

But certainly it belongs to them also to make, and so consequently to sign,
other Writs and Process after appearance of the Defendant as well as before, as
appears by the Copy of the Presentment of Fees following, where there are Fees
set down for these three Writs, viz. Venire fac', Distring' jur', and Subpoena
ad testificand. which none certainly will deny to be Writs after appearance;
and although the Exigent post Cap' Supersed. upon reversal of an Outlawry,
Scire fac' of several sorts, nay the very entering of Appearances themselves
either general or special, and many other things, as is said before, are
omitted out of the said Table, yet they do pari ratione without all dispute
belong unto them as Filizers, and it is very easy to prove that anciently they
have made out such Writs and Process; and without all doubt whatever is begun
on the Writ-side by the Filizer should and ought likewise to be carried on and
ended by him, and the Bill-side has no right at all to intermeddle with it no
more than the Writ-side has to intermeddle with the Bill-side.

And now as a conclusion to the whole matter I shall here give you an account
of a certain Commission mentioned in the Preface, dated the Second day of
February in the fifth year of the Reign of Charles the first (of ever blessed
memory) and now above fifty years since, which (out of his Princely zeal and
love to his Subjects, and to hinder the growth of extortion in Fees, in all his
then Majesty's Courts of Common Law and Civil Law, and all other Courts
whatsoever, both superior and inferior, in this his then Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales, etc.) he was then pleased to grant to several Peers and
others of this Kingdom: And that you may observe the solemnity thereof, and
consequently, imagine what great stress and weight his then Majesty was pleased
to lay upon it, and what respect ought now to be given to it, you have here a
Copy of some part of the said Commission, (the whole being above two hundred
Sheets of Paper) as it was examined (and attested upon Oath lately made in this
Court) with the Record of the whole now remaining in the Chapel of the Rolls;
and which follows in these words,

Rex, etc. praedilectis and perquam fidelibus Le Commission.
Consanguineis and Consiliar' nostris Edwardo Vicecomiti Conway Domino
Praesidenti privati Consilii nostri, Henrico Comiti Manchester Custodi privati
Consilii nostri, Thomae Comiti Arundel and Surrey summo Marischallo Regni
nostri Angliae, Willielmo Comiti Pembroke Seneschallo Hospit' nostri, Edwardo
Comiti Dorsett Camerario praecharissimae Consorti nostrae Reginae, Johanni
Comiti Bridgwater, Edwardo Vicecomiti Wimbledon, Olivero Vicecomiti Grandison,
and praedilecto and fidel. Consiliar' nostro' Johanni Coke Militi uni
principal. Secretar' nostror' and dilectis and fidelibus nostris Roberto
Killigrew Militi Vicecamerario praecharissimae Consorti nostrae, Roberto Cotton
Militi and Baronetto, Hugoni Middleton Baronetto, Henrico Spillman, Thomae
Middleton, Johanni Bingley, Willielmo Slingsby, Henrico Spiller, and Thomae
Cannon Militibus, Edwardo Ascoghe, Thomae Brett, Nicholao Pay, and Thomae
Bridgeman Armigeris, Salutem. Quia dat' est nobis intelligi and in part
verissimum fore invenimus, quod quamplures dilector' subditor' nostr' infra
Regnum nostrum Angliae and Principatum nostrum Walliae tam tempore Regni Domini
Jacobi beatae memoriae nuper Regis Angliae praecharissimi Patris nostri quam
tempore Regni nostri fuer' and in dies sunt injuste onerati and gravati
diversis excessivis Feodis and pecuniar' summis injuste and extorsive exactis
and receptis per quosdam Attornatos, Solicitatores, Clericos, and al. Officiar'
and Ministros in Cur' and foris nostris Judicialibus comunit' tent' apud
Westm', etc. Nos intuitu regio haec considerantes and volentes quod Justitia
omnibus Subdit' nostris aequalit' and indifferent' administretur cum tanta
expeditione and tam minimis expensis quam convenient' fieri posset, Ac quod
omnes extortiones, exactiones, corruptiones, dilationes, abusus and enormitates
qualescunque exercitat' vel usitat' in Curiis and Offic' praed. vel alibi infra
Regnum nostrum Angliae and Principat' Walliae tam infra libertates quam extra
examinentur, explorentur and reformentur, Et qui sic offendisse invenientur
aspere and severe corrigantur and puniantur juxta eor' demerita, Et nos
ulterius intendentes pro bono and quiet dilector' subditor' nostror' quod
omnia antiqua legalia and debita feoda in omnibus Curiis nostris, etc. and in
omnibus and singulis Offic' infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, etc. per omnes
legales, etc. modos, vias, modos and medios celerrime manifestentur,
appunctuantur and stabilientur, ac omnia nova and exacta feoda gratuitates and
extortiones sub color feodor' capt' penitus tollantur, ex quo dilecti Subditi
nostri in dictis Cur' nostris negotia habentes non ulterius per hujusmodi
extortiones vel exactiones onerentur aut graventur quae de tempore in tempus
magis augeantur, nisi remedium opportunum and idoneum citius apponatur: Sciatis
igitur quod Nos pro meliori performatione beneplaciti nostri in hac part,
fidelitati, discretioni and integritati vestris plurimum confidentes assignamus
vos, tres, vel plures vestrum Comissionarios nostros and vobis tribus vel
pluribus vestrum tenore praesentium plenam potestatem, and auctoritatem damus
and concedimus ad inquirend. tam per sacramentum probor' and legalium hominum
dicti Regni nostri Angliae, etc. per quos rei veritas melius Sciri poterit and
inquiri per testium depositiones, ac per omnes alias bonas vias modos and
medios qualescunque per quos veritatem explorare melius sciveritis aut
poteritis, quot, quae and qualia Officia usitat' tenebantur ac exercebantur in
anno Regni Elizabethae nuper Reginae Angliae undecimo aut ullo tempore abinde
(int' al.) in Cur' ad placita coram nobis tenend. etc. quot quae and qualia
feoda pecuniar' summa aut summae in dicto anno undecimo Regni Reginoe
Elizabethae praedict' usualiter and legitime capt' recept' vel habita fuer' per
Judices, Justiciar', Commissionar', Consil. Jurisconsultos, Causidicos vel
Offic' aut eor' Deputat' vel Clericos, Registros, Attornatos vel Solicitatores,
de vel in praed. Cur' temporalibus and qualibet earum vel ad easdem spectan',
etc. Et denique est Regalis nostra voluntas and in mandat' praecipue damus and
per praesentes concedimus quod omnia and singula processus, progressiones,
revelationes, disquisitiones, Inquisitiones, Depositiones testium sacram'
Jurator' ordinationes and omnia alia act a quaecunque capta, habita, facta vel
executa, virtute, vi seu tenore duar' prior' Commissionum consimilis tenoris in
diversis rebus cum his praesentibus, quarum una concessa fuit per
praecharissimum patrem nostrum praed. sub magno Sigillo Angliae geren' dat'
octavo die Martii in anno vicesimo Regni sui Angliae, and altera fuit concessa
per nos geren' dat' vicesimo octavo die Junii in anno tertio Regni nostri
Angliae and omnium aliarum ejusmodi Commissionum exinde concessarum pro
Consilii inquisitione de exactionibus, extortionibus, innovatis Officiis and
aliis rebus sicut per easdem before liquet and appareat erunt in omnibus and
ad omnes effectus, proposita, intentiones and constructiones qualescunque
valida and legalia ac ejusdem virtutis cum processibus, progressionibus,
revelationibus, disquisitionibus, inquisitionibus, depositionibus test'
Jurator' sacrament', ordinationibus, and omnibus aliis actis quibuscunque quae
virtute and tenore presentium capientur, fient, habebuntur vel exequentur, Et
quod hae Literae nostrae Patentes ad omnes effectus, proposita and intensiones
tam benign plene and ample construentur quam nos easdem tenore presentium
intendimus and praecise esse volumus; In cujus rei, etc. Test Rege apud Westm'
secundo die Februarii Anno Regni Regis Caroli quinto,

per ipsum Regem.

And here you see by this Commission that the Commissioners therein named or
any three or more of them, were to inquire and inspect into the Offices and
Fees of all the Courts of this Kingdom and Wales, etc. what Fees were taken
therein in and since the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, and to make use of
what former proceedings had been made in the like nature by virtue of two
former Commissions, the one granted by his Father, King James, in the twentieth
year of his Reign, and the other in the third year of his own Reign, as a rule
and direction for the said Commissioners to walk by; by virtue of which
Commission there was a presentment made the very next year following, for it
bears date the two and twentieth day of April, Anno Dom. 1630. which was sexto
ejusdem Regis, of all the Officers in this his then Majesty's Court, and of the
Fees due and belonging to such Officers, as may appear long since printed (all
but the Crown-Office Fees, and somewhat by way of Preface before the said
presentment, and somewhat by way of conclusion toward the end of it) both in
the Complete Attorney and Complete Solicitor, Books that have been permitted
without recall for many years to walk abroad in the World (certainly not to
misguide, but) for instruction in the practick part of the Law; and truly, but
that I was very unwilling to dismember the said Presentment in regard of the
use that may be made of it, else I would have left out some of the Fees that I
do admit are inserted in those Books, but not in so plain and easy a method as
in this. Note, As to the Filizer 's Fees those Books and this Presentment do
agree in most particulars.
In which said Presentment and Books before mentioned the Filizer's Fees of
this Court, not only for Writs and Process but for entering of Issues, (among
other things) are plainly inserted: And although it be certain there was such a
Presentment made, yet it cannot be at present so positively proved or made out
as the Commission aforesaid (by which it was taken) is, that being enrolled,
but this (as is feared) never was enrolled in this Court, as it ought to have
been, and as in the like nature it was done in the Court of Common Pleas, upon
another Commission hereafter mentioned, (some years after) as to the Fees of
that Court; but what reason there was for the omitting the inrollment of it in
this Court I cannot determine, but leave the Reader to judge as he pleases;
neither is it to be found affiled to the Commission it self, in the Chapel of
the Rolls, nor remaining in the Petty-bag Office in the Chancery, but (as it is
believed) the original Presentment it self of all the Courts whatsoever might
be left in the hands of some of the Commissioners themselves, and so never
returned into the high Court of Chancery, out of which the Commission issued;
but that only some abstracts have been taken out of it by the proper Officers
of the several Courts concerned therein, and so the same have been heretofore
hung up under the then Judges hands in some of the great Offices of each Court.
And that such a Table of the Fees of the Officers of this Court, was heretofore
hung up in the King's Bench Office in the Temple was lately proved by an
eminent and ancient Attorney of this Court and one of the Clerks of the Office,
as before is said they are commonly called for distinction sake, that is to
say, a Clerk to the now Chief-Clerk, upon a late Trial at the Bar in this
Court between one of the Filizers of this Court and the said chief Clerk, about
the right of entering Issues by Original; it is true he could not swear that he
had examined his own copy he then produced with the Table that did heretofore
there hang up, not knowing that ever he should have had occasion to have proved
it a true copy, but did swear then that he had many years since seen such a
Table hang up there in a Frame in that very Room where Mr. Hoddesdon, a former
Secondary of this Court, sat to sign Judgments, and (as he said) it was
believed it was burnt in the late dreadful fire of London, Anno Dom. 1666. and
it is most likely it was so, if not lost in removal or some other way or means
destroyed or else concealed; But to prove that there was such a presentment (as
well as it may) by what footsteps there are of such a thing, and then when that
is done it shall be left to the unprejudiced Reader to judge as to the veracity
of it as he thinks good, to which end let us go back a little to that
Attorney's evidence before given, who said he had his copy (then produced) from
one that was his Master, one Simon Harborne, one of the Clerks to the then
chief Clerk, and who was one of the Attorneys that presented it upon oath, as
you may observe by it; besides there are (at this time) at the least thirty
several copies in manuscript now kept by several Clerks of the Office, many of
which I have seen, and to what end they have kept them, and what esteem they
have for them, or what use they have made of them is best known to themselves,
but certainly the pains was very great in transcribing of them, and therefore
may be presumed was intended for some use, as to make their Bills by for their
Clyents, and the like: The copy of which said Presentment follows in these
words,

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, being sworn before his Majesty's
Commissioners for enquiry of new erected Offices and exacted Fees, etc. to
enquire and according to our knowledge to give true information to his
Majesty's said Commissioners, concerning Offices and Fees in his Majesty's
Court of King's-Beech, do inform and certify upon our said oaths as follows,
the 22. day of April, Anno Dom. 1630.

What Offices were exercised or what Fees were taken in the same Court in the
eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, we cannot tell, for that our knowledge or
memory extends not so far by many years, neither have we any direct or
certain means to inform our selves thereof; but the Offices and Fees that in
our memories have been exercised and paid in the same Court, and all such as
have been innovated and newly erected in the same Court in our memories are
here particularly set down.

First, Concerning Officers --
1. The Clerk of the Crown, Sir Thomas Fanshaw, Knight. 2. The Prothonotaries or
chief Clerks, Robert Henley and Samuel Wightwick, Esquires. 3. The Custos
Brevium or Clerk of the Treasury and Nisi prius, Robert Dewhurst and William
Mason, Esquires. 4. The Marshall, Henry Mordant, Esquire 5. The Filizers of the
several Counties. 6. The Crier and Porter, Ralph Fetherston. 7. The Sealer of
Writs, Robert Killigrew, Knight. 8. The Receiver of Fines, Henry Mordant, Esquire is a
new Officer.
Concerning Fees; and first, Of the Clerk of the Crown.
THE Clerk of the Crown has, during our memory, had diverse Clerks to do the
business of his Office, which have been called the Clerks of the Crown Office,
which Clerks have always, during our memories, been Attorneys in the Court of
King's Bench, and the Clerks of the King's Bench have always, during our
memories, been Attorneys in the Crown Office.

The Fees taken by the Clerk of the Crown and his Clerks during our memories
respectively.
Imprimis, FOR every person indicted Clerks of the Crown Office.
upon any offense, as well criminal as others, for the plea of Not guilty, 02
s. 00 d. And upon information for the like plea, 02 00 Whereof to the Master of
the Office, 01 08 And to the Secondary, 00 02 And to the Clerk for entering it,
00 02 And for every Venire fac' upon the plea Not guilty, 02 00 Whereof to the
Master, 01 08 And to the Secondary, 00 01 And to the Clerk for making it, 00 03
And of every person for the continuance of every matter upon indictment or
information after issue joined for every Term, 02 00 Item, For every inrollment
in a Quo Warranto, for every Roll, 13 04 And as much for the exemplification,
if the party desire to have it exemplified the same Term that it is entered, and
if it be exemplified after that Term, the Fee belongs to the Custos Brevium,
and not to the Clerk of the Crown. And for every Mark received by the Clerk of
the Crown, the Clerk for entry is allowed (and weekly paid his commons), 01 00
Item, For every traverse which comes out of the Court of Chancery and is
enrolled, for every Roll, 13 04 Whereof to the Clerk for entry, 01 00 Item, For
every other inrollment of any Patent, Grant or otherwise, for every Roll, 06 08
Whereof to the Clerk for entry, 00 06 Item, For all special pleas pleaded unto
an indictment or information, and also of all replications or rejoinders, for
every Roll, 13 04 But this has not been usually paid by the Roll, but
according to the length of the plea in paper, as near as could be guessed by
the same proportion. Item, For every special pardon pleaded and allowed for
Felony for entry of the Indictment, 06 08 And for entry of the plea, the
pardon, the Writ of allowance, and the judgment thereupon, for every Roll, 13
04 Whereof to the Clerk for every Noble 6 d. And for Gloves for the Judges and
other Officers of the Court, 13 04 All persons of quality use to give Gloves of
such value and goodness as they please. Item, For the plea of every pardon of
course and entry of the pardon, 13 04 And for Gloves, 13 04 Item, For entry of
a Writ of error in Felony, 02 00 Whereof to the Clerk for entry, 2 d. To the
Secondary for examination, 2 d. And for entry of the Indictment, 06 08 Whereof
to the Clerk for entering, 6 d. For entering of every error assigned, 2 s.
Whereof to the Clerk and Secondary, 00 04 For the Bayl in Court. 05 00 To the
Marshal and Crier, 00 08 To the Writer for making the Bayl, 00 04 To the Clerk
that is toward the cause, 01 08 For the entry of the judgment of reversal of
every outlawry or indictment in Felony, 06 08 And for Gloves, as for the
allowance of a special pardon. 13 04 Item, For the entry of an Indictment upon
a Writ of Error, where the Indictment is not Felony, 04 00 Item, For the
entry of the Writ of Error, Exigent and Return, assignment of Errors,
Reversal and Bayl, the Fees are as in the case of Felony. Item, For the Clerk's
pains in drawing of the Errors, according to the length thereof, and the
labor bestowed therein, 3 s. 4 d. or, 5 s. etc. Item, For every Imparlance
upon Indictment, or other causes, (except Quo Warranto) for every one, 04 08
Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 01 08 To the Secondary and Clerk for
examination and entry, 00 04 To the Attorney toward the cause, 02 08 And upon
every Imparlance upon a Quo Warranto, 06 08 Whereof to the Clerks for entry, 00
06 And the Attorney toward the cause has 06 08 And for the dismission of
every person, upon Indictment for Felony, for insufficiency, 06 08 Whereof to
the Clerk for entry, 00 06 Item, For the dismission of every person upon
indictment of Riot, Forcible entry, Trespass and such like, 04 08 Whereof to
the Clerk of the Crown. 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 04 To the Marshal and Crier,
00 08 To the Clerk for drawing the dismission, and for entering the Roll, 02 00
Item, for every fine the party makes upon an Indictment 04 08 Whereof to the
Clerk of the Crown, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 04 To the Marshal and Crier, 00
08 To the Clerk for making the Fine bill, 00 04 To the Attorney toward the
cause, 01 08 Item, For the Fine upon an information for the King's part, where
the Informer has compounded for his part, 11 00 To the Master, 09 08 To the
Clerk for drawing the Protestation, 01 00 The Warrant of Attorney, 00 04 Item,
For the entry of every cognition to any Nuisance for Highways and Bridges, and
for the Writ of Constar' fac' thereupon, 09 04 Whereof to the Clerk of the
Crown, 06 08 For making of the Writ, 00 04 For making the Fine bill, 00 04 To
the Secondary for giving over the Judgment, 00 04 To the Clerk toward the
cause, 01 08 Item, For the entering of every Postea which comes from the Judges
of Assize, and the judgment thereupon, 08 00 Whereof to the Clerk for entry 6
d. And the like for every Verdict and Judgment upon any trial at the Bar,
except special Verdicts, which are paid according to the length of every Sheet,
00 08 Item, For the entry of the submission of every Recusant, his plea and
judgment thereupon, 13 04 Whereof to the Clerk for entry, 01 00 Item, For every
person bound by recognisance for the Peace, Good behavior, or Felony, who
dies before day of appearance, upon which the Sureties plead his death, for
the Plea, drawing and entering the Judgment, and the Clerk's Fees, 15 04 Whereof
to the Clerk for drawing and entering of the plea, 04 04 Item, The Clerk of the
Crown (who is the King's Attorney in that Court by Patent) has also upon his
confession upon deposition of Witnesses, 06 08 Item, For every one that is
discharged for any debt due to the King for any deodand, Felon's goods, or the
like, 04 08 Whereof to the Clerk of the Crown, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 04 To
the Marshal and Crier, 00 08 To the Attorney toward the cause, 02 00 And where
the Debt is discharged by any Letters Patent or allowance upon a former Quo
Warranto, 06 08 For exhibiting every information, 03 04 Whereof to the Master,
02 04 To the Clerk for making the Information and Writ, 01 00 Item, For an
appearance upon information, 03 04 Whereof to the Master, 02 04 To the Poor, 00
01 To the Book bearer, 00 04 To the Secondary, 00 01 To the Clerk for entering
the appearance, 00 04 Item, For every copy of any information, or any pleas,
the parties pay for every Sheet, 00 08 Whereof to the Clerk for every Sheet
writing, 00 02 Item, For copies of Indictments of Trespass, Riot, Force or the
like, if it be but short, 02 00 If it be of any length above two Sheets, 03 04
Item, For every copy of Indictment in Felony, 06 08 Item, For the Inrolment of
every Writ of excommunicat' capiend. 02 04 To the Master, 02 00 To the
Secondary, 00 04 To the Attorney also in the cause, 03 04 Item, For every
Capias sued out upon the Writs of excom' capiend, 02 06 All which is paid to
the Master of the Office, and the Clerk has the Attorney's Fee in regard the
Writ is very long, 03 04 Also the Attorney that appears or does any act in
Court for any Defendant, has as in all cases at the common Law for his Fee, 03
04 And in Quo Warranto, traverse of Lands Writs of error in Felony being
extraordinary cases and but rare, 06 08 Item, For drawing of all Pleas,
Replications and Rejoinders, etc. upon Quo Warranto, for every Sheet, 01 00 And
for drawing all other Pleas, Replications, etc. for every Sheet, 00 08 Item,
For every Writ of Peace or good behavior, 04 07 To the Master of the Office,
01 08 To the writer of the Writ and Warrant, 00 08 To the Attorney toward the
cause, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 01 To the Under-clerks, 00 06 Item, For the
Supersedeas for the peace or the good behavior, 06 00 To the Master for the
Recognisance, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 04 To the Master for the Writ of
Supersedeas, 01 08 To the writer of the Writ and Recognisance 00 07 To the
Secondary for signing the Writ, 00 01 To the Attorney toward the cause, 01 08
For every attachment in contempt against any person, 04 00 To the Master of the
Office, 01 08 To the Clerk, 01 08 To the Maker of the Writ and Warrant, 00 07
To the Secondary, 00 01 Item, For every Bail taken for appearance, 04 00 To the
Master of the Office, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 04 To the writer for making
it, 00 04 To the Attorney toward the cause, 01 08 Item, For the discharge of
every person upon any Bail of the Peace, Good behavior, Contempt, or any other
Bail, 04 00 To the Master of the Office, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 04 To the
writer for making the Warrant for discharge, 00 04 To the Attorney toward the
cause, 01 08 Item, For every Certiorari for removing Indictments, Informations,
Presentiments, or any other Record, 04 00 To the Master of the Office, 01 08 To
the Secondary, 00 01 To the writer of the Warrant and Writ, 00 07 To the
Attorney toward the cause, 01 08 Item, For every Certiorari in Felony, the
same Fees, only the Attorney has over and above the former, his Fee of 03 04
Item, For every Supersedeas of the Peace coming out of the Chancery and allowed
in the Court, 04 01 Whereof to the Master, 02 00 To the Secondary, 00 05 To the
Attorney toward the cause, 01 08 Item, For the Bail of every person that is
brought in upon any Habeas Corpus, 05 02 Whereof to the Master all, except the
Secondary, 00 04 To the Marshal and Crier, 00 08 To the Clerk for making the
Bail, 4 d. Item, For every Capias utlagat' special. sued out against any
person, 04 00 To the Master of the Office, 01 08 To the maker, 00 03 And the
Secondary for signing, 00 01 To the writer of the Writ and Warrant, 00 07 To
the Secondary for signing it, 00 01 To the Attorney toward the cause, 01 08
These for the most part are made without Fee. Item, For every Writ to remove
Prisoners out of any County to receive trial in another, 04 00 Divided as
Certiorari and Habeas Corpus are, but most of these are made without Fee pro
Rege, Item, For every Writ of Procedend. upon a Certiorari and Habeas Corpus,
04 00 Item, For every Writ of Duces tecum upon the Retorn of the Sheriff that
the party is languidus, 04 00 Divided as the Habeas Corpus. Item, For every
Writ De gestu and fama, 04 00 Divided as the Certiorari. Item, For every
Supersedeas granted upon an Indictment, or other matter, in case where any
person is in exigent to the keeper of the Calendar, if the party make Fine for
every name, 6 d. Or otherwise to the Secondary, 00 06 Item, For every
Supersedeas granted upon any Indictment, if the party do not make Fine, then
the Secondary, 00 06 Item, For every Supersedeas for any person, upon any
Indictment of Felony where the party is in exigent, 01 08 To the maker of the
Writ, 00 03 To the Secondary, 00 01 Item, For every Writ of restitution to
restore a Man to his Lands, Goods or Chattels upon any cause, 06 08 Whereof for
engrossing of the Writ, 00 06 Item, For entering the same upon the Roll, 01 00
Item, For every Writ of Supersedeas upon a former restitution wherein the Lands
are to be reseized again upon the insufficiency of the Indictment, the Master
of the Office has, 13 04 Of which the Ingrosser of the Writ has 01 00 Item,
For every Writ of seizure of Liberties, 13 04 Whereof to the Clerk for making
the same, 01 00 Item, For every Writ of Mittimus of a Record transcribed into
the Court of Wards or Exchequer, 06 08 Whereof to the writer of the Writ, 00 06
And for the Transcript according to the length of the Record by the Roll, Item,
For every Writ of Execution, namely, Capias ad satisfac', Fi. fa', or Elegit,
06 08 Whereof to the writer of the Writ, 00 06 Item, For every Writ of Non
molestand. granted upon Pardon pleaded, or Outlawry reversed, 06 08 Whereof to
the writer of the Writ, 00 06 Item, For every Scire Facias sued out by any
person for breach of the peace or behavior, 06 08 To the Writer thereof, 00 06
Also to the Clerk for drawing the Surmise or breach to the length thereof.
Item, For every Scire facias in Felony, Diminuc' immediat', etc. 06 08 Whereof
to the Writer, 00 06 Item, For every Subpoena ad testific' attachment upon
Information or other ordinary Writ, 04 00 Divided as the Habeas Corpus. Item,
For a Ve. fa. de novo upon a traverse out of the Chancery, which is very rare,
06 08 Whereof to the writer, 00 06 Item, For entering of every Rule given in
Court, 00 04 And no more for the Copy unless it be of extraordinary length,
which is very rare. For examination upon Attachments of Contempt we do not know
what has been anciently taken by reason of the fewness of them, but of late
there has been taken the Fee of, 03 04 And for the Copies of examinations by
the Sheet, 00 08 Item, For entering and making a Copy of a license to the
Informer to compound with the Defendant upon any penal Law, 01 00 Besides the
Judges Fee, 02 00 Item, For every Distringas upon a plea of Not guilty, upon
Indictment or Information, 02 04 To the Master, 01 08 To the Secondary, 00 01
To the writer, 00 03 For the delivery of the Writ upon Record, 00 04 The Master
of the Office has from his Majesty only the annual Fee of 10 08 00 For the
search for every Term, 00 04 For a Jeavous pry for every Clerk for every Term,
00 07 Item, There has been allowed by the Seal of the King's Bench to the
Clerks of the Crown Office at the end of every Term a Breakfast, which they
have of late not performed but altogether omitted. For entering and estreating
every Rule betwixt party and party from the King's Bench into the Exchequer, 01
00

The Prothonotaries, or chief Clerks, have always, during our memory, had as
many Clerks as it pleased them to do the business of their Office, which said
Clerks are called Clerks of the Office, and so soon as they are admitted Clerks
of the Office they are Attorneys and have been always during our memories in
the same Court.

The Fees paid to the Prothonotaries or chief Clerks and their Clerks during
all our memories respectively.
For Writs.
For the Latitat. 05 01 The Prothonotaries.
Whereof is paid to the Secondary for the Prothonotaries, 01 10 To him for the
Judges, 00 08 For the Clerk that writes it, 00 04 For the Attorney's half Fee,
01 08 For the Seal, 00 07 The Supersedeas, Pro quolibet Magistro Offic' 1 s. 8
d. Exigent in appeal, Ve' fa' in appeal, Distringas in attaint' Habeas Corpus,
Certiorari, Procedend. Elegit, Subpoena, Retorn' habend. Withernam, Second
deliverance, Restitution, Scire facias, Pro quolibet Magistro Offic' 1 s. 8 d.
Diminuc' brev. Libello habend. brev. Probibition, Consultation, Proprietat'
proband. Distringas ad deliberand. rem detent. Distringas ad inquir' pro
valor, Resummons, Reattachment, Ven' fac' in audit' querel. versus partem,
Habere fac' seisinam and possession', Respond. in attaint', Vendic' exponas,
Brev' excommunicat', Brev' de Mittimus, All these are accountable to the
Prothonotaries, viz. for every one, 02 00 Out of which they allow the Clerk for
writing, 00 04 The Ven' fac. Averment versus Distringas Jur', Vic', Alias and
Plur' Cap', Fieri fac', Capias ad satisfac', Testat', Inquir' de dampn',
Distringas nuper Habeas Corpus super ce' Corpus, Vic', Non omit. For every one
of these besides the seal, 00 06 And for every Deliberant' de record, 00 04 And
for the Jurat of the Distringas of Nisi prius, 00 04 But all these, during our
memories, have always been allowed to the Prothonotary's Clerks, and are not
accounted for to the Prothonotaries.

Damages Clear.
In every Action wherein the Plaintiff recovereth damages to the value of 13 l.
6 s. 8 d. or above, he pays to the Prothonotaries after the rate of 1 s. in
the pound for damages clear when his Judgment is signed.

Fees due and received by the Prothonotaries and their Clerks for Entries.
For every Deed how short soever, 2 s. For every Action of Trespass, 01 00 For
every Not guilty, 01 00 For every Justification in Trespass, 02 00 For every
Replication, 01 08 For every Action super casum, not above three Sheets, 02 00
For every general Issue to it, 01 00 For every Ejectione Firm, 02 00 For every
general Issue to it, 01 00 For a Declaration in appeal, 02 00 For general Issue
for every Defendant in appeal, 02 00 For every Recognizance super hab' Corp'
for every Defendant severally, 2 s. For every Deposition upon a Prohibition, 02
00 For every Judgment by circumstant', 04 00 Out of which the Clerk is allowed,
00 08 For every other Judgment, 02 00 Whereof the Clerk is allowed, 00 04 For
every Dismission, 02 00 For every commission in Execution, 2 s. For every
Satisfaction, 03 00 For every compaenc' recordat', 02 00 For every Non pros',
02 00 For every Action of Debt, Detinue or Account, 01 00 For every general
Issue thereunto, 01 00 For every conditions performed, 2 s. For every
Replication to it. 01 00 For every script' dedict and pro Custod. script. 02 00
For every Justification in Battery, 02 00 For every Audit' querel. how short
soever, 02 00 For every special Imparlance, 02 00 For every general Imparlance
upon the plea Roll, 01 00 For every Defalt upon record, 02 00 For every
Suggestion upon a Prohibition, how short soever, 02 00 For every Recognisance
to it, 02 00 For every writ of Error how short soever, 03 04 For entering the
Errors, 02 00 For entering in nullo est errat', 02 00 For every Diminution, 02
00 For abatement of a Writ of Error and license to bring a new, 02 00 For
entering the same, 02 00 For every Recognisance single or with Condition, 02 00
For every Inrollment whatsoever longer than three Sheets, 06 08 After the rate
for a Roll on both sides, 06 08 Or half a Roll, 03 04 For every Bail by
Recognisance, 02 06

The Fees for pleading received by the Prothonotaries Clerks, due to themselves
as Clerks and Attorneys.
For their Fee in every cause for every The Prothonotaries Clerks.
Term, as Attorneys as well in the Crown Office as in the Prothonotaries
Office, 03 04 For their Fee also at every Nisi prius, and at every inquiry for
damages, 03 04 For their Fee in every Appeal, Assize and Attaint, every Term,
06 08 For drawing every Declaration in Debt, Detinue, Trespass, Account, etc.
not exceeding one Sheet, 01 00 If more than one Sheet, every Sheet, 8 d. For
drawing every Action upon the case or covenant how short soever, 03 04 For
drawing every Ejectione Firm, 02 00 For drawing every Declaration in Ejectione
Firm Covenant and upon the case, being above three Sheets, for every Sheet, 00
08 For engrossing in Parchment every Sheet, 00 04 For drawing every Surmise
upon a Prohibition, for every Sheet, 01 00 For drawing all special Pleadings
and special Writs, for every Sheet, 00 08 For the copy of every Declaration,
Plea, or other thing, for every Sheet, 00 04 For the continuing of every cause
every Term, 00 04 For entering of all things above three Sheets, for every
Sheet, 00 08 Out of which they pay to the Prothonotaries after the rate of a
full Roll on both sides, 06 08 And for a half Roll, 03 04 For entering of every
Judgment with Circumstant', 05 00 Whereof is paid to the Prothonotaries, 03 04
For every other Judgment, 03 00 Whereof is paid to the Prothonotaries, 01 08
For making every Bail, 00 04 For making every Bill of Middlesex every
Distringas nuper Vic' and Habeas corpus super Ce' corpus per prec' thereupon,
00 08 For making every Habeas corpus ad fac' and Habeas corpus cum pri'
certior' procedend. elegit and habere fac' possession' besides the 4d. allowed
by the Prothonotaries, 01 08 For every Sheet of every Declaration, or other
Pleading recited in a Writ of Damages, 00 04 For every Sheet of any Suggestion,
Declaration or other pleading recited in a Writ of Prohibition or Consultation,
or any other Writ, 00 04 For the entry of every Scire facias, 01 00

Every Clerk of the Office and their Clerks have allowed them at the end of
every Term from the Seal one Writ sealed, not paying any thing, called Jeavous
Pry.

Every Clerk of the Office upon his account to the Master of the Office at the
end of the Term for every Pound he pays is allowed 1 s. which is termed pro
regardis.

Paid to the Keeper of the Seal for Bills of Middlesex at our first knowledge.
For the sealing of every Bill of Middlesex, The Keeper of the Bill of
Middlesex Seal.
from the Essoin day until the continuance day, 00 06 From the continuance day
until the next essoin day, 00 10 For sealing every Alias and Plur' Bill, every
Habeas corpus super Ce' corp' and every Distringas thereupon per prec', 00 01
But now about ten years last past he takes from the very day the Term ended
unto the very day the Term begins, 00 10 And for every Alias and Plur' Bill,
Habeas Corpus and Distringas, 00 02 The Seal of the Attachment, 00 01 The Seal
of the Cap', 00 01 The Post diem of the Attachment, 4 d. The Post Terminum of
the Attachment, 00 08 For the Seal of a Distringas versus Freeholders, 00 01

Fees received by the Secondary.
For taking the acknowledgment of a Secondary.
Deed in Court, 01 00 For signing costs upon every Judgment by confession,
Nihil dic', Verdict and Demurrer, 01 00 Also, for acknowledgment of every Deed,
for every Judgment pronounced in open Court, every Rule to alter a Visne, for
every Rule for an Attachment, Prohibition, Consultation, etc. he receives for
the Poors Box, 01 00 For allowance of a Writ of Error coram nobis residen', 02
00 Whereof to the Box, 01 00 For the Allowance of the Writ of Audita querela,
02 00 Whereof to the Box, 01 00 For the common Bail, 01 02 For a special Bail
upon Habeas Corpus or a Certiorari upon Attachment, 04 10

Fees received by the Secondary for the Judges.
For every Habeas Corpus ad fac' and rec' Judges.
04 00 For every Procedend. 04 00 For a Certiorari to remove a foreign
Attachment, 04 00 For a Procedend. thereupon, 04 00 For every Habeas Corpus cum
Privilegio, 03 00 And out of the said Fee of the Lat' is accounted and paid to
him for them, 00 08

Fees received by the Judges Clerks.
Every Judge's Clerk takes for every Judges Clerks.
Warrant for an Habeas Corpus and every other thing whereunto the Judge puts
his name in the Term time, 01 00 And in the Vacation, 02 00 Also he takes for
the acknowledgment of a Deed before a Judge, which he says is for his Master,
06 08 And for taking of the Depositions of Witnesses upon a suggestion, for a
Prohibition for every Witness, 06 08 He takes more for his own Fee for the
acknowledgment of a Deed, 02 00 He takes also for his own Fee for every
Witness to prove a Suggestion, 02 00

Counsellour's Fees
Are not certain to our knowledge but Counselors.
they usually take for their Fee for every cause ordinarily, 10 00

If they receive more it is of their Clients free gift and not exacted to our
knowledge.

Sergeants at Law do likewise practice Sergeants.
in this Court, and they take some 10 s. for a Fee, some 20 s. or more, as
their Clients will give them, and according to the pains they take, but the
certainty of their Fee we know not.

The Fees paid to the Clerk of the Papers now, who has been during all our
memories one of the Prothonotaries Clerks and appointed by him, and is now
exercised by John Hill and John Woodward.
For the copying of special Pleas, for every Clerks of the Papers.
Sheet, 00 04 For making a paper Book either Issue or Demurrer, for every
Sheet, 00 08

Other sums of Money taken by the said Clerk of the Papers.
For entering in his Book every Record to be read, 01 00 For entering in his Book
every cause to hear counsel at every time, 01 00 For entering every Trial at
Bar, 01 00

Which have been taken by the now Clerks of the Papers about six years, and
about fourteen years before by the former Clerks.

Fees paid all our memories to the Clerk of the Rules, being one of the
Prothotaries Clerks, and is now exercised by Nicholas Pluncket.
For entering every Rule except general Clerk of the Rules.
Rules for answer, 00 04 For a copy of every Rule, 00 04 For every general Rule
for answer being in number above three, 00 02

Other Sums of money taken by the said Clerk of the Rules, which he now
disclaimeth.
For every Rule given in Court, with a copy for a Prohibition or Consultation
he takes 1 s. whereas the due is but 8 d. which has been taken not above five
and twenty years, 00 08 For every Rule, with a copy given in Court the last day
of the Term, he takes 1 s. whereas the due is but 8 d. which has been taken
two or three years, 00 08 For every copy of every Rule after the continuance
day he takes 8 d. whereas the due is but 4 d. which has been taken two or
three years, 4 d.

Also such Affidavits as are read in Court he claims these two years, or
thereabouts, to have the keeping of them, and takes for copies both of the
Plaintiff and Defendant at his own discretion, which formerly has not been.

The Keeper of the Postea's, which is also one of the Prothonotaries Clerks.
He has for the receiving, making and delivery of every Postea, 00 04

The Keeper of the Files of Declarations.
In times past the Keeper of the Files of The Keeper of the Declarations.
Declarations for every search did use to take for his pains in the keeping and
filing of Declarations for every search after the second Term, 4 d. but now by
a general consent for the receiving, filing, pying and showing the Files to the
Filizers and Clerks he is allowed for every Term of every Filizer and Clerk of
the Office, 2 s. and this has continued thirty years or thereabouts, 02 00
Laurence Coldham, one of the Secondaries Secondaries Clerks.
Clerks, for his pains and care in making and keeping the remembrance of the
Entries, and for severing and filing of writs, etc. he receives of every
fellow Clerk of the Office upon his account every Term as a gratuity, 01 00
Walter Carpenter, one of the Secondaries Clerks, for entering notes of the Writs
made in the Term time into Rolls of Parchment, every Term every Clerk of the
Office gives what he pleases. William Roper, one of the Secondaries Clerks
for entering the common Bails into Rolls of Parchment, every Term every Clerk of
the Office gives him what seems good to himself. Roger Yardly, one of the
Secondaries Clerks, for carrying the Rolls of the Writs to the Hall and Office
in the Term time, every Clerk of the Office gives him what he pleases.

The Custos Brevium has always had diverse Clerks to do the business of his
Office, which are called the Clerks of the Nisi prius Office.

Fees paid to the Custos Brevium and his Clerks during our memories.
For every Record of Nisi prius in a short Custos Brevium.
action of Trespass, 04 06 For every other action how short soever, 05 00 For
every full Press of Nisi prius or mittimus, 06 00 For every Nisi prius on the
Crown side, 06 08 For every full Press there, 06 08 For every Nisi prius upon
an indictment of Murder for every Name that pleads to Issue, 06 08 For every
short exemplification in Trespass, 10 00 For every Exemplification containing a
large Skin, 01 00 00 For the like in the Crown side, 02 00 00 For every
Exemplification in Ejectione Firm, 13 04 For filing a Writ being a Post diem
on the Angl. 00 04 For a Post Terminum at any time after the first week ended
in the second Term, 01 08 For every Warrant of Attorney in Murder, 01 00 For
every Sheriffs Warrant, 00 08 For every other Warrant of Attorney, 00 04 For
every search for a Roll for ten years last past, 00 06 For every search for the
same of above ten years last past, 03 04 For search for Rolls for the six last
Terms, For search for every File of Declarations, Bails, Judicials and other
Writs after ten years, 01 04 For the copy of every Sheet between party and
party, 00 04 For the copy of a Deed enrolled, for every Sheet, 00 08 For a copy
on the Crown side, for every Sheet, 00 08 For a File of the Angl. for every
Term after one Term, 00 04 For the copies of every Writ or Appeal, every Sheet,
00 08

Fees now paid to the Custos Brevium his Clerks to be referred to the Table
showed us of Fees.
For the writing of every Nisi prius or Custos Brevium his Clerks.
Mittimus, being but one Press, 01 06 For every Press more than one, 01 00 For
writing every Exemplification in Trespass or Ejectment, 03 04 For writing of
every large Skin of Parchment exemplified, 06 08 The Fees for writing every
Nisi prius and Mittimus were very uncertain until about Anno secundo Jacobi
Regis, and then it was ordered by the Judges that the Clerks should have for
writing of the first Press, 01 06 And if more, then for every other Press, 01
00 And every full Press to contain sixty lines or thereabouts.

The Custos Brevium and his Clerks take the whole Fees for every Press, and yet
there is seldom fifty lines in a Press and commonly fewer.

The Marshal's Fees, as they were certified by Sir William Knowles, Knight.
sometimes Marshal of the King's Bench, as appears by Mr. Antrobus 's Book.
Imprimis, For the enlargement of every Marshal's Fees.
Prisoner under his charge, which is termed a dismission Fee, 01 00 Item, He
demands for every Prisoner upon his enlargement a Fine for not wearing of
Irons, For Executions, in every Pound, 00 03 For Actions, in every Pound, 1 d.
ob. But he agrees with the Prisoners at lower rates. The Marshal takes for
every dismission more than the former Fee of 10 s. 08 08 The Deputy-Marshal and
Marshal's Marshal's Deputy,
Men take for every Prisoner that is committed in the Court, 05 06 And for
every Prisoner committed from the Judges Chamber, 02 06 The Deputy-Marshal
takes for the allowance of every Habeas Corpus, 02 06

Moneys and Fees due and received by the Filizers.
For every Capias, Alias, Plur', Testat' Filizers.
Exig', Proclam' and Distringas in Trespass, 00 06 For every Exig' and Proclam'
in replevin, 00 06 For every pone Capias, Alias, Plur' and Testat' in replevin,
00 06 For every Supersedeas upon the mean Process aforesaid, 02 00 For every
Capias, Alias, Plur', Testat', Exig' in trespass super casum, every suit qui
tam, etc. in every Rapt' Custod. in every Trespass, contra formam ordinationis,
every Ejectione firm, and such special Writs, 01 00 For the Proclamations
thereupon, 01 00 For the Distringas thereupon, 01 00 For every Capias, Alias,
Plur' in appeal of mahem', 01 00 For every Capias, Alias, Plur' in appeal of
Robbery, 02 00 For every name in every Capias, Alias, Plur' in appeal of
Murder, 02 00 For every Proclamation in every appeal, 02 00 For every general
Capias utlagat' and deliberat' de Record. 00 10 For every special Capias
utlagat' and deliberat' de Record. 02 04 For every Resum' habeas Corpus and
distringas in attaint before appearance, 02 00 For every Delib' de Record. 00
04 For every Writ of Withernam, second deliverance, and retorn' habend. before
avowry, 02 00 For every Ven' fac. 00 06 For every distringas Jur' deliberat' de
Record. and Jur' Nisi prius, 01 02 For every Subpoena upon Issue by original,
02 00 For entry of every Declaration in Trespass by original, 01 00 For entering
Not guilty thereto, 01 00 For Entry of every Ejectione firm, and upon the
Case, not above three Sheets, 02 00 If longer, for every Sheet, 00 08 For a
general imparlance, 00 04 For every special imparlance, 02 00 Copies of Writs
of Attaint before appearance, per Sheet, 00 08

They make Bills of Middlesex and all Distring. and Habeas Corpus per prec'
upon them for their Clients as Clerks of the Office may, and take the like Fees
for them as they do.

All Filizers are Attorneys in the same Court, and may take of their Clients
for their Fees, and for drawing and engrossing all Declarations, and for
drawing all special pleadings, and for all copies in such cases wherein they
are Attorneys as the Clerks of the Office may, but they may enter nothing on
the Prothonotaries Rolls, but a Clerk of the Office must enter for them.

He which enjoys the Office of Porter and Crier claims as due to him and
acknowledges to have taken by himself and his Deputies in the Court these Fees
following.
For calling a Jury, 02 00 Crier and Porter. As Crier.
For every Oath given in Court, 00 04 For taking a privy Verdict, 04 00 For
every argument in Law, 02 00 For every wager in Law, 02 00 When one chooses his
Guardian, 6 d. For a Bail taken at the Bar, 02 00 For calling a Nonsuit; 04 00
For calling the Record, 01 00 For calling a Default, 01 00 When a Pardon is
pleaded, 02 00 For every Trial at Bar, 05 00 As Porter.
For every privy Verdict, 02 00 For summoning the Wager Men, 03 00 For a Bail
taken at Bar, 02 00 For a Record called, 00 06 For a Default called, 00 06 For
a pardon pleaded, 02 00 For a discharge of a Rescous, 00 04 For a Bail taking
in the Court, 00 06

Of all these Fees above mentioned, claimed by the Crier and Porter, these
following have been paid as due during the time of our knowledge.

For calling a Jury, 01 00 As Crier.
For swearing every Witness, 00 04 For a wager in Law, 01 00 For a Nonsuit, 01
00 For a Default of Record, 01 00 For a Defecit in Lege, 01 00 For summoning
the Wagermen, 03 00 Also the Porter receives more of the As Porter.
Wagermen, where the Defendant wageth his Law or is ready to wage his Law, 12
00

Fees received by the Clerk of the Errors immediately after the Statute of the
27th of Elizabeth.
For the Lord Chief Justice his Fee for Clerk of the Errors.
the allowance, 17 08 For the Receipt, 05 00 For the Return, 02 00 For the
Certificate of the first Press, 06 00 For writing of the first Press, 02 00 For
a Supersedeas, 02 07 These Fees amounting in the whole to 01 l. 15 s. 03 d.
were paid upon the allowance and for the Supersedeas. For the certifying of it
he takes for every Press besides the first Press, 06 00 For the writing of
every Press after the first, 01 00 For the Roll, 01 00 For marking Non pross.
upon the Roll, 05 00

Also immediately after the making of the Statute of Anno 3 Jacobi Regis, the
Fees taken for the Bail were as follows upon a Writ of Error.

For the Prothonotaries for the Recognizance, 02 00 For the Judge's Clerk, 02
00 For making the Bail, 00 04 For drawing and entering the Recognisance, 04 00
Now, and for the space of 30 years last past he has taken upon the receipt of
every Writ of Error and Supersed. in a gross sum, 2 l. 6 s. 8 d. Also for
certifying every Press besides the last, 06 08 For writing every Press besides
the first, 02 00 For every Supersed. besides the first, with the Seal, 09 03
These last Fees were set down by Sir John Popham, late Lord Chief Justice, ex
relatione Edwardi Pie, now Clerk of the Errors, but we do not certify it of
our knowledge. Also he takes, and for the space of diverse years now last past,
has taken in a gross sum for every Bail, 19 04 For every Writ of Error, tam
in redditione Judicii quam in adjudicatione Executionis, he takes double Fees.

The Fines.
There is an Office invented and erected Clerk of the Fines.
about the sixth of King James, and now exercised by Henry Mordant, Esquire,
whereby is demanded and taken upon the filing of every Declaration in Debt,
where the Debt is above 40 l. and not above 100 Marks, 3 s. 4 d. and above 100
Marks and not above 100 l. 5 s. and so more after the same rate; and also every
Action upon the Case, Trespass for Goods, where the Damages are laid above 40
l. the like rates so that the Plaintiff or Defendant be not a Person privileged
nor the Defendant in Custod. Mar' whereas before 6 Jacobi Regis in all our
memories no such moneys were paid or demanded.

The Seal Office.
The Officer or Patentee receives for Seal Office.
every Writ (besides Cap' utlagat', and other Writs pro Rege, and for
Exemplifications and Writs of Privilege). 00 07 And for every Cap' utlagat, 00
01 For Exemplifications, 02 06 For all other Writs pro Rege and for Writs of
Privilege nothing.

Fees for Trials at the Bar, taken by several Officers as follows.
The Crier for calling the Jury, 02 00 Trials at Bar.
For swearing every Witness, 00 04 The Porter for keeping the Doors, 05 00 The
Crier for a Nonsuit, 02 00 The Deputy-Marshal, 02 00 The Tipstaves or Marshal's
Men for a Verdict given before the Court rises, 08 06 If the Jury lie together
all Night, 17 08 The Judges Foot-cloth Men 1 s. a-piece, 04 00 The Secondary
receives for a privy Verdict, 13 04 The Secondary receives for a Verdict in
Court, 02 00 The Money he receives for the privy Verdict he says is thus
divided, viz. The Judge that takes the Verdict, 06 08 To the Secondary, 02 00
And the rest among the Officers that attend, 04 08

Of all the Fees before mentioned, we present these following to be due.

To the Crier for calling the Jury, 01 00 For swearing every Witness, 00 04 For
calling a Nonsuit, 01 00 To the Deputy-Marshal, 02 00 To the Porter for keeping
the Doors, 01 00 To the Secondary for taking the Verdict in Court, 02 00 For a
privy Verdict to the Secondary, 13 04 Which is divided as aforesaid. And now
they take no other Fees than these last mentioned. We pay into the Crown-Office
for estreating every Amercement upon a Sheriff. 01 00

The Clerks of the Office have formerly paid no Fees at the Trials in causes at
their own suits, but now they pay for their own Causes as for their Clients.

Also there is paid to the Secondary his Clerks by every one of the
Prothonotaries Clerks every Term that he fails to bring in his Rolls within
24 days next following after Trinity Term, Michaelmas and Hilary Terms
respectively, and within 10 days next after Easter Term, 1 s. whereas they have
always formerly had time to bring them in until the Essoin day of the next
Term without Fee.

Also there is paid to the Secondary his Clerk for the filing of every common
Bail after six days after every Term over and above the due Fee, 4 d. the Table
of which several payments last mentioned is remaining in the King's Bench
Office.

These be all the matters which for the present we remember, and which we
conceive to be within our charge to be inquired of and certified: And we
farther certify that every one of us does not know all and every the Fees and
matters herein certified to be true, or that they have been paid of our own
proper knowledge, but some of them some of us respectively knows of his own
knowledge, and some of them we take by relation and information of some others
of us that have hereunto subscribed, upon whose information and relation we
believe these things to be true. And there have been produced and showed unto
us certain ancient Books, or Notes, remaining in the hands of Christopher
Hoddesdon, James Tetlowe, Richard Antrobus and Richard Barnett, wherein some of
these Fees were written, whereby we are induced to believe the said Fees in the
said Books or Notes contained to be anciently due and payable; the Copies of
which Books or Notes so to us produced, according to our charge in that case,
we are ready to show to his Majesty's said Commissioners, together with this
our Certificat. And we do farther certify that we know not of any other Books,
Rolls, Deeds, Records, Orders, Tables, Notes, or any other Writings,
Memorandums or Warrants which may give any farther testimony concerning the
premises, except one Note or Book remaining in the hands of William Langhorn.

Robert Redwood. William Harvey. Francis Beard. Laurence Gibson. Christ.
Hoddesdon. James Tetlowe. Stephen Bunce. Lewis Bromhall. Robert London. William
Tompson. Thomas Farrer. Simon Harborn. Richard Britain. Richard Barnett.
William Small. Edmund Denny. Nicholas Tippett. Thomas Powell. Richard Antrobus.
John Green. John Badger. Felix Wilson. Robert Clark. Ambrose Mudford, Richard
Slater. William Jumper. William Leach. Gilbert Barrel. John Dobbins.
These Fees following were not certified in the former Verdict, but thought fit
by most of the Jury, to be left out as things not inquirable or comprehended
within their charge.
To the Associate for entering a Cause in the Lord Chief Justice his Book. 11 08
To the Sheriff for the Return of the Venire fac', 00 04 For Return of the
Distring', 02 04 For the Sergeant for summoning the Jury, 03 04 To the Marshal,
02 00 To the Crier, 01 00 To him for swearing every Witness, 00 04 To the
Sheriff for a Tales, 02 00 To the Associate for a Tales, 02 04 To him for a
Default, 02 04 To the Hall-keeper for the Green-cloth, 01 06 If it be in the
Night, to him for Lights, 00 06 To the Bar-keeper, 01 00 To the Sergeant for
keeping the Jury, 01 00 To the Jurors, 08 00

Innovated Fees.
To the Associate for taking out of a Record not tried, 02 00 Which began first
about twenty years past. To him that Reads the Records and evidences, and
takes the Verdict, 01 00 Which has continued about thirty years. To the
Judges Foot-cloth and Horse-keeper, for every Cause, 01 00 Which has been
above thirty years. To the Associate for the Return of the Postea. 02 00

If the Verdict pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be nonsuited then
there are these Fees taken of the Defendant again.

To the Marshal, 02 00 To the Crier, 01 00 To the Foot-cloth keeper, 01 00 To
the reader of the Record. 01 00 This use began about nine years past. Also for
every Remanet where the Plaintiff is not in default, the Associate takes for
entering the Cause again in the Lord chief Justice his Book if he will have it
tried. 11 08

This has been used above twelve years.

Fees paid in our memories for a Nisi prius in Middlesex.
To the Associate for entering the cause in my Lord's Book, 11 08 To the Sheriff
for the Return of the Venire facias, 02 00 To him for the Summons and the
Distr', 12 00 To the Judges Marshal, 02 00 To the Crier, 01 00 To him for
swearing every Witness, 00 04 To the Sheriff for a Tales, 02 04 To the
Associate for a Tales, 02 04 To him for a Nonsuit, 02 04 To the keeper of the
Juries, 01 00 To the Porter, 01 00 To the Jury, 12 00

Innovated Fees.
To the Associate for Return of the Postea. 02 00 To him that reads the
Record and Evidence, and takes the Verdict, 01 00 To the Judges Foot-cloth and
Horse keeper, 01 00 This has continued about 30 years. To the Associate for
taking out of a Record not tried, 02 00 This began about sixteen years past.

If the Verdict pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be Nonsuited, then the
Defendant must pay these Fees following again.

To the Marshal, 02 00 To the Crier, 01 00 To the Foot-cloth or Horse keeper,
01 00 To the Reader of the Record, 01 00 This use began about 12 years past.
The Marshal's men demand and take for the keeping of the Jury at Nisi prius in
Middlesex. 03 06

Which is more by 2 s. 6 d. than is taken in like case in London.

Fees paid in our time to the Clerk that draws up Special Verdicts in London
or Middlesex.
For drawing it up per Sheet, 01 00 For indorsing it per Sheet, 00 08 For
copying it per Sheet, 00 04

Fees paid all our time for drawing a Special Verdict at the Bar.
For drawing it per Sheet, 01 00 For Copies per Sheet, 00 04

Fees paid to the Clerk of the Assizes for Posteas in our memories.
For returning every Postea the Verdict passing for the Defendant, or the
Plaintiff Nonsuited, 02 00 For drawing a special Verdict per Sheet, 01 00 For
every Copy thereof per Sheet, 01 00 But now the Clerk of the Assizes takes for
returning every Postea with a general Verdict, 2 s. if it be long and contain
diverse Issues then more than 02 00 For two Copies, per Sheet severally, 00 08
For engrossing per Sheet, 01 00

Fees paid to the Sheriffs during our memories.
For returning a Cepi Corpus. 00 04 For returning a Venire fac' in London, 00
04 For returning it in any other County, 02 00 For returning a Scire fac' with
a Nichil, 01 00 For returning a Scire fac' with a Scire feci, 02 00

Finis Feod. de Banc le Roy.
THese were Attorneys (no doubt) of the greatest knowledge in those times, and
most fit to be concerned in such an Inquiry after the Fees of that Court
wherein they were Attorneys: The three first were Clerks in the Crown Office,
as I have been informed; Hoddesdon was afterward Secondary of the Court, Small
of Furnival's-Inn, Denny of Clifford's-Inn, Slater one of the Clerks of the
Nisi prius Office in this Court, Leech was the now Secondary's Master, Barrel
Clerk of the Rules; some of these I knew, and the greatest number of them that
did so present as aforesaid were Clerks to the then chief Clerks, and it may be
some of them were well known to some of the now Judges Officers and Attorneys
of this Court, and it is strange that they should not understand well their
Master's Fees above all others; and yet these Attorneys have presented those
Fees for entering Issues by Original to be due to the Filizers which the now
chief Clerk claims to be due to him, and the same Attorneys that presented
theirs, at the same time presented the then chief Clerk's also; which Fees
cannot be admitted to be his due and the Filizers Fees presented denied to be
their due, except it must be presumed they swore right and were very honest men
as to one part of the said Presentment, and perjured and very dishonest men as
to some other part of it; which cannot be, for Juramentum est indivisibile, and
non est admittendum in part verum and in part falsum, as my Lord Coke has it
in his 4. Inst. c. 64. But (as is said before) the original Presentment cannot
be found, whether it be burnt, or mislaid, or kept secret, or what is become of
it is hard to determine, although it has with great care and pains been sought
after, and if it shall not in some short time be brought to light it may be an
inducive cause hereafter, I hope, to our most gracious Sovereign Lord the King
that now is, to grant another like commission when he in his abundant Princely
wisdom and goodness shall think fit, that so there may be a standing Rule for
the future by which the Fees of this Court may be taken and thereby all
extortion avoided. But that all the Fees that do belong and have been usually
paid to the Filizers of this Court in their several capacities, are not
mentioned in the said Presentment, is very plain and obvious in that these
following are casually omitted; that is to say, there is no Fee inserted for
the entering of the appearance, either general or special, nor for the Writ of
Allocat', nor for the Scire fac', nor for the length of any Writs or Process,
nor for the entering of any such Writs or Process, nor for the transcribing of
the special Outlaries with Inquisitions returned into the Exchequer, which as
Clerks of the Outlaries they ought to do, as well as the Clerk of the Outlaries
in the Common Pleas, nor in case there be more than four Names in a Writ,
(except Men and their Wives) then to pay double Fees as now is paid (if it be
so) for Latitats nor for any Distring' against a Peer, against a Corporation,
or against a Hundred, nor for any Testat' Distring' or Testat' Pone, nor for
any Writ of Homine replegiando, or Capias in Withernam thereupon, or Testat'
Capias in Withernam, and diverse other things as Inrolling of Indentures and the
continuance of Process, and the like; but Bernardus non vidit omnia. And it is
certain the Filizers have made and do make all and singular the Writs and
Entries above mentioned, as is before proved, and therefore certainly some Fees
are due to them for so doing, but what the due Fees are herein I cannot set
down, because I know them not in particular, but shall leave them to the
Judgment of the Judges of this honorable Court to determine what the Filizers
ought to have in such cases, only the Reader may observe, if he pleases to
look back into the aforesaid Presentment, and there among the Filizer's Fees he
will find that for entering of Issues, if they were above three Sheets they are
allowed there 8 d. per Sheet: And likewise the said Presentment mentions a Fee
for every Writ of Withernam, second Deliverance and Retorn' habend. before
Avowry, which seems to imply as if the Filizers had nothing to do with it
after Avowry; if so, how comes it to pass that since the said Presentment was
made they have entered Replevins, Avowries and Pleas in Bar thereunto, and
Judgments thereupon, on their Filizer's Rolls, as may appear among the many
Entries of Issues by Original Writ before recited; for the very next Term after
it was made, to wit, in Trin. 6 Car. 1. one Gosnold, Filizer of Suffolk, entered
a Scire fac' in replevin and in Hill. 7 ejusdem, Nil dic' in replevin entered by
the Filizer of Somersetshire, in Hill. 12. one Eveleigh, Filizer of Devon,
entered two Issues in replevin, and in Pasch. 14. ejusdem, Rot. 7. one Wright,
Filizer of Sussex, entered a Replevin with an Avowry, and Plea in Bar and
Judgment for the Avowant, and a Writ of Enquiry for Damages awarded, in Mich.
14. the like by Pain, Filizer of Sussex, in Hill. following the like by the said
Pain, Trin. 15. an Issue in Replevin by the said Pain, in Hill. 17. Rot. 22. one
Blincoe, Filizer of Somersetshire, entered a Replevin with an Avowry and Plea in
Bar, in Hill. 1652. Rot. 16. one Woodeson, Filizer of Yorkshire, entered a
Judgment in replevin, with a Retorn' habend. and a Cap. in Withernam awarded,
in Hill. 1655. Rot. 12. one F. Gregg, Filizer of Derbyshire, entered a special
Plea in replevin, and Non pros. superinde, and Retorn' habend, in Trin. 1657.
Rot. 14. the aforesaid Pain entered three several Declarations in replevin, and
for want of Avowries several Writs of Pone are awarded, in Pas. 23 Car. Regis
nunc Rot. 16. one Bathurst, Filizer of Kent, entered a Judgment in replevin, a
Retorn' habend. Averia elongat' and a Cap. in Withernam awarded, and many more
might be here inserted but these may suffice. And whereas the said Presentment
(prima facie) may seem likewise to contradict it self (which well considered
upon a review of the whole matter it does not) in that there is set down some
Writs of the same nature and by the same names, to belong both as well to the
chief Clerk, or Prothonotary, as also to the Filizers, and among others I shall
observe these, as namely, the Supersedeas, Habeas Corpus, Process in appeal,
Subpoena, Resummons, and the like; now to reconcile this seeming contradiction,
the Reader is to take notice that these last mentioned Writs, and such like
other Writs also, may and do belong to the chief Clerk, or Prothonotary; when
the Action is commenced by Bill without Writ, (as it is elsewhere observed that
upon a Scire fac' to revive a Judgment by Bill, it is always said per Billam
sine Brevi nostro ac per Judicium ejusdem Cur' recuperasset, etc.) So when it
is commenced by Writ, that is to say, original Writ out of Chancery, then may
and do the said last mentioned Writs and other such like Writs also belong unto
the Filizers, to instance in one particular and more plainly as to this matter,
in that of Appeal, my Lord Coke says in his 3 Inst. Cap. 105. fol. 237. of
Pardons, that in an Appeal of Death, Robbery, Rape, etc. the King cannot pardon
the Defendant and his reason there given is, for that the Appeal is the Suit of
the party to have revenge by death, and whether the Defendant be attainted by
Judgment, etc. or by Outlawry, the pardon of the King shall not discharge the
Defendant; and the reason certainly is very strong and prevalent. Now the
Appellors may sue such Defendants or Appellees rather, by way of Appeal either
by Writ or by Bill, as the said Lord Coke says in his said Inst. Cap. 50. fol.
114. of Clergy, speaking of the Statute that gives it, that that act extends
not to Appeals by Writ or Bill nor to Appeals of the Approvers, and the late
Reverend and Learned Judge Hale, in his Book of Pleas of the Crown, fol. 179.
Title Appeals, says that they are of two sorts, by Writ and by Bill; touching
Appeals by Bill, says he, they may be prosecuted in this Court, against any
that is in Custod. Marescalli, or let to Bail, they are the Sovereign Coroners;
and in many other cases there expressed, which I here omit; because the matter
of Appeals being very large and copious in its own nature may deserve hereafter
to be spoke to by it self. And I should not have said thus much now, had it not
been to set forth how that the Writs aforesaid and other such like Writs
agreeing both in their name and nature, and being presented in the said
Presentment of Fees; may both belong to the chief Clerk, or Prothonotary, when
proceedings are by Bill and not otherwise, and to the Filizers when they are by
Writ and not otherwise, etc.

There was also another Presentment made about eight years after that (and why
so soon after it I cannot imagine) for it is dated the 24. day of November,
Anno Dom. 1638. by virtue of his said Majesty Charles the first his command
signified to the then Lord Keeper and Judges, in these words.

It is his Majesty's pleasure that the Judges of all his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, that have accustomed to impannel Juries (of the Officers and
Clerks of the same Courts) to inquire of matters concerning the same Courts,
shall impannel such Juries this Term, and inquire what Fees have been taken in
such of his Majesty's Courts of Justice by the several Officers of the same
Court, by the space of thirty years last past, upon Certificate whereof his
Majesty will take such course for the settling of those Fees in the said several
Courts as to his wisdom shall seem meet: And the Lord Keeper is not only to
perform this his Majesty's pleasure in the Court of Chancery, but to signify
the same his Majesty's pleasure to the Judges of the other Courts that they may
perform the same this Term. At the Court of White Hall, October the 17. 1638.

Francis Windebanck.

These are the very words of his then Majesty's Command, in Obedience whereunto
within four days of the end of that Term another like Presentment was made, a
Copy whereof I now have in my hands, and it follows in these words.

A Presentment upon Oath of all such Fees and Payments as now are, and by the
space of thirty years now last past have been used to be taken by the several
Officers, Ministers or Clerks of the Court of King's Bench, hereafter
mentioned, as belonging or claimed to him or them, by reason of his Office,
Place or Clerkship by Us whose Names are hereunder written. The 24. day of
November, 1638.
In which Presentment (among all the other Officers Fees of this Court, which
for brevity sake I omit) is presented the same Fees over again (as in the
former Presentment) due to the Filizers of this Court, under this very same
expression (as before) viz.

Moneys and Fees due and received by the Filizers.
And at the bottom of the said last Presentment, it is thus concluded.

These be all the Fees for the present we remember, saving to the Court all
such rights and Fees as we remember not, and may happen according to the extent
and jurisdiction of the Court, and we know of no Fees taken, begun enhaunsed,
increased or innovated, within the space of thirty years now last past.

* Chr. Hoddesdon. John Woodward. * Simon Harborn. Reynold Bryan. * William
Jumper. Laurence Coldham. William Hubbold. Thomas Lethbridge. * Laurence
Gibson. * Richard Antrobus. * Edmund Denny. George Merefield. * William Small.
Thomas Dawborn. and, Nicholas Wemm.
These were the Names of the then Jury of Attorneys, the first of them was
Secondary of this Court soon after, and I desire the Reader to take notice that
seven of them (thus * marked) were of the former Jury, six of them I knew, and
I believe many more of them were known to the now Judges or Officers of the
Court, and all or the most of them Clerks to the then chief Clerks; but I shall
urge that reason no farther, only I observe that by virtue of the said Mandate
from his then Majesty there was the like Presentment made of the Fees in the
Court of Common Pleas, Note the prudent care of that Court to inroll their Fees.
and enrolled upon Record in that Court, as by the Records of Michaelmas Term,
15 Car. primi, Rot. 889. may appear, and it had not been amiss certainly if it
had been so in this, but it seems this was omitted also; and I find by some
printed Rules and Orders of this Court, made and published in Michaelmas Term,
Anno Dom. 1654. by the then Judges thereof, namely, Roll, Ask and Newdigate,
before mentioned, amongst other things it was ordered that a Jury of able and
credible Officers, Clerks and Attorneys once in three years be impannelled and
sworn to inquire, first of the points usually inquirable by Writ, viz.
Falsities, Contempts, Misprisions and Offenses; Secondly, Of such who have been
admitted Attorneys or Clerks, and are notoriously unfit, their names to be
presented to the Court and they to be punished or removed, as the case shall
require; Thirdly of new or exacted Fees, and of those that have taken them
under whatsoever pretense, and to prepare and present a Table of the due and
just Fees, that the same may be fixed and continue in every Office, and
likewise for the Marshalsey, and that some persons be enjoined and sworn to
give evidence, (viz.) some Clerks of the Court, and some Attorneys in every
County, not excluding others. And no doubt but hereupon some Presentiments were
likewise made in this Court, but what became of them is unknown: And whether it
be not fit that such Rules and Orders should still be made and continued in
this Court, and duly put in execution, I do most humbly refer and submit to
the Judgment and opinion of the now most Learned and Reverend Judges of the
same.

The Names of the present FILIZERS, and where most of them are resident.
Bedfordsh. Edw. Smith, at his House over against the Blew Bore Inn in
High-holborn. Berks. Robert Hastings, at his house in White-chapel. Bucks.
Cantabr. James Fuller, of Clifford's-Inn. Cornub. The same. Cumbr. The same.
Derbysh. Thomas Statham. Devon. John Green, in Ship Yard in Bartholomew-Lane.
Dorset. John Martin. Ebor. George Woodeson, at Mr. Tho. Gallowe's Chamber in
Clement's-Inn. Essex. William Twyford, at the Wool-pack in the Poultrey. Glouc.
John Try, of Gray's-Inn. Heref. William Hastings, at his house in Hatton
Garden. Hertf. William Ravenhill, at Grocer's Hall. Huntingt. Kent. Thomas
Bathurst, at Mr. Oade's a Scrivener in Breadstreet Hill. Leicest. William
Benson, at his House in Shoreditch. Lincoln. John Browning, at the Crown in
Kingstreet by Guildhall. London. John Try aforesaid. Middles. The same.
Monmouth. John Smith, next door to the Crown in the Poultrey. Norfolk. William
Avery, at Gray's-Inn. Northamp. Godfrey Wildbore, at Mr. Hart's Chamber in
Clifford's-Inn. Northumb. James Fuller aforesaid. Nottingh. The same. Oxon.
Henry Dodd, in the Paper Buildings in the Inner Temple. Rotel. James Fuller
aforesaid. Salop. Bazil Hearne, at his House in Basinghall Street. Summers.
Robert Randall, at Mr. Abbington's in Coleman Street. Southamp. Francis Caplyn,
at his House in Wineoffice Court in Fleetstreet. Staff. Michael Martyn.
Suffolk. James Fuller aforesaid. Surrey. John Try aforesaid. Sussex. Richard
Aylwin. War. James Fuller aforesaid. Westmorl. John Hind, at the Horns in Bell
Yard. Wigorn. Wilts. Samuel Porter, in Star Court in Friday Street. Civ. Cant.
C. Cov. C. Bristol. John Airs, at Mr. Philip's. House in Wandall Court in
Blackfryers. C. Ebor. C. Exon. C. Glouc. Henry Ewen. C. Lincoln. C. Litchf. C.
Norw. C. Wigorn. Vil. Not. William Bennet. V. Kingst. super Hul. William
Osborne. V. South. Francis Caplyn aforesaid. V. Pool. V. nov. Cast. super Tin.

And where it happens that there is no Filizer, any other of the above named
Filizers may make out the Process, and the Test of the chief Justice is
sufficient, although without any Filizer's name to the same; and such Filizer
may also do and perform all other matters whatsoever subsequent or belonging
thereunto, that so a failure of Justice in the proceedings may be prevented.
And when any change shall happen in any of the aforesaid Filizers by death or
otherwise, or any admitted into the vacant places, it may be known of the
Keeper of the Sign of the Latitats in this Court, who keeps a Book of the
Names of the Filizers, Clerks of the Office and Attorneys at large of the said
Court, and the time when they were admitted.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THAT the practice by Original Writ is of very great antiquity in the Court of
King's Bench, Page 1. That it prevents in a great measure the delay of
Execution after Judgment had and obtained, 6. That against some sort of
Persons, and in some sort of Actions, there is no other way to proceed in the
said Court but by Original Writ, 9. That it is most agreeable to the Statute
lately made for setting forth the cause of Action in the Writ, 13. That the
Filizers of the said Court have not only made and entered on Record Writs and
Process by Original, but also entered Declarations, Imparlances, Issues,
Judgments, and diverse other proceedings thereupon, and also have enrolled
Indentures, and all this upon their Filizers Rolls, 19. Some directions in the
way of practice by Original Writ in this Court, 55. The King's Majesty's Fines
upon Original Writs, 59. Also how to appear for the Defendant, either upon
Arrest, or upon the Exigent, or upon the Reversal of the Outlawry, 67. How to
reverse an Outlawry by Writ of Error, 74. How to proceed to the Outlawry after
judgment, 77. Somewhat concerning Imparlances upon Suits brought by Original
Writ, 79. How to plead an Outlawry either in Abatement or Bar of any Action,
84. Where Suits by Original Writ ought to be laid, and when the Visne may be
altered, 86. How to proceed so as to have a special Capias utlagat' together
with the Inquisition thereupon taken, sent into the Exchequer, and to get a
Lease from the King of the Defendant's Lands. 88. Somewhat concerning the
drawing of Declarations by Original Writ, 91. The manner of removing Actions or
Plaints out of inferior Courts into this Court, and after that how to proceed
in them, 93. Some reasons impartially offered to show how it has come to pass
that the practice in this Court by Original Writ has decreased and that by
Bill increased, and what has occasioned some Entries of Issues and other
proceedings to be made, as well on the chief Clerk's Rolls as on the Filizer's
Rolls, 97. Some Precedents of frequent use, both of Writs and the Entries
thereupon, and also Declarations, Imparlances, Issues, Judgments and Defaults,
and other proceedings in Actions brought by Original Writ, and entered by the
Filizers, 111. Le Capias, Alias, Plur' and Exigent, 112. Le Foreign
Proclamation, 113. Le Allocatus, 114. Le Supersedeas quia improvide, ibid. Le
general Cap' utlagat', 115. Le special Cap' utlagat', ibid. Intratio separal'
process. de Cap', Alias and Plur', Exig' and Proclam' and utlagaria reversat'
superinde, 116. Le special' Bail sur reversal del utlagaria, 121. Le special'
Bail sur Arrest, ibid. Supersedeas sur' reversal del utlagar' pro defectu
Proclam' ubi bona and catalla Def. capt' fuer' per Breve de special Cap'
utlagat' devant le reversal, 122. Aliter ex assensu Attorn' pro Quer' sur' Def.
imposition' Ball' coram un' Justic' Cur', 123. Breve de Cap' ad satisfaciend'
Exigent superinde, 124. Exigent post Cap' puis un recovery pro dampnis in
Commun' Banco, and affirmetur in Cur' hic sur' brief de Error, 125. Breve de
Pone sur' un' brief de Recordare, ibid. Intratio inde, 126. Breve de Distring'
super pone praedict. ibid. Distring' envers un' Peer, 127. Testat' Distring'
sur' nichil retorn' envers un' Peer, ibid. Testat' Pone sur' tiel retorn'
envers un' Peer, ibid. Distring' versus un' Corporation vel Hundred, 128. Un'
special Cap' ad arrest', ibid. Intratio inde, ibid. Testat' Cap' superinde,
129. Intratio inde, ibid. Supersedeas in abatement del brief de Exigent, quia
Def. in ill' nominat' Miles, quando fuit Miles and Baronettus, 130. Breve de
Exigi fac' post un' Pone and Cap' retorn' fuer' and Def. in contempt' Dom'
Regis, 131. Breve de Certiorar' Vic' L. pro eo quod Exigi fac' casualit'
perdit' est super quo Def. fuit retorn' utlagat', 132. Distring' and Proclam'
en un' brief envers un' Corporation, 133. Intratio de Imparlance in ascun
action per original, ibid. Scire fac' sur' pardon utlagar' per Statut', 134.
Retorn' superinde, 135. Retorn' habend' ubi Quer' fec' defalt', ibid. Intratio
inde, 136. Retorn' habend' alio modo ubi Quer' fecit defalt' and breve de
inquir' de dampnis, 137. Simile inquir' de reddit' aretro and valor' Averior'
capt' post suggestion' Def. in natur' Cognition pro quodam annual' reddit
secundum Statut', 138. Breve de secunda deliberatione, 139. Non omittas, 140.
Intratio inde, 141. Distring' ball' super cepi Corpus, ibid. Intratio inde,
142. Intratio de languid' in Prisona super un' Capias, 143. Habeas Corpus licet
languidus, ibid. Intratio de amerciament' Vic' pro non retornand' breve de
Cap', Alias aut Plur', etc. 144. Distring' nuper Vic', ibid. Intratio inde,
145. Non pros' pro defectu Nar' post comparentiam super Exigi fac', 146. Breve
de Cap' in Withernam sur' plur' repleg', ibid. Breve de adjournament' fact' per
les Filizers, 148. Le Retorn' per Vic' superinde, 149. Breve de Distring'
versus un' and post un' Essoin versus al' in un' quare impedit, 149. Intratio
inde. 150. Breve de Pone post Essoin and un' distring' in consil' casu, 151.
Intratio inde, ibid. Le entry del general appearance, 152. Consil' del special'
appearance ou special' Bail, ibid. Scir' fac' versus le Manucaptor' superinde,
153. Simile sur' utlagar' puis pardon le Roy, 154. Exigi fac' versus un' Def.
ubi aliter Def. capt' fuit per plur' and comparuit super cepi Corpus retornat',
155. Breve de Proclamation superinde, 156. Separal' directiones Com' Palatin'
and aliis jurisdict' ut Cestr' Dunelium, Lancastr', Dover and Insul' Elien',
pro brevibus and process. etc. 157. Le general' utlagar' Com' Pal' Lancastr',
158. Le special' utlagaria eid' Com', ibid. Nar' in casu semel recitat', 159.
Bis recitat' in transgr', 160. Nar' versus un' Def. quando alter Def. stet
utlagat', ibid. Non assumpsit, ibid. Non Cul', 161. Nil dic' in transgr' vel
transgr' super casum, and agard de breve de dampn' and Judicium superinde,
ibid. Le brief de inquir' de dampnis in transgr' vel transgr' super casum, 162.
Judicium in ejectione firm per nil dicit versus le casual ejector ubi dampna
sunt remiss. 163. Venir' fac' sur' exit' junct', 164. Distring' jur' superinde,
165. Le Subpoena ad testificand' superinde, 166. Intratio discontinuance del
plea in le Count per quer', ibid. Irrotulatio Indentur' cognit' coram Capital'
Justic' extra Cur', ibid. Irrotulatio ejusdem cognit' in Cur', 167. Utlagaria
sur' un' indictment placit' in bar' ibid. Replicatio de general' pardon al
utlagar' placitat', 169. Intratio special' pardon' placit' al utlagar', 170.
Abatement placitat' pur' variance enter le brief de Original' and le Count pur
ceo que quer' port son brief prout un' Mil' and Bar' and Count' ut un' Armiger.
ibid. Utlagar' placit' in abatement ad un' brief de Exigent alio modo, 171.
Placit' in abatement quod quer' fuit covert Baron' tempore impetrationis brevis
Originalis, 173. Simile per misnomer in le degree del quer' ibid.
Excommunicatio placit' in abatement del brief puis imparlance, ibid. Placit' in
abatement quod breve original impetratur' contra formam Registri, 174.
Abatement placit' pur ceo que fuer' deux Executors per volunt', and brief de
original' fuit port in le nosme de un' eor' tantum, 175. Cap' in Withernam ubi
sur' plur' breve de homine repleg' Vic' retorn' quer' esse elongat', ibid.
Testat' cap' in Withernam sur' plur' breve de homine repleg' supradict', 177.
Supersed' al utlagar' reversat' quando Def. est in custod. Mar', 178. Cap' in
appeal de mort', 179. Intratio inde, ibid. Cap' cum Proclamatione superinde in
le foreign County, ou le appellee nominatur in le brief de original' per
Statut' de An. 8 H. 6. c. 10. 180. Exigi fac' superinde, ibid. Cap' in appeal
de Robbery, 181. Cap' in appeal de Maihm, ibid. The names of the Counties and
of the Towns that are also Counties in Wales, and the number of their Sheriffs,
182. Some Cities and Towns likewise in England which are Counties also and have
Sheriffs and their number, 183. A Modus for the Testes and Returns of Process
by Original Writ returnable in Easter Term, 184 and 185. The like where the
Original Writ is returnable in Trinity Term, 186, 187. The like where the
Original Writ is returnable in Michaelmas Term, 188, 189. The like where the
Original Writ is returnable in Hilary Term, 190, 191. A general Rule of the
Court of King's Bench for the signing of Writs and Process which are made by
the (...) upon Original Writs. 194. The Commiss^^^ that empowered the taking the
Presentment of the Fees of all the Officers of the said Court. 196. The Preface
to the said Presentment, 205. The number of the Officers, 206. The Fees of the
Clerk of the Crown and his Clerks, 207. The like of the Prothonotaries, or
chief Clerks and their Clerks, 223. The like of the Keeper of the Bill of
Middlesex Seal, 230. The like of the Secondary, 231. The like received by him
for the Judges, 232. The Judges Clerks Fees, ibid. Counsellour's Fees, 233.
Sergeant's Fees, ibid. The Clerks of the Papers Fees, 234. The Clerk of the
Rules Fees, 235. The Keeper of the Postea's Fees, 236. The Keeper of the Files
of Declarations Fees, ibid. The Secondaries Clerks Fees, 237. The Custos
Brevium's Fees, 238. The Custos Brevium's Clerks Fees, 239. The Marshal's Fees,
240. The Marshal's Deputies Fees, 241. The Filizer's Fees, ibid. The Crier and
Porter's Fees, 244. The Clerk of the Errour's Fees, 245. The Clerk of the Fines
Fees, 247. The Seal Office Fees, 248. Fees for Trials at the Bar, ibid. Fees
for estreating amercements, 250. Fees paid to the Secondaries Clerk for
bringing in of Rolls, ibid. Also to him for the filing of every common Bail,
ibid. The Certificate of the Attorneys that did make the aforesaid Presentment,
251. The Names of the said Attorneys, 252. Some Fees left out in the
Presentment aforesaid, and only annexed thereunto as things not inquirable or
comprehended within the charge of the said Attorneys, 253. Some innovated Fees,
254. Fees paid for a Nisi prius in Middlesex, 255. Some other innovated Fees,
ibid. Fees paid to the Clerk that draws up special Verdicts in London or
Middlesex, 257. Fees paid for drawing a special Verdict at the Bar, ibid. Fees
paid to the Clerk of the Assizes for Postea's, ibid. Fees paid to the Sheriffs,
258. An account given of some of the Attorneys that made the Presentment as
aforesaid. 259. That all the Fees belonging to the Filizers are not therein
mentioned, 260. That the Filizers have made Process and Entries of Issues in
Replevin after Avowry as well as before, 262. A Reconciliation of the aforesaid
Presentment where it may seem (prima facie) to contradict it self, 263. Some
short account given of another Presentment, made about eight years after the
former, in which Presentment the Filizer's Fees are the same as in the former,
266. The names of the Attorneys that did make the latter Presentment, and that
seven of them were in the former, 268. That the Fees of the Court of
Common Pleas were enrolled of Record in that Court by virtue of the latter
Presentment, 270. That there has been, since the said several Presentiments,
other Juries of Attorneys appointed in this Court for the ends and purposes
aforesaid, ibid. The Names of the present Filizers, and where most of them are
resident, 271.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 21. Line 7. for were read where, p. 34. l. 17. for so r. for, p. 87. l.
26. r. as before, p. 107. l. 2. for 133 r. 113 and 116, p. 113. l. 6. for
praecepimus r. praeceperimus, p. 114. l. 22. for de r. die, p. 116. l. 13. for
apperciat' r. appreciat', l. 17. for apperciation r. appreciation, l. 27. for
hoc r. hac, p. 124. l. 15. for apponit' r. apposit', p. 125. for tum r. tam, l.
8. the like, l. 12. for apponit' r. apposit', p. 133. l. 16. for scilicet r.
similiter, p. 129. for Quare r. Quere, p. 138. l. 13. for fecerit r. feceris,
p. 146. l. 16. for sui r. suis, p. 149. in le margent for vel r. del, p. 152.
l. 24. for scilicet r. similiter, p. 154. l. 16. for hac r. hoc, p. 158. l. 10.
for omittet r. omitteret leaving out and, p. 160. l. 5. for eidem r. idem* p.
162. for Judocisimo r. Judaismo, l. 16. for al' r. il', l. 21. before per r.
suis, p. 188. l. 3. for xvi r. xv.

Books newly Printed for Richard Tonson.
THE first part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, or a Commentary upon
Littleton, not the Name of the Author only but of the Law it self. By Sir
Edward Coke, Knight. The Ninth Edition carefully corrected, with an Alphabetical
Table.

To this Edition is added Two Learned Tracts of the same Author; the First,
His Reading upon the 27. of Edw. 1. entitled The Statute of Levying Fines; And
the Second, Of Bail and Mainprize.

Poems upon several Occasions, with a Voyage to the Island of Love. By Mrs. A.
Behn.


