The Country-Man's Companion: OR, A New Method Of Ordering Horses and Sheep So
as to preserve them both From Diseases and Causalties, Or, To Recover them if
fallen Ill, And also to render them much more Serviceable and Useful to their
Owners, than has yet been discovered, known or practiced.

And particularly to preserve Sheep from that Monsterous, Mortifying Distemper,
The Rot.

By Philotheos Physiologus, The Author of The Way to Health, long Life and
Happiness, etc.

London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Court in Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch.

The Preface.
THe Righteous Man (says the inspired Prophet) is Merciful to his Beast: Which
Mercy, Compassion or Pittifulness consists not only in his not abusing them
with excessive Labor, and unreasonable Stripes and Hardships, but in providing
for them convenient Food, and helping to free them of Diseases and Infirmities,
when by his own or other Negligence or ignorant Conduct, Distempers are brought
upon them; or rather in such a prudent and moderate Government and Use of them,
as may prevent, and give no occasion for such Evils.

It Is generally said, and very truly, That Man is the Viceroy of the Creation,
and to him i^ given Dominion over the Beasts of the Earth; but this Rule is not
absolute or tyrannical, but qualified so as it may most conduce, in the first
place, To the Glory of God, 2dly, To the real Use and Benefit of Man himself,
and not to gratify his sierce and wrathful, or foolish and wanton Humor; and,
3dly, As it best tends to the helping, aiding and assisting those Beasts, to
the obtaining all the Advantages their Natures are by the great, bountiful and
always benificent Creator made capable of; For as a Shepherd is the Ruler of
his Flock and yet is bound to feed as well as fleece them: And as Angels,
though of a kind superior to us, yet by Gods Decree are Ministering Spirits, and
often employed for the good of their Inferior (Man) so will not any wise, or
(which is all one) good Man think it below him to descend to do good Offices to
these under-graduated Fellow Creatures of his, whom some with a proud
disdainful Scorn call Dumb Creatures and Brute Beasts, though yet they will
have a Voice to cry against their Oppressions; and if all things were rightly
weighed, the former would appear much more Brutish (that is, more Absurd, and
acting more contrary to the pure Dictates of unbiased and indepraved Nature)
than the latter; It being certain that Lions and Tigers are not more savage and
cruel, Geese and Asses not half so stupid, Foxes and Monkies less knavish and
ridiculous, Wolves not more ravenous, nor Goats more lascivious than abundance
of those grave Bearded Animals that pride themselves with the empty Title of
Rational Souls, whilst the whole bent of their Lives and Actings is
Diametrically opposite to all the Precepts of Reason, and even of common Sense.

This is not said to undervalue the Noble Dignity of Humane Nature, whereon the
Adorable All-bless'd Creator vouchsafed originally to impress his own Image,
but to remind that Insolent Creature [Man] (too apt to forget it) of his
miserable degenerate state, and to awaken him to aspire to that real Dignity
which he seems almost wholly to have forgot.

And as in a former larger Treatise I have endeavored to bring Man acquainted
with, and prudently to govern himself (an Empire far more Happy and Glorious
than any the Alexanders or the Caesar's could by their Murdering Arms atcheive)
so in this short Discourse my aim is to offer some Helps for his better
Management of two of the most useful Inferior Creatures committed to his
charge, I mean, Horses and Sheep, concerning both which I have observed great
Errors to have been committed, as well to their own Loss and Damage as to the
Prejudice of those poor Creatures, by many that have the keeping of them.

Vale.

The CONTENTS.
Chapter I.
OF Horses, their Natures, Complexions, and how to preserve them from Surfeits
and other Inconveniences whereunto they are subject, page 1. The best way to
prevent Surfeits and other Diseases in Horses, p. 5. The ill consequence of
keeping Horses in close hot Stables, p. 12, 13. Of Horses Food, p. 21. What
Water is best for Horses to drink, p. 26. Showing the Difference, Nature and
Goodness of River-Water, p. 26. of Spring Water, p. 27. of Pump-Water, p. ibid.
of Pond-Water, p. 28.
Chap. II.
Of Sheep, their Natures, and the best way to secure them from the Rot, and
preserve them healthy, p. 32. How to prevent the Scab and Mange in Sheep, p.
37, 38, 39, 40. also the Diseases of the Gall, Jaundies, Choler, Phlegm,
Blinding, Stoppages, Water in the Belly, Red Water, Coughs, Pains in the
Joints, Lameness in the Feet, etc. p. 41, to 44. The Reasons in Nature what it
is that is the chief occasion of the Rot in Sheep, and the Times when it is
contracted, p. 45, 46, etc. And particular directions for the certain
prevention thereof, p. 53. Of the Language of Sheep, p. 59. Of the Excellency
of a Shepherds Life, and that it is no less Innocent and Honorable than
Ancient, p. 70. Of Sounds, and the Benefits Musical Harmony yields to Sheep,
etc. p. 78.
Chap. III.
Of the Evils that attend an idle and soft Life, and the Benefits of moderate
Labor and Exercise, p. 85.
Chap. IV.
The Planter's Speech to his Neighbors and Countrymen in Pennsylvania, East
and West-Jersey, and to all such as have Transported themselves into New
Colonies for the sake of a quiet retired Life, p. 100.
Chap. V.
The Complaints of the Birds and Fowls of Heaven, for the Treaohery and
Violence they sustain from Man. p. 14^.
CHAP. I.
Of Horses, their Natures, Complexions, and how to preserve them from Surfeits
and other Diseases and Inconveniences whereunto they are subject.

AN Horse is a very excellent Creature for Shape and Beauty, for Strength, for
Swiftness, and for its great and general Use; for (to omit its frequent
employments in War, most valuable and delightful to such as practice that
destructive Course of Life) in the Transactions of Peace and Affairs of a civil
Life, in Tillage, Carriage, swift Conveyance upon important and necessary
Occasions, Draughts, working of Engines, and a thousand other matters, Man
happily serves himself really and effectually with this kind of Beast; for I
will not mention the famous Sports of Racing, since it is founded on an
extravagant Humor, rather than any just cause, nor know I whether for our own
Diversion, o^ forbid hopes of getting Money (which being but a Mineral, or
refined Dirt, seems much inferior in the Dignity of Nature to the least or
meanest Animal) We cannot justify the over-straining (in such manner as is
commonly practiced) and over-forcing Creatures, otherwise so truly useful,
beyond their strength. Though I am not ignorant that there want not some of
Adam's Race, so little elevated in Understanding above the Beast that
perishes, that they will voluntarily in like manner expose their own Health
and Lives upon no more Important occasions then for the Rabble to cry, Well run
Tom! for getting half a Piece from him that laid the Wager, to be Drunk with.

Horses are dignified with a strong Martial Nature, viz. hot and dry, but as
all other Animals they differ much as to their Identical Qualities and
particular Constitutions, some more Choleric and Fierce, others more
Phlegmatic, Sanguine or Melancholy: Therefore some are more lively, brisk and
swifter of motion, but others of dull heavy Dispositions, slow in motion, great
Bellies and Heads, with dull heavy Eyes: But in General as to their four
Humors, Heat in Horses does predominate, and they do exceed most other
Creatures therein, whence do proceed those Brisk, Lively, Bold, Free, Proud
Dispositions, whereby they are more easily apt to be forced by their Riders and
Drivers beyond their strength and power of Nature; which for want of mercy,
Compassion and Understanding is often done. And thence so many Diseases in this
Creature, more than any other, do proceed; for they are not thus infirm from
their Temperature or Radixes, but the same arises from, and is occasioned by
the Disorders and Intemperances their Mannagers do enforce them unto, being by
^ir natural Constitutions not only one of the strongest and hottest, but also
the Healthiest sort of Animals; for in what Creature soever the Natural Heat is
strong, the Spirits are great, brisk and powerful; and for this cause Horses
exceed most other Creatures in Courage and Martial Exercises.

This innate Heat and Strength in Horses is further manifested by this, viz.
Let the Season of the Year be never so Wet, or Cold and Unkind, yet the Grass
will bring upon them little or no Inconveniency, though they lie out Day and
Night, and though the same Grass and Pasturage will rot Sheep, and cause Cows
to become unhealthy, as also that in September and October, when the Air and
Elements are humid and thick, whence do arise great Dews, which makes the Grass
white like a Frost, that so turns the Stomachs of Cows and Sheep that they will
not feed, but stand still or lie down till the Sun has dried or exhaled the
Moistures (except they are very hungry, and then it proves of evil consequence
to them) yet even then Horses, though they lie at their ^ill of Grass, will
feed as freely as at other times, and without prejudice; Nay, do not many
Farri^rs, and others, turn diseased Horses out all Winter in hard Pastures,
(and give them neither Hay nor Corn) which often proves of good effect, as to
their Cure? It is also from their great Heat that Horses will eat a far greater
Quantity of Food than Cows (though the latter have near as large Bodies to
nourish, besides the great Quantities of Milk they afford to their Keepers
twice a day) Now this sharpness of Appetite and quick Digestion proceeds from
the strength of the Central Heat, which they are so strongly dignified withal.
And this all Riders and Keepers of Horses ought in the first place to
understand, so as to know their Natural Temperature, and accordingly to observe
Order and Temperance in their Mannagement, or else they will quickly make way
for Diseases, as most do, through Passion, Violence and Ignorance in the
Government of them.

The best way to prevent Surfeits, and other Diseases in Horses.
ALL Riders and Drivers of Horses ought by all means to ride or drive them
moderately in the Morning, if they intend they shall perform their Journey (or
Day's Work) without prejudice to their Healths; for they generally eat most
part of their Food in the Night and toward Morning, and also drink freely,
which does in some measure indispose them; for full Stomachs do naturally
hinder from performance of Labor, since Nature cannot equally endure two
Burdens at one time. Exercise is always dangerous, if it be violent, on
repleated Stomachs, whether in Man or Beast; for let a man observe, if he eats
or drinks plentifully in a Morning, and then presently labor strongly, or go a
Journey after it, unless he be very moderate therein, he shall find himself
much indisposed the first part of the day, his Limbs aching, hot and faintish;
the very same is to be understood in other Creatures, only they cannot make
their Griefs and Inconveniences known, nor have understanding to observe the
Rules of Temperance, either in Quality or Quantity, or the apt Times and
Seasons, therefore their Keepers ought to be merciful, wise and considerate,
and govern them aright, which they cannot do without considering, That the
Stomach and Natural Heat cannot attend two Works at once; for when the Stomach
is full of fresh Food, all the Powers of Nature are busy to lend their
Assistance to help forwards Concoction, during which time all the external
parts, and whole Body seem to be in a degree indisposed, but after three, four
or five hours (in which time the natural Heat has digested and made Separation)
then the Passages begin to be open, with the Pores, and the Blood and pure
Spirits have their free Circulation, which gives advantage to the thin pleasant
moist vapors of the Air to penetrate all parts, and to be sucked from without,
as by Spunges, which renders all Creatures brisk, strong, lively, and able to
go through with their work.

Time, Quantity and Quality are three material Points to be regarded by every
Rider and Driver of Horses, and he ought to consider the Strength, the Method
and Possibility of Nature, or else he may quickly lay heavier Burdens than
they can bear; but the prime Lesson every one ought to learn, is [The Knowledge
of Himself] and to distinguish the Properties and particular Operations of his
own Nature, and what Quality carries the upper Dominion in the respective
Complexions, and according to the degree every one understands of himself, the
same he is capable to know of all other Creatures, and so shall be able, on all
occasions, to vary the Rules of Order and Temperance, according to each
Creatures peculiar Nature; for in Man is contained the true Nature of all
things (how else could he be truly called, The Microcosm, or little World?) and
if he would know any thing essentially, then first the same thing must be
manifested in himself, and then this Knowledge is true, solid and certain; but
all other Learning or Knowledge, which depends on Custom, Chance and Tradition,
is not a man's own; and therefore is but a bare Opinion, which most are apt to
vary and change, and to have but little faith in, because such knowledge does
not arise from the Root of their own Lives, but is foreign, spurious,
adventitious, borrowed from abroad, and taken up upon the uncertain Credit of
the People, who rarely know any thing as they ought to know. Nor does any thing
make man's depraved state appear, more than for him to entertain vain Opinions,
and follow Custom instead of Reason and the Nature of things; this being the
only path that does keep so many in blindness and ignorance; and tho I love and
honor Husbandmen for the Use, the Innocence, the Laboriousness and the
Antiquity of their Calling, yet I must not ^latter them so far, as not to tell
them, that many of them are thus guilty of following too pertinaciously old
Customs, not much unlike the Irish, whom nothing but the penalty of an Act of
Parliament would restrain from fixing their Tackling to their Horses Tails in
Plowing and Drawing, and from getting out their Corn by burning up the Straw,
though they daily saw the Advantages of the English using Collars and Traces,
and of their Thr^shing, whereby they had Straw to supply their Cattle in
Winter, when many of theirs starved; yet they would keep to their old Barbarous
Custom still, till they were cudgelled out of it by a Statute.

When Horses are by hard Labor or over-Riding, hot and tired, then to prevent
Surfeitings, and many other Diseases, first, They ought to be well rubbed down,
then tie them to the Rack for one, two or three hours, more or less, according
to the degree of Weariness; during which time, do not give them any sort of
Meat or Drink, but between whiles keep rubbing them; and when they have rested
and cooled themselves by degrees, then give them both Meat and Water, but not
so much as they will eat or drink, till they have rested well, and recovered
their natural Heat and Spirits, which have been wasted by over-Labour or other
Accidents; for nothing is more dangerous, both to men and beasts, than
fullness, and much eating and drinking upon Weariness; for when through Labor
the Spirits are spent, the Radical Moisture in a degree consumed, the Body then
falls into a burthensom Heaviness and Indisposition; and then Meat and Drink
presently taken in, is nothing else but to add a second charge or burden to
Nature; for Meats and Drinks do require strength of Spirits and natural Heat to
help Concoction, or else Nature falls into a greater languishing, as often
comes to pass for want of Understanding: For in such cases, no sorts of Meats
or Drinks whatsoever, have so kindly a power to recover the Spirits and natural
Heat, as a proper time of Rest has; though yet Meats and Drinks must be
administered, or else Life nor Strength cannot be continued, but then it must be
conveniently timed, and due quantity and quality observed, There being a proper
time and season (says the wise man) for all things under the Sun. Rest
recovers, chears, comforts and strengthens Nature, and all the Members and
faculties, prepares and sharpens the Appetite, helps Concoction, opens the
Pores, whereby the whole Body is wonderfully refreshed with a pleasant
Moisture, whence a good Appetite and lively brisk Digestion do proceed. If you
will not believe me herein, I desire you please to try it upon your self, viz.
When you are very weary or over-tired by Traveling, Labor
or any other Accident, before you eat or drink, sit still silent, and shut
your Eyes for an hour, or two, or three, keeping your self warm, or rather take
a nap of sleep, which will best do it, I appeal to your own experience, whether
after this you will not find your self not only refreshed, but also your
Appetite much more quick, and better disposed both for eating and drinking, and
your Palate more perfect; and then you may both eat and drink with far greater
pleasure, and less danger to your Health: The same is to be understood in all
other Creatures that are subject to such Inconveniences; and the same
Experience teaches us, that half that Quantity both of Meats and Drinks, will
at some times overcome Nature, and send dark dulling Fumes into the Head, more
than double the Quantity of the same Meats and Drinks at other times, when
Nature is brisk and lively, and free from Weariness. But so ignorant are many
of themselves and Nature's Power, that when they are over-hot, weary, fainty,
their Spirits spent, and Radical Moisture evaporated, the first thing they will
endeavor to do, is (as it were) to force Nature to take greater Quantities
both of Meats and Drinks, than she is able or willing to bear, fondly thinking
thereby to restore Nature to her former strength in a moment; whereas by this
means they do but the more oppress her.

As heat does much abound in Horses, so for that very Reason, Stables that are
close are very injurious to their Health; yet few Horse-keepers do imagine, or
in their whole Lives once think of the great prejudice thereby done to their
Horses, especially where they stand too much in their own St^e and Dung; for as
every Creature's own Excrement is most offensive, so there is no Creature does
more abominate strong fulsom Smells than Horses, or that more delight in sweet
pleasant Scents, as being agreeable to their Nature. All or most Creatures,
even the very S^ine, will keep their Styes and Kennels sweet and clean, and not
foul them, unless they are confined: The Dung of Sheep is harmful to them, as
we see that often folding of them in a place, will not only keep them from
proving (or thriving) but also will give them the Mange; and the same may be
said of Cows, in reference to their Dung, though the same, when dried, be by
some esteemed a good Persume. Now if it be thus hurtful to Sheep, and other
Cattle that live without doors, what then is it to Horses, who are continually
stowed up in hot close Stables, and whose Nature and Dung is many degrees
hotter? The truth is, Horses never want an House or Shelter, but only in cold
wet Weather, which is the worst for all sorts of Cattle.

Most Stables are so close that the refreshing Influences of the Air are
prevented from having free ingress and egress, by which means the constant
stagnated Air there becomes of a gross sulpherous humid Nature, as may be
perceived when you ^nter a close Stable in the Morning, you are presently
encountered with such an hot fume or steam, as is ready to suffocate you, and
yet this is still more offensive and prejudicial to the Horses themselves, than
to you, since to every Creature its own Excrement is most intolerable, as
aforesaid; and this infecteth their Blood with a sharp hot salt Humor,
hindering the Circulation thereof, so that the Passages are stop^, the natural
Heat weakened, Concoction hindered, the edge of the Appetite dulled, and a
general Tenderness posses the whole Body, whence also proceeds Shortness of
Breath, so that upon every Accident, hard Riding or the like, they fall into
Disorders, and become Broken-winded.

Nothing more disorders Nature than ^cessive Heat, but more especially in this
Creature; for it abates their Strength, Vigor and natural Courage, and causes
them quickly to Tire, nothing being more unnatural and unhealthy to Horses,
than to keep them, like Mistrisses, that the cold fresh Air (forsooth!) must
not blow upon them; for besides the beforementioned Evils, their cooping them
up, where they stand or lie a great part of their time in their own Dung and
Piss, generates various Diseases in their Blood, and also in their Feet and
Legs, which Horses that lie in the open Air without doors, are never subject
to. On the contrary, nothing does more preserve the true Life, Strength and
Health of all Creatures, (but more especially of Horses) than the open fresh
cool Air; and therefore (at least) all Stables and places where Horses are
kept, ought to have many large open Windows on all sides, that the hot Steams
may pass away, and refreshing Breezes freely enter; for this Element is the
true Life of every Creature, the Cleanser and Purifier of all things, gives
vigor to the Spirits, unlocks the Passages, and with moist and thin spirituous
Vapors, comforts, cools and refreshes all the parts, preventing Sweating, and
the too great Evaporations of the Spirits, causing the natural Heat to become
more central, which does strengthen the Stomach and digestive Faculty

The chief cause and use of Stables at first was for Shelter in extreme
Weather, as when there was much Rain, and then they were built like
Court-houses or Hovels, covered on the top to keep them dry, but open on all
sides, that they might in such wet Weather eat their Meat dry, but were loose
to run at large when they pleased, which was a very Judicious and Commendable
way of keeping them; and (I am informed) this fashion is to this day observed
by a Gentleman in Yorkshire, who has the best breed of Horses for all strong
Exercises, as Hunting and the like, in the whole Country.

Now take two Horses of equal goodness, and let one of them be kept according
to Custom in a close Stable, and the other put into a small dry Field, where
there is but little Grass, with a Shed in it open on the sides, that he may eat
this Hay and Corn dry, and let the Horse in the House, and the other that is in
the Field be allowed the same quantity of Hay and Corn, (only in very cold
sharp Weather and Winter time, that in the Field will require more than that in
the House, by reason the cold pleasant Air opens the Passages, drives the
Natural Heat more central, and so causes a greater Appetite) Now that Horse
that is kept in the Field will outdo him in the House in any kind of Labor,
and be nothing so subject to be Tired, or be Surfeited, or Broken-winded, etc.
there being as much difference between these two, as between a nice Citizen or
Gentleman, and an honest laborious Country Husbandman; the former being warmly
clothed, used to close Rooms and lusty Fires, and instead of rusling Trees
before their Windows, they barricado them with Shutters, and a file or two of
close drawn Curtains, and get soft Feather-beds, into which they sink every
night almost as deep as into their Graves, and an heap of Coverings able to put
a Russian into a Sweat, with another Guard of Curtains drawn round about, their
heads wrapped up in thick quilted Caps, as if they were afraid their Brains would
be stolen away from them, so that hardly a breath of Air can get to them; to
which in the day time they add rich and dainty Food, and strong intoxicating
Drinks: By all which they become altogether unapt, and indeed unable to endure
any kind of Labor, Hardship or other Accidents, without manifest danger to
their Health; nay, let them have all the care they can, with the wise
Directions of their Guenny-fed Doctor to boot, yet never the less they are
continually afflicted with inward Stoppages, Obstructions and Disorders, which
they call Colds; and the more they do indulge themselves, the more subject they
become to all manner of Di^eases, But on the contrary, the Country man, or
whoever he be that does accuttom himself to open Airs, indifferent Clothing,
airy Rooms, simple Meats and Drinks, with proper Exercises or Labor, and
observes other Circumstances belonging to Health (as we have taught in our
general Preatise of the Nature of things, entitled, The W^ Health, long Life
and Happiness, etc.) such an one shall in all respects be healthier, stronger,
and more able to endure Labor than the former, and his Life shall be more
pleasurable and delightful to him; for Nature in every one is capable of being
made weak, feeble and tender, as they shall indulge her; and on the other side,
she becomes hardy, strong and healthful, if you expose her to proper Labors
and Exercises in open Airs, and to proper simple Food and Drink; and the very
same is to be understood of all other Creatures, only you ought to vary your
Rules and Order according to the Nature and Constitution of each.

It is also to be noted, that such Horses as are kept in the Stable, especially
those that do not constantly work, as Saddle-Horses and the like, ought not to
have Hay always lie in the Racks before them, nor Provend^r in their Mangers;
for the continual feeding or blowing on their Meat, will dull the edge of their
Appetites, and flatten the Stomach and Action of the Natural Heat; therefore
they ought to be tied back from their Racks for six, eight or ten hours
together, which will give Nature, and the innate heat of the Stomach time to
rally, and great Advantages to cleanse and digest all superfluous Juices and
slimy Matter, which dulls the Stomach, stops the Passages, hinders Digestion
and the Generation of good Blood; for nothing proves more profitable both to
Men and Beasts, than a proper time of Fasting, which does, as it were, refine
and purify Nature, makes the Blood thin and good, whence proceeds pure and
undefiled Spirits, and brisk lively Dispositions, and renders Food pleasant and
delightful unto them.

Also, it is convenient not to give any Cattle much Meat at a time, but such a
quantity as they may eat up clean, so shall their Stomachs and Pallates be kept
sharp and Spirits brisk; Whereas the contrary, viz. Fullness and continual
Supplies of Food stupisies all the Senses, and nauseates the Stomach, heat the
Blood, making it thick, which occasions impure Spirits, whence do arise
unnatural Heats in all the external parts of the Body, with a wearisom
Indisposition and shortness of Breath; for this cause it comes to pass, that
most or all Horses that are kept in close hot Stables, with Meat continually
lying before them, blowing on it, etc. are not only subject to a great number
of Diseases, but on hard Riding are apt to be out of Breath, and Short-winded;
than which, nothing in (...) Horse is worse.

Note further, that when your Horse has been rid hard or work't much, you may
conveniently give them a little Water about two or three hours before you give
them Meat, provided you suffer them not to drink too freely, or to the full.
Also, r^bing down Horses (when hot) with a dry wisp of Straw, is to be
preferred before walking of them. And as for such Horses and Cows as are kept
in or near great Cities, where many times Granes are a great part of their
Food, there ought to be some Salt now and then mixed amongst the Granes, which
will dry up the moist Humors, and prevent Windy and Watery Diseases, or the
Rot, (Salt being of a warming drying Quality.)

Remember also, that Stables are more than ordinary pernicious to Mares with
Foal, as likewise that their Colts (when foaled) ought to run in the Fields
with their Dams, until they wean themselves, which will be near a Year.

If the beforementioned Rules be observed, your Horses will seldom want
Bleeding, or any kind of Drenching; but if you find your Horse proves too fast
on the change of Pastures or Food, be the Season of the year what it will, or
be the occasion height of Keeping, or little Work, then the safest and surest
Course to preserve them from Diseases, and also to cool and lessen their Blood,
is to give them moderate Labor, and withdraw or alter the quality of their
Food, which will digest all (...) Matter, and out off the causes of Diseases in
the very bud; whereas both Blood-letting, Purging, and most such unnatural
means, are for the most part done at a venture, without the true or certain
knowledge either of the Disease or Physical Virtue and Operation of the
Medicine, so that thereby many times the Malady or Disease is increased, for
though the common Practi^ of Physic, as to men, be very dangero^ and
uncertain, yet there is still greater uncertainty in Medicines, as to cure,
when administered to any sorts of Cattle; for men are capable to judge, in some
degree, of the Nature and Operation of Medicin^, and to express what they find
in themselves of their Virtues or Vices; but the dumb Beasts cannot do any of
this. Besides, most Purging Compositions and Dr^ used for Cattle, come from
other Countries, which are of a contrary or differe^ Nature and Operation from
those of o^ own growth. And since all our Cattle d^ constantly live on the
Grass, Herbs, Seed^, Grains and Fruits that our own Country produces, therefore
those foreign Ingredients are more strange and disagreeing (...) them, than
they are to men, because Man through Vanity and Custom has enured himself to
them by the constant or frequent eating of Outlandish Productions, either
entire, or at least by mixing them with their other common Food.

Of Horses Food.
ONe of the best Meats or Foods for Horses is good Rick-Hay, that is about half
a year or three quarters old, which has heat in the Mow, and so cut in fresh
every day out of the Rick; for that is to be preferred before Hay out of the
Barn or Houses, and will make all Cattle thrive and prove better; First,
because the pleasant spirituous thin vapors of the Air have their free
Circulation and Influences in and about it, which does powerfully penetrate all
parts, even to the Center of such Ricks or Stacks, and keeps the pure
spirituous Quality and Balsamic Virtu^ of such Hay living, and causes the
said Hay to settle closer and harder together than it will in Houses: therefore
Rick Hay has a finer smell or scent than the other (which all Horses much
delight in) and this proceeds from the briskness of the spirituous and
balsamic Virtues; for this cause if Rick-Hay be well ^ured or made, all sorts
of Cattle will choose it before others, especially Sheep, who have the nicest
and best Pallates to distinguish. All that can be alleged against this son of
Hay is, That there is some waste; which is inconsiderable, if the Season be
dry, and care taken, as ought to be. For the contrary Causes or Reasons House
or Barn-Hay is not so good, viz. because there the sweet influence of the Air
has not so free ingre^ and egress, nor can the more spirituo^ parts thereof
penetrate such Hay, which does in a degree suffocate the Spirit thereof, and
therefore it will not settle so close^ for when the spirituous and balsamic
Virtues of Hay are wounded or hur^ either by Suffocation or Evaporation, the
the same becomes of a light hollow substance, and is of a dry Nature, of litt^
heart or virtue, the Spirit being the tr^ Life and moving Power of every thing,
and the Air is the blower up thereof, which does keep the Spirit living: I d^
not mean the gross Element, but you a^ to understand, that in this gross
Elemen^ of external sensible Air, there is contain^ a pleasant living spiri^us
Power, which is the true Life of all things, and its Ray^ do more or less
penetrate all Bodies, b^ if by any accident, or on purpose its Influence be
hindered or prevented, then such things or places do presently contract great
store of Humidity, and such Air becomes hot thick and sulpherous, whence are
generated several sorts of Vermin and Insects, more especially when the season
is hot; for Heat and Moisture are the occasion of the Generation of all such
things; but where the Elements have their free Influences, the generation of
all such Vermin is prevented; as M^ths never breed in Woollen Clothes that are
daily wo^, nor Buggs in open Houses, but only in close places, as in Beds, and
when packt up in Chests, where the Sun and Air are hindered from having free
Influences, and so there is Humidity contracted, and when hot Weather comes,
there are generated such Creatures, according to the Matter, and that Quality
which does predominate, which if it proceed from the Animal Life, then the
Creature so producted is of a stinking Nature, more offensive than any of those
Insects or Vermin that are generated from the Vegitative Kingdom.

But the chief and great Food for Horses is Corn, viz. Corn in the Straw, which
is to be preferred before Corn that is either only Thresht, or both Thresht and
cleansed from its Chass. For all sorts of Corn, when cleansed from both Straw
and Chaff, are too hot and gluttenating, and over-heat the body and blood, and
obstruct the Passages, whence Short-windedness and many Inconveniences proceed:
But on the contrary, Barley, Pease, Fetches, Beans or Oats given in the Straw,
are not only a firm dry strong hearty Food, but the Straw of each sort of Grain
eaten therewith does open and cleanse the Stomach from all Supersluities,
drying up the moist Vapors, and keeps all the Passages and the Bowels clean
and free from hard tough or sharp Humors and slimy Juices, which often
obstruct Nature, and cause griping Pains, or Plague in the Guts. Also, this
sort of Food does resine the Blood, and generate pure Spirits, whence proceeds
Strength, Courage and Vivacity, and lively sparkling bold Spirits and
Dispositions, and makes them drink freely, which much helps to the equal
distribution of the Food; for this cause, Oats of all sor^ of Corn are
accounted the best and healthiest Food for Horses, because two third parts of
them are Chaff; for should the Chaffie parts be separated from them, a^ is done
in Oat-meal, and so given to Horses it would prove as hurtful as any, viz.
(...) the common green Wheat, and more, i^ would so stop and heat the Blood;
for the Flower of all sorts of Grains is gluttenating and obstructive; for in
the Flowerie parts does consi^t the hot Nurtritative Quality, and in the Straw,
Chaff and Bran is contained the opening cleansing and digestive Property, so
that there seems to be a necessity that both should be eaten together, being
most natural and helpful to each other: The Chaffie Brannie parts of Corn, and
the Flowerie parts thereof may not unfitly be compared unto the Whey and Curd
of Milk, when separated; In the Whey is contained the opening cleansing parts,
in the Curd the Nurtritative Quality; the Whey being eaten is too hungry and
opening to be taken as Food, and the Curd alone is too hard heavy and apt to
obstruct Nature, and will afford but a bad Nourishment; therefore both Butter
and Cheese must be eaten with Bread, or something that is like it, or else it
will prove of evil Consequence.

But it is to be noted, that Threshed Corn of any sort, is an excellent strong
hearty food for Working-Horses that go at Grass, especially all the Winter; let
them lie out a Nights, and give them Corn in the Mornings before they go to
work, and again at Night.

It is very convenient, that all Stable-Horses should be put to Grass from the
middle of May till the latter end of June, or until July; for all Cattle
delight much in Grass after a long Winter; besides, Grass in the Spring is full
of Life and Vigor, of an opening cleausing Quality; therefore good to purge
and carry off those thick Juices and Humors, which the Winter and other
Inconveniences have left behind; likewise, the open Air and lying abroad all
night does wonderfully clear and purisie the Blood, dis-lodging many
Impurities, which the Winter and those Stables have contracted, and cures the
Feet and Legs of those Diseases and Maladies which hot Stables have caused; for
Horses naturally abounding in heat, and standing in those hot steams and
Vapors, the same are apt to over-heat and sret the Blood, especially in the
Feet and Legs, which occasions Putrefaction, which is the principal cause of
the Diseases in those parts, wherewith Multitudes of Horses are more or less
insested.

What Water is best for Horses to drink.
RIver-Water deservedly challenges the first place of all others, and is much
to be preferred before Spring or Pump-Water, it being made more friendly and
fat by its running through various sorts of Earth; for the surface of the Earth
does contain a fat saline Quality, which the Water sucks into it self, whereby
this sort of Water becomes of a soft slippery Nature, opening and cleansing,
far wholsomer for all Creatures to drink, and performing all uses in
Housewifery better, and to more advantage than any other Water, except
Rainwater. Moreover, River-Water has the benefit of the Air, and sweet
Influences of the Elements and Coel^stial Bodies, which do (as it were) purisie
and open its gross earthy Body, so as it becomes more spirituous and airy than
either Spring or Pump-Water, not so harsh and blinding.

The next Water in Goodness to this is Spring Water, especially such as runs
near the surface of the Earth, and proceeds from a good Mold, as Sandy, Chalky
Grounds, which for the most part are of a warming soft Nature.

Pump-Water follows, which (where better is to be had) I cannot commend, by
reason of its ^ld Saturnine Nature, whereby it binds the Body, and the constant
use of it obstructs Nature; nor is it so good for any uses in Housewifery as
the former.

There want not some who do much applaud Pond-Water for Cattle, counting it a
strong warm feeding Water; and indeed it is so in some sense, but much
inferior to Running or Rainwater; for its constant standing without Motion
does thicken and condense it, and renders it of a gross fulsome Quality. the
thin spirituous cleansing Property thereof, being as it were suffocated for
want of fre^h Supplies and Motion: and where these two things are wanting no
water can be good; For Motion cleanses and destroys the gross thick parts
thereof, which advantage Pond-Water has not, and therefore does commonly send
forth gross offensive Smells and Vapors, and to Taste is dull and earthly,
unpleasing to the Palate and senses, which proceeds from a muddy Quality, and
Excrements which do happen to such Waters, not having vent or motion to purge
it self, which all Running-Waters have. And this want of motion and supplies do
not only cause them to smell strong, and become of a thick slimy sub^ance, but
also causes putrefaction, whence are generated various sorts of V^rmin, which
Running-streams are not subject to.

It is also to be noted, that that Water that has any manifest smell or taste
more than an Aerie taste and smell is not good; For good Water has no strong or
manifest smell or taste, or if it have, it is only a fresh pleasant Aerie
Sweetness; and therefore if you find any other seent or ^usto, you may be sure
that such Water is defiled by Accident, or else is not good in its own kind;
and all such Waters are unhealthy, either for Man or Beast to drink, being of a
heavy dull Nature and Operation; for that pure thin spirituous Quality before.
mentioned (which all good Water does contain) is here destroyed or suffocated;
and then presently the dark gross earthy Phlegmatic Nature is awakened, even
as it is in all other things, viz. When the pure Oil and Spirituous parts are
by any Accidents wounded or destroyed, the strong fulsom Natures of Saturn and
Mars appear sorthwith in their malevolent Forms. But so long as the Spirituous
Qualities and Balsamic Virtues in any thing remain entire, and not violated,
the strong fulsom Nature lies (as it were) hid or unmanifested, being
incorporated in the Embraces of those good Virtues; for the Friendly Quality
does mix it self with every thing, according to its Nature, which is called,
and really is the Essential Virtue of each thing; but if the good Virtue be any
way destroyed or impaired by external Violence, or by improper Preparations, be
it either in Meats or Drinks, or the like, then that thing becomes of little
use or virtue, but rather a loathing to Nature; and if such things are
frequently eaten or drank, they prove prejudicial to Health, loading Nature
with Obstructions, and cause dull Indispositions, as daily Experience shows.

For these Reasons, Pond-Water is not so good as that of the River; and the
continual drinking of such stagnated Waters will generate thick Humors and
gross Blood, hindering the Circulation thereof, dull: the Appetite, and
occasions many occult Diseases, the rather for that such Waters are subject to
various Excrements of the Cattle that frequent, which cannot there (as in
Running-Water) be purged away, but proves of evil Consequence, and causes
Putrefaction and Diseases.

But here some will object and allege, That both Horses and Cows will choose
rather to drink Pond-Water than River. -- -- To which. I Answer; This does
often happen to be true, and no wonder; for I hope you do not expect your
Horses and Cows to be better Philosophers than your selves, in distinguishing
the Virtues and Vices of Waters; for the Pallates of Cattle are adulterated by
Custom even as men's are; for if you accustom your self to Food that is not well
prepared, or Drink that has an ill smack, yet in length of time it will be so
familiariz'd, and so stir up and awaken its own Property in the Body, that the
ill smack or scent can hardly be perceived: So great is the power of every
particular thing to strengthen and incorporate its self with its simile in the
Body, whence does proceed the Possibility in Nature of making all things in a
certain sort friendly unto it self. Now Pond-Water is generally the warmest of
all others, and those Cattle that are used to it, had therefore much rather
drink it than other, the common use of it hiding the fulsome Taste and gross
earthy Smell. But still, there are some Ponds that are constantly fed with good
Springs, and others that in Rainy Seasons are plentifully supplied with
Freshes, and the Water of either of these is very good and wholesome.

I am not insensible that these Rules and Observations will seem strange, and
(perhaps) Ridiculous to the wise Iockies of this Age, since contradicting their
beloved Prophet, Custom and Tradition, whom the Multitude admire. However, I am
satisfied in that I have, (by making them public) performed my Duty to my
Country, and so leave them, not dispairing but that there may possibly be some
few found of so much Ingenuity as to make Trial of them, and then I doubt not
but (how mean, uncouth or inconsiderable soever they may now seem) they will
acknowledge them to deserve both Thanks and Imitation.

CHAP. II.
Of Sheep, their Natures, and the best way to secure them from the Rot and
other Inconveniences, and preserve them Healthy.

SHEEP area sort of Animals highly to be esteemed, as well for the Excellency
of their Natures, wherein they transcend most other Creatures, as for the
manifold Benefits they afford unto Mankind.

The Dignity of their Nature renders them the Emblems of Innocence, and fit
Metaphors for Virtue: Thus not only Princes by the Heathen-Sages are called
Shepherds, and their obedient and well governed Subjects, their Sheep, to
intimate that no other species of Creatures are more inclinable to good Order,
or so readily governable; but even in sacred W^it the People of God are every
where denominated, The Sheep of his Pasture; and Christ himself likens his
Disciples and Followers to Sheep, and calls himself, The good Shepherd that
lays down his Life for his Flock. And this was for the near Affinity Sheep
have to Equality, and to the harmless innocent Life and Principle, which
Christ's Sheep and Lambs do live in. But on the other side, he compared Evil Men
unto, and called them by the Names of wild, fierce, savage, ravenous Beasts, as
Bears, Tigers, Wolves, etc. because that sort of degenerate men do live in, and
are acted by the uneven fierce and cruel Nature and Principle, and have therein
an Affinity with the Beasts before mentioned. And thus there is as perfect an
Antipathy between the friendly innocent Principle, which governs and rules in
the Hearts of Christ's People, and those that are guided by his holy
Peace-breathing Spirit, and those other that live in the power of the fierce
Wrath and uneven Nature, as between Sheep and Wolves or Foxes, and the like
Beasts, whose very sight does afright and amaze them, even more than that
contrariety proceeding from their Radixes, Sheep being dignified as it were
with a gleam of the Celestial Principle of Unity, having no manifest Quality
predominating; whereas on the contrary, all the beforementioned Beasts of Prey
have their predominant Quality standing in the fierce Wrath, as appears by
their unsightly Shapes, their frightful Howlings or Noises that they send
forth, their cruel Inclinations and bloody Dispositions.

To speak more plainly, Sheep are in Temperature moderately Hot and Moist, and
in Complexion Phlegmatick-Sanguine, with a mixture of Melancholy, and if they
exceed in any of the four Humors, it is in Moisture; their Radical Fires burn
but gently, being of a good equal Temperature, whence their sweet and amicable
Natures and Dispositions do arise; For this cause all Inequality is an utter
Enemy unto them, especially excess of Moisture. For they are very porous, by
which the moist vapors of the Air do powerfully penetrate them on all parts,
which causes such Quantities of Wool, and does supply them with store of
Moisture, which when the Air is humid, or too much wet weather happens,
proves prejudicial unto them; for this cause Sheep can live longer in times of
Drought, than many other Creatures, without Water, and receive less prejudice
by the want thereof; though all Creatures are more or less nourished by this
way, and do suck in their spirituous moist Nourishment, like Spunges on all
parts; if this were not so, no Creature could subsist. For the attractive
Quality and natural Heat do in a hidden way draw in the moist spirituous
Vapors, which the Element of Air does plentifully afford; and the more Humid
the Air is, the greater Quantity of Moisture is received into the Body, which
Nature performs in a Magnetic Insensible way; but the same does more
manifestly appear when the Season is wet, the Element of Air being then more
imbibed with Humidity than in drier times, and therefore most or all Creatures
will then live with, and desire lesser Quantities of Water than when the
Weather is dry, though the Meat and Labor be the same. This may also appear in
Man: If he shall live temperately in his Diet and Exercises, so as he do not
sweat, nor any other way affront Nature, to put her to the Expenses of too
great a Transpiration, then let him drink a pint or a quart in twenty four
hours space (which is a sufficient Quantity for such whose Labors are easy)
then observe that such an one shall make more Urine in quantity than he drank;
and if the Season be moist and the Air humid, he will make near double the
quantity, provided he do not eat Foods that are over Salt; for such do
naturally heat the Body, and consume the thin moist cooling Vapors, which
serve for the help of Concoction, and do comfort and refresh Nature. But on the
contrary, if a man shall drink two or three Gallons in a day, as many do
(though to their shame, and the Injury of their Healths, especially if their
Drink exceed in strength) then it is to be observed, that such an one will make
but half, or no^ half the quantity of Urine, as he swallowed down Liquor. And
also, it is to be noted, that the more Temperately any shall live, and the
smaller the quantity of Food they eat, the more Urine they will make, that is,
proportionably to their Drink; for Abstinency cools the Body, opens the Pores
and Passages, sets the Natural Spirit at liberty, and strengthens the
Attractive Faculty; for this cause, a proportionable time of Fasting makes all
the Members and whole Body light and airy. But to return to our subject --

The more Sanguine and equal any Creatures are in their Qualities, the more apt
they are to be put out of tune, when any affront or disorder is offered unto
them; for this cause Sheep cannot endure any kind of Extremes without manifest
danger to their Healths, they being sensible of every Inconvenience, whether it
be from their Keepers, or from the Elements, by reason of their tender Spirits
and natural Heats, so that every disorder wounds their Health, as if they be
but driven a little too hard when the Weather is hot, or if they be coursed
with a Dog, or the like, which puts them into an heat, in any such case, if
their Keepers suffer them to lie down whilst they are yet hot, and this ^e done
often, it will make them break out with a Scab or Mange when they come into
fresh Pasturage or about Michaelmass. Also, if they are Folded too close it
will occasion the same Disease; or if in Summer time and hot Weather the
Shepherd do move them too often out of one place into another, as the custom of
some is, who do not understand the Nature of this delicate Creature, especially
if it be in the heat of the day, it will keep them from proving or thriving,
and also cause the same Distemper. So likewise much wet will Rot them;
therefore Shepherds ought to be the most knowing, and careful of all
Husbandmen, since they are to preserve so timorous and tender a Creature,
whose Nature cannot endure any Inequality without danger.

It will be convenient that all Shepherds in dry Summers, who keep their flocks
in common Fallow-Fields or Downs, when Grass is scarce, and that they have no
keeping for them but what such miserable Commons will afford, should let their
Sheep out of the Fold betimes in the Morning; not that they naturally delight
to feed early, but in times of Drought, and where Water is not near at hand,
then early in the Mornings the Air is moist and full of humid Vapors, which
powerfully penetrate, and are sucked in through all parts by the way of the
Pores, which Nature has more advantage to perform when they are out of their
Fold, because they spread themselves into fresh open places, where the Air is
more humid thin and spirituous than in Folds, where the Breathings and Heats
that do proceed from the Sheep, do make such Airs thick and hot, rather
suffocating, heating the Blood and drying up the cool refreshing Moisture: for
this cause, if they are penned close, it gives them the Scab or Mange, as is
mentioned before.

You are to take notice of the Situation of your Field or Downs, and in the
Morning walk or slait your Sheep gently on the highest and and driest parts; or
if there be Cornfieldsd or humid Pasturages, then feed them by the edges
thereof for three or four hours, till they begin to be weary, and the heat of
the day comes on; But remember that you do not use any Violence toward them,
for violent Motion will heat and spend their Spirits, and dry up their Radical
Moisture, and stir or awaken the Central Poisons and Original Heat, which ought
not by any means to be awakened; and yet the same is sooner done in them (if
care be not taken) than in other Creatures, by reason of their weak timerons
Spirits and tender natural Heats.

But when the Sun draws near the Meridian, viz. about ten or eleaven of the
Clock, you ought to turn them from off the edges of such Pasturages or
Cornfieldsd into the lowest Valleys or Clayie Grounds that your Field will
afford, and there let them lie at large, and at the greatest ease you can, and
as scattering as your Valley will afford, till folding time, which ought (if
the Drought be great) to be late, otherwise not. You ought at all times to use
Tenderness and gentle Behavior to your Sheep, but more especially in dry
times, and when the Grass is scarce; for a far lesser quantity of Food will
supply Nature's wants when they are still, quiet and lie at ease, and a less
quantity of Water, than when they are hurried out of one place into another;
for Motion, especially in hot seasons, and in the heat of the day, does cause
sweating, and too great an evaporation of the Spirits, whence follows faintish
Indispositions, that bring very ill Effects.

This Order all Shepherds ought to observe from the latter end of May till
August, if hot dry Weather continue so long, and being duly followed, will
preserve your Sheep from many Inconveniences, especially from breaking out with
the Scabb or Mange toward Michaelmass, or when they come to fresh Pasturage.

As for the time of Shearing of Sheep, there are various opinions amongst
Shepherds, some will have it sooner, others later; but for certain the best is
to unclothe them betimes, viz. in the latter end of May or beginning of June,
and many of the Sheepmasters and Shepherds are of the same judgment; but out of
a certain Policy they will not shear them then, because they should sweat in
their Wool, which makes it watery, heavy, and consequently more for advantage;
but that is not any part of my Work, I only aim to inform you the best and most
Natural way and means to preserve them sound and free from Diseases, and for
that purpose it cannot be denied but that the Shearing them betimes is best,
especially in hot Summers; for their Wool is so thick and hot as it causes
them to sweat much, which evaporates the Spirits, and causes saintiness,
weakening the Natural Heat, which hurts the digestive Faculty of the Stomach,
and that by degrees disables them to go through an hard summer; for after
shearing is commonly the hardest time for Sheep, especially for all Fi^ld-Sheep
(which are the subject of my present Discourse) whether it be a seasonable time
or not; for Sheep will prove better after they are shorn than before: And if
the latter part of the Summer be dry and hot, then there is but little Grass;
if wet, the Sheep being newly unclothed, are cold and uneasy, and also hungry,
but the Grass is then of a gross substance and but of little Virtue, it being
the Declination of the Sun, all things fade and decrease in Power, Virtue and
Strength: And such Sheep as are by good Order well kept in the beginning of the
year, shall be far better able to go through an hard time, (which generally
happens in the latter end of Summer, viz. in July, August and September) than
those that are out of heart for want of good order and keeping; even as a Cow
which is well wintered will give a far greater quantity of Milk the following
Summer, than one that has been hardly kept.

When Summers prove Wet, especially when the Rains come in about June or July
then these following Rules ought to be observed, whether your Field be subject
to the Rot, or the contrary; for Wet is a far greater Enemy to Sheep than
Drought, as daily Experience does testify, though all Extremes are bad.
Therefore the Shepherd in all such Seasons ought to let his Sheep continue in
the Fold till seven or eight a Clock in the Morning, or longer, if the Morning
be very moist; in which time the comforting Beams of the Sun, with the help of
the Air, will in part, or wholly have exhaled and dried up those moist slimy
Vapors the night distilled down on the Grass, which being gone, the Grass is
much more wholesome. Besides, their lying long in the Fold does beget a sharp
piercing Appetite; for Fasting does naturally digest and clean the Stomach and
Vessels thereof from all superfluous flegmie matter, which is contra^ed by that
too much moisture, which Grass in wet seasons does plentifully contain; for the
action of the Stomach and Natural Heat is never idle, if the Creature be in
health; so that when it is not supplied with its usual food, then it powerfully
attracts or draws unto its self all such gross matter and supersluities, and
casts it forth both upwards and downwards, thereby preventing matter for the
generation of Diseases; and when the Stomach is thus purged and prepared by due
fasting, then a little inconveniency in food will not hurt, whether it be in
quality or quantity; for a vigorous well prepared Stomach does not seldom make
good Nouri^hment of very ordinary food.

Further, the Sbepherd is to observe to fold his Sheep before the Dews fall,
whereby he may avoid many Inconveniences; nor need he fear that the long Nights
lodging will hinder them from proving; for all Cattle that have clean sharp
Appetites will eat as much in two hours as others will in four, whose Appetites
are imperfect and Stomachs foul and obstructed through phlegmatic Juices and
supersluous Humors; Besides, Sheep do not naturally care for feeding in the
Morning, whilst the Dew is much on the ground, except in times of scarcity,
which seldom happens in wet seasons; the Passages of Sheep are then furred with
a moist slimy matter, which ought always to be cleansed, either by Fasting, or
by some drying food, as Hay, Corn, or the like.

If Shepherds observe these Rules, they may prevent most of the Diseases Sheep
are subject to, since for the greatest part they are occasioned for want of
good Order and skill, as Heats, Colds, Over-wet weather, being folded on
New-plow'd moist grounds, or for want of a little Hay in the latter end of
summer, viz. in July, August and September, when the Weather proves wet and
cold. And though your Field or Pasturage will not Rot your Sheep, yet it may
and does oft-times cause a great number of Diseases, many of which prove satal
to them, as the Diseases of the Gall and Iaundies, Choler, and sickness coming
of tough Flegon, Blinding, Stoppages, Water in the Belly, Red-Water, Coughs,
turning Evil, Pains in the Joints, Lameness in the Feet, and the like Evils and
Distempers.

Shepherds should likewise observe, that after an hard Summer and great
scarcity, when they put their Sheep into fresh Fields and Pasturages, where
there is plenty of Grass, if then he intends to preserve them free from
Disorders, he ought not to let them eat as much as they will, but only bait
them (as they call it) and when they have eaten pretty well to take them out,
and let them have a sufficient time to digest it, and then turn them in again;
and continue this order for a Week, or two, or three, as ^ou shall see
occasion; and though your Sheep do not look so full, and p^ove so fast as
others, that lie at Rack and Manger, (as the Proverb is) yet in conclusion they
shall gradually attain to the same or better Proof and Well-liking with others,
and be abundantly sroer from Disorders and Diseases. This the Shepherd may
remember, That from Midsummer to Michaelmass is the most dangerous season in
the whole year; and therefore then he ought to be most careful and circumspect.
And of this I shall now proceed to give the true Grounds and Reasons in Nature.

The most hazardous time for occasioning the Rot in Sheep is from July to the
last of September, especially if there be Floods or constant Rains, or moist
foggy Airs.

There are many Opinions, what the matter is that does breed the Rot in Sheep,
some s^y the cause is, their licking up of small white Snales, which much Wet
does generate; others think that it is occasioned by great Dews, and others
have other Fancies, which I forbear to mention, being all besides the business.
For most certain it is, that the true cause of this pernicious and fatal
Disease in Sheep is too much Moisture at the season beforementioned; for they
very rarely Rot at any other season of the year, though there be the same
occasion, as to the Weather, which all Shepherds and Sheep-masters ought well
to consider. As for Example; Suppose Wet weather comes in after Michaelmass,
viz. in Decemb^r or January, and hold so most part of the Winter, yet this
shall not Rot Sheep, except some few in low Marshie Moorish Grounds, where they
have store of Grass, and lie nights and days and have no Hay given them. Or if
Rains and floods come in January, February, March or April, and hold dripping
till the latter end of May, or beginning of June, and then cease, and a dry
Summer follow, this also will not cause Sheep to Rot, except (as is said
before) in some certain low Grounds, a few may be infected.

Hence it appears, that from the latter end of July to the last of September or
October, is the time for generating this Disease, and wherein it reigns amongst
Sheep, if that season happen to prove wet. Now the Reasons why Sheep are not so
subject to this Disease at other times of the year, are,

1st. If Rains or wet Weather come in after Michaelmass, in December, January,
or the like, the season then is cold; which does check and consume the raw
indigested flegmy substance or matter, which all grass is filled with in the
latter end of Summer, viz. in August, September and October, as appears by the
Latter-Math or Hay made in those Months, what poor feeble stuff is it, in
comparison of that Hay the first Spring produces? And how little heart it
affords to those Cattle that feed thereon?

2dly, In this Winter-season most Sheep are in part kept with Hay, which dries
up ^d consumes all that superfluous Moisture which is so injurious to Sheep.

3dly, The Coldness of this Winter-season causes the natural Heat in all
Crea^res to become more Central, which gives ^rength and power to the Stomach
and ^igestive Faculty to digest and throw off ^ll raw cold superfluous matter,
which at the other beforementioned season, gives ^ccasion for the generation
of this Disease; for all cold weather strengthens the natural Heat, sharpens
the Appetite, and make the Spirits strong and powerful. Thus both Men and
Beasts have sharper Appetites and stronger Digestions, and can without
prejudice, eat more Food in cold seasons than in hot, and less Drink does serve
them; for the stronger and more lively the natural Heat and Spirit are, the
greater and sharper is the Stomach; but a less quantity of Drink will suffice
Nature, because all external Heat, if it exceed the Medium, draws forth and
evaporates the pure subtle Spirits, which impedes and weakens the Natural Heat
and Action of the Stomach, and then the hot sierce original Fires of Saturn and
Mars are stirred up, and become manifest in all the external parts of the Body,
which indisposeth the whole, and makes the Members glow with an unnatural Heat;
and therefore then all Creatures desire and require more Drink and less Food;
but then they are not so strong and lively as in* cold, but faintish, and more
apt to contract Diseases from every Inconveniency o^ Disorder.

4thly, If Wet or Rainy Weather come^ in in March or April, and goes out in the
latter end of May or June, then there i^ no danger of this Disease, because the
are kept with Hay most part of the Spring, which as is mentioned before,
destroys all the putrefying Matter; Besides, the Spring is powerful and lively,
giving Life and Virtue to all Creatures, the warm and enlivening Beams of the
returning Sun embrace, the reviving Nature, fills all things with Spirit, so as
that the Grass and Herbs then are freed from, or nothing so subject to that
gross flegmy Substance most sorts of Herbage consists of in the latter Spring,
by which all Creatures are healthier, and better able to withstand Disorders or
Inconveniences that happen from the Elements. Besides, Sheep, as is hinted
before, have been at Hay a considerable time, which is a sound, healthy, hearty
Food, suitable to their Natures, and drying up all Superfluities; nay, the very
Season it self is an Antidote and Preservative; for how pleasant, lusty and
vigorous is every thing brought forth at the approach of the Sun? and how
joyful all the Creation is, every thing seeming to sport it self in various
Delights? But when once Phoebus drives down his fainting Steeds, and with
shorter Marches descends with his Chariot from the back of Cancer, then
quickly does all Natures Wardrobe begin to be fullied, every Vegetable and
Annimal droops, decays and languishes, and the Earth mourning the Retreat of
her Celestial Lover, with his golden Locks, brings forth none but Sickly and
Rickety Productions. And therefore no wonder if so tender a Creature as Sheep
be at that time much more liable to contract this Disease for the Reasons
aforesaid, than in the Spring.

5thly, But to come to some more particular Reasons; all Astrologers say, that
Sheep are under the dominion of the Celestial Sign Aries, into which the Eye
of the World enters the 9th or 10th day of March, at which time the Sun is
strong and powerful, as being exalted therein; and therefore then this glorious
Celestial Body by its benevolent Influences, chears and comforts all things;
But on the other side, about the 11th of September, Sol enters Libra, where he
is in some degree impedited or debilitated, as being in opposition to his
Exaltation: These Celestial Influences do often take place, but more
especially when other Causes concur, as when Rains come in about July, and
continue till September or October, and the like.

6thly, You must consider that at this latter Season of the Year, Sheep have
passed through the Heats of Summer, which have awakned their natural Heat,
stirring up from the Center the hidden, or sleeping Poisons, whence the Spirits
on all occasions are apt to be evaporated, and Diseases generated, which then
meeting with Food full of gross Humors, and earthy phlegmatic Matter, arising
from declining Vegetations, do then manifest themselves to the great prejudice
of Health; for which Reasons those Months of July, August, September and
October are most dangerous both to Man and Beasts; Are not Men more sickly in
this Season than in any other? and also Diseases then contracted more fierce
and mortal, as Plagues, Rots, Murrains, etc?

Not that it is to be doubted but Sheep may Rot, on have watery Diseases in the
Winter, as well as in Autumn, but then it must be such as lie Night and Day in
marshie wet low Grounds, living chiefly on Grass, which in all wet Seasons,
without giving them some Hay at times with it, is very pernicious to them;
whence it comes to pass, that most Years such Grounds do more or less distemper
Sheep; As for Example, in Northamptonshire and Leicestershire, where their Land
is rich and low, their Grass plentiful, and Sheep large, but the
Country-Farmers are cunning enough to save themselves pretty well, for knowing
that their Sheep are subject to this fatal Disease, they are careful to time
it, and bring them up to London Market, before they are too far gone, and then
our Citizens and dainty Dames do make good Cheer with this stately and (no
doubt) very tender Mutton, and are as Blithe and Merry at the Burial of their
Carcasses in their own Paunches, as Young Men and Maids are at their
Whitson-Ale, or liquerish Matrons at a Gossipping.

Some do say, that there is a Spring Rot sometimes, but this is very rare, and
when it happens, the chief Cause has been either the disorders of a wet Winter,
where care has not been to give them a sufficient quantity of Hay, or that they
have fed in low wet Grounds, where they have eaten too great a quantity of
Grass, or else they have been Touched the Michaelmass before with the Rot; and
though they do hold well all the Winter, yet when the Spring comes, the hidden
Distemper manifests it self, for at that time Nature has a fresh and lively
Motion, and what is Infirm will then appear.

Having thus discoursed and laid open the Cause of the Rot in Sheep, from the
Closet of Nature, and pointed out the time when, and by what means that
Mischief is to be feared; so that I hope all Shepherds and Sheep masters will
henceforth take particular notice when Rains, and much wet weather happens
about July, August or September, or when it is generally a wet Summer, and
continues so till toward Michaelmess, and that they will remember, then is the
Time to be feared of a general Rot. I shall now proceed to befriend them with
some Directions, how to prevent the danger in that case threatened.

1st. You ought to keep your Sheep in the Fold till eight or nine a Clock in
the fore-noon, or longer, according as the Morning is either wet or dry, the
Air humid or clear; or if there be great Dews, as often there are in August and
September, and also in October; and when the Sun and Elements have pretty well
dried up the moist Vapors and Humidity off from the Earth, then you may let
them out, and keep them on the highest Ground, and where it is dryest, and if
the day prove dry, then you may about the middle of the day feed them in the
lower grounds for two or three hours; and when it draws toward Evening, put
them again on the higher places, always observing to fold them before the Dews
fall, and let them be folded on dry grounds, it being injurious to Sheep to be
out late at night, by reason of the humid Vapors which then arise.

2dly. If it do chance to rain a considerable part of the day, then you ought
to give your Sheep a little Hay at night and in the morning, which is the
surest Remdy against this Disease, and also many others; for dry Food is proper
at all times for Sheep, especially in wet seasons, and ought to be given them
once a day all the Months before mentioned. There are likewise other sorts of
Food, which are admirable for this purpose, viz. When the Weather is very wet,
and the Air humid, with great Dews, to give them three or four times a week,
either at night or morning, Oats in the straw, or Pease and Barley; this will
prove an absolute prevention of the forementioned Disease; or if your Oats or
other Grains be Thresht, then mix some Salt with them, and so give it them. If
this be continued, and the aforementioned Observations followed, it will
certainly prevent the Rot and other Distempers; for this dry Food does afford
such a firm Nourishment, that it dries up and consumes all superfluous Moisture
in the Body. Now the Rot in Sheep is a Dropsical Disease, or the overflowing of
gross Phlegmatic Humors, which in a little time spoils the Complexion, that it
becomes of a pale waterish Color: It also generates hard congealed matter or
knobs, corrupting the fountain of Blood, and causes the Body to become cold;
for the Bodies of all Creatures have their Original from the Watery and Earthy
Qualities, as the Spirits have theirs from the Element of Air: But in what
thing soever the Element of Water does too violently predominate, there all is
poisoned, the Natural Heat loses its power and proper Action, and Nature is
put out of her way, and all the Humors and sweet Oil, or Balsamic Virtues
turn sower, or become of a stinking Rankness, whence proceeds Melancholy, and
a sad heavy Spirit, which is the beginning of Sorrow and end of all Pleasure,
which nothing will so well prevent as continual supplies of the
beforementioned Foods, viz. Hay, Corn in the straw, or Thresht Corn mixed with
a little Salt. This will certainly cut off the causes of this Distemper in the
bud, if other circumstances, mentioned before, be duly observed.

There is another thing which will very much help to prevent the generation of
this Disease, (the Rot in Sheep) viz. to have large sheds, or low wide Houses,
like Barns, but open on all sides, to house your Sheep in, during wet cold
Weather, which is a general Rule in Flanders; and when the day proves wet, many
times they will keep them in the House all day, and give them Hay; but at all
times they observe not to let them out before the Sun and Elements have exhaled
the moist Dews and Vapors, and to house them again at Night, before the said
Dews and Humidity falls; by this means they preserve their Sheep from the Rot;
whereas otherwise their Land being low, their Sheep would almost every year be
swept away thereby.

But note, that these Rules and Observations must be Timed; for a little
Industry and small Charge may prevent the Mischief; but if once your Sheep be
tainted, then it will be an hard matter to recover them; you may possibly
preserve them, with a great deal of care and charge, till spring, but then most
of them will dye. Therefore be sure use these Preventive Remedies as soon as
you perceive the Weather begin to require them.

But when there happens three or four days, or a week of dry Weather, then you
need give them Hay but once every other day, or a few Oats or other Grain,
either in the straw, or thresht mixed with a little Salt, as you see occasion. I
would, by the permission of the Lord, be he that with four or five Loads of
good old Hay, viz. Hay one year old, and a few Oats or other Grain, preserve
and secure three or four Hundred Sheep from the fore-men tioned Disease in a
general Rot, and I would not take any other measures than what are before
specified.

Those Sheep-masters that live in places subject to the Rot, may do well to
change their Sheep every two, three or four years, for Hill-Country Sheep,
which will, on the change of Pasturage thrive much better, and not prove so
subject to Diseases; for change of Pasture for Sheep, and Air for Men,
generally proves Healthy: In all Hilly poor Grounds, where Sheep do work hard
for their Living, they do thereby become healthy, strong and hardy; for Nature
in all Creatures does use highest diligence to Arm and defend her self against
those Inconveniences hard keeping and labor bring on her: But those Sheep that
are bred in Rich Pastures, where they have Grass in superfluity, lying at ease,
filling their Bellies without much labor or motion, like idle People, who feed
to superfluity and to sleep; such Sheep, I say, are subject to many Diseases;
for no Creature can attain to Fatness, except they have Ease, and superfluity
of Meat and Drink, which consequently renders them full of gross Phlegmatic
Humors and Juices, which do in a degree deprave Nature of its innate Heat, and
as it were suffocate the pure natural spirits and strength, and stop the
Passages and contract the Vessel of the Stomach, and give much flesh and little
spirit, and that too very impure; Hence the Flesh of such Creatures that are
large, and bred in low Marshie grounds, loaded with fatness, is nothing so
sweet and pleasant as that of smaller Cattle, that are fed more moderately on
high dry Grounds. Nor will their Flesh take salt or keep so well or long, nor
breed so good Nurtriment, more especially in the said Months of August,
September and October; for then the flesh and sat, not only of Sheep, but all
other Annimals, is far more gross, and fuller of phlegmatic Juices than at any
other times of the year, and that is the Reason it will not keep so long, or
take salt, as at other times; for where the Phlegm abounds in any flesh, or
fat, there the pure Spirits and balsamic Virtues are weak, and those few that
are, are impure, therefore such Flesh presently turns to Putrefaction, the
gross Juices and Humidity hindering the Salt from incorporating with it; for
where the spirituous part of flesh is hurt or wounded, either by overfatness
and phlegmy substance, or the Creature surfeited, or the flesh kept too long
after it is killed, etc. then such flesh will not take salt, nor ke^ as others
do. If you think this strange, ask the Tallow-Chandlors whether the Tallow be
not fuller of gross Phlegm in Summer than in Winter, but more especially July,
August, September and October; Which does render all Creatures more subject to
Diseases in that Season, than at other times, and their flesh unclean, and
apter to generate Diseases in men that eat it, as I have more clearly and
largely demonstrated in our Treatise of Temperance, and the Nature of Things.

Of the Language of Sheep.
ALthough Sheep have by Nature but one One only Tone or Bleat, yet they can
communicate their Minds to each other by varying and altering the same,
according to the respective states of their Minds and Spirits, and suitable to
the occasion, no less readily than Mankind do convey their conceptions by
articulate words; for when such a Center is awakened, then presently such a
sound is predominate in the Bleat; the like is to be understood in all other
Creatures, even in Men; for every Word does vary in its Sound, according to
what Property is awakened in the sevenfold Nature; and look whatever Property
carries the upper Dominion, such a Sound or Tone is chief in the Word, and
carries along with it the power of that Property or Principle, and by way of
spirits it incorporates with its similes, in those to whom such words are
directed. And according to the Radix of each word, so do they kindle either
Love or Anger; for every Word does sound forth the state and nature of that
Center, whence they proceed.

Which the great Prophet Moses seems to intimate, where he says, That God
brought all Creatures to Adam, and he gave them Names expressing their Natures,
or according to their Natures. That is, The very Word in it self did comprehend
and sound forth the genuine Nature, Complexion, Disposition, Inclination, and
what Form and Property did predominate; so that to hear any Creature named, was
(then) to have a complete Definition, or at least, Description of the true
internal Nature, Virtues and Vices of that Creature; which was the true
Language of Nature, and the Original, which Man has fooled away by suffering
his Mind and Desires to enter into the evil, unclean, violent, savage, wrathful
Nature of Bears, Tigers, etc. But the Beasts and Birds do still retain that
first natural Mother Tongue, which the Creator endued them with in the
beginning, and are not deprived of it, because they have firmly and constantly
kept and observed the pure Law of Nature; and therefore can understand by one
single Bleat, Sound or Tone the various States, Inclinations and Dispositions
of each other, as also express Fullness, Hunger, Love, Hate, Joy, Sorrow, where
they should be, and the contrary; which no mortal Man can do by any one Word,
Sound or Tone.

As for Example; A Flock of Sheep of four or 5 Hundred are slaiting and grazing
by a Corn-field, or inviting Pasture, if any one of them sees any pass in the
Hedge, that Sheep shall slip in, and fall a feeding with silence, and not so
much as Bleat, or hardly look up, except for fear, knowing she is where she
ought not to be; But observe the next Sheep that sees this that is got into the
Corn, no sooner does she give a Bleat or two, but it does as sensibly call or
alarm the whole Flock, as particular Words do men, or the sounds of Trumpets
and Drums do Soldiers, and then presently they all fall to running into the
Corn, making a noise, and Bleating till the whole Field ring of them. But at
other times, particular Sheep in the Flock will bleat for sundry occasions, as
when they want their Lambs or Fellows, as also when they are otherwise
discomposed with Hunger, Cold, or the like, but then none of the rest will so
much as look up, except their Lambs, which if they are within hearing, will run
through the whole Flock, and quickly find their proper Dams by their Calls.
Also, they can distinguish the Shepherds Whistle, which is performed by his
Hand, from all other Whistles, and will turn at the hearing of it, and many
other things of the like nature; which experienced and observing Shepherds know
to be true. So true it is that the Creator has endued all the Inferior
Creatures with admirable Natural Gifts of Self-preservation, and distinguishing
Senses amongst themselves, far exceeding Man, who yet was made a thousand
degrees more sublime, but he wandered out of the Path of that pure Law and Way
he was ordained to walk in, whereas those other inferior Creatures have not,
and therefore they all retain those Original Gifts bestowed upon them in their
Creation.

The Scriptures of Truth do testify, That the Holy Ancients in the first Ages
of the World did understand this Original Language, which is the true Language
of Nature; for thereby Adam gave apt and proper Names to all the Host of Heaven
and Earth and Seas, and to his Wife Eve or Hevah, as also to his Sons, Cain and
Abel; in which Names in truth were couched their Natures, and what property or
seed was predominant in each of them. And so, in several after Ages, diverse of
the Wise Men having the same Knowledge, did always give their Children such
Names as did express and significantly demonstrate their Natures, Inclinations,
and what Property or Quality was predominate in them: And likewise it did often
express and sound forth the Providence or Accidents (as we bindly call them)
that did attend them at or near the Conception or Birth. The very same Rule
they followed in the Appelations of Places and Cities, so that he that did
understand the true Notation, Nature or Signification of their Names, did know
what Quality or Principle had the Dominion in them, whether Vice or Virtue,
Love or Anger, and the like; for they did not give Names by guess, or at a
venture, or because the Parent's Name was so or so (for I do not remember one
Person in all the Bible that bears his or her Fathers or Mothers Name) nor upon
idle or vain Conceits, as most or all do nowadays, without understanding or
enquiring into the Signification of them. Whence one calls his Daughter Ursula,
(that is, a little Bear or Cubb) when perhaps she is as pretty a Well-bred
Wench as any in the Parish, and another names his Prudence, when she is the
silliest foolishest Slut in the whole Town. These Absurdities those wiser Times
avoided; neither would they choose good Names, except they were suitable, and
did naturally express their Natures and Qualities. For they did not seldom give
their Children Towns and Places Names, which did express their Evil Nature,
when the Truth of the matter so required. As the Name of Nabal signified Folly,
and the Reason is given by the Text, Because Foolishness was with him.

Hence it was a frequent Custom amongst these wise Ancients and men of God, to
change their Names according as they were changed in their Nature. As in the
case of Abraham, his Original Name was A-bram, which does sound forth and
signify the outward Nature and Principle of Wrath, which all Mankind had
fallen into through Sin, Transgression and Violence; but when he turned his
Will unto the Lord, and believed in him, and when (as its said) the Word of the
Lord came unto him [That is, when he became enlightened by the divine Principle
of Gods eternal Love, and waxed Obedient unto the holy Voice of Wisdom] Then
the Lord said, thy Name shall no more be called A-bram, but A-bra-ham; which is
as much as to say, The Father of the Faithful: whereas A-bram, his first Name,
signified a great Lord, or Father in Nature; but A-bra-ham denoted not only a
Father in the outward Nature, but a faithful Father, in whom the Love and Light
of God did govern. The same is to be understood of Jacob, when he wrestled with
God, and overcame; then, and not till then, the Angel said unto him, As a
Prince have thou Power with God, and with Man, and have prevailed; therefore
thy Name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel. Which latter Name does
comprehend and truly signify both the Divine and Humane Nature, in which all
Mysteries lie hidden.

This Mystical Language some of the Holy and Wise in all Ages understood, even
to the time of the Manifestation of the Son of God in the Flesh, who himself
said to Simon his disciple, Thy Name shall be called Cephas, (which does
signify, a Stone or Rock) after he had made that sound Confession, Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. On the Belief of which, as on a Rock, the
Doctrine of Christianity is founded, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail
against it. So Panl was first called Saul, a Name of the sierce Wrath and
lordly Spirit, as appears by King Saul, who disobeyed the Voice of the Lord,
and persecuted David without cause, and so also did this Saul, the Servants of
God, with all Violence, and a mad zeal, Imagining, that therein he had done God
good Service. But when once the Lord h^d met with him, and struck him blind, in
order to giving him true sight, and had altered his Nature and Spirit, then the
Lord tells hi^, ^e shall no more be called Saul, but Paul; a Name of Humility
and sounding forth the Principle of divine Love. So ^congruous and Absurd was
it thought to continue those Names which were not suitable to the Natures of
those that bear them.

Yet nothing is more frequent amongst us, nay, many in these latter days do
choose Names for their Children, not only unsit and unsuitable, but even such as
does signify the holy Virtues, even of very Divinity it self, as Faith, Hope,
Charity, Grace, Emmanuel, etc. Which Names do truly signify the Goodness and
holy Virtues of God; which rarely have any simile with the predominant
Qualities in the People so named: Therefore every time such People are named,
those that call them are not only guilty of a Lie, and Breach of that Command,
Thou shall not call Evil Good, nor Good Evil, but also do take the Name of the
Lord in vain, by expressing the holy Virtues, without due regard, and
blasphemously attributing them to such as live in the contrary Principle, viz.
of ^ierceness, Uncleanness and Wrath. What a Mistake (not what an Impiety) is
it to call a Vile Wicked Man Emmanuel, which is the true Name of the blessed
and adorable Savior of the World, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ.

But the Reason of the difference between the Practice of this Age, and that of
the wise Ancients, is this, When the holy men of old named their Children, or
gave Names to any other thing, they applied themselves to the Oracle of God, to
that divine and natural Wisdom that taught both Adam, and others, apt and
proper Names, whereby to express the Nature and Virtue of each thing. But this
Mysterious Knowledge has now scarce any being, or at least, is not regarded by
the Sons of Men; Ignorance and Conceitedness having gotten the Dominion, and
captivated the divine Understanding and Gift of God in man's Soul, which ought
to be the Directer in all things a man undertakes to do; for all true natural
and divine Knowledge of Nature and Himself do hence proceed, even that
Essential Word that made all things, and is the true Life and Power that
preserves them all. To which most Noble, yet most Benign, Courtcous and
Familiar Master, I commend all my Fellow-Shepherds, earnestly advising them to
apply themselves unto him, who is always most ready and willing to teach and
instruct every one that comes unto him, being weary of false Opinion,
Tradition, and the Ways of the Multitude: This Divine Master is near unto every
one, he is no Respecter of Persons, plain Russet is as acceptable in his sight
as Cloth of Gold and Tissue, and the Shepherd as welcome as the Prince; for he
makes no difference between any that are humble, and not too wise in their own
Conceit: nor will he puzzle the Heads or torture the Brains of his Scholars
with the reading of Multitudes of Books; Three Volums complete his Library, two
of his Works, viz. the Internal and the external, or the Microcosm and the
Megacosm, the little World, or a man's own self, and the great World, or that
vast expanded Folio of created Beeings, Vegetable, Annimal and Mineral
(Celestial and Terrestrial) and the the third is the holy Book of divine
Scriptures. Here are all the Authors taught in this School, and yet containing
infinitely more Wisdom than Ptolomy's vast Library at Alexandria, or all the
Book-Trash of the Vatican: Nor shall you here be encumbred with that
Lip-Learning of various Tongues and Languages, which spends most part of a man's
Life, whilst he vainly endeavors to get a Blessing from the Confusion of a
Curse, and when he has done, is as ignorant of himself, and of Nature, and of^
every thing worthy to be known, as in the beginning, and many times more too,
Presumption and Op^nion of Science being now added to his natural Ignorance:
But this most excellent Tutor opening the Eyes of the Mind, and fixing them
inward, lays open to him all the Treasures and Mysteries contained in himself,
where lie finds the true Virtue, Power and Nature of all Elements, and thereby
is fit to look abroad, and thence-forth capable to judge of the Nature, the
Virtues or Vices, hidden Properties and Manifestations of all things he meets
with in the great World, and joins in this mystical Language of Nature with
every Creature, whose Voice or Tone proceeds from Equality, ^hereby making a
joint Consort of Praises to the glorious Creator and Fountain of Intellectual
Harmony.

Of the Excellency of a Shepherds Life, and that it is no less Innocent and
Honorable than Ancient.
OF all sorts of Husbandmen, Shepherds have the Advantage of Employment, 1st.
For that they have one of the most Innocent kinds of Annimals to converse with;
2dly, Because the same is easy, and most part of the year pleasant. 3dly.
Since they have the most spare Time for Contemplation, which if well employed
will furnish them with many Excellencies, both in Divine and Humane Gifts: Time
is a precious thing, and there are none but Sots and idle Drones that dare
spend it in waste. Now of this choice Commodity Shepherds having so great a
stock, they will be more than others to blame, if they do not improve it to the
enriching of their Mind with excellent Notions. 4thly. In former Ages no
Employment was counted so Noble, Pleasant and Honorable; Princes have envyed
the jocund Shepherds Happiness, and some crowned Heads abandoned the Toilsom
Gayeties of Empire, and voluntarily exchanged their Scepters for the Innocent
Pastoral Crook. But what spoke we of Kings and Princes? most of the Eminent
Prophets and holy Wise Men that were born and lived up to a far greater Dignity
than that of a perishing Crown, were not ashamed to be Shepherds. As Abel, the
first good man after the Fall, and Jacob, that eminent Patriarch, who brought
up his whole Jury of Sons (not excepting Levi himself,) to the same Occupation:
That illuminate Prophet Moses, who slighted the Delights of Pharoah's Court,
chose the Life of a Shepherd, though but as a Servant to another on the Plains of
Midian. And Royal David spent his Younger years in no other Employment. All
these, and many other holy Personages and Prophets husbanded their time so well
whilst they were tending their Flocks, that the Lord endued them with many
divine and natural Endowments, so that they were all well acquainted with the
most hidden Mysteries of Nature, and had the Knowledge of the Astral Sciences,
as well as of the Inferior Operations.

When the blessed Jesus descended from the ever-blissful Regions of Glory, to
become Man, that he might enable man to be reunited with God, the most
Illustrious Appearance of his Celestial Attendants (the holy Angels) was first
to the Innocent Shepherds in the Fields of Bethlehem: Have not the Priests and
Ministers of God, both in the first and second Testament, gone under the
Denomination of Shepherds; A Title our Savior himself vouchsafes to take upon
him, and calls his Disciples and chosen Ones, His Flock, whom (he says) hear
his Voice and follow him wherever he goes. A Metaph^r drawn from the Nature
of this Annimal, and true in the History and Figure, as well as in the Mystery;
For if Sheep be on a Bridge, or dangerous Precipiece, if one that is their
Leader, be forced into the Water, or the like, all the other will (usually) of
their own accord leap in after, though it be to their apparent Destruction;
such a natural Simpathy there is between them, and one with another.

But now in these degenerate days, and Dregs of Time, and the very Rust of an
Iron-Age, all these things are forgotten and neglected, not only by others, but
even by Shepherds themselves, and they grow Careless, and consequently
incapable of their own Happiness: O! what Excellency of Parts and Wisdom might
they attain unto, would they but lay out their spare Minutes in retired
Thoughts, and serious Meditations, which might not only render them able to
preserve their Flocks in perfect Health and Splendour, but furnish their own
Minds with an understanding of the holy Secrets, both Divine and Natural, to
know the operation of the Celestial Bodies and Elements, the use of Herbs,
Seeds and Grains, and the Virtues therein contained, with the degrees of
Temperance requisite in the use of them all; especially having the Advantages of
Silence and Solitariness (those two grand Handmaids to Wisdom) Their
Employment consisting of one simple thing, not pestered with many Visitors, nor
the Impertinent Chat of a Multitude of Customers, nor the Trouble of Bills of
Exchange, nor undermining Flatteries of Courtiers, nor litigious Plagues of
Mercinary Tongues, or tedious Attendants on Quirking Lawyers, and the like
mischievous En^umbrances, which render most Peoples Lives burdensome, and
divert their Thoughts from all things truly great and Noble, whereas the whole
course of their Life is, or may, and ought to be a quiet and delightful study;
for which purpose, they have always presented before their Eyes the harmonious
Motions of the Coelostial Bodies, and the Ravishing Beauties of the Vegetable
Kingdom; the Glorious Stars of the bespangled Firmament, with their wonderful
Courses, Risings, Settings, and Operations; as also the Resplendent Treasures
of the Teeming Earth, in innumerable Herbs and Flowers; breathing out Cordial
and Reviving Exhalations, as in Gratitude, repaying by such Aromatic Scents
and Oblations, the kindness of those Sunbeams and sweet Influences of the Air,
which have contributed to their Birth. Add to this, that their Ears are always
filled with the delicious Consorts and charming Harmonies of the Wood- and
Field-Mulitians, whilst their Eyes are delighted in beholding their Innocent
Sheep and Lambs seeding and playing round about them; all which cannot but
afford an incredible Delight and Pleasure to their Minds, if they are but
Intelligible.

And as there is no Occupation more Ancient, Honorable or Beneficial, so
neither is their any so Innocent and Harmless: A Merchant is rarely (says the
Wise man) without sin; Its Naught, its Naught, says the Buyer, but when he is
gone away he boas^eth, will be true in all Ages, as well as Solomon's: The
Criticism of Trade (as it is now managed) is little more than one man's
Circumventing another: And how much vain expense of Words (to say no worse) is
become almost necessary in Retailing, is obvious to every man that ever bought
but a pair of Shoes, and every Woman that has laid out so much as a Penny in
Thread, or an half Penny in Needles: By what Craft Lawyers, Physicians and
other Gown-men generally heap up Mouldering Estates, need not be mentioned. But
the Honest Shepherd is freed even from all these Temptations; His Charge gives
their Guide no evil Example; Malice, Ambition, Revenge, Treachery, are their
altogether Strangers; No Quarrels for Right of Dominion,. No Insurrections, No
private Repinings, No PLOTS, No Treasons, No Murders, No Love-Intrigues are
there to be heard; they feed quietly together, are still and Patient, contented
with that innocent Food and simple Drink, which bounteous Nature has prepared
for them.

In a word, Sheep are the Emblems and lively Patterns of all Virtue and
Innocence; Disdain not therefore, O ye Shepherds! to learn those Qualities of
them, since you know the Wisest Solomon sent some men to School to learn of the
Ant or Pismire: But be you Sober and Temperate, endeavor to know your selves,
and the degrees of your own Nature, which will enable you to understand all
other things aright: Improve your Time, let no Moment (which is never to be
recalled) pass without doing, or being employed in some good Work: Read good
Books, especially that Book of Books, [The Bible] Turn your Eyes inward, think
What you are? Whence you came? And how? What you are composed of? To what end
you are made and endued with so many Senses, and such a degree of
Understanding? How you now live? What helps, and what hinders the Functions of
your Life? What must be your End? And whither you tend? And what are the proper
and only means to make you happy here and hereafter?

A serious Revolving of these Questions, and examining your selves and your
unbosom'd Hearts, touching these Queries will be a most useful as well as
pleasant Exercise, and under the shade of an Hedge, more enlighten your Minds
than some years spent in a sweaty Library, the Chat of a Coffee-House, or even
the empty Documents of the Schools: And when your Spirits begin to languish
under the weight of these severer Contemplations, then refresh your Bodies
either with the Harmony of your well-chosen Instruments, or by being diligent
in Planting, Inoculating and Grafting Trees of various kinds of Fruit (than
which I scarce know any Labor more delightful) or in setting Hedges, which may
prove, not only Ornamental, but very Beneficial to your selves and Flocks, to
secure both from the Injuries of the Elements. And those that do thus manage
their Flocks with Wisdom and Discretion, shall answer a good Conscience toward
God, improve themselves to a Praiseworthy degree of Knowledge and Happiness,
and preserve their Sheep to a far greater Health and Profit than others.

Of Sounds, and the Benefits Musical Hramony yields to Men and Beasts, and in
particular to Sheep.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter occasionally mentioned the Music that
Shepherds use to have, I think it will not be improper here to add a few words
on that subject, since the same does not only conduce to the sole Delight of
the Shepherd himself; but is also of good use in respect of the Creatures which
he tends, who are much delighted thereby; and it is certain, that by how much
any Creatures Life is rendered more delightful, by so much the faster it
thrives, and is the less subject to Diseases. It Is agreed on all hands, That it
was a general Custom amongst the Ancient Shepherds to use and play on Musical
Instruments, as (in ruder times) on Oaten Reeds, and afterward on Hawboys,
Bagpipes, Flagolc^s, etc. He is wholly a stranger to the Poets, and never so
much as Traveled Arcadia, even in the Romance, that can be ignorant of this.
No^ was that ^ice only amongst the Heathen-Swains; for we find that great King
and illuminated Prophet David, being bred a Shepherd, had by use, and his
curious Genius and Industry, attained unto an Excellency therein, even in his
Youth, whilst he followed his Fathers Flocks, as was afterward manifest, not
only when by his curious skill in playing on the Harp he moderated the Rage of
King Saul, but afterward, by his continual Inclination to Harmony, whereof his
sweet composed Psalms (the most Musical Poems ever extant in the World) will be
as lasting as Irr^fragable Witnesses.

There is no doubt but Musical Harmony is endued with wonderful Excellencies
and equal parts, not only of the Terrestrials, but also of the Coelestials, and
its Harmonious Sounds and pleasant Consorts do powerfully, yet quickly, as by a
most Natural Inclination and Simpathetical Attraction allure all Creatures to
its own Property, what ever in their Radix stands near, or is capable of its
Influences: So that it does not only change the Affections, Intentions,
Gestures, Motions, Actions and Dispositions of men, and impose its own
Harmonious Property on them, but also allures many sorts of Beasts and Birds to
delight in hearing its pleasant Tunes: Thus some sorts of Birds are inveigled
by Pipes, and Hearts may be caught with the same; Nay, the Fishes themselves are
not insensible of its Charms, Musical Notes causing Friendship between Men and
Dolphins, as the sound of an Harp does lead up and down the Hyperborean Swan;
and some Authors relate, that Melodious Voices are the best means to tame the
wild Indian Elephants; yea, further, That the Elements themselves submit to its
Power; for it is storied of the Halesian Fountain, which is otherwise calm and
quiet, if a Trumpet be but sounded, shall presently rise up, raging, and swell
over its Banks. So wonderful is the Power of Musical Harmony, that it appeaseth
the Fury of the Mind, raises the Spirit, calls them back that are desperate,
and refreshes the Weary; insomuch that the Arabians say, That Camels carrying
heavy Burdens in tedious Journeys over the vast and barren Deserts, are much
cheared, and will go more stoutly for the singing of their Leaders; and hence
perhaps it is, that all our Carters and Plow men generally Whistle to their
Cattle when at work; and even of men themselves, those that carry great
Burdens, and most sorts of Laboring People do commonly sing in their
Employment, and thereby are strengthened, and their work goes the more
delightfully forward; for Harmony chears and refreshes the Annimal Spirits and
Senses, and causes equal Operations, which do much for tific Nature, and
chaseth away Melancholy and vain and troublesome Imaginations; For this cause
Democritus and Theophrastus affirm, that some Diseases both of the Body and
Mind, may be cured thereby, which we read was actually done by the Musical Hand
of Therpander of Lesbos on many of his Countrymen the Lesbians and Ionians;
their violent Fevers and other Diseases, giving place to the Salutiferous
strains of his Harp, which bid desiance to all the Medicaments of the Man-L^ch
of Chios, and all his Tribe of Physicians. Orpheus, Amphion, Pythagoras,
Empedocles, Asclepiades, Timotheus, etc. all mere Heathen-Artists, as well as
the heavenly-inspired- David, have performed Wonders by Musical Consorts,
sometimes stirring up dull Spirits to an active briskness by melodious and
familiar Sounds; at other times restraining wanton, furious or angry Heats, by
the sweet Violence of their graver Airs; for by no other means did Pythagoras
reclaim a Luxurious Young man from immoderate Lust.

Since such are the effects of Music, it was not without great Understanding,
and a deep In-sight into Nature, that Shepherds in former Ages did apply
themselves thereunto, and endeavor to Charm their Innocent Flocks with the
pleasant Concords of their well-tuned Lays; for Sheep are Creatures of a most
excellent Composition as to the Elements of the Body and Spirits, and therefore
all Harmony and Equality has great Assinity with their Natures, and they are
therewith wonderfully delighted and pleased, especially in times of scarcity
when Pasturages are hard and scarce, as also in cold rainy wet Weather; for a^
such times, Music does as it were compose and moderete their discontented
Minds and Spirits, and gently allures them to quietness, which does much suit
with the Humor and Disposition of this Creature, and affords them great
Benefit.

Nor is it any wond^ that Musical Harmony should have greater Power over, and
(...) Affinity with many sorts of Beasts, than it has in respect of man,
because they (...) the first pure Law of Nature given them by the Creator in
the beginning; whereas man, through the power of his depraved free. Will, has
prcipitated himself into Inequality, and ^ll kind of Discord, so that most men
take delight and pleasure in Oppression and Violence, destroying the Peace and
Concord, not only of those of his own Species, but also of all other Creatures,
being become an Enemy to the rest of the Creation, and nothing but a continual
Vexation and Perplexity to himself; so that every Beast of the sield is better
and happier than he, except he enters again into the Unity and Love of God in
Jesus Christ, that great Master of Harmony, which has put Heaven and Earth
into Consort, and will teach eery faithful Shepherd to tune and play upon his
own Instrument, to the comfort of his own Soul, and the Praise of his Creator,
who alone can give him Intrinsic Wisdom and Understanding in divine and humane
Mysteries, that he may be able both to preserve himself and the flock committed
to his charge.

The CONCLUSION.
THus have I delivered what I had to say, and thought might be of use on this
subject. I have followed the Method of Nature, not of Art: It Is probable many
may despise our Directions, because they are plain and familiar. A Likely
business, they will cry, that keeping Horses without Doors, and giving Sheep a
little Hay, should do such mighty Feats! We expected you should have taught us
some rare Drench, composed of as many Ingredients as ever Markham dreamed of,
and to have been given in an Unicorn's Horn, enricht with the Yolk of a
Pheenixes Egg, to render it more Cordial, If you had talk^ at this rate, and
sent us to the Apothecaries and Drugstiers for Medicines brought from one and
the other Indies, we should have thought something might have been done; but you
give us Rules that will cost us nothing, and how do you think any Body will
either value or practice them? I confess this is the Humor of the World, and I
expect no better; If you will not cheat them with hard words, and something
that appears difficult and that costs them dear, they slight and contemn you.
But wise Nature is quite of a contrary temper; with her, the most common things
are the most excellent; Her Remedies are plain, familiar, easy, cheap, ready
at hand, and always Come-at-ab^. In some places I may seem to have deviated
from my subject; but I am sure, if those Digressions be not strictly pertinent,
they will not be wholly useless, if they meet with a qualified Capacity; and I
shall never think much to go a little out of my own way, if thereby I may help
to bring my Reader into the Paths of Virtue and Nature; for which end, if he be
Wise, I have said enough, if he be otherwise, too much; and so conclude with a
Welfare to the first, and a Farewell to the rest.

CHAP. III.
Of the Evils that attend an Idle and soft Life, and the Excellency of moderate
Labor and Exercise.

A Soft and Idle Life has no sympathy either with God or Nature; for the
Heavens, Stars and Elements, with the wonderful and amazing variety of Beasts,
Fishes, Vegetations and Minerals, wherewith the lower Worlds are endued and
furnished, are the Works of the Lord, and are still continued and maintained by
his All-wise Providence and divine Word, which is never idle; for Idleness is
allowed no being, either in the internal or external Worlds; all in the
beginning was brought into a Being through Labor and Motion; as the wise
Moses says, The Lord moved himself on the face of the Waters; and they are
still sustained to this day by the same active and working Powers of the
Creator; Consider the daily motion of the Coelestials, viz. the Sun, Moon, and
the wonderful Companies of Stars, their Rising, Setting, continual Courses and
various Consigurations, all in exact Order; behold the Rivers Laboring
continually in a long progress, to pay their Tributary Streams to the Ocean,
and the Ocean by Industrious Tides, and Flux and Refluxes, stri^ing to supply
the Land: The Sun exhales Moisture from below, and bottles it up in Clouds till
an appointed time, and then returns it with plentious Usury to water and make
fat the Earth with the Dew of Heaven: Without Motion there is no Vegetation;
should the Primum Mobile stand idly still but a few minutes, the whole Munda^e
Systime would be ready to sink into Confusion. All those necessary things that
serve for the Support and Accommodation of Humane Life, are not, cannot be
procured without Labor; Nay, Life it self cannot otherwise be maintained; The
Blood must be always circulating, the Pulse (Nature's Clock) continually
striking, the Stomach must labor hard in her Kitchen to dress, prepare and
separate Aliment for the other parts; the Lungs be busy in Transpiration, the
Hears sending forth Reserves and new Supplies of Spirits to all the Frontier
Garrisons and remote Limbs of the Body, whilst the Brain is no less solicitous
to give the necessary Orders from the grand Counsel held between ^he
Understanding, the Will and the Judgment; whereunto Intelligence every minute
arrives from the five Sallyports, called, [The (...)] and all their Results are
careful (...) and treasured up by the Recorder [Memory] Nay, should the Hands
grow sluggish, and neglect supplying the Stomach with food, the Mouth would
soon be open to (...) their Laziness.

From all which it is apparent, as if written with Sunbeams, That nothing is a
greater Evil than Idleness; it breaks the first Command of God, and
contradicts the whole course of Nature, and is the Mother of Oppression and
Violence: A Sin that never goes alone, but attended with a black Train of other
Vices, always subject to the gross inferior Powers and evil Demons, which
continually promp them on to commit all kinds of Outrages against God and his
^aw in Nature. From whom did all vain Plays and wicked Games and such other
lewd Exercises, which they call Diversions and Pastimes (as if TIME (than which
nothing is more procious, and for want of which, or the mis-spending it, there
are, or one day will be such loud and lamentable Complaints) were such a Drug,
that we must be beholding to the Devil's Inventions of Cards, Dice, Coemedies,
etc. to rid it off our hands) Whence, I say, did all those Devises (which are
daily the utter Ruin of Thousands) proceed, or who were the first Inventers,
and continue the chief Haunters of them? Are they not such as oppress the Poor,
and get Money and Riches by Villainy and Violence, and abandon themselves to
Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness and all Uncleanness?

This sort of People it was, that by giving way to the Dictates of their own
evil Genius, found out and brought into fashion those varieties of unlawful
Sports, as Cards, Dice, Ninepins, Billeards, Shu^e-Boards, Lotteries,
Whimsey-boards, Stage Plays, mixed wanton Dancings, Huntings, Hawkings,
Low-bellings, Drolls, Iack-Pudding-Tricks, Foot-Balls, Wrastlings,
Cornish-Hurlings, Cudgel-Playing, Bull-baitings, Bear baitings, Cock fightings,
Races, Ringings, and a thousand other Vanities, of which some are matters of
mere Hazard, whereby men led on by Covetousness, lose their own Estates, in
hopes to get other men's, and both the Contenders at last are equal Beggars;
others are Rude, Robustick, Unmanly and Unscemly; others, Cruel, Bloody and
Oppressive to our innocent Fellow Creatures; others, Effaemenate, and tending
to Debanchery, but all vain, and to be condemned, as in many respects, so
particularly because they take up that Time which ought to be better employed,
viz. to the Honor and Glory of God, the Improvement of our own Understandings,
and rational Faculties, and the public Benefit of the Creation.

Where Note, That by Idleness I do not mean a Letargy of the Soul, or Stupidity
of the Body, or the not doing any thing at all, but the doing of Evil, or that
which we ought not to do; for in the first sense, there is scarce any thing
ilde in the whole Creation, the Devil himself is busy, running up and down
like a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; and whoever he be that does
not exercise himself in Virtue and Goodness, he is always doing the contrary:
Men's Desires and Imaginations cannot stand still; nay, even when the Body
sleeps, they are working and framing a thousand Idea's and Chimara's; therefore
when we exhort men to eschew Idleness, we mean, That they should for sake the
pursuit after vain things, which are unnessary, and will not turn to any solid
account, but rather are evil and destrustive; and on the other (...) that they
would apply themselves to diligence in the Ways of God and Nature, and the
Exercises of Piety and Virtue.

Thus our Auc^lor Adam, that he might not be idle, had his Task set him, even
in the state of Innocence; And what was it? To dress his Garden and keep it.
This is the appointed business of all his Offspring; every one ought to employ
himself in preserving the Garden of his Soul clear from the over-spreading W^ds
of Vice and inordinate affections, and his Body free from Uncleanness, and
super^uous Humors; and though in Paradise his Work was but his Diversion, (as
indeed all Labor to those in Paradisical state is no more) yet as soon as he
had precipitated himself from that happy Condition, he is presently enjoined to
get his Bread by the sweat of his Brows; no^ by the Sweat and Labor of other
men's Brows, but of his own; not to spend and consume on his Lusts and Passions
as much as five Hundred can get by their hard Labor, as is now a days
practiced by many much inferior to him, who make both men and Beasts groan
under such heavy Burdens as are their Ruin, which is a Crying Sin, though the
least regarded of any other; do not some particular Persons spend as much daily
in Wine, strong Drink and Rich Food, (compounded with as many Ingredients as
there are weeks in the Year) as would well sustain ten, twenty or forty People
in simple harmless Food? And is there not spent daily in one City, viz. in
London, near Fifty Thousand Pounds Sterling in Wine, Brandy, and other Spirits
and strong Liquors? which is Eighteen Million, Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand
Pounds Sterling every year. A Prodigious Sum of Money to be swallowed up and
pissed away in one year, by a parcel of Spoil-Goods, on a spot of Ground not
above six or seven Miles long, and three or four broad! The greatest part of
all which is spent in superfluity, and by idle People, as well to their own
particular Prejudice, in point of Health, as to the Impoverishment of the
Public, and Robbing of the more Poor and Industrious of those necessary
Supplios which God and Nature bountifully allowed to all Mankind. And yet this
Gluttonous Invasion amongst most of the Rich and Great, is not counted any
Evil; for they esteem it their Privilege, saying, What! has not God given me
Plenty? Wherefore then should I pine my Self, or deny to gratify my Appetite
and craving Desires? And thus they study to pamper their Bodies, even till they
oppress them, and employ all the noble Faculties of their Souls to advance the
worse than brutish Pleasure of their Throats, and Lusts of the Flesh; as if
the whole business of their Lives were only Injection and Ejoction, never so
much at once considering the hard Labors, Cries, Groans, Dangers, Wants, and
sore Oppressions both Men and Beasts do undergo to procure those things, which
they so vainly and superfluously consume, destroying thereby their own Bodies,
and stupifying their Minds and Senses, whereby they are not only rendered
incapable of every good Work, but the Soul becomes a Den sit to entertain the
Infernal Inhabitants.

It Is most certain, that Idloness and Gluttony are two of the greatest Tyrants
in the World; for they enthrall the Mind, and draw it to all kind of
Vitiousness, and both enfeeble and torture the Body by a great Number of
Diseases, which are also entailed to their Posterity; so that what men call
Pleasure proves the greatest Pain. For tell me, O thou idle and sottish
Glutton! what real Pleasure is there in the continual supping of Wine and
Drunkenness, and to have thy Table twice or thrice a day loaded with the
Richest Foods and Fruits, not only of our own Country, but fetched with vast
Toil and Hazards from the fa^ thest Corners of the Earth? Do you not hereby
Tire, and make simple Nature groan under many sore Burdens? Do not your Veins
glow with an unnatural Heat? Are not your Heads pestered with Fumes and
Dullness? Do not your Members ache with very Idleness, and languish for want of
Exercise? Is not the sharpness of your Palate dulled, so that you cannot taste
the good Relish of the best Food, or most Cordial Drinks? Are not your Passages
stopped and furred, and the Digestive Faculty and Natural Heat of the Stomach
debilitated, so that Nature cannot make any true Separation; whence are
generated evil Juices, that enfeeble all the Joints, and put the whole Systime
of Nature's Occonomy in your Bodies out of Kelter, whence corrupt gross Blood
is generated, and consequently impu^e Spirits; from whence an Universal ill
habit of Body arises?

The Richer Meats and Drinks are, the sooner do they tire and nauseate, if
taken in Excess, and when Nature is forced to receive them. Idleness and
Superfluity can find no place of Rest; their Horses nor Charriots can give them
ease, nor their softest Beds, nor most delicate Couches, ^ut all things that
they intend for their Pleasure, prove wearisom and painful unto them. Therefore
the Wise Ancients, and great Princes and Prophets, the better to obey the
Commands of God, and imitate his Works, both Celestial and Terrestrial, were
skilled, not only in sublime Arts and Sciences, but also in all Husbandry, and
the mannagement of Cattle; As Abraham the great and Pious Father of the
Faithful, and his Son Isaac, and his Grandson Jacob, and Royal David, etc.
whose Sepulchers, or the Shadows of their Memories our modern superfluous DONS
pretend to Honor, and yet at the same time scorn to imitate them, but hate and
contemn their Deeds. That famous Patriarch Isaac did not say to his Son Jacob,
Thou art my Heir, it does not become thee to spend thy time to understand
Husbandry, or to be a Plowman or a Shepherd, and a Companion of Clowns and
^usticks, ^ut I will have thee bred a Gentleman, that is, E^ and drink of the
best, and superfluo^sly, and do not work, but ride up and down in thy Coach,
and be waited upon by a parcel of Servants altogether as idle as thy self; and
thou shall Rack thy Tenants, and Domineer over the Poor, and oppress and
violate their Rights, and spend their Labors, and the sweat of their Brows in
Riot and Wantonness, and lead a lazy swaggering Life, and bear all out because
thou art my Son, and well Descended. But alas! these Maxims of Education were
not known or practiced in those days, but the Prudent Fathers brought up their
Dutiful and Laborious Children to their own Trades, and in honest Country
Employments. Jacob had twelve Sons, how many of them did he make Lawyers,
Universitymen, or Inn^ of Court-Gentlemen? No, No; they were every one of them
Shepherds, and were not ashamed of their Occupation, nor thought it any
dishonor to their Birth; for those were the Golden Times, so much celebrated
by the Ancients, when Kings and Princes studied Wisdom, and preferred the true
Knowledge of God and Nature in themselves before the vain Conceits of
Ignorance, Ambition, or the outward and barren Noise of Lip-Learning, but
Tutored their Children in the Mysteries of undisguised Nature, and contented
themselves with ^lain Country-Lives, mean Clothing and ^ple Food, which
rendered them sound ^d healthful, both in Body and Mind; ^ir Children for that
Reason being not so subject to such a number of Diseases as ours, nor to
Immature Deaths; for Temperance and Cleanness in Meats and Drinks, joined with
moderate Exercises and Labors, are most excellent Assistants, and very much
tend to the rendering of men capable of obtaining the true Knowledge of God and
Nature in themselves; for when the Body is free from Disorders, the pure thin
Vapors of the Air are sucked in as by a Sponge, on all parts, which do
wonderfully refresh and replenish Nature, and render the Body full of brisk
lively Spirits, which make it vigorous and sprightful.

And Labor duly followed does not only strengthen the Body, but fortifies us
against many Evils, making all the Limbs better able to discharge those
Functions for which they are designed, begets Appetite, helps Concoction,
Corroborates the Stomach and Natural Heat, frees the Passages from
Obstructions, makes the Blood circulate freely, etc.

In a word, Labor and Abstinence are not only two of the best Physicians in
the World, and two of the best Common-Wealths-men, the Pillars of Strength and
Fortitude, but the Grounds of all Virtue. Therefore know, O Man! if thou do
not employ those Talents which God has entrusted thee with, and put them to
that use for which they were lent thee, then the Lord, the great Creator will
spue thee out of his Mouth, as he did the proud disobedient Angels: Nor will it
serve thy turn in that day to say, My Father got an Estate by Oppression, Blood
and Violence, and made me his Heir, why then should I work? Had not I Slaves to
do my Drudgery? I am a Gentleman born and bred, who shall hinder me from taking
my Pleasure in Carrouzing, Pampering my Carcass, diverting my self in all
manner of Uncleanness and Idleness? No No, these Allegations will not excuse,
but aggravate both your Guilt and your Punishment. Every one must give an
Account of his Stewardship. No Punctilio's of Gentility, or Birth, or Blood, or
Titles, or Estate will stand thee in stead; nor any man's saying, It was my own,
and therefore I might do therewith what liked me best. For this is a most
false Usurpation and Robbing God of his Propriety in his Creatures, and
assuming the same to thy self. Alas, vain Man! The Lands, the Mines, the
Fruits, the Corn, every thing thou so proudly boastest to be thine own, are
Gods; for he made them, he preserves them, he endues them with all their
Virtues, he lent thee the Possession of them to employ them to his Glory, and
the good of thy fellow. Creatures; not to lavish them away on thy Lusts: And if
thou do abuse them, he can in the twinkling of an Eye take thee from them, or
them from thee, and bestow them on another; nay, so far art thou from being
Lord Paramount over those outward things thou enjoyest, that thou have no Right
nor Title to thine own Self, but thy Person is Gods by Creation, who made thee
to serve him, and not thy own Imaginations, and that thou might be capable of
serving him, and thereby in the end to obtain that Happiness which is the
Consummation of thy Happiness or chiefest Good; he has endued thee with Organs
of Body and Faculties of Mind, but thou let'st them rust with Idleness, or do
weaken and destroy them by Excess, and so thy Work, that very Work for which
thou wast made remains undone; thy Creator is most ungratefully neglected, or
Impiously affronted; thy Fellow Creatures, instead of a Guide or Helper, find
thee a Tyrant, and their Tormentor: Thy Life is rendered uncomfortable here, and
all Endeavers after a better state hereafter are by thee slighted. What
remains then, but that the Justice of divine Vengeance should arise terribly
against thee, and cut thee off from the Land of the Living, and cast thee into
utter Darkness and ever lasting Flame, to have thy Portion with the Devil and
his Angels, whom thou have imitated and served. But on the other side, Blessed
and thrice Happy are they that in time entertain and cherish Temperance, and
exercise themselves diligently in VVell-doing, and do not misuse the good Gifts
and Graces of their Creator, whose Garments are not stained with Oppression,
but they retain Humanity, and live under the Dominion of the Friendly Principle
and Divine Love, being at Peace with the whole Creation; for Nothing then can
Hurt them, because They have hurt Nothing.

THE Planters Speech To his Neighbors and Countrymen in Pennsylvania, East
and West-Iersey, etc. And to all such as have Transported themselves into
New-Colonies for the sake of a quiet Life.
My dear Friends and Countrymen;
THough it may seem very Impertinent and Unnecessary to go about to repeat to
you the Occasions and Motives that inclined you to abandon the Land of your
Nativity, and those comfortable outward Employments and Accommodations which
most of you had there, and to adventure your selves to the Hazards of a long
Voyage at Sea, to come to this Remote part of the World; yet lest you should
forget those Inducements, as often it happens, that men by a slothful
Negligence or Ignorance, after some Tract of Time, fall from their first Love,
and blindly hurrey themselves into the very same Mischiefs which they intended
to avoid, and build up again what they justly endeavored to destroy, not
foreseeing the future ill Conveniences of their present (supposed Innocent)
Actings; I shall take leave briefly to mention some few of those weighty Causes
which I am confident originally swayed your Spirits to this Transplantation,
and those good Ends, for the obtaining of which you chiefly removed hither.

The Motives of our Retreating to these New Habitations, I apprehend (measuring
your Sentiments by my own) to have been,

1st. The desires of a Peaceable Life, where we might Worship God and Obey his
Law with freedom, according to the Dictates of the divine Principle,
unincumbred with the Moldy Errors and Fierce Invasions of Tradition, Politic
Craft, Covetous or Ambitious Cruelty, etc.

2dly. That we might here, as on a Virgin Elysian Shore, commence or improve
such an Innocent course of Life, as might unload us of those other outward
Cares, Vexations and Turmoils, which before we were always subject unto from
the hands of Selfdesigning and Unreasonable Men.

3dly. That as Lot, by flying to little Zoar, from the Ungodly Company of a
more Populous Magnificent Dwelling, we might avoid both being grieved with the
sight and Infections, as well as odious Examples of Horrid Swearings, Cursings,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Uncleanness, and all kinds of Debauchery continually
committed with greediness; and also escape the Judgments threatened to every
Land polluted with such Abominations.

4thly. That as Trees are transplanted from one ^oyl to another, to render them
more Thriving and better Bearers, so we here in Peace and secure Retirement
under the ^ntiful Protection of God, and in the Lap of the least adulterated
Nature, might every one the better improve his Talent, and bring forth more
plentious Fruits to the Glory of God, and public Welfare of the whole
Creation.

5thly. And Lastly, That in order hereunto, by our Holy Doctrine, and the
Practical Teachings of our Exemplary Abstemious Lives, transacted in all
Humility, Sobriety, Plainness, Self-denial, Virtue and Honesty, we might gain
upon those Thousands of poor dark Souls scattered round about us, (and
commonly, in way of Contempt and Reproach called, Heathens) and bring them not
only to a state of Civility, but real Piety; which effected, would turn to a
more satisfying Account, than if with the proud Spaniards, we had gained the
Mines of Potosi, and might make the Ambitious Hero's, whom the World admires,
blush for their petty and shameful Victories, which only tend to make their
Fellow Creatures Slaves to those that are already the Devil's Vassals: Whereas
hereby we might release Millions from the Chains of Satan, and not only teach
them their Rights as Men, and their Happiness when Christians, but bring them
from the Power of Darkness, into the Mavelous Light and the Glorious Liberty
of the Sons of the most High.

These Thoughts, those Designs, My Friends, were those that brought you hither;
and so far only as you pursue and accomplish them, you obtain the end of your
Journey. If these be neglected, though your Ports and Rivers were full of Trading
Ships, your Land never so Populous, and laden with the most vendable
Commodities, yet I would be bold ^o say, That your Plantation were in a most
unthriving Condition; that like men in a Fever, tumbling from one side of the
Bed to the other, you have shifted your Dwelling, but not recovered your
Health, nor are one Inch the nearer your proposed Happiness in America, than in
Europe; and have traveled some Thousands of Miles to as little purpose as the
Jesuits into Iapan and China, or foolish Pilgrims in their tedious vain
Journeys to Compostella, Loretto, or Jerusalem.

Our business therefore here in this New Land is not so much to build Houses,
and establish Factories, and promote Trades and Manufactories, that may enrich
our selves, (though all these things in their due place are not to be
neglected) as to erect Temples of Holiness and Righteousness, which God may
delight in; to lay such lasting Frames and Foundations of Temperance and Virtue
as may support the Superstructures of our future Happiness, both in this and
the other World.

In order to these Great and Glorious Ends, it will well become, nay, is the
Indispensible Duty of all that are Superiors amongst us, to make Laws and
imitate Customs that may tend to Innocence and an Harmless Life, so as to avoid
and prevent all Oppression and Violence either to Men or Beasts; by which we
shall strengthen the Principle of Well-doing, and qualify the Fierce, Bitter,
Envious, Wrathful Spirit, which (as it is said of Fire and Water in their
Extremes) is a good Servant, but a bad Master.

Be pleased therefore to give me leave, (or whether you are pleased, and will
give leave, or no, I must, because it is my Duty, take it) to nominate some
Particulars, which in my Opinion will be convenient for us to observe, and may
be as so many Pillars to sustain our New-Building, and prevent those Deluges of
Evil, that otherwise will in time unavoidably break in upon us.

I. Since Temperance is the firmest Establishment of a People, and most sits
them for all the Duties of a Civil and Religious Life; since Strong and Heady
Drinks are no way necessary to Humane Life, but rather their at first (perhaps)
innocent and moderate use, is most apt to degenerate into Excess, and the
Example of those that use them most sparingly, tends to encourage others to
partake therein, who have not so much discretion as to use them properly,
(which indeed should be only in certain cases, as Physic) as is apparent in
our Neighboring Indians, whose Welfare we ought, in Christian Charity, to
tender as much as our own, and not lay Stumbling Blocks before them, whereby
both our Holy Religion becomes scandalized, as well as our future Temporal
Safety endangered. I would humbly, and I hope may justly, piously and
prudentially Advise, That we should either wholly prohibit, or lay very large
Impositions on all sorts of Brandy, Rum, distilled Spirits and Wine, so as to
render the common ^se of them impracticable.

For much better it is, that the Merchants that deal only therein, and the
Distillers should los^ their Trade, and the Vines for that use be neglected,
than that We, and our Posterity and Neighbors should by such a Temptation
perish, and commit all kind of Outrages and Uncleanness in the use of them: For
what if all such amongst us, either Young or Old, Rich or Poor, that are found
to drink of them (unless in case of Sickness, and prescribed as Physic) were
punished with Servitude for a certain time, and the Offense not to be bought
off with Money; What would the Public, or any sober Person be the worse for
this? Has not woeful Experience taught us the evil Consequences of drinking
such Liquors in our own Native Country? Are not such Practices the Leading
Cards to all Vitiousness? They precipitate Young Men into all kinds of Fury,
Madness and Folly; and besides weakening the already exhausted Natural Heat of
the more Ancient, they render Gray Hairs, (which ought to be the Ensigns of
Gravity and Wisdom) ridiculous and contemptible; In Women they destroy and
corrupt the very Radix of Nature, and intail a great Number of incurable
Diseases on Posterity; add to this, that they not only Spend and impair the
outward Substance most unnecessarily, but at the same time drown the Mind, and
debilitate all the Intellectual Faculties, and by extravagant Expenses render
us incapable to perform those Offices of Charity and Beneficience, which we
might otherwise, and ought, render to our poor Neighbors, and the public
benefit of our Country: In a word, these Superfl^ities and needless things
cannot be procured and used without hazard to our Health and Lives, and
oppression to the whole Creation, for all such things are dear, and hard to
come by; and when they are procured, the use of them proves of more dangerous
Consequence than the charge and trouble of getting them, so that when all is
done, they only serve to Tickle and please the sensual and depraved Appetite of
vain Men, and to force Nature out of her innocent way.

The use of such Superstuities is attended with many other evil Circumstances,
as first, it occasions men to let their Farms or Plantations dear, or makes
them labor very hard, or put their poor Servants upon Excessive Toil, and put
their own, both Body and Mind as it were on the Rack, to procure such things as
are necessary, and then not content therewith, they must exchange them away for
that which stands them in no stead, viz. To sell their most pleasant and
fragrant Fruits, Grains and Seeds at a low and poor Rate, that with the proceed
thereof they may buy Brandy, Rum, Wine and the like at dear Rates, As to give a
Bushel of brave Wheat for half a Gallon of Brandy, or a Gallon of Rumbullion;
What comparison is there to be made between a Twelve Penny Wheat Loaf and a
Pint of Brandy, Rum or Wine? The first is the real Preserver of Nature, a
durable sustantial Food, most grateful to Nature: The last serves only for a
moments time to please the sensual Appetite; but its evil Operations and
Effects stay behind, heats the Blood, makes the Veins glow with an unnatural
Heat, destroys the edge of the Appetite, renders the whole Body uneasy, and
fills the Mind with an innumerable Troop of wanton and vain Imaginations, which
seldom are raised, but (as it is said of evil Spirits in Magic) they do some
Signal Mischief, both to the Body and Mind. Or (to take notice by the way of
other the like Superstuities) which is most useful and beneficial to humane
Nature, one Ounce of Nutmegs, Cleves, Mace, and the like, or 20 or 30 brave
New-laid Eggs? (which of all sorts of Food are the compleatest, and being well
ordered, afford the best of Nourishment). Or which is indeed most serviceable,
a Pound of good Butter or Cheese, or on the other side, a Pound of Sugar,
Currants, Raisins, and the like? Indeed these last are excellent Fruits, but
they will not grow in our Country, nor under our Elevation; therefore not so
proper for our Bodies, every Soil naturally bringing forth, by the merciful
Wisdom and Providence of God, such Vegetations as are most agreeable to the
Constitutions of the People of that place.

Besides, all foreign Fruits and Commodities are dear, and for the most part
serve only to squander away Estates, advance Gluttony and procure Diseases, and
the frequent use of them does sow seeds of Oppression, causing mankind to
labor for that, which in truth he had much better have been without. Has not
this particular evil Inclination unto, and hankering after strong Liquors, and
other the like Superstuities, destroyed the Healths and Estates of many
Thousands in these Western Indies, (as they are called) of our Countrymen,
viz. in Iamaica, Barbados and the Leward Islands, where they have and do make
it a common practice to sell their excellent Butter, Eggs, Fruits, and fragrant
Herbs, their Hens, Turkies, Ducks, etc. to purchase Rum, Brandy, Wine, and
putrisied stinking salt Flesh and Fish, which have destroyed their Healths,
emptied their Purses, and rendered them in every respect Unhappy?

Moreover, the Disorders hence arising have put out the Eye of their
Understanding, and debauched the Natural Faculty of distinguishing between Good
and Evil, Wholesome and Harmful, Pleasant and Nauscous, and made them Brutish,
Sottish and Ignorant, even like Swine, to take pleasure in that Mire wherein by
Custom they have long wallowed themselves.

In particular, there is a pernicions sort of Drink in great Reputation and Use
amongst them, called, PUNCH, which with your leave, I shall give you some
Account of, as to both its Nature and Operation, to the end we may expel and
prevent, even in the bud, the growth of such evil Customs and Habits amongst
us. This sort of beloved Liquor is made of Brandy or Run, Sugar, Water,
Lime-Iuice, and sometimes Ginger or Nutmegs: Now here are four or five
Ingredients, all of as different Natures as Light is from Darkness, and all
great Extremes in their kind, except only the Water.

Is It. Rum and Brandy are terrible hot, fierce, sulpherous Spirits, void of all
the good friendly Balsamic Virtues, and middle Quality, which is the Moderator
and Qualifier in each Body, whilst it remains unviolated or entire; but
whenever it shall happen that this benign Property is wounded or destroyed,
either by undue Preparations, or other Accidents, then that thing becomes
either of a fierce raging domineering wrathful Operation, or else of a stinking
rank Nature, according to the Nature Original in each thing, as is plain in all
Balsamic Liquors; As Canary for Example, when once this aimable Quality is
destroyed by the common way of Distillation, then it becomes fierce, raging and
unnatural; and when the same is perished in Flesh, Herbs or Fruits, they become
putrified, rank and stinking; therefore in all sorts of Foods and Drinks there
ought to be great care and diligence used, not to destroy this friendly Quality
or middle Nature, which is in every thing the Uniter and Preserver (as it were)
of Soul and Body, it being that which gives the most fragrant Smell and
pleasant Taste to all Drinks and Foods, and is the true Life, Light and
Splendour of every thing in the Annimal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms. And in
what thing soever, be it Annimal or Vegetable, this friendly Quality is either
naturally impotent, or impaired by pernicious Art, or other Causalty, thence
forwards that thing is neither good for Food nor Drink, except the Venoms of
the Martial and Saturnine Properties (which then are altogether predominant) be
first corrected; for if it be in Animals, then such Beasts are fierce, cruel,
ravenous and unclean; If in Minerals, they are high Poisons; if in Herbs or
Fruits, they are rank and fulsom, and also in some degree Poisonous; and all
this by their natural Constitution and Quality: And the very same is to be
understood when the Essential Virtues of things in themselves, most wholesome
and pleasant, come to be hurt or destroyed; which being done in the Preparation
of Rum, Brandy, and all such sulpherous Spirits, it is evident how destructive
the use thereof must be to Nature.

2dly. Limes are an immature Fruit, wherein the Martial and Saturnine Poisons
are so powerful that the Sun and Elements have not had power to awaken the
Balsamic Virtues, or bring the Properties of Nature into an equal Operation,
as it has in other Fruits. The Juice of Limes therefore contain two siery
Qualities, viz. a Saturnine churlish Fire, which is of an hard Co^gulating
Nature in Operation, like the raw cold Saturnine Airs of Winter, which congeals
the Water, and hardens all things; 2dly, a sharp keen Martial Property, of a
sower harth sretting Nature and Operation. And though in that Drink called
Punch these Extremes are somewhat allayed or moderated by the friendly
Ingredients, viz. Water and Sugar, which do not only render it pleasurable to
the Palate, but also more tolerable to the Stomach. Nevertheless it must be
granted that no Extremes can be made altogether Homogeneal by any Artificial
Mixtures, or give Nature such ample Satisfaction as those things that are equal
in their parts. For the first leave the Stomach and Desire always either
Craving and in want, or disordered. For when such improper Compositions of
Mature and Immature Fruits and Unwholsom Liquors come into the Body, Nature's
Limbeck, the Stomach, quickly separates them, as sometimes you may perceive
after you have eaten or drank such things, by the sower Belches and keen sharp
matter the Stomach sends up into the Mouth; as when any shall eat Pyes, Tarts,
or other Food made of unripe Fruits, though never so much sweetened to deceive the
Palate, if one make a Meal of them, he shall find those sower distasteful
Belchings, and also that they leave his Stomach unsatisfied. The same may also
be said even of Ripe Fruits, when too great a number are jumbl'd together of
contrary Natures. There are but few that are truly sensible of the many sore
Evils and Dissatisfactions improper Mixtures in Diet brings upon the Body and
Mind of Man.

But certainly, My Friends and Countrymen, you cannot but be sensible how
freely, how bountifully the Creator has given us all those things that are
truly Natural and Necessary to support Life; and are they not familiar, and
procured with little Labor and less Hazards, either to the Body or Mind? But
on the contrary, are not all these Needless things hard to come by, so that
oft-times the Acquest of them tends to the Ruin of the Soul and Body? And yet
when all is done, the enjoyment of them gives neither Satisfaction to the one
nor Health to the other, but makes our Wants the greater; for presently we
shall want Doctors and Physic to repair those Ruins which our own
Intemperances have made; such improper Meats and Drinks being the original
Causes of those cruel Belly-Akes and griping Pains in the Bowels, Fevers,
Fluxes and Dropsical Diseases, both here and in the West, as also in the
East Indies, where our English inhabit, all according to the Nature of each
place, and as other Circumstances of Intemperances shall concur.

But besides Diseases, there are many other Mischiefs that do attend all those
places and Countries that accustom to give themselves up to Supersluity, and
especially to the drinking of strong Liquors; for they deprave both Superiors
and Inferiors, and are the Nurses of perpetual Crimes, Confusions and Disorders
on both sides, rendering the first Fierce, Rash, Tyrannical, and unfit for
Government; and the latter, Rude, Bold, Surly, Inhumane, and more apt to
Contemn all Authority than Obey.

Nor is this Prohibition more sit and requisite in respect of our selves, than
in regard of our Neighbors; so that if once we admit the common drinking of
such Heady Intoxicating Liquors, we may justly expect the same Inconveniences
to befall us as have done New England. For the Venom of such Liquors, by our
fatal Example, will quickly spread it self amongst the Indians, and so instead
of making them better, or more humane and tractable, by our Christian Virtues
and Abllemious Conversation, we shall make them Tenfold worse, and teach them
the g^d Sin of Drunkenness, which is the Inlet, Parent and Nurse of the most
Monstrous Enormities, as Uncleanness, Murders, etc For all People who have not
the true Knowledge of God, and his divine Principle, and the Understanding of
the hidden Natures of things, are terrible greedy and desirous after such
fierce wrathful Liquors, as also after Food wherein the Blood is, it being the
Original of every Life, which is the forbidden Fruit, that man ought not to
have eaten, nor awakened, there being searcea more evident Token of his
depraved state, and that the fierce wrathful Spirit does bear sway and carry
the upper Dominion, in men's hearts, than their violent Inclinations after
Blood, and fierce strong Liquors, which two things have a simile to, and with
each other, and the Devilish Nature and Wrath is nourished by the use of them;
which is further manifested by all the Savages of the Desert, as the contrary
appears in Sheep, and all tame humane and tractable Creatures, which therefore
we ^ll Clean Beasts.

II. Another thing, my Friends and Country men, which I desire you to consider,
is, the innumerable Evils and cruel Miseries man draws upon himself, and the
whole Creation, is the common use of warlike destructive murdering Weapons,
and their Appurtenances, viz. Guns, Swords, Powder, Bullets, Shot, Drums, and
the like Devilish Instruments; I may properly so call them, for no doubt the
invention and use of them all did originally proceed from, and is still
some^ted by the fierce Wrath; for as they have been always used for
Destruction, so indeed they can have no other use, but only to awaken and
encourage Wrath and Bloodshed; Therefore let not our Streets (the Temples of
Peace, and Tabernacles of Love and Innocence) be encumbred with such
mischievous Tools; let not our pure Air be disturbed with their ungrateful
Noises, Clashings, Ratlings and ^ouncings, nor poluted with the Sulpherous
Steams they send forth, as if so many Devils had marched through the Skey, and
lest the stench of the Infernal Regions behind them.

Wherefore should we give wild Indians, that do not know the use of the
Messengers of Death, such a bad and fatal Example, as to show a new Method how
to kill one another, which no doubt in process of time they will improve so far
as to make War upon us, and kill us with our own Weapons, witness the Evils
that by this very means have attended our Neighbors, and the like, we or our
Postenity may justly expect. Besides, tell me, I pray, what Affinity there is
or can be imagined between a Christian, and Guns, Swords, Powder, Shot, Drums,
and the frightful noise of Armed Troops marching on to Manslaughter, Desolation
and Spoil? does such Employment of Wrath and Blood, look any thing like the
pure, peaceable, meek, innocent Christian-Life, which teaches to do unto all as
we would be done unto; and to love not only our Friends and our Neighbors, but
also our Enemies; which assures us, that those that use the Sword shall perish
by the Sword, that commands us, if we are s^ote on the Left Cheek, to turn the
Right, etc. Can any thing be more Opposite to all this, than swaggering in Buff
and Armor, and boasting how many Men we have killed in a day?

And though many of you do not use, nor perhaps intend these Martial
Instruments for Manslaughter, but only to kill and destroy other inferior
Creatures, and Inhabitants of the Elements; yet I pray consider, why will you
arm your selves, and provide thus to kill those innocent Creatures? Does not
bounteous Mother Earth furnish us with all sorts of ^ood necessary for Life?
Wherefore then will you trouble your selves to kill those Creatures who have a
have a Title by Nature's Charter to their Lives as well as you? Shall not the
groaning of those Creatures call for Vengeance? And must not there be a
Retaliation? Can you think the Noble Race of Man was made to be a Tyrant over,
and a Scourge unto the inferior Inhabitants of the World? No sure, he was to
treat and govern them in Love and Friendliness. But instead thereof, he is now
become their deadly Enemy. Therefore though you will not fight with, and kill
those of your own Species, yet I must be bold to tell you, That these lesser
Violences (as you may call them) do proceed from the same Root of Wrath and
Bitterness, as the greater do, there being but one grand Fountain from whence
all kinds of Evil, Violence, Oppression and Cruelty do proceed, whether it be
toward our Brother, Man, or any other of our Fellow Creatures. And though
Custom has made the killing and oppressing of Beasts, Birds, etc. to be
sa^liar, and consequently easy, and done without any Remorse or Bowels of
Pity, yet it is still from the dark Root. It Is true, we read in Scripture
frequently of the Killing both Men and Beasts; and it is true, the Lord did give
the Nations liberty to kill and eat the Flesh of Inferior Creatures; But note,
That this was not done until Mankind had departed out of his holy Law, and
government of his divine Principle, into his sierce Wrath, out of which wrathful
Principle he permitted the killing and eating of Flesh; so the Scripture says,
The Wickedness of Man had corrupted the Earth, and then the Lord said, My
Spirit shall no longer strive with Man, Threescore and ten years shall be the
term of his Life, etc. That is, Man would not submit unto and be governed by
his holy friendly Principle of Love and Light; therefore the Lord in his fierce
Wrath (which man had rather chosen to precipitate himself into) shortened man's
Life, and gave him Flesh to eat; which sort of Food had the nearest Affinity to
that Wrathful Spirit that had then gotten the Government in Man. But in
Paradise, that is, whilst man continued under the sweet Conduct of the divine
Principle, his Bill of Fare, allowed by his Creator in love, was only, Every
Herb bearing Seed, and every Tree in which is the Fruit of a Tree yielding
Seed, to you it shall be for Meat, Genesis 1. 29. Thus far the Children of Israel
in the Wilderness, as long as they were Obedient, God provided and fed them
with Angels Food, pure and delicious Manna; but when they grew Disobedient, and
Murmured, and nothing would serve them but Flesh, God gave them Flesh in his
Wrath, and Quails in his Displeasure, which fitted them for Destruction.

Furthermors, though you will not kill those of your own kind, yet your
Children seeing and learning these Preparations of Oppression and Violence,
they may come to be of different Opinions, and by degrees kill one another with
their Fathers Guns and Swords; for we know not what sort of People will come
after us, nor what Spirit they may be of: Therefore it will be highly
convenient for us to prevent the Growth of all Fierceness, Wrath and Violence,
even in the bud, by our Laws and wholesome Customs; for there is no way or means
that can or will so powerfully disarm the Rage of Men and other Creaturs, as
Clemecy and Well-doing. Has not the Lord by his divine Hand of Providence
brought us into a pleasant and fruitful Country, that flows (as one may say)
with Milk and Honey, that is, all things necessary for sustaining Life and
rendering it delightful, as far as Nature desires, or Innocence will admit; why
then should we by our Intemperance make i^ slow with Blood, Oppression and
Violence? Will not a little Labor cause the Earth to bring forth a great
number of brave fragrant Herbs, Fruits and Grains, which will readily supply us
with both dry and moist Nourishment, and preserve our Health and Strength
without the use of Guns, Swords, Powder, Shot, or the like Engines and Utensils
of War, which have their Original from the fierce Wrath of God in Nature, and
let men pretend what they will of Necessity, cannot be used, but only by the
same Spirit.

Wherefore should we Christians, whose Laws and the Doctrines of our Savior
engage us to live in love and unity, that we may be rendered capable to
understand and enjoy that glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, which the whole
Creation groans to be delivered into; why, I say, should we with wrathful
Weapons, and breathing Death and Destruction, terrify, amaze and alarm not
only one another, but also all the Inhabitants of the four Elements, merely to
gratify our extravagant Desires and wanton Appetites, or furious Passions, and
all the while to suffer the friendly Law and good Principle of Gods eternal
Love to languish, sigh and groan under the burdens of those intolerable
Evils; in which slate Man often finds himself in great Trouble and Discontent,
and wonders very much what may be the occasion thereof; not considering the
true cause, viz. That their Hearts and Souls do move in the fierce Wrath, and
that they do not do unto all as they would be done unto, nor live in Innocence
and Concord with all Creatures, which is the true Christian Doctrine. Therefore
to prevent all these Troubles, Dangers and Annixities, it will become us to be
wise and Innocent in our Laws and Customs, that our Youthful Settlements may be
a means to preserve us and our Posterity, and then our Childrens Children will
bless our Souls, and we shall as naturally attract the sweet Influences of the
Coelestials, and also the benovelent Aspects of all Creatnes, as the Lodestone
does Iron; for every Like draws to its self its Likeness; for therein consists
its highest Joy.

III. A Third thing I would offer to your Consideration, is, That you will not
suffer it to become a Custom, or to be lawful for any amongst you to wear any
sort of Garments or Clothing, save only such, both Woolen and Linen, as our
own Country does or may produce; nor of any other Colors, but such as the
Woods, Seeds, Earths and Minerals of our own Land affords; By which we shall
encourage, not only all Ingenious People, but also our own Commodities, and
altogether discourage Foreigners. Also, let it be a Custom amongst us for all
our Superiors or Magistrates to wear White Garments made of Wool, which is not
only more serviceable, but natural, whereby they will be good Examples to the
lower sort, who in such things always take their measures from those above
them. Besides, such Clothings are easier procured, and Custom has stronger
Chains to hold the Multitude than the most severest Laws; And why should
Christians so much desire those Martial and Saturnine Colors! whereas White is
truly natural, the emblem of Innocence and Temperance, which God and Nature
gives us without labor or trouble, it being convenient for us who have in some
degree separated our selves from the Vanities of this World to choose all such
things as have the nearest Affinity to Simplicity, as well in Clothing, as in
Meats, Drinks and Exercises, by which we shall not only free our selves from
unnecessary Bonds, needless Changes, vain Fashions, burdensome Inconveniences
we have many Years labored under, but also teach our Posterity this important
Truth, That the sewer things we need, the Happier we are, and the more quiet we
shall lead our Lives; Superfuity and Extravagant Desires being the Mother of
all Need, Labor, Pain, Trouble and Diseases.

IV. We ought by all means to discountenance all Babylonical Letter-learn'd
Physicians, both for the Soul or Body; and on the contrary to direct and teach
every one to hearken unto their own Genius and the Voice of Wisdom in
themselves, which being minded, will teach every one the right Cure far better
than their Mercinary Prescriptions. It will be also very convenient that our
Superiors should accustom themselves to an higher degree of Temperance and
Self-Deneal, which will have greater Influence on the meaner sort; and let them
be diligent in Labor and Industry; By which wholesome Laws and Customs it will
become a shame either to be idle, or addicted to Superfluities; Therefore let
their Meats, Drinks Exercises and Clothing be according to their Age, and the
necessities of Nature, and no more; whereby the young and simple Ones will be
kept from despising the Children of the Poor, and the Poor from admiring and
envying the Rich; which will put a perpetual stop to the Carrier of Pride and
Covetousness, since then all will enjoy the Goods of the Creatures, as it were,
in equal Portions. Wherefore then should any strive, and sweat, and bustlo so
furiously to arrive at great Riches, seeing that as they cannot be procured
without such great Care, Labor, Violence, Oppression, not only to a man's own
Body and Soul, but also to the whole Creation; so the Enjoyment of them
contributes nothing to our real Happiness, but rather leads us into more Snares
and Dangers than the Hazards and Turmoils of getting them did.

The chief end men seem now to propose to themselves in the Acquisition of vast
Riches, is, That they may eat of the best Lambs, Fowls, Fishes, etc. and drink
Wine and strong Drink to Superfluity, and to live in Idleness, and be clothed
with soft and costly Raiment; That they may be admired by the Multitude, and
dwell in sumptuous Houses, cramb'd with Rich and glittering Furniture, and such
like Vanities; All which puff up the Rich with a swelling Conceit of their own
Worth, and causes them in most Nations to despise, and count the Poor but as
Dogs in comparison of themselves: And on the other side, makes the Poor
secretly Hate and Curse the Rich; And hence usually proceed Tmuults,
Insurrections, and most of the public Miseries and Desolations which happen
amongst the Sons of Men: And what can be more fit and prudential, more
necessary for the public Repose, as well as the Happiness and Content of all
Individuals, than that we should not only by our Laws, but also in our Examples
and Customs, cut off these Roots of so many Evils, by grubbing up all
Temptations to such Superfluity and Intemperance, and by so well cultivating
our Plantation, as to remove all the Matter whence these Mischiefs are
generated. And then we and our Children shall be free from those Disquietudes
which chiefly render man's Life uncomfortable; free from wasting Laborious Days
and Restless Nights in a greedy pursuit after Noxious Vanities, and half
killing our selves with cruel Carking Cares and Excessive Drudgeries; free from
Sh^king Policies, Unmanly Frauds and Lewd Endeavors to supplant or circumvent
our Neighbors; all which proceed for the most part from an insatiate Desire,
either to gratific a Luxurious Paunch or please a vain glorious I^h, which will
never be contented; but makes it enjoyment of the greatest Abundance, only a
Step to Mount it self toward the grasping (...) some, ^et higher
Extravagancies; and if it could become Master of all the Novelties the four
Worlds afford, would yet with childish Alexander be ready to sit down and cry
for more Bawbl^s and New Play-Things.

V. Let it be a Law and Custom amongst us, not only to abandon the use of all
Weapons of War, but also to avoid all Attempts and Beginnings of Violence, as
not to suffer any to use Cruelty unto, or to Hurrey and Oppress any of the
Inferior Creatures. This may seem a small and light thing, but really the
Consequences of it are very great; for this will disarm the Rage of our Young
People, and give their greener Years a settled Tincture or Habit of Love,
Compassion and Concord. Have you not often seen in our own Country, little
Children, almost as soon as they are able to take up a Stone or any other
Weapon into their Hands, fling it at some Bird, or other innocent Creature, and
to take delight in hanging, drowning or to^ menting young Cats or Dogs, or any
thing else that they can master; which evil Inclinations to Violence proceed
partly from their Birth, as being begot from Wrathful Essences, and the like
bad Qualities predominating in their Parents, and partly from Imitation; for
the daily Practice and Examples they behold of Cruelty and Violence offered to
all Creatures by their Fathers, stirs them up to do the like as far as their
Power will reach to do Mischief. For this cause most Boys whilst they are in
tender years do delight in Drums Swords, and all Weapons of Violence, because
they see their Fathers and the Elder sort of their Sex do the same. But on the
contrary, Female Children delight themselves in sewing of Linen, Needle Work,
playing with Babies, making of Banquets, imitating Christenings, (as they call
them) and the like, in Imitation of their Mothers, whom they see much concerned
in such Affairs. Since therefore whatsoever you do, your Youth will certainly
endeavor to imitate; and for that there is as well a Possibility of awakening,
strengthening and encouraging Innocence, Compassion, Patience, Concord, good
Will and harmless Inclin ^ions in all Youth, by the Practice and Custom of
Well-doing, as there is of breeding and encouraging Wrath and Violence by evil
Practices and Conversations: Therefore it will be good to season your
Children's first Years with Customs tending to Virtue and Innocence; in order
to which, nothing will be more Prevalent than good Examples.

VI. Let it not be lawful for any amongst us to use Scoffing, Jesting or Idle
Discourses, but (...) our Conversation always relish of Wisdom, humane or
divine, and help to instruct each other in the true knowledge of God, Nature,
and our selves; and let Tale-bearers (the Firebrarnds of Society, and Nurses of
Strife and Dissension) be punished with Servitude; nor let Riches, chance of
Birth, gay Clothes, nor any other thing be counted Honorable amongst us, but
only the true knowledge of God, Nature, and our selves, and acting pursuant
thereunto.

VII. Let us resolve to relinquish that mischievous Custom of Marrying for
Wealth; and therefore let it be prohibited for any to give Portions or Dowries
with his Daughters; by this we shall discourage the Spirit of Covetousness and
Idleness in our Young Men, and prevent their making use of base depraved
counterseit Kindnesses, which are but mere Complements, to bring their greedy
Desires to pass: Nor ought the diseased and deformed, who are not fit for
Generation, or to answer the end for which Marriage was instituted, be desirous
to press into that state: Also, all unequal Matches, as Young with the Old, and
Old with the Young (which commonly proceed from Lust in one of the Parties, and
Covetousness in the other) ought to be discouraged, and all such unnatural
Marriages branded with a Note of Infamy, and th^se Persons to be accounted most
miserable who commit such Intemperances.

IX. For the preventing of Theft, let it be ordained, that if any Person steal,
he shall make fourfold satisfaction to the party injured, either by Money or
Servitude. And if any wilfully commit Manslaughter, then let such perish by
the same Sword or Weapon. And let all the Fellons that give themselves to
stealing be compelled, during all their time of Servitude to wear a different
Garment from others during their whole Lives, that all may know what they have
done. And to hinder such bad Practices in the Root, let none be exempted from
Working, but only Magistrates and Tutors.

X. It ought to be considered, understood and taught amongst us, That the
fragrant Herbs, Fruits and Grains were not only ordained by the Lord for Food
in the beginning, but also that the same are still much to be preferred for
their natural Excellency, before and above the Stock and Radix thereof. For is
not the Corn to be preferred before the Stalk it grows on for Food? And are not
all sorts of Fruits far more acceptable than the Trees whence they proceed? The
very same is to be understood of all Animals; Is not the Milk of Cows and Sheep
more pleasant to behold, and better Food, being varied by the House-wives Art,
than the Blood and Flesh of such Cattle? There being as great a difference
between the one and the other as there is between Fire and Light; the Fire
being of a consuming sierce Nature, but the Light thereof is of a most
delightful aimable Principle or Quality, and yet if there were no Fire there
could be no Light, the Fire being the Radix of all Light and Loveliness. Every
particular Creature and Fruit, be it ever so mean and simple, is an Image of,
and does contain the true Nature and Property of the whole. The Fruits and
Grains of all Vegetables, as also the Fruits of Animals, send forth a pleasant
Odor, and are delightful to the Sight and Palate, easy of Concoction,
assording Nourishment of a clean firm substance; but the Stock or Stalk, which
is the Father of the Fruit, is of an astringent harsh sower bitter Taste, and
an unpleasant Smell, not fit for Food; even so it is in Animals. For this cause
it will be highly convenient for us to put away from us all Intemperance and
Super^uity, and to prefer the eating of Fruits, Grains and Seeds, for fear we
should be precipitated into the Wrath before we are sensible of it, as many
Thousands are; for men's strong Inclinations to Flesh and Blood, and to all
Beastiality, do too clearly manifest that they live in the Power and Operation
of the sierce Wrath and savage Nature of the wild Beasts of the Desert.

XI. The usual time of our Labor need not exceed Six Hours in a natural day;
for if every one performs that duly according to the Obligation which the Lord
has laid upon men in general, without exception, and content themselves with
innocent Fruits, Grains and Seeds, and observe the Rules of Moderation and
Temperance, you may assure your selves, that six hours Labor in a day will
plentifully supply us with all things necessary for Life, Health or Pleasure;
Not that the rest of our time should be spent in Idleness, much less wasted in
vain Gaming or Riot, but employed in meditating on the Works of God and Nature,
innocent and useful Conference, reading profitable Books, refreshing our
Spirits with the sweet Airs of Music, practicing curious and beneficial Arts,
as Planting, Inoculating, Grafting, studying the Science of Numbers, the Use of
the Globes, the Theory of Navigation, and all the parts of the Mathamaticks,
for those whose Genius leads them thereunto; Others to gain skill by Experience
in the Knowledge of Herbs, Plants, and other Vegetations, to distinguish them
by their Names, Shape and Virtues, take notice of their Agreement with, or
Antipathy to each other; and particularly to observe the Signature of each; for
on every thing God has engraven certain Mystic real Characters, fully
expressing its true Nature and Virtues to such as can obtain the skill to read
that ^ssential Alphabet; also reading of true and select Histories, wherein by
taking notice of the Revolutions, Confusions, Slaughters and Meseries men in
all Ages have brought upon themselves, by their Lusts and Pride, we may both
learn to detest their Ways which lead to those Confusions, and be excited to a
greater gratitude to God for his Mercies to us, in planting us under more happy
Circumstances.

XII. Let Sugar, Spanish Fruits, and all sorts of Spices be sold only at and
place in a Town, and be used wholly in Medicines, and not to mix with any sort
of common Food or Drink; for they are not only Superfluous, but prejudicial to
Health so to be used. Also, let our times of eating be about Nine in the
Morning and Five in the Afternoon; for you will find that much more agreeable
than a Meal at Midday, as commonly in use; for the central Heat or Eye of the
World being then in the Meridian, has great power to awaken the Natural Heat,
and also to evaporate it, and therefore at that time, most People, especially
in hot Weather, do feel themselves more hot and indisposed than either in the
Morning or Afternoon; besides, all that would preserve their Health, ought to
fast a proper time between Meals, that so the Stomach and Natural Heat may the
better concoct, and make a perfect separation, whence is generated good Blood,
and brisk lively Spirits; besides, a long Mornings work or exercise, dulls and
wastes the pure Spirits, which renders Nature not so capable to digest a full
Meal of Meat and Drinks; And let this be a general Rule amongst us, That Nature
be always stronger than the Meats and Drinks, and not your Food stronger than
Nature; and then you will find your selves after such Meals refreshed, and not
dulled. And by observing these Rules and practicing Temperance, you will
prevent abundance of Diseases, so that I need speak the less touching Physic;
Only shall recommend to your notice and public use the following Po^ltice, for
the speedy and certatn Cure of Burns, Scalded Limbs, Byles, Fellons, or any the
like Sores, viz. Wheat Flour, Water and Milk simpered over the sire till it be
thick, and then add some Sugar and make it sweet, and apply this to the part
grieved 9 or 10 times a day, the oftener the better, and then anoint the it with
fresh Butter to keep it, subtle; for all these Ingredients do cast a friendly
Aspect to each other, and are of a Balsamic Nature, and therefore do soon
raise up the dismayed Oil or wounded Spiits, by mel^orating, and asswaging the
awakned Poisons in such Hearts. Perhaps some good Houswife will be apt to
contradict me, and say, that Bread may do better than Flower: But give me leave
to tell her, that Bread has passed through a strong fiery Preparation, which
has, as it were, broken the very heart of it; besides, it does more or less
retain those sulpherous Vapors it received in the Oven, which are very
injurious; also Salt being generally mixed with it, makes it so much the worse,
Salt being of a sharp fretting Nature, apt to incorporate with the Venoms in
such Sores, and so advance and increase them.

What is said of Bread is clearly manifested by this, viz. Put what quantity
you will of Bread into Water or Milk, and it will not thicken nor become of so
strong a substance as it will do with a small quantity of Flower. For this
cause Milk and Water thickened with Flower, (provided it be not thicker than
Milk-Pottage, and do but just boil up) is one of the healthiest Foods in the
World for all Ages, but especially for Children and Old People; for it does not
only administer wholesome Nourishment, but naturally opens the Passage of the
Stomach, and powerfully carries the Windy matter downward, and causes it to
break away with case. This sort of Food is good for all Women, but more
particularly those that are troubled with Fumes and Windy Vapors flying into
the Head; nor does it bind the Body, as some ignorantly imagine, though
sometimes it does prove beneficial in Looseness and Fluxes, but that does not
proceed from its binding Quality, but from its sweet friendly Nature, by
moderating those sharp keen Poisons that are by some Intemperance or Accident
awakened in the Bowels.

There are several other particulars which might be recommended to your
Observation and Use; but if you duly follow these, and continue to walk in the
strait Paths of Nature, your Eyes will be daily more and more enlightened, and
you will come to see and discern in all things what is good, wholesome, safe,
proper and natural, and the contrary, so as to choose the one and refuse the
other.

There only remains now one Objection to what I first proposed touching
avoiding the use of Weapons, viz. That if we shall do so, we shall presently
become a Prey, and be overrun by Foreigners.

To which I Answer; This Objection is somewhat like that of the Jews of old,
consulting whether or no they should put to death Innocent Jesus; If we let
this Man alone, cried they, the Romans will come upon us, and take away our
Place and Nation. Whereas on the quite contrary, for their Wickedness in
slaying the Lord of Life, God in his just Judgment brought upon them the Romans
indeed, who destroyed them with (...) Desolation, such as no Age can parallel;
so there is just Reason to judge, that the direct contrary to your
Apprehensions will happen in this case; for Innocence is a better Bullwark than
Force, and will more surely protect you than great Guns and Munition of War.
And indeed what Security is there in those things, since there is no Nation,
though never so well furnished with or skilled in the use of them, but one time
or other is subdued and overrun by the greater Violence of others? Whereas
your Harmless, Innocent, just Course of Living will disarm the Rage of your
Neighbor Princes; for nothing does so powerfully fortify a Nation or People
as Virtue and Well-doing. For all Wars are set on foot either for Covetousness
to make themselves Masters of great Treasure and Spoil, or for Ambition and
vain Glory, to boast of their Victories, or for Revenge of past Injuries. Now
none of all these will have any place in Relation ^on. For first, you
contenting your selves with what is necessary, will give no (...) ^on to their
Covetousness; nor can they (...) any Honor by vanquishing those that (...) no
Resistance; nor pretend a Quarrel (...) Injuries received when you live at
Peace will all the Creation: Which last, by a secret, yet powerful Magnetism
will again draw all things to a friendliness toward you. Whence come Wars and
Fightings, (says the Apostle) Is it not from your Lusts? Root out the latter,
and you will be inno danger from the former: Having once subdued our Inward or
Home Enemies
there will be no fear of foreign Forces, but all things shall work together
for our good. Besides, good and virtuous Examples will work far more upon our
Neighbor Indians than Lip-preaching or external Rites of Religious Worship;
for the first does reach to the Root, and touch the inwards of a man, the
latter affect only the Eye or Ear; so that nothing can effectually overcome the
fierce Wrath, both in man and without him, but only living in the Power and
Operation of the pure innocent and friendly Principle of God's Love, whence all
Compassion and Well-doing proceed, that being the true Protector and Defendor
of our Faith, and in which alone is perfect Peace, wherein we shall find rest
to our Souls. But on the other side, Intemperance and Supersluity do enthral
Mankind, makes that their Masters which was ordained to be their Servants, and
exposes them to continual Dangers, Troubles, Turmoils, Vexations and Miseries.

Thus in true Love to the Welfare of this our New Plantation, and to you all,
My Friends and Countrymen, I have laid before ^u those things which I conceive
tend to your Peace, Prosperity and Happiness: And may the good Spirit of Light,
Love and Innocence illuminate you to pursue and vigorously endeavor what may
conduce to these most Safe, Honorable and Desirable Ends.

CHAP. V.
The Complaints of the Birds and Fowls of Heaven to their Creator, for the
Oppressions and Violences most Nations on the Earth do offer unto them,
particularly the People called Christians, lately settled in several Provinces
in America.

THough Nature has formed most of our kind for Harmony, and endued us with
Ravishing Notes, and the warbling Airs of Melody, yet we cannot but now for a
while forget our pleasant Singing, and in Sorrowful Tones sigh out our just
Complaints, from a deep sense of those Oppressions and undeserved ill usage
under which we groan. It Is not the severity of the Season, nor the ^arshness of
the Weather, that so much afflicts us; for to those Inconveniences of the
Elements we patiently submit; but it is the Treachery and Tyranny that we endure
from the hands of Creatures that call themselves Rational, and whom we never
injured, but on the contrary have many ways obliged, that enforces us to
remonstrate to all the Creation the Injustice of their Dealings and our
Sufferings.

Cruel and heard-Hearted Man! does this Persidiousness and Tyranny of thine
toward us Inferior-graduated, yet Innocent fellow Creatures, look like thy
first Estate? Has not our Creator made and ordained thee his Governor and
great Vicegerent over all the Inhabitants of the lower Universe, to Rule them
with Meekness and Equity? and formed thee his Image, viz. to live in and under
the Government of the divine and friendly Principle of his Love and holy Light,
but you have disobeyed the Commands of our Creator, and despised the Voice of
Wisdom in your Hearts, and through Cruelty, Violence and Oppression not only to
one another, but to all the Host of Heaven, have precipitated your selves into
the fierce Wrath of God and Nature, whence have been invented all Guns, Powder,
Bullets, and other hellish Engines of Destruction, by which you do not only
plague and torment and butcher one another, but all other Innocent Creatures,
whom the great Jehovah has made for his Honor and Glory, and to sing forth
his Praise, by whose Power and divine Hand we are sustained; for he bountifully
gives us our daily Bread without labor of Body or perturbation of Mind;
therefore in our way and according to our nature, we joyfully chaunt forth
Hellelujahs to his Name, and rest satisfied with his good pleasure.

But depraved Man will not suffer us in peace or safety to go on with that
Employment for which we were made, but declares himself our Enemy, and
causelessly proclaims War against us, and by force and fraud, open Violence and
secret Stratagems endeavors, wherever he can catch or surprise us, to
deprive us of that Life which God has given us.

And we are more especially astonished to meet with these usages from those
that call themselves Christians; who of late years have found out and settled
themselves in the Regions and Countries of America, where before their Arrival
we lived in a very great degree of freedom and security. But now by this new
Neighborhood of those from whose, Profession we might promise our selves
nothing but Love and good Will, our Condition is much altered for the worse,
our Danger and Destruction is daily increased, and to kill and murder us is
become an Occupation and a Trado, for which purpose these peaceable Christians
(as they would be counted) have brought with them all kinds of Snares and
Engines of War and Violence, which never had before been seen, nor their
frightful hellish Noises heard in our Coasts. Now how absurd is it for those
who fly from Violence in one place, to begin it themselves on the Innocent in
those places where they take shelter? Flow much below the dignity of a Man are
those cruel and insidious Practices? How foreign from and contrary to the
Doctrine of that Christianity which you profess, where it is expressly declared,
That whoever uses the Sword shall perish by it: That is to say, he that by any
kind of Violence does awaken the Center of Wrath in himself, shall be
precipitated into it; and therefore your most holy Prophet, the first born of
the Sons of God, and in and by whom the World was made, says, My Kingdom is
not of this World, for then would my Servants fight. That is, My Kingdom, and
that state whereunto I bring my Disciples, does not consist in Wrath, Violence
or Oppression, but in Peace, Innocence, Love and universal good Will, doing
unto all as they would be done unto. And in pursuance of these Injunctions and
Instructions from that adorable Prince of Peace, we have been informed, that
diverse Christians in the Primitive times, at the first arising of the Day Star
of Gods eternal Light and Love, did deny themselves all the violent Sports of
Esau and Nimrod, and bore their Testimony against all Oppression and the use of
those devilish Engines of Destruction; and many in their own Country will not
to this day be seen to practice any violent Exercises, as Hunting, Hawking,
Shooting or laying of Suares and Traps to betray the guiltless Inhabitants of
the expanded Firmament, but make it a main point of Doctrine to disown
Fighting, and use of Arms, and Practices of Violence, as being contrary to the
divine Principle; and yet some of the same men coming into our Indian
Territories for the sake of a good Conscience, and that they might exercise
their Minds and Liberties in peaceable Well-doing, which the Sword of Wrath
disquieted and hindered them from enjoying in their own Country, did as lustily
provide themselves with hellish Engines of Wrath, Cruelty and Bloodshed, as
Guns, Swords, Powder, etc. as if they had been marching into the Fields of
Mars, rather than into a Land of Tranquillity and Repose.

But tell us, O Men! we pray you tell us what Injuries have we committed to
forfeit? What Law have we broken, or what Cause given you, whereby you can
pretend a Right to invade and violate our part, and natural Rights, and to
assault and destroy us, as if we were the Agressors, and no better than
Thieves, Robbers and Murderers, fit to be extirpated out of the Creation? Sure
we are, we have not made our selves more Rich than our Neigbours, nor
endeavored to establish to our selves a Tyranny over them: We have not taken
away their Privileges, nor laid Cities and Countries waste: We are not guilty
of Burning of Towns, nor Deslowring of Virgins, nor Ravishing Matrons, nor of
Slaying Old Men, or carrying away Captive the Young: We do not gather our
selves into Troops to destroy those of our own kind; nor have we at any time
Plundered them, or haled them into loathsome Prisons: Nor are we offended with
each other, because our Feathers are not all of a length or of the same color:
We ea^ not to Gluttony, nor drink to Excess and Ebriety, whilst some of our
kind are half starved: Others of larger Bodies or higher Fleight, do not
squeeze and oppress the Inferiors with hard Labors, whilst themselves surfeit
in Riot and Wantonness: We do not rob one another of natural Raiment, nor grow
proud with their Ornaments: Our Foods and Drinks are not the price of Blood,
nor do they smell of the Violence and Oppression of Egypt; but our Liquor is
pure Water, and our Food is given us by the divine hand of Providence: Our Love
to each other is neither partial nor dissembled; nor do we couple for Money,
Honor, or any private base Interest.

Consider therefore, O Man! our Innocence, and thine own high Birth, and fully
not thy natural Honor with an unjust pursuit to destroy us, but remember, that
all the Inventers of those Engines of War and Violence, which thou usest
against us, have brought them forth from the Root of Bitterness; and know this,
that none can use them but from the Power of the same black Principle. How
unworthy the humane Nature, and how unlike Innocence is it, for thee, O Man,
that art made but a little lower than the Angels, to hang a great Iron Sword by
thy side, a huge Budget of stinking Sulphur and N^tre and l^aden Pallats at thy
Girdle, and an heavy Gun on thy Shoulder, and thus laden with Violence within
and without, to run through thick and thin, over pleasant Plains and craggy
Mountains. playing at Bo-p^p behind Trees, Bushes and Hedges, like a Thief or
Trepan, taking all advantages to betray Innocence, and unsuspectedly let fly
the fierce Thunderbolts of Mars, and the Poisons of Saturn, to deprive us of
our harmless Lives, to the great Amazement of all the Peaceable Inhabitants of
Heaven; and when all is done, the Sum Total of thy Exploit, and all the Trophy
and Triumph of thy War like Expedition, is but this That with the expense of
much precious Time, and enduring more extremity of To^l, Hunger and C^ld than
perhaps thou would have suffered to save the Life of one of thy wanting
Brethren, thou have treacherously Killed a poor Innocent Bird, whose Carcass
perhaps will scarce yield thee a Penny, whilst in the mean time and with half
this pains, thou might at thy own needful and lawful Occupation have gotten
to the value of six Pence or a Shilling, and yet oft-times the time, charge and
trouble of Dressing this thy unjust Prey, is double the value of it when it is
dressed; whereas one Pint of Milk of it self, or conveniently varied, would
give thee a much more wholesome and nourishing Meal.

Consider further, what an odd, dishonorable and Beggarly Basen^ss it seems to
be in Gentlemen and those of Estates, who live and spend most part of their
time in idle Wantonness, Gluttony and Excess, and whenever they have a mind
to exercise themselves a little, and disperse the thick Fumes of a late
Debanch, then out they must go abroad to offer Violence to some of their fellow
Creatures; and they that are content to hire lewd and obscene Mi^strils, to
divert them at their Revels, with a rude scraping on a parcel of Cats-Guts with
their clumsey Fingers, are so far from returning us any thanks for that most
pure natural and ravishing Music that we continually assord them gratis, that
on the contrary, with the blackest Ingratitude they study our Destruction: And
this their Malice they chiefly execute when it is frosty snowy and severe
Weather, when the Sun, the Fountain of Light and Comfort is retreated to the
remotest Tropic, when the Earth is stripped of Fruits and Grains, and lies
bedrid and benumbed under the Bands of sullen Saturn, and the Heavens withdraw
their sweet and friendly Influences, then instead of relieving us in our
Extremity, and preserving us from the Rigors of the Season, and of the
Elements, they take their opportunity to add to our Miseries and Dangers, and
rather than fail to do us a mischief, punish themselves with Wet and Cold,
lurking in private Holes to circumvent and murder (...); and he is the bravest
Fellow that can kill most of us, which serves them to beast of amongst their
Drunken Companions in their Riotous Feasts, when they make themselves merry at
our being buried in their insatiate Paunches.

But why should we wonder at this Violence and Unnaturalness of depraved men,
seeing that they do not scruple to do almost the same to those of their own
Species? Nay, we are informed, that in the more Populous Countries, where these
Killing Christians live, when there happens a very hard cold frosty Season,
there can hardly and little innocent Bird escape their bloody hands, but even
the Harmonious Blackbirds, the sweet Quavering Throshes, and the high soaring
Lark (who every Morning sends up a Sacrifice of Melody in the Suburbs of
Heaven, and whom all, not stupefied into B^ty, are half ravished to hear, such
are their charming Notes) yet all promiscuously go to Pot, and fall Victims to
this unparalled Barba^ity.

And so far as we can perceive, we shall quickly be but in little better
Condition, if the Trade of Violence, Killing and Inhumanity be encouraged, as
it has been hitherto; for the Europeans and Christians are far more expert in
the feats of Arms, and these Murdering Mysteries than our former Masters, the
Indians, whom the Christians and others do in contempt call Heathens,
Barbarians and Savage Wild People, which indeed is true, and in their Barbarity
they do as much Mischief as they can; but they had not wherewith to destroy us
in any considerable Numbers, neither are they such cunning Artists in the dark
Wrath and Devilish Practices of Killing, nor did they attempt us but to
satisfy their Hunger; whereas now they are encouraged to make a Trade of
selling our Bodies for Brandy, Rum and strong Liquors, which the Christians
give them in Exchange, though the same proves almost as great a Mischief to the
Indians as to us, and in the end will prove of as fatal Consequence to the
Christians themselves.

For by selling the Indians Guns, Powder, etc. they grow more expert in all
kind of Violence, and practice the same not only upon us, but oft-times on one
another, and in time, no doubt will attempt the same on those who furnish them
with these Mortiferous Tools, ^s by Experience is found they have done in other
places. Besides, the Christians bring them acquainted with the several sorts of
pernicious intoxicating strong Drinks, before mentioned, the use of which makes
them Mad, and tenfold more Devilish and Inhumane than they were before; for the
more savage, wild and brutish any Man is, both the more fond is he of such
strong Liquors, and the more mischievous Effects have they upon him; so that
rather than they will be without those abominable Drinks, after once they have
tasted them, they will travel night and day with all Pains and Cunning
imaginable, to hunt, kill and destroy us, and all other Creatures, not so much
(now) for Food, as for the Skins, Feathers or Carcasses to sell, that so they
may be able therewith to procure those baneful Drinks; whereas before the
Christians Arrival they only were able to kill some few of us, and that too, as
it were, for Necessity, for Food, and Skins to cover them in the Winter; but
since they hunt Fish, and torment all the innocent Inhabitants of the Elements,
so that they cannot have any rest or security; for they will sell the choicest
of their Skins and Furs to procure a little Rum or Brandy, or a Gun, Powder,
Shot, and the like, which only tend to their own Destruction, as well as ours;
for as with the one they take away our sweet Lives, so with the other they ruin
their own Healths, contract various Diseases never before heard of amongst
them; and besides, put themselves to a World of needless Slavery and Toil to
procure to themselves these Mischiefs. And is* it not a shame that it should be
said, (and too truly) that where the Christians come in new Plantations, they
instead of converting, have often debauched the old neighboring Indiane and
Heathen-Natives, and rendered many of them worse than they were before?

But still, tell us (if thou can) O Man! wherefore do thou thus degrade thy
self to become a S^tter, a Tr^pan, a Snare, a Plague and a Torment to all the
rest of the Innocent Inhabitants of the four Worlds, wherein yet thou plaguest
thy self more than any of them? Has not thy Creator made thee in his own Image,
endued the with divine and human Wisdom, substituted thee Governor and
Deputy-Lievetenant over all, and bountifully enricht thee with a thousand
Privileges and Benefits, which we poor inferior Graduates are denied? And have
not thou power to command, by Understanding and Art, the lower Animals to serve
and labor for thee, as to plough up and till the stubborn Ground (but rendered
so by thy Sin) so that it becomes fruitful, and brings thee forth a great
number of various sorts of gallant wholesome nurtritive Seeds and Grains, which
being wisely ordered may make variety of curious Food? Art thou not endued with
Strength and Art to manure, cultivate and improve the Earth, also by planting
innumerable Fruit Trees, which will afford not only good Food, but likewise
several sorts of delicate and refreshing Drinks? Does not that brave Creature
the Cow, pay thee Tribute twice a day, by filling thy Pails with Nectar, which
of it self is a sublime Food, and being altered by Care and Art, makes several
sorts of excellent Dishes? Does not the bounteous Earth, out of her
ever-Teeming Womb, by Nature and the help of thy Art, present thee with a vast
Number of various sorts of beautiful, fragrant and virtuous Plants and Herbs,
proper both for Food and Physic? In a word, has not our benificent and
indulgent Creator freely accomodated thee with the Blessings of all the four
Worlds, which almost surpass in Number the utmost reach of humane Arithmatick?
Has he not appointed the Coelestials to distill continually their sweet
Influences upon thee? Do thou not command the fine soft Wool of that most
innocent and useful Creature, the Sheep, to cover the self-contracted Shame of
thy Nakedness, and keep thee from the Injuries of the Elements? Art not thou
possessed of all the stately Woods and noble Trees (wherein we are content to
spond our selves and build our Nests) but thou take liberty to cut them down,
not only to supply thee with Fires, but also to furnish thee with many other
Conveniences, both of Necessity and Ornament, especially to build thee Houses
therewith to secure thy self from pinching Frost, and violent Rains, and
offensive Winds, and parching Sun shine; and yet though we are thereby disseized
of our ancient Freeholds and Habitations, we have never been heard to murmur or
repine, who yet enjoy not a thousandth part of these Privileges and
Felicities: We pretend not to command over any of our fellow Creatures, ^or
have the use of Fire, nor the benefit of Houses; we wear none but our own
natural Cloathings, and are continually exposed to all the Injuries of the
Elements; neither are we endued with Arts and Sciences, Crafts and Mysteries,
whereby to make any Advantages to our selves, so that we have nothing to trust
to but only the divine Hand of our Creator; when he gives us a Breakfast, we
know not where we shall have a Dinner, nor what it will be; so when we Sup, we
know nothing of what Food, or where we shall eat on the Morrow, but wholly rely
upon our Maker, who never fails to comfort and feed us; for a few, and simple
mean things sufficiently serve our turns, and relieve our wants, and therefore
we need not many; our Desires never wandering beyond the necessities of Nature;
our Food is innocent and our Drink simple Water, therefore we are not sick, but
live our appoint time in perfect Health.

Wherefore then, O Man! should thou lie in wait to shorten our days, to
disturb our Repose and interrupt our Harmony by the hellish Noise of thy Guns,
Arms, Snares and Stratagems? Or why do thou teach thine Offspring, as soon
as they are able to handle a Stone, to fling it at us, as if we were your
Enemies? Are not those of our winged kind, that inhabit the most sweet and
sublime Element, the Air, more Noble than any of the inferior Creatures, that
grovel upon the Earth, or hide themselves in the Waters? And do not all men
delight to hear our Melodious Consorts and Musical Notes, filling the Heavens
and Earth with our delightful Songs, which we chaun^ forth in honor and praise
to our Creator, being free from Envy, Strife and Contention, from carking Cares
and Vexations, all places being our Home, and we go freely where we please,
except when entangled in thy treacherous Gins and Devices, for which there is
no pretense or provocation, nor the least color of Reason why thou should
envy our sin pl^ innocent safe, seeing we cannot by our Death cont^te any thing
to thy Happiness, who art al^eady so plentifully stored with the great and
gallant Privileges and Advantages beforementioned. And, O! what a brave noble
wise Creature would Man be, and what Honor and Glory might his Government
bring unto his Creator, as well as Comfort and Happiness to himself and all his
Fellow Creatures, if he lived innocently, and did but as we poor Creatures do,
viz. answer that end for which he was made, and do as he would willingly be
done unto.

I have heard, that one of the cunningest of our kind, viz. a Jack Daw, who
(like some pretended Christians, loves Churches, more for convenience and
shelter than Worship, having made a Nest in the Steeple, or some part of the
House, where a number of them use to meet for performing their public
exercises of Religious Worship, and by means thereof, often hearing a great
noise below, was prompted, by curiosity, to enquire the occasion thereof* so
listening attentively, he heard the men there met were a reading the
Commandments of God, where it is said, Thou shall do no Murder: To which all the
People answered, Lord incline our hearts to keep this Law. And afterward they
proceeded to read many good Prayers to God to forgive them their Trespasses and
Mis-deeds, all their Violences and Abuse of Gods Creatures, etc. Which
extremely rejoiced the poor Bird to hear; so he returned to his fellows, and
acquainted every Bird that he met with in the Airial Plains, of these glad
Tidings, That MAN, their Tormentor and v^gilent Enemy did now repent of the
Evil of his Ways, and would now commit no more Murders, nor Acts of Violence on
the Innocent. Which was received with an universal Acclamation of the Volatile
Troops, and now with redoubled Notes began to sing louder Anthems of Joy and
Gratitude for so great a Blessing, which would give a general Peace to the
whole Creation But their Mirth was but short lived; for the very next day this
Daw, with some others was abroad seeking for Food, and there comes one of the
same Persons whom he had seen so devoutly praying in the Church, and lying in
ambush with a long Gun cramb'd with Brimstone and Nitre and murdering P^llets
of Load, as soon as he spied his opportunity, let fly at the harm^ess Birds,
and killed several of them upon the place, and wounded others; those that
escaped acquainted their Fellows what they had seen and suffered, and bid them
look to themselves, whatever fair words men might use; for they say, and do
not; they pray God would incline their hearts not to commit any Violence, and
yet the Profession, the very Trade of Killing is one of the most Honorable
Callings amongst them in their esteem: They with their Lips desire the Lord
would forgive them their Oppressions and Violences, and in their Hearts resolve
upon, and by their Practices continue the same Outrages. Thus vain and depraved
Men, through their wanton and extravagant Desires after those things which they
need not, nay, which are much more prejudicial than profitable unto them, do
draw upon themselves a deluge of Calamities; the more they have, the more they
need; for as their Possessions and Enjoyments are enlarged, so continually in
proportion are their greedy Desires augmented, like Persons in a Dropsy,
coveting after more Drink, because they have ingurg'd too much already; and so
through Transgression and Violence that Noble Rational Creature, becomes the
most miserable of all Animals, who was made in the beginning not only the
Supreme, but most Happy, and Wisest of all: And although we are daily subject
to all his Snares and Violences, yet still we would not for a thousand Worlds
be in some men's condition; for they have made themselves not only subject to a
thousand Miseries in this Life, but more especially in the World to come, which
has no end; whereas both our Joy and Sorrow terminates with this Life, and
extends not beyond the short horizon of Time: And though we do undergo great
Inconveniences, and often lose our dear Lives sacrificed to irrational and
ungodly Violence, yet let him know, That he himself is and shall be thereby the
greatest Sufferer; and therefore we advise him to be careful that he do no^
awaken the sierce Jaws and ravenous Mouth of the Wrath, for fear he be thereby
in the end swallowed up, and there be none to deliver him.

Can thou, O Man! accuse us for breaking or transgressing Gods pure Law in
Nature? Are we guilty of Cheating, Lying or bearing false Witness, of Gluttony,
Drunkenness, or taking the adorable Name of our Creator in vain? Have we usurpt
upon thy Privileges, taken away thy Lands, or laid waste thy Houses? Do we not
abominate thy Uncleanness, and observe the proper times of our Couplings? Are
not our Males tender and loving, and our Females so chaste that they will not
admit the greatest Courtier amongst us to touch them out of their proper
Seasons? Are either of us ever jealous of each other? Where can thou find
amongst all the numerous Inhabitants of the four Worlds, so much Abstinence,
Love, Constancy and Chastity as in our kind, our Males taking the like care and
Industry as the most sober provident well-disposed Man does for the
Preservation and Accommodation of his dear Wife and tender Children; for during
the time of our hatching and breeding up, they duly take pains to provide and
bring home Food for their Females, whilst they sit, and also for their Young
Ones after they are brought forth; neither do they visit the Nests of others,
but keep close to their first chosen Loves; therefore Anger, Jealousy and
Contention (those Thorns which render most of your Down-Beds uneasy) enter not
into our unbounded Habitations.

We contend not, nor wrangle about our Pedigrees, nor trouble our Heads about
Noble Birth and State; neither have we any Lawsuits for Rights, Privileges,
Lands or Inheritances; the whole expanded Ante-Court of Heaven our Creator has
given in common amongst us, not limiting us by any Landmarks; the vast and
spacious Air is our natural City, whereof we are all born free; nor have we
forfeited our Charter: The Composition and Elements of our Bodies are more
brisk, lightsom, agile and pleasant than any other Creatures, as coming nearest
to the Celestial Quires than the heavy dull melancholy Earth-creepers, or
Phlegmatic Inhabitants of the Ocean; therefore we can remove many Miles in a
very few hours, and mount our selves to the lofty Regions, and there behold,
the wonderful Secrets of our Creator in the generation of Meteors, how soft
Vapors are cran'd up, by the Suns strong Beams, and condensed into Clouds, and
thence distilled into Showers, to enable the Earth to afford us Nourishment;
how falling Drops being intercepted in their way, congeal into ^lakes of Srow;
and how hot Exhalations imprisoned in surrounding Vapors of a cold and
contrary Nature, force their Passage with bright Flashes and terrible Noises,
which you call Lightning and Thunder; whilst in the mean time, whilst we survey
near hand these Wonders, our fallen Prince [Man] is confined to his Earthly
Palaces, ^uzling like Swine in Dung and Dirt, or rather like Moles, always
moiling, yet always blind.

This Active Life, joined with our innocent simple Diet, preserves us from
being afflicted with Diseases; Your Agues are as unknown to us as their Causes
and Cures are to your Physicians; We have no Fevers, because we never burn
with unnatural Lusts, nor Dropsies, because we never drown our faculties with
over-charg'd Bowls; neither are our Joints crampt with the Great Pox, nor our
Skins deformed with the Small; Our Young Ones are not tortured with the Evil or
Rickets, nor those of riper Age with Trembling Palsies, Putrefying Seurvies, or
any ^he like cruel Diseases! so that rarely any of our kind dye unnatural
Deaths (unless occasioned by the T^eachory or Violence of ^an) but we are by
the goodness of our Creator blessed with Health and long Life, not subject to
Distempers, slavish Labors, Cares, or any other Perturbations either of Body
or Mind, because we still continue in ^he constant Observation of that pure
inno^nt Law of God in Nature, in which we were first created, and do still
retain those natural Gifts and Self-preservations which we were endued with in
the beginning; for the Lord made all Creatures sound and healthful, and now if
any are otherwise it is because they have forsaken Gods pure Law, and depraved
themselves; the most fatal Instance whereof is Man, who was in his Creation
adorned with wonderful Gifts and Graces, both divine and humane, and in every
respect made more complete than any other Inhabitants of the material Worlds;
but behold now how miserably is he degenerated and shut up in Ignorance, Folly
and Blindness, by his stepping out of that innocent Law God had placed him in,
and giving way first to the Insinuations, and by degrees to the Tyranny of the
fierce violent wrathful poysonons Spirit, which has not only captivated his
Soul to all Evil, and exposed his Body to innumerable Diseases, but also
enslaved all the vast Multitudes of the (...) Worlds; for he being our Angel
and Governor, therefore we partake in the ^ad Consequences of his Transgrssion
(...) Fa^, but none so much as himself, because none sinned, nor broke God's
pure Law but himself; se^ not only those of our kind, but all others (except
Men) do still return (...) truly Noble and universal Language which our Creator
endued us with in the beginning; and though carried or voluntarily flying into
remote Climates, many hundred Miles distant, can as intelligibly understand
those of our own kind, as nearer home where we were bred; but it is not so with
our Prince [Man] for if he travels but four or five hundred Miles, or shifts
three or four Degrees of Latitude, he must have an Interpreter, or else he can
no more comprehend the Language of those of his own Species than he can do
ours; And yet what a clutter does he make about Languages and Scholarship,
spending the prime part of his Life (which ought to be entirely employed in the
Study of Nature and Wisdom) in learning a few Ca^ting words, of the Basis and
true Root whereof he knows nothing; whereas we need no tyrannical Schoolmaster
to lash us into the knowledge of Grammar, or teach us the use of Letters, since
we can by our Natural Tones communicate whatsoever is needful for the Relief or
Preservation of each other, still varying that Tone according to our
Necessities.

Do not therefore boast, O Man! nor grow proud of thy great Knowledge and
Parts, nor usurp to thy self a License to oppress and domineer over both the
weaker of thine own kind, and all other innocent Inhabitants of Air, Earth and
Sea: From whence did thou derive thy Authority for killing thy Inferiors,
merely because they are such, or for destroying their Natural Rights and
Privileges? Is it not from thy Fall? Has not Transgression been the occasion
thereof? And is it not the Effects of the fierce Wrath, where every form has
its motion and operation in Discord; And h^st not thou by adhearing thereunto,
and being governed by the Serpentine Nature, attracted unto thy self a thousand
Evils and Calamities? For what inferior Creature in the World is afflicted with
so many Diseases of Body and Perturbations of Mind as thou art? Also, art not
thou the most helpless and forlorn Creature of the Universe, and more subject
than any of us to receive Impressions from the Injuries of the Elements? For
art not thou beholding to the in or Graduates for thy Clothing, and a great
part of thy Food? And art thou not continually assaulted with inward and
outward Enemies? with perpetual Plagues of Suspicions, Fears, Jealousies and
unsatisfied Desires? And do not thou fear those of thy own kind more than all
the fierce Savages of the Deserts?

What Authority do thou retain over the Elements? or what savor or kindness
will they show unto thee, more than to us poor Inferiors? When once they get
the Mastery, will not the Water drown thee, the Fire burn thee, and the Earth
swallow thee up? Nor have thou any more command of the Air; How have thou lost
those spacious Dominions the Creator invested thee with in the beginning?
Examine thy self, O thou Two-Leg'd unfeather'd unthinking Thing! What can
thou truly boast of now, according to thy common way of Living, more than we? A
Crane has a longer swallow, and therefore it is like takes more delight in
receiving its Food and Drink; and yet many of you make the pleasure of your
Throats your business, I may almost say, your godd: The Eagle can vastly outsee
you, the Vultur out-smell you, every one of us hear more nimbly; for Chastity,
our Turtles vye with the very best of (...); for Paternal Affections toward
their ^oung, our Pelican exceeds you, and for returning Love toward helpless
Parents, our Storks may shame you. Dare any of your Songsters, Musick-Masters,
Choristers or Organ-Players compare with the ravishing Notes of a Morning Lark
or an Evening Nightingale? What more certain Knowledge have you of the Times,
or the changing of Seasons, or any the like secret Operations of Gods Power in
the internal and external Nature? Are not thy Astrological Predictions
generally false, and thy Prognostications of the Weather scarce so significant
or certain as the Chattering of our Magpies, or the Screaking of a Peacock? Are
not all thy Methods of Physic as fallible? And do thou not venture blindfold
at these things, by Cuess and Chance?

Consider therefore, O Man! that tho^ art the unhappiest of all Gods Creatures,
and that thou do excel all others in Cruelty; for if thou had thy Will,
thou would hardly leave one of our innocent kind alive to sing forth the
Praises of our Creator, and to welcome in the great Eye of the World, and the
delightful Spring, at whose Approach all things r^joyce, and chaunt forth Hyms
and Praise to the Creator, every thing according to its kind and nature (Man
only excepted) whose Teeth are imbrew'd in Blood, which will not be for his
good, but has thereby broken the holy Commandments of his Creator, as the
Scriptures of Truth do testify, I will, says the Lord, cut off that Soul from
the La^d of the Living that d^fileth himself with Blood. Consider also, O Man!
how unpleasing, dollerous and frightful would it be to thee in the pleasant
Months of March, April and May, when thou walk in the delightful Fields, if
thou should not hear the pleasant and refreshing Charms of those of our kind,
would thou not fear, say and think, that the Creator was angry, and that some
Judgment was near at hand? Why then do thou thus endeavor to bring all our
joyful Tones, Notes, Sounds and melodious Harmonies into Mourning and Silence,
and to root us from off the Earth, and that we should have no Being or
Habitation in the Elements, which are as much our Right by Elohim's great
Charter as they are thine. Also, how Monsterous, Cruel, yea, and every way
Ridiculous does Man behave himself to all those of our kind? for though many do
not, cannot delight themselves with the best Instrumental Harmony those of
their own Species can make, yet all men love and delight in our pleasant Tunes
and Harmonies; and yet neither our Innocence nor our Ravishing Notes will
appease his Fury toward us, but many of them in the hard and severe Winter
will rise betimes, and spare no pains to kill us, and on the other side, when
Spring comes, the very same men will rise as early to walk in the open Fields,
Groves and Meadows to hear our Melodious Songs and pleasant Harmonies. Oh!
manifest unparalled Contradiction and Cruelty! Does this look like Man in his
innocent estate, who was made but little inferior to Angels, and an Associate
with God himself, who endued him with both divine and human Wisdom? Alas! No.

Leave off then, O Man! for shame leave off thy Pride, and thy vain Glory, and
boast no more of thy Knowledge, and Dominion, and Authority; for in truth thou
art poor, and blind, and we^k, and helpless, and miserably ignorant; sink down
therefore into Humility, and cease from Cruelty, first against those of thine
own kind, and then thou may come to see and abhor the Error of opp^ essing
t^y Inferiors; for this is the way to retreive thine Honor and Dignity, to
bring back the Golden Age, and that Innocent Estate, which by oppression,
cruelty and violence thou have lost; for Mercy, Innocence and Well-doing are
well-pleasing to our Creator, and agreeable to the noble divine Principle, and
attract the sweet Influence of the Coelestials, so that the Merciful, and the
Peacemakers and Peace-Preservers shall be filled with all good things; for as
Man was created after the Image of God, so in him are contained the true Nature
and Properties of all Elements; and since God is both the Maker and Preserver
of all Creatures, there is no doubt but Man (his Vice-Gorent here below) ought
to imitate his Sovereign therein; but instead thereof he sets himself to
destroy not only those of his own kind, but also all other Creatures; so that
through Sin and Vanity he is become a professed Enemy to all the Host of
Heaven. How many thousands of our innocent kind have been murdered by Guns,
Traps, Snares, etc? and many thousands both of our Males and Females have lost
their loving Mates by the like Stratagems, and no Pity or Compassion taken by
Man on our miserable Sufferings, but rather they encourage each other to our
destruction, and cry, Hang these scurvey Birds, shoot them, destroy them, they
are good for nothing but to eat up our Corn: As if God that created us had done
it in vain, as if he intended us not a subsistence and Food? What right I pray,
has Man to all the Corn in the world? or why should he grumble and repine if we
take a few Grains to supply our Necessities, whilst he squanders away such
Heaps upon his Lusts?

Wherein I fear he has so much besotted himself, and by continual Practice is
become so hardened, and has so powerfully irritated the dark Wrath in himself,
that all our Remonstrances to him to move him to Merey and Compassion, and to
forbear polluting himself with the Blood of the Innocent, will be but in vain,
and that we must still sigh and groan under his Cruelty and Tyranny, which as
long-run will return seven fold upon his own guilty Head.

The B -- ds Supplication.
OH, Thou Great and Immortal Creator! Cause of Causes, Fountain of Being, God
of Nature, Author, Preserver and Upholder of this glorious Universe, Parent of
Angels and Men, and all other Animals inhabiting the vast Deeps, or the
spacious Earth, or the unbounded Air, Thou have given a Well-beeing and
Self-Preservation unto all thy Creatures; but Man, whom thou have made our
Lord, having east off all Affection toward us, disobeying thy holy Commands,
has plunged himself into the Fountain of fierce Wrath, and therefore above all
things desires and delights in Violence and Killing; for nothing will satisfy
the hungery Wrath but Slaughter and Blood, (for every thing must be maintained
by its Likeness) so that his Rage is now grown so active, that we have no place
that can secure us from his Violence, but he continually pursues, seeking to
take away our innocent Lives. The ungrateful and terrible Noise of his Guns
drowns our sweet Melody; the whole Air is infected with the stinking Fumes of
his murdering Powder; no place is free from his Ambushes, Nets, Glns, Pitfalls
and Snares, so that the sight of a Man is become most dreadful and terrible
unto us, whereby our Lives being always in danger and fears, are made grievous
unto us: Every Noise we hear we are afraid our fierce Hunter is near; And though
we cry and make our mournful Complaints, no Mortals will hear us or take pity
on us, but divert themselves with our Death, and laugh and sport at our
Destruction. So that we have no Friend, no Patron on Earth to help or
^ommiserate our miserable estate, and rescue us from their Treachery and
Cruelty; none to fly unto but thee, O holy Fountain of Light and Life, to whom
we send our dolorous Cries and mournful Complaints; for we proceeded from thee,
and then art the Lord our Maker; preserve us, thy poor Creatures in that
natural Liberty and Safety wherein thou have placed us; restrain the hands of
Violence, inspire all that profess thy Name with the Spirit of Meakness,
Tenderness, Mercy and Compassion both toward each other, and all thy Creation,
that their Sword may be turued into Pruning Hooks, their frightful Guns into
Instruments of Melody, and there may be no more Fighting, Wounding or Killing
in all thine holy Mountain.

Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately published by the Author of the Country - Man's Companion, a
Treatise entitled, The Way to Health, long Life and Happiness, or a Discourse
of Temperance, and the particular Nature of all things requisite for the Life of
Man. Wherein is contained, 1. A Description of the four grand Qualities, and
how every man may know his own Complexion, whether Chollerick, Sanguine,
Phlegmatic or Melancholy, and what Diseases they are most subject to; also
what food is most agreeable to Persons of every Constitution. 2. Of the
excellency of Temperance, and the Benefits of Abstinence and Sobriety. 3. A
Discourse of the several sorts of Beasts, and of their Flesh in particular. 4.
The Proper and most Natural way of preparing, viz. Boiling, Roasting, Baking,
Stewing, Frying and Broyling of Flesh and other Food. 5. The Seasons of the
year in which most People are liable to Diseases and Mortality, and the Reasons
thereof, and what Food is best to preserve Health at that time; Showing also
the Seasons of the year in which most sorts of Flesh are unclean and apt est to
contract Diseases; and what times men may eat Flesh with least danger to their
Health. And of the Nature of Summer Fruits. 6. Of Waters, Ale, Beer, and
Tobacco; also of Clothing, Houses and Beds, and what great Benefits arise from
Moderation and Temperance in those things. 7. Of each particular Trade, as
Shopkeepers, Carpenters, Joyners, Seamen, etc. 8. Of Herbs, Fruits and
Grains, and the nature and operation of each 8. The Mischief of Variety of
Meats and Drinks, and the inconveniences of improper Mixtures; and on the other
side, what Foods are fit to be compounded. Of Colors, and how, with seven
perfect Colors, to imitate and represent all the Appearances and Colors in
the whole Universe. 10. The Reasons in Nature why Cities and great Towns are
subject to the Pestilence and other Diseases more than Country*Villages. 11. Of
Infection or Catching-Diseases, and how they are transferred from one to
another. 12. Of Women, their Natures, Complexions and Intemperances, etc. 13.
The cause of Surfeits, and how to prevent them, and keep the Body in Health:
The danger of drinking after superstuous Meals. And what it is that chiefly
breeds the Scurvey in the Blood. Of Suppers, and what sort of People may use
them without prejudice to their Health. 14. Of Windy Diseases, the Reasons
thereof, and why English People, especially Women, are so much troubled
therewith. The Evils of eating and drinking Food too hot. And Mischief of
eating and drinking between Meals. Of Fatness, and what sort of People are
subject thereto, as also how to prevent it. 15. Of Bugs, and from what Matter
they do proceed, and how to prevent their Generation. 16. The Vermin-killer,
being several easy sure Receipts to destroy Vermin. 17. A short Discourse of
the Pain of the Teeth, showing from what cause it does chiefly proceed, and an
experienced easy way to prevent it. 18. How to cure all Cuts, Wounds, Bruises,
etc. without Salves, Ointments or Plasters. 19. Of Marriage, and the
Inconveniences of unequal Matches; that they make no Harmony, and the Evil
consequences that follow, more especially for Young Men. With several other
most useful Observations, too large here to be enumerated; convenient for all
that are Lovers of Health and Strength to observe. To which is added, A
Treatise of most sorts of English Herbs, either Physical or fit for common use;
showing, 1st, The apt times to gather them Astrologically, when the Planet that
governs them is strong and well aspected, the same being there calculated for
19 Years: 2dly, How to preserve and keep them without losing their Virtues:
And, 3dly, The best way of using them i^ Posset-Drinks, Decoctions and
Cordials, so as not to destroy the pure spirituous of them. Printed and Sold by
Andr^w Soul, at the Crooked Bil^t in Holloway-Lane, Shoreditch.


