TRYON's LETTERS, UPON Several Occasions.

Viz.

1. Of Hearing. 2. Of Smelling. 3. Of Tasting. 4. Of Seeing. 5. Of Feeling. 6.
Of the Making of Coal-Fires. 7. Of the Making of Bricks, Tyles, etc. 8. Of
Religion. 9. Of Dropsies. 10. Of various Opinions in Religion. 11. Of the
Humanity of Christ. 12. Of an Afflicted Mind. 13. Of Faith, Hope and Charity.
14. Of God's Permission for Killing and Eating of Beasts. 15. Of a Soldier's
Life. 16. Of the Fountain of Darkness. 17. Of the Fountain of Love and Light.
18. Of Cleanness. 19. Of Flesh-Broaths, etc. 20. Of the Right and Left Hands.
21. Of the Corpulency of the Body. 22. Of Fevers. 23. Of Education. 24. Of
Smells. 25. Of Predestination. 26. Of Death. 27. Of Judicial Astrology. 28. Of
Perpetual Motion. 29. Of Music. 30. Of Languages. 31. Of Times for Eating. 32.
To a Planter of Sugar. 33. To a Gentleman in Barbados. 34. To a Planter, about
the Manufactury of Cotton. 35. Of the Making of Sugar. 36. Of the Burial of
Birds. 37. Of Fermentation.

By THO. TRYON. Author of the Way to Health, Long Life, and Happiness.

LONDON: Printed for Geo. Conyers, at the Ring; and Eliz. Harris, at the
Harrow; both in Little Britain, 1700

TO THE READER.
THESE following Letters, which were occasionally Written both at the Request
of diverse Friends and Countrymen at home, as well as of some Strangers from
abroad; their various Questions then readily answered, according to that
Capacity and Talent the Giver of all Gifts has endued me withal, in
conformity to that grand and important Commandment of our Blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, that we should not hide our Light under a Bushel, but expose it on the
Housetop, are now contrary to my original Intention in Writing, exposed to
public View; the Consideration of their being loose Papers, and so subject by
Time and other Casualties to be lost, of my having the number Seventy in my
view, and daily expecting to be called to Inherit that Land, which Adam, the
Great Father of Mortality, has entailed upon all his Posterity; as also that
the Publication of them might prove of some moment and advantage, not only to
private Persons, but even to the public, in the present and future Ages,
together with the Auxilary Influences of some of my Friends and Acquaintance,
powerfully disposing of me thereunto; though at the same time I cannot but expect
to meet with some Readers, who will allege our Performance in this kind to be
unnecessary, seeing many of those Subjects here treated of have been already
handled in some of my former Wriings; and not only so, but that in some of the
said Letters themselves, the same things seem to be repeated and insisted on
again and again, which even in the softest Language can be represented no
otherwise than Tautology in us.

But to this, it may be easily answered, that Necessary and practical Truths
cannot be too often taught and repeated, till they are well understood, learned
and distinguished; neither were the great Mysteries of Time and Eternity, by
any other Way or Method manifested or brought to light, but only by a constant
Repetition, according to the Saying of the Great Apostle of the Gentiles; that
the visible things that appear and are constantly repeated, show the great and
invisible Power of God: And indeed it is impossible for any Mortal to speak or
treat aright of God or Nature, or to display the wonderful Operations of
things, and their respective Complexions, without knowing and distinguishing
the original Principles, I mean the four grand Qualities, which some of the
ancient Philosophers called Sulphur, Mercury and Salt; but are since better and
more familiarly understood by our common Names, of Saltish, Bitter and Sweet
Qualities, which are the said first Principles, both in the Animal, Vegetable
and Mineral Kingdoms, and according to their respective Degrees or Gradations
in each Creature or Thing, such not only is the Form, Nature and Name thereof;
but he that can distinguish the Signature; and which of these four has the
Ascending or Ruling Power, in any Animal, Herb, Seed, Tree, or Mineral,
together with the Strength or Debility of the other three Qualities, in their
several degrees; such an one, according to his proportion of Knowledge and
distinguishing Faculty, is thereby rendered capable to judge of the Constituent
parts of the said Thing or Creature; and therefore no Man can pretend to know
or prescribe the Nature, Virtues or Vices of any Created Being, without this
Knowledge; for you are to understand, that all visible Beings or Creatures do
arise and deduce their Birth from Number, Weight and Measure, that is, from
certain original Principles, which the Great and Wonderful Creator has limited
them to, or incircled in, which are as so many Eternal Fountains, from whence
all the Great, Noble and Beneficial Sciences, Arts, Trades and Employments in
the World take their Birth, and undoubtedly the nearer any one comes to, or
imitates Nature and God's Law, that is his Original, the more curious and
excellent such a Person becomes thereby.

But for a more clear Illustration of this grand Truth, even to meaner
Capacities: Are not the original Foundations and Principles of all Sciences,
Arts, Trades and curious Inventions, bounded and incircled within the compass
of such and such Numbers? and whatever curious Notion or Thing is brought to
light, must be done by a constant Repetition of those original Numbers, and
more particularly in the wonderful and demonstrative Science, the Mathematics,
whereby so many useful and excellent things are effected, for the Preservation
and Benefit of Mankind: Is not all done and perfected by a constant and
perpetual Repetition of Nine Figures? And are not the Seven Notes the very
Center and Basis of all Musical Harmony, both Vocal and Instrumental, no
Lesson, Division, Song or Tune, being to be made or composed without the
perpetual Repetition of them?

The like is to be understood of the most ingenious and admirable Art of
Representation or Painting, wherein, by the apt mixtures of the Seven Colors,
(for the original ones, which are called perfect Colors, do not exceed that
number) a Skilful Artist can represent the various Colors of Animals,
Vegetables, Minerals, etc.

The same may be farther demonstrated in Words and Speech, and that too in a
most wonderful manner, it being a grand breach of the Mathematics, though few
consider and apprehend it; and what a strange thing is it, that the vast and
amazing varieties of things in the almost infinite Distributions of them,
together with their Productions, Terms and Utensils for all Sciences, Arts,
Occupations and curious Employments, should be all moved, distinguished and
understood by the Composition of the Four and Twenty Letters, without which no
Man can understand or distinguish one thing from another; which said Letters
are but so many Notes or Figures, that while each stands alone, and is not
joined to any other, does not distinguish or express any thing that is
intelligible, and therefore are then of no Force, Use or Virtue, but being
aptly joined and compounded, wonderful things are performed by them, so that
all Sciences, Arts, Employments, and whatever else is performed and brought to
pass by Mankind, are effected by a constant Repetition of the abovementioned
Nine Figures, Seven Notes, Seven Colors, and Four and Twenty Letters; so, but
more especially, all Words, Rhetorical Discourses, Lofty and Elegant Speeches,
are nothing else but a constant Repetition of the said Four and Twenty Letters,
whereas in themselves and alone, they are of no more Use than one Figure in the
Mathematics, one Note in Music, or one Color in Painting.

The like is to be understood in all inferior Arts and Occupations, to instance
only in Architecture, wherein the Free Mason and Carpenter are limited to such
a number of Fundamental Principles, let their Building or Structure be great or
small, or of what Fashion and Ornament it will, that any one that does but
understand and distinguish them aright, can at first sight imitate any Form or
Ornament in that kind, and if it be the Interest of the Artist, or that the
same be required of him, he can readily Invent both Fashion and Orname^ too;
whereas otherwise nothing can be performed, but is it were, by chance; and
hence it is, that any Person or Persons, in all Sciences, Arts and Trades,
become more or less excellent in proportion to their Capacities, and Inspection
into the Fundamentals of Arts, or their respective Occupations.

This being a sure and constant Rule, that the Son is the Offspring of the
Father, and an Epitome in all Particulars, there being nothing more clear, than
that every thing must bow to its original Law, and imitate that from whence it
took its Birth.

It is moreover worth remarking, that as Sulphur, Mercury and Salt, or the four
grand Qualities beforementioned are Predominant or Graduated in any thing,
accordingly it becomes better or worse, and the Figures, Tastes and Complexions
of Matters are in proportion thereunto, so the like is performed by the Use of
certain Humane Numbers, as has been instanced in the nine Figures, seven Notes
of Music, and four and Twenty Letters, as it is also in the Principles of all
inferior Arts and Trades, which do arise and take their original Birth from the
said grand Principle, which is God's Eternal Law and Method, there being but
one Text in the Practice of all Sciences, Arts and Mysteries of Trades,
insomuch that there is acertain Concatenativs Power and Agreement between the
original Principles and natural Powers, and their respective Operations, for as
there is no Humane Numeration can comprehend the Stupendous variety of Nature,
in respect to the Things or Creatures, Forms, Complexions, Virtues or Vices
contained in the four Worlds or Elements; so on the other hand, it has never
been known, that any Man has attained to the utmost limits, or highest pitch of
any Science, Art or Trade; and therefore the most Skilful and Learned Person
that ever was in the World, had much more to learn, than he had attained to, so
that as all the Heavenly Bodies, glorious Constellations and admirable variety
of Luminaries, do constantly move within their own Circles or Orbs, keeping
time and place to a moment, both in their Risings, Settings and Configurations;
and that none of those numerous and distinct Powers do at any time exceed their
Circles, o^ prescribed Boundaries, so all Science, is not only performed by a
constant Repetition of the same things, but is also incircled within such
Bounds, Limits or Numbers, as is beforementioned, which it is not in the power
of the Artist, to break through at any time; insomuch that it is manifest, that
all things have a certain Ground or fundamental Principle, whereon all the
Superstructures do depend: But though it be true, that the inward Mystery and Law
of God is the same, as the outward, and that on the other side the outward
Mystery is understood by the inward; yet so it is, that there are rarely found
any Eyes so quick-sighted, as to penetrate into both, which to understand and
distinguish, is the greatest Blessing Humane Nature is capable of, as to be
ignorant of the same, must be the greatest Defection and Misery, for otherwise
a Person must act and practice every thing by Chance, Custom and Tradition,
living according to dark, evil, fierce and unequal Principles, the Consequence
or rather Effect whereof can be no other than Ignorance, Stupidity and
Degeneration, which gave rise to the Restrictive or Coercive Laws of
Magistracy, and without which Civil Society could not be long Supported nor
Maintained.

But, without proceeding any farther this way, if the Intelligent Reader do but
consider and weigh what has been already said, I do not doubt but he will
clearly see the Repetitions that fall out now and then in some parts of this
Book, are not barely so, but serve to advance same other Notion, which could
not have been done without; for suppose now a Man were to describe the Genuine
Nature, Qualifications, Complexions and Operation of an hundred sorts of Herbs,
Fruits, Seeds, Trees, Minerals or Animals, now to effect this great Work, must
he not first necessarily consider the respective Gradations of the four grand
Qualities, how they stand in their Government, whether equal or the contrary,
and which of them have the Dominion and Ascendency? These, I say, are the
Texts, whereby he must describe the Natures, Virtues and Vices of them all, and
within the Limits and Operations of these four Qualities, he is bound and
incircled, and he that has obtained this Springhead of Blessing, to know God,
himself, and the Nature and Operation of things, cannot fail at sight to
describe any Animal, Vegetable, or the like, and to show their inward Virtues,
Vices and Complexions, according to his Gift, Circle or Orb he moves in.

But, notwithstanding the Objection made concerning the Repetitions that are
dispersed here and there in these my Letters, the reason and necessity whereof
I have fully set forth in the Premises, which are sufficient to satisfy the
Scruples of the understanding Reader, and which is all I care for, yet I am to
take notice, that there are a great many things contained therein, that are
perfectly Novel, for though there is nothing new under the Sun, and that most of
the Subjects have at one time or another been handled after a sort, yet I dare
avow it has been quite after a different Method and Form, and no such
Super-structure erected from fundamental Principles are herein set down all
along: It cannot be expected, and it will be too tedious to enter now upon
Particulars, they will best appear in the Perusal of the Work it self, and
therefore as I cannot see any thing farther to be Objected against me, than
that I have been Prolix, and have not confined my self within the just Limits
of an Epistolary Method, all that I say, is, that upon my Resolution to publish
them, as aforesaid, I found it necessary, in the Revising them, to alter some,
to enlarge and exemplify others, and to add diverse things in diverse parts of
them, by way of Illustration, which made them spin out to such a length, as you
see them, and was wholly designed for the Reader's Benefit and Satisfaction;
but if I have been so Unhappy as to fall short of my intended Aim, I am sorry
for it, both upon his and my own account, and heartily beg his Pardon, who am,

His highly Obliged and Very humble Servant, Thomas Tryon.

THE CONTENTS.
LEtter 1. Of the noble Sense of Hearing, with the various Uses and great
Benefits thereof. Letter 2. Of the Sense of Smelling, with its proper Seat,
Nature and Uses. Letter 3. Of the Sense of Tasting, and wherein also the great
Mysteries thereof are set forth. Letter 4. Of the Sense of Seeing, and of its
various Uses and Benefits. Letter 5. Of the Sense of Feeling, with its
universal Benefits and Influences over the rest. Letter 6. Of Fires, and the
best way to make Grates, whereby a less quantity of Fuel is required, and yet
that rendre^ more useful and expeditious in the Preparation of Foods, and upon
other occasions, than our common Fires. Letter 7. Of the best Methods for
Tempering of Clay, Making of Mortar, Tyles, Flooring and Bricks, together with
an Account of different sorts of Earths, and what Herbage, Fruits, Seeds,
Grains and Trees each is applicable to. Letter 8. Of Religion, with the Nature
and Practice thereof, and that the Knowledge of God and a Man's Self, is the
first step to all true and undefiled Religion. Letter 9. Of Dropsies and the
Nature of them, with some Account of what Diet and Exercises such should use,
as also how to Retrench Expenses by a Frugal Method of Living. Letter 10. Of
various Opinions in Religion, and the Original Cause of those great
Differences, Oppressions and Violences proceeding therefrom, with Remedies
proposed for prevention thereof. Letter 11. Of the Humanity of Christ, showing
the Grounds from whence the great Differences concerning it do arise, how it is
to be understood, and the great Benefits that accrue unto Mankind from it.
Letter 12. Of an Afflicted Mind, and showing how it may be prevented, with some
other Remarks. Letter 13. Of Faith, Hope and Charity, with the Excellency and
Benefit of each, and how Mankind, by practicing the last, imitates his Creator,
and renders himself capable of being United to all that is Good. Letter 14. Of
that part of Scripture, wherein God commanded, or rather permitted Beasts to be
Killed and Eaten, with the great Error of Mankind in misinterpreting the same,
and how they are rightly to be understood. Letter 15. Of a Soldier's Life,
showing from what Principle that Bloody Employment takes its Birth, how
contradictory it is to the Divine Law, and destructive to the Unity and
Well-being of Mankind, and that all other Creatures have an equal share in
those Calamities. Letter 16. Of the Fountain of Darkness, with the Actions,
Employments and Inclinations arising therefrom, and how they Govern in every
particular Creature, when evil Principles obtain the Ascendant. Letter 17. Of
the Fountain of Love and Light, and what Actions, Inclinations, Dispositions,
Words and Works proceed therefrom, and how they Govern in each particular
Creature. Letter 18. Of Cleanness, with the Benefits thereof, and the Mischief
of the contrary, as also what Foods in their Nature are clean and unclean.
Letter 19. Of Flesh Broaths and Potages, and those made of Herbs, Seeds and
Grains, with an Account of which is most clean, and affords the best
Nourishment. Letter 20. Of the Right and Left Hands, with the great Error of
Peoples teaching their Children to distinguish them by such Terms. Letter 21.
Of the Corpulency of the Body, with the Cause thereof, and how to prevent and
abate it. Letter 22. Of the Nature and Causes of Fevers, and how in some
measure to prevent them. Letter 23. Of Education, wherein is set forth the
right, true and natural way of Bringing up Children. Letter 24. Of the Nature
of Smells, and what Scents in their Original are Clean, Good and Beneficial, or
the contrary. Letter 25. Of Predestination, and how it ought to be understood.
Letter 26. Of Death, and why all Creatures, especially Mankind, are unwilling
to Die. Letter 27. Of the Science of Astrology, wherein are showed the Causes
in Nature, why Persons Born at one and the same minute, and under the like
Constellations, are of different Shapes and Forms, and of various Fortunes.
Letter 28. Of the Perpetual Motion, wherein is showed the Impossibility of the
Humane Nature's being capable of it, as being Diametrically opposite to all
God's Methods and Laws. Letter 29. Of the noble Science of Music, with the
Defects of the best Teachers of it, and Methods proposed for the speediest and
certainest way to attain to the highest Perfection therein; to which is added
somewhat concerning the Art of right Speaking and Reading. Letter 30. Of
Languages, and the easiest way for a Person in Years, to attain to the true
Pronunciati^ of any Foreign Tongue. Letter 31. Of the Times of Eating, wherein
in showed that about 8 in the Morning, and 3 or 4 in the Afternoon is the most
proper Season, with the Reason thereof. Letter 32. To a Planter of Sugar,
concerning the Premoting of the Cotton Manufactury in our Plantation* Letter
33. To a Gentleman in Barbados, concerni^ the first Settlement, Growth and
Decay of our Sug^ Plantations, and the necessity they lie under of Plan^ ing
other Vegetations, etc. Letter 34. To a Planter, touching the Manufactu^ of
Cotton, wherein the Necessity and Advantag^ thereof is amply considered. Letter
35. Of the Making of Sugar, wherein the My^ stery of it, from the very first
Planting of the Ca^ to its highest pitch of Refining, is Explicated, wi^ the
vast Benefits that do accrue therefrom to Eng^ land; where also the Art of
Distilling is handled. Letter 36. Of the Burial of Birds, how unaccounta^ it
is, and the Author's Conceptions thereupon. Letter 37. Of Fermentation, with
the Nature and O^ riginal Invention thereof; wherein is also showed h^
Pernicious and Destructive Fermented Liquors (...) to Mankind.
Twenty Seven Philosophical Letters UPON Several Occasions.
LETTER I. Of the Sense of Hearing.
SIR,
I Perceive by your Letter, that you have been mightily affected with a
Consideration of the Senses, in admiring the wonderful Composition of the
Organs, and the nice and exquisite manner of their Operation; for your
encouragement to proceed in so commendable and useful Speculation, I shall
endeavor to Suggest some hints of Meditation to you, which perhaps you have
not yet thought of.

I Shall begin with the Ear, that noble and brave Sense of Hearing, and descant
a little upon its Use and Benefits, and the great disadvantages Mankind is
subjected to, through the want of it, it is placed in the most Intelligible
part of Man. It has its residence in the Head, and is therefore capable to
distinguish between the good and evil qualities of Sounds. For Man being a
complete Image or Extract of all Essences, containing all their true Qualities
or Principles, that nothing might be defective, he is endued with five
wonderful Powers, called Senses, by which he is capable of judging between the
good and evil. Of all things the Senses are the chief carriers or conveyers of
what is presented before them, to the influential Principles or Magic Powers
of the Soul, and where they are kindled or stirred up out of their silent and
quiet Magia into motion, whence proceed all Inclinations, Dispositions, Words
and Works; hence they are midwifed into the World, whereby all the deep, hidden
and silent powers become Corporal; for who could tell whether he loved Music
or curious Consorts of Vocal and Instrumental Harmony, if he had never been in
the hearing of such things; or what Child would ever speak any Language or
Tongue, if he had never heard it; and so of all other things that are under the
province of this Sense: All the good and evil of words, Speeches, Sounds, etc.
are conveyed to the understanding, by the peculiar power of this, without the
intervention of any other Sense.

Now, it must be understood, that Words, Sounds, Tones, etc. are endued with
all the Qualifications, Virtues and Vices of the Intellectual Man, only with
this difference, the Quality which is chiefly stirred up in the Magic Powers,
that stamp their Character on the Word or Sound, whether good or evil.

It is also farther to be considered, that the outward Senses are but the
Instruments to convey the species of grosser things to the intellectual or
silent powers, principles or qualities; by which means, various Centers and
Magic Fires are excited; which before lay so occult and involved, that a Man
was not sensible of any such disposition, to affect or dislike this or that
thing residing in him: It Is by these Doors or Passages, that Man becomes
acquainted with himself and Foreign Objects, understanding the forms of his own
Composition in good and evil.

The multiplicity of the Senses does not at all prevent their perfection, for
though there are ^ive in number, yet each is complete in its kind and o^fice,
none interfering or intrenching upon the Province of another, but all jointly
conspiring to accomplish their own proper Work: The Ear cannot judge of
Colors, nor the Sight of Sounds, etc. There is as great variety in Sounds, as
there is in Colors, Shapes, Forms or Figures o^ material Bodies, both in their
Internal and External Natures.

All Sounds, Tones, Noise or Words in Men, Beasts, Birds (...) Elements, do all
arise from the two Grand Fountains of Goo^ and Evil in this visible World: All
words proceeding from the Meek Fountain of Gods Eternal Love, are soft, sweet,
and Melodious of a yielding Temper, and penetrating to the very cente^ of the
Magic Powers; from whence the variety of inclination have their Birth.

But if these Harmonical Sounds, etc. find but a weak reception, then they make
but little impression on the Central Powers and Qualities; and then do as it
were retire, not leaving any Ideas of their own forms, as the old Proverb has
it, It goes in at one Ear, and out at the other. The same, vice versa, is to be
understood of all Tones, Sounds, Words, etc. that do arise and take their Birth
from the Dark Fountain of Evil, etc.

For there is no greater evil under the Sun, than for Mankind to speak Evil
Words, or hear lewd Discourses; by this sort of Communication, many Thousands
of ignorant People have been utterly Ruined; for if these Hostile Methods gain
the Ascendant, they awaken the sleeping Poisons that take such possession that
they can never after be turned out of. Upon this account, a due regard ought to
be had to Children, taking care that they come within the hearing of no base
words and filthy Communication; because such Sounds, by reason of the latent
resemblance between the internal power and the outward Object, stick closer to
them, and make such deep impressions, to that degree that the Signatures can
never be eradicated nor defaced, neither by cultivation, or any other
endeavors.

Therefore such as would not be hurt by this Sense, must shut the Gate of their
Ears against all evil Sounds and Voices, which will, if admitted, unlock the
inmost Cabinets of Nature.

Now, if Man would use the same Care and Art in managing and dressing the
Humane Ground, as the Husbandman or Farmer does in the Cultivation of his
Common Field, he would be very happy; if the Seed he Sowes be good, or
defective, his Crop is according; so it is in the Humane Ground, if he Sows
Tares and Thistles, will he expect Wheat and Barley? it is preposterous and
unnatural: A multitude of incurable Disorders and Mischiefs arise for want of a
due attendance to, and understanding of these Truths; the contrary is to be
conceived, if we admit the entrance of none but good, melodious and delightful
Sounds, Speeches, Words, etc.

The Fabrication and Constitution of the Organs, is also to be considered, the
form of it is wonderful, and would naturally entertain none but sweet, soft and
Harmonious Sounds, proceeding from the Fountain of Love and Goodness, as is
evident by experience; for all harsh, sudden, violent, fierce Noises, are
Ungrateful and Displeasing, nay, oftentimes Mischievous and Prejudicial to the
Ear it self; for which reason Men use to stuff their Ears with some soft Wool,
or the like, when they are going to Engage, least the violent percussion of the
Airs, and Vibration, should too fiercely incur upon the Organon, and disturb
the Timpanum; by which means, many have for ever lost the use of that Sense or
Faculty. The same Method is to be observed in all sudden and unusual Sounds, as
Thunder, etc.

Now, seeing what great advantage is to be made of this Noble Sense, is it not
a shame to go to the Coffee-house, Taverns, and other Public places of resort,
and hardly Ten Words of serious Discourse, tending to the Advancement of Virtue
or Morality, but all Banter, Jesting, Lying, Scoffing, etc. Therefore it is fit
Men should speak less, or be wholly silent till they are capable of speaking
better.

Sir, I hope you will excuse the freedom I have assumed, and accept these
sudden and almost Extemporary Remarks upon the subject of your Contemplation,
as an Instance of real friendship, from

Yours T T.

LETTER II. Of the Sense of Smelling.
SIR,
IN Return to your earnest Request of having me continue my design of Unfolding
the Nature of the other Senses, as I have done that of Hearing; I have
adventured to admit that discourse of Smelling to your Perusal, as I intend
also the remaining three; withal Teaching you how to defend your self against
ill Scents, which you intimate are very prejudicial to your health.

THe Sense we are now to Treat of, is the Image of all Qualities, Powers and
Principles, both of Light and Darkness, dwelling in the Center of each thing;
and it is clean or unclean, according to the property that governs the
Creature, so that as soon as the Body of any thing is opened, it may thereby be
distinguished what Form or Principle ruled in the Center of Life; and he that
has the true Use of this Faculty, may easily discern the Complexion of any
Creature: It is an invisible Power, its. Body is the Air, which in a very short
time will convey the Scent to a considerable distance, and is received into our
Bodies by the Assistance and Mediation of the Air, which is a thin Spiritual
Body, penetrating into all parts, doing good or harm, according to the
respective Qualities that have the Ascendant; incorporating with great Vigor,
with every thing it finds like its self; upon which account, gross stinking
Foggs, Scents and Vapors, are unclean, and extremely hurtful to the Mind and
Body, being continually drawn into the Central parts, and Wound the Health
(...) a Spiritual and Invisible manner. The contrary is to be understood of
good Smells, and clean, thin, sweet Airs, etc. Now every Scent or Smell,
whether good or bad, clean or unclean, does by custom and continual
communication, beget and strengthen its Simile; by which the grossest and most
impure Airs, become easy and familiar, otherwise several stinking Trades and
Employments would not be tolerable, nor in any degree Healthful; for as Gods
Love is one and the same in all things, so is his Handmaid Nature, which uses
all possible Endeavors to provide and Arm her self against the Assaults of her
common Enemies, Custom and Habit begetting their own properties, and rendering
those things easy, which would otherwise never be endured. Moreover, such
troublesome gross Smells are naturally more agreeable to some People than to
others, as being endued by their Constitutions, with greater talents of
suitable matter, whereby they live as healthy as those who are accustomed to
clean and finer Airs: Nay, some Men's Natures and Complexions are so agreeable
to these gross Scents and thick Vapors, that they find themselves Disordered
when they come into more pure and subtle Airs, as is evident in such who Live
and are Born in Cities and great Towns. A Consideration is also to be had, to
the Meats and Drinks any Person feeds on, which prepare the Body to a better
bearing of Scents or Smells, whether clean or unclean, for Food is the
substance of each Man's Body and Spirit; and for this cause, London, and some
great Cities, are as healthy, and as few Dye in them as in the Country, in
proportion to the number of People; notwithstanding the cleanness and goodness
of the Air: Besides, the Foods in many Countries of England, are grosser and
worse prepared than in great Cities; great part of them living on Hogs Flesh
ill Ordered and Cooked, eaten fresh or very little Salted; also penning them up
in close Sties during the time of their Fatning, is very prejudicial to the
Flesh; which subjects the Eaters to a great number of unclean Diseases in their
Bodies, as Mangy Scabs, Sores and Boils; these things ought to be well
considered, because they do very much Affect the Body, in order to the manner
of its receiving the impressions of Airs, Scents and Smells. Again, there is
not the same likeness and affinity between the Countryman's Food and Air that
he lives in, as there is between the Citizens; the Country Air being fine, and
full of Brisk Lively Spirits, and the Cities the contrary; neither is there the
same Agreements in the Methods of living, whereby the fineness of the Air is
rendered of little value or benefit to them, for what the one Builds up, the
other Destroys.

Now, the Sense we are discoursing of, is the common Officer that communicates
these Airs and Scents to the whole Body, whether they be good or evil, and the
Body nor the Mind cannot be hurt with them if this Sense will powerfully
withstand and oppose them, and not suffer them to enter; for each Sense has a
Gate, which it can open or shut as it pleases, and therefore when any Person is
among gross and unclean Smells, he can hold his Nose: But the best way is, if
he is forced to stay there any considerable time, to draw the Air into his
Mouth, and expel it again the same way, by keeping it open; by this means, a
Man may in a great measure, avoid the Injury which such Smells would otherwise
do, for neither the Taste, Sight, Hearing nor Feeling, can be Afflicted with
any evil or good Smell, not communicate the evil of the bad, nor the virtues of
the good to the Central parts of the Body, nor Affect the natural Spirits; each
must do its own Business, they cannot Act for one another.

Nevertheless, there are some Scents and Smells so highly graduated in the dark
direful nature of sullen Saturn, and fiery Mars, which neither the Temper nor
Constitution of Man, or other Animals, are able to sustain or endure: They are
of such a vehement, subtle and resistless operation, that they surprise and
destroy all the Faculties and Powers of Life in a Moment: Their Motion is so
quick as admits no Guard or Prevention: There are no Antidotes against their
force, neither in Foresight nor Physic. Italy and Spain can give many fatal
Demonstrations of this Truth, who are so exquisite in the mixing, preparing and
compounding of Scents, that they have dominion over the very Air to what Extent
or Limit they please; Nay, they will force the Air to Conspire with their Black
Designs, and retain the Infection till their Mischiefs are Completed.

Likewise there are several sorts of Minerals and Metals, that in the Melting,
Refining and Separating, send up such Mortal and Inimical Vapors, that no Use
or Custom in the World can ever render familiar and healthful; the more crude
and foul any Metal is, the more gross and poisonous are its fumes when it
passes the fluxes of the Fire, as Quicksilver, Lead, and many other Metals.

On the other side, the higher any Metal is in its Nature Refined and Purged,
the finer, sweeter and more pleasant are the fumes it sends up from the Fire
when Melted and Refined; and consequently more healthy and agreeable to the
Workman. The very same is to be understood of the Fat of Beasts or other
Animals; it is better or worse, clean or unclean, according to the Graduation or
Birth of the Creature, which is declared by their Shapes, Forms and Figures, to
the distinguishing Eye; also the Cries and Tones they send forth. Likewise when
the Flesh o^ Fat is Burned, and the Center of the Body opened, the fume o^
smell informs you what property of Nature had the Principle Government in the
Creature; the scent of the Dung or Ordure of most Creatures, will afford a
manifest Discovery of their origina^ Qualities, whether clean or unclean, etc.
This is apparently evident, let a Hog eat the same Grass, Corn or Food as
Sheep, Oxen, Cows, etc. yet the Swines Breath, Urine and Dung will never have
the same Scent or Smell with the other; so that every Creature is endued with a
natural and unremoveable Power or Quality, in Changing and Transmuting the
Principles of the cleanest of Meats and Drinks into the substance of their own
Nature.

Now the Sense of Smelling is placed in the Head, as the most Intelligible part
of Man, for the five outward and five inward Senses are the Power that makes a
Man a Rational and Intelligible Creature, whereby he is able to distinguish the
Power, Virtue or Vice of all Visible and Invisible things: This Sense is a
Curious and Divine Power, that is neither seen, felt nor tasted, which is
placed in the front of the Face, (viz.) in the small compass of the Nose, that
it may be always ready to perform its Office, and Communicate the refreshing
Airs and delicate Smells to the more Central parts of the Body; by which the
whole is preserved.

Now, by the help of this Sense only, as we have explained and described it,
any Intelligent Person may obtain the Gift of distinguishing Things and
Qualities, whether they be good or evil, clean or unclean; and know from what
Fountain or Original each Scent or Smell takes its Birth and does proceed.

I have Enlarged the further in Discoursing upon this Sense, because of the
Importance and Usefulness of its being rightly understood. Without a due
Examination of these things, and an intent Application of the Mind to them, all
our labor will be in vain: We shall live only as the Beasts, who blindly
follow the Dictates of natural Instinct, being utterly Incapable of Enquiring
into the Differences and Distinctions of their own beings. This is that
Knowledge which Denominates us Rational, and upon the right Use and Exercise of
which, our Welfare both here and hereafter does depend; which that you may be
fully endued with, according to the Capacity of your understanding, Is the
hearty desire of,

SIR, Yours T T.

LETTER III. Of the Sense of Tasting.
SIR,
I Have received yours, and shall endeavor to give yo^ satisfaction, according
to my Talent, touching the great noble and useful Sense, called Tasting, which
is a Sense mo^ wonderful for its various Uses and manifold Benefits, and in i^
is contained many Mysteries; the true knowledge whereof, do (...) it were,
wholly depend on the four grand Qualities, (viz.) the Astringent or Saltish,
the Bitter, the Sweet, the Sharp or Sour^ these four Properties or Qualities
are the Original, not only (...) all Tastes, but as it were of every Being, and
they are Material Mankind and-all Creatures are Compounded of; and according to
the Graduation, Strength or Weakness, these are in eac^ thing, so the Creature
is better or worse, sometimes the Astringent or Saltish is most Potent, at
other times the Bitter, Sweet, the Sharp or Sour, and the Thing or Creature has
its Name and Complexion accordingly. Now no Man ever did or can judge of the
Nature, Inclination, Disposition and Operation of any Creature, if he does not
distinguish the Power and Government of each of the forementioned Qualities,
that have obtained the Ascendant.

Neither ought any Man to attribute unto himself the name of a Philosopher, or
a Knower of things that has not learned the A, B, C, or this grand or first
Lesson, (viz.) to know and distinguish the Forms and Qualities himself is
Compounded of; for all true Understanding and knowledge begins at home, for in
him is contained the true Nature and Properties of all visible and invisible
Beings and Things; Therefore it is in vain to judge of the Nature or Complexion
of any thing, when the Signature is not known nor distinguished, all such
Opinions are in the dark, or by chance, and because Mankind, and likewise all
other Animals, should not be misled, God has endued them with five infallible
Guides and Directors, that no Action of Life should be done but with Advice and
Understanding, and not, as is said before, by chance.

The wonderful Creator has Made and Created all things like himself, for He
and the whole Offspring of Heaven and Earth are but One, he is not divided
from his Works, but is in the very Center of them, by which he does support and
preserve them.

For this cause he has given and centerally endued Mankind with five great and
most Illuminating or Intelligible Powers, called Senses, by which he is rendered
capable to judge and distinguish of the Nature, Complexion, Disposition and
Inclination, first of himself, and then of every other Being, four of which
Senses are placed in the Head, and therefore it is called the most Intelligible
part of Man, the other is through the whole Body, in every part alike; so
wonderful has our Creator made Man, and so complete, that there is nothing
wanting.

As the Sense of Hearing is the Judge of all Sounds, Tones, etc. both of Man,
Beasts and Elements, so the Sense of Smelling is the true Judge of all Airs,
Scents and Smells, be they of what kind soever; the Sense of Seeing is the
Judge of all Forms, Shapes, Figures, Signatures and Bodies, both in the Animal,
Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms; likewise the Sense of Feeling is the Judge of
Life in Animals and living Creatures, also of Cold, Heat, Softness, Courseness,
etc. as being the Center of all the other four, as we shall treat more at large
in the said Sense.

The like is to be understood of this great and noble Sense, the Taste, whose
Office is to judge and distinguish the Virtues, Vices and ruling Qualities of
all Meats and Drinks, not only of those sorts that are Simple and Innocent by
Nature, but likewise such as are made and compounded by the curious Arts of
Coolts and Housewifes.

The common Eating and Drinking of such Compositions, the most part of them
being mixed with improper and disagreeable Ingredients, and performed by
chance, and without understanding or distinguishing, do not only prove
injurious, as being the very original and head Spring of many incurable and
cruel Diseases, intailing them on their Posterity; but such Foods and Liquors
do mightily spoil and adulterate this noble judge of Taste, by which means Men
do for the most part lose, and as it were, Obliterate the natural or entire
distinguishing Property and Power of this Sense.

For every sort of Meat and Drink has a secret powerful Energy, to beget,
increase and exalt the Property or Quality that has obtained the Government,
or that is Predominant in the Foods or Liquors.

So that since Compositions in Meats and Drinks have been so frequent and
common to most, or all, or have where-withal, the Palate and Taste is not only
adulterated and made incapable of proper judging or performing its Office, but
the Stomach is also depraved, and likewise most or all the great Officers
appointed by God and his Law for the preservation and conduct of Nature, or the
Microcosm Man.

So that most Men not understanding the true Uses and Benefits of those
forementioned noble Powers, are in no better Condition than a Ship that has
neither Pilot nor Rudder, and is thereby exposed to the Rage and Fury of the
Elements, and violent, fierce, invading Powers of an Exorbitant or Adulterated
Appetite.

Now it is likewise farther to be understood and considered, that where the
Sense of Seeing, Feeling, Hearing, or the Sublime Sense of Smelling is short,
or not capable of discerning or judging the Innate Nature and Complexion of
Animals, by their Forms, Shapes and Signatures. This Sense of Tasting can
readily open all the Doors and secret Gates of Nature's Cabinets, and in a
moments time, find out and manifest all the hidden or central Mysteries of each
thing.

This noble and great Sense is like Fire, that has a Key in its self, that can
in a moments time unlock the hardest Coagulations of the Original Qualities,
and manifest what Principle or Property ruled in the Center, whether clean or
unclean, as is most manifest and clear in the Burning of various things,
Woollens, Woods, and the like, the inward Power and Complexion thereof being
very difficult to be understood and judged, when such things remain entire.

This the Taste can do, and therefore it may be justly styled the Prince, King
or complete Judge over Life and Death: Wherefore the Creator and Preserver of
all his Work, has placed this noble Officer in the principal Gate of the
Microcosmical City, (viz.) the Mouth, that nothing might be suffered to pass
into the Stomach or Nature's Magazin, where all Foods and Drinks are
promiscously Treasured up, in order to sustain and support the whole Body;
besides, the Creator has ordained under the Conduct and Government of this
Prince, the Palate, several under-graduated Officers, as Sentinels that are at
all times ready to obey and execute the Orders and Commands of their Superior
Prince, (viz.) the Lips, that can in a moment shut its Gates, and withstand any
thing that intrudes or is offensive; the next is the Teeth, which is a strong
or powerful Officer or Sentinel, that can by its Innate power, shut and keep
out all the Enemies of the Body: The next, in order to the two former, is the
Attractive Power, or mighty preserving Faculty of the Body, for so soon as the
Judge or Superior Power commands the Gates to be opened, and the Teeth to
macerate or break the Food to pieces, but presently this third Officer, the
Attractive Faculty does with all power and vigor draw and Collect a fit and
proper Menstruum or Moisture, which does render the Teeth, Mouth and Tongue
capable to Chew and Melt the Food into a soft pappy matter or substance fit for
the Stomach, and the better the Foods are Macerated or Chewed, the easier they
are of Digestion, and the better Nourishment they afford unto the Body.

Likewise this Prince, the Taste or Palate has another powerful Officer
placed in this great Gate the Mouth, or common Road that leads into the
Metropolitan or Human City, which is called the Expulsive Faculty, by whose
Innate power it can, at the command of its Superior Prince the Taste or
Palate, immediately Expel or Spit forth, (and that with great vigor,) what
Meat, Drink or other thing is distasteful or unpleasing to the Palate or Sense
of Tasting, so wonderfully has our Creator guarded the Gate, Road or common
Passage, that nothing might pass into the Body or Stomach, but only what is
proper and agreeable to sustain and preserve the Human Nature in a due regular
Temperature and Union.

For if this Gate or common Passage be kept from being violated or forced upon,
by Adulterers and Thieves, and that no unclean thing enters, then all the whole
Body and Mind is Sound, Healthy and free from all cloudy Burthensom Diseases.

But on the other side, if the Prince the Palate, or Superior Officer be
adulterated, and has by intemperance and improper Meats and Drinks, lost its
entire and natural Taste, or true distinguishing Power, then presently all the
under-graduated Officers and Sentinels are thereby made heavy, sleepy, dull,
idle, careless and impure, and then this great or wonderful Gate or Road stands
open to all Intruders, and there is no Uncleanness nor Intemperance that is
withstood, but all Viciousness does freely pass without any Examination of the
said Officers or Sentinels, so that the Human City must needs be Defiled,
Wounded and Distempered.

For Meats and Drinks being the very Original and Substance, both of the Body
and Mind, as we have largely discoursed elsewhere, therefore the Lord has
placed so many powerful Officers and Watchmen in this Road or common Gate, that
thereby no unfit Meats nor Drinks might pass nor be admitted, without a strict
Examination of its Virtues, Vices, Cleanness or Uncleanness.

However, all these Faculties and Officers must be Subservient to the higher
Powers, (viz.) the Will, which is, as we have said in some other Cases, the
Primum mobile of all the Actions of Life.

So that very often the Imaginative Powers being kindled or roused up by some
Advice or Example, either of Custom or the like, that such and such things are
good and profitable both for Heath and Physic, whence arises and springs a
potent Desire and strong Inclination, and so commands the Palate and all the
Properties of the Mouth, to send it into the Stomach, and when it comes there,
your Will and Desire has no power to call it back, agree or disagree, there it
must abide, till Nature can overcome and separate it, and send the particular
parts into all the Frontier Garrisons and Sally-ports, where it oftentimes
proves Oppressive.

And if the Power of the Expulsive Faculty did reside, or any part of it, in
the Stomach as it does in the Mouth, many People would almost as frequently
cast their Food up as they Eat it, it being common for them to over-load their
Stomachs with too large a quantity, and of contrary qualities, not but there is
an Expulsive Faculty in the Stomach, which does, as it were, lie hid or
sleeping, and Nature does very rarely call forth or rouse up this Property, but
only when she is sorely oppressed, either with too great a quantity of Meats
and Drinks, or with things Hetrogenial or of contrary Qualities.

And whenever this happens, the Operations of the Stomach, and all the
Subservient Vessels thereof are in a mere Agonious or Tumultuous State and
Condition, by which it appears as clear as the Sun at Noon day, that the
Palate, Taste and the Vessels or Servants thereunto belonging; are the ^roper
and natural Judges, of what is good and agreeable, not only in quantity but
also in quality: If Order, Temperance and Cleanness be observed in the use and
custom of Simple Foods and natural Drinks, otherwise the Taste or Palate is not
a proper Judge.

For all the Senses and their under-graduated Officers are Servants to the
Mind, Will and Desire, and to the Original Principles they arise and proceed
from.

For this cause every Sense and other Quality, and principle of the Body, and
also of the Judgment, are subject to be adulterated and depraved.

And though there be many sorts of Meats and Drinks that at first seem to be
very burthensom, and as it were contrary both to the Palate and Stomach,
nevertheless, by a little custom, they become easier and easier, till at last
they are coveted and desired, which comes to pass by a weakening and
strengthening their Similes, which at the first Eating or Drinking, as Smoking
of Tobacco, or any other of the like things had but little footing or matter to
work on, and that too, which was very weak and impotent, and lay as it were hid
in the still and sleeping Magia, but so soon as a Consederate appeared or
touched it, then it began to start up, rejoice and grow strong, so that weak
Properties are made strong and potent, and on the other side strong Properties
or Qualities become weak and impotent when their Consederates are taken away.

Now, by these and the like methods and ways all the Senses become Depraved and
Adulterated, more especially the Sense of Tasting; as he that is accustomed to
Foods ill prepared, and which are of a strong fulsom hogoa, will not like that
which is curiously done; and he that uses himself to high relishing Foods do
not care for things Temperate; and such as use themselves to sweet Foods do not
like those that are contrary. And so of Drinks, etc.

And as the Customs of Foods do deprave, change and alter the Palate to the
like and dislike, the very same is to be understood of the Stomach and in most
or all the Vessels and other parts or members of the Body.

For each thing both in Meats and Drinks, according to its own Nature and
Complexion or what Quality do Govern, do with the highest diligence Advance,
Incorporate and Nourish its own or like Property or Quality, and is never quiet
till it have obtained the Ascendant and Begot or Generated its own form in the
Palate and Stomach.

And if the Food or Drinks be unequal in its Qualifications, then it proves the
more difficult to make it familiar; but when it is done and afterward the same
Person have a mind to leave it, such a thing will and do prove harder and more
difficult to leave and forsake it, then it was at first to make it easy and
familiar.

For the more unequal any thing is in its own parts the greater is the
inequality, such, Meats and Drinks and other things begets, and so soon as it
has obtained its own form and complexion, then it pleases the Palate, and
the Stomach is not contented without it; which show the tractableness of Nature
out of one thing into another, or rather the Increasing and Decreasing of the
Forms and Qualities of Nature; and that Man is like every thing, and every
thing like him: The very same is to be understood of the Reason and all the
Properties of the Mind, and Intellects are subject to be altered and changed
out of one thing into another both in their Opinions and Judgments, by
Discourses, Custom and Communication if the Will and Desires admit of it, or
else nothing can be done.

And as improper and unequal Foods and unnatural Drinks becomes as it were
natural by Use, Habit and Custom, so likewise the Mind and Understanding do
admit of the like Errors.

And therefore Men will as heartily Plead and Uphold and Suffer for an Idle
Opinion as for Truth it self, so that it is clear that the Elements of the Body
and Mind are as it were one Lump and Subject to be wrought on by every
inferior and unequal thing.

And therefore if the Understanding and Judgment have lost its way and be
Adulterated by Custom, false Opinion and Ignorance, then the Reason is
Corrupted and gets false Notions of things, and the Will and Desire acts
accordingly, Commanding all the Inferior Officers of Nature to its Dictates
and Subjection; then the palate, the proper and natural Judge of all Meats and
Drinks, and things belonging to Nourishment, loses its entire and curious
distinguishing Faculty, being commanded by the Will and the Judgment contrary
to its Native Right, to Eat or Drink this or the other thing, which at first
the Officers of the Palate and the Expulsive Faculty of the Mouth, would
willingly cast back, and not have suffered them to have gone into the Stomach:
This little Children are often commanded too, (viz.) To Drink and Eat things
that go against their Stomachs, which by a little Custom as is mentioned
before, becomes more easy and familiar; which comes to pass sooner or later,
according to the degree of the Antipathy, by which both the Body and Mind are
depraved, and all the Noble Properties of Nature are thereby brought into
unequal Operations; and Complexions are gotten in those Green and Tender Buds
which seldom ever depart without wounding or doing some signal Evil both to the
Body and Mind: For all sorts of Peoples Childrens Pallates are most entire,
simple and perfect, except those whose Fathers and Mothers have lived Irregular
and Intemperate Lives, which evil influences their Children cannot but partake
of, and so bring a Debauched Palate and several other Distempers into the
World; which for the mos^ part will stick as close to them as their Skin to
their Flesh.

For Diseases thus received are very rarely Cured, except regular Diet and
other degrees of Temperance, may possibly l^ve so much influence as to make
their Lives tolerable.

For this cause it often proves Hazardous to the Health of many Children, to
force a custom, or endeavor to make them Eat and Drink those things they are
unwilling to receive, as many sorts of strong Drinks, which seldom fail to do
Mischief, and several Foods which Children would turn their Heads away from o^
Spit out, which do seldom happen when the Food is Simple and the Drink Water.
The great Wound to Health is, strong Drink and the Food, compounded of several
Ingredients that are improper and disagreeing, which of late years has been
much in use; so that many Children bring with them into the World compounded
Diseases, from that Substance and Materials the Seed is made or generated,
which does according tothe Law of Nature endue the Fruit with all the parts
thereof.

If People were sensible of what great Importance an entire Simple Life of
Order, Sobriety and Temperance is, they would not dare to run such Hazards to
humor a liquorish Palate, or rather a debauched Palate, as they do; intailing
on their Posterity* a Thousand Evils.

The Depravation and Ignorance of the Palate in most People that are of Age, is
chiefly occasioned by the Custom of the place and the Command of the will, by
which this Noble Sense and all the undergraduated Officers lose their
Government and the true Nature and Taste of things, not knowing nor
distinguishing their Friends from their Enemies.

So that every sort, both of Meats and Drinks passes into the Stomach
promiscuously; the Sentinels and Guards being as it were Drunken or Stupefied.

But on the contrary; a perfect Palate is like a Powerful, Strong, Wakeful
Guard of Armed Men, that bravely Maintain their Post and Defend the
Microcosmical City from her Enemies.

For the use and office of the Palate is to distinguish whether our Meats and
Drinks be equal or unequal, that is, whether the Bitter, the Sweet, the
Saltish, Astringent or Sour; and which of these have the Governing or
Predominancy in the said Foods and Drinks.

For these four Qualities are the very Center and original foundation of all
the wonderful and amazing Varieties, not only of Tastes, but of the Complexion
of every individual thing or Creature, both in the Animal, Vegitable and
Mineral Worlds or Kingdoms; and according to the degrees of their Government,
such a Form, Shape and Signature, Qualification and Nature, they are of either,
good or bad, virtuous or vicious; from which foundation and ruling power, each
Creature obtains the name either of good or evil.

Therefore no Man can pretend to know or understand the general nor particular
Nature, Effects and Operation of any thing or Creature, if he be Blind and
Dumb, as to the Signature and distinguishing these four Grand Qualities or
Mighty Powers, that are as it were the very Center and Composition of all
things; for if the Musician do not understand the wonderful Power and Energy of
the Seven Notes, which are the Basis and Central powers of Equality and
Concord, nor the Mathematician the true uses of the Nine Figures, the first can
make no Harmony, nor the last cannot penetrate into the Secrets of that
wonderful and demonstrative Science, by which so many Wonders and Useful
Trades, Callings and Employments have been Midwifed into the World, to the
great benefit of Mankind. For he that does not understand the Proportion nor
the Qualities and Parts things are made and compounded of, cannot have any true
or certain knowledge neither of himself nor of any other thing, but do speak
and judge by chance, and not from any intelligable or Central Knowledge or
Understanding.

The five outward Senses are the Materials Man is Compounded of as to the
Elements of the Body, and which are the true House and Corporality of the five
inward Mental Senses or Spiritual Powers; the outward being as so many Kings
and Princes who have under their Command many Officers and Sentinels that have
several Posts, by whose Vigilance and Diligence all the common Roads and
Passages might be kept safe and free from Tumults and Disorders; for the
outward Senses are the Carriers or Presenters of all Objects and things to the
sleeping Magic Powers of the Mind or inward Senses, and therefore it is of
great and infinite moment for every one to regulate and keep the five outward
Senses in due order, (viz) That they be not defiled nor adulterated by
Intemperance, Uncleanness and Disorders, neither in Meats, Drinks, Employments
nor Communications. And therefore this great and Noble Sense, the Taste or
distinguisher of all Qualities, Forms and Complexions, is wonderfully and aptly
placed in the Mouth or grand Gate or inlet that leads into the very Center of
the Microcosmical City; which Gate or Passage is double Guarded, as is
mentioned before, that it may be able to bolt or shut out whatsoever shall be
offered that is not profitable nor good; either for the Support or Substance of
the Body or Mind. But if this Sense of Tasting be s^llyed, and most are rendered
incapable of distinguishing Virtue from Vice, or natural Preparations from
Hetrogenials; to judge better of the Nature and true Operations of Foods and
Drinks than Blind Men can of Colors, or Deaf Men of Music; for having lost
the true use of this Noble Faculty and Precious Jewel, a Man is left destitute
of all conduct, and there remains but one thing, by which he is rendered in any
degree able to resist the great Enemies of Nature, Gluttony, Uncleanness and
Disorder, (viz) the will and desires can by its innate Power command the Gates,
the Teeth and Lips to be shut and barred up, to defend and keep out all
Invading and Incroaching Powers that continually attempts to storm the Health
and Preservation of Man.

Therefore it is a Virtue of great Value to command the Mouth to be shut and to
deny himself the Tasting of improper Meats and Drinks, and to keep the Mouth
shut against the beloved Apple; for by Eating Mankind is preserved both in the
Harmony of his Body and Mind, and by Eating he is likewise sunk into the
deepest Misery and Depravity, as Witness our first Parents. Eating is a great
Misery, which few or none understand, if they did, there would be more Care and
Caution in it then there is.

It was not without great Reason and inspired Thought that the Learned Moses
tells us, that our first Parents Fell, and Degeneration came on them by eating
of the Forbidden Fruit; what that was, we will not undertake to decide;
however, it is not to be doubted, but that it did arise and proceed from the
evil Powers and divided Forms, that is, from the disunion of the Principles and
Qualities of their own Composition, for whosoever does Eat and Drink without
the Eye of Wisdom, and distinguishing of God and of Nature in themselves, must
of necessity Eat the Forbidden Fruit; for in whomsoever the Powers of the
violent wrathful Spirits are stirred up and awakened, the Mouth of the same
black Principle is opened, and with its highest diligence desires and seeks out
a suitable Food; this was the dark or gloomy Door that all the great ^wils and
Cruelties came in at; for when the Central Bloodhounds have gotten the Scent,
and tasted Blood and Wounds, then all the noble Faculties the Senses,
especially that of the Taste, becomes depraved, and the Will and Desires arises
and are continually Generated from the dark Magia, then there is no distinction
between Cleanness and Uncleanness, Violence and Virtue; that Form that is
awakened in the sullen Magia, forms the Thoughts, Desires and Wills, which
Rules and Commands over all the Inferior Officers and Powers, and Nature bows
before this violent, fierce and fiery Spirit, as Jacob did before Esau. Now
Meats and Drinks are of the same Lump, and in them are contained the complete
Nature and true Property of Man, be they of what kind soever, every sort and
particular has its own Complexion, and its whole Business and Inclination is
to advance that Property which is strongest in it, and does use all Industry to
subject all Forms and Powers to its Government, be it either Good or Evil,
Violence or Patience, Anger or Love, for so soon as Mankind loses his Way and
distinguishing Faculties, then immediately a crowd of Usurpers throng in upon
him in a hostile way, and call for their Similes or Assistance; for every sort
of Food and Drink, when it comes into the Stomach, is presently turned to
Blood, Spirits. Dispositions and Inclinations; and if the Forms be divided and
Disunion begotten, then Wrath, Fierceness and Violence obtains the Government,
and then all Meats and Drinks are changed and Converted into their own Nature
and Property, whether they be clean or unclean, for every specific Body or
Thing is endued with its own Magnet, and its Innate Power does draw forth such
Matter, Juice or Nourishment, that is proper to sustain and support its own
Body, and at the same time the other Forms and Qualities lie as it were hid,
sleeping in the Magia; (as for Example,) In one Field or Pasture there are
several sorts of Animals (viz.) Cows, Sheep, Horses and Swine, and they all Eat
one sort of Herbage or Grass, which do Nourish and Sustain them,
notwithstanding they are of several Species or Kinds, as is mentioned before,
the Swine Transmutes the Juices of the Grass into its own Nature, (viz.) into
gross unclean Flesh, and a foul stinking Excrement, very burdensome, and a
mere loathing to Nature; the Horse to a lively, strong, brisk Nourishment the
Dung or Excrement not at all offensive; the Cow from the same Food does Extract
good clean Nutriment, and a considerable quantity of Milk, whose pleasant
Colors do declare its Excellency, and the Flesh is much finer and cleaner,
also the Dung is of a good Smell, and some do esteem it a good Perfume; the
like is to be understood in all Husbandry, each Grain of Seed do^ by a secret
Power and Sympathetical Inclination, attract a suit^ble Matter out of the
Earth, to support and nourish its own Body, so Curious, so Mysterious, so
Wonderful and so Amazin^ are the Works of the Great Creator and Eternal
Preserver of (...) his Offspring.

The very same is to be understood of the Operations in the Human Nature, for
since Man has immersed his Will and D^sires into the blackest and deepest
degrees of Bestiality and Depravation, and Lives in and under the Lyonish,
Bearish and Do^ gish Spirits, and died with the deepest Color of Violence an^
Fierceness, then these Rapacious Beasts, and all those evil Properties and
Qualities have obtained the Ascendant, and Rule (...) the Will and Desires, so
by the Power and Operation of the^ ruling Qualities, a suitable Nourishment is
Extracted from (...) Meats and Drinks, be they of what Nature soever, clean or
unclean, the Commanding and Transmuting Powers, standing (...) the wrath and
fierceness of the divided Forms and disunity (...) the Natural Powers, which do
presently awaken and stir up a mo^ violent Spirit in the Eaters and
Communicaters of such thing for so soon as Mankind Tasted Blood, together with
the Flesh, presently awakened and rouzed up all the dark, morose, uncle^
Spirits, and dark Properties of the sullen Magia, and Incorpo^ ted with, and
strengthened their Similies, which did quick prepare him to do the like by his
own kind, (viz.) To Kill (...) Slaughter, and to have no more Mercy nor
Compassion, than had of the Beasts, being both done from the same Principle
Violence.

Eating and Tasting has a wonderful Power and Energie, it b^ing the very
Substance of a Man's Life, this Sense being an ^ticing Faculty, and when it is
depraved, and the Will kindl^ in Violence and Debauchery, then it destroys many
thousands poor Ignorant Mortals, and sends them into the next Wo^ therefore
Temperance and Simplicity in Meats and Drinks, (...) to keep this noble Sense
simple and entire, is highly commen^ble, and as it were the Fountain of all
Wisdom.

Many more Excellencies and Virtues the Holy Creator (...) endued this great
and noble Sense the Tasting with, and (...) cularly that of Pleasure and
Delight, which seems to surpass all others, what Pastime, Pleasure and Delight
is there in the World, that can be compared to a sharp, entire, well prepared
Appetite? does it not at once completely Indulge and Gratify the whole?

For though this Sense does not represent the curious Forms and Figures,
Odoriferous Smells or Scents, Melodious Sounds and Harmonies; yet it does
entirely afford the highest degrees of Pleasure, though it must be confessed it
is short, yet livelier than the other as to the Tasting part; but at the same
time, with the help and assistance of the under-graduated Officers, (viz.) the
Teeth, Liquor and Menstruum, it conveys all the Substance into the Stomach, the
common Magazine or Storehouse of Man, and then its Subservient Vessels or
Officers, separates those Meats and Drinks, and conveys or carries the finer
part thereof to every Part or Member of the whole, which does refresh and
strengthen every particular, so that there is a melodious Agreement and lovely
Consort between that great variety of all the Forms, Qualities and Senses at
once, which does exceed all other Pleasures or Delights in the little World.

For what Person is there in the World that has a well-prepared Appetite and
sharp Stomach, that will not leave or separate himself from all other
Pleasures, be they of what nature soever, for a good Meals Meat and Drink, when
exceeding Thirst and Drought invades him? Here the Senses of Life are
concerned, and the Support of all the parts of Nature are touched at once, and
there all the Parts and Members, together with the Power of the Senses that do
inspire and reinforce the Will and Desires, insomuch that they become so very
Strong and Potent, that they command the Hands and Feet and all the other
Parts, to provide Materials for the maintaining the great Pleasure of the
Palate, and to furnish the Stomach or Magazine with such Matter or Food, that
they may sustain the whole; and therefore in cases of necessity, some of the
Ancients have counted it Lawful to Steal or Plunder for so much Food and Drink
as will sustain and preserve Life.

So that there is a greater necessity to support and maintain the Pleasure of
the Palate than any other belonging to the Body. There are three things that
are for the Support of Mankind, and that he cannot Live without, (viz.) Food,
Houses and Cloths: Now Food has the first place, Houses the second, and Cloths
the third. And as this great and noble Sense does afford unto Mankind the most
ample and compleatest Pleasure of all others, and is of the most necessity, so
on the other side, if it be over indulged and cloyed, so that it becomes
depraved by an intemperate unclean Life, then most or all the forementioned
Delights and Pleasures are abated, for the more excellent any thing is in its
own Nature, the greater are the Evils whenabased.

Therefore the Foolish, and such as give themselves to Intemperance, Gluttony
and Drunkenness, finding the natural and excelling Pleasures of this Sense,
they have in most Ages used all endeavors, with great Labor, Care and Hazard,
both to the Body and Mind, with a thousand Inventions and unnatural or
disagreeing Compositions, Childishly imagining thereby to gratify the more, and
continue the long Pleasure and Delight of this Sense, but being ignorant and
mistaken in the Operations of Nature, which are all Simple and Innocent, most
of them have Experienced the quite contrary Effects, and instead of true
Pleasure and Delight, they have dulled, cloyed or blunted the Edge of their
Appetites and Palates by their often addresses they make to it: Eating too much
in quantity, and of disagreeing Qualities, foolishly compounding many brave,
noble, rich Ingredients together, of disagreeing Qualities and Natures, which
do, as it were, at once take away and deface all the true Relish and Taste of
those fine Things and Dainties, which perhaps many hundreds have lost their
Lives to fetch and procure, besides these are not half the Evils that attend
those Preposterous Inventions and Methods of Compositions, and Mankind
endeavoring to prolong and gratify this Sense, (viz.) How many hundreds of
cruel Diseases has Man brought on himself, and worst of all has intailed them
on his Posterity? by which he has, not only destroyed and obliterated all the
entire Delight and Pleasures of Life, and of this noble Sense, but of them all.

Pray tell me what Pleasure can any Person have in the hearing of curious and
melodious Consorts, and Airs of Music, that lies crying out with the Gout? Or
who can take Pleasure in brave noble and delicate Prospects, or in fine Shapes,
Forms and rare Painting, whose Body and Members are full of Diseases, and
hardly any part free from Pain? Or what Delight and Pleasure can curious
odorifirous Smells or Scents afford unto him, who is Sick of a Burning Fever,
or in a downright Consumption* Does not the Scent or Smell offend such an one?
And what Delight can any Person have in the best and choicest Meats and Drinks,
when his whole Body is Indisposed, or invaded by various Diseases? Or what
Pleasure or Delight can any one take it the Embraces and Touch of the fairest
Sex and finest Objects, when his Body and all his Members does languish under
various Diseases and Indispositions?

So that this great and important Sense the Tasting, being kept entire and
perfect, by Order, Temperance and Cleanness is as it were the complete Delight
of all the Senses and Powers of Nature, and that faithful Officer and Conveyer
of all Materials t^ the Center of Life, by which the Body and Spirits are
continually supplied and maintained, and so long as it is in its Perfection and
Simplicity, it is the Original of all other natural Delights and Pleasures, but
being, as is mentioned before, sullied and adulterated by surpluss of Meats and
Drinks, both in quantity and quality, which do not only at once destroy its own
Nature, Gust and Pleasure, but likewise of all the other Senses and Powers both
of the Body and Mind.

So that all the Delights of Life, the Pleasure of Time, and the Intellectual
Speculation of the Wonders of God, his Law and universal Nature, is sunk, which
Mankind has foolishly depraved himself of, Intemperance, Uncleanness, Violence
and Oppression, which has so blunted and sullied all the noble Faculties and
Functions of Nature, that he has lost that great Gift and distinguishing
Power, so that he has not any true use of his natural Senses, neither does he
See, Hear, Feel, Taste nor Smell the Intrinsic Virtues nor Vices of himself,
nor the Things he Communicates with.

Now this is his Fall, (viz.) to be ignorant of those Officers and Powers he
every moment Uses and Converses with, and cannot do one thing without them, be
it of what Nature and Quality it will. The deep degrees of Man's Fall is such,
that he is now Acted and Operated by all those great Powers, no otherwise than
the Beasts, what he has obtained more, is a Cunning, Violent, Oppressive,
Circumventing Sense of Policy, so Miserable Wicked and Ignorant is Mankind
become, notwithstanding his Creator has dressed and endued him with so many
noble and worthy Faculties.

What a brave Serene, Quiet, Delightful World would there be, if Man would but
turn the Eye of his Mind inwardly, and Search, Feell, Taste, See, Hear, Know
and Find himself; for to know a Man's Self, is to understand all the great
Mysteries and Wonders of God, both Corporally and Incorporally; when this
Blessing attends any Person, then he does not only contemplate the Mysteries
and Wonders of himself, and the amazing varieties of occult Powers, Forms and
Principles, but he is thereby inspired, and the eye of each Power is so clearly
open, that he Sees, Hears, Tastes, Feells, Smells and Distinguishes the Magic
Birth of all things in this visible World, and when he looks on, or beholds any
Individual Form, Figure or Shape, he Sees and Penetrates into the Center of
that thing, and distinguishes the inward Nature and Complexion, and what Form
or Quality has the Government and Signature, by which Knowledge and true Sight
he can put it to that use that God and his Handmaid Nature ordained it.

Likewise when such an one shall hear any Discourses, Words, Voices, Tones and
Cries, both of Men and Beasts, he can distinguish from what Center each Sound,
Discourse, Word, Voice, Tone or Cry does arise and proceed from, and what
Principles o^ Qualities, do carry the uppermost Dominion in them, and the
Character of that Form they are signed with, and whether each did proceed from
Equality or Inequality, Harmony or Discord, by which he is armed and fitted to
Embrace that which is good and agreeable to Harmony, Unity and Virtue, and to
resist and refuse what is evil and hurtful.

Also when he Tastes any particular Food or other thing, he can distinguish
whether it be good and proper to be Eaten, how prepared, mixed and compounded,
or simple, and what are the Qualifications of it, and the Form that has the
chief Ascendant in it, distinguishing by the Taste for what it is good, and the
contrary, and so be able to Embrace the Good and withstand the Evil.

The like is to be understood in the other two noble Senses or Powers, the
Smelling and the Feeling: Now this is some part of the Knowledge of a Man's
Self, for by the distinguishing these five great and wonderful Powers called
Senses, the inward Eye of the Mind is opened, so that he can through those
inspired Qualities, See and Penetrate into the Center of himself, into the five
Inward or Intellectual Senses, which in all degrees answer to the five Senses
before treated of, which there is a large Account of in our Treatise of Dreams
and Visions.

Now, as Man has lost the true Intrinsic Uses of these great and noble Powers
the Senses, by Intemperance, Uncleanness and his rapacious Living on such Meats
and Drinks that was not suitable unto Uniformity and his Original Innocent
State; so on the other side, there is no method nor way to reinvest and obtain
his first Condition of Unity, and the understanding of himself and the
Signatures of his own Composition; but Temperance, Cleanness, and to abandon
all Violence and Oppression, both to Man and Beast, by which the Divine Union
is to be understood and enjoyed, which can never be accomplished, except
Mankind keep God's Law, which we shall farther demonstrate in our Answer to
your Letter, wherein you desire our Judgment touching the Operation of the
five Senses in the Beasts.

In the intreim, we send you this, which please to accept as an Answer to your
Question, not doubting but the consideration thereof wi^ afford you some
Benefit.

LETTER IV. Of the Sense of Seeing.
SIR,
BY the Receipt of yours, I find you have a great desire to have my Judgment
of that most Stupendous and Wonderful Sense of Seeing, in Answer whereunto I
shall, according to my Talent, endeavor to Explicate the Variousness, Virtues
and Powers of that most amazing and admirable Faculty.

NOW as that wonderful Eye of Heaven the Sun, is the very Center of Light of
all the numberless numbers of Creatures, being the Foundation, and Well being
of them all, who by its illuminating Beams, Communicates Life and Light to all
the Host of Heaven and Earth, without which all would be a dark Chaos of Misery
and Confusion. Words are too short to set forth the Uses and Excellencies of
this Sun of God, in which the Preserving and Divine Power, is understood and
manifested.

And as this high illuminating Spirit and Power is the Eye, which does
enlighten and preserve every Member and Part of the Great World, being its Soul
or Center. The like is to be understood of the Sense of Seeing in us, for as
the Sun is the Eye of the Macrocosm, so is the Sense of Seeing the Light of the
Microcosm which does enlighten every Member and Part thereof, for Man is a
complete Image of God, and his Handmaid Nature, and does contain the true
Nature and Properties of the whole, and therefore is called a Little World, or
an Extract from the Great, and as this high and mighty Power the Sun, does
enlighten, direct and conduct all, and by whose Power and illuminating Beams
all this wonderful variety of Beings and Creatures are understood and
distinguished.

And as the World would be a miserable Chaos if the glorious Eye of Heaven were
withdrawn but one moment, even so it would be with Man, for this Sense of
Seeing is both in the Great and the Little World the true Guide of all Action
and Motion; and in this Sense or Light is contained the Secret or Central Fire,
which by Motion and continual Circulation of contrary Qualities becomes
manifest, warming and preserving the whole, being the Root and Original of
Vegetation, and the true Father of the Light, for Fire and Light are
inseparable, they dwell eternally together; for this cause, where the Light is
weak or but little, there the Fire is as impotent, as is most manifest in all
the Northern parts of the World, most part of the Year being terrible-Cold,
Frosty Weather, the Elements being Congealed for want of Heat.

The contrary is to be understood in the Southern parts of the World, where
there is Light, Heat is always at hand; and in what thing soever the Central
Fires are potent, there the Light is also strong, powerful and lasting, there
being always a proportionable Nature between the Light, Fire or Central Heat of
each thing, both in Animals, Vegetables and Minerals; for this cause Children
and all Young People have a clearer and more penetrating Sense of Seeing than
those of Age, because their Light burns clearer, and all their Humors are
clean, vigorous and free from dull, cloudy Vapors, the Elements of Water and
Fire being thin and more pure, do rarify each other, by which the Oil of Life
or Salnitral Virtues are clean and free from gross obstructing Matter, from
whence the Fire has its bright, clear, shining Quality; so that in Youth all
the Operations of the Elements are more brisk, lively and powerful than in Age,
as appears, not only in the Sight, but in all the Actions of Life.

For as the Natural and Central Fires decay, the Light equally grows weak, some
sooner some later, according to the degrees of the Decay or Weakness, sometimes
this decrease of natural Heat is Universal; and when this happens, the whole
Body does quickly dwindle and fall into Death, but very often this Decay of the
Natural Heat happens in the Intelligible part, the Head, by some accident of
Obstruction, the Vessels or Optic Nerves becoming stiff, or as it were glewy,
the Porous Parts or Vessels being narrowed or small, which does prevent the
free Ingress, Egress and Regress of the fine thin rarefied Spirits that are
generated through the whole Body, which every moment does ascend by certain
Circular Motions, into the Head or most Intelligible Part, which if at any time
the whole Road or common Passage of those fine thin rarefied Spirits be stopped
or obstructed, the Person so Afflicted immediately falls, and nothing but Death
follows, and that in a moments time, this being the Original occasion of sudden
Death, so that many Sound Healthy Persons by such like Obstructions fall into
Death, who otherwise might have Lived many Years, as being free from Diseases.

For this cause Temperance and Cleanness, both in Quality and Quantity of Meats
and Drinks, are as it were, the Springhead of Health and the Generater of
fine, clean nutriment, good Blood, pure Spirits, noble Dispositions and
Inclinations, whatever Cormorants and unclean Belly-gods may Dream to the
contrary, Nature and God's Law is always true, and cannot lie: Every thing
under the Government of the glorious Eye of Heaven, does arise, proceed and
follow its first Matter, and carries in its Bosom or Center a Key that can
readily join and unlock all the secret Doors of Nature's Cabinet, and finding
out and incorporating with its Simile, increasing and strengthening the same,
which is the highest Joy and Solace of all Corporal and Incorporal Beings.

For this cause, as any Persons Meat, Drink, Employment and Communications are
either from the dark, cloudy Root, clean or unclean, so the Humors, Blood,
Dispositions, Inclinations, Words and Works, all proceed and go on in a
straight Line or Method, therefore to be either too much in the Sun or Shade
begets Complexions; for Meats and Drinks are the Center and Substance of our
Lives, and in them are contained the true Nature and Property of all Qualities,
Principles and Dispositions, enduing the Eater with their Qualifications.

If this were not true, Man could not Subsist or have his Life continued,
whatever the unthinking do or may imagine to the contrary, every thing knows
its own Voice and Cries after its own Dam or Mother, and the Senses are the
Officers, Carriers or Conveyers of all things to the Central parts and
Understanding, so that all the hidden Powers and Qualities are awakened, each
Quality having its peculiar Appetite, do direct and draw unto its self, both
Corporally and Spiritually, not intermeddling with the Business of its
Neighbor.

So this wonderful penetrating Sense is the only Guide of the Body, and capable
Power to present unto the Understanding and Judgment the Forms and Signatures
of all things in the Animal, Vegitable and Mineral Worlds, by which an
enlightened Philosophical Mind, can in some degree (by the Form and Signature)
understand the Complexion of each, and consequently their Uses.

It is this Sense that does likewise present unto the Intellectual part of Man,
all delightful and pleasant Prospects, serene Airs, and agreeable clean
Elemental Operations, also all curious Forms and Figures, and the unspeakable
variety both of Colors and other Ornaments, made by curious Art and Ingenuity,
by which the Mind and Understanding is pleased and delighted.

It is also by this Sense, that Men represent all good Methods or Order,
Temperance, Cleanness, the proper ways of Preparation of Meats and Drinks, also
proper Gestures, Behavior and Deportment, Well-going, Nimble, Handsome Running.
It is likewise the Matron of noble, curious Arts and Sciences, as representing
unto the Understanding the proper Way and Method of Doing and Methodizing each
thing.

And therefore all Parents, Tutors and Nurses ought to represent before their
Children, all Virtuous Actions and Gestures of Sobriety, and if any Person
would have their Children Skilled in any curious Art, Science or Trade, then
they ought to accustom their Children to be daily with, and among those that
are Skilled and Practisers of those Arts, even from two or three Years Old, the
Younger the better, for the constant looking on or beholding any thing, or
seeing the beginning and ending of things pertaining to any Arts and Sciences,
begets the Ideas and Forms, not only of those things, but the Manners and
Methods of Performance in the Understanding and Judgment is thereby made good;
for Man being like all things, and all things like him, and each particular
having its own secret Key, it has Power thereby, when represented to the
Understanding, to open and strengthen its own Form, so each thing becomes
increased and strengthened, and the parts thereof distinguished.

For Example, if any Person would have a Son or Daughter to understand the
curious Art of Representation, (viz.) Picture-Drawing, not the Working part,
but only to have Judgment, and know and distinguish when a piece is well done,
and the contrary, then let such a Child, instead of Playing with Babies or
worse things, be for the most part among such as Draw and Paint, 4, 5 or 6
Years, or more, by which seeing this Art performed, the Understanding and
Judgment will be mightily advanced, and made capable of knowing and
distinguishing the goodness of that Art and Property of each particular Feature
and Part, of any piece of Drawing or Painting, notwithstanding the Hands are
incapable to perform the said Art.

The like is to be understood of Music, and all or most other Arts and
Sciences, for each does endeavor with the highest diligence imaginable, to
apprehend and comprehend all things that are within its own Province or Power,
and therefore does continually convey and represent them before the
Understanding or Judgment, opening all Centres, leaving no Stone unturned, (as
the Proverb has it) that it may thereby beget its own Form and Figure, and if
the Artist be curious, and perform the thing with great Skill, then the Child
that beholds such Practices, shall have Judgment, and distinguish accordingly,
and so on the contrary the very same is to be understood of all Employments,
Trades, and whatever else of this nature; also the like is to be understood in
learning any Mystery, for if the first Learning and Practice of the Senses and
Ideas of the thing, open the Gate of its own Property by degrees, and join
Forces, strengthening its self, so that the Genius to that thing, which in the
Human Mystery lay hid, is raised and awakened from its still Sleep, and by
continual Manuring and Cultivation such an one becomes an Artist or good
Workman.

But many times it falls out, that a Youth is put to an Art; Trade or
Employment, in which his Genius is very weak and impotent, which is a
Misfortune that cannot be helped, and such an one cannot attain to be a curious
Artist; every thing having its due bounds or limits, the Forms and Qualities of
Nature may by Cultivation be improved, or the contrary, but never made; for
this cause some are more unapt to Learn than others, for where the Genius is
strong, Nature bears a more near Simile with the thing they are to Learn;
therefore one is said to be happy and another unhappy; and whatever has been
said of Virtue, the same may be understood of Vice.

Therefore all such who have the Tuition and Government of Children, ought, on
peril of God's Displeasure, to keep a strict Eye over them, not letting them go
as it were out of their sight, and if it were possible, that they may be
preserved entire in the simple Methods of Nature, and not see the Gluttony,
various Intemperances and Disorders, nor vain Sights, Shows, Pastimes,
pernicious Plays and Games, which take deep root in the Human Earth, and though
they do not distinguish things evil from good, nor the right from the wrong;
nevertheless the Sense of Seeing is always vigilant in all Forms and Qualities,
and carries, represents and communicates the thing or things to the
Understanding, and with a powerful Influence Penetrates into all Centres and
Qualities, rousing up the sleeping Magia or Magical Powers, and finding its
Simile, strengthens and increases it, by which it often gets the Ascendant in
the Center of Life, riding triumphantly, and then that Form or Property obtains
the Government.

Such Children or Young People having no Understanding, Government or
distinguishing Power, between good or evil, nor what arises and proceeds from
the one or the other, so that vain or wicked Principles and Qualities are
fixed, and become as one entire Substance and Form of Life, which cannot be
wholly overcome or obliterated, though many have and do seek it with Tears, as
Esau did.

For whatever Qualifications are well taught and fixed in Childrens tender
years, whether it be Sciences, Arts, Trades or Employments, be they either evil
or good, they will in spite of their riper Understandings or Judgments, dwell
with them; and if they do not improve, yet they are always ready and
forthcoming on every small Call or Occasion; their Qualities and Essences are
not to be altogether Obliterated.

Now when these things are rightly considered or understood and distinguished,
all or most of the methods of Tutoring or Educating Children, or our selves,
(viz.) or our Offspring, are most of them unaccountable, and are little else
but various evil Inventions, proceeding from the dark Kingdom of Wrath and
Fierceness, to betray and ensnare their own Race. The first thing Mothers,
Nurses and Teachers by degrees do Teach their young Infants is Gluttony, Pride
and Idleness, which are not improperly called the Engines of the Devil, or the
Offspring of Hell: And after much pains taken to engraft the forementioned
evils, and another called Lying; at Seven or Eight years of Age, they dress
them up in Gaudy. Super^uons Garments, and send them to the Dancing-School to
complete the Tragedy: As also playing in the Streets, or at Neighbors Houses
promiscuously, where they see all sorts and kinds of Immodesty, Disorders and
Intemperance; so that not only many Thousands, but the greatest number of
Mankind do make use of this Noble Ray, the Well-being, Joy, and Grand Center of
the outward Life, contrary to the end for which it was ordained; (viz.) to an
ill purpose, and to their own damage, to violate and oppress those of their own
kind, and all the innocent Inhabitants of the Earth, breaking down all the
Natural Laws and Bonds of Friendship between each other, and destroying the
Uniformity of all the under graduates.

This Sense is the greatest and most noble of all others, for it makes the most
hidden and mysterious things to appear, and that which was and is enclosed in
the very Center of Darkness, to become manifest, that which was without motion
to become Living, that which was Cold to become Vigorous and full of Heat and
Splendour; by its peculiar power Mankind can as it were behold at once half the
Globe Water and Earth, with the wonderful Varieties and Mysteries therein
contained. In a word, it is the Pleasure and Well-being of every Life, and true
Guide of all Actions: The Eyes are the Gates, through which the Spirits of life
pass and repass, having their ingress, egress and regress through the whole
Body on all sides, by Pores; but those that pass through the Eyes are more fine
and transparent, carrying with them a fiery powerful life; and therefore, if
these two Gates are kept open too long, the whole Body in a very little time
becomes dull, heavy and indisposed, not being able to perform any Action or
Exercise; and this weight or heaviness will come on so strongly, even like
Death it self, that all the powers of the Understanding and Mind cannot
maintain the motion and vigor of the Body; neither can the most choice Foods
or Cordial Drinks, but all become still, and as it were benumbed.

For this cause persons may fast longer from Meats and Drinks than from Sleep;
therefore these Gates must be shut six or eight Hours in every twenty four, or
else Nature and our Bodies cannot subsist, nor be able to go on with common
business, neither continue in a state of health; so great is the necessity of
Rest: Therefore poor mean Meats and Drinks, with a due proportion of Sleep,
will support and sustain Nature far bey and the richest Foods and strongest
Drinks, with half the proportion of Sleep.

Wherefore all young People or Children ought to have their full time of Sleep
and rest, that making them strong, lively and vigorous, and fit for all Actions
of Life: Besides, the Eyelids are not only useful to preserve the fine, thin,
pure Natural Spirits of Life, from the usual motions; by which all Actions and
Exercises of life are performed; but by their closing, there is a kind of
Cessation from their circular motions, so that in this time of sleep, the
Spirits regain strength and vigor, and thereby a new Life and Motion is
Generated: They likewise serve to many excellent uses in Nature, so it defends
this delicate tender Sight from all evils that may happen without, in 50, 60,
or 70 years; they are also of excellent use at all times or seasons to shut out
the Light, that the Evils, Vanities, Intemperances and Disorders, lewd Sports
and Plays that are daily Acted by Mankind, to the great prejudice of himself
and dishonor of God, which all good Men ought to turn from and not so much as
suffer this Glorious Light of Heaven to represent them to our understanding.
But above all, to keep the Eyelids of young People shut, that they may not see
the wickedness of this World, at leastways as little as may be, for vain things
are the Pests and Distempers of every Age; and whosoever avoids and shuns them
as much as in him lies, is the more happy.

And all Tutors and Parents, instead of Tricking and Dressing their Children in
Bravery, and bringing them to Plays and Balls and Dancing Schools, should
represent to them all sorts of poor Tradesmen and Industrious People, bringing
them to places where they may see all sorts of poor indigent People, who not
only rise early, but notwithstanding hard Labor and Pains, fare very hard,
having ragged Clothes, and Shoes without Soles, being all Dirty, going about
the Streets Cold and Hungry, having no Food to Nourish them. Also Weavers and
Throwsters, where great numbers of Boys and Girls are employed. These and many
others, for want of Conduct and Education, become barbarous in their
Deportment, Women as well as Men. These ought to be represented as Examples, to
those whose better circumstances will give them the advantage of Learning and
Sobriety.

That it is not as some vainly imagine, (viz.) Lost time to be well taught and
skilled in several Arts and Sciences, and that betimes too; for Seeds Sown, and
Trees Planted in season, bear the best Crop, and brings forth the noblest
Fruit; and whatsoever thing you would not have your Children inclined to, never
let them see it, for Children and young People use all Industry to imitate what
they see, Example and Precedent going beyond Precept: The first is a complete
birth and substance, the other but a Notion, and no more than Air or Spirit
without a Body, which passes and repasses, and is lost in an invisible breath
or fume, being quickly obliterated and forgot.

There are three degrees to be commenced before any thing in the mind of Man
attains a complete birth, or come to be substantial; the first degree is, the
Original thought or desire, the second is, this being modelled and banded to an
fro by the five Counselors the inward Senses, the Reason and Understanding
being always at their Elbows to give necessary advice; and this thought being
represented to the Judgment, to know whether it be fit or reasonable it should
be Coined into Words, the next degree is, putting these Words into Actions,
which does Crown the whole, and makes the Birth substantial and complete,
whether it be in the evil or in the good, and can hardly ever be obliterated.

For instance, if a Man think or imagine an evil thing, and stop there, he may
easily repent, and thereby annihilate it; but if he bring this thought before
the Judge by the Counselors, and it is by them commanded to be Coined into
Words, then if it be an evil thing it will be much harder repented of; but if
it proceed without Correction into Action, then as is said before, the case is
much more difficult; therefore Actions and Evil Precedents do Wound all People
very deep, more especially Children and young People; therefore you ought not
to let them see any thing that you would not have them practice, as Soldiers in
an Army Training, fine Horses in their Furniture; nor any sort of Shows or
Games, Fighting and Killing either of Man or Beast; nor let them play with Dogs
or such like Creatures, for whatsoever is seen, acted or practiced, takes
deeper root than either that which is a Care, Thought or Word; every particular
thing works on its likeness, according to its power, and whatsoever is done in
the evil, by Examples and Precedents, the like is to be understood in the
Virtuous and good courses of Life.

And were it possible to make Mankind intelligible, and to distinguish between
the two Grand Fountains of good and evil in themselves, and to know from what
root each Thought, Word and Action takes its Birth, and from whence each
Invention, Employment, Art and Trade does proceed and are Midwifed into the
World, then would this discourse be valuable unto the Sons of Men, and they
would, without invitation, repent themselves of their mistaken Conduct both in
themselves and in the Education of their Children; but if Men Act and Teach
without either sight or true knowledge, what can be expected? nothing that
proceeds from them can be more certain than the Judgment of Blind and Deaf Men
in the distinction of Colors and delicate Airs of Music, as is mentioned
before.

Seeing is a most wonderful Sense, and the only power, by which all the various
Forms, Figures and Shapes of things are represented and communicated to the
intellectual or imaginative faculties; and Man being an Epitome, the whole
Nature and forms of things, by which there is a secret conveyance, and each
thing has power to communicate and awaken the hidden or sleeping Magia of
Nature, by its own Key, that can unlock all Gates, and raise up, awaken and
strengthen its own property; which by continual management of the strong Will
and Desires, such and such a form or quality comes by degrees to obtain the
Ascendant, getting the Government in the Mind, which does in a short time
betray the Judgment and becloud the Understanding, and then all appears to be
rational; and though the Customs b^ ever so Inimical and Prejudicial to Nature,
and does Diametrically oppose the Health and Well-being, both of the Body and
Mind, nevertheless all goes down; and many are so blinded with false Opinion
and Tradition, that no Pains, Cost, Labor or Trouble, shall Deter them from
being in the Fashion, or to do what they see others do; what a great charge and
pains do too many Thousands take to maintain their Fantastical Dresses? how
frequently do they put themselves upon the Rack, both of their Bodies, Minds
and Purses? in a word, what would not young People do that they may appear in
the Fashion, or be equal with those that are in the highest Mode? will not they
use all Wicked Methods of Life, as Whoreing, Robbing, Stealing; nay, Murder it
self? and indeed what Wickedness is there that Youth and Children will not
practice to get Money, to consume on their Lusts and Invading Passions.

Now if Fathers, Mothers and others, did in any degree consider these things,
they would not so readily Teach, Nourish and Permit these Devilish, Spiteful
Powers and Qualitys as they do; neither would they be so easy, and give Money
to Dancing and Fencing-Masters, nor would they suffer them to see Poppets, and
other foolish Plays and Games; no, no, they would be as far from these things
as the East from the West. People never so much as once think of the evil that
may ensue, when their Children, Servants and others go to Shows, Fairs, and
playing in the Streets and at Neighbors Houses, which does wonderfully pollute
them; nay, is it not frequent for many of our modest Dames, both in Country and
City, to spend some part of their time when they are at Worship and Church, in
gazing, looking and noting those Persons or Gallants that are most in the Mode,
or have gotten the newest Fashion or finest piece of Lace, Point, bravest or
richest Silks.

Now seeing these fine things has so deeply and so centrally awakened the
imaginative and secret powers of the Mind, that they can hardly eat their
Dinner, before they have informed their Husbands and Companions of the richness
of such a Neighbors Gown and Head-dress of the newest Mode, often undervaluing
the Station, Income or Estate of those Sparkish Madams. The like is among the
Proud young Sons and Daughters, telling their Parents how brave, rich and
fashionable such and such a Neighbors Children are, endeavoring to imitate
and exceed them, showing their Discontents if they are not satisfied; which
frequently occasions great Disturbances in private Familys: For Parents and
Guardians foreseeing the Inconveniences that attend such things, though it be
too late in the day: Therefore many do use all endeavors to Plant and Sow good
Seed, but the ground or humane earth is not capable to receive it, being as it
were choked or overrun with pestiferous Weeds, which the Parents have so
early Planted; that neither the Fear of God, nor the Instructions and Threats
of Fathers and Mothers can obliterate or root out, having taken such deep
footing in the imaginative and intellectual faculties of Nature; the very
Beauty of the Mind being so early sullyed by ill Methods and Managements.

And yet most People would have their Children Virtuous Sober, Temperate and
Modest, fearing God; whereas they have Sowed in their tender years, the Seeds
of Luxury, Pride and Idleness, which are the three Sons of the evil Demons; so
that there is much more Mischief than Thousands imagine, in the wrong use of
this Sense: But did your Offspring behold the beauty of Order, Temperance,
Form, proper Preparations of Meats and Drinks, Cleanness, Industry, Silence,
good methods of Learning and Speaking, or any other virtuous course of Life,
Children and young People would as readily imitate, observe, follow and
practice the^, as now they do all kind of Viciousness and Evil; the Divine
Principle, Holy Light and Love of God in Jesus Christ, is as near to Mankind as
the Evil Principles; and the one is as ready to exert its power as the other,
as each is and shall be encouraged by the Primum Mobile, the Will; for into
whatsoever the Will and Desires of Mankind do enter, whether it be good or
evil, that power or principle is awakened and strengthened in the very Center
of Life, and will quickly obtain the Ascendant, provided a contrary Will do not
timely intervene; so that many Thousands of ignorant People are deceived before
they think or know any thing of it.

These are some of the Thoughts (relating to your Question,) which at present
occurr to Memory; hoping that what is herein Inserted, may give you
satisfaction, and be acceptable.

From your ready Friend T. T.

LETTER V. Of the Sense of Feeling.
SIR,
IN Answer to yours, touching that most wonderful Sense of Feeling, I shall
endeavor according to my Abilities, to satisfy your earnest desire: First,
Therefore you may observe, that it is the Center of Life, and of all the other
Senses, for if this be wanting in the whole, or in any particular Member, the
Melancholy House of Death immediately seizes, but any of the other four may be
lost or wanting, and oftentimes two of them, nay three, and yet the Life
continued in vigor.

Therefore the All-wise Creator has placed them in particular Cells or
Apartments in the Head, that if any one, two or three of them should be hurt,
distempered, or lost, the whole might not be in danger of sinking into Death,
though Nature is not complete if any one be Lost or Disordered, but this great
Sense of Life, (viz.) the Feeling is universal, and no part of the Body can
subsist without it, not so much as one moment, and therefore when this Sense is
Disordered, or any Obstruction or Distemper invades it, the whole becomes
heavy, dull and melancholy; and Death quickly ensues; so on the other side,
when it is in order, the Motions and Circulations of the Body and Members are
free from Obstructions, then it is the true Pleasure of Life, and all the other
Senses are Subservient to this, and rejoice in its Prosperity, as being their
Prince and King; the Industry of all the others is to support and maintain this.

For if this Sense of Feeling sink, none of the others are or can be well; by
the Innate Power of this, Mankind and all Creatures, (viz.) Animals,
distinguish between Joy and Sorrow, Grief and Pain, Sickness and Health,
Temperance and Gluttony, also Hunger and Fullness, Heat and Cold, Weight or
Lightness, Hardness and Softness, Fineness and Courseness, Smoothness and
Roughness, Thickness and Thinness, in a word in this Sense is apprehended and
comprehended, all Pleasures, Touches and Embraces, and as it were the very
Center of all natural Enjoyments, both of the Body and Mind; and therefore the
great, various and wonderful Powers of the whole, Bows before it, and with all
endeavors, each in its respective place, to serve it with the highest
diligence, for the Life and Center both of Joy, Sorrow, Pain and Pleasure, is
in this universal Sense.

Therefore all Powers yield their Obedience to it, for this cause whenever
this Sense is Encountered or Invaded by any universal Disorder, Intemperance or
Uncleanness, the Life of that part that suffers the Disorder immediately
Perishes: This the Learned call the Dead Palsy, and several other Names they
give this Disease, which of all others, is one of the most Dolorous and
Melancholy, which do attack and invade many Persons through disorderly Living
and Intemperance, Drinking and Eating both in Quantity and Quality, such things
that are too gross, hard, spirituous, and of a strong fulsom Composition and
Preparation, from whence Juices of a proportionable Nature are Extracted, which
do infallibly generate thick, gross Blood and impure Spirits, which do as it
were, narrow, stop and swell the Highways and natural Roads, (viz.) The Porous
Passages of the Body, and the Nerves do by these thick Juices, become stiff and
Glewy, so that the Blood and Spirits being touched with these Diseases and
Infirmities cannot have their free Ingress, Egress, Regress and Circulation,
but are waylaied and stopped; according to the degrees of these Obstructions, the
Diseases and the Distempers are more or less.

Now all Fumes and Vapors, that many thousands of People, especially Women,
are subject to, as the Gout and all Obstructions, Falling Sickness, and several
other cruel Maladies, they are procured and likewise transferred from one Age
to another, for want of Wisdom, Temperance and Cleanness in the Methods of
Life, for every Person does desire and incline to such and such Meats and
Drinks, Exercises and Communications, according to the ruling Qualities and
predominant Humors, and their Equality and Inequality; and the Nourishment,
Humors, Blood, Spirits and Dispositions are in proportion; whence the Seed is
Generated, as being the Essence of all the natural Properties and Powers; for
this cause most or all the variety of new and old Diseases are transferred,
conveyed and intailed on their Posterity, etc.

Therefore there is hardly found any Medicine capable to C^ them, being so
deeply rooted in the very Center of Nature: Now as these Diseases have
increased since Trade has advanced, so likewise have improper Compositions and
Hetrogenial Preparations gotten great footing in the World, b^ which every Age
does produce a new Offspring of Diseases, (...) known or hardly heard of
before, as in this Nation since Stro^ Beer, Ale and Wine became common Drinks,
and our com^ Foods compounded and mixed with Spices, Sugar, Spanish F^ and
several other Ingredients, we say since this, there a^ great number of cruel
Distempers started up in Man's Body, (...) were not heard of before, for every
sort of Meat and Dr^ has the Key in its self, to seek, embrace and feel out
its own likeness, and has an Innate Power in its Bosom or Center, to generate
an Offspring of its own Nature, in proportion to the Nourishment such a thing
affords, as the Gout, Stone, Rhumatism, Rickets, and many Leprous or Scabby
Diseases, which within 70, 80, 100 or 200 years have been Midwifed into our
Nation.

Now it is to be observed, that all the other four Senses, when they have
gratified themselves, and taken Pleasure even to the highest degree of Luxury,
Do slip their Necks out of the Collar, (as the Proverb has it) leaving all
their evil Works and Deeds of Darkness, to this poor and most deplorable Sense
of Feeling, who is bound under the Iron Gates of various, severe and
intolerable Diseases, all their malignant Influences, the Taste, Smell,
Hearing and Seeing, shut their Gates, and take their Rest, but the Feeling is
rarely ever quiet or easy, Sleep and Rest gives them Resurrection and a new
Life, but the Feeling remains uneasy, every Member and Joint aches, and the
whole Body is Indisposed, Sleep being nothing else but a Transitory Death, or
an Occultation to a Renovation; and therefore no Man nor other Creature can
Subsist and Live, except they Die near or altogether a third part of the time
that is allotted them.

So that our Lives are a constant or continual Dying; this being Matter of
Fact, why should Mankind be so fearful and timorous of Death, seeing he that
Lives 100 years, is Dead more than 30 of it? which time is an unaccountable to
him, as those that are really in Eternity, where there is neither Time nor
Place, Near and Far off being altogether the same, and no Man would be more
concerned to Die than he is to Sleep, if he had not broken the Law of his
Maker, by invading and bringing Desolation on all the Host of Heaven and Earth,
which is the Secret and Original of Mankinds Fear, and the true cause of his
Uneasiness and Perplexity; for in this World there is no Creature that Lives
without a continual Dying, or becoming as it were Invisible.

Do not all the Herbs, Fruits, Seeds and Grains, and whatever else appears in
Bodies, Shapes and Forms? They we say do daily Die, that they may be capable to
reinvest themselves in new vigorous Bodies; and do not all the Beasts of the
Field every moment as it were enter into Death, that they may be able to
maintain a short Momentary Life, though the Beasts do not enter so deeply into
Death as Man? Their Sleep being but a kind of waking, in comparison of Man's;
for what Creature in the World is so drowsy and heavy as Man? Nor is there any
thing that sleeps so sound and deep, or do require so much as he, except some
few that are called by the name of Sleepers, whose Nature, Original
Constitution and Disposition compels them to it? But most Beasts, Birds and
Fish, their Rest and Sleep is nothing but a continual waking in comparison of
Man's deep and dead Sleep.

The principal cause why the Creatures are not so drowned in this drowsy Death,
is, they have not broken God's Law, but live more entire, and according to
their Original, their Meats and Drinks being more suitable to their Original
Natures, whether they be clean or unclean, for to Unclean Creatures unclean
Food is suitable and agreeable to its Qualifications, and to the Clean clean
Foods are in proportion suitable, and therefore all the Beasts are not only
more wakeful and less subject to the Sleep of Death than Man, having all their
Senses more ready, lively, brisk, and at all times more at command, for they
rarely gratify the four Head Senses to disturb and torment the Sense of
Feeling; and therefore are not so terribly pestered with such a number of cruel
Diseases as Man; therefore it is most clear that all the great Powers called
Senses, are dull, heavy, and as it were half Dead, when sleeping, but when
waking are brisk and lively, all according to the Meats, Drinks, Employments,
Communications and Exercises, for Mankind by rapacious unclean Meats and
Drinks, makes himself of another Complexion, and his Constitution is another
thing than originally it was; nothing being so deplorable and so great an Evil,
as to act and live in a contrary Method to its own Creation, and this is the
greatest Curse that can fall upon any Creature, this is Man's greatest Fall and
Misfortune, which can never be cured, except he again enter into Resignation or
Self-denial, (viz.) Into Equality or Union, that is, into Temperance and
Cleanness, and live according to his Original State and Constitution. But so
long as he oppresses the Creatures, and violates their Well-being and Quiet, he
can never have reason to expect to be freed from far greater than the
inferiors, and therefore this Feeling Power is rarely free from Trouble and
Perplexity, as being subject to all kinds of irregular Courses, both of the
Body and Mind, there is no Disorder or Intemperance, but does fall on it, as
all our Labor, Care, Love, Hate, Hope, Fear, Hunger, Cold, Heat, evil
Communications, and all Words and Works, this Sense is the Center or House both
of Joy and Sorrow, both in Time and Eternity.

For this cause Mankind ought to be on his Guard at all times and Seasons,
being beset on all sides both within and without, with a great number of
Temptations and evil Customs, the Degeneration of Man is such, that all things
he meddles with is a Share to him, being deprived of the true use of the
Powers, Qualities and Principles of himself, and being in the Dark, he uses all
his Senses to a wrong purpose, so that all those high and noble Intelligences
are sullyed and made subject to the gross, inferior unclean Powers, which does
continually load and lay as it were intolerable Burdens on this universal
Sense, every Action and Motion of Life, Inclination and Disposition does
influence that, it being the Touchstone which does demonstrate from what
Principle or Root each Action and Motion of Life does proceed and take their
Birth, whether from the Evil or Good.

Now this Sense is the Judge both of the Body and all its Actions, and also of
the Desires and Inclinations, so that Man has no occasion to look abroad for
Counselors or for a Judge, they all dwell in himself, he is the Thing, (viz.)
The great Mystery, wherein all the Treasures both of Time and Eternity are to
be understood; and therefore the Apostles might well say, that whatsoever could
be understood or known of our Great Creator, and of his great Powers in Nature,
was manifested in Man, and as clear to be seen as the Sun at Noon, but who can
see the Sun if he be Blind.

Is it not a most miserable and deplorable Condition Mankind has fallen and
sunk himself into, that he has lost the Understanding and distinguishing
Power, of his own Composition, and of his own Senses? and that he has not the
use of them to that degree as the Beasts have? (as we shall demonstrate when we
treat of the Common Animals,) for it is not possible for any Man to understand
the whole, if the parts of the Things or Qualities it is compounded of, be not
distinguished; this is most clear and manifest in all Sciences, Arts and
Trades, which do all arise and take their Birth from Man, and the Mystery
contained in his Microcosm; for if all Sciences, Arts and Trades, yea a
thousand Mysteries and rare Inventions, that have, are, and will be found out
and brought to light, had not been originally Essential in the very Center of
Man, then it had been impossible to have brought them to light.

What great Pity and Lamentation is it, that Man, who is endued with so many
great, noble and worthy Faculties, and in whom is contained all the great
Mysteries of Time and Eternity, and made to live in and under the Operation of
the United and Illuminated Powers of God's Law, should suffer his Will and
Desires to enter into the dark Magic of Discord, Fierceness, Wrath, Violence,
Intemperance, Uncleanness and Oppression of all the innocent Inhabitants of the
Earth, and at the same time to plague and to torment himself; for the Groaning
of those Creatures that suffer Pain, never fail to procure Misery to the Actors
thereof.

It is farther to be noted, that that thing which is Pleasure to the Sense of
Tasting, and a Delight to the Sense of Seeing, does often prove a torment to
the Sense of Feeling, as in Gluttony and Drunkenness, which do frequently
distemper the Body, and perplex the Mind: The like the Sense of Seeing does
bring on this Sense, by presenting curious Objects to the Intellects, which
puts Man on the Rack till he has obtained his desires; and when that is done
there is no more satisfaction than before; for i^ Wisdom be obliterated, then
there is nothing can give satisfaction; for such do all things, by Custom,
Tradition and President, asking no question.

Now if Mankind has lost the use of those grosser Powers, how can he then be
capable of the more Intellectual and Divine Operations of Gods eternal Law and
Holy Light?

The first foundation of this Stupidity, Blindness and Erro^, was gross Eating,
Drinking, and Uncleanness; for nothing has so much Power and Authority on the
Body and Mind, (...) Meats and Drinks, which do sustain and support both Body
a^ Spirits, and according to their respective Virtues or Vices, they nourish
and incline to this or the other thing; so that nothin^ has so great power to
preserve the intrinsic Virtues and goo^ Properties in Man, as Sobriety,
Temperance and Cleanness; and on the other side. nothing does so much fully the
worthy and i^*telligible Faculties, as Intemperance, Disorder and Uncleanness.

This is clearly manifest in that noble Sense the Smelling, which is as we have
said, an invisible Power, whose body is the Air: This is the Sense by whose
directions all the Beasts and Creatures (who have kept Gods Law) do distinguish
and choose their Foods (viz.) what to eat, and what to forbear; this, Sense
penetrates to the very Center of each thing, and does distinguish the good and
evil Qualities, and presents them to the Judge, and if good they embrace them,
if evil they refuse them; this all the undergraduated Creatures do perform
without touching o^ tasting, which noble distinguishing Power Man has least
of; an^ thereby the Sense of Feeling is wounded by receiving Meats and Drinks
that produce Diseases and Pains; for all the Disorde^s, Intemperances and
Errors of the other four, fall or center o^ the Sense of Feeling, whence
springs such a multitude of Diseases in the Body and Mind.

This Sense is a faithful Sentinel or Guard, that presents all Comers and Goers
to the distinguishing Powers and Judge, which gives certain and true Judgment,
if it be not corrupted and blinded by degenerate Courses and unclean Methods of
Life; otherwise it is capable to determine by its Touchstone, the Complexion of
each thing; if it be cold, as a stone, then it turns it by, as unfit for
communication, because of his weight and hardness, the Central fire being
locked up in the cold Watery Co^lation or strong Bond of the Saturnine property;
and there^ it is only good for such uses as Building, to withstand the wrath of
the Elements, and to shelter Man from their fierceness; also if any thing be
presented in which the strong fierce heat is kindled, it puts that by, and
tells its various uses for which it is good, and the contrary; the Truth of
this may be further demonstrated by several Arts, Trades and Employments: The
judgment whereof chiefly depends on this Sense of Feeling, for by handling it
is known whether work be welldone and complete. Its smoothness, closeness,
thickness, thinness, etc. are represented to the Understanding, and determined
according to what it finds, whether it be good or evil.

It is likewise farther to be noted, that this Sense of Feeling is the ground
or original to all Corporality, for though the Mind or Soul do contain all
Principles, Forms and Powers, which do all lie in the sleeping or silent Magia,
even as all forms and qualities of Nature do in the Earth; which could never be
known or become manifest, if the Husbandman by Manuring and Cultivation did not
stir up and awaken the innate Powers and Qualities, which do as it were stir up
and wrestle with each other; from whence proceeds a lively brisk motion of heat
and vigor, which is called growing or vegitation; and then the hidden or
incorporeal Forms and Qualities become visible, being manifested in corporeal
and individual Bodies; for none of the Magical Forms and Powers can be known,
before they become Clothed with suitable Bodies.

For every Spiritual Power or Quality when it is stirred up or agitated by
circular motions, and the russling or rubbing together of contrary Principles,
which do generate and open the Gates of heat and moisture, which lie hid under
such Spiritual or Magical Power and Form, and is capable to attract proper and
agreeable matter for a Clothing or Body; and according to the Governing or
Predominant quality in the Spirit or Magic fire, whether it be the bitter,
sour, salt or sweet, such a Body, Shape or Form that thing obtains, and is
accordingly Vicious or Virtuous.

For in all Corporal Beings, the Phlegm or Body is the House, wherein the hidden
or Spiritual Beings become manifest; and therefore so soon as the Spiritual
substance that is surrounded and skinned over, has obtained its highest limit,
then there is no longer a Progression or Vegitation, but all falls into
Retrogradation.

Now the Phlegm or Body does by degrees dye, and the inward power, strength,
virtue and spirit of the thing loses its House or Clothing, and so sinks into
its Original, and becomes again mingled with the hidden Powers and Spiritual
Beings of the Elements; and so much difference and variety you see in the
Shapes, Forms and Colors in the Animal, Vegitable and Mineral Kingdoms, which
is beyond all human numeration: The same variety there is in the Complexions of
the Spiritual Powers and Qualities; each Spiritual matter that has the
Government, gives the Shape and Color, and as the Operations of the hidden
Nature are in the Creating, Generating and bringing to Manifestation the deep
and wonderful Powers of the Vegitable and Mineral Kingdoms: The very same is to
be understood in the Animal Kingdom, there being no difference, but that the
last is higher graduated.

The Body of Man is the human Ground or Earth, which is as it were a Circle; in
which is contained all the Spiritual Powers, Forms and Principles of Nature: if
this were not so, Man could not, nor ought not to be styled or called the Image
or Likeness of God; so that in Man lies hid all the wonderful Mysteries and
Magic Powers of things, even as they do in the Earth.

Now the Will is the Husbandman, who can and does by the assistance of the five
great Powers and Counselors the Senses, stir up and awaken the sleeping Magic
Powers, unto a sensible Feeling, Tasting, Seeing, Smelling and Hearing of each
other: And this is Sensation or a stirring feeling Power.

For all the hidden inwardmost Principles and Powers of the Body are Magical,
Spiritual and Invisible; the Body is but the Phlegm or Clothing of the said
Powers, as the gross body of Vegitables are the Clothing or Covering of the
Spiritual Sal-N^tral Virtues and Powers, and keeps the said Virtues from
evaporation.

For no Spiritual Power can be, or ever is contented or satisfied, when once it
is awakened or stirred up out of its silent Magia or quiet Rest, till it
obtains a body, without which it cannot become manifest to its self, nor to the
rest of the Corporal or Visible Powers; for all the hidden Principles or
Qualities are not satisfied till they are invested with proportionable bodies,
that thereby they may obtain an individual Being.

Therefore from Words each Man does proceed to Actions or Works, which does
complete all the gradual proceedings and birth of Nature, by which they become
essential and substantial; so that Principle, Quality or Power that was in its
first original ground, a Naked or Magic thought, is by the working, moving
Powers, and contrary Qualities brought into a visible substance, or Corporeal
Body; so that from the Nothing or invisible Spiritual Powers, the Visible and
Corporal Bodies and Substances of all things have taken their birth; and
therefore it was well and truly said, by the ancient Seers and Wisemen, that
God made all things out of nothing.

For the original ground, or unchangeable and incomprehensible Being, is a
Nothing in comparison to Corporality, or Corporeal Bodies; and therefore no
Magic Powers or Spiritual Being can be manifest to its self, or become
individual, as before mentioned, till it Clothes it self with a proportionable
Body, and does agree with the original Spiritual Power that governed in Spirit.

For this cause all the Words, Works and Actions of Mankind, are in their
Original nothing else but a Magic or Spiritual invisible transparent Power,
which does move and work by several degrees of progressions, circular motions
and births: All these Powers by the help and management of the Judge and five
Grand Counselors, are Midwifed into the World, and become substantial; so that
all things are Created, Made, and most wonderfully Generated out of nothing;
its ground or original being a Magical or Spiritual Power, which, when
understood and distinguished, are all Wonderful and Amazing; and therefore what
Knowledge, what Understanding and Distinguishing is so Noble, so Great, so
Divine and Beneficial to Mankind as the true uses of his Senses in himself; for
so soon as this Divine Sight or Union is in any competent degree obtained, then
all the Magical and Corporal, Spiritual Powers, feel, and gently touch each
other; in which consist the highest harmony and solace of the Mind, which happy
State or Condition of the Soul, is called Regeneration, or an obtaining some
degrees of the first original State and Condition Man was Created in.

For the fall of Mankind was, and is still Magical and Incorporeal, (viz.) in
the very Center of his Life; for he did by and from the power of his Free Will,
and consent of the five Grand Counselors, penetrate into, stir up, and awaken
the sleeping, poisonous, fierce Original Qualities and dark Magical Fires,
which immediately occasioned unequal Motions and Operations, whereby each form
becomes discontented, and invades each others right, and so the union of the
still, quiet and Spiritual Powers, became of a terrible selfish nature; and
being divided in their Government, Domineer over each other, and then was Man
immediately hid from the Divine Vision, and the Holy Union hid from him.

For so soon as these fierce invading forms and qualities had obtained the
Government, and broken the Simplicity and Innocence of the blessed Union, each
form did with the highest diligence, Court and Covet all things, both inwardly
and outwardly, that was agreeable to its own nature, that it ^ight thoroughly be
increased and strengthened; and these disunited Powers of Man's Soul would not,
nor could not be satisf^ed, but had, and still have, a longing, strong desire
after Corporality, or to Cloth themselves with suitable matter or Bodies; and
these insulting Powers have gotten the Dominion in the Free Will, which is the
Primum Mobile, or chief Governor of all that Microcosm Man; then each Quality
longed and lusted strongly and vigorously after proportionable Food, that they
might thereby be strengthened and increased, and so become Corporeal; for from
this very Ground did always, and do at this day, spring those voracious, gross
and unclean Desires and Inclinations in the Mind and Souls of Mankind; for
every Desire and earnest Inclination is a swift Spiritual Property or Power,
proceeding from the awakened Magia of evil or good, according to the equality
or inequality of the Forms and Powers.

And if this invisible Thought or Imagination be brought before the Judges and
the five Counselors, and not cut off or condemned to the Dark Cell of
Oblivion, but permitted to pass into the World, (viz.) to be Coined into Words,
and from thence into Actions, which do complete the Birth; and then this
Desire, bare Thought or incoporeal Inclination, becomes substantial and
Corporeal; so that that which was a nothing, is by the Husbandman's Management
and Cultivation made substantial, and becomes a gross Corporeal Body; and if
that bare Thought, Inclination or Desire be evil in its Original Forms or
Magic Powers, and the Judge and Counselors do propagate it, that it arrives
to Actions or a complete birth; such go on in their own way, and attract all
evil and fierceness to its self, as proper suitable Matter; for every Spiritual
Power or Quality when it has Clothed its self with a suitable body, does
still more violently carry on the government and innate nature of its Original,
and is endued with all the Qualifications and Inclinations that did arise in
the first Magic Thought.

For all things, both in the evil and likewise in the good, do eternally go on
in their Law, if the Judge and Counselors do not prohibit the Birth, and
annihilate the first Thought or Intention which is in their Province to do; but
if they admit it to pass through all the degrees and properties of Nature, and
it obtains Corporality, then the Law stamps its Soul or Signature on it, and so
it proves of great difficulty to obliterate and destroy it.

This was, and is still the fall and depravation of Mankind from the Union of
God, and all united Virtues and good Powers: The Magic dark Powers of his Mind
and Soul, he suffered to be violently awakened, which as is before mentioned,
long after a proportionable Food, that they might become Corporal.

Now the command that he should not eat of the Central fruit that grows in the
dark Magic, where each form is divided in its government, having their
Operations in inequalities, and the Judge and Counselors concurring; then the
Senses agreed to the eating all gross, unclean, violent Foods, and such that
cannot be procured without Oppression.

Man's fall was first Magical, before it could be Corporal, and so is every evil
or wicked Action that is done or committed; and as the Fall and Man's passing
out of the Union of and from God, was done in the Mind, and from the Central
powers of the Wrath, and unequal Operations of the Forms and Qualities; even
so, and from the same Center must Regeneration begin its work. And first the
Eye of the Mind and all the intelligible Powers, Counselors and Judges must
have the distinguishing Powers made clear and manifest, or else no Man can
distinguish between the two grand fountains of good and evil. And if this
Glorious Sight be once obtained, then it will be easy to reconcile the divided
Forms and Magic Spiritual Powers of the Mind; for as the original Disunion
began in the Center of Life; in that place where the Tragedy was committed,
must the Redemption and Reconciliation be effected.

The Fall of Man as was before mentioned, was nothing else but breaking the
Union of his own Composition; when each form, quality, fountain and spirit
advanced it self in domineering and self-will, by which all the intelligible
Fountains, Spirits and Principles operated in Divisions and Tumultuousness; so
that the Body and Mind was, and is filled with pain and horror: And what was
the first Man's Fall and Degeneration, is still every Man's fall that lives in
and under the divided forms and disunited powers of their Minds, and where the
intelligible forms and powers have lost their innate sight and distinguishing
properties; then the Heart aches, and the whole Body and Mind becomes uneasy;
and in this state and condition the feeling Sense or Power loses all its
harmonical Union, true Pleasure and Delight, and in its stead is felt trouble
and pain.

So that this Sense is not only the Center of both Joy and Sorrow, but of all
the other Senses and natural Powers; and therefore whenever any of the other
Senses commit any evil or uncleanness, the smart thereof falls on this Sense of
Feeling.

Likewise when the Mind is by evil principles influenced or misled, on which
there do often follow great troubles or perplexitys. This Sense by Natures Law
must bear and endure all.

So on the other side, this Sense does enjoy all the pleasures of Temperance,
Cleanness, Wisdom, Innocence, Charity, Order and Union: This is the House
wherein all the good and evil influences do dwell and inhabit. This Sense first
felt the miserable Fall and Depravation of Mankind; the Eating the forbidden
Fr^it, the Dis^ion within and amongst the intelligible Powers, immediately puts
the Body and the natural Powers and Spirits into Disorder, and puts out the
Divine Eye; and then the inv^ding, wilful, fierce, wrathful Powers command all
the great Guides and Counselors the Senses, all the qualities and properties
of the Body and Mind, to obey and observe their Laws and Edicts, which were all
Created and Coined from the disunited forms and fountain Spirits, who had
obtained the chief government in the Heart and Soul; then the eye of Unity,
Temperance, Cleanness, Order and prudent Conduct was blinded, or as it were
quite put out.

So that all the intellectual, and also the outward Senses lose their Native
Right, (viz.) their distinguishing faculty; so that most or all things are
either done by Chance or ignorantly.

This was the original Fall, and is the present state of Mankind at this day,
which most, or all Men feel by woeful experience; and this lost state of Union,
and being divided from God, cannot be again felt, seen heard, smelt and tasted,
but only by undoing all that our forefather Adam and we his Children did and
daily do commit, (viz.) by the turning the eye of Mankinds Will and powerful
Desires, into Temperance, Cleanness, Order, Humility, Charity, Justice,
cleanness in Meats and Drinks, Inclinations, Dispositions, Words and Works; by
which Holy Virtues Man may be again reinvested, and render himself capable of
knowing and distinguishing all the operations of the great and wonderful
commanding powers of his own composition, which is called and truly styled the
knowledge of a Man's self; and then and no ^before, this great Power and Sense
of Feeling will again obtain its primitive state of Purity, true Pleasure and
Unity; (...) likewise all the other four, which will then be again installed in
their proper stations, and rule, command and direct-accordingly!

The Innocence and true Harmony of Mankind, did Originally, and does chiefly
consist in the unity of this Sense called Feeling, both Corporeal and
Incorporeal.

The first false step that Adam made, or any of his Posterity, has and does at
this day make, the evil Influences are felt by the disharmony this Sense falls
into; and on the other side, this is the Sense that all the sweet Influences
and harmonical Operations of all the other Senses and great Powers, both of the
Body and Mind, can center, and there are no Passions committed, either in Love,
Hope, Fear, or Hate, but the Effects and Fruits thereof center and fall into
this great Magazine and Storehouse.

The Sense of Feeling, and the chief business and work of all the other
fourSenses, is to raise up, ripen and collect all its works and productions,
and fix them on this Sense, that they may thereby obtain the Lost unity; for in
the divided operations of the Sensual Powers there can be no Pleasure, for in
this state one Form, Sense, Property or Power does use the highest industry
imaginable, to strengthen it self, and to invade all the Provinces of its
neighboring Princes, which do perplex and break the Union of the whole.

And therefore many great Evils and Mischiefs fall on Mankind for want of true
Wisdom and distinguishing Understanding; for if Man has lost the Knowledge and
Divine Sight of himself, then he cannot penetrate nor distinguish between the
two roots, from whence Pleasure, Pain and Trouble take their original birth; so
that each Sense, Form and Power, both of the Mind and outward Senses, do all
things in a blind self-ful method, and use all ways and means to obtain the
unity in the use and practice of extremes, and each particular Property does
imagine to be self-subsisting and complete, without being concerned with its
Brethren, or at least consulting them by way of Advice.

For if the great inward and outward Counselors or Senses be blinded or
corupted, then all the Incorporeal Powers of the Soul and Mind are likewise
misled into all Errors and gross Stupidity: So then if any of the Senses
represent any Object or material thing to these purblind intellectual Powers,
and blind Principles of the Soul and Mind, which do draw or attract the use of
them so Powerfully, that the disunion of the Microcosm Man, is more and more
increased, and by this means, that which was intended by God's Law as a
Blessing, (and if used as it ought, would have been so) has produced an Evil or
Curse, as Instance, that noble and wonderful Sense the Sight, beholds a curious
Beautiful Creature or Object, whose place and office is to represent the same,
to all the invisible intellectual Powers, Principles and Qualities, which by
this glance or Ray of Light; the Mind, Will and desires, are so kindled, and as
it were wounded with this Object, that all the still sleeping Magic Powers,
are in a moment stirred up and awakened so that the disunion and disquietness
of the Mind is increased, notwithstanding the Fruition of the desire be
obtained.

The like is to be understood in all the Operations of the other Senses, when
they bring or present their Fruits to the unthinking blind Intellect or Mind,
which comes to pass by this means, (viz.) all the inward and outward Guides,
and Powers of Life and Understanding, as is mentioned before, having left their
Primitive Light and Unity, each Property does with the highest industry
imaginable, strive to obtain a particular fierce exalting power, aiming at
nothing else all this while, butt hereby to obtain its lost Pleasure and Union
which it misseth, and instead thereof falls into a greater disunion and
disturbance, never considering this great truth, that Concord cannot be
accomplished but only by the Agreement of all the Principles and Qualities, the
thing or Creature is compounded of.

It is likewise observable, that every small Passion or pleasu^ that does in
any degree exceed the limits and bounds of Temp^ rance, Order and Innocence, do
produce and multiply a gre^ deal of pain, disorder, trouble and perplexity; so
that whatsoever does endeavor to increase any of the Pleasures of the Senses,
by indulging and advancing any one of them, does at the same time augment and
multiply displeasure, perplexity, pai^ and disorder, even to an hundred
degrees, and according to the Proverb, for a momentary Pleasure, the poor Sense
of Feeling is compelled to endure many of years pain here, and eternally
hereafter.

So that the four outward Senses, and their passions and intemperances do not
only add perplexity to the Body and Feeling Power, but the five inward Senses
of the Soul and Intellect do still suffer greater misfortunes, (viz.) perpetual
Discord and Anxiety, and therefore there is no method nor way to obtain the
true and natural Pleasure of this noble, great and universal Sense and Power of
Feeling, but only by Temperance, Order and cleanness of the other four Senses,
which method of Life, will by degrees open an Intellectual Eye of
distinguishing the Compounded Powers of a Man's self, and the two grand
Fountains, of Eternity, Love and Light, Anger and Fierceness, how to avoid the
one and Embrace the other. For Cleanness, Humility, Self-denial and Temperance,
do wonderfully advance and strengthen the Unity and Eye of Understanding: and
there is nothing does so much disperse and dissipate the thick Clouds of
Darkness and depraved Understanding, as Cleanness, Innocence, and the avoiding
all oppositions and violences, which was, are and ever will be, the forbidden
Fruit, the eating thereof became the Substance both of the Corporeal and
Incorporeal Powers of Man, which did immediately open the Gates of their own
Principles, and by degrees did Captivate all the innocent harmonical Powers and
Properties; and then the fierce, wrathful, invading and unclean Spirits and
Principles obtained the Government: This was, and is, called man's Fall or
degeneration from Unity; then, and not before, was this Sense perplexed with
pain, then Man was hid or Captivated in those fierce, dark, invading, turbulent
Principles and Powers; and the Divine Principle or Eye of Wisdom or
Distinguishing was hid from Man, and he was, a^ it were, stripped of all his
Ornaments, being left Naked, he was forthwith invaded by all the disorders and
evils both of the Body and Mind.

This was the depravation of Mankind, and the Original of the opposition and
contrary Will in Man, which deplorable state, and miserable condition, cannot
be cured but only by (...) Medicine Compounded of Innocence, Charity, Humility,
Temperance, Cleanness and Order in Meats and Drinks, Communications and
Employments, which are only capable to reinvest all the great and wonderful
Senses and Counselors, unto their Ancient or Primitive State of Pleasure and
Unity, where each Sense and intellectual Spiritual Power, does See, Hear,
Smell, Taste and Feel, both in a Corporeal and incorporeal Consort of Love: in
Innocence, and harmless operation, each Principle and Power brings all its
Works, Fruits and productions, into the Magazine or great Power of the Sense of
Feeling, in which all the united Powers of the Michrocosmical World rejoice,
that they feel themselves Centered in the Blessed Fountain of God's Eternal
Love and Light. Which is according to God's Eternal Law, every Principle and
Quality does its own business, and Eternally goes on in its own Method, both in
the Evil, and in the Good. For Time and Eternity are one, notwithstanding the
most Learned (as they call them,) are of another opinion: And therefore those
that in the time the Soul dwells in the Body, do enter with their Wills and
Desires into this or the other thing or Principle, must dwell in the same
Quality to Eternity, if it do not uncloath it self of all Stupidity,
Uncleanness, Violence and Wrath; for it is these evil Qualities, that do
Torment this great and wonderful Power of Feeling, both in Time and Eternity;
the trouble and anxiety of the Soul, being both the same in the Body as in the
Invisible World, whatever some may judge to the contrary, and it does suffer
both Corporeally and Incorporeally.

And therefore all that would enjoy the true Pleasures both of Time and
Eternity, and know the Riches, true Delight and Union of this universal Sense
the Feeling, must Redeem their Time, and Cloth themselves with their Original
Cleanness and Inocency, and live in the simplicity of their Ancient Law, not
contenting themselves with a groundless hope, as most men do, some more, some
less, for no Man hopes for what he enjoys or Lives in, but for those things he
is Ignorant of, and is far from seeing or knowing whether the thing hoped for
will ever come to pass.

Therefore he who hopes, always fears, for hope and fear are brethren, dwelling
in the House of Darkness and Death: And though this be a hard Chapter for some
to Read, nevertheless it is Matter of Fact; for had not Man broken the Law of
his Maker, then had he not lost his way, and by Consequence had had no Cause or
Reason, to hope to find it, nor to fear he should not, for the true State of
Man's Intellect and Mind, is to Understand, Distinguish and Enjoy.

And there is nothing more true than where Hope, Fear, Joy and Grief Dwells,
all the Intellectual Powers of the Mind are Ignorant, Dark and Blind, they
being turbulent Passions of the Mind, that come in with Man's Transgressions.

Hope is a Deluding, Enticing, Airy, Thin Quality, and if a Man catches or
lays hold on it, he cannot hold it, but it leapeth forth, no Bounds nor
Limits can Master it: If a Man's hopes chance to come to pass, it is so
Volatile that it inclines the Mind to some other thing, which the desire of
obtaining does mightily stir up all the Silent or Magic Powers of the
Intellect, thereby causing great disquietness of the Soul, and hard Pain and
Labor, even to the hazard both of Health and sometimes of Life; and if it be
obtained, the Diseases of the Body or Mind are no nearer the Cure or
Satisfaction.

No, this is a slippery Spark, much like the Philosophers Mercury, which is
almost impossible to Fix, which has deluded many thousands, who have been
deceived in their Imaginations, and fallen into many Calamities, without any
Satisfaction.

How many have been deceived by being well Stocked, and Freighted with this
Airy Notion Hope, which is endued with such a Magic Spell or Power, that few
or none escape its Charms, but it leads Mankind with great inclination out of
one thing into another, which tire the Body and perplex the Mind, always
running before, standing at a distance, but never out of sight, enticeing
Mankind with her Airy Baubles and Novelties that Man does not need, never
arriving to a quiet and fixed Harbor.

And when a Man has for many Years, or perhaps all his Life, thus been
perplexed and disquieted, he is no nearer a Fixation or Satisfaction than at
first, but many times farther off, and must pass into the Eternal Regions
altogether unknown.

And therefore there is no greater Character or Mark of Man's Depravation or
Fall, than this night of Hope and various Desires after that, which when
Attained, we are as far or farther from Union and Content than before.
Therefore he that would enjoy the Illuminating Truth, with a clear Sight, and
distinguishing Understanding, must neither possess himself with Hope nor Fear,
Joy nor Sorrow, for they are all Passions, and the chief Discoverers of
Ignorance, Blindness and Disunity, but must quietly submit to God's Divine
Hand, that is never wanting to all such that Live within the Bounds and Limits
of his Eternal and Unalterable Law.

All such will feel and enjoy the Pleasant Fruit of Paradise, both in Time and
Eternity, but when the Eye of the Mind and Intellectual Powers are Dark and
Ignorant, and when the opposite Powers, to all Cleanness, Virtue and
Temperance, are awakened, then all the Desires and Hopes do Proceed and are
Generated, from those Ruling, Fierce, Invading, Violent, Unclean Spirits and
Powers, which stir up and forces the Husband to leave his Loving Wife and
Tender Children, exposing-them to all kind of Ruin and Misery; the Son to leave
his Father and Loving Mother, and open his Breast to Guns and Swords, and to
all manner of Cruelty and Hardship; others to Rob, Plunder and Steal; some to
undertake long, hard and hazardous Voyages, and a thousand difficult
Enterprises; which no Man would ever do, if he did not hope to escape the
danger and come off well: Who would be a Soldier, if he were sure to be killed?
and had no Hopes? or what Person would break open a House, if he did not hope
to do it and not to be taken? none of these wickednesses and violences would be
done, if that Gentleman called Hope, did not flatter them, and entice them to
it. So that it is most manifest, that Men do hope against Reason, Wisdom,
Understanding, and all known Virtues, who are all sure to Feel the Smart sooner
or later.

LETTER VI. Of FIRES.
SIR,
I Have received yours, wherein you desire to be informed the best Method of
making Grates and Coal-Fires, in Kitchens and Chambers, the which I shall
endeavor to Answer.

1. TAKE two Fire-stones, about 14 or 16 Inches high from the Hearth, which you
may fix to a Back of Bricks, in Depth about 7, 8, 9 or 10 Inches; the wideness
in the Front 12 or 14 Inches, in proportion to the Depth, that is to say, if
the Depth be 7 Inches, then the Front 14 Inches wide, between which Stones you
are to place a Grate made much in the nature of a Gridiron, (viz.) It must
stand moveable upon 4 Legs, not exceeding 3, 4 or 5 Inches at most from the
Hearth, the last of which will serve for the greatest Kitchin-Fires, and the
first for Chambers, with 2, 3 or 4 small Bars, made round, about the bigness of
your little Finger, and about 3 or 4 Inches distant from each other, the
uppermost Bar to be the strongest, all fastened in 2 sides of Iron, ascending
from the 2 front Legs, as high as the top of the Fire-stones, which will be all
flat, on the top, in the front; the bottom Bars to lie flat and not edgeways, a
little distance from each other.

Note, that the Stones at the sides and the back behind, must be both made
upright, without any shelving, (as the usual Custom is) and between the Grate,
and the 2 Stones at the sides, and the back of Bricks behind, you must leave
the same distance, as you make between the Bars at the Bottom of your Grate, so
your Grate will go in and come out easily, which will powerfully draw the Air
on all sides, and behind, and make the Fire Burn strong and clear, so that you
will have no occasion to use any Bellows to blow it; the reason whereof is, it
being as deep, or of the same compass at the bottom as on the top, and the
Grate not standing close, either to the sides or to the back, the Air freely
circulates on all sides, so that your Fire burns many degrees stronger than the
Customary sloping Grates, which are high from the bottom of the Hearth, and
sloping, which prevents Attraction and Circulation of the Air, whereas the low
standing of this Grate, together with the depth and upright standing of the
sides and back, (as is mentioned before) makes it burn so clear and strong,
that it will Heat Iron fit for Forging, and Boil and Prepare any sort of Food,
not only in less than half the time, but much sweeter and cleaner.

The best way of kindling this Fire, is with a few small Sticks, Shavings or
Splinters, upon which put your Cinders, and a few fresh Coals, then you may
light it with a Candle, and it will burn without blowing with Bellows, for
blowing weakens and destroys the Sulphur or Sal niter in the Coals; for this
cause Fires that are blown, will not Cake or Coagulate, and consequently will
not burn near so strong as those that are not blown.

Besides, this Fire will burn quicker, or in a shorter time, and sooner fit for
use, and not so apt to smoke the House, nor the Foods that are prepared by it.
If you have not Fire-stones for the sides, Bricks will perform the same, and
are more lasting. The Charge of the Grate, Stones or Bricks, are much less the
the common Grates and their Appurtenances; the whole of the smaller sort will
not cost above 12 or 14 s. the larger not exceeding 20 or 26 s.

Moreover, the low standing of this Grate does prevent the Chimney drawing up
the heat, whereby the Room is ma^e much warmer, and the Hearth made so hot,
that you may Bake small things thereon, provided that you place Backs to
reflect the heat, as is used in Roasting of Meat; and warms the Legs of those
that sit by them, which other Fires seldom do: These Fires will Boil any thing
in your Pots, without having Hang^ to them, placing only 2 small moving Bars of
Iron, which w^ reach from one side to the other of the Brick-work, (which m^
all be flat and even on the top) for your Pot or Vessel to st^ upon.

LETTER VII. Of Bricks, and various sorts of Earth.
SIR,
YOurs I have received, and shall endeavor to answer your Request, (viz.) The
best and most natural way of making Bricks, Tiles, Mortar, Plaster and
Flooering. Of Bricks.

1. DIG up your Earth between Michaelmas and Christmas, that it may have
sufficient time to mellow, ferment or digest, which will render it more apt and
fit to Temper, and about March or April it will be fit to Tread or Temper,
which ought to be done more than doubly what is usual, for the goodness of the
Bricks wholly depend upon the well performance of its first Preparation, for
the Earth in its self, before it is wrought, is generally brittle and dusty,
and as it were without Band or Stability, but by adding small quantities of
Water by degrees to it, and working and incorporating of it together, does open
the body, by which the Astringent Sal nitral Power of nature does appear and
tinge the whole, with a tough Glewy, strong Band or Substance, which without
these reiterated Strokes, Beatings or Temperings, could not have been
manifested; for this Saturnine, Tough, Constringent, Band or Oily Substance is
hid and captivated in the innermost Center, even as the sweetness in Barley, is
not nor cannot be manifest to our Senses, till it has past through the several
Fermentations and Operations of being made into Malt, which manifests the
hidden sweet Quality, which was so central and captivated by the Martial and
Saturnine Forms, that without this Operation would still have lain hid or
disappeared.

The like is to be understood in the Temperament of most sorts of Earth: This
is farther manifest in the Housewifes Art of making good Bread, when there is a
due quantity of Water put to the Meal, and well wrought up together, such Bread
becomes not only smooth and firm, without having either eyes, or being subject
to crumbling, but it Eats sweeter and mellower, and becomes easier of
Concoction, affording far better Nourishment than such as is over watered, and
not sufficiently Tempered, provided the other Operations, which belong to the
making of good Bread, be performed, (viz.) Baking, etc. as we have formerly
written in several of our Writings.

It is farther to be noted, that the common Method of over watering, both in
the Tempering of Bricks, Mortar, Flooring, etc. proves baneful, and destroys
the end for which they are designed, for the Laborers generally Temper their
Mortar with great quantities of Water, to make it easy in Working, and greater
dispatch in fitting it presently for use; but this Method does not open the
body, so that the Astringent Sal nitral Powers of Nature lie hid as before, in
which consists the tough, glewy, binding Quality, therefore such Mortar
becoming dry, is almost as brittle ^s the Earth of which it was made, and is
the ruin of many noble Structures; for the Laborers, instead of putting on
much Water at once, ought to lay it on by degrees, and mix and incorporate the
Lime, Sand and Water well together, by continual Strokes or Workings, which
will open their bodies and manifest the hidden sal nitral Virtues and glewy
Qualities, that make it tough, smooth and binding; for much Working makes and
melts it into a soft, smooth Consistency fit for Use, with half the Water, and
raises a dewy Moisture out of its own body, which knits and binds, and when dry
becomes as hard and as durable as the best of Stones.

Bricks thus Tempered become solid, smooth, hard and durable, and one Brick
thus made, takes up near as much as a Brick and a half made the common way,
which are light, full of cracks and spungy, occasioned by the want of due
Working and Management; and the mixing of Ashes and light sandy Earth, to make
them work easy, and with greater dispatch, as also to save Culm or Coals in the
Burning of them.

The excellency of Bricks consist chiefly in the first and last Operation; for
Bricks made of good Earth and well Tempered, become solid and ponderous, and
therefore will take up a longer time in Drying and Burning than our common
Bricks need, Note, that the well Drying of Bricks before they are Burned,
prevents cracking and crumbling in their Burning, for when the Bricks are too
wet, they are then extremes, which does never well together: The best way of
ordering your Fire, is to make it gentle at first, and increase it by degrees
as your Bricks grow harder.

It is also to be noted, that in what Earth or thing soever the sal nitral,
oily Virtues are weak, hid or unmanifested, that thing is not only dusty and
brittle, but consequently subject to decay, as is most clear and manifest in
Stones, which though they are hard, yet are very brittle and more subject to
decay, than the Lime made thereof, for the fierceness of the Fire or Martial
Violence, does loosen and open the strong cold Contraction of the Saturnine
Quality, (which Contraction in the original, arises from the Element of Water)
which has as it were set the Sal nitral Virtues at liberty, which were before
captivated under the cold Coagulation of the original Forms, so that adding a
small quantity of Water to those Burned Stones, or unslacked Lime, will melt
them down into a dusty or mealy Substance; which being put into a quantity of
Water, will as readily impart or give forth its Virtues into the said Water, as
ground Malt will yield and give its sweet Virtues to the warm Liquor in the
Mash Tub, and leaves the Grains without Strength or Virtue: The like is to be
understood in slack'd Lime, put into a quantity of Water, which will draw forth
and imbibe the Sal nitral and Oily Virtues of the Lime, which will have no more
Strength or Virtue than the aforesaid Grains; for if you take this Lime thus
Infused, and join it with Sand or other Earth, (although you Temper it to a high
degree) yet it will never make a binding or lasting Mortar, whence it appears,
that where the Central Powers or Sal nitral Virtues are hid or captivated, or
where they are drawn forth by any Art, or destroyed by Accident, they are of
little or no Use for that thing for which they are designed. If this were not
so, why should not Stones beaten into Powder make Mortar? or Barley when
broken, (and not Malted) yield forth its Virtues into the Water? Note, that
Water draws forth the sweet Virtues of the Barley Malted, which makes various
Exhilerating Liquors.

The like is to be understood of Water, which has imbibed the Sal nitral
Virtues and Astringent Qualities of slack'd Lime, which renders it fit for many
Uses, both in Food and Physic, (viz.) It is the only Ingredient that
Sugar-Bakers use in the Making and Refining of Sugar, for no Sugar can be made
without it, or its Equivalent, (viz.) Potashes, which are too Dear with us in
England; for without this Limewater no Sugar could be Boiled up to a Body or
Grain, but would still remain a Syrup. Sugar in its own Nature is an Extreme,
(viz.) A complete Sweet, in which the other Qualities are wanting; and for that
cause cannot be raised to a Consistency, and fit for Use without this or a like
addition, for the Sal nitral Virtues in Lime have their Original from the
strong Astringent Band and might of the Fire, which is wanting in the Juice of
the Sugar Canes, which being joined to it, gives Life and Vigor to this heavy,
flat, sweet Body, and raises it to a hard sparkling Grain, shining like
Christial, and renders it much more useful for Eating, and all other
Operations, than otherwise.

Limewater is also good, taken inwardly, against all inward Bleedings or
Ulcerations, as also outwardly to wash all Itchy and Leprous Sores and Humors,
a Poultice made thus, (viz.) Take a quart of Limewater, and make it boiling
hot, infuse therein some Rosemary for a quarter of an hour, keeping it hot, but
not boiling, then add as much Bread to the Water and Rose^ary as will make it
thick, with two Ounces of Refined Sugar, stir it and incorporate it well
together, spread it on a Cloth, and apply it every two or three hours, and in a
short time it will allay and take away any Swellings or Pains in the Head,
Neck, or other parts of the Body.

It is likewise to be noted, that the more powerful the Original Forms in any
Body are, the stronger is the Coagulation, and that Body or Thing produces a
more powerful Salniter; for this cause Chalk will not make so good Lime as hard
Stones or Flints, for a weak thing cannot produce a strong, which appears fatal
to many fine Structures in London, Built with Lime made of Chalk, for the
Original Forms, (viz.) The Astringency which is from Saturn, that gives a
Shell, Skin or Covering to all Bodies, both in the Animal, Vegitable and
Mineral Kingdoms, and is as it were the House where the other Forms dwell, and
is the Original of all Coagulating, Attracting or Indrawing Powers, which
preserves and keeps the Volatile Salnitral Spirits from Evaporation: If it were
not so no Creature or Thing could obtain its highest Limit or Perfection, and
therefore whenever this hard, tart or severe Astringency is broken or
wounded, the Salnitral Oils or Sweet Virtues suffer Violence, and sink into
Death without an application of a powerful Medicine or agreeable Remedy.

Now, Chalk does manifest by its color and its soft mealy weakness that the
forms and principles of Saturn and Martial Fires, a^e weak and impotent, and
that Venus and Mercury have the Dominion or Government thereof; who always
produce more Nice and Weak Sal Nitral Virtues: The powers of Venus are further
manifested by its white color, which in its own nature is innocent and
yielding, and as it were wanting of toughness and fire, which the Saturnine and
Martial quality always endues their Children with; and according as the degrees
of those original Forms are placed, and qualified in each thing or Body, so
that thing or Body is harder, softer, bigger, lesser, stronger or weaker, and
their Virtues and Use are accordingly; for this cause all Herbs that are harsh,
astringent, hot or bitter, afford not only greater Quantities of Sal Niter, but
more powerful, sharp and penetrating, as Wormwood and others that are under the
Regiment of Saturn and Mars.

The like is to be understood of all sorts of Earth and Stones; for where the
Original or Saturnine quality is strong in the Sal Niter, such Stones are
contracted and drawn into the most complete consistency, or hardness when in
Earth; then such Earth is of a glewey sticking nature, as Clay and all Earth
that has Affinity therewith; the Sal Nitral Virtues thereof, in such Earth,
lies so hid in the tough Saturnine Body that it will not bring forth Vegitation
without being Manured by Earth that has passed through a Ferment, or some
Digestion, wherein the Martial Salt and Venereal propertys are strong; from
whence such Bodies have their brittle, mealy or yiedling quality, as Lime,
Chalk, Ashes and Dung; for in this sort of Earth, the Martial Fires, from
whence bitterness has its Original, are as it were wholly captivated in the
Astringent Chamber of Saturn.

It is also to be noted, that this Earth wants the assisting Qualities of Sol,
Jupiter and Venus; for in what thing soever any one Original Form is powerful,
the Unity thereof is thereby destroyed, and that thing may be good for
particular Uses, but for general it cannot: As for Example, If the Saturnine
Power have the chief Government in any Thing or Creature, that Thing or
Creature becomes Hard, Cold, Constringent, Melancholy and Pensive, as is
farther manifested in all Earths wherein Mars has the chief Government and
Dominion; such Earths are endued with great Heat, are Short, Gravelly and
Sandy, full of small Stones, so that in all hot dry Seasons, the Vegitations
proceeding therefrom, are subject to Scorching and Withering.

It is likewise to be noted, that this Martial or bitter Quality is strong in
Trees, and such Trees are Hard, full of Knots, and not tall in Stature; but
when the Taciturn or Astringent Form of Saturn is joined in any Tree or other
thing, with the Martial or bitter Quality, then such Trees or Bodies are tall,
smooth, hard and very d^rable, as Oaks and the like, in which those Forms are
powerful: But if Sol or Venus, or the sweet Quality have the chief Government
in any Earth or other thing, such Earth is mellow, easy to be wrought and
worked up, especially if the Form of Jupiter be joined in Government, then it
is more deep, mellow, fit for Herbage, Tillage, and the best of Corn, its
color is yellowish, and very good for Wheat, and not so apt to be Blasted by
unseasonable Weather, as other Herbage and Grain are, where extreme Qualities
Govern; for the nearer the Union, the four grand Qualities stand in any Thing
or Ceature, the more useful and beneficial that thing becomes, and its Shape
and Form is the more beautiful, for every Original principal Quality and Form
is endued with peculiar Sal nitral Virtues, which is the Original ground, from
whence arises the great variety of Complexions, Forms and Figures, Usefulness,
and the contrary, though this be a Digression, I don't doubt but it will be
useful to the Understanding Reader. Note, The same Method that has been
described about making of Bricks, will do for Tyles.

Note, A Wall or House may be made with unburned Bricks, first let your Earth
be high and well Tempered, smooth and well Molded, as is mentioned before;
this must be done in the hottest Season, then dried and turned after the man^er
of Brickm^king, only it must be longer exposed to the Sun and Elements, till
they become hard and tough, with these Bricks you may make firm substantial
Walls for a House, after this manner; Take Loam or a Brick Earth, and mix
therewith some good Lime, Temper them very high, till they become tough, smooth
and glewey; let the Wall of your House be two Bricks, or two Bricks and a half
thick, your unburn'd Bricks being laid in this well Tempered Mortar, they will
cement and become one hard solid body, as if the whole were but one Brick or
Stone; when you have raised your Wall 4 or 5 Foot high from the Foundation,
then let it dry 2 or 3 days before you proceed farther, then Build thereon 4 or
5 Foot more, making the like pause as before, and so proceed till your Wall is
finished, then Temper some of the same Earth the Wall was made of, with a
little more Lime than you used for the Wall, which you must be sure to Temper
very well, and with this Mortar, Plaster all your Wall well on the outside,
which will keep off the Weather, for nothing injures this Wall but wet and
moisture, which this Coat will defend, and if you would have it more beautiful,
it is only putting more Lime to it, and less Loam, and when this is dry, you
may Color and Paint it with Red, Blue, or any other Color that pleases you
best.

Floors, the best of them are made thus; Take two thirds of Lime, and one third
of Coal-Ashes well sifted, with a small quantity of Loamy Clay, mix the whole
quantity that you intend to use, together, and temper it well with Mortar, and
make it up into a heap, and let it lie a week or ten days, in which time it
will mellow and digest, then temper it well over again, and be sure your
quantity of Water do not exceed, but rather that it may obtain a Mellow
softness and Toughness from Labor, then heap it up again 3 or 4 days, and
repeat your tempering very high, till it becomes smooth and yielding, tough and
glewy, then your Ground being levelled, lay your Floor therewith, about two and
a half or three Inches thick, making it smooth with a Trowel, the hotter the
Season is the better, and when it is thoroughly dried, it will continue time out
of mind: This makes the best Floors for Houses, but especially for Malt-Houses;
but for those cannot get these Materials, or go to the Charge of them, may take
of Clayey Loam two thirds, and new soft Horse Dung one third, with some small
quantity of Coal-Ashes, if they may be had, and temper these after the same
Method before mentioned, and lay a Floor therewith 3 or 4 Inches thick, smooth
and even; this will cement and become hard, strong and durable, being done in a
hot and dry Season, good for Cottages, Barns and other small Houses; but any
that would have more beautiful Floors than these, may first lay their Floors
even, smooth and fine, either with the first or last mentioned Flooring, then
take Lime made of hard rag Stones, and temper it with a little Water and Whites
of Eggs, the more Eggs the better, let these be tempered and beaten
extraordinary well, to a very high Pitch, with this cover your Floor, about a
quarter or half an Inch thick, before your underflooring be too dry, that they
may well Incorporate together, which Workmen do well understand; this being
well done and thoroughly dry, if sometimes rubbed over with Mops or Cloths, with
a little Oil on it, it will look very Beautiful and Transparent, as if it were
Polished Metal or Glass, provided the Eggs and Lime are thoroughly tempered, and
otherwise well performed.

LETTER VIII. Of Religion, and the Knowledge of Man's self.
SIR,
NOthing in the World could have been more acceptable than your Letter, Fraught
with an earnest desire of being acquainted with such Truths, as will ascertain
a Man's Happiness in this Life, and his Salvation in that which is to come. It
is indeed a Noble Piece of Curiosity, to Enquire into the Nature of True
Religion, and as much our Interest as it is our Duty: The Wise Man Comprehends
the whole of Religion, in these few Words, (viz.) Fear God, and keep his
Commandments. But this Definition or Description being too General, I shall
endeavor according to the Talent that is given me, to Illustrate it in several
Particulars, that it may be the better and more easily understood.

THe Apostle St. James tells us in plain terms, that Pure and Undefiled
Religion consists in Visiting and Relieving the Widow and Fatherless, etc. that
is, the greatest and surest Evidences of the Truth and Sincerity of our
Religion, are Works of Mercy.

This all Men consent to in Words, though not in Practice, the first Step is the
Fear of God, the second the Knowledge of our selves, the third Temperance in
Meats and Drinks, the fourth Cleanness in all our Foods and Methods of
Conversation.

The Knowledge of God, our selves, and his Law, do open the Eyes of our
Understanding, and teach us to distinguish between Good and Evil: I mean those
Secret and Internal Powers of both that are in our selves, and other things, by
which means Man comes to obtain a good Genius or Director through the whole
course of his Life: this is the Sum and Total of Religion, which like a great
and flourishing Tree, shoots its self forth into many fair and spreading
Branches.

Your Food must be clean, and as near as you can, procured without Oppression
and Violence; your Drink must be Water, and a due quantity is to be observed in
both, (viz.) so much only as is requisite to the satisfaction of the Exigencies
of Nature. We must be Merciful to all Creatures of an Inferior Order, and
Especially to have a Sympathising Compassion for those of our own Kind. We are
to use the greatest Care imaginable in the Education of our Children, who must
in a little time after us, come to Govern the World: To be very diligent that
they do not spend their precious Time in Vanity, (as the Custom of too many is)
but continually Exercise them in some useful Arts and Sciences, that in time
may become serviceable to themselves and others; to instruct them to
distinguish the Forms they are Compounded of, and how every Creature is endued
by Gods Eternal Law, with an Influential Virtue, to Work on its Simily; so that
whatsoever a Child, or any other Creature Eats, Drinks or, does, it has a
particular Key or Power in it self, to open its own Gate, and there Incorporate
with and strengthen its Simily.

This sort of Learning ought to be Insinuated, even in their Cradles, which
would make it grow strong and Vigorous, as we daily see, if Men Practice
Virtue, they will grow strong in well doing, and so on the contrary, for there
is a wonderful and almost Insuperable Power in Habit and Custom.

Now if you would bring up your Children in Virtuous Exercises, their Meats and
Drinks must be Innocent and simple; by which the Principle of Wisdom and Unity
is begotten. Our Meats and Drinks, are the Aliment and Substance of our Lives,
and as it were the Basis and Grounds of our Spirits and Bodies in this visible
World: For Man is by all Wise Men and Philosophers, esteemed the Complete
Epitome or Image of God, and contains the true Properties and Qualitys of all
things, both in the visible and invisible World, Man being like all things, and
all things like him, so that each thing has a particular and natural
Inclination to Work on him, and beget it is own Complexion, is manifest beyond
Contradiction.

If so, then whatever a Man applys and gives himself to, whether Virtue or
Vice, that obtains the Ascendant in him: If he be adicted to Temperance,
Sobriety and Order, then the good Genius obtains the Government, and attracts
the Virtues of all things from without, and the Holy Powers from within, by
which method a Man Arrives to the true Unity in himself; the contrary is to be
understood, if any one give themselves over to Evil, and Intemperate Courses of
Life, for it is only the Practice of Good, that Moves the Holy Principles of
Gods Eternal Love in Jesus Christ.

But Words and Notions, without a Suitable Conformity in Actions, though never so
strong in the beginning, do by degrees grow weak, and at last become of no
Effect at all.

For this Reason many Sober Men that have Preached and Declared many Excellent
Doctrines or Notions, in the first Dawning of the Day of Gods manifestation of
his Love to their Souls, have afterward by degrees grown very weak and
Impotent; now this dwindling and debility, has only proceeded from their not
making a Law of Practice agreeable to their Doctrine, and Educating their
Children, etc. in the Powers and Virtues of this Law, which is really the Law
of God, and under that consideration, it should have been propounded unto them,
by which means all the Forms and Powers of the Microcosm would have been
Established in Innocence and Goodness, beyond the possibility of ever being
eradicated or weakened.

Sir, Be pleased to take this for a present Answer, I have much more to say,
but the time obliges me to Conclude.

Your Friend to serve You.

LETTER IX. Of DROPSIES.
SIR,
I Received yours, and am extremely concerned to hear of your present ill state
of Health, nor am I less sensible how hard a Task it is for you to support your
self and Family in so languishing a condition, for I am very well satisfied
that your Expenses do much exceed your Income. You tell me you are invaded by a
Dropsy, afflicted with Obstructions in your Breast and Stomach, and that the
Physicians have given you over as Incurable; after having made your Purse as
great a sufferer as your Body. This indeed is a very depsorable Case, yet not
wholly to be despaired of, for if you will be obliged to follow my directions,
I doubt not but to restore you to your health; and teach you to maintain your
Family, with less charge and more comfort than you have ever yet been able to
do: You must therefore, if ever you design to be Well, wholly change your
Course, and observe some other and better Methods of Life.

LET all your Drink be Water, with some toasted Bread infused, the more Bread
the better; and your Food be as i^ here prescribed. Make your Bread of fine
Wheat and well Baked; Pap of Wheat Flower and Water, seasoned with Salt, and
eaten with a few Crumbs of Bread; Water Gruel made and ordered according to our
directions in the Monthly Observations for Health. Or thus, Take half a Pint of
whole Oatmeal, Boil it in three quarts of Water for half an hour, this is the
sweetest and best of all other, for such as live without Flesh; be sure to
season all your spoon Meats with Salt, make small Dumplins little bigger than
Crown Pieces, they will be soon Boiled, and make the best Bread, and give the
greatest satisfaction to the Stomach; on this you must be contented to live one
Year, and not eat any thing besides what is above mentioned, neither Flesh,
Fish, Butter, Eggs, Cheese, Milk, etc.

Moreover, if you ever intend to regain your Health, you must Frequent the
Fields, and use Exercises and Walking by the sides of Rivers, and in open Airy
Places; let your House and Bed be kept Airy, sweet and clean; and if you have
the Courage to observe this Method for one year, I am Confident you will find
abundance of Satisfaction, and not be easily persuaded to leave it off.

Then for Retrenching your Expenses in House keeping, you must endeavor to
bring your Wife and Children to follow the same Method of Living, this will
preserve and increase their Health, and beget an unexpected Strength and
Agility, both in Mind and Body, to a much higher degree than the Customary
Meats and Drinks can ever pretend to.

In the Morning about eight of the Clock, your Wife and Family for their
Breakfast, may eat each of them a Pint or more of thick Flower Pap, or thick
Gruel, and a small piece of Bread; and at Twelve, a Pint of Pap or Gruel, with
a Dumpling or two, as before prescribed; and then at six in the Evening, each
to have a Pint of our thick Gruel: By this way you may maintain your self and
Family in Food, for three Shillings, or three and Sixpence per Week, and eat
not only plentifully, but with the highest satisfaction to the Stomach and
Palate; and if you have a Mind to indulge them with Butter, one Pound a Week
will do it sufficiently, putting a small piece as big as a Nut into into each
Persons Dish.

Remember to keep your Children always in some useful Exercise, not permitting
them to play abroad promiscuously, in the Streets and Fields, but do you your
self Teach them their Books at Home, according to the Method we have set down,
in our Discourse of Education, observe those Rules, and you will make your
selves easy, and your Children happy. Instruct them in Housewifery, and other
useful things betimes, with Love and Meekness, keep them from the sight of vain
Shows and Games, idle and sinful Sports and Pastimes; let their Clothing be
plain and modest, that you may prevent the Growth of Pride, Passion, Violence,
Oppression and Covetousness; fix them to constant orders in Rising and going to
Bed, Labor and Exercises, accustom them as much as in you lies, to silence and
modesty, nor use many and Superfluous Words when you speak to them, but let
your whole deportment to them, be grave without jesting and scurrility, which
they will be too apt to Learn of themselves; let your Correction be Gentle and
Just, be sure it be always for a fault, in order to Amend and Reform them; and
not only to show your Authority and Power, Inflict upon them Fasting or some
silent Punishment, such as will stick closer to them, and make them more
ashamed, than Passionate Words, and Violent Beating, which do always foment and
excite ill natured Humors, that have often very mischievous Consequences
attending them, being ever mindful, that every like does get and produce its
simily, especially in Sensitive Creatures.

Thus I have given you some hints and brief Directions of what I thought
necessary to be observed, not only in your present Circumstances, but through
the whole course of your Life, of which I doubt not, but your own Experience,
will in a short time give you ample satisfaction, so recommend you and your
Family to the Love of God in Christ Jesus. I remain,

Your Assured Friend and Servant to Command.

LETTER X. Of the Various Opinions in Religion.
SIR,
I Am extremely Obliged to you, for the Friendship and Courtesy your last so
abundantly professes, and withal must assure you, that the Inclination you
have testified, of diving into useful and mysterious Speculations, affords me
no common satisfaction: for concerning the Nature of the things you enquire
into, it is absolutely necessary to be well informed, seeing no small
inconveniency attends the being ignorant of them; nor is it possible for a Man
to arrive at a Certa^, and come to any satisfactory Judgment, in matters of
Religion; t^ his Scruples are fully Answered, in relation to your Question,
otherwise he will be an Eternal Rover, perpetually fluctuating upon t^ Waves of
Doubt and Error; and like the Logicians Individu^ Vagum, be never brought to a
Point, nor capable of a particular Denomination,

YOU desire to know how it comes to pass, that Mankind does so Diametrically
oppose one another, in the Notion and Sentiments of Religion, and the Worship
of God, to the continual disturbance of the Public Peace of all Nations, all
the total destruction and ruin of Man himself.

First, The Grand Reason of this difference has been, and (...) is, the
Ignorance and Blindness of the Priests, Prophets and Teachers of the People,
not distinguishing between the two Grand Fountains of God's Love and Light,
Darkness and Evil, from whence all things proceed and take their Birth; for
(...) that Worships without distinguishing the Good from the Evil, opposes and
destroys those every Principles he endeavor to support and preserve himself by.

Secondly, they invent new fangled Methods, and whimsie^ Circumstances of
Worship, which have no foundation in Nature, nor any agreeableness to the Law
of God, and stamp then with the Venerable Name of Religion, and impose and
exact the Observance of them with severe Penalties. This is a cert^ sign of
their Blindness, Ignorance and self Conceit: For God is one, his Law is one,
and Religion is but one, from whence (...) appears that these fierce
Contentions, and Brutal Outrages, which Men exercise against one another, are
undeniable signs of Man's wretched Degeneracy from his first pure State of
Union; always groping in the Dark, and making Inferences and Conclusions, with
no better certainty than a Blind Man would Judge of Colors, or a Deaf Man of
Sounds, who if they happen to Judge sometimes right, it is to be attributed to
mere casualty and accident, and not to any certain knowledge.

Now as Ignorance and Blindness is the root of Disunion, so Agreement and
Concord, arises from the Understanding; for Men never differ about things
wherein they have Judgment, and of which they know the particular parts and
Qualifications. For Example, take Twenty Musicians, and they will all readily
agree, that the seven Notes or distances are the Ground and Foundation of all
Musical Harmony; and equally know when their Instruments are in Tune: The same
is to be understood of all other demonstrative Arts and Sciences, as in Music,
which tho it be not the most useful, it is confessedly the most Inspired Branch
of all the parts of the Mathematics, for by the sec^ Virtue, of its Mellodious
Sounds, it irresistibly penetrates to the very Center of Union, as we have
largely Discoursed of in our way to Health. So Twenty or Thirty Carpenters,
that are Workmen and Artists, shall in the Discourse of their Trade,
unanimously agree and accord in the Fundamentals and Reasons of their Art, and
tho the Fashion and Form of the Houses they Build may differ, yet the Principle
and Rule by which they Work is still the same, a Turkish Carpenter can Build a
House in England, and an English one in Turkey, because they both agree in one
Principle and Foundation. The like is to be conceived in Religion; as there is
but One only God, so there is but One Law, and One Religion, and all the
Differences and Controversies about Worship, proceed also from Ignorance,
Partiallity, Pride, Covetousness and Impurity. Now the Principles and Materials
of True Religion, are these.

First, to believe and acknowledge this Only God to be the eternal Fountain of
all Beings; nay, very Being its self; for all other things are said to be or
exist only in a Derivative and Metaphorical Sense, that he is the Creator of
all Creatures, and the Preserver of his Offspring.

Secondly, to observe the rules of Justice, Mercy, Clemency and Charity, which
he has prescribed and commanded, to be just and faithful Stewards of all things
put under our Government; as much as in us lies to avoid all Violence, Cruelty,
Uncleanness, Intemperance and Disorder, and to do to all Gods Creatures as we
would be done unto, knowing that we must be accountable for all these things to
the Grand and Chief Possessor and Lord. This is undoubtedly the Sum of true
Religion, which all or most Nations agree in and consent to. The first step is,
the knowledge of God in Man's self, for he that does not understand the
principles and qualitys he is compounded of, cannot be a true Worshipper, nor
direct others in the paths of Unity, nor apprehend any thing aright: The Soul
of Man is fitly compared to a Field, whose Earth contains all principles and
qualitys, but produces nothing of value till the wise Husbandman does Manure
and Cultivate it; so it is with the Human Ground; do not all Children when they
are to learn any Art, Science or Trade, begin wrong, which arises only from
their ignorance. Thus it is with Religion, all is done by chance where there is
no intrinsic understanding of the parts of the thing; they are to judge or
practice, be they what they will.

Sir, This is a true, though short account of the grand reason of Men's
Differences and Religious Contentions; which be pleased to excuse and accept
for an Answer,

from Your entire Friend T. T.

LETTER XII. Of the Humanity of Christ.
SIR,
I received yours on the Twenty Sixth, and follow all the directions you
prescribed, in reference to the business concerning the settling of your Estate
in Lincolnshire; but the Theological Question in your Postscript did at first
somewhat startle me, the Quaery it self being of so nice and difficult a
Complexion, and withal knowing you your self to be of a disposition that
seldom cares to busy its self with matters of a speculative Nature. However, I
shall endeavor according to my small Ability, to give you some answer, always
professing not to be dogmatical and positive, when any more rational account
shall be offered me.

YOU would know how the Humanity of Christ, or the Divine Fountain of Gods
Love, Mercy and Holy Light is to be understood, and what use it may be of to
Mankind, seeing there has been so many Disputes and Contentions among
Christians about it.

The original occasion of all this is, their not truly distinguishing the
forms, qualitys, principles and powers of God, his Law and universal nature,
but confounding and heaping all together, they so live and act only in the
knowledge of good and evil; whereby they fall under the dominion of the divided
forms and spiteful powers, whence proceeds Pride, Envy, Violence, and all hot
Disputes and Controversies in Religion, even to so high: degree and ferment,
that they oppress, kill and destroy the Peace and Well-being of each other. Now
our great and illuminated Apostle Paul tell us, that great is the Mystery of
Godliness, and Christ's Manifestation in the flesh, which seemed to be as great
a mystery to the Primitive Christians, as at this day, (viz.) they did not
then, neither do we now distinguish the Grand Fountains of Gods eternal Love,
Light and Mercy, from the Eternal Fountain of Darkness, Fierceness and Evil,
but as is said, they mingled them together; for Man cannot avoid that power
that leads him to Destruction, nor observe nor follow that principle or quality
that will preserve him, if he be ignorant, or do not believe it has power; no
error or evil can be avoided or amende^ till it be known to be an error, etc.
Hence it is clear, that true Religion and the constant practice of Virtue, does
chiefly consist in the true understanding and distinguishing the principles and
Powers of God; first in Man's self, and next in other things; for the great
Eternal Fountain of God's Love, Light and Mercy, of which a very large Portion
did not only dwell in the Human Body of Jesus Christ, from whose Virtue and
Holy Power did proceed and flow all those wonderful things he did, but the very
same united Fountain has been an Inhabitant amongst the Sons of Men, even from
the beginning, and is the Eternal Son of the Great Creator, by whom all things
were made, and by whose Power and Virtue they are preserved; and as Christ
himself said, Except I be in you; that is, Except this Eternal Light and sweet
Love of God reign in your Hearts, You are Reprobates. It is the Holy Eternal
Principle and Fountain of God's Love and Power, that Essentially dwells in the
very Center of all Men's Hearts, and who give up their Wills and Desires to be
Guided and Conducted by its Council: It never failed to Reconcile and Unite
their Souls to their Creator: This Central and Holy Preserving Power in the
Human Body of the World, is in every Specific Body or Thing respectively,
according to the Graduation of each Being or Creature; and as each Creature is
more or less dignified with a larger or lesser proportion of this Holy Virtue,
this Eternal Divine Power, that Creature or Thing is accordingly better or
worse.

This whole Visible World is nothing else but the Great Body of God, which was
made by his Eternal Love and Power, and is ever sustained by the same; and as
God preserves the Macrocosm by his everlasting Fountain of Light and Love, in
the very same manner he does the Microcosm Man or little World, which contains
all the true Properties of the Great, so that the Power of the Eternal Son of
God and Fountain of all Beings, is not limited to any Specific Body, but is
Incomprehensible and Unfathomable, filling Heaven, Inhabiting the Center of all
Bodies, giving Virtue, Light and Love to all, according to the Graduation and
Capacity of each.

It is therefore of great and unspeakable Advantage and Use to Mankind, to know
Christ or the Divine Fountain of God's Eternal Word manifested in the Human
Nature, that is, to arrive at the true Knowledge of God in our selves; for the
Manifestation of Christ, or the Son's Power in the Flesh, is the right
Distinction every Man makes in himself, of God's Eternal Voice of Wisdom, Love
and Mercy, etc. that directs us in the Paths of true Virtue, and secures us
from the Spirit of Error, Violence and Oppression. Pray tell me what will it
avail any Man, that the Holy Divine Power of God did in an extraordinary degree
and fullness dwell in the Human Body of Christ, by which he performed many
excellent and wonderful things, and at the same time knew nothing of the Divine
Manifestation of God's Eternal Love in his own Human Nature? If that remains a
Mystery unmanifested in and to himself, he will be but little benefitted by the
Divine Power and Love of God, manifested in the Human Body of Christ: It
matters not what Names Men are pleased to distinguish themselves by; God knows
no Names, (...) Natures.

This is the true Use we are to make of the right Understanding of Jesus
Christ's Humanity, which it has pleased God to manifest to many, who have been
willing to submit to, and (...) guided by the Voice or Principle of Divine
Light, which dw^ in the Center of every Man's Life: And certainly it is the
greatest Blessing, both here and hereafter, to know Christ Jesus, (...) the
Divine Fountain of God's Eternal Love, manifested and distinguished in our
Human Natures; for from this Power of the Son, our Gracious Lovely Fountain,
does proceed Justice, Mer^ Love, Compassion, Cleanness, Temperance, Order, and
in (...) doing unto all Creatures as we would be done unto; it is the Eye of
the Soul, whereby Men are enabled to distinguish in themselves, from what
Principles and Fountains every Thought Word and Work does arise and exert its
self in the Hum^ Ground or Nature.

Hence it is fully evident, that the Knowledge of Christ or the Son of God,
manifested in our Flesh and Human Nature, teach^ and powerfully inclines every
one that obtains this Spring-he^ of Blessings, to Worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, to (...) his Neighbor, nay his Enemies, and behave himself as a (...)
and Faithful Steward in the Management of all things put und^ his Government,
to one who has the witness of this Truth (...) fested in his Soul, all
Controversies, Disputes and Content^ cease, having a firmer and better
certainty in himself than (...) can be drawn from partial and wrangling
Debates: It is Co^ ence bears him Testimony, with St. Paul, that all that can
(...) known of God, is manifest and known in a Man's self: A^ this be true, as
undoubtedly it is, wherefore do Men so foo^ly enquire elsewhere, and look
abroad, for what they may (...) little Application, readily find in themselves?

Therefore my Friend, turn the Eyes of your Soul inward, and (...) shall find
the Son's Blessed and Amiable Power in the Center of (...) Life, to which you
must compel your Will and Affections to be (...) and Obedient: It Is this
Self-Study I recommend to your daily Pr^ all other things are Foreign to your
Interest, but this Knowledge (...) stand you in everlasting Stead, and
administer Infinite Comfort (...) Satisfaction, when all outward Assistances
shall fail and desert yo^.

Your truly Loving Friend, T. T.

LETTER XII. Of an Afflicted MIND.
SIR,
I am now Reading your kind (...), and am sensibly concerned you meet with such
a heap of Troubles in your Affairs, (espe^lly the Loss of your two Brothers,)
which must of necessity (...) sensibly invade your Peace and Quiet, and if
given way to, multiply Afflictions in your Mind and Body; there is no shelter
(...) such Cases, but an humble and entire Submission to the Divine ^ill and
Providence, which will in time afford you the best Re^dy, especially if you can
persuade your self to lead a Philoso^al and Pythagorian Life, in Meats, Drinks,
Exercises and Communications; the last of these, if duly observed, will add
^ndantly to the Health of your Body and the Content of your ^ind: I could
heartily wish it were in my power to join with (...) in so noble a Design,
nothing in the World could be more (...) my good liking. As to your
Indisposition, I cannot at pre^nt give you better Advice than I have already
done, when I ^coursed you in London: however, I would have you, if possi^, to
exalt your Mind, that your present Afflictions and Cir^stances may not get
Dominion over you, for neither your (...), Natural Spirits, nor Body are able
to endure such Fatigues, ^ations and Troubles, as others, who are of more
sturdy Con^tions: Much Thinking to you, will be as prejudicial as hard ^king
will be to another. In my Opinion, the best Method (...) settle your Affairs,
limit your self to a convenient Comped^y, and spend your days in such Company
as is most suitable (...) your Humor and Disposition, and as much as you can,
avoid (...) being Agitated and Suspended between the Extremes of (...) and
Fear, I mean as to the Affairs and Business of this World, for when those
Passions have got the Possession of Weak (...) Crasy Natures, they not only
wound the Health, continue (...) advance Diseases, but becloud and darken the
Minds, Intel^ Powers and pure Spirits; for when the Human Properties (...) Weak
and Distempered, the Natural Spirits are in proporti^ Weak and Languid.

This, Sir, with my best Respects, be pleased to accept, from Your assured
Friend, T. T.

LETTER XIII.
Of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
SIR,
I Have yours of the 8th instant, and shall Answer the Contents as well as I am
a^le; your desire is to know the Original and True Ground of Faith, Hope and
Charity; and which of the three is most Essential to Man, and most like unto
God? Now Faith, Hope and Charity have three Grounds or Originals, from whence
their variety does proceed, (viz.) From the grand Fountains or Principles in
Men's Souls, the first carries in i^ Power, Courage, Fierceness, Violence,
Covetousness, etc. from the second arises Love, Good Will, Mercy, Compassion,
etc. a^ this has the Name and Nature of Goodness, Virtue, etc. From the third
proceeds Wordly-Mindedness, Intemperance, Disorde, Vain-Games, Laughing,
Jesting, etc. Now according to the Custom of each Country or Place, and as
these three have obta^ed the Government in the Soul, from thence springs Faith,
Hope and Charity; if the Inclinations of a Man be kindled in the first, then
such an one hopes to Kill, Destroy and Oppress his Fellow Creatures; but if the
Divine Fountain of God's Love and Li^ obtains the Government, then such do
Hope, Will and De^ not only the Preservation of themselves, but also the Peace
a^ Well-being of the whole Creation; but if the Soul be kind^ with the Spirit
of this World, and subjected to its Governm^ then a Man's Hopes are Worldly and
Selfish, from this Deg^ racy of Man, from the Unity of the Original Forms,
Princip^ and Powers, and his not distinguishing the Nature and Opera^on of
each, does not only arise the wonderful Varieties and Co^fusions in Opinions,
but also the variety of Faith, Hope a^ Charity, each according to the Power of
that Form that has ^tained the Ascendant in the Soul, together with the Custom
(...) Countries, and the Dictates of their Priests and Teachers, every Quality
or Principle that has obtained the Government, Laboring with its highest
diligence, to accomplish its own Work, (...) strengthen its Victory, by
violently Resisting and Opposing (...) that is contrary to its self; if it were
not so, how is it po^ for a Man to believe he does God good Service, and hope
for Reward in this World and another, for Killing those of his (...) Kind, and
Oppressing all others; and at the same time (...) Death for a Vain, Idle or
empty Opinion, Faith or Hope: Ig^rance, and Living under base Customs and
divided Forms (...) the Original of most Men's Faith and Hope, they are Airy
Principles, and of evil Consequences, if they have not their Birth from Love
and Light, Charity is an Essential Power o^ Divine Virtue: Nothing does so much
Resemble God, and recommend Man to him, for he gives freely to all his
Offspring, without Respect of Person, and receives nothing: Charity is the
only thing whereon our Eternal Happiness, as well as Temporal depends, as is
clear by the Judgment pronounced on the Goats on his Left Hand, by our Savior
Christ, he does not Condemn them, because they had not Faith nor Hope; or that
they were Turks, Jews, Infidels, Christians, or distinguished by any other Name
or Modes of Religion, but their Sentence was possitive, for not having Charity,
not rightly and liberally disposing their Gifts the Lord had endued and
entrusted them with, and made them Stewards of; I was an Hungry, Naked, and in
Prison, and you relieved me not, etc. Charity is Substantial, the first and
last true Step in Religion. It Is a cheap and easy Religion, that consists in
Faith, Hope, and a few good Words; but Charity touches to the Quick, and trys
what Metal a Man is made of; by this you shall know you are of God, if you Love
one another; all the rest is but a Lip-service, a vain ^rivolous Dream and
Shadow of Worship, having no Agreement with God, nor Foundation in Nature,
being Invisible Qualifications; as St. James (...), Faith and Hope are dead
without Works; Jesus Christ, in the State of his Humiliation, Taught nothing
more than this Do^ne; as his whole Practice was doing Good, so his Preaching
(...) a continual Inculcation of Love and Charity; for in whom^ver these
Essential Virtues dwell, and enjoy-their free Exer^se and Vegitation, no
Question is to be made, but such have (...) sufficient Portion of those
Invisible and Sublime Virtues of ^th and Hope. I am, Sir,

Your Unfeigned Friend, T. T.

LETTER XIV. Of GOD's Permission for the Eating of Flesh.
SIR,
(...) ^m extremely pleased, that my Answer to your last met with (...) so good
a Reception, which encourages me to hope you ^ll find no less satisfaction in
what I shall briefly observe, concerning the Question you make; how those
Scriptures, which intimate God to have commanded or permitted Beasts and under
graduated Creaturs to be Killed and Eaten, are to be understood? In Answer
whereunto, it is to be considered, that Man had long before such Command or
Permission, Eaten of the T^ of Knowledge, the Tree of Good and Evil, whereby he
had separated and estranged himself from the Unity of God's Light and Love, so
that the Spirit of his Understanding became Blind, and he grew an utter
Stranger to himself, and his own Composition, which is called a Degeneracy or
Fall, which subjected him to the influence of the divided Powers or Forms, and
became totally Ignorant of the Primitive and Original state of Unity* wherein
he was Created, by which means Wrath and Violence gained the Ascendant over
Man's Will and Affections, according to the Dignification and Power of each,
calling Good Evil, and Evil Good, subduing all the Desires and Faculties of the
Soul (...) the Tyranny and Obedience of the Wrathful, Fiery, Envious Powers and
Forms, where each Quality or Principle Industriously oppose and domineer over
one another, till the prevailing and superior Quality issues forth its Command,
which may in o^ Sense be called the Command or Permission of God, given i^
Wrath and Fierceness, as a Punishment for the Violation of his Pure and
Primitive Law of Love and Light. It is manifest, the all the Cruelty and
Barbarity we see daily Exercised in destro^ing the Peace and Well-being of one
another: And Inferior Creatures, who were Created for another End and Service,
(...) take their Birth, and proceed from the Dark and Stygian De^neracy and
Separation, from the Divine Power and Union; (...) from the Uniting Power and
Eternal Love of God, by whose Virtue all things were made and preserved; this
same Holy Principle became Flesh, and Dwells in every Creature, and is the
Light and Life of Man: This is the Voice of Wisdom, that cries in the Gates of
Man's Microcosmical City, against all Violence to Man and Beast, and is the
Reconciler of Man's Soul to God* bringing it into an Equality and Union. This
is the true and natural Effect of God's Love, and whoever has attained to this
Blessed State, will esteem the Killing of an Ox, as the Slaying of a Man, as
the Scriptures testify, Man is called the Temple of God, that if when Men have
given up their Will and Desires to (...) Governed and Guided by the Holy
Principles of God's Eternal Light and Love in Jesus Christ, which Inhabits the
Center of all Men's Hearts, by which they are rendered capable of recovering that
Union again, from which they are Degenerated, so the when the Souls of Men are
once reinstated by this Blessed Fo^tain of Benignity, into the equal Operation
of those Principle and Forms whereof he is Compounded, they will readily set
their Seals to the Truth and Certainty of the abovementioned Scripture: But
others, who do not Live under the Influence and Conduct of this Holy
Government, are by the Operation of the Envious and Spiteful Powers, betrayed
into the Commission of such Enormities and violent Cruelties as are equally
abominable to God and all good Men, generally such is the Original Composition
of Man, that the Customs of Countries, Religion, and particular and formal
Education will mould it into any Shape or Figure, being Susceptible of all
Qualities: And this is the Grand occasion of Man so violently pursuing the ways
of Wickedness and Evil, as if it were their chiefest Good, not being at first
rightly Instituted, nor wholly brought under the Power and Government of God's
Holy Light and Love, and withal living in a continued and wretched Degeneracy
and Ignorance of their first Fall and Separation from the Holy and Peaceful
State of Union, in which they were Created. This I say is the Foundation of all
the Outrages, Villainies and Violence we see so commonly Practiced, Ignorance
giving them encouragement in their ways of Sin: Therefore if God at any time
permits Man to commit any Evil, or to do any Injury to Man or Beast, this
Permission issues forth not from the Fountain of Benignity, but from the dark
and bitter Fountain of Spite and Vengeance, separated from the Uniform Powers
and Divine Vision, as it is said, Is there any Evil in the City, (viz.) Man's
Heart, and am not I in the midst thereof? For the Lord fills Heaven and Earth
with his Divine Essence and Presence, and where he is not in his Love, there he
is in his severe Fierceness and Anger.

Hence it is undeniably apparent, that the Love and Light of God in Jesus
Christ, which is the true Redeemer and Reconciler of Man's Soul to God, cannot
commend Evil in Man, it being its own Genuin Nature, Inclination and
Disposition to act like it self, (viz.) Uniformly, disposing and inclining Men
to Holiness of Life, and to the Exercise and Observation of all other
^oncomitant Virtues, as Cleanness, Order, Temperance, Pati^e, Love and Mercy:
But the plain Truth is, Men have g^n (...) themselves, their Wills and Desires,
to be Captivated and ^ed by the Fierce, Violent and Angry Powers of the
Fountain of Wrath, from whence all Irregular Inclinations, Words, Works,
Commands and Permission does proceed and derive their Original Birth and Being.

These Tr^s you ought strictly and daily to Examine and Consider, (...)
earnestly desire, that God would give you an Enlightened and Divine
Understanding, to distinguish rightly between these two Grand Fountains and
their Operations, which is the greatest Blessing Human Nature is capable of
Enjoying in this Life, and which will make it entirely Happy to all Eternity in
that which is to come.

Yours in the most unreserved Respects, T. T.

LETTER XV. To the Honorable Colonel KENT. Of a Soldier's LIFE.
SIR,
I Received a Letter from you the last Campaign, Dated from B^sels, some time
before the opening of the Treaty of Peace, which brought along with it the
welcome News of your Health, and some Scruples concerning the Lawfulness of
your Profession, occasioned as you declare, by Reading a Book of Ours,
Entitled, The Way to Health, etc. I greatly Congratulate the happy Fortune of
its fa^ into your hands, and am apt to believe it was some good Providence that
directed you to it, not imagining there could be any Treatise of such a Nature
as that is, in so Quarrelsome and Contentious a Country: I confess it is a
Discourse very unsuitable for a Soldier, unless he could wholly dispossess
himself of the Prejudice his very Profession subjects him to, and bring an
Unbyassed and Impartial Disposition to the Realing of it.

INdeed I must acknowledge, Colonel, that I have often admired what could
possibly be the reason, that Men of excellent Parts, both Natural and Acquired,
of sound Sense and good Education, should as it were Hand over Head,
voluntarily, without any Necessity or Compulsion, thrust themselves headlong
into Arms, as if a Life of Incessant Fatigue, Hardship and Hazard were
desirable, and a Man's chiefest Glory did consist in having a Commission to
Destroy his Fellow Creatures? But now I find, by your Letter, that your
Understanding is alarmed, your Eyes opened, and that you begin to doubt the
Justice of your Undertaking; I am very well satisfied you may make the Scruple
without the least Imputation of Cowardice, having already given unquestionable
Evidences of an undaunted and fearless Spirit, through the whole Course of the
late Campaigns: Therefore since you desire my Judgment of the Matter, I shall
endeavor all I can to advance your Conversion, and set you right in your
N^tions.

It must be considered then, from what Grounds or Principles this natural
Disposition to Revenge, Blood and War does arise, surely all the Commands of
God and Man, do proceed from the two Grand Fountains of Good and Evil, and
according to the Predominancy, Rule or Government of either of these Principles
in the Heart or Center of Life, are all a Man's Actions Influenced and
Denominated: If the Harsh, Fierce, Oppressive Spirit obtains the Dominion, all
kinds of Evil are tolerated and become Lawful, especially if the Teachers
justify it, and the Prince commands it, for now adays, and in former times,
the main Business of those sort of People, is to Study Reasons to support and
approve the Actions of their Prince, for let his Methods be never so Irregular,
they are obliged to Assert and Justify them, and in the most plausible Dress,
their Rhetoric can Invent, recommend them to the People, being hired thereto
by vast Revenues, and particular Privileges and Immunities, so that their
Judgment in this Case ought by no means to be resied on, they being Parties,
and generally having the greatest share in public Commotions and Transactions.

The Popish Clergy have given abundant Instances of this Complaint, Justifying
any Cause or Pretext of one Princes making War against another, as they were
Influenced by Ecclesiastical Interests, and particular Respects, who ever Read
the History of the Troubles of Italy, and did not discover the Pope to be the
grand Fomenter of all the Blood and Distraction, that sullied the Beauty of
those Delightful Provinces; nor has his Holiness been less concerned in the
Tumults and Calamities of other Places more distant from his own Territories,
sending his Emissaries, Incendiaries and Beautefieus abroad, to disturb the
Peace of People, making no Conscience with Insi^ting and Whispering Rumors, and
feigned Stories, to Amuse them at first, then lead them into War and Confusion,
as often as he sees such damnable Methods necessary to augment the Interest of
his Pontifical Dignity and Grandeur; and I am afraid, that other Sects and
Orders of Men, who would be accounted of a gentle Nature, and more Reformed,
will not be able to keep themselves altogether clear of this Guilt and
Imputation.

Now, though there are many Circumstances and Occasions that may stir up and
provoke Mankind to Murder and Destroy one another: Yet the mai^ Spring and Root
of this wrathful Inclination, proceeds wholly from the Grand Fountain of Evil
in a Man's Self, as we said before, so there ought to be a particular Notice
taken of this, if a Man would ever be able to give an Account and Reason of his
Doings: For whoever has once Immersed his Will and Desire to enter into the
Evil Principle or Fountain, and is Governed by the Qualities thereof; all sorts
of Violence become Lawful to him, for from the Center of each Fountain, (viz.)
Good and Evil, all Laws do proceed and arise, which conform and agree with
their Original Ground, etc.

Hence it is, the Prince who is the Center of his People, i^ the direful and
wrathful Principle, can at any time, upon some fair and plausible pretense,
(for Violence never wants a Colo^ to justify its Irregularity,) either make
War upon his own Subjects. or call his People to Arms, lead them into Foreign
Re^ons through Heat and Cold, Want, Necessity and Danger, (...) purpose to cut
the Throats of those that never did him any hu^ perhaps upon no better
occasion, than the satisfaction of a private Resentment. Would it not amaze a
Man seriously to consider, upon what inconsiderable motives Men are thus hurri^
to their own and others ruin? To see Gentlemen and Noblem^ of good Estates, who
may enjoy all the worthy and commend^ble Pleasures of Life, without any
interruption; to see the Husband forsaking his Wife and Children, the Son his
Parents, the Lover his Darling Mistress, and all these the true and easy
enjoyments of Life, nay, quiting the very possession of those things they wish
most to Enjoy, to List themselves into the Public Service, exposing themselves
and all they have, to Chance and Uncertainty, only to follow a noisy piece of
Brass, or the sound of a stretched Sheep skin, Stemming tumultuous Seas,
Climbing over Rocks and craggy Mountains, Traveling night and day, through
Woods and Deserts, on purpose to destroy those they never saw in their Lives,
nor never had any Personal or particular Quarrel with, and all this perhaps for
Reasons in which they are wholly unconcerned: for sometimes a Fantastic Prince
will in his Humors and Capritio's, run the hazard of destroying a Province,
upon as slight an occasion as a Gentleman shall ki^ his Footboy. The great Men
of the World are moved by the same Springs as we are, subjected to the same
Passions, and if the Evil Principle has gained the Ascendant, there must needs
issue very fatal Consequences, when Wrath is joined with Force and Power. This
plainly declares, that most men are fallen from the Peaceful Government of Gods
Eternal Light and Love, into the direful dark Kingdom of Violence and
Oppression, where every Property and Quality are at variance and enmity one
with another; and do with the the greatest Tyranny imaginable, dominee^ and
reign; Survey but the very Materials of a Military Profession, and you shall
find they all proceed from this dark wrathful Fountain, Swords, Guns, Spears,
Mortars, Bombs, Carcasses, Powder, Regiments, Brigades, Squadrons, Platoo^,
Ambuscades, Mines, Bastions, Hornworks, Intrenchments, Pa^sados, and an
infinite train of monstrous and horrid Terms of Art, Coined and invented on
purpose to signify the Cruelty, Violence and Injustice of Martial Exercises;
nay the very Actions, Gestures and Looks of Men are altered, and fashioned
according to the Nature of this envious Fountain of Evil, from whence they are
produced. The Poets of old were well aware of this, when they described their
God of War, to be a bloated, blustering, fierce, envious, furious, bloody,
untamable Deity; su^ Epithets as these would suit much better with a Devil,
than a God; and further to show the Extensiveness and Universality of this
Evil, they had a Goddess too, a Bellona, altogether as fierce, raging,
destructive and un^eaceable as Mars himself, by which Characters and
Descriptions, they painted and set forth to Mankind the odious, abominable,
unjust and p^rnitions effect of War, and the Spring and Source from whence they
proceed, and if possible, to deter Men from all actions of Violence, Murder and
Oppression, have very honestly Represented their very Gods concerned in these
Tragedies, with a Countenance as ugly and frightful, as the grounds thereof are
Unlawful and Inhumane.

So that it is, by departing from the Holy Union of Gods Eternal and Divine
Light and Love, that Man becomes Freighted with so great a quantity of wrath
and fierceness, pushing him on in a blind and direct opposition to the Kingdom
of Light and Love, Goodness, Virtue, etc. Hence it is that we daily see that
most Men, even in civil Societies, and better regulated Governments, can upon
any slight occasion, or imaginary pretense whatsoever, immediately draw the
Sword, kill and destroy their Neighbors, Friends or Companions, without the
l^st remo^se or regr^, and if this were not so, if there were not this radical
and seminal Malignity in the very Constitution of Men, Generals of Armies would
find it very difficult to Muster such great numbers of Men together, upon the
beat of a Drum. And Children being Begot from the Species of wrath and
fierceness, and, from Generation to Generation, Educated and Encouraged in the
practice thereof, it mightily awakens and strengthens these ^l Principles and
Qualities in them, whereby they become prompt and ready, at all times to exert
their Talents and Invading spiteful Powers, to the destruction of their fellow
Creatures.

Now these false Notions do and are like to continue, because their Leaders and
Teachers* instead of incultivating into them, the Injustice of these Actions,
and demonstrating the Evils they being upon the whole Creation, rather Preach
up and Teach the L^fulness of War and Fighting, and not so much as contradict
(...) Practice of Eating the Flesh and Blood of Innocent Under^ted Creatures,
by which means no Man is safe longer than the fear of Death, and Sword of the
Magistrate protects him, or whilst the greater wrath Commands the lesser, and
keeps it in Subjection.

Now the only Method to cure this prevailing mischief, is for every man to look
down into himself, and accurately to distinguish from what Principle all the
Actions and Practice of Life do take their Birth; for in our selves, Colonel,
God has Essentially planted all the great Mysteries of Nature, and what is
needful to be known, the first Step to all Prudence, Virtue and the Fear of
God, is Mercy, Compassion, Justice and Innocence, all which Spring only from
Gods Divine Kingdom of Love and Light, and no man can approach and be United to
the Fountain of Benignity, but by the practice and Imitation of Gods Holy Law.
Which Consideration, with others mentioned in this Epistle, may I hope, be
sufficient to confirm you in the disgust you have taken against that Bloody and
Violent profession.

Honored Sir, Your most Humble Servant, T. T.

LETTER. XVI. Of Employments arising from the Fountain of Darkness.
SIR,
I Have considered the Contents of your kind and loving Letter, and am glad to
find your Curiosity Busied in such useful and necessary disquisitions, as to be
truly informed how every Man may come to understand and distinguish in himself,
the two Grand Fountains of Good and Evil, or Gods Eternal Principle of Love, as
also that of Wrath.

NOW you must Remember Man is a Complete Image of all Fountains, Principles,
Powers, Qualities and Operations, and although we have in several of our Writings
already Answered this Question in the gross: nevertheless, as a Testimony of an
hearty desire to have you fully instructed in all points, that become a
reasonable Creature, I shall with all readiness, give your thirsty Soul, a more
particular Account of Words, Works, Employments, Meats, Drinks, Trades, Arts,
Sciences, etc. from what Principle or Fountain each takes its Birth and
Original, in the manifested Word of God, or the Principles of this Visible
World, which shall be presented as a Mirror or Looking-Glass, for every Man to
behold himself and his Actions in; so that each may clearly discern the great
danger he is in, being pressed, and as it were hemmed in on all sides with evil,
wholly under the power of divided forms and qualities, which have their whole
Operation in a Hostile way: And to do our business effectually, we shall first
begin with Children, and show the fundemental mistakes and errors of their
Education, from whence all inclinations to all manner of Violence, Oppression
and Cruelty does arise.

Mothers, Nurses, and those to whom generally the Care and Instruction of
Children is committed, do by their improper Methods and ill Conduct, too often
awaken and advance in the green and tender branch, the three Grandsons of the
Devil, Gluttony, Pride and Idleness, continually forcing Meats and Drinks upon
them, neither agreeable in quality, nor proportionable in quantity, which
general evil juices thicken and condensate the Blood, and alarm the central
Fires, to the discomposure of the whole Body, and the perpetual uneasiness of
the tortured Child, who fills the whole House with Outcries and Lamentations;
then no more suitable Remedy is found to quiet it but another Dose; filling his
Head with a deal of impertinent Tattle and Nonsense, which has no better effect
than adding Fuel to the Fire, and augmenting the disturbance; and which, if it
were not through folly, neglect, and inadvertency, grown into a custom, would
be condemned and abhorred as sinful and abominable.

Then when they come to be about Three Quarters or a Year Old, and begin to
distinguish one thing from another, the lesson of Pride is very formally and
mischievously inculcated and prescribed to them, by pointing and asking them
where they are Fine, making a great and silly noise and wonderment at new
Shoes, Stockings, Petticoats, etc. till they are Seven, Eight, Nine or Ten
Years of Age.

All this while the Fathers, Mothers, Nu^s, Servants, etc. do not only teach,
countenance and cultivate the two former Vices, Pride and Gluttony, but double
their industry to make them idle and wanton; the Seeds whereof being too soon
and early awakened, make such deep and lasting impressions both in the outward
and inward Practice, insomuch that they become so fixed and central, that all
the tutoring and endeavoring of themselves or others, can never be able to
obliterate or remove them, but remain as so many sealed Spells or Characters,
that can never be dissolved.

All or most Plays or Games Children in their Infancy are tolerated in, with a
thousand odd Postures, Tricks, Frolicks and impertinent Rhimes, Words, and
insignificant and useless Inventions, arising from the dark Kingdom and Fantasy
Spirit of this World, furnish them with fit and apt materials for Sports of an
higher malignity, proceeding from the Center of Wrath, as Stage Plays, Cudgels,
Ninepins, Cards, Dice, Billiards, Table, Shuffleboard, Racing, Cock-fighting,
Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Dog-fighting, etc. whereby all sorts of enmity is
taught and advanced.

Besides the frequent custom and practice of abusing and oppressing the Beasts
and subordinate Creatures, by over-working them, suffering t^m to want, and the
like; does mightily excite and strengthen the seeds of Envy, Hatred and
Cruelty, etc.

Likewise all Jesting, Bantering, Jeering, wanton Discourses, and all other
Essays of a little Wit and a large Impudence, Passionate Railing, bitter
Invectives, Calumnies, Lying, Swearing, Nicknames, and spending precious time
in prating of things we are not concerned in, or not at all edifying; all
formal Complements, fawning Addresses, Love Stories, Plays and Romances, be
they of what kind soever, do all proceed from the same Fountain, and produce
the same dire effects.

Also all Employments and Trades that bear the marks and signatures of
Violence, as Butchers and all Killers of Beasts, Fish or Fowl; Fishers,
Hunters, Hawkers, Nets, Traps and Gins, with abundance of other devices, to
betray the innocent and let the guilty go free; and all that buy or sell Dead
Bodies of Creatures for Funeral-Shows, Embalmings, etc. are touched with the
like pernicious Evil: All Carmen, Horse-coursers, Drivers, Beastherds,
Swine-herds, Seamen, Miners, Brick-makers, and all slavish robust Employments
border on the black Center, which is evident from their Qualities, most of them
being surly, rash, cruel, impudent, Swearers and Drunkards, nay, even the fair
Sex and most Sanguine natured Spirits, will by the use of their gross and
Saturnine Employments, be quickly tainted with the Infection of the en^s and
spiteful Powers, by reason of the latent image and resemblance of all things in
the Humane Soul.

It is to be observed also that all Meats and Drinks proceeding from the dark
Center, ought to be avoided, (viz.) Flesh and Fish, which are not only gross
and unclean, but cannot be procured without death to the Creature, and
awakening the Center of Wrath and Violence. Also all Spirituous and strong
Liquors, as is manifest by the Drinkers thereof, in their preposterous
Discourses and Actions; also all poisonous and crude Fruits, Her^ and Seeds
ought carefully to be abstained from: Moreover, the Beasts, over whom this dark
Fountain has gained the Ascendant, are, the Lion, Bear, Crocodil, Wolf, etc.
too tedious here to be enumerated, with Dogs, Cats, Hogs, and the like, whose
Shapes, Figures, Tones and Cries do sufficiently declare from what Fountain
they proceed* and by what Principle they are Governed: And the Weather that
this evil Center produces when it has got the dominion in the Elements, are
turbulent fierce Storms, violent Winds, Rain, Snow and Hail, and all other
unkind and unseasonable Weather.

Now it ought to be Man's daily study and consideration, that he has these
contending Enemies in himself, that he is beset within, without, and on all
sides, that he cannot defend himself from the forementioned Calamities if he
does not truly distinguish between the good and the evil; from this it appears,
of what necessity it is for Man to know and understand from what Principles
each Thought, Inclination, Word and Work have their Birth and Original; from
the want of this Central Knowledge does proceed the original mischiefs in the
Education of Children, and all the other evils that attend them through the
whole course of their Lives; for without this all things are unaccountable, and
done either by the direction of the envious Powers, or by mere casualty and
chance; so miserable is Mankind, and so degenerated from the Union and true
knowledge of himself and of God his Holy Creator: Therefore my Friend, turn
your Contemplations inward, and find God in his eternal Love and Light in your
self, and then you will certainly know and find him in all things else.

Again, all Cunning Policies, Stratagems, and pretended fair Speeches of
Statesmen and others, with a design to impose upon Man's Credulity, making
People believe one thing, and at the same time intending another, deceiving the
Ignorant, to bring their own base Ends and Devices to pass, proceed from the
same dark Stygian Lake or Fountain; as also the Practices and Methods of
Informers, Suborners and Trapanners, whose Business is to Ensnare and Betray
their Neighbor out of their Lives, Livelihoods, or Reputation, for Money;
these are the Sons of the Reigning Evil, and deserve the blackest Character, to
whom is that accursed Denunciation, Woe, woe, woe, for Ever.

All unwholesome Airs, stinking, gross, sulphurous Smoaks of Cities, Towns,
Slaughter-houses, Markets, etc. are of a Saturnine and Martial Nature, proving
very often Pernicious to Mankind, by Infecting the common Air with terrible
Pestilences and Distempers; for as we said before, every Form or Quality will
ever Incorporate and Unite with its Simile, wherever it finds it.

The Eastern Sages in former times, seem to have been abun^ntly more sensible
of these things than the most Learned of the latter Ages of the World, of which
Philosophy the Bannians, and some few others, retain still a great many evident
Footsteps and Characters; their Principles generally led them to Mercy and
Compassion, not to Kill, Strike, Oppress, or Eat the Flesh of any Beast, Fowl
or Fish, not to Quarrel or Fight with their Brethren; the Education of their
Children is remarkable, bringing them up in all Softness and Humility, usin^
angry Words, nor passionate Blows for Offenses, but Correct. them by calmes
Ways and Methods, discoursing and talking with them as if they were Senators
and not Children, by which means they mildly opened the Center of Virtue, and
disarmed the fierce wrathful Powers and Principles, of their Force and Energy,
which does so powerfully incline the Soul to clean and humble Methods of
Living, that they are never known to deviate or swerve from the Laws of their
Ancestors in the least degree: The Parents never fearing that their Sons should
grow Intemperate, Drink, Swear or Rob, List themselves into the Service of
Princes, Marry into strange Tribes, or leave their Religion to embrace another:
The like is to be understood of their Daughters; and though in those Oriental
Countries and Government, all Persons are at the Command and Will of their
King's, Princes or Sovereigns, yet the Constancy, Charity and Innocent
Principle of their Religion, which does separate them even from those they
Converse with, preserves them entirely from all Assaults or Violations of what
kind soever, whilst all the other Inhabitants are subjected to the Arbitrary,
Will and Lust of their Commanders; so true it is, that Innocence hurts nothing,
and nothing can hurt that, when it has Centrally obtained the Ascendant in the
Soul, by Virtue of good Education, Precedents and Religion: It stands obstinate
against all the Temptations of Preferment, Riches and Greatness, no Power being
able to Corrupt or Destroy the Seed so seasonably and timely Sowed, and so
wisely Cultivated. It would be well for Europeans and Christians, if they would
observe the like prudent Methods in the Education and Tuition of their
Children, timely Sowing in them the Seeds of Virtue, Patience, Mercy and
Justice, and be particularly exact and careful in the choice of Trades, Arts,
Sciences and Employments, wherein they are to be Instructed, for upon these
things, in a great measure, all their future Welfare, Peace and Happiness
depends.

It must by no means be omitted, that even in the Worship and Service of God,
there are many Superstitious Errors and Mistakes crept in, arising from this
Principle and Fountain, as Sacrifices, Victims, magnificent Buildings, adorned
Altars, Carving, Painting, Statues, Bowing, Cringing, Ceremonies of all kinds,
Antique Postures and Vestures, Music Vocal and Instrumental, and many other
silly Inventions of Priests, on purpose to Amuse and Deceive the Ignorant and
get their Money.

It is farther to be observed, that all far-fetcht Rarities and needless
Superfluities, which are procured with hazard and great danger, are very
Instrumental in the Service of Pride, Avarice, Ambition and Intemperance, as
all Trading Countries, great and populous Cities, Towns, etc. have found by
woeful Experience. These imported Trifles having been in a great measure the
chief Promoters of Violence, Oppression, and all kinds of Debauchery. I would
if possible, have Mankind very sensible of this Grand Truth, that all things
that are procured by Violence, or any kind of Oppression, must be retaliated,
for every Tree brings forth Fruit of its own Nature, and every like begets and
advances its self, which is the Eternal Law of God and Nature. The Estate
gotten by Injury or Injustice to Man or Beast, cannot long continue in that
Family, without great Disturbances, Losses, or Troubles, till Restitution be
made.

Thus, Sir, I have largely Painted out to you the Grounds of Humane Frailty and
Misery, and showed you how greatly Man is depraved and sunk deeply into the
very Abyss of Hell, insomuch, that he has utterly lost his Understanding, and
the distinguishing Faculty or Spirit of Wisdom, to Blunder on in Blindness,
Violence and Oppression, being continually hurried along with the Impetuous
Current of vile Affections, and the dark and spiteful Powers, which have
miserably blurred and defaced his Noble and Divine Image. This I hope may serve
for a full Resolution and Answer to your Question, and a farther assurance of
the Love and Friendship of,

SIR, Your Obliged Servant, T. T.

LETTER XVII. Of Employment arising from the Fountain of Light.
SIR,
IN my last I gave you an Account of the Thoughts, Words, Works, Actions,
Inclinations and Employments that spring from the Eternal Kingdom or Principle
of Darkness, Violence and Wrath, whereby Man may clearly comprehend the great
Hazard and Danger he is in, both in Time and Eternity. Now I shall in this,
discover and distinguish the Divine Fountain of God's Love and Eternal Light,
which does continually Oppose and make War against the Assaults of the Devil,
and the Kingdom of Wrath and Fierceness, in Mankind, with a distinct Account of
the Nature of this Fountain of Benignity, and what Thoughts, Inclinations,
Words, Works, etc. do arise and take their Original from this Holy Light and
Love; and as in our former, so here we shall begin with Children.

Good Education is the Sinews of all Virtue and good Government, Mankind being
an Image of God, and consequently of the whole Nature of things. A Child is to
be made any thing that his Father, Mother or Tutor pleases to have him; every
thing is alike to a Child, Good or Evil are all one, because every thing, both
in the Evil and in the Good, has a Key in its self, which is the reason that
evil Communication corrupts good Manners. All soft and pleasant Imaginations,
Inclinations, Courteous Language, and free Speeches, without Reservation or
secret Meaning, have their Birth from the Divine Kingdom of Eternal Light and
Love, Justice, Patience, Compassion and Charity to Man and Beast. All mature
Thoughts, Considerations, and distinguishing the Evil from the Good, Temperance
in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, proceed from the same Fountain, such as are
Harmless and Innocent, and can be procured without Injustice, Hazard or
Cruelty, and such as are not attended with the Dying Groans of our Fellow
Creatures, (viz.) Herbs, Seeds, Grain, Fruits, etc. which have a kind and
harmless Birth, free from Corruption, and are as it were Divine and Angelical,
in Comparison of Fish, Flesh, etc. For all the Beasts of the Field are in one
Sense our Brethren, and the Great Creator of all Beings has ordained the same
Way and Method for their Generation, Decay and Corruption, as he has to Man;
there being no difference in the Grand Point; besides, they are endued with all
the sensible Powers and Faculties as Men are, being equally sensible of Hunger,
Thirst, Cold, Heat, Pain, Weariness, and an infinite train of Distempers; and
therefore all Violence, Oppression and Injustice done to them, in Kiiling and
Eating their Flesh, appears Barbarous and Unnatural in the sight of the Divine
Principle of God's Eternal Love in Men's Hearts and Souls, which is the Son or
Holy Power of the Father, and Great Creator of all things.

All sorts of soft, clear, sweet, pleasant Waters, were Primitively ordained as
the only Drink for Man and Beast, the Springhead of all Liquid Nourishment,
taking their Birth from the simple Uniform Powers of God, being temperately
drunk and used, does Support, Sustain and Preserve all the Drinkers thereof,
far beyond all other invented Liquors or Juices, which do all border on the
black and dark Fountain of Wrath, and never fail to awaken and strengthen their
Simile, to the great Dishonor of God, and utter Ruin and Prejudice of Mankind;
from whence it is most manifest, that whosoever desires to Worship and Serve
God in Truth and Sincerity, and advance the Kingdom of Unity, and be good
Precedents and Examples to their Neighbors, ought to drink Water.

All Employments, Trades, Arts and Sciences, that have an innocent Birth, and
use Materials not proceeding from Oppression or Violence in the making and
procuring them, as all sorts of Husbandry, Tilling and Cultivating the Earth,
keeping and preserving of Cattle and useful Beasts, Makers of Garments,
Builders of Houses, to preserve Mankind from the Inclemency of the Seasons and
Injuries of the Elements; in fine, all Honest Employments that tend to the
Maintenance and Good of the Creation, and are harmless in themselves, do
advance Unity, which is the highest Perfection of all Religion and Well-doing.

Learning of Letters, Rhetoric, Oratory or well Speaking, Writing and
Understanding Numbers, their various and manifold Use and Service in the
Mathematics; also Music, which is the most wonderful and exalted Science, and
the only true Epitome of the Incorporate and Heavenly Harmony; there being
nothing that more fully, clearly and substantially demonstrates the excellent
Unity and Agreement of all the various Forms, Principles, Powers and Qualities,
and though the Use thereof, is not of such necessity as Tilling and Dressing
the Ground, and many other Arts and Trades, which are founded in Man's
Degeneracy, and falling from the Unity in his own Soul, yet it is manifest
beyond Contradiction, that Music is the most highly graduated of all the
Sciences, and of unspeakable Use to the sober, innocent and humble Minded, it
being an undeniable Maxim, that Unity begets Concord, and that Discord is the
inseparable Attendant of Disunion, ever teaching a Man this necessary and
important Lesson, that he should in all his Circumstances and Conversation, act
and move Uniformly, and keep his Instrument, (viz.) His Mind in Tune, which, to
be able in any competent degree to obtain, is the chiefest Blessing of this
Life and that which is to come.

All Communication, Discourse, and Reading of Books that prescribe Innocence of
Life, Temperance, Order and Method in Eating and Drinking, how to prevent the
Bodies falling into Discord, to keep the various Forms and Powers in Agreement,
have their Original from, and mightily tend to advance and promote the Effects
of the Holy and Divine Principle of Light and Love in the Hearts and Lives of
Men; therefore we ought to be very careful what we write and speak, for there
is nothing truer than, that where the Discourses, Words or Writings does
proceed from the Divine Fountain, they do always carry the power of the
Principle along with them, awakening and strengthening the same. The like is to
be understood of Evil, there being nothing more natural than f^r every like, to
increase and beget its self.

All kinds of useful, tame and tractable Beasts, and several sorts of Fowl,
take their Birth and Original from the more uniform Powers and Qualities, and
their Forms and Shapes are accordingly, and the Fruits and Service they afford
to Mankind very beneficial, as Sheep for their Wool, and Cows for their Milk,
which have been so valued by some Eastern Nations, that they have provided Laws
against the Killing of them, though in reference to other Creatures they have
been as Barbarous as their Neighbors; also the Horse and several kinds of
Birds, that give their Service for the Use and Benefit of Man; likewise all
delicate Flowers of various and delightful Colors, and fragrant Smells,
straight, tall, smooth, clean Trees, open Plains and Meadows, also the Unity of
the Elements, as clean, serene Airs, etc. do issue from the Divine Fountain,
from whom all Virtue and Goodness flows; and according as each Thing or
Creature is more or less Dignified with this Blessed Principle, so they become
better or worse, useful, or the contrary. All Creatures stand in the Eternal
Law, and act according to their first Composition, and as the Forms, Principles
and Qualities were seated in the first Creation, so they stand fixed in all for
ever, except in Man, who has power by the freedom of his Will, and the Faculty
of distinguishing between Good and Evil, of Changing, Increasing or Decreasing,
Principles, Forms and Qualities, where the Principle of Light and Wisdom is
weak and glimmering in the Birth, he can by due Management and Cultivation,
augment and strengthen it: Man is so wonderfully made and endued with such
mighty Gifts, as excel the highest Seize of all the Creatures, so that if
the Eye of his Mind be open, and his Will kindled in the Divine Magia, his Soul
has power to meliorate, increase and unite all the Forms and Qualities of his
Composition into the blessed Harmony, then all Works of Oppression, Violence
and Malignity cease, all Controversies and Disputes in Religion submit and
yield themselves Prisoners to his Judgment, which is able now to discern the
difference between Right and Wrong, Truth and Falsehood; then the Kingdom of
Christ, or the Divine Fountain, commences its Reign with the Practice of all
the Holy Virtues, acknowledging God's good Hand of Providence in all his
Dispensations, Justice to himself and others, Temperance in Diet, Humility,
Charity, Mercy, Self-denial, and in short, the whole Circle of Moral and Divine
Accomplishments, which that you may be truly sensible of, and fully endued
with, is the constant and hearty desire of

Your Affectionate Friend, T. T.

LETTER XVIII. Of CLEANNESS.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 26th of August, and must acquaint you, that I
have several times and in several Writings, given a full Account of the
substance of your Question, yet when I consider the importunity of your
desires, I have prevailed upon my self to say something more to the Point in
hand, withal considering how difficult it is, for Mankind to be persuaded of
the truth of those things which they have not been sufficiently accustomed to
examine and enquire into; they are indeed Truths of unconceivable importance,
to all whose Eyes shall be enlightened to understand the Mysteries of Nature;
Cleanness in Foods being a thing of greater moment and value than the World
usually imagins; for they are the very Being, Substance, and as it were, the
Original of the Microcosm Man, and in them are contained all the true
Properties of him, having a Simile in all Particulars, with the Qualities,
Principles and Fountain-Spirits, and being taken into our Bodies, they are
separated in our Stomachs, by the curious and cunning Chimistry of Nature,
whereby they afford Support and Nourishment. This wonderful Elaboration,
Digestion and Separation, by refining, purging and cleansing the Spirituous
Virtues of our Food, advances them to a higher pitch and degree, from whence
Imaginations, Inclinations, Dispositions, Complexions, Words and Works have
their Birth.

Every thing in this Visible World does contain the Nature and Qualities of the
two Grand Fountains of Good and Evil, in their very Original, they are endued
with an Influential Virtue or Vice, according as each Form stands nearest to
Unity or Discord, as is apparent in their Forms, Shapes and Signatures, etc.
Now when things come to be eaten, drunk, or joined to any other body, then
every particular Quality, Virtue or Vice is stirred up and awakened, by a
certain Secret Simpathy or Antipathy, for the Original of all Motions does
proceed from the joining of contrary Qualities, Principles and Powers.

Now if this be not thoroughly understood and distinguished, no Man will be able
to make a proper and advantageous choice in Food or any other thing: The want
of this Key is the back Door or Inlet of Darkness, Ignorance, and all the Evils
attending Mankind: From this Ground arise all our inordinate desires and
longing after unclean and unequal Meats and Drinks; for all Imaginations or
Appetites are clean or unclean, equal or unequal, according to the degrees of
Concord or Discord in each Person's Complexion.

Nothing does more demonstrate the Depravation of Mankind, the depth of
Darkness and Error, into which he has Ingulphed himself, than a voracious
desire after unclean Food, especially such as cannot be procured without
Violence and Injustice, in destroying the Unity of God's Creatures, who bear
the Image of their Creator in a great measure as well as our selves. This
distempered Appetite of Man, in coveting unclean Foods, had never exerted its
bloody Effects, if Man had not been first Polluted in himself, for no Commands
of Violence, Inequality and Uncleanness can spring from Equality, Simplicity
and Concord: Desires have always proportionable Nature and Conformity with that
Power, from whence they are derived.

If this Ground of true Wisdom and Philosophy were rightly apprehended and
believed, how cautious and careful should we be in the choice of our Meats and
Drinks? What wonderful satisfaction and pleasure should we take in using clean
and innocent Foods? and how mightily would Concord, Simplicity and Unity be
generated and advanced?

Now, if Man were not sunk down to the lowest degree of Depravation, he would
not only separate himself* from the grosser Uncleanness and Impurities in
Eating Flesh, but also from the Fruits of the Animals too, though it must be
confessed they are abundantly preferrable to Flesh; nevertheless they do carry
with them, and contain all the true Natures and Properties of the Stock or
Creature from whence they proceed: However, seeing they are the Fruits they can
spare Mankind, with no great damage to themselves, without any manifest Pain,
Trouble, Injury or Oppression, may be Eaten with less Harm and Prejudice than
the other; yet this is to be remembered, that the too frequent use of Butter,
Eggs, Milk, Cheese, etc. do insensibly awaken and beget Bestial Inclinations
and Dispositions: No Man can pretend to avoid the natural Effects of God's
Eternal Law: No Armor is proof against the Influential Powers, even of the
least of Nature's Works; for which reason it is highly necessary, that Man
should distinguish the Intrinsical Virtues and Vices of things, (viz.) to
obtain a true knowledge of their Natures, Complexions and Operations; for he
that has gained the Blessed sight of whatsoever he looks on out of himself, the
same shall he find in himself in all its qualifications, so that there is a
Simpathetical Concatination of all things. By virtue of this Divine Light and
Understanding Mankind is rendered capable of discerning and applying all things
that tend to the advancement of the Heavenly Kingdom of Unity, whereby the
Virgin Birth is obtained. Let this serve to whet your Appetite after the
improvement of Wisdom and Knowledge, and remain a Memorial of the unfeigned
friendship of

Your Humble Servant, T. T.

LETTER XIX. Of Flesh-BROTHS.
SIR,
I Have received yours, wherein you desire my judgment of Flesh-Broths or
Pottages, their Nature, Operation and Nourishment; and likewise Pottages and
Gruels made of Vegetables, as Fruits and Herbs without Flesh, and which of the
two does afford the best, finest, cleanest and healthiest Aliment to the Body
and Mind: This Question we have answered in several of our Writings,
nevertheless, shall endeavor to gratify your curious Philosophical Mind and
longing desire after Wisdom. And first, shall give you an account of Pottages
made with Flesh, and of the Fat, Gravy and Blood of Animals.

THe flesh of all Animals and Beasts is gross, succulent, and full freighted
with many impurities and uncleanness, as we have demonstrated in our Book,
Entitled The Way to Health, etc. And to say nothing of the Bestial and
revengeful passion of their Mind, which after Deaths painful stroke centers in
the Blood and Spirits, and those violent incroaching Spirits do never fail to
incorporate with their Similies in the Eaters, it being the natural Law of God
and the way of Nature, which no Art can prevent.

For as Man is the complete Image and Likeness of all things, Creatures and
Powers; on the other side, all Created Powers are an Epitome and likeness of
Man, so that in one Degree or another, Man answ^s to all things, and all things
to him; and as all Meats and Drinks are made and compounded both of Body and
Spirits, even as Man, so from our Foods our Bodies and Spirits are continued,
made and sustained, all according to the goodness, badness, cleanness or
uncleanness of our Meats and Drinks; for from the body of the said Foods, Man's
Body always is Created and made, and from the Spirits, Man's Spirits are from
time to time generated and supported, and so Nature still goes on; for from the
Spirits are made and do proceed Inclinations, Dispositions, Words and Works,
and they better or worse, clean or unclean, according as the Meats and Drinks,
and their respective Natures and Originals are.

Qualities always maintain and generate their like; for the Children cannot but
partake and be endued with the Principles, Forms and Dispositions of the Father
that begot them, and from whence they proceeded; and though they may alter as
to the degrees, some stronger, some weaker, yet are they the complete Image of
the Father, which is the eternal and unalterable Law of our great Creator.

So that there is nothing more clear and manifest, than that all Meats and
Drinks are endued with an influential Virtue and Power, to generate, strengthen
and maintain their own form and quality, having in their own Bosom a Key to
open all the secret Doors and Cabinets of Nature, and there to incorporate,
join, and reinforce all such forms, principles and powers, as are most
agreeable to themselves.

So that it is the highest degree of Blindness, Ignorance and Depravation, for
Man to imagine and think that there is little or no difference in the Nature
and Operation of Meats and Drinks, and that one thing is as good as another;
which deplorable and miserable Estate and Condition of Mankind, is much to be
lamented and highly pityed; for so long as this Blindness and deepest Stupidity
overwhelms People, there can be no inclination to true Virtue, Innocence and
Regeneration, (viz.) to be made better, for all things both in Body and Spirit
are better or worse, vicious or virtuous, according to the materials of which
they are made and compounded.

To this all Men agree, that a clean thing cannot be generated or proceed from
an unclean, nor a strong thing from a weak: This is generally understood by
every Man in his own Science, Art, Trade and Employment; and in particular,
this is wonderfully demonstrative in Husbandry, Painting and Manuring the Earth.

Yet this great and valuable Truth is not understood, nor at all regarden in
the Cultivation and Manuring their own Earth, (viz.) their Bodies, Souls and
Spirits: What a strange and unheard of Paradox is it, that he who pre^nds to
have Skill and Judgment, and to manage and govern the World and all things
therein, should be so ignorant, and know so little of himself or of the powers
and principles of his own Composition?

Will not the Husbandman tell you that such and such Land or Earth will bring
forth and bear such and such Grains, Seeds, Herbs, Trees and Fruits, better
than others? And will not the Lime-makers and such as are Skilled in Mortar and
Building, tell you that strong Lime cannot be made of Chalk, and that a strong
thing cannot proceed and be made of a weak one; but strong binding Lime must
have a strong, firm Original, that is, hard strong Stones, wherein the Sal
Nitral qualities of Saturn and Mars, or the original Forms are powerful? And
will not the Husbandman tell you, that if you will have your Cattle or Horses
endued with the greatest strength and agility, then you must give them the
finest and cleanest Foods, and such as by the Sun and Elements are purged from
their gross flatulent juices; for in such Foods the Spirits are clean, free,
prompt and ready, not being overwhelmed and drowned in gross matter; and of all
such, Corn has the first place?

And will not Drivers and Keepers of Horses tell you, that dry, clean Foods
will enable them to go through more Labor, without damage and hurt than Grass?
And do not Butchers and Tallow-Chandlers agree, that Cattle fed with Corn and
Hay, their Flesh will take Salt better and keep longer, and the Candles made of
such Fat, will not only burn best, but also endure longer, and are harder and
more firm?

The like is to be understood in all other things, every particular Species
carries along, even through all things, its original Seeds, both of virtue and
vice, strength and weakness, always enduing their Children or Offspring with
their own original qualifications; so constant, so true are the ways and
methods of Gods Law in Nature, and who dares deny these Grand Truths?

Now my Friend, if you understand and distinguish what here we have hinted at,
then you will easily make a judgment between Flesh-Pottages and those made of
Herbs, Fruits and Grains: However, for your satisfaction I shall give you a
more particular account of them.

Flesh-Broths or Pottages are various, better or worse, according to the sorts
they are made of, and the season of the Year, and the Food the Creature is fed
with; which our Writings give a particular account of, as touching that:
Therefore I shall not enlarge.

The Fat, Blood, Gravy, or Juices of all Beasts are exceedingly crude, full of
gross matter and dull, heavy, purblind Spirits, with contaminated dolorous
Species; and when it comes into Boiling Water, the Water immediately penetrates
the whole substance, and naturally draws forth and imbibes all the flatulent
gross juices and bloody matter, and as it were incorporates it into its self,
so that it becomes one Body, and the less water such flesh is Boiled in, the
more impure, gross and fulsom the Pottage is; the more water the better it is,
both for the Flesh and Pottage too: Now this cleansing liquid Element, does by
an innate disposition, purge, cleanse and draw forth, as is said before, all
the frothy, slimy evil juices of the flesh, and leaves it more clean, and the
Broth is thereby endued with all the malignant qualitys; and the more such
Pottages are Boiled, the worse and more stagnated, gross and heavy they become;
for Fats cannot be altered, changed or purged from their original impurities,
as Vegetables can. The Oily Sal Nitral qualitys are so knit together, that
there is no art can alter or change their forms, or purge them from their
grossness.

Besides, Fats or Oils will not admit of Boiling, for the longer they are
Boiled, the stronger, grosser and heavier they become, as the Tallow-Chandlers
and Melters of Fat observe; and therefore they Boil it as little as possible,
but run it off as it melts and rises in the Copper; and that which rises up
first is the cleanest and finest, and the Candles made thereof are better, and
Sold for more than the other that comes up last; and for this cause they Boil
as little as they can, only as much as will dissolve the matter; for if they
should not try and separate the watery, crude, grosser parts, the Candles would
not burn clear, and the Light would not only be dim, but they would run and
sputter.

And if you would be farther satisfied what virtues and vices Flesh-Pottages do
contain, then look into the bottom of Tallow-Chandlers Melting Coppers, and
take notice of the black contaminated sulphurous substance called Greaves,
which many buy to give their Dogs; with the very same all your Fats and Flesh
you eat, is as plentifully furnished as the Tallow, and some of it much more;
for Candles for the most part are made of the cleanest of the Fat, (viz.) that
which is called Suet, great quantitys thereof being eaten in Pudding.

Now there are several parts of the Creature, where the flesh is much more
unclean and foul than Tallow or Suet, as the Neck, Sticking-piece, and the
Head, that contains great quantities of black Blood and glandulous Matter,
which many People make Pottages of; such Broth does never fail of conveying all
those stinking, bloody, voracious, unclean qualifications to the Eaters, which
generates Nourishment of a heavy, slow, dull, melancholy nature and operation;
the Spirits proceeding therefrom are impure, glimmering, morose and churlish;
the Complexion and all the Inclinations and Dispositions are followed and
endued with a proportionable Nature.

Also all Pottages made of Flesh are the very Channel, Sink, and Common-shoar,
that dreans and draws forth, or attracts all the unclean dregs, or bloody
stinking matter which the flesh is endued with or subjected to: For this cause,
all Flesh-Pottages do prove unhealthy to all People, but more especially to the
Sick; and therefore the Eastern Physicians forbid the Diseased all Flesh-Broths
or Pottages, and eating of Flesh.

And it is not to be doubted, but in all places where most of Peoples Food is
Flesh, that the Diseases for the most part take their birth from their gross
unclean juices; so that there can be no greater evil than to eat those fulsom
dregs and lumpish Pottages, which cannot but by simile increase and encourage
the Disease, by augmenting the offending matter; and all this is done for want
of understanding and distinguishing the Principles, Fountain-spirits, cleanness
and uncleanness of things, and their respective Operations, both in the
Macrocosm and Microcosm, and the concatenation of things, how every thing works
and joins forces with its likeness, which is the highest joy and satisfaction
of all Beings.

Nor can any Man make an happy choice of things, till he can distinguish
betwixt the intrinsic and extrinsick virtues and vices of our selves and all
other things; and no sooner is the Divine Eye opened, but immediately Man sees
that Meats and Drinks are the very substance of our Bodies, Souls and Spirits,
and that all the Dispositions spring from thence.

Now on the other side, there are a great number of clean Pottages made of
Grains, Seeds, Fruits and Herbs, which are all noble and fragrant, (viz.)
Water Gruel, Rice, Conju, Wheat, Chocolate, and various sorts of Candles, made
of Wine, Ale, Beer, Cider, Oatmeal and Sugar; likewise diverse Spoon-meats, made
of Milk and Water, and such as these may have Butter mixed with them, (viz.)
Gruels and Paps, which is many degrees finer than the Fat of flesh, not only as
it is the noblest Fruit the Creature affords to Mankind without any manifest
pain, violence or oppression to them; but it is also far cleaner than other
Fat, and will endure and keep longer, and will likewise bear more Boiling than
other Fats, that is, such as we Eat and make Candles of.

The Sal Nitral Virtues or oily Body in Vegetables, is not only more clean,
sweet and fragrant, but much easier separated in the Stomach, and does
administer both dry and moist Nutriment in a clean and easy Method, begetting
their Similies; and does with the highest diligence withstand all the
encroaching Powers or Humors; for such as is the Food, such is the Body, Soul
and Spirits, Cleanness and Equality begets Children like themselves: And the
more simple and equal your Meats and Drinks are, the more equal are your
Humors; also the calmer and purer is your Blood, which is the Source whence the
Spirits are Generated, and from the Spirits, as we said before, arises
Dispositions, Imaginations, Inclinations, Words and Works, both equal or
unequal, according to the foundation or first matter.

This being granted, what great care ought Mankind to have in all the methods
of Life, for Meats and Drinks being the radix of all Nourishment both dry and
moist, are by the curious Art and Chemistry of Nature, higher graduated; from
whence all the nobler faculties take their Birth, wherefore we urge the grand
necessity of Prudence in the choice of our Foods, because hence are the
Generation of all Essences, Forms, Dispositions and Temperaments, and thence
the Seed in Man does arise, proceed and take its Birth and Generation: And this
Seed contains the true Nature and Properties of the whole, and so becomes a
complete Image and Epitome of all Forms and Powers; and as the Qualitys, Forms
and Powers are in the Father either equal or unequal, so they are in the Seed,
and as they are in the Seed so they are in the Son

For this cause, Unclean and Bestial, Bloody, Gored Foods, and such as are
procured by violence, do contaminate and sully the very Original of Man; so
that the unclean, violent, evil Essences are conveyed from Generation to
Generation, and therefore it is no wonder Mankind grows worse and more violent
and unclean in his Imaginations, Words and Works; for every Tree bears Fruits
according to its Qualifications and Original Principles. If Man would be so
wise to stand still and give himself the leisure to consider these things, then
might he see into his own Essences and Qualitys, and how every particular thing
is supported by its Simile, and that from hence springs such direful
inclinations after these Bloody, Bestial Meats and Foods: Must it not be from
the insulting Powers and divided Forms and Qualitys and proportionable Essences
in the Central Powers; for every Inclination and Desire does proceed and arise
from some Central Quality that wants Food to support it, and according to the
nature and quality of the Essences, such a Mouth it has, and such Food it
calls for.

Now if Men did in the least see into the Mysteries of themselves, and
understood any thing of this, we should not need Arguments to convince them of
the truth of what we have in several of our Writings endeavored to make them
sensible of, (viz.) their deplorable State and Condition.

YOURS, T. T.

LETTER XX. Of the Right and Left Hands.
SIR,
I Have yours, and also considered your Question, (viz.) for what cause and
reason Mankind in most Nations do teach their Offspring not only to
distinguish their Hands by the terms of Right and Left; but all Parents, as
Fathers, Mothers, Nurses and Tutors, do industriously accustom and teach them
to use on all occasions one Hand more than the other; that is the Right Hand,
which is a true Sign and Manifestation of man's Depravity, and that he has lost
his way, acting in the Dark, without any true consideration, sight, or from
Principles, as we have more largely treated and showed in our Writings.

For Nature nor Gods Law knows nothing of neither Right nor Left, but they are
words or terms, by which the Ancients distinguished good and evil Principles,
and not the Hands or Members of the Body, as in the Cases of the Ninivites;
where it is said, there were so many Thousands that did not know nor
distinguish their Right Hands from their Left, that is, good from evil; which
to do is the greatest Blessing and highest degree of Illumination, whatever
some dull Souls may imagine to the contrary.

Now man is the only visible Creature that does contain the true nature and
property, both of the visible and invisible World, as being a complete Image of
God and of Nature, being most wonderfully made; and in him is contained all
Mysteries, both of Time and Eternity: And so much as any Man does truly know of
himself, and to that degree as he does distinguish the Principle, and in Words,
Powers and Operations of his own Composition, so far he is capable to penetrate
into, and know of all Created Beings; so that it is most clear and true that
Man is complete in all the Spiritual and Corporal Powers, Principles and
Properties; there being nothing wanting to complete Man's external and internal
Happiness and Union, but true Wisdom, Sight and Understanding, and to
distinguish the use of the powers and principles he himself contains, that is,
to understand the right from the wrong, the evil from the good, and how to
compose, unite and bring the great and most wonderful variety of his Nature
into Unity or an equal Temperature; this being wanting, all his Actions and
Methods of Life are done by chance, or rather left-handedly; that is, from evil
principles, dullness, and horrid Stupidity, all the properties and
qualifications of MansMind and the Members of his Body, are equally useful when
known; and the Harmony neither of the one nor of the other, cannot be made up
or completed if any property of the Mind or Member of the Body be wanting or
defaced, but all goes on in a right line or method; are known, distinguished
and practiced, there being as is said before, no Left Hand in Gods Law: This
Hand comes in at the Door of Ignorance, where the Union of the parts are broken
and divided, where each Form, Quality, Inclination and Disposition becomes
self-ful, and sets up for Mastery, which is the principle of the Mind and
Spiritual Powers, and also in the Members of the Body is rightly called the
Left Hand, as taking its Birth from Selfefulness or evil Principles, being by
Men so understood, as when any Man does a thing badly, that is termed
Left-handedly; and when a Man meets with Misfortunes in his Business, such a
one will be ready to say, That he got over the Left Shoulder, and this word is
seldom used, but when any thing is done irregular, or when Losses and
Misfortunes happen; and if Man had not lost the Knowledge of God, himself, and
of the Law of Nature, the Operation of the Left Hand would not have had any
Being in him, but his Mind and Intellectual Powers being divided or strayed
from their Union or Harmony, then they become Left Handed, that is, all the
Outgoings, Inclinations and Actions, both of the Mind and Members of the Body,
have their Operations and Power of Action from Inequality, that is, from the
Influences of the Evil Genius or Left Hand.

And as Mankind is fallen into the highest degree of Ignorance and Blindness in
the Principles of his Mind and Understanding, from whence the Power of all
Actions in the Members, proceed or take their Birth, which is the Original
Foundation, not only of this Error in the Use of the Hands, but likewise of all
the other Members of the Body, for where the Eye of the Mind is put out, and
where Ignorance possesses, there is no end of Error and Misfortune, which can
never be regulated, till Men distinguish in themselves the Right Hand way from
the Left, that is Evil from Good, Right from the Wrong, Union from Disunion,
Discord from Concord, and Equality from Inequality, for from the Left Hand
proceeds all disasterous and extreme Operations and Methods, both in the Mind
and Members of the Body: Nothing is done well that is done left-handedly, that
is from Ignorance and Blindness. Is it not wonderfully strange, and as it were
miraculous too, that in so many hundred Ages as have passed, that Mankind
should not know the right and proper Use of their principal Members of the
Body, by whose Actions the Life is preserved? but when any Man is endued with a
distinguishing Mind, and does thereby penetrate into the gross Ignorance and
Degeneration of Men's Minds and Intellects, then it will appear to be no wonder
that Mankind does know no better; for if the Mind be Dark and Ignorant, all the
Commands and Directions do issue forth and proceed in proportion; for all
Conduct, both good and evil do proceed from within, and therefore such as the
Mind is, suitable are the Actions and Methods of Life: The Virtue and Vice of
every Tree is discovered by its Fruit. In a word, If your Understanding and
Mind be left handed, all the Actions and Motions of your Members are in
proportion; and as the degrees of Wisdom or Ignorance, all proceeds
accordingly, and Mankind may assure himself, that he is not more mistaken in
any one thing than in this, (viz.) To give such unnatural and almost monstrous
Directions to his Offspring or Children, from one Generation to another, to
deny them the proper and true Use of their principal Members the Hands, from
whose Use proceeds most or all the principal Actions and Curiosities that
Support not only the Life, but Pleasure and Beauty too. This selfish Ignorance
of Teaching and Whipping Children, principally to the Use of that which they
are pleased to call the Right Hand, does at the same time disable the other
Hand, wrongfully called, or rather nicknamed the Left, so that it does not
only dwindle and become weak, but as it were useless, in comparison what it
would be if it were equally used with the other, for each Member does grow
strong or weak, more or less useful, as they are Exercised in Action, which is
the Root of Strength and Agility, for Nature is ne^r forgetful of Supporting
and Supplying her Children with what is needful and proper for their
Preservation; and this is evident in all her Operations and Methods: Are not
all sorts of Cattle and Creatures, that are used and accustomed to moderate
Labor, do not they grow strong and fit for the Labor or Exercise that they
are put to? as Horses, is not their Strength increased in general through their
whole Bodies? and also in particular Members, if any one part be put to bear
more Labor or Hardship than another, does not that Member or Part, if not too
much oppressed, grow in some proportion strong, and thereby the abler to bear
it? The like is to be understood in all the Parts and Members of a Man; he that
uses any Labor, wherein the Back is chiefly concerned in the performance
thereof, that Part grows thereby stronger than otherwise it would; and he that
uses to Digg, as Gardeners, Brick-makers, and the like, are not their Legs and
Arms much stronger than other Men's? and that Leg or Arm that is most used, or
that the Labor lies hardest on, (provided it be not too great) that grows
strongest, and the other seems to dwindle, and becomes weak or impotent.

Now one Member, Arm, Hand or Leg is not made more strong or apt for the doing
and performing any kind of Labor, Art or Science than the other, but it is
only Use and Custom that makes all that, for each Part or Member of Man's Body
does contain and is endued with the true Nature, Properties and Humors of the
whole, and is thereby rendered capable when Assaulted or Oppressed with Labor,
to send for Aid, and extract Virtue and Power from all the adjacent Members and
Parts of the whole Body, and according to the nature of the Labor or
Employment, Strength is by this means Communicated. Every particular Thing or
created Being is an Image and Likeness of the whole, with only this difference,
the Qualities and Principles are in one thing strong, and in another weak,
following each other in degrees, which is the Original of that wonderful and
amazing variety of Complexions, the Members of the Body are like the various
Seeds Sowed in the Earth, each being complete, that is endued with the nature
of the whole, only the four Grand Qualities differ in their degrees of
Strength, Weakness and Government, so that every Seed is thereby made capable
to attract Virtue, and a suitable Juice or Nourishment, to strengthen and
support its self against all unequal Operations and fierce Invasions of the
Elements.

This secret or mystical Method the most wonderful Creator has centrally given
to all created Beings, according to the degrees and nature of each Thing or
Creature; for this cause the unequal Use of the Members, be it in what kind it
will, proves detrimental to the Body in general, but more especially to
particular Parts, (...) that Part or Member that is most used does become
strong, by drawing Virtue and Strength from its neighboring Part or Partner,
and so render one Part more useful, and the other less, which is nothing else
but an addition of Inequality, which takes its Original Birth from Ignorance
and the Inequality of the Mind and Intellects, which does mightily hurt
Mankind, rendering him much more unapt in his Trade or Employment, the Arms and
Hands being the chief and principal Members that are employed in most or all
Arts, Trades and Employments: How awkard is it for Ship-carpenters or others of
that Trade, to perform any part of their Work with the Left Hand, though it
lies never so fair for that Hand, and as contrary to the Right, so that not
having an equal Use of the one as well as the other, Men are p^t to a Shift,
and are not only longer about it, but perplexed too, so that most or all Men
are as it were Fettered, by being accustomed to improper and unnatural Methods,
for nothing can make a Man's Business so easy and familiar as the equal Use of
their Hands and Arms, they being the head Springs and principal Engines in all
or most Business, Trades and Employments whatsoever: Why is our Left Hand, as
we use it, more weak and unskilful in the performance of every Action than the
Right, it is for no other reason than that it has ^ot been used properly, or
rather rightly, God and his Handmaid Nature have endued them with a like or
proportionable Strength and Parts, there being no difference but what the
Mother and Nurse have made, whose whole Business is to make one Lame and the
other Strong, so that the Right may be thereby capable to do and perform the
Business of both, which Method does diametrically oppose not only Nature, but
render half our Members useless and of little value; and as Children are
equally capable of learning and speaking of one Tongue or Language as well and
readily as another, by hearing it spoke, even so they are in the Use of their
Hands, both in Writing and all other Arts and Employments.

The Errors that arise from this and other ill Managements are almost beyond
number, for as is said before, the too much use of one Hand or Member, and the
too little of another, does powerfully strengthen the one and weaken the other;
for as is mentioned before, that which is most used does attract Strength, and
draw Virtue from the whole, but more especially from its Partner or Brother
Member; by which many young People, especially of the Female Sex, grow
Deformed; whereas if they did use their Members equally, such things for the
most part would be prevented, more especially if the other Methods taught in
our Books were observed.

What an unthinking, untoward, unknowing, unskilful, unmindful, unregenerate,
unfaithful Creature Man is become, as blind and dark as Hell, much to be
Pitied, knowing little or nothing of those Principles he is compounded of or
operated by, neither of his Body nor Mind, though he do continually communicate
with both; but what can be said? or who is able to mend this dark Age so long
as Ignorance, Blindness, Self^ood, Pride, Vainglory, Covetousness, Envy,
Fierceness, Violence, Tradition and Customs govern Mankind? Nothing better can
be expected. Sir, This being what offers from

Your ready Friend to command, T. T.

LETTER XXI. Of CORPULENCY.
SIR,
I Have yours of September the 20th 1696, and take notice that you are troubled
with, and subject to, Corpulency or Fatness, and other Concomitant Diseases;
and that you would have a proper Medicine to give you some Relief and Ease: You
likewise say you have had the Advice of the most Learned in your parts, and
that all Prescriptions and Medicines have proved ineffectual, and that your
Disease increases upon you; I have no inclination to be dabbling with you^
Purse, but shall give you a plain, wholesome method of Life, in Meats, Drinks and
Exercises, which if you observe, will with the Blessing of God, make your Life
tolerable, if not wholly Cure you.

NO Fatness can be Cured, except such Persons do withdraw the Fuel, and forbear
such things both in Meats, Drinks and Exercises that maintain and support it,
being a Disease that seldom goes alone, but is attended with a black train of
other evils; their natural heat is seldom potent enough to support and digest
their Foods; besides, the Liquor or Menstruum of the Stomach is rarely free
from Crudities, so that great part of their Foods and Drinks are turned into
gross, impure Juices, which for want of warm brisk and lively Spirits and thin
Blood, great store of Flegmy Fat is generated in all the Members, and likewise
in the Vessels and Passages, so that the whole Body becomes glewy, and as it
were stagnated, which prevents the thin Juices and Humors from their free
passage and circulation, for all the inwardmost or central parts of Man's Body
are like Spunges or fine Strainers, by which the fine Humors or Spirituous
Virtues of our Food and Drink pass and repass, which is called a free
circulation of all the Juices that serve for Nourishment, for there are no
large Pipes or Currents for conveyance of Nutriment, as some do imagine, but
all the parts are like Glass, that lets in the Light, by reason of its
transparency: The like is to be understood of the passing, repassing and
circulation of the Nutrimental Humors, Juices, Blood and Spirits through the
whole Body, the Bladder being as it were the Sink or. Bag to receive all the
thin Juices or Urine which a natural motion and secret attraction Drains,
(viz.) the Superfluous or Excrementitious moisture from all parts of the Body,
and notwithstanding the great quantities that fall into this Bag or Sink; there
is no Pipe, Vessel, or any thing like it, that conveys or carries this Liquor
or Urine, but all is done in a Mystical or Wonderful Method, (viz.) by the
attractive Power of that part, as being its Disposition and Office to draw the
thin moisture from all parts of the Body, and the Bladder being Spungious the
Urine penetrates through all parts of it, as by way of Pores, much like Sweat
that is occasioned by Labor, and many other ways, which by motion and
agitation of the Natural heat do easily penetrate through all the parts, and
such as Sweat much do make so much the less Urine, provided the Liquors taken
into the Body be in proportion.

The like is to be understood of most of the conveyance of all Humors and
Juices from one Member or part of the Body to another; so that whenever any
Member or other part becomes as it were fixed, and the porousness of any of
them be stopped, that the fine thin Juices, Blood and Spirits, cannot penetrate
or freely repass, then presently is felt a pain or some disorder, and if the
Obstruction be much, then that Member or part swells and is full of pain, or
the Distemper called the Dead Palsy falls on that part or Member, but more
often this sort of Obstruction proves the Gout; for the Airy, Windy quality in
the Body which does continually penetrate, and with a quick and powerful
circulation run through the whole, as being the central Life of the Blood,
which if wounded, penned up, or its circular swift motion any way hindered or
obstructed, then great pain or swelling attends that Member: The Obstructions
of this thin, light, airy Spirit or Quality in the Body, is the Original of a
great number of cruel Diseases.

And it is farther to be understood, that all salt, strong, hard, gross Foods
that generate thick or tough Juices, thick Blood and impure Spirits, do
mightily stop the glassy transparent or porous Vessels, which do not only
occasion gross Flatulent Humors, and Crude Juices to lodge in several remote
Members and parts, but penns up and stops the circulation of this Airy quality,
from whence springs the Gout and all other evil, windy and gross Distempers,
which rarely any Medicine Cures.

Likewise it is to be noted, that the Diseases arising from those evil
Obstructions, are various, and of as different Kinds and Natures as Complexions
and Constitutions are; in one it gives the Gout, in another the Stone and
Gravel, in another a gross Phlegmatic Humor and Fatness, all according to the
Original Humors in each Man.

Also these Obstructions do in many People occasion Fumes and Vapors to fly
into the Head, and to perplex other parts of the Body; likewise some others
there be, that from the ill Habits of their Constitutions, even from their
Birth, as it were Born with Obstructed Natures, which they derive from their
Parents ill Habits, Obstructed Natures and Ill Livings; for no Man of
Understanding doubts but that the Seed is a complete Image of, and does contain
the true Nature and Properties of Man, so the Seed becomes better or worse, all
according to the good or ill Habits, Temperance or Intemperance, Order or
Disorder of the Parents, so that Wisdom, Understanding, Temperance and Order,
are not only the Springhead of Blessings to Mankind, but likewise to all their
Children and Posterity; which is of great moment, and ought to be considered by
all People that pretend to fear God and keep his Laws.

Now the Original of those hard tough Humors and mortiferous Diseases, take
their Birth from the Disorders, Intemperan^es, Gross, Heavy, Unclean Foods and
Strong Drinks, for such as the Spirits and Juices of each thing are, such
Humors, such Blood, such Spirits, such Flesh, such Dispositions, such
Inclinations, such Words and Works they Generate and Maintain, together with
the Airs they live in and Employments and Exercises they follow: Therefore such
as have a mind and would be Healthy, Cured, or lessen the Distempers that have
already invaded them, must observe an orderly* regular Diet, and the nature of
the Food they eat, whether gross, clean or unclean, simple, innocent; and the
like as to their Employments and Airs, or else none can obtain their lost
Health, or make their Lives in any degree easy, for every thing tends to its
Original, and never sails to exert its own power on all occasions and
considerations, with that which has the nearest affinity to it.

Now if the truth of what we have said be considered, understood and
disti^guished, then such a one will know that Temperance, Order and Cleanness
are the Springhead of all Virtues, and as it were, under God, the Original not
only of Health but of every good Work and Action; so great, so powerful, and so
wonderful are the Laws of God and the innocent Methods of Nature, they Crown
their Observers with the Blessings of Time and Eternity.

I do not doubt, but when you have well considered of what I have already said
as to your Distemper, and what I shall say, but that you will incline to
observe the Methods I shall propose for the Cure of your ill Habit of Body, and
the Diseases attending you: Now the Meats and Foods that are most suitable for
the preventing your Fatness and other Evils, are, all such as are clean in
their own Nature, having no manifest quality too highly exalted; for every sort
of Food that is unequal, does increase your Malady, and leave a Wound behind
it.

You may eat, and probably with some success too, Bread, Butter, Cheese, Herbs,
Roots, Fruits, Gruels, Chocolate, Paps, Milk-pottage, and various sorts of
other clean, innocent Foods; but it will be better for you not to spread your
Table too large, but confine your self to a less compass, (viz.) to Bread,
Butter and Cheese, Water Gruel and Flour-Pap, only with Salt and no Butter in
it, and let this be your Method, (viz.) in the morning a Pint of thin
Water Gruel, with a small piece of good well Baked Bread a little toasted, bite
your Bread and sup your Gruell; the like when you eat Pap, always drinking a
quarter of a Pint of Water after it presently, and forget not before or after
you eat your Gruel, to take a walk of a Mile or two in the most clean, airy
place you can, or by running Rivers side; for all Airs are much ^ner by running
Waters than else where, for by the curious, moist, thin, Spirituous Vapors
that such Rivers do send or breathe forth, incorporating or mixing with the
common Air, it both becomes rarifyed, and thereby is made more transparent,
thin and Spirituous, so that it easily penetrates into the very center of all
parts of the Body, opening all the passages, and moving Obstructions, causing
the Circulations of all the Humors, Blood and Spirits to pass more freely; if
this were not so, People that walk by such Rivers sides and others that work on
it, would not have such pressing, sharp Appetites, even far greater than those
that are exercised on the higher Grounds; but if any Man Swim or go into such
Rivers to wash themselves, or do any other thing of that nature, it will
sharpen and increase the Appetite to a higher degree.

Now this comes to pass by the fineness of such Airs, and the thin Spirituous
Virtues that penetrate to the Body on all sides, whichare sucked in by the
Pores, giving a certain recruit to all the natural Spirits in the Body.

It is likewise to be noted, that such as travel or work in Windy, Rainy
Weather, do thereby obtain a sh^rper and a stronger Appetite than by the like
Exercises in dry Seasons, and such a one will not so often want supplys of
Drink, because such seasons and places do afford them a much finer moisture,
and more agreeable to Nature: You may take your walk before or after you have
eaten your Gruel and Bread, then Fast till Dinner, about one or two of the
Clock eat a small Sallad raw, made of Parsley, Spinach, Sorrel, and a few
Onions with them, and eat them with a little Salt and Vinegar, no Oil, but with
Bread and Butter, or Cheese, and sometimes only with Bread; drink with them
fresh small Ale or good Water, the last being Superior to the first; then fast
till Supper, and about Seven of the Clock eat a Pint of Water-Gruell or Pap,
with a little piece of Bread toasted, and once or twice a week take a walk of
5, 6, 7, 8 or 10 Miles, or more, as you shall find your self able, and as you
grow stronger, increase your walks, to 20, 30 or 40 Miles.

And you must always go till you be weary, but not till you be Faint, for
Nature will not increase her strength if you do not in a moderate degree exert
her Faculties and put her to a little Hardship; for it is an undeniable rule,
and it always holds true, that Nature endeavors to strengthen and arm herself
against all Affronts and invading Powers; for this cause, the more you Labor
the more you may, and the easier it becomes to you, which most attribute to
Custom, which is true in a Sense; but give me leave to tell you, so soon as you
put your self to any unusual Exercise or Labor, Nature uses all her
endeavors and powers not only to withstand such Labors, but to overcome them,
that she may be a Conqueror with ease; and therefore if any particular Member
be more used in this Trade or other Employment, whether it be a Leg or an Arm,
that Member or part in a little time grows more potent and strong than the
other; and for this cause, after Tradesmen have done their common days Work,
most of them can walk and exercise themselves in many other things with
delight, and not feel half the dullness and weariness as they did at their
Customary Employments or Labors, which had worn out or dulled the natural
Spirits that supported those parts most employed, and did undergo the greatest
part of the labor of that Employment or Trade.

But all this while, other Members and parts of the Body that were not so
intent or employed in the said Labor, remained as it were fresh, lively and
full of Spirits, so that when such a one comes to another sort of Exercise or
Labor, wherein those Members or parts were not so much concerned, as is said
before, then they do readily lend their Aid and Assistance, by which a Man does
exercise himself in another Employment for some time, with ease and delight,
notwithstanding he was weary at his usual Trade or Employment.

The principal cause and reason of this is, every part of the Body has its
particular Offices, and the natural Spirits that support and supply it with
strength and vigor, which lies as it were still, and does not exert its
strength nor powers till that part or Member comes to be employed.

This being the original Cause, that a Man after he is weary and dull at the
long continuance of Labor in one thing, and the whole Body seems to be tired;
yet at another Employ or Work he shall be (as was said before) fresh and
lively, which is by the supplies of the lively Spirits, that centered in such
Parts and Members, whose supporting Strength and Powers were not called forth
in the foregoing Labor.

For this Cause and Reason, variety of Exercises and Employments are best and
least burdensome to Nature, being much easier performed, and with more
pleasure.

If this were not, little weak Children could never go through a days Play with
such might and vigor as they do; for they are not conducted by Reason nor
Interest, for the obtaining a days Wages or greater Gain, but follow Nature,
and so soon as they are dull and weary at one Sport or Pastime, they presently
fall to another, never reasoning the Cause or studying the Point, but go out of
one thing into another; so that when night comes, they have tired all their
Members and Parts of their Bodies, and have left no Spirit uncalled.

It is therefore a grand Mistake in all Parents and Tutors of Children, being a
wrong Notion, (viz.) To let their Children Play, to refresh and make themselves
more agil and lively; whereas the very contrary is to be understood, for
nothing does so much unfit, dull and becloud their brisk, lively, sporting
Spirits, as such various Sports, which unfits and renders them incapable for
all sorts of Learning.

Whereas they ought to be Methodiz'd by their Tutors and Parents, that is, to
be appointed several sorts of Learning for the day, not exceeding one hour at a
time for one sort of Art, and though the same sort might come in the afternoon
as in the morning, yet they should spend but one hour at a time, by which they
might learn six several sorts of Arts and Sciences in one day, (viz.) Language,
Writing, Singing or other sorts of Mu^ick, some useful parts of the
Mathematics, and Gardening, ^itting or Sowing; the meaner Arts to spend the
less time in, by which the whole day would be nothing but a Play or Diyersion.

Of all Exercises, Walking or Going is one of the most strong and healthy; for
as we have demonstrated, most Employments, Trades or Arts, when a Man has
Labored all day at any of them, yet he leaves some Member or Part of the Body,
as it were unwearied, so that a Man may as it were, with some kind of Delight
and Pleasure exercise himself in another, but Going or Walking hard, does at
once tire and weary all the Parts of the Body, and though some are more weary
and tired than others, because more exercised, or more weak, yet all will be
wearied or tired after hard Walking.

So that if a Man after such Going, does exercise or labor at any other thing,
he will presently find himself disabled, and no Member or Part can supply him
with fresh and lively Spirits; which does show and clearly manifest, that
Walking or Going is one of the best and most natural, as well as equal
Exercises, and for that very reason it begets the best Stomach and Appetite,
and is the principal Employment, for Health and the increase of good Blood,
strong clean Spirits and vigorous Nerves, and particularly for all fat, gross,
phleg^tick People, and such as are apt to be so: And the more such use Going,
the more they may, and the greater the Journeys are, the better, provided they
come to it by degrees; there being no Trade or Employment so beneficial,
natural and healthful, though all Exercises are beneficial and good for most or
all People.

And if going on foot were esteemed genteel and customary, many would receive
great Advantages thereby; and notwithstanding it is so natural, so healthy, and
gives the Practisers thereof such strength and pleasure of Appetite,
nevertheless few there are that choose it for their own sakes, or the Benefits
it endues the Practisers withal.

Riding is a good Exercise, and of much motion, and passing through various
Airs, begets good Appetites, and is healthful, but not to be compared with
Going on foot, as not being so natural, nor employing the Members and Parts of
the Body so equally and genteel; so that Riding cannot increase and beget such
Strength, nor so many powerful Spirits: Indeed it is an Employment or Exercise
of great motion, but very unlike Nature, being the motion of the Horse and not
of the Man, which is altogether contrary to the natural habits and motion of
Going, and all other Motions that Men are subject to, or ever practice; and as
this Riding, Jolting, Turbulent Horse-motion is altogether contrary to any
Motion or Gesture that belongs to Men, or that they are subject to; so it
cannot be made easy but by custom; and such as do not accustom them selves to
Riding when Young, can hardly ever make it easy in Age, the greatest Use of it,
is, that it is expeditious and genteel, and Going on foot seems Poor, Beggarly
and Despicable, even as almost all the usefullest and most innocent things in
the World are; a Horse is a high, lofty, proud Creature, and may in some
measure influence his Rider with such Dispositions, but Going on foot is
innocent, simple, natural and contemplative, free from care, having but one to
take care for; the fewer we have in Family the less is our Trouble.

Your Friend, T. T.

LETTER XXII. Of FEVERS.
SIR,
BY yours I am informed of your present ill state of Health, and that you are
very subject to a Fever, or much Indisposed by Heat, which attacks you on every
side, and upon every small Disorder of Meats, Drinks and Exercises, and that
you desire my Judgment of the Original of those hot Humors, and by what Method
to prevent them, which I shall readily do; the Gifts and Talents God has
bestowed on me, are all at the Service of true Seekers of Wisdom, that being
the end for which they were given.

FEvers are as various in their degrees as they are in their Natures, all
according to the Meats, Drinks, Employments, Venus and Airs, together with the
Intemperance of the Stock or Parents, this last is the most dangerous and
deepest rooted of all others, and hardest to be Eradicated, for every Fruit is
better or worse, according to the temperance, equality or inequality of the
original Forms of that Thing or Creature, both in the Animal, Vegitable and
Mineral Worlds or Kingdoms; for the Fruit of each thing is the complete Son or
Image of all the Principles, Qualities and Powers of the Father, that Generated
or Begot it; so that all the Intemperances or unequal Methods of Life, be it
Meats, Drinks, or any other thing, do center in the Seed, which contains all
the Species and Essences of the Disorders, both of Body and Mind, and do rarely
fail to engraft and entail those incroaching Properties and unequal Powers.

Many of these Diseases thus procured, lie hid during the time of Youth, or so
long as Nature is vigorous and strong, but so soon as Age comes, or any other
concurring Accident or Intemperance, they start up and appear in their own
Forms; for which there is hardly any Medicine found that can make them
tolerable. Is not this most clear and manifest in all the Bea^ts and Vegetables
of the Earth? and are not all the Young ones or Offspring of this wonderful
and amazing variety of Beings, better or worse, sound or unsound, healthy or
unhealthy, strong or weak, according to the temperaments and goodness of the
Seed, and the equality or inequality of the Earth or Ground it is Sowed in, and
the Cultivation of the Husbandman, whether managed with Prudence or the
contrary?

And as it is with the Beasts and Vegetables, even so it goes, and the very
same is to be understood in the Humane Ground, a strong thing cannot arise and
proceed from a weak one, nor an equal from an unequal, or a healthy from a
sickly, every Seed, Fruit or Son carries in its central Bosom, all the
Qualifications, Degrees and Temperaments of the original Stock or Father; this
being the very Ground and principal Cause why so many cruel Diseases that
attend Mankind, cannot be Cured, neither by Medicines, nor wholesome temperate
Methods of Life.

Now, if this Ground or true Foundation of Wisdom and Philosophy were well
understood, the Physician would be capable of giving good Advice and Precedents
of Life, and likewise others would be careful, cautious and temperate, both in
the quality and quantity of their Meats and Drinks, being sensible, that from
the Body and Spirits of each of them, our Bodies and Spirits are continually
Made, Created and Generated, and according to the degrees of Equality and
Inequality, Temperance or Intemperance, such is the Humors, such is the Blood,
such are the Spirits, such Imaginations, Dispositions, Words and Works, every
thing according to its original Constitution, and whatsoever Form has obtained
the Dominion in the central Fire, always is generating and creating its own
Species or Son, who does in all particulars contain all the Properties,
Principles and Powers of the Father, as is hinted before, so that the Essences
of each thing we Eat and Drink, in order to support and continue our Bodies and
Spirits, do never depart, but advance and confederate with their Similies and
Likenesses, and according to their goodness, grossness, cleanness and
uncleanness; such a Man is created, generated or made: This being the eternal
and unalterable Law of the Great Father of all Powers, and Creator of all
Beings, which no Man can withstand or obliterate; therefore Equality,
Cleanness, Order and Temperance are as it were the Originals of a Sound,
Healthy Body, Harmonious Mind, and a Pious, Sober, Clean, temperate Offspring:
For all things in the Good and Evil observe their Original Law, every thing in
its own way, according to its Dignification, in Evil or Good, Equality or
Inequality, such a Child, Son or Fruit it Brings or Widwifes into the World;
for this Cause Cleanness, Temperance and Order have been so highly celebrated
and commended by all the Seeing and Distinguishing Men, both of former and
latter Ages; so that it is plain and manifest, that most of those cruel and
incurable Diseases that now reign in the Microcosmical World, have been
conveyed and entailed by their Progenitors or Parents; and if Mankind should
now take up and live on simple, innocent Meats and harmless Drinks, and free
himself from Violence, Uncleanness and Opression, it would be two or three Ages
before Man would be Healthy and Sound, either in their Bodies or Minds, so
deeply are they wounded!

Which miserable and melancholy State or Error can never be mended, neither in
the Stock, Branch, Fruit nor Son, till it be seen and known to be so, and that
the Eye of Wisdom be opened in Man's Mind, by which he sees, understands and
distinguishes between the Intrinsic and Extrinsick Virtues, Vices, Cleanness
and Uncleanness of their Food and Drink and all other things they join or
communicate with.

Now, as Fevers are more tolerable or violent, according to the Form or Power
that Operates, Agitates or Invades the natural or central Fires, for Fire is
the root of motion, and the true Strength and Pleasure of Life, when it burns
gently and calmly, but when it is agitated or too violently awakened or stirred
up, then presently, as with a rapid and turbulent motion it seizes the radical
moisture and sweet Oil, which is the true Life and Original being of the Fire,
but Burning too violently it consumes this Oily Body, and violently attracts
the thin, Spirituous, Airy Qualities or Powers unto it self, for all heat or
fire of what kind soever, naturally and with great Ardency attracts or draws
unto it self the Air, it being its Life, for without it it can neither burn nor
subsist.

The Air thus drawn does always carry in its Bosom the watery Spirit or Element,
which gives unto the Fire its bright, clear, shining Luster; but the Central
Fires being thus agitated or awakened, do in a moment destroy and consume both
the radical, Oily Body, and also the Airy and Watery Spirits and Natural Powers,
which do presently as it were stagnate and prevent all the circular Motions,
and in a great measure stop the Vessels and Parts both Internally and
Externally, so that the Blood becomes thick, gross, hot and frothy, and the
Pores of the outward Members and Parts becomes hot, narrow or stopped, which does
prevent the Penetration, Ingress, Egress and Regress of the fine, thin,
Spirituous Vapors of the Air from without.

So that if the fiery Spirit be violently awakened, it breaks and destroys all
the Circulations and Correspondence of the whole Body, all the inward faculties
being in an Agony, or a tumultuous State and Operation, and thereby the Life is
sunk or destroyed as it were in a moment, if some powerful Food or Medicine
does not timely prevent, by opening the doors and porous passages, and to
advance the Circulation of the Blood, Spirits, and all the Airy Motions and
Faculties; for should the healthiest and strongest Person's External Pores be
stopped but one Quarter of an Hour, such a one would be seized with a Fever
immediately.

For the fine, thin, Spirituous Vapors of the Air that do penetrate the Body
on all sides, and by the attractive qualities are sucked or drawn in by way of
Pores, which do refresh, uphold, increase and support all the natural Motions
and Circulations of the Blood and Spirits, and their fine, thin, Spirituous
powers of the Air do never fail to carry and convey the transparent, thin,
moist Vapors or Spirits of the Element of Water; for as the Fire cannot burn
nor subsist without the Airy Spirit, so neither ean the Air continue its brisk
lively motion without the support of the Fire, which incorporates its self and
dwells in the moist Vapor or Spirituous quality of the Water, which Watery
Spirit gives Life both to the Air and the bright shining light of the Fire, one
cannot subsist without the other.

For this cause, if any Person is employed abroad in moist, wet Weather, and in
or about Waters or Rivers sides, such People have for the most part, stronger
and sharper Appetites than in dryer Seasons and Places; for the Air being in
moist Seasons (provided there be not too much wet Weather) filled or
impregnated with the fine, moist Spirits of the Water, which does give such a
powerful life to the Air, that both becomes rarefied; by which it more
powerfully penetrates the whole Body, through all parts and Members, to the
very Center, which by a Sympathetical Agreement reinforces all the material
Motions, causing a powerful and lively Circulation, both of the Blood, Spirits,
and all the Aliments; from whence does arise and proceed a lively brisk Motion,
Strength, Agility, and strong, sharp Appetite, for the more free and open the
Trade and Commerce is between the outward and inward Elements, or between the
Microcosm and Macrocosm, the better is the state and condition of Health, both
of the Body and Mind.

For this cause, the oftener and more any Person does expose his Body to the
open Air and Elements, the stronger the Appetite and Digestive Faculties of the
Stomach are, and such Persons are more strong and lively, likewise they are
more hardy and more free from Colds and Obstructions, which are nothing else
but a Condensation or a stoppage of the porous Passages, from whence cruel
Colds and a thousand Diseases proceed; therefore it is not good to Cloth the
Body too Warm, but of the two, Cold is to be preferred to heat, provided it be
not too much, and that it be born with pleasure or without pain.

For the inward Virtues of the Elements of Air and Water, are curious living
Powers, which do sustain and preserve all the wonderful Beings in this great
World, but in what Creature or Thing soever these living Powers and the thin,
penetrating, moist Spirits and Vapors become stagnated or thickened, then that
Creature or Thing becomes dull, heavy, and full of Indispositions and Crudities.

Now when in any Creature the forementioned central Fires Burn too violently,
attracting and drawing all the moist, Spirituous Vapors, both of the Air and
Water, consuming and destroying as is before mentioned; then immediately the
Pores are in a manner stopped, and the Forms and Properties do press, and as it
were rub against each other, by which the Fire Burns more intense and fierce,
like two sticks rubbed hard against each other; the Internal central heat is
thereby stirred up and awakened, and so fiercely kindled, that this Fire which
lay hid and captivated in the very Center, does by this agitation and fierce
motion, burn up and destroy the whole Body in a moments time, the Fire being
the Original of Motion, and the true pleasure of all the other Elements when it
burns easy or gentle, but when it loses its power in any Creature or Thing,
all becomes cold, dull, heavy, congealed, and as it were frozen in that
Creature or Thing in which the Fire is impotent, and that thing stands near the
House of Death and the Melancholy Regions: And though this Noble Element the
Fire, be as it were the Life and Original of all lively Motion, and the
Well-being of every Creature, and when it incorporates or equally mixes with
the other Elements, burning gently, notwithstanding its Excellency, wonderful
and various uses; yet most of the Distempers of the public State, and also the
Diseases incident to Mankind, are as it were Originally occasioned by this
Element, and also most of the Outrages that are committed in the great World,
from Man to Man; and likewise the greater part of the Diseases that so terribly
torment and afflict Mankind, which if Man observe with a clear Eye and
Understanding, he will then see and find that this great Evil has fallen upon
him for his great and deep Degeneration and Separation from the Unity of Gods
Holy Powers, and his not knowing and distinguishing the Powers and Principles
of God in himself.

Now Man having lost his way, and being sunk into Darkness and Ignorance, he
takes hold and uses the gross, fiery, sulphurous and Brimstone Spirit, which
Governs in Man as he stands in Self-fulness and separated from the Divine
Fountain of Benignity or Holy Union, not being mixed, incorporated or allayed
with the sweet Water of Eternal Life in Jesus Christ.

This Spirit or Fire before mentioned, as it stands divided from the Union, is
a high, lofty, exalted Power, the Original of all Pride, and a domineering
Spirit; and in what Creature soever it obtains the Government, that Creature
becomes proud, and of an insulting Nature.

Now the chief and principal cause or reason is that this proud, fiery,
domineering, and as it were consuming Spirit of Fire has obtained and gotten
such an Ascendant in the Hearts and very Souls of Mankind, and also that the
exalted and predominating power in most Diseases, is this fiery, brimstone or
sulphurous quality of Fire.

Now as any Form or Property obtains the chief Government in the Heart,
immediately this very quality does Sign or Stamp its Character, and as it were,
lay its Commands on the imaginative Power; and so Signs the Inclinations,
Dispositions, Words and Works from the Government of this lofty, fiery Power
and Spirit; from whence proceeds all Vainglory, Pride, high and lofty
Imagination, Inclinations and Desires after base, slavish, violent, oppressive
Employments, as also ardent and longing Desires after unclean, gross Foods and
high, lofty, strong Drinks, for every Mouth will be fed with agreeable Food,
the Attraction, Desires and Inclinations do always arise and proceed from the
ruling Quality; and Man being divided from the Union of God and his own
Composition, into Disunion, the fiery, envious, spiteful Powers exalting
themselves, cause a direful Appetite in Man.

And from these very Qualities the violent, oppressive Trade of Killing one
another, and Eating the flesh of the Undergraduates or Beasts, having taken
their Original Birth; for every Spirit, Principle and Power does desire, and is
supported and maintained by its Similie, so that it is most clear, nothing
being more manifest than from those high, exalted, fiery Spirits and Powers in
Man, have sprung such violent and direful Appetites, and strong Inclinations
after the Blood of their own Kind, and to eat the Flesh and Blood of the
Beasts, likewise to drink hot, fiery, exalted Liquors; so that there is a
Concatenation between the Imaginations, Inclinations, Natural Spirits,
Dispositions, Words and Works, Communications, Employments, and the Diseases
Man is most subject unto.

Now as all the forementioned qualifications do arise and proceed from a fiery
ground, which do with great power and strong vigor attract proportionable
Foods and Drinks; therefore most of our Diseases cannot but be Signed with the
Character of Fire, for every Principle, Form or Quality, whenever it has
gotten or attained the Ascendant in any Man, it goes on in a straight, regular,
constant Method to do its own Work, (viz.) to nourish, support and increase its
own Spirit and Power, whether it be in the Good or in the Evil.

Hence it is no wonder, that Mankind is so frequently seized, wounded and
destroyed by so many sorts of fiery Diseases, (viz.) Fevers, when any thinking
Person considers what Powers, Principles and Qualities rule and govern in his
Heart and Soul, there being a Sympathetical Agreement and Inclination between
the governing qualities in Men's Minds, and their Meats and Drinks, and likewise
their Diseases, all follow one another in a direct Method or Line.

Now the power and influence Meats and Drinks have on all the Faculties of
Nature, no Wise man will or can deny, as is before sufficiently demonstrated;
besides, there is still another Ground and deep Original for the conveyance and
generation of a great multitude of Diseases, but more especially this fiery
Distemper, (viz.) the Seed being the complete Image or Epitome of all the
Properties, Forms and Powers, both of the Body, Soul and Spirit; and for this
cause Man is called the Son or Offspring of God, or his Image: The same is to
be understood of Man when he Generates a Child, is he not his Son, and does he
not bear the Image and true Signature of his Father? is he not endued with all
the principles and powers of Body, Soul and Spirits? and if the Seed did not
contain the true Nature and Property of the whole Father, then the Fathers
power or part thereof would not have an Essential Being in the Son, neither
would the Son be his true Image; this being true, as no Wiseman can doubt: Then
by the same rule, Virtues and Vices of all Kinds are Sowed in the Seed, and
according as the Father and Mother are qualified and tempered in their Order,
Sobriety, Temperance or Intemperance in their Meats, Drinks and Employments,
Communications, Imaginations, Inclinations, Dispositions, Words and Works, such
is the Seed and the Fruit that is Generated, Begotten and brought forth, and is
in Body, Soul and Spirit, the very same in all the principles and powers.

This being true, what Conduct, Temperance and Order, what Cleanness,
Self-denial and Wisdom, ought Parents to be endued with, seeing they entail all
their Virtues and Vices on their Posterity?

Now Mankind has so far estranged himself from all those forementioned
Virtues, by his gross Evils, Violences, Oppressions and Uncleanness, that he
is run into the deepest degree of Depravity, Blindness and Ignorance; so that
most do live under and are governed by the divided powers and forms of their
own Composition, where every quality and principle are at Enmity with each
other, so that he is hunted out of one evil into another, Fierceness, Violence
and Oppression being his chief Delight, and as it were the Pleasure and Pastime
of most Men, (viz.) Great Men study how they may destroy, ruin and kill those
of their own Kind and Species, and the lower Ranks, in hunting, oppressing and
killing the inferior Graduates, and all the innocent, harmless Inhabitants of
the four Worlds; and in Conformity and Proportion to these rapacious
Employments, are the principal Foods of Man, so that there is a Concatenation
and Sympathetical Agreement and Concurrence of all sorts and kinds of wrathful,
fierce Violence, contrived and managed by the inbred, fierce, encroaching,
spiteful, envious Powers, which have not only sullyed, but as it were
obliterated the Noble light of Understanding and has sunk Man into the deepest
and darkest ignorance of himself and all that is good, so that he neither sees,
hears nor understands any thing as he ought, and thereby becomes subject to,
and is acted and governed by the forementioned tyrannical Spirits.

Now there is no way or means to prevent those violent Diseases and other
Distempers, but by the wholesome rules of Order, Temperance and Cleanness in
Meats, Drinks, Communications, Employment, Words and Works, which does oppose
all the forementioned Customs, as much as Light does Darkness, or the Day the
Night; by which the Observers may obtain a better Seed, which will produce a
Healthy and Virtuous Offspring, (viz.) The Foods material and suitable for
this purpose, are as follows; Bread and all Foods made of the Flour of Corn,
have the first place, both for Cleanness, Virtue and good Nourishment, as Bread
and Water Gruel, Flour-pap, boiled Wheat, boiled Barley, Hasty-pudding, boiled
Bread, and several sorts made of the Flours of Seeds and Corn: Next to these
are Milk, Butter, Cheese, Eggs, and a great number of other Exhilerating Foods
made thereof: The principal Drink allotted and ordained by God and the Law of
undefiled Nature, is pure clean Water.

Next to these are Communications, which have great power over the
Imaginations, Inclinations, Dispositions, Words and Works, either to increase
or advance Virtue or Vice; and these Employments are very material, (viz.) All
such as are Humane, free from Oppression or Violence, either to Man or Beasts;
likewise all sorts of Husbandry, or any Business in the open Air, more
especially such as is on or near the Water, and to Travel in rainy, moist
Seasons. Thirdly, Thin or moderate Clothing, airy, clean, sweet Houses and
Beds, observing a mean in all things for Temperance, and to understand the
proper Measure, both in Quantity and Quality, are the Sinews of Health, both of
Body and Mind; which to distinguish and understand in a Man's self, is the
Springhead of all Blessings; for whatsoever may or can be understood of God,
and of his unalterable Law, is completely and entirely contained in Man.

Therefore the greatest Calamity, the most miserable, melancholy and deplorable
Condition in the World, is for a Man to be Ignorant of himself, not to
understand and distinguish the Powers of God and his own Composition, for want
of this inward true Knowledge he Judges of all things as a Blind Man does of
Colors, and a Deaf Man of Music, all is done by Chance, Trade or Custom; so
great and so deep is the Depravation of Man.

SIR, Yours to Command, T. T.

LETTER XXIII. Of EDUCATION.
SIR,
I Received yours of the 20th instant, wherein you desire me to give you an
Essential Method of Educating and Bringing up your Children, they being all
Young and of tender Age, by which they are rendered capable of being taught and
molded into any Form, Method and Government: First, I referr you to our Book,
entitled, A New Method of Educating Children; which I desire you would Read:
However I shall endeavor to gratify your Desire with those Talents the Lord
has given me, not doubting but they will be thereby improved by your Prudent
Conduct; therefore please to observe these following. Rules and Methods.

1. YOU ought to understand and endeavor to be sensible, that our Creator has
made Man in his own Image, and a complete Epitome of all Principles, Qualities
and Powers, both of the Corporial and Incorporial Worlds, all things have an
Essential Being in Man's Soul, (viz.) Virtue, true Light and Darkness, Love and
Hate; and if Men once come to be sensible of their own Composition, and to
distinguish between Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice, and from what Principles
each takes its Birth, they would hate and lament their ill Conduct, both of
their own Methods of Life, and the bringing up of their Children; it is
impossible any Man should be capable to avoid the Errors of Educating Children,
if he does not distinguish the two Grand Fountains of Good and Evil in himself,
and how the various Powers, Qualities and Inclinations, which do all arise and
proceed from these two Fountains, are to be Qualified, Allaied and United; for
all sorts and kinds of Knowledge and Learning, though it carries the fairest
and most plausible Face; yet if it do not arise and proceed from the Light of a
Man's own Life, and have a Center in himself, and distinguished from what
Ground and Principle it proceeds; it is of no value, but all Fantastic and
Uncertain.

This is most manifest and true in this Visible World, and likewise in all
Sciences, Arts and Trades; no Man is rendered capable of giving any true
Account, or to Judge rightly of any particular Science, Art or Trade, and the
inward Mystery thereof, but only such who have Judgment, or can distinguish the
principal Qualities and Parts of that piece of Art or Workman^ip; therefore it
has by the more Wise and Understanding Men of all Ages been owned, that the
Knowledge of a Man's self, has been the Springhead of Wisdom, because no Man
can possibly know God, who knows not his Works; all which are a complete Image
of himself, and he that does not understand nor distinguish the Signature of
his own Composition, cannot do it in any Specific Body or Thing, be it ever so
small and inferior.

Now, the want of this Self-knowledge, and distinguishing our own Principles,
Qualities and Powers, is the Grand Inlet to all Evil and Error in this World,
both in particular and public Governments.

For this Cause, no Man can be a true Politician or Governor*in this World, if
he does not distinguish the Powers and Principles of Good and Evil in himself;
for where this central Knowledge is wanting, there is nothing but Error, Pride,
Self-Arrogance, Covetousness, Envy and Domineering, their Imaginations being
kindled, not only in those Evil Qualities but also in the fantastic Regions of
this World, so that if any Good comes under such Kings or Princes Government,
it is all as it were by chance; therefore, my Friend, the first true step for
obtaining the Wisdom, is to seek and know God, and the Operation of his Powers
in your self, which to understand and distinguish, is not only the greatest
Blessing, but it likewise furnishes you with all sorts of Materials, for the
Mamaegment and Government, both of your self and all that God has put under
your Government and Conduct.

First, Your Wife, or whosoever Nurses or Brings up your Children, must refrain
and not use that most idle and pernicious Customs of fantastic, foolish
Talking to their young, tender Infants, which does make such great and deep
Impressions, even from one Quarter of a year Old, which takes such Essential
root, by way of Simile, and so obtains such a Power, and strengthens the
fantastic Principle, that it is not to be wholly rooted out or obliterated.

Secondly, They ought likewise to Cloth their Children in modest, plain
Garments, and by no means to point, show or endeavor to make them sensible
where they are Fine: This is frequent amongst all sorts of People, as well
those that esteem themselves Sober and Religious, as others, which does
mightily infinuate, raise and awaken the high, lofty Property of Pride, and lay
sure and lasting Foundations of Self-esteem, and by degrees strengthen most
evil Qualities, by which Means and Methods they put an Esteem and Value on
themselves, and at the sam^ time disregard and undervalue all their Inferiors;
this does (...) deeply wound and lay such sure and lasting Methods of Pride,
that many thousands of poor distressed Mortals are never he^ed: That Mothers
and Nurses, ought to refrain from the practice of that evil Custom of
Slabbering, and Kissing their Children, asking and teaching the Children to do
the same; and though this seems to be an innocent Custom at first, and likewise
their talking of Baudy; nevertheless, this does so early open the Gates of
Venus, and lays sure and lasting Foundations for Wantonness and Uncleanness, so
that many thousands can never free themselves from those invading turbulent
Motions and Inclinations after Women.

Thirdly, Mothers and Nurses should as much as is possible, refrain and forbear
much Talking; especially impertinent Discourse, and teach them by a sedate
silence, and showing their dislikes in a few words, and those as grave and
sober as if they were talking with Senators.

Fourthly, They ought not to show or speak in the hearing of their Children,
any thing wherein Passion is expressed, for whenever this is practiced, the
Children are thereby Precipitated into the same Principle of Wrath and
Violence, which from time to time is so mightily strengthened, by which early
planting, Wrath and fierce Passion obtains the Ascendant in the Soul, which
can never be destroyed or overcome; but let the Correction of your Children be
done by some silent, wise, sober Methods, sometimes by fasting, standing silent
alone, and the like; such Corrections will penetrate deeper into their Souls,
and make them more sensible than Whipping and Beating, which does chiefly serve
to advance the Principle of Bitterness, Envy and self-ful Power; for by the
Eternal Law of God, every like begets and strengthens its Simile.

Fifthly, Use your Children to a constant hour of going to Bed and Rising,
(viz.) Go to Bed at eight, and Rise at six or seven, according to the Season of
the Year; Custom makes their Sleep more sound and certain, which is a great
Convenience, both to Mothers and Nurses.

Sixthly, So soon as your Children can go about, teach them several little, but
useful things, both within doors, as in the House, and also without in the Air,
(viz.) To know their Letters, which they are capable to learn before they can
Speak, Sowing, Knitting, picking up of Sticks or small Stones, carrying from
and bringing to you several little things, also learning to Write, Cast
Accounts, Music, and Drawing, in order to Painting, and when you are minded
they should stand still from those little Affairs, then command them to stand
silently by you, looking on you and what you are doing, which still makes a
deep Impression on their Minds, by which they will not know what that, Vanity
is, called Play, there being nothing more pernicious, nor promotes Idleness and
Vanity more, than Childrens Playing promiscuously one amongst another; it is
certainly one of the Grand Original Banes and destruction of Mankind, for it is
so timely planted, and awakens all sorts of Passions; fantastic Spirits and
Qualities, so that as they by degrees grow stronger and stronger, they
Degenerate into all sorts and kinds of Wickednesses; therefore all Parents,
Fathers and Mothers ought to employ their Children, or else they will employ
themselves, and spend all their brisk, sporting Spirits, in Play and Vanity;
also keep them from the sight of those Children that are suffered to Play; also
from all Plays and Games, and the ill Usage of any of the inferior Creatures;
for all those Evils are like Pestilential Airs, they Influence all their
Beholders, and leave their fatal Strokes and Wounds behind them: Suffer not
your Children to speak much; likewise be careful, that you do not Laugh or make
a Jest of any of their Actions, for such things prove of evil Consequence to
them.

Seventhly, Keep not your Children too long at any sort of Business or
Employment, one hour for some sorts, and two hours for others; and as near as
you can, make all their small Affairs, Arts or other things they learn,
delightful, and let them not be put on Business when they are sleepy, or
otherwise Indifposed.

Eighthly, Above all, observe the Rules of Temperance and Moderation, both in
the Quality and Quantity of their Foods, also Times and Seasons for Eating,
(viz.) At eight in the morning, some sorts of Spoon-meats, again at twelve or
one, and at five or six in the evening, the smallest Meal ought to be in the
middle of the day; let all your Meats and Drinks be simple and of a harmless
Nature and Operation, made of Vegetables and Fruits, and Water for Drink, let
them eat nothing that cannot be procured without the Dying or Destruction of
one of your fellow Creatures; consider all things, and what great Power and
secret Energy, Mercy, Compassion and Innocence, do carry with them, and with
what excellent Virtues they endue all those that live in and under their
Government; for in them is comprehended all the Good that Man is capable to
obtain, both in Time and Eternity.

I could say much more, but having sometime since published a small Book,
called The New Method of Education, to which I referr y^, where you will find
some unvulgar Directions for the Bringing up of Children, which please to
Peruse: Thus, with my Love and Respects, I remain

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, T. T.

LETTER XXIV. Of the Nature of SMELLS.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 20th of July, 1697, and shall endeavor to give
you some satisfaction, and likewise an account what Smells or Scents are good,
wholesome, healthy, and the contrary; and in order thereunto, we must first give
you an account of the Five Senses, and of their government and power in the
Corporial and Visible World, being the five Sentinels that keep the Gates of
the Microcosmical City, so that no intelligence neither of good nor evil pass
into the City, but only by the Leave and License of these Sentinels or Guards,
each having its peculiar Office, (viz.)

THe Sight is that noble and great Sense that lets in or conveys all Bodily
Forms, Figures and Species of all Corporial Objects, to the invisible Mind or
Intellectual of Man, both in good and evil, either to his Preservation or
Destruction: The like is to be understood of all the other Senses, they do not
Act one for another, but each does its own work appointed by the All-wise
Creator; as for Example, no Objects, Bodies, Figures or Forms, hurt or ensnare
the Mind or intellectual powers of Mankind, if he does not behold or see them.

The Smelling, Tasting, Hearing and Feeling have no power to convey the Objects
or Forms of things to the Central Powers or invisible Man, but only the Sight,
in whose Province it consists and stands.

The very same is to be understood in all the other Senses, each is confined by
the Eternal Law of the Creator, to keep within the bounds of its own Circle,
and in all particulars to do its own work; so wonderful and miraculous are all
things made and compounded, so that it is most clear and manifest, that nothing
has power to wound or hurt the Mind and Soul of Mankind, but only those things
that these great Powers or Senses admit or suffer to enter in and through one
or more of these five Gates, and by the permission of those Sentinels, which
does verify that old Proverb, that is, what the Eye never sees the Heart never
^es; which we have treated of more at large, where we discourse of the Five
Senses and their Uses, therefore shall proceed to Particulars, (viz.) Scents or
Smells, disagreeable and unhealthy, are as follows.

First, all such as proceed from the putrefaction of Animals, as Bloody
Slaughter-houses, Butchers-shops, and all other places where are Sold the Dead
Corpse of the Creatures, likewise Fish-Markets and Shops, Tanners Yards,
Hog-styes, and the like places: Next to these are Houses of Easement, close
Chambers or Rooms, where the Air has not its free influences; the Airs of such
places are very pernicious and haueful, also the Airs of Cities and great
Towns, where there is a Composition of evil Scents or Smells, proceeding from
Slaughter-houses, Shambles, Tallow Chandlers-shops and Melting-houses, the
breathings and fumes of all sorts of Flesh and Fish, Cooks-shops, and the
Dressing or Cooking of all such things, the relics or putrefaction thereof
running through the Streets; which fumes and breathings do incorporate with the
common Air, all being mixed or compounded with the Smoaks proceeding from
numerous Chimneys, which does stagnate and becloud the fine Spirits of the Air,
so that it becomes of a heavy, dull Nature and Operation, and is most injurious
to young People and Children, by reason of their tender, fine Spirits, which
are much more hurt or wounded than those of greater Ages and Strength, and
likewise to such as are subject to Obstructed Natures.

The Cures for such are fine, sweet, pleasant Airs, and clean, thin Foods and
small Drinks: It is likewise to be noted, that there is nothing more hurtful to
all Peoples Healths, but more especially to some, than the Air of Houses, both
Public and Private, where many People are Congregated or met together; where
the refreshing Briezes of the common Air are prevented, and where the variety
of breathing from Distempered Natures, are compounded and mixed with the Air,
and so is drawn into the Body, again and again, which ought to be remedyed, on
peril of your Health.

For the Air being the Life, and consisting of a thin, Spirituous substance, it
penetrates to the very Center of all Bodies, and therefore when it is mixed or
compounded with the putrefaction that arises from the Animal Kingdom, and from
things where the fine Spirits and sweet Virtues are destroyed, and the Original
Forms of Saturn and Mars do govern, all such Forms do mightily infect and spoil
the common Air, with a violent, poisonous Property or Disposition, which does
powerfully beget their Similies; every thing has a Key in its self that can
open all the secret doors of Natures Cabinets, and wheresoever it finds its
likeness, there it confederates and exerts its own form and property, so that
Complexions are begotten, and by degrees appear and become strong, which in the
Original were weak and impotent; and on the other side, that property that is
powerful in any Persons Complexions, may by degrees be made weak and faint, by
the use, custom and practice of the other qualities, if Nature and the varietys
of Properties were not capable of being increased and diminished, evil Scents
and pernicious offending Fumes could never be made familiar, nor evil Company
draw Men to Vitiousness, it being the chief pastime, delight and pleasure of
all the wonderful variety of qualities and principles of Nature, to increase
and confederate with that which in all things is most suitable and agreeable
unto its Temper and Complexion.

And these secret and wonderful Operations cannot be performed any other way,
but only by the five great Princes or complete Governors, called Senses; the
Creator has appointed each of them its province and government, who are always
ready and on their Guard to defend the Tree of Life, that is, that nothing
should be communicated to the Central parts of Nature that should be injurious
or hurtful; for no evil can be conveyed unto the Mind of Man, but only by the
admittance of one of these Governors or Senses, as we have treated else where;
and therefore it is advisable not to keep bad Company, nor Communicate with any
thing wherein the wrathful powers and grosser putrifactions have obtained the
Ascendant, for no Person can withstand the secret Conveyances and Operations of
Nature, every particular principle and quality goes constantly on in its own
way, and does its own work, and meddles not with its Neighbor; each Sense
judges of all things under and belonging to its own province, and is only
capable of communicating them to the Microcosmical World.

It is likewise farther to be considered, that all or most of those Scents or
sweet Smells that proceed from the Animals, are for the most part hurtful to
the fine Spirits in Man, more especially when they are too near, as the Civet
Cat, a rapacious Creature, and fiery by Kind, therefore that substance or
matter called Musk, is nothing else but an Excrementitious matter, or the ^ume
or froth proceeding from a fierce, fiery, violent Natured Creature.

And for this cause, it is very offensive to all fine, tender Spirited Persons,
Use and Custom makes it familiar to most, there being no other reason to be
given for its Virtues, but only that it is the dearest of Stinks; and if Hogs
Dung were as scarce, its probable it might be as much in esteem, for the
Creature is much fiercer than a Hog, and the Houses where they are kept are
many degrees more offensive, and we are not mistaken, if we should affirm, that
Hogs Dung is a better perfume, and less offensive to Nature.

It is likewise to be considered, that the evil Scents and Smells that does
arise and proceed from each particular Creatures Excrements or Putrefaction,
are more offensive to themselves than the evil Smells and Scents proceeding
from Animals of another Kind, that is, evil Smells or Scents that arises from
the Dung of Horses, and putrified matter in close Stables, is not only
offensive, but takes off their Stomachs from their Meat, and infects them with
sundry Difeases.

The like is to be understood of Sheep. For Example, if they are Folded or
Penned up too close for several nights in a place, the Scent or Smell of their
Excrement being conveyed by that great Governor, the Sense of Smelling, to the
Central parts, does infect the Blood and all the Humors, with a hot Mangy
Disease, called by the Learned Shepherds the Scab or Mange.

Now, notwithstanding these Folds lie open and exposed to the Heavenly Dews and
Influences of the Air, nevertheless the Scent or Smell of their own Excrements
are so prejudicial to them.

Now if Sheep were to be Folded or Penned up where Cows or Horses had been put,
their Excrements or Dung would not have had any such operation or influence on
their Humors.

The very same is to be understood of all other Animals, and more particularly
in the Human Nature; the Scents and Smells that do arise and proceed from our
own Excrements, or any other Uncleanness, are much more offensive and
prejudicial to the Health, both of the Body and Mind, than such as proceed from
the Excrements of other Animals or Things: This is evident by all Men's
Experience, and therefore the Great Creator and preserving Power of the Lord
has endued most or all undergraduated Creatures, with an innate Wisdom and
self preserving Cleanness, far exceeding Mankind; which is very wonderful, and
does manifest the great Wisdom of the All-wise Creator.

Therefore it does plainly appear that all kinds of Uncleanness contradicts the
whole course of Nature. and in the highest degree opposes Gods Law, and is a
true Signal of Man's Degeneration from the Holy Unity he was made to live in and
under; for all evil Smells proceed from Uncleanness, and from the same Root
does arise all Plagues and Epidemical Distempers; and for this cause, when any
Person shall happen to be in places where evil Smells and Scents are, or where
Epidemical Diseases reign, not to suffer the Air in whose Body those poisonous
qualities dwell, called gross or foul Smells, to touch that curious part called
the Sense of Smelling, which Governor or Prince keeps his Court of Guard
between the Nose and Brain, but by opening your Mouth and sending it out the
same way, any Person may in a great degree avoid the evils that come by gross
Scents and Smells, for the magic, inward or secret powers and properties of
Nature cannot be roused up, awakened or penetrated into, nor the Vices nor
Virtues of things conveyed to them, but only by the five grand Counselors or
Governors the Senses, each cayrying and communicating all things belonging to
its Province so that the evil Air, Smell or Scent that does not touch the Sense
of Smelling, but passes in and out without the license and admittance of the
Smelling, is not capable to do so much injury as otherwise, for none of the
other four Senses can open the Gates either of Virtueor Vice, or of any thing
but what belongs to its own Province, as is mentioned before; so that it is
clear, that evil Scents and Smells are less hurtful that are breathed in and
sent out by way of the Mouth, without, or unknown to the Sense of Smelling,
which method does free the Brain from many great evils and inconveniences,
which a little custom will make very easy and familiar, so that any Person may
pass through or be in stinking places as it were, unhurt, and at the same time
avoid the displeasure of an evil Scent or Smell, which does not as is mentioned
before, hurt the Health; but when such Airs are conveyed to the Sense of
Smelling, then it has its evil influences on the Spirits.

And therefore all Persons that are accustomed to stinking places, and are of
Trades that communicate with the putrifactions that proceed from fierceness and
violence, exercised by Mankind on their Fellow Animals or Creatures, become
dull, foul and gross, and this curious, and as it were Divine Sense, loses its
distinguishing property; and such Persons are by these and the like
Communications, made and altered in their very Radix, so that most of them
appear in another Form and Complexion: If this were not so, a Tallow-Chandlers
Melting-house, and Butchers Slaughter-houses, and the dark, gross, stinking
Smells, and the thick, dreadful Fumes thereof, could never be made familiar.

Every Spiritual Power carries in its Bosom a natural Key, that can with the
greatest facility imaginable, open all the secret Doors and Passages of its own
Principle and Quality, by which Secret, or as it were, unknown Operation,
Mankind is changed, either for the better or for the worse, all according to
the nature and ruling Property or Complexion of those things they work in, or
communicate with, so that most or all Men, immerse or plunge themselves into
many great Troubles, Vexations and Miseries; and all for want of Understanding
and distinguishing the variety of those Forms and Principles they are made and
compounded of, which is the highest degree of Depravation, and a Calamity much
to be Lamented; for what evil is greater than for any person to lessen the true
use, and to be ignorant of himself, and consequently is blind and ignorant of
all other things? for true understanding and distinguishing takes its Birth
within his own Circle, he being an Epitome of the whole Creation, and of the
variety of all the wonderful Beings therein contained, that is the Original and
Grand Principles and Fountain-spirits are Essentially in him, and he is the
very Thing, or else Man could not contain the true Nature and Property of all
visible and invisible Powers, or obtain the name of being truly styled or
called the Likeness and Image of the Great Creator, who is All, in and through
All.

Now, Scents and Smells that do advance Health and preserve the finer Spirits,
both Externally and Internally, are as follows, (viz.)

Of all Scents and Smells, clean, sweet Airs, such as are free from the Commu^,
the crowds of Men, and more particularly those by running Rivers and hilly dry
Fields, that lies or joins to them, where Flowers, Trees, and various sorts of
fragrant Herbs send forth their most pleasant and oderiferous Scents and
Smells, which do incorporate with the fine Spirits of the Air, and by the
thinner Fumes proceeding from the Powers of the Element of Water, impregnate or
endue such Airs with a powerful and penetrating Virtue, which Persons do find
by Experiencing a lively Briskness, and sharp Appetite.

The like is to be understood in all moist Seasons, provided there be not too
much Rain, but moderate, which when the moisture is temperate, does with its
natural Key, gently and softly open the inward and secret Gates of each thing,
freeing the finer Spirits, so that they are thereby on the Wing, rendering them
capable to incorporate with the common Air, impregnating it with its fine
refreshing Virtues; the truth of this all Persons do find, when Exercised in
the open Air in such Seasons, and therefore all such as are troubled with, or
subject to any kind of Obstructions of the Breast, or to Languishing,
Consumptive Diseases, may be relieved, and the Diseases in a great degree
remedied by a constant Exercise of Walking, and the like, by River-sides, or in
such Seasons, or whether the Air, being the most sublimest of Elements, and as
it were the true Original of Life, and therefore the finener and more free it
is from Defilements, the greater are the administering Virtues and Powers, both
to the Health of the Body and Mind, the Magic Spirits and invisible Powers are
the true and original Life of all Bodies, according to the fineness, thinness
and unity of the Spirit.

And so on the contrary, such is its Body, and it has its Form, Figures and
Qualifications from thence, and the Element of Air being the finenest and
thinest of all others, as was mentioned before, so the inward Virtue and
Spiritual Powers thereof are in proportion, more especially when it is defiled
by Uncleanness, chiefly such as proceed from the Putrefaction of the Animal
Kingdom, which is the grossest and more pernicious than any that proceed from
the Vegetables, more particularly from Slaughtered Beasts; likewise the Airs of
Gardens and Fields, where Flowers and Herbs of various kinds grow, are filled
with the sweet odoriferous Virtues and Fumes of them, and such places are
thereby made very pleasant, healthy and wholesome.

Now, the best Perfumes and Sweets, are such that grow in our own Climate, and
under the Elevation and Influences of our own Stars and Elements, all being
most agreeable to our Constitutitutions; some being more suitable, having a
nearer Affinity to one Person than to another, even as it is in Eatables or
Foods, the Complexions of Smells or Scents are as various, and there is as
great a variety in them as there is in Complexions, Forms and Inclinations of
Mankind, by which means all Scents and Smells are agreeable to one or another,
and disagreeable to others, all according to the degrees of the Sal Nitral
Virtues or Magic Spirits, so that what is a pleasant, delightful Smell to one,
is a distasteful, unpleasant Scent to another, which is only to be understood
in the Vegetable World, and not in the Animal, all is gross there, and it is
very rare, that their Slaughtered Limbs do send forth Scents that are pleasant,
except to such as have their Senses depraved by the Use and Communication of
gross things, for the Scent or Smell of the best Flesh or Fish when prepared by
Fire, which opens all the Body, and sends forth the inward Virtues, as one may
call it, are strong and fulsome, except to those, as was mentioned before, who
are used to the eating of them, whose Spirits and Bodies are daily made,
subsist, and are continued by them; but to others, who do Live on cleaner
Foods, their Smells and Scents are no better than a strong, stinking Fume or
Vapor, more especially when the Housewife or Cook has not Judgment, or does
not distinguish the Operation of things, and the Method of preserving the
Spirits, and the contrary, which is very rarely done by Preparers of Foods.

And it is to be noted, that as all or most of the Animals, and the Foods made
thereof, do naturally send forth gross, loathsome Smells, Scents and Fumes; so
on the contrary, all or most of the Vegetables do as naturally breath forth
sweet, pleasant, delightful Smells; more especially all Eatables, and many
other of most delicate and fragrant Scents; therefore they have been called by
the Honorable Name of Angelical Food, not only from their Fragrancy but
Innocence of Birth and harmless Operation, both on the Body and Spirits,
Cleanness and Fragrancy being two of the most valuable Virtues, which
Uncleanness and Depravity have almost Banished out of the World; now Herbs that
are pleasant, and their Smells or Fumes most healthy, are these, (viz.)
Southern-wood, Hysop, Time, and Mother of Time, Winter-savory, Mint,
Pennyroyal, Sage, Bawm, and several other Sweets, but these are the principal;
the next Sweets are Flowers, some of the material are as follows, Pinks,
Gilly-flowers of several sorts, Carnations, Jessemy, etc. likewise a great
number of Field Flowers, which are less sweet, but more Virtuous, as to the
Fumes sent forth into the Air, as the Blossoms of several sorts of Grains and
Fruit Trees, which do fill or impregnate the Air with odoriferous Fumes.

There are likewise several other sorts of Herbs, whose Smells and Scents are
very delightful to some and healthful to all, as Tansy, Wormwood, Featherfew,
and all other bitter Herbs that grow in Gardens, and also in the Fields and
Commons, their Fumes and Scents are sharp, strong and penetrating, amongst whom
Rosemary is one of the most valuable, for its noble and lively Virtues, the
Fumes of those Herbs do naturally move all kinds of Obstructions, for the
bitter Quality is the Root of all Motion, and in what Creature or Herb soever
it is temperate, then it is the true moving, boiling Power, and the pleasure of
Life, and cause of Joy: For this Cause Bitter Herbs are of great Use in
Medicines, and their Scents and Fumes are in proportion: This bitter Quality is
the only and principal Friend to the Sweets, for the Bitter or Mars does so
mightily love Venus, that wheresoever the Bitter Quality meets with the Sweet,
it hugs it close and keeps it from turning Sharp or Acid; for this Cause bitter
Herbs, as Hops, etc. are added and put into Beer, that the Sweet or Spiritual
Virtues might not too quickly turn sour or sharp; Physicians have likewise
prescribed Potions made of bitter Herbs, to moderate or check the Acidity or
Sharp Humor in the Stomach, occasioned by the eating of so great quantities of
Fat, sweet Foods and strong Drinks, for there is nothing known in Nature that
does allay, and as it were captivate the fierce, hot Fumes of Mars, as the
sweet Balsamic Water of Venus, or the sweet Quality.

For this Cause bitter things are mixed or compounded with our Foods, more
especially with the sweet or oily Body, and it is for those Reasons, that the
Cacao-nut being made into a Food, proves so universally grateful and agreeable
to most Stomachs, which does chiefly proceed from the Sal Nitral Oils and
bitter Quality, which Qualifications do render it in the Stomach of easy
Separation and Concoction, far exceeding all the Oils of other Nuts, and
likewise of Olives and Almonds, besides the Oil of Cacao-nuts is so equally
mixed and graduated with the bitter Quality, that thereby it becomes
dissolvable, and will by the heat of Fire melt into a mass or pappy Substance,
and not become rank, as the Oil of all other Nuts and Things will, just as
though God and his Hand maid Nature had endued this noted Plant and Fruit, with
all the united Virtues of the Vegetable Kingdom; and though this Spoon-meat,
called Chocolate, will not agree with some Stomachs, the occasion thereof is
not in the Nut, but either in the Depravity or Foulness of the Stomach, or in
the things it is compounded of, (viz.) Sugar, Spice, Milk and Eggs, there being
hardly any Spoon-meat or Pottage (excepting our thin Water Gruel) that will so
soon collect and beget so strong and sharp an Appetite, as Chocolate made
without any thing compounded with it, but only made with the entire Nut and
Water, it being one of the most easiest and cleanfing Spoon-meats that is or
can be procured; it is not only easy of Digestion of its self, but a small Dish
after any sort of Food or temperate Meal, will not only advance the Concoction,
but make all easy and lightsome, which does declare the excellency of its
Nature and equality of its parts; and we do affirm from good Grounds and
sufficient Reasons in Nature, that there is hardly any Foreign Fruit or
Ingredients that come into England, or any of the European Countries, that is
so Homogenial as this Nut, though this Nation has no necessity either for this
or any other, our own Climate and Country furnishing us with all things
necessary, both for Food and Physic, Praised be the Great Creator of all
Beings.

Now it is likewise farther to be noted, that strong Scents or Smells of all
fragrant Herbs, Flowers, Seeds and Grains, or Drugs and Spices do best supply
and furnish Nature with their Virtues and Excellencies at some convenient
distance, for this noble Sense of Smelling is so Sublime, that near and strong
Scents are apt to overcome, and as it were glut it, that it becomes rather a
displeasure, and hurtful, than a pleasure to Nature; all the Senses are liable
to be overcome and glutted, as well as the Palate and Stomach, though the
Gluttony of the other four Senses does rarely prove so hurtful or injurious, as
that of Tasting, or the Palate.

Sir, I could enlarge upon this Subject, but have here inserted what is needful
at present, from

Your assured Friend to Command, T. T.

LETTER XXV. Of PREDESTINATION.
SIR,
IAm very much concerned at the Intelligence your last kind Letter gives me, in
reference to your great disorder about the Consideration of that much
Controverted Point of Predestination, which has, does, and will occasion great
Troubles, as well as Disunion among the Christians; the end of which never can
be expected, till Men arrive to a better Understanding.

THAT Blindness in this Point has done unspeakable Mischiefs to Mankind, will
evidently appear by what follows; but by God's Blessing, a Medicine may be
administered that may in some measure, if not totally, satisfy your longing
Desires after Truth in this Case.

You must therefore know, that God, without Nature and Creature, is an
Incomprehensible, Unfathomable, Eternal Being; and therefore the Learned Moses
says, that God made all material Things of Nothing; and this Nothing is the
Eternal Unity and the highest Good, even that very Power that preserves all
material Being.

Now, this Unfathomable, Eternal Being, could, neither does design any thing
unlike himself, because he is the All in Time and Eternity, being the Father of
all Creatures, whither Corporeal or Incorporeal, the everlasting Power and
Mind, the one only Eternal Will, which wills nothing but Good.

And when this Unity or Eternal Power had a mind to cloth the various
Spiritual Powers with Corporeal Matter or Forms, then the invisible Powers,
Principles and Qualities, by the Energy of the one only Eternal Father,
attracked proportionate Matter for their Body or Clothing, and as the
Salnitral Spiritual Powers of the Lord stood in their degrees, such were their
Forms and Figures, Dispositions and Inclinations; and hence all the varieties
of visible Beings arise, and it is, as was said before, impossible for the only
Creator of all things, to will any thing contrary to himself, being All in All,
from Eternity to Eternity, and it is for this Reason, that all things do so
vehemently long after God, their Original, all Creatures being the Image of him
that made them.

But the nearer any Creature arives to the Unity, the highest Good, the more
Virtuous, Beautiful and Happy is that Creature, exceeding all those Creatures
standing more at a distance, and obtains a Name accordingly.

All things are in pain, seeking and groaning with the highest Desire, to
obtain the Eternal Unity, not being capable of Rest, till they are swallowed up
in it.

And all the Spiritual Powers, by which every Creature is preserved and
sustained, have an Eternal Original, and are so many Branches of the
Incomprehensible Unity, which is the Cause that all Creatures, that are
Sensitive, desire to Live for ever, and the regard every one has to preserve
his Body, though intolerable Pains are always about it, is a sufficient
Evidence of this Truth.

The same thing is Essential to Brutes, who dread the Shock of Violence, and
tremble at the Instruments of their Dissolution, which proceeds from the
Spirits, and not from the Body and Desire of Life. Wherefore it must be the
highest Will, to violate the Unity by putting a Period to the Lives, either of
ones own kind or the other Creatures, being the most spiteful Opposition to the
Laws of God, Nature and Eternity.

But what can be said, or who can convince the great Ignorance and Blindness of
Mankind? This Evil is the effect of Man's Fall in the abuse of that noble
Faculty, the free unbounded Will of Man given him alone by his Creator, which
he should have used to the Glory of God, the Preservation of himself, and the
whole Creation: But he forthwith introduced this Will into Self-hood, broke the
Unity and destroyed the Concord of his own Composition, which was the true
Image of God, and an Epitome of the whole Creation.

Here came in that Noxious Opinion of Predestination, that never could have
found a room in Man, but by his falling from the Unity into Discord; the
Operations of the divided Forms, Qualities and Principles, which is the true
Birth of Reprobation and Predestination, as is now held and maintained by some
among us: But it is evident, that God has given Man a free Will, or his Reason,
by which he surmounts Brutes, had been of no use to him; it is this noble
Faculty, by which he is capable of knowing God and all his Greatures, and
preserve it from Error; God has given his Law in Nature, and revealed Will,
whereby he is made capable of discerning, whenever his Desires and Powers may
exceed their Limits.

Had God before the Creation, absolutely Predestined Mankind, he could not
have varied from it, but have stood in that Law, even as the Beasts and all
other under-Graduates do, for they cannot break that Law, as is very plain; for
did they know their Powers, it were impossible for Man to Rule and Guide them,
and much less, being so Impotent, for him to Oppress and Destroy them so many
ways as he does.

Hence it is evident, that Man is Free Will, by which he Transcends all other
Visible Creatures, is become his greatest Curse, having thereby broke the
Unity, and defaced the beautiful Image of the Great God, by suffering his Will
to enter into Discord, and his Election depends on himself, being accountable
for all his Evils and Misfortunes. For the Eternal Father of all things is
always ready with open Arms, to receive all that are willing to hear and
observe the Laws and Dictates of the Voice of Wisdom.

Are not all the Works of the Creator like himself, and we his Children endued
with Principles, Qualifications and Dispositions from himself: We indeed vary
by and through the Selfhood, but God is eternally equal in all his Methods,
causing the Glorious Eye of the World, the Sun, and all the Fructifying Dews of
Heaven, with the sweet Influence of the Caelestial Bodies, to fall
proportionately on all: One Man's Field is not Predestined to the continual
scorching Beams of the Sun, and at the same time his Neighbor's to be Drowned
with Floods and Inundations of Water: No, the Eternal Fountain of Beings hands
forth his Spiritual and Temporal Blessings without respect of Persons, having
equal regard to the meanest and most Noble of his Creatures, none having any
Character or defending Power beyond another, to protect him from the wrath of
the Elements, Sickness or Death, which made the Wise King Solomon say that one
Event happened to the Wise man and the Fool.

Now, had the Almighty Being, like some unequal Tyrant, or unrighteous Prince,
made and appointed some of his Sons and Daughters to Eternal Misery after this
Life, and others to all imaginable Happiness, he would never have given Laws
whereby Man might govern his Will; and all Preaching and Teaching had been
vain, and as ineffectual as to Beasts, who live in their limits that is set
them; and as they do not particularly call any thing their property, so they
freely possess and use what Nature sets before them.

Nothing is more impious and contradictory to God, than this Opinion and wicked
Imagination, making the most Merciful, Righteous and Just God, the Maker and
Preserver of all things, the Original cause of Evil.

Every Man becomes predestined to good or evil in this World, and the World
to come, as he introduces his Will or Desires into good or evil, it being in
the power of each Principle and Quality to predestinate and lead all those that
are entered into it according to its power, either into good or evil: For
Instance, the Son Disobeys his Father and Mother, takes to the Highway to
Kill, Rob, etc. and continuing in this Method, the wrathful, fierce Principle
and Quality rules over him, an^ will most assuredly predestinate him to
Destruction.

Therefore, my Friend, turn the Eye of your Understanding inwards, all the
Wonders and Mysteries of God's Nature are within you, you are the Thing your
Self, and if with Fervor and Devotion you wait at Wisdoms Altar, you will
quickly feel the Grace and Holy Power, the Glorious Light of the Son of God
arising in you, and teaching you such harmless, innocent Methods of Life and
Love, that will lead you into the Unity, and convince you, that as God is One
and undivided, having equal respect to all the Sons and Daughters of Men, and
whenever the Harmony is broken, it proceeds from our selves, and not from
God's Predestinating us; and this take to be a sufficient Answer, and I hope it
may be as aparent to you as it is evident to,

Your Faithful Friend, T. T.

LETTER XXVI. Of DEATH.
SIR,
(...) ^ceived yours, and take notice of the Contents, and in particul^, (...)
of your unvulgar Philosophical Question, (viz.) You desire to know (...)
Original Cause and Grand Reason, wherefore every Sensitive (...) under Heaven,
does with great earnestness desire to Live for Ever (...) on the other side
fear and dread nothing so much as any kind of (...) or Violence that may tend
toward the putting a Period to the ^fe.

MY Friend, all the wonderful and amazing varieties of created Beings and
Creatures in this Visible World, which are beyond all Humane Numbers, have all
proceeded and sprung from an Eternal Original, and are an Epitome or Image of
the (...) and Incorporeal Worlds and Principles; and these manifested Powers do
contain the true Nature and Property of the Internal Worlds o^ Spiritual
Beings; for every particular or spe^ Body or Thing, does in its Signature and
Complexion, carry that Eternal Stamp or Character it was Sealed with from
Eternity, or before it was separated from the Great Fountain of (...) Unity.

Now, it is to be noted and considered, that the great and (...) Powers, and
variety of the invisible Spiritual Beings, did, do, and ever will long and
desire to be made manifest, that is, to be known to its self, which cannot be
any other way, but by being clothed with a Corporeal Body, for a Spirit, or an
In^e Power cannot become Individual, if it be not clothed with a suitable
Body, they being like a Circle, in which all the Spiritual invisible Principles
and Powers do act and become ^nown to themselves, and thereby be made capable
of Joy, Ho^, Fear and Sorrow.

It is likewise to be understood, as was before mentioned, that the Spirit of
each Creature is before the Body, and the Desire the Cause and Original
thereof; and as the Learned Apostle Paul says, the Body is Dead without the
Spirit, and (...) Spirit is not, nor cannot be known to its self, nor Enjoy or
S^fer without the Body; and every particular Creature or Being is endued with
all the Principles, Properties and Qualities of the Eternal Father or Invisible
Fountain of Unity, and are all the true and natural Sons thereof; and therefore
each Sensitive Creature does from an Innate Disposition and Spiritual
Inclination desire to be like its Father that has Begotten it; for the Son
does contain the true Nature and Properties of the Father; and therefore not
only Man, but all other inferior Creatures are the Likeness and Image of him,
from whence they proceed and had their Birth, each according to its Kind and
Graduation; and as the Original Forms and Powers were more equal or unequal,
inferior or superior, whence proceed the great and wonderful variety of visible
Creatures, both in the Animal, Vegitable and Mineral Kingdoms in this World;
for accordi^ (...) the degrees, equality and inequality of the Spiritual Qua^
and Powers; such were the Desires, which did naturally (...) vehemently attract
a proportionable Matter out of all thi^ for a Covering our Body; and that Sal
Nitral or Spiritual Po^ and Virtue, that did Predominate or had the Ascendant,
Sig^ the Body with a Character, and the Inclinations, Disposition, Shapes,
Figures and Forms were accordingly, so that the ^dation of the variety of
Bodies and Complexions proceed (...) the degrees of the Invisible or Spiritual
Powers.

And for this Cause it is no wonder, that every Creature (...) has obtained
that high degree of Sensation, and is thereby ca^le of enjoying or suffering
either Pleasure or Pain, (...) with the highest diligence endeavor to avoid
all Violence* (...) and Death, and desire to Live for Ever, seeing that (...)
sprung from the eternal and unsearchable Fountain of Unity, for every Creatures
Actions, Inclinations and Desires are all ^cording to the Composition of the
Spiritual Properties and (...) lities, all which have an eternal Original,
whence the great (...) Desire in all Creatures do spring and arise of Living
(...) Ever; and notwithstanding the Inferiors have no cause of Dread, nor Sense
on them of any World, or being after this, either Good or Evil, nevertheless
they fear and dread all kinds of ^rt, Violence, Oppression, and consequently
shun and avoid ^th with as much Cunning and Wisdom as Men, and do (...) the
highest Diligence, Industry and Prudence endeavor to ^serve themselves and
Offspring, nay, they rather exceed (...); besides, they have not transgressed
their natural Law, and ^fore they cannot be oppressed with any fear of Pain or
Sor^ after this Life, but the Original of all fear of Hurt, Violence (...)
Death, does proceed from the Spirit or Spiritual Powers, (...) has clothed or
incircled themselves in Matter or Corpo^ Bodies, which the Spiritual Properties
and Powers would preserve and keep as an Habitation for Ever, for by means of
(...) Corporeal Body or Matter, the variety of the Spiritual Pro^ties are
encircled, and so become a Self-subsisting Creature, known to its self, as was
mentioned before, and is thereby ren^ed capable both of Pain and Pleasure, Joy
or Sorrow; for that which is Eternal does naturally desire what is like it
self, (...) therefore those Spiritual Beings and Powers that have the like
motion and Sensation of all Creatures, cannot by all the ^ning Rhetoric in the
World, be persuaded on any account, o^ be made willing to Die or be separated
from their Bodies, (...) nothing is able to abliterate those Inclinations,
Dispositions and Qualifications of the Spiritual Powers clothed with material
Bodies, they received from the Grand or Eternal Fountain the Father and Creator
of all Beings; so that the natural Disposition (...) Desire of all Sensitive
Creatures, is to preserve their Bodies (...) Ever, which is like themselves,
and according to their Ori^al Natures, for no Spiritual Power can (...)
contrary to its (...) and its Original Fountain or Father, that Made or Created
it.

And for this Cause the Under-graduates do all of them fear and dread Hurt,
Violence and Oppression, or any thing that seems to tend to put a Period to
their Lives, as the like Actions (...) Mankind, and much more, if it be
possible, for as they know (...) Hurt, nor do no Injury to their Knowledge, but
Live within the Limits of the Law their Creator prescribed them.

For this Cause all or most of the inferior Creatures do fear all kinds of
Violence more than Mankind, for the more harmless and innocent any Creature is,
the greater is the Opposition between the Species of Hurtfulness and Violence,
so that the Crea^ Fears and Calamities are thereby increased, and all Op^ is
the harder to be undergone.

For this Cause, the more innocent a Creature is, the greater (...) and Evil it
is to Oppress that Creature, and therefore Man's Violence, Oppression and
Killing the Beasts, is an extraordinary Evil and Sin against God and his Law,
for Killing stands in eternal Opposition to the Creating Power of God, which
proceeds from Eternity to Eternity, and this Eternal Spiritual preserving Power
being the complete Life and Essential Being of all Creatures; whence proceeds
and springs an eternal desire of Life, or to Live for Ever, according to its
Innate Nature, so that it is the greatest Sin that can be committed against
that wonderful Mystery and Creating Power of God, as being most opposite, not
only to the Creation, but also to all the Eternal Spiritual Powers that are
clothed with material Bodies; for the true Life, Power, Motion and Actions of
all visible Bodies ^esides in the Spirits, which has an eternal Original, as
was mentioned before, and therefore not willing to be oppressed, hurt, o^ to
have its Body any way destroyed, for the Body is the S^rits natural Right, and
will not part with it, unless necessity compe^s.

And for these Reasons the highest Evil and Punishment that can be done to
Mankind, is to put a Period to Life, and therefore the Laws of most Countries
do not indict or compel Me^ to Die, but only on the committing of great Evils:
The continuation of Life is strangel^ precious in the Central Qualities and
Spiritual Powers of every Corporeal Creature; and will not Man choose a
miserable, troubled, labo^ious Life of Vexation, rather than a short and easy
Death? and this Desire and earnest Inclination to continue a miserable Life,
does not only proceed and arise from the sense Men have of Sin and the breaking
of God's Law, for which eternal Punishment is threatened, though this seems to
be sufficient cause to be the Root of each Man's fear of Death, which does not
consist in his Transgressions, but from that eternal Life and invisible
Spiritual Power, that supports and dwells in the Body, which in all Creatures
does with the highest diligence imitate that Fountain from whence it proceeds.

(...) it is not to be doubted, that if a number of Men should be Educated and
(...) up, and under Custom and Meth^ that did not teach (...) believe the
Immortality of the So^ (...) Rewards for Virtu^ nor Punishments for Vice;
neverthel^ the fear and dread of all Violence, Oppression and Death would be
the same as now it i^, and with other Creatures; for God's eternal Laws in
Nature are the same yesterday, to day and for ever, or from Eternity to
Eternity; and Man makes Laws and imitates Customs that are varied and changed
out of Evil into Good, and out of Good into Evil; but God's Law and (...) in
all the Operations of the Spiritual Powers, are in a cons^ fixed Method; and it
is clear, that the greatest Evil and (...) thing that can be done to Man or any
other sensible Creature, is to put a Period to the Life before it has obtained
its highest Limit; and this sort of Violence does in all its Circumstances
Diametrically oppose the Creating, and likewise the Preserving Power of God,
and the greatest breach of Unity.

Now, that which will make Death and the Thoughts thereof easiest, is a clean,
harmless, sober, temperate and innocent Life, Living within the Compass and
Bounds of God's Law, that is, to do unto the whole Creation and Creatures as a
Man would be done unto; and if this was done, nevertheless every one would Live
eternally in this World, if they could, because the Spirit, which is the Life
of the Body, has an eternal Original, and would be clothed with a
proportionable Body, for no Spirit nor Spiritual Power can be known to it self,
or be a Self-subsisting Individual Creature, or be capable of Joy or Sorrow,
neither in this World, nor in that which is to come, if it be not comprehended
within the Circle of a Body; and therefore the Philosophical Apostle Paul tells
us, that if the Dead rise not, or if there be no Resurrection, that is new
Bodies, they were the most miserable of all Creatures, which is as if he had
said, that if after the Death of these Mortal Bodies, if the Eternal Spirit or
Immortal Soul did not obtain or cloth it self with a suitable Body, that is an
Immortal one, then their Works and good Deeds could not follow them, neither
could the Holy Men and Saints be capable of enjoying those eternal Blessings
promised to all those that observe the Laws of their Creator, and keep his
Commandments; for if there be no new Bodies, then the Soul and all the
Spiritual Powers that circled and dwelt in this gross Body must of necessity at
Death mingle themselves into and with the eternal Fountain, and thereby be
eternally Annihilated, ^s to Individuality, or of being known to it self, and
consequently not capable either of Joy or Sorrow: And note, that according to
the Disposition and Complexion of the Spiritual Powers, such Bodies they are
clothed with, and therefore it is not to be doubted, but that every Man in the
World to come shall be clothed or obtain a suitable Body, proportionable to
the Spirit and Soul, and such as in the time of the Body did freely immerse and
enter into all kinds of Fierceness and Violence, Killing those of their own
kind, and all under-graduated Creatures, their new Bodies shall obtain a Figure
or Form in proportion.

And therefore the Scripture does say and speak of the Heavenly City and
Angelical Powers, without the Gates are Bears and Dogs, for the Spirit is the
Original of the Body, and not the Body of the Spirit, and according to the
Equality or Ine^ality of the Spirit or Spiritual Powers; such a Figure or Form
that obtains, for the great and wonderful variety of Forms of Bodies and
Figures of things, do arise and proceed from the variety of the Spirits and
Spiritual Powers which could not have been manifested, but only by means of the
Body, nor be known to themselves.

It is likewise further to be noted, that Death does at once obliterate and put
a period to the five great Princes or Counselors, called Senses; in which, by
and through whom, the living Powers and Spirits of Eternity do manage and
transact all material things in this Visible World or Corporeal Body, and at
the same time Buries them in the great Abyssal Mystery, separating the loving
Husband from the affectionate and tender Wife, and all other visible things
that are near and dear to the Senses and innate Affections; and all that claims
an interest to the outward Corporality, the sensitive Body and Spirit of this
World, have a right unto, and are necessitated to plunge or leap into the grand
Mystery of Eternity; and that which does increase and multiply the fear and
dread thereof, and makes it so exceeding timorous to pass through or over this
Sea into Eternity, is, First, Men's living and acting contrary to Gods innocent
Laws of Nature, and the embracing of evil Customs and Traditions, most of which
do diametrically oppose all the innocent uniform Powers and Laws of Concord,
the ignorances thereof being the greatest evil in this World; for it is almost
impossible for any Person to obtain the Unity, if he does not distinguish the
Power of God in himself, and the Principles of his own Nature and Composition;
and for this cause, many of the Justest and best of Men that have no^ only been
soberly and religiously inclined, but have as it were transacted all their
Affairs with softness and equity, according to the settled Religion and Custom
of the Nation and Place they are Educated in; nevertheless those great and
unnatural Evils, Violences and Oppressions, most or all Nations commit against
God and his Holy innocent Law, do so strong and powerfully spring and boil up
in the center of Man's Soul, so soon as the Eternal Spiritual Powers do see and
feel that their body or circle of Corporality shall be taken away, or they
separated from them, (...) there is a great and wonderful Consternation or
Tumult, all the Centers, Powers and Principles being awakened, and as it were,
grating or rubbing one against another, occasioning great Disorders and Agonys
between the Nature, Spiritual Powers and Principles, all being unwilling to
shift or quit their Body or natural ^tation, and be put to seek a new one, and
being as is mentioned before, altogether ignorant of; then does arise in the
Center of the Soul various Accusations, of their not doing this or the other
thing, or of some misspent time or neglect of the ^mon Duty of going to
Church, and the like; which is often too true, but this great perplexity of the
Spiritual Powers and Soul, is, Man's not living in any degree answerable to that
great Law of God and innocent Method of Nature, but instead thereof have
contented themselves to live in the Observations, Customs and Laws of
Tyrannical Princes and Nations, which have Originally sprung from and been
Midwifed into the World by the divided powers of Nature, Selfish Pride and
Covetousness, and all under pretense of Virtue and Religion, which the poor
ignorant, miserable People receive, believe, and will dye in the defense of
those wicked Laws and Customs they are Educated and Taught in, which does
occasion the greatest number of Mankind, violently to run into the greatest
Errors, and consequently into Discord and Disunity, which is as I have said
before, the grand occasion of those Troubles and perplexing Agonies most Men
experience on their Dying Beds; for if Men Live in the practice of Violence,
Fierceness and Oppression, be it either to their Kind, or Creatures of inferior
Ranks, the Equality and Union of the Powers and Principles of God in a Man's
Soul is thereby broken, whence does arise and proceed those unheard of troubles
many Thousands endure when the Soul and Spiritual Powers must leave and be
separated from their Habitations or Bodies; and therefore we would have every
one understand this grand and most necessary Truth, (viz.) He that would Dye in
Peace or in Unity, must endeavor by all the ways and methods imaginable, to
transact his Life in Innocence, and being obedient unto the Voice of Wisdom or
Divine Principle, ^ch dwells in the Center of every Man's Soul, which is the
true and powerful Advocate; and is not only willing but able to unite all the
Sons and Daughters of Wisdom and Innocence unto the Blessed Fountain of
Benignity: Union with this great Original Being, is the only one thing that all
Creatures, both Corporeal and Incorporeal ardently seek and groan after,
because nothing but that can or is able to give Peace and Satisfaction; so
great and wonderful, precious and necessary is an harmless, innocent Life, it
being the very Center of Peace and Eternal Tranquillity, the Understanding and
Living in and under the good powers and principles of Innocence, is both the
pleasure of Time and the happiness of Eternity; for Innocence wounds nothing,
nor nothing that Union, being the Center not only of every Man's happiness and
quiet, but the highest satisfaction of all other Creatures, which no Man can
pretend to arrive at this Haven of Temporal and Eternal Bliss, but only by
observing and living in Gods Law, in all the methods of Life, (viz.) in Eating,
Drinking, Speaking, Wearing, Buying and Selling, avoiding all oppressions and
violences both to Man and Beast, for it is impossible that any Person should
see the Blessed State of Unity, whereas every day he greedily and exorbitantly
sustains, maintains and continues his Life by the effects and fruits of
Disunity and Violenc^, daily and hourly offered to his fellow Creatures, many
degrees more innocent and harmless than himself; which miserable and
melancholy condition of Man and his high and deep depravation, can never be
retrieved or redeemed, so long as Mankind does remain stupid, and altogether
blind as to the understanding of Gods Law in themselves, and the particular
Principles they are made and compounded of, and their respective Operations;
for nothing is more true, than he that does not distinguish the birth of every
Thought, Word and Work, and from what Fountains or Principles they proceed, is
compelled to do all things by chance, Tradition and Custom they are his
Projecters and Masters; so that when Mankind comes to lie on a Dying Bed, the
Senses and all the Corporeal Powers become impotent and melancholy, then most
or all the actions of Life are as it were unaccountable unto the Soul and
Spiritual Powers, which Spirits do as it were with a rapid motion, seek the
cause of their Trouble and Disunion, but being ignorant of Gods innocent Law,
they blame themselves for the neglect of some little or trivial matters, many
of which had they performed, the Soul would have been as far from Satisfaction
as otherwise; and therefore to be ignorant of Gods Law in a Man's self, is the
greatest evil, and brings on Man's Soul the greatest perplexity and trouble,
whatever some may think or imagine to the contrary, for no Person has any
occasion to perplex and disquiet himself about what shall be his condition
after Death, if he spends this little part of Eternity in the observation of
Gods innocent Laws; for what can molest or disturb that Person that has
troubled nor hurt nothing, but has spent his few days in a calm, innocent
method of Life and Unity? And as Blindness, Depravity and Ignorance is the
grand Inlet to all Violence, Oppression and Disunity, so it is the true Root of
all fear, suspicion and desparation in the Souls and Spirits of Mankind; and
likewise at this door comes in all wicked, selfish, mistaken Notions, both in
Religion and all other matters relating to the Soul; for Man's Fall and deep
degrees of Blindness and Depravation have divided and separated him from the
true knowledge of his Maker, and also from the knowledge of the Mysteries, both
of himself and all the uniform powers of Nature, which stupidity and ignorance
does powerfully enclose and shut him up in the circle of Darkness, having no
certain knowledge, neither of the things that shall be transacted in Time nor
Eternity; and it is well it is so, seeing Mankind has so violently and freely
immersed his Will into this great Sea of Evil, that he does not know or
understand future events, and the sequel of things, which the All Wise Father,
and ever Blessed Creat^ of all Beings has wonderfully ordered; for if Mankind
were not limited as to the knowledge of future events of things, he would be in
a far worse condition, and more miserable; for should the Loving Mother foresee
what Miseries and Calamities would befall her young and tender Child, what a
Melancholy condition would this foreknowledge bring on the Parents, whose
affections is as their own Lives, the Son runs into the Armies of Princes, with
a free undaunted Will, rendering himself liable to all the Miseries of Life,
both in this World and that which is to come; another Robs, Breaks Houses,
Kills and Murders all that stands in his way or opposes his wicked practice,
and at last is Condemned, and Hanged for his violent Crimes and furious
Oppressions; and an hundred other sorts and methods of Vice, both the Sons and
Daughters of Mankind immerse themselves into; for according to what Principles
govern in each Stock or Tree; such is the Fruits according to the common
Proverb, for there is nothing more true than that Discord and Disunity begets
and brings forth Children like themselves; if the divided Forms and violent
oppressive Customs and Principles have obtained the Government in the central
Life of the Father and Mother, the Son or Fruit cannot but must partake and
bear a Simile of its Parents, whence it proceeded; for if the Foundation of any
Creature be Evil, the end must center in the same; for most of the great
Outrages, Evils and Calamities that fall on and attend Mankind, do arise and
proceed from his acting and living under the Government of the disunited and
self-ful Principles and Powers of his own Composition, as was hinted before.

Therefore, that Man should have the Knowledge of future Events, either of this
World or of that which is to come; it would be a great addition of Evil and
Misery to him, seeing he transacts the Affairs of his Life under the conduct of
such violent evil Principles and mischievous Methods, Traditions and Customs:
But if Mankind had but one grain of true Wisdom, and did see ever so little
into themselves or own Magia, then a Man would easily guess what Events such
violent, oppressive Methods of Life would produce and bring to pass, both in
the Evil and also in the Good, for Nature and God's Law is always one and the
same, and true for ever; for every Principle and governing Quality begets and
brings forth Children like it self, and endues them with all the Qualifications
of the Father, both in Body and Mind, Soul and Spirit, and where he is willing
to presage or promise unto himself or Posterity any Good, he must Live first
and transact all the Methods of his Life in harmlessness and innocence,
avoiding Violence and all sorts and kinds of Oppression, either to Man or
Beast, using all the Creatures to a good end and purpose, and above all not to
do or enter on any Action of Life without applying ourselves and taking the
Advice of that Divine Power, Principle and Advocate that dwells in the Center
of every Man's Soul, whose Rule and Prescriptions, if obeyed, will render our
present Momentary Lives comfortable, and Dying-Beds easy, and our future State
most Happy.

My Dear Friend, I doubt not when we shall meet in the Heavenly Regions, but
that we shall have a most undoubted Confirmation and Illustration of those
Truths and wonderful Mysteries we have discoursed of in our Writings, which the
Ages to come will have cause to Praise God for, who is the Giver of Gifts and
the Revealer of Secrets to the Sons and Daughters of Wisdom, from whom this
Knowledge has proceeded; which undoubtedly in future Times will draw many into
the innocent Method of God's Law, which, if Mankind Lived in, would quickly
ease the Soul of that great dread and fear of what shall happen after Death;
for nothing can hurt or perplex that Soul that has lived a harmless Life,
neither in Time nor Eternity, all Dread, Fear and Srrrow comes in at the Door
of Violence and Hurtfulness, as also our not governing our selves nor the
Creatures, according to the Right of Nature, and the one only Original Law; and
this great violent, tormenting Monster does first take its Birth in Man's
Meats, Drinks, Exercises and Employments, Words and Works are the Fruits that
are generated from the central Powers and natural Spirits, so that those evil
Principles and Qualities are conveyed from one Generation to another, the
Children being Essentially endued with all the Principles, Dispositions and
Qualifications of the Father; and that which makes another considerable
addition to those Grand Fountains of Evil, Violence and the breaking of God's
Holy Union, is the evil and preposterous Education of our Children, and the
wicked Examples and Precedents of Fathers, Mothers, and all concerned in
Bringing them up, so that what evil Qualifications are wanting in the Seed, are
made up and completed in their Education, which has and does take such deep
root, that every Generation are more and more Wicked, notwithstanding the
continual Preaching, Teaching and Admonishing of the Clergy of all sorts, and
their threatening the Evildoers with eternal Damnation, and Happiness to those
that do well, and the Severity of the Magistrates too; nevertheless all will
not do, because Precedents, Examples, and the continual practice of all
Violence and Wickedness do take deeper root, and make far greater Impression
than Words and Precepts: What great matter can be expected for Men to hear two
or three hours Discourse of the excellency of Virtue, and at the same time,
both Teachers as well as the Hearers do practice Evil and Violence all the Week?

Now, when these things are understood and well considered, how is it possible,
that Mankind can arrive at the Haven or Port of Rest? or what satisfaction can
that Soul have, whose Methods of Life has been in opposition to true Innocence
and Virtue, having lived and acted by and under all selfish, violent and
tyranical Spirits and Customs? and though many of them be tolerated by
Religion, Laws and Tradition, as those supreme and highest Evils are, (viz.)
The Oppression, and Killing those of our own kind, and all the rest of the
innocent Inhabitants of Heaven and Earth, and Eating their Flesh too; those
violent Practices of Life the poor Soul can never excuse it self of or get over
at the hour of Death, when all the Natural or Spiritual Powers must be
separated, and the Soul left Naked to its Works, which attracts a new Body to
cloth it self with; there can be no true satisfaction or content in that Soul
that has lived in Oppression, and whose daily Practice has been to break the
Union, both in himself and in all other things: The Customs of Nations, Laws of
Princes and Ignorance, will not obliterate those Evils that diametrically
oppose God's eternal Law, both of the Creation and his Divine Providence of
Preservation, whence do arise in Men's Minds and Souls, in Sickness and at the
hour of Death, great Horror, Trouble and Anxiety, and through Blindness and
Ignorance do place the cause of their dissatisfaction on some inferior Evil,
which they are guilty of too, as was mentioned before.

Therefore, he that would Live well and Die in Peace, must first know God, his
Law, and himself; secondly, do no Hurt, thirdly, do all the Good he can;
fourthly, Live and Sustain his Life with harmless and innocent Meats and
Drinks; fifthly, practice all innocent Employments; sixthly, observe the Rules
of Justice, Mercy and Clemency; seventhly, to Educate their Children in all
Submission, Honesty and Innocence, and give them no Examples of Evil, Violence
or Oppression; for in their tender Age the true and lasting Foundation of
Unity, true Virtue, and innocent Methods of Government and Life are laid; it
being impossible for Mankind or any particular Person to act in a true and
regular Method, in Inclinations, Words, Works and Employments; if he be
ignorant of God's central Law planted in himself, and the Qualities and
Principles he is made and compounded of: If this great and necessary Knowledge
be wanting, and not distinguished, this Secret and wonderful Mystery of our
selves being not known, all Thoughts, Inclinations, Words and Works of Life,
are either done by chance or proceed from selfish Evil, morose and wicked
Principles, as every days woeful Experience does confirm; as for Example, As Men
and Women pass in the Street or elsewhere, if any Accidents of hurt, be it
little or much, from one to another, though unawares or against their wills,
nevertheless they send forth fierce, wrathful Words, all tending to promote
Violence, as if the Center of Hell was open, which evil Speeches do with a
rapid motion join Forces, and raise up by Simile the like Properties in them to
whom they are directed; by this and the like, a Man may see without a
Prospective Glass, what Principles most or all Men live in and are governed by,
(viz.) Disunity and Deformity are most or all of our Children and Young People
Educated under; and such like wicked Methods are their Precedents and Examples,
and these evil Seeds being Sown so early, they take such deep root, that in
most Constitutions these evil Dispositions and voracious Inclinations can never
be obliterated by all the Precepts in the World.

For this Cause the People in general of most or all Nations, continue as
Wicked and as void of true Knowledge, Temperance, Sobriety and Piety as ever,
nay, every Age makes an addition of new, and as it were unheard of Violences,
Oppressions and Blasphemies (...) the former, notwithstanding the Laws of
Magistrates, to correct evil Manners, and the Admonition and Preaching of the
Gospel, the Truth of this all Historys for many hundred years past confirm;
therefore this Degeneration of Man into all kinds of Evil cannot be remedied or
cured by any of the Ways or Methods formerly or at this day practiced, but by
another Method of Life, (viz.) We must begin at the Root, that is, with that
which makes Men, or is the Substance and Essentials of our Bodies and Spirits,
clean, innocent Foods, and harmless Drinks, that our Children may proceed from
an innocent Root, and be brought up in all harmless and innocent Methods of
Life; and above all, that they see nor communicate with nothing that is
unclean, or contrary to Virtue, Sobriety and Unity, which will not only
preserve Mankind from those gross Violences and Oppressions, but will lay a
true and lasting Foundation, for their Posterity, for Virtue, Temperance, Order
and Innocence, as also the Knowledge of God, which are like Arts, Trades and
Sciences, best and surest planted in the young and tender Age of Children, that
may easily be done then which cannot be at riper years, as we have largely
demonstrated in our Book, entitled, A New Method of Educating of Children;
therefore in the Eastern Countries the great Zealous Pilgrims, and as it were
unheard of Votaries in Religion, as well in false as true Notions, are all
taught and impressed in Childhood; and by the constant Precedents and Examples
of their Elders, together with the Traditions of their Forefathers and Custom
of the Country they live in.

Now, upon the whole Matter, it does appear as clear as the Sun at Noonday,
that most of the Methods and Actions of our Lives do diametrically oppose the
eternal, creating and preserving Power of our Great Creator, and his Law of
Innocence and Unity; this being Matter of Fact, how then is it possible for
Mankind to be contented or satisfied on a Dying-bed, when the Soul must be
separated, not only from its Habitation, but also from all Coverings, Shelters,
and all that is near and dear to it? besides, there are several other great
Evils that do mightily increase the Anxiety and Trouble of a Dying Man, more
especially to all sober Persons; one of the most principal is, that they are
obliged to leave their loving Wives and young tender Children and Relations, to
be exposed to the infinite Hazzards, Calamities and Miseries of the wicked,
ungodly, unthinking, blind and ignorant World, and that their Posterity must
plunge themselves into the b^se, gross, unclean, fierce, oppressive Customs;
Traditions, Methods and depraved Ways and Principles Mankind has immersed
himself into: The consideration of this, to any Thinking or Pious Person, must
needs make a considerable Figure of Trouble, not only to a Dying Person, but
also to those that enjoy perfect Health; if a Man does take a view of their
particular Actions and Methods of Life, and then divide them into ten parts,
there will certainly be found nine of them most miserable in this World, in one
degree or another, whose mischievious, intemperate, unclean, violent Life does
also threaten them with eternal Trouble and Disquietness; it is that ^me when
they read, they may at first sight marvel that we talk or discourse after this
manner, but if they will but give themselves leisure, to think, consider and
look and examine all the various Actions, Methods, Practices and Employments
Mankind subjects himself unto, then he will find it true; first consider the
great numbers that follow Drums and Trumpets in the Wars of Princes, and the
violent Employments that depends thereon, and this great number are a^ it were
the Heart of a Nation, (viz.) The Youth in the Prime or f^l Strength, next to
these the Sons of Violence and Oppression are the Mobb or common People, which
are as great in number, as wicked, and hardly one degree lower graduated in all
Acts of Intemperance, Uncleanness, Violence and Discord than the former; they
want no Furniture to complete them in the Acts of Mischief, but in the Word of
Command or Power, as is clearly manifested, when Changes or Accidents in the
Government of Cities, Nations and Countries, are not the great Multit^e in a
moment fitted and prepared for all ^apin and Spoil, as though they had been
trained up and taught the Arts of Violence from their Childhood? which does
sufficiently demonstrate what Principles and Methods of Life they are Educated
in, and what Matter, Seed and Ground they proceed from; the next sort are the
middle People, and how many of them are of violent, oppressive Principles,
Unjust and Unmerciful, without true natural Affection and Pity, horridly
Covetous, Unclean and Intemperate, loade^ with procured Distempers, and various
other great Evils: Likewise considerable numbers of this Rank do fall into
Poverty by Extravagancy and want of Conduct in Trading, and other Misfortunes;
fourthly, the next to these are such as are called Gentlemen, which are of
various Degrees and Ranks, the greatest numbers of these are endued with these
following Talents, (viz.) Their chief Care and Industry is to Educate their
Children in all or most of the Grand Evils, which do oppose and contradict
God's eternal Law of Unity, and his preserving Power, and that there may be no
degree of Evil and Depravation ^ing, they first very industrously teach and
educate them in Gluttony, Pride and Idleness, next the vain Compliments and use
of A^ms, even in their young and tender years, as the Killing, Hunting and
Oppressing all the innocent Inhabitants of Heaven and Earth; next to these,
Feats of Arms or Martial Discipline, that they may be endued with the high and
domineering Spirit of Violence, which does not only fit them to be Butchers and
^ill Men with ease and without trouble, or the least regret, as Butchers Kill
Beasts; but to be ^ble of being Commanders over the Sons of ^ceness and
Oppression, (viz.) Soldiers; also another part of (...) M^n of Honor and Title
are of High, ^roud, Lofty Tempers, (...) Oppressors of the Poor, being
Gluttons, Dru^ds, general Wa^ters of God's Creatures, which does not only draw
on them a multitude of cruel, tormenting Diseases; but disturbed Minds, uneasy
Beds and guilty Consciences too: Now, when these things are considered, and the
true Nature and Principles of them, and whence those great and numerous Crowd
of Calamities proceed; then such an one will not ^rvel, that most Men's
Dying-beds are so burdensome and anxious, both to the Body and Mind; more
especially when we consider the (...) part or greatest number are cut off in
their younger Age or Strength, which makes our Separation from the material
things of this World many degrees more burdensome, ^rrible and frigh^ful to
all sorts and degrees of People: Now, this cutting off the Life so early, even
in Childhood, and in Youth, or Strength of our Y^s, is undoubtedly occasioned
by the Intemperances, Uncleanness and Disorders of our Fore-f^thers, with the
addition this present Age makes, does cut off the greatest number of Ma^ind,
which does m^re cle^ly appear when we consider the amazing variety and (...)
^fspring of the four Wo^ds or Elements, (viz.) The under^duated Creatures; do
not things in the Mineral Kingdom arrive to Maturity, as Metals, Stones, and
any other things, belonging to the Element of Earth? and do not Vegetables do
the same, whose variety in Nature are beyond Humane Number? great part whereof
does sustain the Life of Man: The like is to be understood of the inferior
Animals or Beasts, do not the greatest number live to old Age, or the highest
Limit of their Circle or Law, except some, who are subject to the Drudgery and
Tyranny of Man, as Horses, and the like? for should these great numbers and
variety of Creatures be liable and subject to but half the Disorders,
Intemperances, Uncleanness, Depravity and Diseases Mankind is, what an addition
of Misery would it multiply on Man? or how could he Subsist or be Supported,
and his Life preserved by them? for should the greatest part of Fruits, Grains
and Herbage be Cut off or Blasted in the Bud, or the Offspring or Young ones
of Cows, Horses, and other inferior Ranks of Creatures be Cut off or subject
to Distempers, what a great Perplexity would it be on the Humane Race? for
nothing has kept them from being invaded by various Casualties and Sicknesses,
and preserving them in living to their highest Limits, but only their
continuation within the Circle of their Law, that God and Nature have subjected
them to and under, which, if they had at any time disobeyed or broken, then the
very same Flood-gate of Evil and Misery would immediately have fallen on them,
(...) it has done on Man.

Therefore it is most evident, that the great numbers of unclean, cruel
Diseases, short Lives and immature Deaths, and (...) thousand other Evils come
in upon him, as soon as he disobeyed his Creator and the undefiled Law of
Nature, the obeying and living within the Limits thereof is the ^ond and
Preservation of all the Under-graduates, and the contrary is the melancholy
House of Death and Misery, as appears by the many Troubles and Perplexities
that (...) the Humane Race; for should Mankind be divided (...) Ten parts, more
than Nine of them Dies, and are Cut off either (...) Childhood or in the Prime
of their Strength and Age, many do thereby leave poor, helpless, miserable
Wives and Children behind them, who are exposed to all kinds of Violences,
Oppressions and Wants, and are under no better Circumstances than a Ship
without either Pilot or Rudder.

Now, my Friend, I do not doubt but when you have considered the forementioned
Particulars, you will be satisfied, wherefore Mankind are so deeply concerned
in, and do so much fear and dread Death.

Likewise there are several material causes in the common me^ of Men's Lives,
that ^ing melancholy imaginations and troubles to the Dying Person, besides
what we have before mentioned, (viz.) in Parents giving precedents, and
educating their Offspring in all or most of the grand Vices our Great Prophet
^sus Christ has strictly forbidden, on peril of his high Displeasure: The
first thing they teach their Children is, the 3 grand Vices, Gluttony, Pride
and Idleness, which are the common roads and inlets to all other Evils, as
Passion, Violence and Uncleanness, which do diametrically oppose Justice,
Mercy, and that great and Universal Sacrament, Charity; for which Holy Virtue,
Our Lord and Savior justified and saved the Sheep on his Right Hand,
commanding them to enter in and inherit the Eternal Paradise, whose Gates always
stands open to the Children of Wisdom and Obedience: Is not Fighting and
Oppression become the honourablest Employment? and are not our Children trained
up in the use of Arms and Violence, to kill and oppress not only those of our
Kind, but spread their Venom also over all the undergraduated Inhabitants of
Heaven and Earth, who all become Victims to their fierceness and cruelties,
being altogether as it were dispossessed of common Humanity; for which
Practices, all the Goats on the Left Hand were Condemned; for ^he Salvation and
Preservation both in Time and Eternity, is intailed not only on Christians, but
also on all other Nations and Religions, on no other condition than to observe
and live in the ^ower and practice o^ Gods Commands, the particulars of which
our Divine Patron and Principles of Wisdom, do command and enjoin all his
Disciples unto, and all that act contrary thereto, ^doubtedly (...) his
displeasure* Do not most Men that are endued with plentiful Talents and
Blessings of this World, live ^th themselves and Offspring in one degree of
Luxury or other? and is it (...) for ^ple of all sort^ and Religions; to break
that great and important Co^dment? that is; to (...) and give the be^ and
c^oicest (...) and Drinks to (...) at (...) in no need, (...) kind of (...) and
that are able to (...) and Feast^ (...), whi^ (...) ^ly one of the greatest
E^ls, but (...) incon^ to each Party, preventing them from doing such deeds o^
Charity, which otherwise they would be capable of* How willing are thousands to
Treat themselves and Friends ^th Bottle^ of Wine, and with costly Dishes: of
Meat, and at the same time are unwilling to give one Shilling to relieve their
necessitous and wanting Neighbor, and (...) other things and agreeable
practi^es to this, most that have wherewithal do subject themse^ (...); and as
to (...) Talkative or Discou^ part, it produc^ that great and (...) effect of
Folly, Laughter, which the Tuto^ of such (...) Methods call pleasure, and a
sort of (...), a^ (...) Mankind could not (...) his (...), (...) than exposing
it to Sale, as it were by Inch of Candle; which does make a Sick and Dying Bed
still more uneasy and burthensom, more especially when the Sick Person shall
think and consider of the Methods of his Life, great Agonies do arise and
spring up in the Soul, feeling its self almost naked or uncloathed of all the
Pleasures of Life; most of which Perplexities are Originalliy occasioned by the
vain Educations and wicked Customs of Natons, more especially among the
Christians: What vain, empty, frivolous Discourses do all Mothers, Nurses and
Maids use to their Children, the first 6 or 7 years of their Age? always
discoursing between Jest and Earnest; great part thereof Childish Banter, with
a hundred odd Tricks and Postures, which does take such deep root, awakening
their Similies, so that those Vices become essential; that neither Time nor
Correction is ever able to obliterate them: Is it not common where 5 or 6
Children are, with a Mother, Nurse and Maid, the whole House is filled with a
great noisome Crying, others Laughing, their Governesses Whipping and Threatening
of them? and it is but little amended when they come to 18 or 20 years of Age,
when 6 or 8 of these meet, what a strange variety of Notes are heard, as loud
Obesence, Laughter, Jesting, Lying, and Jeering one another, each endeavoring
in vain talking, to move that vain and ridiculous posture of Laughing; nay, our
Gray-Hair'd Senators are not free from these Vanities, it being common for
ancient People to please and delight themselves in telling long Stories of
their Youthful Wickedness and Follies, and that too in the hearing of young
People, and in the presence of their own Children; for Histories tell us, that
Christ never Laughed whilst he was Clothed with the Humane Nature; and to this
day it is esteemed a very odd thing for any Person to Laugh in the Eastern
Countries: Nowthese things considered, no marvel that most Men on Dying Beds
are under such perplexity and horror of Mind, which does occasion thousands to
make Solemn promises to the Lord to amend and redeem their times, if he pleases
to continue their Lives for a very little season longer, which very few do
perform; for those grafted evil Methods do quickly get head, and there the evil
Powers become strong and potent; which does verify that Proverb, That which is
bred in the Bone will never out of the Flesh: Few or none ever consider, that
those Childish Evils or Venoms most suck in their Childhood and Youth, do
naturally improve in riper years, even to Old Age, as all Trades, Sciences, and
other Learning do; so that most or all Man's days are worse than trifled away:
The truth of this appears by the general Conversation of Mankind; go amongst a
hundred sorts of People, of all Pretenses and Religions, and observe their
Converse and Discourse, their Nature and Tendency; and upon the whole, a Man
shall not hear one word among many that is edifying, useful and proper, or that
tends to the benefit of Mankind, neither in the observation of that which makes
them Men, and is the support of the Body, Soul and Spirit, or the knowledge of
God, first in our selves, and then in all other Creatures; or how Mankind may
render himself capable of discharging that great duty to his Maker, (viz.) to
govern himself and all the undergraduated Creatures in Good Will, Love and
Harmony, which is the true method of doing unto all Gods Creatures as a Man
would be done unto; no, no, not a word of any such necessary Truths, but most
or all frothy, vain and fantastic. Now if Mankind spends all his Childhood in
sucking in and learning Vanity, and their strength of years in the practice of
those Evils and Intemperances which often cuts Man off betimes; when these
things are considered, it is then no marvel that the Dying or Sick Bed becomes
so uneasy, there being hardly any sort of People in the World that their
Disciples do Dye with that great trouble or pain of the Mind and Body, as the
Christians; more especially that part called the Reformed, which comes to pass
for the reasons before mentioned: The Eastern People in General Live and Dye
peaceably and easy, more especially the People called Bannians; who perhaps are
some of the strictest Observers of Gods Law, (viz.) doing unto those of their
own kind, and to all inferior Animals and Creatures as they would be done unto;
having a severe and particular regard to maintain Unity and Humanity, that they
may in the Resurrection or next World, (when New Bodies shall be given them,)
arise in Humane Forms and Shapes; for it is their undoubted Faith, that if Man
lives in Gods Law, and leads an innocent, harmless Life, showing Mercy, Love
and Compassion to all the sensible Creation, that then they shall not only
obtain an Angelical form of Body, but have an Eternal Blessed Unity to live
with God and his Holy Angels, in the spangled Regions of Eternity: But on the
contrary, those that live in the practice of Violence, Oppression and Killing,
whose Minds, Spirits and Souls are precipitated into those furious, fierce
Principles; they shall be Clothed in Eternity with suitable Bodies, for
without the Unity or Holy City of Innocence are Dogs, Bears, Lions, and the
like Beasts of Prey, says St. John in the Revelations; there being nothing
more true and certain, he that breaks the Unity both in himself and in all
other Creatures, does immediately divide himself from God, and breaks forth
into Discord, Perplexity and Trouble, let his Religion, Custom and Laws of his
Country be what it will: And on the other side, that Person that keeps the
Unity in himself unviolated, by living in innocent, harmless methods, has Peace
both in his Living and Dying: It is a Proverb amongst the Eastern Philosophers
and Bannians, that nothing makes the Life of Man pleasurable, and the Dying-bed
easy, but an innocent Life, and to imitate God, who is the Creator of all
Beings and the Preserver of all his Works: This they say is the true Worship of
God, and joins them to the Fountain of Benignity: Innocence hurts nothing, nor
nothing that those Eastern Sages or Philosophers have great* Veneration for,
Silence is one of the most necessary and useful Virtues, because most Men know
but very little, and therefore they ought to talk or discourse in proportion to
their Understanding; for this cause where there is much talk, there is a like
proportion of Ignorance and Folly uttered; as the Wiseman says, A Fool is
known by his much talking: Therefore Pythagoras and many other Eastern
Philosophers, taught their Disciples and Scholars Silence, as the first and
principlest Precepts; which the People of those Countries do observe to this
day; time and practice has made it easy and natural to them; so that amongst
them, when several Ages are together, (viz.) Children, Young Men and Women,
middle Age and Old Age, there is not any noise, as talking altogether, but all
stand silent and sedate, each Age speaking in their turn, according to their
Degrees, which does not only prevent many Evils, but renders their Family
easily Governable, preventing all evil Communication, as Idle Jesting,
Laughter, Anger, and a hundred other Inconveniences that attend the Northern
Christians; for Silence is the true Nurse and Support of Wisdom, more
especially when the Seeds of Virtue are sown in Childhood: Likewise, most of
the Western Indians are great Observers of Silence, speaking much in a few
Words; for much talking is the bane of Meditation, obstructing the due
consideration, which ought always to have the first place in the Mind, before
the Thoughts or Imaginations are Coined into Words; so that Person which is
silent by Choice and Prudence, does obtain many advantages of a talkative Man;
he that is silent and utters nothing but what is well digested and weighed,
such a one can remember all his Discourse and Conversation in order; but on the
other side, he that is talkative or speaks much, utters many things by chance,
and is subject to forgetfulness: This the Christian Nations have, and do daily
experience to be too true: Since the Gates of Silence have been broken open in
the Christian Nations, and talking of it has been advanced, the true practice
has been neglected; and it does now consist chiefly in noise, and giving a
parcel of fine words, for there are no People in the World do talk so much of
Devotion and Religion, and do practice so little; Words without Practice are
like Faith without Charity; and it is too true, that most do study and
endeavor to improve their talents of Words, and well methodiz'd Discourses,
more than they do in the Practical part; the last being the Life, and the first
nothing but Clamor, and making our Creator Author of all those evil Practices,
which do concur to make the Soul of Man uneasy, both Living and Dying: What
Country in the World does equal the Northern part of Christendom, in that
Universal Sin of Drunkenness, which never goes alone, but is attended with a
numerous train of Evils of the blackest Nature and Character, more especially
amongst the Reformers, who are willing to be thought the best of Christians?
There are very few that have wherewithal, but do in one degree or other exceed
in their Glasses; which reigning Sins most of the Eastern and Western Indians
have avoided and freed themselves from, by contenting themselves with that
Drink which our Creator and his Handmaid Nature have given and ordained for
Drink, both for Man and also for all other Creatures, (viz.) pure, undefiled
Water, which has preserved them from many Evils and Outrages; which others
that have neglected this Blessed Fountain, have committed against God and all
other Creatures; also they are not only the greatest Drinkers of strong Drinks,
but the most voracious Eaters of all sorts of gross, unclean Flesh, making
little or no distinction between one sort and another; which does generate all
things proportionable thereunto, rendering them surly, bold, robustick, gross,
in all the Actions of Life, which makes very great additions of trouble and
discontent, when they are forced to look that grim and meagre Tyrant Death in
the Face: Besides what has been said before, there are two or three vexatious
Evils that the Northern Christians, and others that call themselves by that
name, do torment and plague each other with, (viz.) Persecution, which does
mightily stir up Envy, Backbiting, and various sorts of Hatred and Contention;
which do look with grim, fierce, wrathful Countenances on a Dying Bed; likewise
amongst them have been midwifed into these Northern Regions, various and
unheard of Heresies, and most wicked Opinions, as Ranters of various sorts and
kinds, which tend to all Evil and Sensuality:' What Intemperance or Uncleanness
is there in the, World, that the Northern Christians have not midwifed into an
essential and substantial Method, by a Universal Custom and Practice; there is
hardly a poor. Tradesman or Labourer that does not spend the 8th. or 10th. part
of his Gettings or Wages in Tobacco and Strong-drink, and at the same time
their poor Wives and Children half Starved for want of Necessaries: These Vices
of late years are become a Trade, and practiced by the greatest Pretenders to
Christianity and Religion, and many other inferior Violences, as young People
throwing at Cocks; and several other cruel Sports, and neither the Fathers,
Preachers of the Gospel, nor Elders of the People, do Correct them for those
vile Pranks and Evils; so that it is as clear as the Sun Beams, that all or
most of these Intemperances and wicked Customs, are justified by our Senators
and Parents; for what Evils or Crueltys soever are commonly practiced in any
Place or Country, and not Corrected or Punished, neither by Parents nor
Magistrates, is a true Sign that such things are justified: Now let any prudent
Person give himself leisure but to consider these depraved Customs and Actions
of Mankind, with a distinguishing Understanding, and then he will see with half
an Eye the true cause and reason why Man is so perplexed at the Hour of Death,
or on a Sick Bed, and how hard a thing it is for him to look the pure,
undefiled Love and Son of Eternal Light in the Face, when most of his Actions
and Words are bloody cruel, inhumane, and as black as Hell. The whole business
of Life and all the Ingenuity, Gifts and Graces the Great Creator has endued
Man with, have been most or all improved to advance Pride, Vainglory, Cruelty,
Oppression and Selfhood. My Friend, when you have read over this Epistle, and
weighed it well with a distinguishing Mind, you will be satisfied wherefore
Mankind is so affrighted when he thinks of his Change, or when he is on his
Sick and Dying Bed.

These are some of the improved Talents the Lord has given me, which I freely
present and recommend to you; which please to receive for Answer. I remain

Your ready Friend and humble Servant, in the Love of God, T. T.

LETTER XXVII. Of ASTROLOGY.
SIR,
YOur kind Letter is before me, and I have considered the Contents thereof:
Your principal Question is, whether that Noble branch of the Astral Sciences
called Astrology, has so great influence and important Signification on the
Humane Race, as Astrologers of all Ages have affirmed, as appears by many of
their Learned and Ingenious Volumes; wherein they do endeavor to demonstrate,
that each Person is either Fortunate or Unfortunate, Healthy or Unhealthy,
Strong or Weak, Wise or Foolish, Tall or Short, Handsome or the contrary, all
according to the time or minute of Birth, and ruling Constellations they are
Born under, and an hundred things more to this purpose, too tedious to be here
ennumerated. Now you say nothing makes such deep and grounded Scruples in your
Mind and Understanding, of the Validity or Truth of this Art, as this one
particular, (viz.) no Person of Understanding but believes, that in the City of
London, and likewise in the Nation, that there are a great number Born at one
time or minute. and under the same degrees of Ascendants, ruling Stars and
Configurations of the Heavens; and yet all you say are of various Fortunes,
Shapes, Figures, Inclinations and Dispositions: I answer, now all that you take
notice and affirm, is a grand Truth; and yet, we must tell you, that this does
not at all invalid or make void Judicial Astrology, but that it is most evident
that the Planets and Heavenly Bodies have an innate and powerful influence on
all Su^lunary Bodies or Things; for it is most evident, that by the circular
Motions, Configurations and Influences of those mighty Powers of God or
Heavenly Bodies, all material things are influenced, altered and changed out of
one thing or quality into another; all the Elements bow before those great
Powers, and never fail to yield their Obedience; and therefore as they retreat
toward the Chambers of the South, our fruitful Season ceases, and the reviving
Beams of the Great Eye of the World forsakes our Horrizon, we are attended with
cold Winds, short Days, long Nights, Rainy, Cloudy, dark Weather, with an
intermixture of Frost and Snow; which does, during the absence of the Sun and
other ruling Constellations, strip the Vegetable World of all its Ornaments, so
that Nature becomes like Old Age, and lies Bed-ridden till the return of this
Glorious Body, whose presence gives as it were a new Life, Vigor and Strength
unto all the Undergraduates and Offspring of this World; and for this cause,
no Man can or dare deny their influences, conduct and power, in and over
visible things; but as to the Forms, Shapes, Manners, Strength, Weakness,
Riches, Poverty, Honor, Dishonor, Healthiness, and the contrary, which
variously do attend Persons in all Places and Countries, Born at one and the
same time, and under the same Stars and Constellations; which as is said
before, does not invalidate the Astrological Science or Influence of the
Heavens on Mankind, for the causes and reasons following, (viz.) First, every
Seed produces or generates a Body and Spirit, in some proportionable degree,
according to its Qualifications and Nature, never failing to bring forth some
new Essence, that did not manifestly appear in the old Stock or Parents; and
although a thousand Persons should be Born at the rising of the same
Constellation and under the same Elevation and Configuration of Heaven,
nevertheless each of these Persons will wonderfully and strangely vary, both in
their Shapes, Forms, Inclinations and Fortunes: The reason is plain, and as it
were barefaced; for is there not a strange variety in the Foods, Drinks,
Inclinations, Dispositions, Labors, Communications, Customs and Educations: As
for Example, suppose that in one City or Town there are ten Persons have ten
Sons Born at one and the same minute, and they Educate and bring them up in ten
several Arts and Trades, every one of these Persons shall by the secret power
of their Employment, be influenced and subjected to the Method and Manners of
those that are of the Employment: Is not this clearly seen in all sorts of
Business? and the same is to be understood in Communication. Now if those
External Conversations, as they may properly be termed, are endued with such a
mighty Energie and Power to seek out their Similies, and thereby impose their
propertys on the Humane Nature, as in a great degree to increase and change the
Inclinations, Dispositions, Words and Works: What then must Meats and Drinks
do, which are the very Essences and Substances of the Humane Nature? every Son
and Daughter is endued with all the Qualifications of their Parents, and the
Seed is made and generated from all the Qualifications of the Father and
Mother: First, from the quality and quantity of their Meats and Drinks, clean
or unclean, well or ill prepared, proper or improper Mixtures: Likewise it is
influenced, and as it were inspired by each Persons Employment, Communication,
Words and Works; for every Variation not only in Meats and Drinks, but also in
all other things or manners of Life, do beget and produce variety of Shapes,
Forms, Dispositions and Inclinations: This is wonderfully manifested in the
Husbandman's Art; do not the mixtures of various Earths together, alter and
change the Vegetables for the better or worse, stronger or weaker, and every
sort of Dung or Earth, according to its quality and quantity is thereby rendered
capable, and do bring a newOff-spring of Vegetables, called Weeds or Herbs,
that were never seen to appear in that spot of Land; for the mixtures of Earths
that are of differing qualities, do alter and change the complexion of such
Land or Earth, by which secret power of Qualities, that property that was
strong becomes weak, and that quality that was in the complexion weak, and did
as it were disappear, becomes most powerful and manifest: The very same is to
be understood in the Art of Representation; does not a skilful Painter by an
apt commixture of various Earths and Drugs, most curiously represent all the
wonderful variety of the Colors, both of the Animal Vegetable and Mineral
Worlds; which is all done by the Sympathetical Power and Secret Operation of
the mixtures, and compounding the four grand qualities, the Heavens and the
Elements do continually sow and shower down Seeds of Varietys: As for Example,
cast up Gravel or Clay, that to all appearance is destitute of all the Sal
Nitral or Seminary qualities of Vegetation, nevertheless, being for some time
exposed to the Sun and common influences of the Elements, such Gravel or Clay
will become covered with various sorts of Herbage; likewise it is farther to be
observed, that the Religion, Customs and Manners of each Place or Country, do
powerfully alter and change the Complexions of Mankind, either for the better
or worse, Virtue or Vice; as suppose there should be a scrutiny made, (viz.) a
thousand Male Children of the most roughest, fiercest, choleric Complexions,
should be sent to be Nursed and Educated in a Bannian Country, where there is
no Fighting, Quarrelling not Killing either of Men or Beasts, or of any Living
Creature; but all their Methods and Manners are sedate and calm, where these
young choleric Sparks have, nor do not see any other Precedent or Example, but
Clemency, Mercy, and an humble Deportment of their Elders to Men and Beasts,
esteeming it one of the greatest Sins or Crimes that Man is capable to commit
against God and the whole Creation, to oppress, hurt or kill either Man or any
Living Creature; and let these Youths remain amongst them till they be 20 or 25
years of Age, in which time they will be thoroughly grounded and fixed in their
Religion and Customary Methods, not letting them know from whence they came nor
from what Parents they proceeded; and then you may be assured that he that is
fiercest by Complexion, all the Rhetoric and profits or interest in the World
will not be able to persuade such a one, either to Kill, Oppress, be Drunk, or
go freely into the Armies of Princes, to destroy those they never saw nor had
no occasion of Quarrel. The like is to be understood in all Religions, can any
persuade a Turk to become a Christian after 20 years of Age? Or on the other
side, a Christian to be a Turk? and so of all others; by which this great Truth
does appear over all, that Customs, Examples and Living Precedents have far
greater power and influence over Mankind, than the Constellation any Person is
Born under: Besides, the wonderful and amazing Varieties both of the Animal,
Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, are such, that the Births of all Created
Beings, are in one degree or other manifestly unlike; many Men have been
curious in this matter, but no Man could ever find two things in all
Circumstances alike, or of one dimention or complexion: And the original cause
of this Wonder is hid from the Eyes and Understanding of the greatest number of
Men, the blindness, ignorance and wickedness of Mankind is so great, that the
Sons of Wisdom are forbid discovering of this secret Wisdom; for the Unlearned
would not only trample Pearls under foot, but also make an ill use of them no
Man doubts; but according to the old Maxim of Wisemen and Naturalists, that Man
in Soul. Body and Spirit is a complete Epitome or Image of the Great Immense
Creator and Father of all Beings; and therefore in him is contained the true
nature and property of all material Things or Elements, and he may be fitly and
properly likened or compared with the Earth, in which are the Seminary Seeds
and powers of all Herbs, Grains, Fruits and Trees, of which there is amazing
variety, even beyond Humane number, only this difference is to be understood,
the Sal Nitral forms and four grand qualities stand in their several respective
degrees, in some things one form and quality is strong, another weak, which
does occasion the great difference of Earths, which by the understanding
Husbandman and his Cultivation, can be made capable to bring forth all kinds of
Herbage, Corn, Seeds, Fruits and Trees, by his increasing and decreasing of
qualitys, which by his Dressing, Dunging and Manuring, he changes the
complexion of the Ground by his apt mixtures, making weak qualities strong, and
strong properties weaker: Now can any understanding Man imagine but that there
will be the like great difference in the Humane Nature, for Men's Employments,
together with their Communications, are able to vary their Complexions, abating
and lessening their sanguine, tractable Tempers, and advancing their fierce
invading Tempers, which before their conversing with things of the like nature,
could hardly be seen or known; so that there is nothing more true, than that
every particular Trade, Employment or Practice does incircle all such that
enter into such Business, having a Key that opens all the secret Doors and
Gates, and the Complexion or Nature of that thing is never satisfied till it
has found out its Similie, which in a little time and practice does strengthen
and advance; by which weak Dispositions and fainty Inclinations become strong
and powerful, and on the other side, strong Inclinations and Dispositions are
mightily weakened, and grow languid and drooping as if they had a Consumption:
Now if every Man and Woman did not contain the true nature and property of the
whole, then this could not be done, for every particular thing must have a
Friend or a Confederate in the Humane Nature, or else it could have no power to
increase, decrease, strengthen or weaken Forms, Principles and Qualitys, and
mould them into their Natures, by impressing their Dispositions and
Inclinations in a great degree alter and chang them. Now if this be true of
Exercises and Employments, which are but External, and managed with the motion
of the Members of the Body, then what power and influence must Meats and Drinks
have on the Soul, Spirit and Body, which are as it were the Original or
Seminary Seeds and Substance of the Humane Nature, whose Operations are all
Internal; from which are generated Blood, Spirits, Inclinations, Words and
Works, either clean or unclean, better or worse, all according to the nature of
the Foods? If Mankind and those skilled in the Astrological Science did
understand, and had Wisdom to distinguish these things, they would be far more
afraid of the malignant influences of the Stars and Constellations that rule in
that part of the Globe called the Earth, that is, evil Education, unclean
Meats, Drinks, Exercises, Trades, Employments, Communication, Tradition, wicked
Customs and Examples, than from the Male Configuration of the Heavenly Bodies,
not but Men do by their Uncleanness and Sinful Methods, most powerfully attract
and draw the venomous Nature and Dispositions out of all the Stars, Elements,
and all Undergraduated things; for as is mentioned before, Man is like all
things and all things like him, and so he is rendered capable to influence all
things, and all things have power to influence him, either for better or worse.
So wonderful has our Blessed Creator made all Creatures and Beings, enduing
them with an influential Power and Energie; and more particularly the Humane
Nature, for it is not to be doubted, but that Mankind is endued with an innate
Power, and thereby is not only rendered as capable to move and influence the
Starry, Celestial, and all the powers of the Elements, as they are to move and
influence him to that or the other thing, whether it be Virtue or the contrary;
for the Princes, Governors, Magistrates of all kinds, together with the
Priests, Prophets and Advocates, are the great Stars, Planets and
Constellations that Govern, and under whose influence all Men and other
Creatures and Things are subjected to in this Sublunary World, there being
nothing more true and manifest; that they are the Lord of every Man's
Ascendant, for by the power and virtue of their Commands, Laws, Customs and
Traditions, they make all bow before them, let them be of what Constitution,
Nature, or under what Constellation soever, all Configurations, both good or
ill must yield Obedience to their Methods, as we have before showed by the
Memorials, Laws, Customs, Traditions and Religions of all Nations; for this
cause, that which is esteemed true Virtue and Religion in one Country, is Evil
or Vice in another: Now, can any Person that wears Eyes in his Head be so
ignorant as to think or believe, that the powers and influences of the
Celestial Bodies are the prime Cause and Promoters of those vast Variety and
Difference there is in the Religions and Manners of Mankind? no, no, the true
Original of all this amazing variety of Sentiments and Methods, are the
Or^cles, Prophets and Gods each Country does Observe, Adore and Worship, be
they either good or evil, all, both the Wise and the Simple fall Victims to
their power: Would not Swearing, as is mentioned before, and all other evil
Words be they of what nature soever, be as unknown and altogether as hard and
impossible as for Children to learn Hebrew, Greek, or any other Language they
never heard any speak; no, the Celestial Stars and great illuminated Bodies,
whose Orbs or Circles they move by our demonstrative Guesser: The
Mathematicians do tell us that the Orb or Circle of each Planet is far greater
than the whole Globe of Earth and Water, which hitherto no Man in the general
has doubted, what they have found true by the Observations of the most Learned
and Ingenious of all Ages for some thousands of years; and if so, what mor^l
Man can guess the wonderful Creatures and Inhabitants that may possibly dwell
and inhabit those Spacious Airy Plains? for so they seem to us; and who can
tell but that the Globe of Earth and Water may appear to the Creatures of those
Worlds as they do to us; and consequently that the Mathematicians and
Astrologers of those unknown Worlds, may make as great ado about the influences
of our Planets, Stars and Constellations, as we do of theirs, and give us the
same Titles and Names as we do them; but we have never ravelled in their
Regions, nor conversed with the People and World of the Moon, and therefore
shall submit and be silent in this guessing Philosophy. It is further to be
considered, that the good and evil Successes or Fortunes to the Ascendants,
Planets and Significators, that as Astrologers say, are showered down upon
Mankind by the benevolent and malignant influences of those great Luminaries
and Celestial Bodies, which are various and strange, if all be true as
Philosophers say: Now the Evils and Misfortunes are as it were beyond Humane
number, in comparison of the Good; and whatsoever Misfortune or Evil does
happen or befall Mankind, is by many of those cunning Men attributed to the
Configurations and Directions of Planets and Significators, or some one of
them; to Saturn they say, when ill lignified, he powerfully inclines his Sons
and Daughters to Oppression, Violence, Killing, Covetousness, Backbiting,
Envy, Strife, and all kinds of evil Words and Works: And the like is to be
understood of the other Six Planets; whereas, it is as clear as the Sun Beams
at Noonday, that all the Intemperances, Evils and Outrages Mankind does commit
against God and his Neighbor, are generated and midwifed into the World by
Customs, Presidents, evil Communications and Examples; as appears by the
foregoing; and if this be true, how angry then will those great Illuminated
Powers of Heaven be with Man, for laying the Cause and Foundation of those
great Evils upon them, as when the fair Sex are vain, proud wanton and foolish,
to say that Venus, that great and wonderful Illuminated Body and Queen of Love,
is the cause that inclines them to such Wickedness; or when a young Man is
ingenious, sharp and witty, and turns all into Cheating, to attribute it to
Mercury; and when any Person is vain, wanton and unconstant, to lay the cause
on the Moon and her Influences; or when a Man is fierce, devilish,
hard-hearted, cruel, and subject to Wrath, Passion and Violence, to lay the
cause on Mars; and when false in Religion, to attribute it to an unfortunate
Jupiter; and when proud and subject to Vainglory and boasting, to fix it on
the Sun; when in Truth, the Original cause of most or all Evils and Sins, take
their first birth in the center of a Man's self, and the People he Lives amongst
and communicates with; so that Mankind does mightily add to his evil Course of
Life, by laying the cause where he should not, and belying those innocent
Powers; which wicked Trade he has followed ever since he transgressed Gods
Holy Law and Commandment, putting the evil from himself and laying the cause on
some other thing; of which its said, that our Mother Eve was the first
Precedent or Example: Now what Mankind have to say for themselves when they
shall be brought to the Test, I cannot imagine; for it seems impossible for
Astrologers, that they should pass their Account without making retalliation or
satisfaction; so that the Wisemen have made but poor work of their Studies.

It is likewise further to be Noted, that no Creatures or Sublunary Bodies are
subject or compelled to obey the Influences of the Heavenly Bodies, but only
such as have kept and Lived under the Law of God, and observed and not broken
the limits of their Natural Orb or Circle in which each specific Body or
Creature was Originally Created and brought forth, as we have hinted before;
for all the wonderful and most amazing of the Heavenly Luminaries called Stars,
Planets and Signs, and though their number be far beyond all Humane Numeration,
nevertheless each of them does keep within the limits and bounds of their Orbs
and Original Circles, and does always move with an exact and regular motion,
keeping and obeying the Voice and great Law of their Creator: And for this
cause, all Corporeal Beings that live and move within the Limits of their first
Law, and have not at any time broken, nor in any degree exceeded its bounds,
are all subject to the Laws, Orders and Methods of Heaven, and to all the
Influences of those great Powers, vulgarly called Stars, Planets and
Constellations; and they do with the highest diligence endeavor to observe and
imitate their Superior Powers, every Creature observing both time and season;
so that all things are done and brought forth in an exact and wonderful Method
and Order, which is strangely amazing and surprising to any considerate Person:
Do not all the numerous Offsprings of the Earth obey the Motions, Influences
and Voice of the Heavenly Bodi or Constellations? And are not the Children or
Fruits of our Mother Earth, better or worse, strong or weak, virtuous or the
contrary, all according to the Benevolent or Malevolent Influences or
Configurations of the Stars, Constellations and Elements. The like is to be
understood of the Sensitive Creatures called Beasts, of which there is an
unaccountable variety; nevertheless, each does in a most wonderful manner and
curious method observe and constantly obey the Original Law God stamped on
them; and their Young Ones or Children learn and observe the same, without the
invading, fierce Rods of Schoolmasters or Tutors; and as the Heavenly Bodies
and Governing Powers of the Great Creator, do all work, move and govern in a
most exact and regular Order and Method: The like is to be understood of all
the Children or Offspring of the Elements, who keep their first Law, and
therefore they do all as exactly keep and observe their times and seasons,
always moving within the compass and bounds of their own Circles or Orbs they
were Created in; and their whole business both of Motion, Inclination; and all
the Actions of Life, is to imitate and observe the Laws and Commands of their
Superiors, (viz.) the Heavenly Bodies: But the contrary is to be understood of
the Humane Race, who have defaced their noble Image, by breaking the Law of
their Creator, and thereby have destroyed the Orbs and Limits of their own
Circle, so that they are as it were blind, and know little or nothing of the
wonderful Operations of their own Heaven, nor are they in any degree sensible
of their own Natures or the Principles they are compounded of, which makes them
utter Strangers to themselves and to all the wonderful Mysteries of Gods Law;
and for this cause, Mankind ever since he has transgressed the Holy Laws of
God, and exceeded the limits and bounds of the innocent Methods and Operations
of Nature, has been as it were forced and compelled to make strict and severe
Laws against the wicked Enormities and Violences he committed against his own
Kind, and likewise to all the innocent Inhabitants of Heaven and Earth; and had
not some of the more Wise fixed on Mankind those Laws of retalliation, (viz.)
of Rewards and Punishments, Man would quickly have destroyed the whole Creation
and have raced himself off the Earth; so that it is as clear as the Sun at
Noonday, that if Mankind had not Dishonored his Creation and defaced his
noble Image, by suffering that great and wonderful power, the free and
unbounded Will, to enter into evil Principles, and consequently Practices; by
virtue whereof he was Superior to all the visible Creatures of this World; then
we say, if this had not been done, Mankind would not have had any more occasion
to have made Laws with promises of Rewards and Punishments, than the
Undergraduated Creatures of the Field have; for so soon as Man had entered into
Cruelty and Revenge, and so broke himself off from the Commands and Laws of God
and of the Heavens, that he instantly became his own Lawmaker, and was thereby
subjected to all the Influences, Laws and Customs of the Sublunary Planets,
Stars and Constellations, and is principally governed by them in all Nations;
and therefore as Mankind is departed from the simple Methods of Gods Law into
evil Principles and Methods of Life, by which means he has rendered himself
incapable of the benevolent Influences and Powers of Gods Law, and also of the
sweet and fructifying Dews of the Heavenly Bodies; but on the other side, by
his cruel and unnatural Methods of Life he is only capable to attract or draw
unto himself the Venom, and weak Influences out of all things Elements and
Constellations; for all things of this great Being or visible World, are
compounded of the two Grand Principles of Good and Evil, and into what Man does
enter with his free unbounded Will, that same Principle obtains the Government,
and becomes his Ascendant or Governing Constellation, whether it be Good or
Evil; and this Grand Truth every sensible Man must grant, that each principle
or quality has a Key in its own Bosom, both in the Evil and in the Good, to
penetrate the depth of all things, and to influence and to be influenced by its
Similie; the Good searches the whole Globe of the Heavens and Earth, and
wheresoever it finds its Similie there it rejoices, and is thereby
strengthened. The like is to be understood of the evil Genius, every Star, Sign
and Planet has great influence and power in his own Orb or Circle, for in them
all Learned in the Astral or Mathematical Science, each Planet or Constellation
delights and has a Similie with its own Nature, but when those great
Luminaries are out of their Orbs, or meet with contrary Natures, then they are
said to be weak and impotent, and their Influences are in proportion, from
whence the Notion of Strength and Weakness of the Planets proceed; every
particula^ thing both in the Heaven and in the Earth, is best pleased and
delighted in that which is nearest and most like it self; this every one does
know more or less; and therefore if Mankind would have the benevolent and sweet
Influences both of the Heaven and of the Earth, and of those of his own Kind
too; then let him with his Will enter into Temperance, Patience, Order, and
into all virtuous courses of Life, and then he will quickly obtain that Blessed
Magnet that will attract and influence the good in the Earth and in the
Heavens, and the good likewise in the whole Universe will naturally and
powerfully influence him, all the great Governing Stars and Constellations will
befriend him with their virtuous Influences: The contrary is to be understood
of him who suffers his Will and Desire to enter into the Methods and Principles
of evil and violent courses of Life, such a one draws unto himself the Evils
and Venoms out of all things, both of Heaven and Earth. Others object and say,
(viz.) if each Man's good and ill Fortune, Health and Sickness, Death and Life,
Honor and Dishonor, Riches, and the contrary, do depend on the time of Birth,
the Ascendant, Governing Stars and Constellations, together with the Friendly
Aspects and Configurations the Heavenly Bodies have with each other; they say
if this be true, how comes this to pass that a Hundred Thousand Men come into
the Field of Mars, Fifty Thousand on a side, and within the compass of one day
or twelve hours time, there are Slain Sixty or Seventy thousand on both sides,
this does startle and amuse all Men that are ignorant of the Government and
Powers of the Heaven and Earth, making conclusions, and measuring all things
according to their narrow Capacities and Sensuality, knowing nothing of Gods
Law themselves, nor the Simpathetical Methods of Nature; for as we have
mentioned before, Mankind having by Disobedience and Fraud, broken the Laws of
God, and consequently of the Heavens and the great ruling Powers thereof; and
therefore he is not now in the common Capacity of those Creatures that have
kept their first Law and Station they were Created in; so that now by the power
of his free Will he is rendered capable to Create, Choose and Ordain Earthly
Stars, Constellations, Governors and Princes in this Sublunary World, or dark
Earthly Globe, and thereby he is become a complete Citizen of the Earthly
Regions, and consequently as subject to the Influences of those Earthy Gods,
Governors and Princes, as those Creatures are to the Heavenly Constellations
and Governors that have not broken their Law, but kept their first Station; and
as these most wonderful and amazing Luminaries, Stars and Constellations, do by
their circular Motions, Configurations and Simpathetical Operations, govern and
rule their Subjects or inferior Creatures, that have not broken their first
bounds and limits of Gods Law, and a regular, exact Method and Order, as is
most clear and manifest (by every days Experience) to the Vulgar. The like is
to be understood of the Degraded Legions, or Creatures called Men, who have as
is mentioned before, broken their Original or Heavenly Laws, and so are no more
subject to the Laws, Orders and Methods of the Heavens and ruling Princes of
their own making; for so soon as Man had Degraded himself, and fallen from, and
out of the power of the Heavenly Government, and so become depraved, then
immediately from the same ignorant, blind and wicked Principle, as by Similie,
he did and does to this day, choose and advance proportionable Governors and
Princes to rule over them, and do therethereby oblige themselves under the
Penalties of cruel and severe Laws, and so becomes subject to all their Innate
Influences and Commands, so that it is most clear and manifest, that if the
Governor of any People or Prince of this or the other Nation, have a mind or
desire to make War, or to spoil his Neighboring Countries, he can presently
command his People or Subjects into Warlike postures, and cause them to march
into the Field, where Twenty or Thirty Thousand are Slain in a Moment, so that
every one is subject to the good and ill Fate and Destiny of that Star or
Constellation he has made his Governor, and unto whose Laws he has subjected
himself.

This is farther demonstrated by all the under-graduated Creatures called
Beasts, (viz.) If any Person becomes Master of a Thousand Sheep, Cows, Horses,
or any other Creatures, has not our Laws and Customs made him Lord over them?
and does not their good and ill Fate depend only on him, being unaccountable
for all his Actions toward them, whether good or Evil, Life or Death are in
and under his Power and Influence? and cannot he dispose of those innocent
Creatures several ways at his pleasure, one part or number to the Hangman or
Butcher, to be Slain all in one hour, and another number to be preserved for
some years? and yet for all this those Creatures are Midwifed into this World,
not only at several times, but under as various Ascendants and governing
Constellations of Heaven as Mankind is; so that it is clear, let any Person be
Born under what Ascendant or Constellation soever, nevertheless he shall be
compelled by the Laws of his Sublunary Gods, Customs and Traditions of the
Place or Country he lives in, to submit and obey them: For so soon as Mankind
broke himself off from the innocent Influences and Government of the Law of
God, and the sweet Influences of the Heavenly Powers, he immediately became
subject to a Foreign or Tyrannical Power, so that he is become altogether
ignorant of all the great Mysteries, Qualities and Principles his Creator has
endued him with; the Eye of his Understanding, and all the wonderful Faculties
and Intellectual magic Powers become encircled with a dark Cloud of Ignorance,
so that he is now like a Ship that has neither Pilot nor Rudder, tossed to and
fro by the fierce invading Waves of the Sea, that has no Harbor nor Center,
but he is continually drawn by the dark, ignorant, insulting, earthy
Constellations, Customs and Powers, out of one Evil into another, seeking
Content and Rest in all his Und^kings, Enterprises and Methods, but rarely
finds any Satisfation, which cannot be obtained by any other way or method, but
only by Virtue and the Power of Regeneration, that is to return and observe the
Laws of God and Nature; for Mankind cannot be a Subject of Heaven, till he
obeys and lives in and under the Laws and Influences thereof, as our great
Prophet and Savior Jesus Christ, or the Divine Eye or Principle has told us;
His Servants ye are whom ye Obey.

Accept this in Answer to yours, for the present,

from your Friend and Servant T. T.

LETTER XXVIII. Of the perpetual MOTION.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 26th. of May, 1699, filled with complaints of the
various Indispositions and Diseases that have lately invaded the Health, both
of your Body and Mind; and the worst of all is, these Intestine Enemies have
not only beset you on all sides, but they are numerous and powerful; so that
all the helps and succors that Nature, with the aid and assistance either of
Meats, Drinks, Exercises, Airs or Medicines, seem too short and feeble to
restore you to your former Health: However we shall freely give you our Advice,
which will be easy to be observed and practiced, if you will but stem the Tide
of Custom and give your Mind to it, (viz.)

First, We referr you to our Writings, in which we have largely discoursed of
the Preservation of Health, also of the qualities and quantities of Meats and
Drinks, also of Exercises, Airs and Communications; where you will find both
general and particular rules for Health.

Secondly, The Foods that may be most valuable to recover and maintain your
lost Health, are several sorts of Pottages or Spoonmeats, as Water Gruel,
Milk-pottage, Pap made of Water and Flour, or with Milk and Water, Possets,
Bread, and Milk as it comes from the Cow; several sorts of Caudle, made of
Oat-meal, Water, Ale, Wine, or with Eggs, Chocoalate, all eaten with some
Bread, these are the principal Foods you ought to apply your self unto, being
easy of Digestion, and are to be preferred before hard, strong, salt, fat
things; for the Juices and Virtues are easy, Distilling their Nutritive
qualities in a silent Method, making no noise, nor give no Disturbance, from
whose innocent power and sweet virtues, the Blood and all the motions of the
Body becomes advanced into a better state of Health.

Thirdly, Your Drink ought to be good Water, or at least ways small Ale, Wine
allayed with Water, etc.

Fourthly, Exercise your self in open, airy places, and by running Rivers
sides, and you must above all refrain and withdraw your self from all Sedentary
Business, more especially, that tedious and ineffectual Study of the perpetual
Motion, a thing that seems altogether impossible to be obtained, because it
does Diametrically oppose all Gods Methods and Laws in this Visible World,
which you and others ought to have considered, before such a Labor had been
entered upon; do but survey and contemplate all visible Beings and Offsprings
of God and his great Powers, called Stars, Constellations and Elements, as
Earth, Air, Fire and Water; by whom the Great Creator works all wonderful
things; are not their Productions and Created Beings limited in their Motions
and all their Methods of Life? or can any Creature break their Circle in which
Gods Law has bounded it? and if the Sons and Daughters of the Elements have
their set bounds and limits, and cannot pass their several Periods of Time, how
then is it possible that we by a certain Art or Science, should outdo our
selves? for Art and Science is but a third Birth from the Original, and
consequently but Grand Children; now that which is endued with a perpetual
Motion, Old Age never overtakes them, but they are as it were always Youthful
and Vigorous; and therefore may have the Character of Immortal; and if the
Offspring and Children of the great Immortal Being be Mortal, what then must
the Arts and Sciences be that are produced or flows from them, as a third
Birth? or can that Creature which is Mortal produce that which is Immortal or
Perpetual, which is one and the same: There is no Creature or Being in this
Sublunary World that has an Eternal Motion, but only the Original or Grand
Powers of God, (viz.) the Sun, Moon, and innumerable Company of Stars and
Constellations, together with the ever teeming Elements, (viz.) the Fire,
Water, Earth and Air, whose generating, creating and preserving Motions are
perpetual; but their Progenies or Offspring, whose variety and number are
beyond Humane Arithmetic, which are all circumscribed to certain Bounds,
Limits and Periods in their Motions, Generation and Growth; and that is most
clear, and it is witnessed by innumerable living Testimonies, that for any
person to pretend to do or attain to that, which God, his Law, and the whole
course and method of all Created Beings forbids, on the peril of Gods high
Displeasure: It is true, Mankind by Industry and Art, has found out many
curious and useful things, as that of Clocks and Watches, which of late have
been mightily improved, and it is not to be doubted, but that it will be still
farther advanced in all Motions and Curiosities thereunto belonging; but still
Gods Eternal Law and his Handmaid Nature, puts Bounds and Limits, so that they
cannot exceed their Circles; all Arts, Trades and Sciences take their Birth in
Nature, and the better Workman or more curious any Person is, the more nearer
he comes to Nature, but however it is but an imitation of her; for all Arts and
Sciences, Trades, and whatsoever is done and performed by Mankind, the
Excellency thereof does chiefly depend on the degrees of each Persons Judgment,
and their distinguishing that principle, form, quality and nature of the thing
or materials they work on, and according to the degrees of each Man's Judgment
and distinguishing power, such a Workman he becomes, either better or worse;
the Original Principles of all Sciences, Arts and Trades are the same for ever,
but the Superstructures or Building thereon do strangely and wonderfully vary,
either for the better or worse, all according to the judgment and the degrees
of distinguishing in the Workman; for Nature has bounded every Man in his
Gifts and Talents, for Arts and Sciences are beyond all Humane Number and
Capacities; however there are very few, if any that attain to their highest
limit in either Arts, Trades, Sciences, Health or length of Days, which have
come to pass by the depraved and unnatural Methods Mankind have from one
Generation to another embraced: For this cause, the more ignorant any Person
is, the more he values the Works of his Hand, that is, the Commodity he works
on or makes up; and indeed no Artist is so apt to bragg or be proud of his
Work, as he that wants a sound Judgment and a distinguishing Understanding,
such a Persons Hands goes as far as his Judgment, he values that which one that
has Understanding and does distinguish the principal parts of such a piece
cannot; but that Person that has a sound Judgment, and does distinguish the
principles and parts of the matter or thing he works on, such a one is rarely
proud or conceited of his Art in himself, whatever he may pretend to others for
the sake of Gain or his Interest, because his Judgment and Understanding went
before, or is greater than his Hands can perform; by which Eye of Distinction
he sees plainly that the piece of Work, be it what it will, may be better
performed; so that such a one is less apt to boast: For this cause, ordinary
Workmen or such as are called Bunglers, are more apt to boast and to be pleased
than better Artists; and if the curious Workmanship of some others of the same
Trade did not clip the Wings of such Persons, they would be exceeding proud of
what they can do: Now as is hinted before, there are but few People in this
Nation that ever do attain to the highest limit or number, or become so curious
in Arts, Sciences and Trades, as their Genious is capable of; the Original or
grand causes thereof are, (viz.) First, most or all Youth are too Old before
they are amongst, or communicate with such People that are of the same Trade,
Art or Science they are put to, as we have more largely Discoursed in our new
Method of Education, for the younger and greener Children are, the more capable
they are of receiving all Characters and Impressions; and for this cause, if
little Children were but accustomed to be amongst, and constantly communicate
some part of each day with hard working Tradesmen, and though they were not
able to do or perform any part of such Labor with their Hands, nevertheless
their Judgments and distinguishing Faculties of Nature, will as it were,
unknown to themselves, be improved; and such when they come to be put to that
Trade or Art, shall obtain it in a shorter time, and be more curious and better
Workmen.

Secondly, There is wanting a true natural method and form in the learning and
doing of most things, and the well ordering of Young People, both in Meats,
Drinks and Communications; for Temperance and Order are the Spring-heads that
renders Mankind capable to attain to the highest limits of his natural Genius:
And on the other side, for want of conduct and a proper management of the
Humane Earth, and of the Sowing in each sort of Land the most agreeable Seeds,
and that too in its due Season, is the chief occasion that the greatest number
are so deeply Depraved, Insipid, Ignorant, Foolish and Intemperate, knowing
little or nothing either of God, themselves, not of the wonderful Works of
their Maker; for to be Ignorant is the greatest Evil in the World, because it
puts Mankind on a thousand Projections, that have no principles nor ground in
Nature, some in one thing some in others, which do ensnare and entangle the
most ingenious Persons, whose Gifts and Talents would have brought Honor to
God and have been serviceable unto Men; but for want of Prudence and a
distinguishing mind, all their Toil, Labor and Industry has chiefly served to
Inslave themselves, both in Body and Mind, and to lead their ignorant
Neighbors into the same Mischiefs and Inconveniences: Therefore my Friend, lay
aside all natural Propensity to this Study, and the Reading of Authors that
treat of this matter, (and also consider what we have here presented you with,
and mind your Health which is deeply wounded or invaded on all sides,) which is
the true method and means under God to preserve your own Motions and Health,
both of your Body and Mind, to the highest degree, that God and his Handmaid
Nature have allotted you.

I am your Friend and Servant T. T.

LETTER XXIX. Of MUSIC.
SIR,
YOURS of the 26th. of July, School, lies before me, and having seriously
considered the Contents thereof, importing your desire to know whether there be
any better or shorter Method for Children and Young People to learn Music,
than our Musicians and Masters of that Science do usually teach: I do readily
agree with you, that their Methods are not only Intricate, Laborious,
Chargeable and Tedious; but farther, when all is done, amounts to little or no
purpose or assurance of time, whereby many Lovers of that excellent Art have
been discouraged from learning themselves, or having their Children instructed
therein, and consequently the improvement of so inspired a Branch of
Mathematics, is obstructed; to which the pride and insolency of many of the
Masters, especially such as are endued with any excellency therein, has not
also a little contributed, in as much as what from the one and the other cause,
we do experimentally find; there is not one of Thirty or Forty that ever
attains to any competency of knowledge in this Art, or to perform a Part at
Sight; so that their Time, Labor and Money spent therein, is much worse, and
redounds more to their damage, than if so much had been given clearly away; for
the Tree is not only lost, but even the Season for Planting and Sowing also:
Wherefore upon the whole matter it must necessarily follow, that if shorter,
easier and quicker Methods be not gone upon for the obtaining a competent stock
of Knowledge and assurance in it, than is now generally taught, it will be the
part of every considerate Person to desist from the pursuit of it, and to
engage and advise others as much as he can to the contrary.

But, Sir your longing and earnest desire after Wisdom and true Knowledge,
having penetrated into the very Center of my Magia or Magic Powers, (as I may
call them) has generated many thoughts and true Mathematical Notions in my
Head, concerning thisScience ofMusick, which I shall make bold toMidwife into
the World in due Season, whether with or without the leave of our Musical
Gentlemen; but first communicate them unto you for your approbation and
satisfaction; and having premised, that I have already showed in my Book
Entitled A way to Health, the Excellency of Music in General, and
particularly the principles and Birth, as Sounds and Harmony, to which I referr
you. I shall endeavor in this place to lay down a short and easy way and
method, for Learners to obtain a competent Knowledge of this noble Science.

The first thing then that you are to teach your Children, whom you design for
Music, is to read and know the proper Names, and the Notes, and the Gamut, and
to distinguish them in their several places and distances

Secondly, you are to teach them the time and length of each Note, by
expressing them with the Voice and motion of the Foot, if it be Instrumentals;
but if Vocal, then with the motion of the Hand; and this any Musical Child will
readily learn and perform in less than four Months, if they be kept to the
practice thereof but two or three hours in a day: When that is done, then teach
them to strike the Notes with the Bow or Finger, according to what Music it
is, and be sure to make them keep and constantly beat the time of each Note
with the foot, and never suffer them to neglect the motion of it or of the
Hand; and as soon as they can strike the Strings any thing clear and firm, then
proceed to some easy Lesson, not to strike one Note or Bar without measuring of
them with the motion of the foot and Voice too; and though the Child cannot Sing
them, yet in Speaking of them in time, together with the forementioned motion
of the foot, will not only confirm them in the dividing of the time, but also
beget a natural motion and habit, both in the Members of the Body and Intellect
or Mind too: Or else you may teach Children to strike the Strings, then make
them to do it in time, always using the motion of the Foot or Hand, and so
proceed, never suffering them to neglect the said motion of the Foot, and
Speaking or Voice, which is a double confirmation, and will give the Learner
assurance, making them to understand the dividing of time much sooner.

Now by either of these Methods you may learn any Child of Six, Seven or Eight
years of Age to play any indifferent Lesson, Base, or Division at sight, within
the space of one year, which I caused one to do in less than Ten Months, and
when he could do that, learned to Sing, and take out all indifferent Songs,
without a Master, in four Months space; for the greatest difficulty in learning
of this noble Science, consists chiefly in understanding of the Time, since by
the wonderful and secret Art of dividing it, all Musical Harmony is performed,
and without it there is none either in Man or Birds, but only a Voice, Tone or
Noise undistinguishable; and therefore Musical Harmony is nothing else but a
proper and most natural method of Talking in Tune, or a kind of a Simpathetical
agreement between Words, Tones and Sounds, divided into longer or shorter
Sentences, which can never be nicely or properly performed, either in Vocal or
Instrumental Music, but only by the motion of the Members of the Body, as well
as the Intellectual part of Man: For all Arts, Sciences and Trades whatsoever,
are learnt by a threefold Method or Birth, the first whereof is done by
opening the hidden or Magic powers in us, vulgarly called Thoughts or
Imaginations; the second is, when those Thoughts or Desires are formed into
Words or Sentences, and the third Birth is the putting of these two into Motion
and Action, whereby Thoughts and Words become in a kind Essential, Substantial
or Material, which so long as the Art or Science remains in the Magia only,
could never obtain Essentiality, but continued as an Ideal power, and as it
were unknown; easily cut off, lost or forgot.

But when the Thoughts or Magic Powers are formed into Words, they then become
more External, and do thereby obtain as I may say, a Sidaereal or Airy Body,
which is much more difficult to be obliterated, than that which is retained in
the Thoughts or Magia of the Mind; but still Words being no more than a
composition of the Airy Powers, can by no means become really substantial, but
only by being put into Action; which is clearly demonstrated and understood in
the learning of all Arts, Sciences, Trades and Employments; not but that the
Five Senses may be made capable of great Distinguishings and Understandings, by
being accustomed to hear Musical Harmony, but they can never perform or do any
thing except such do midwife the Magic Powers of Hearing, into Words, Motion
and Action, which Crowns the whole with Essentiallity, and gives it an
existence; and therefore its almost impossible for any Person to be a complete
Artist in any common Trade, Art or Science, by the use of the Sense only,
except such things be performed by the Motions and Actions of the Body and
Members thereof; for while any Art remains in the Magia only of Thoughts or
Words, it can never be performed from that very reason or constitution of such
Bodies, if I may call them so, which are invisible, and as it were Ethereal,
and cannot be incircled or made Essential; so that our Thoughts and
Imaginations pass and repass, leaving no Precedent or Footsteps behind them,
that any thing can be learned thereby; and though Words may be said to approach
nearer unto a Corporiety than Thoughts, yet they being too slender, and their
Airy Bodies invisible, they cannot make such a deep impression, nor become so
substantial and significant as the Motions or the Members of the Body; and for
this cause, all Men cannot but be sensible, that no Thoughts or Words are so
valuable or so substantial as Actions, seeing Motion and Action may be called
the Royal Bodies, wherein all the Intellectual and Magical Powers are
incircled, and thereby become known; and through the same Circle, the said
Powers, Thoughts and Words become substantial and real; so that upon the whole,
its manifest that all the curious Arts, Sciences, Trades and Occupations that
have, or ever will have a Being in this World, must be midwifed in through Motion
and Action, according to the Great Apostle of the Gentiles, who says, the
visible things do show and declare the invisible Powers of the Great Creator.
Hence it is all Men agree that Practice is the Life in Learning of all
Sciences, as it brings forth and manifests the hidden, Magical Thoughts and
Powers unto us, making them substantial, which could never have appeared or had
a Being any other way.

Now Sir, upon your understanding aright what we have herein Demonstrated, its
not to be doubted, but you will be of my Opinion, that the Masters of Music
ought to teach their Scholars the dividing of Time, by certain movements or
motions of the Body, before they suffer the Sounds of the Instruments to enter
into their Ears and Intellects, or at least to teach them to divide their Time
by the motion of the Body, at the same time; but the first Method is the best,
and soonest Learned; for the Sounds of all Instruments and Voices are
invisible, and being Clothed with a thin Aaereal Body, they easily penetrate
into the very Center of our Intellectual Powers, as it were by an assimulating
quality, whereby an Airy Body or Habit is quickly begotten; which Habit is as
it were Incorporeal, Unfixed, moving to and fro with a rapid or unbounded
Motion; so that if the Musician teaches his Scholar long by Ear, without the
motion and action of the Members of the Body, then that habit of Hearing, and
of the Incorporeal Powers, will grow so strong, and the Airy Fancy so moveable,
quick, and as it were unbounded; that it will be a difficult piece of work, and
require much time to bring such a one to Play Time, or to have any assurance,
the motion and action of the Members of the Body being not easily to be brought
to move in any degree of Uniformity with the motions of the said prevalent,
unbounded Fancy; whereas all Motions ought in Musical Harmony and dividing of
Time, to keep an equal pace with each other; and the reason thereof is, because
the motions of the Intellect and Airy Roving Fancy, cannot be any way fixed or
brought into an equal motion, but only by being made Corporeal, that is, by
being put into action or motion of the Members of our Bodies, which in the
beginning of any Persons Learning, is easily performed, because the motion of
the Body or Members thereof correct those flying, unbounded ones of the Aerial
Fancy and Imaginative Powers, and at the same time the Airy or Intellectual
motions of the Fancy, inspire the heavy, dull, melancholy, Corporeal motions
of the Body; so that there is by a little custom and practice a concatenation
or agreement between both, so they keep equal and go Hand in Hand together, and
the Person so Learning is as it were unperceived by himself, made capable to do
more in one year and to better purpose, than generally is done the common way
within the compass of Seven; so horrid and mischievous are Unnatural Methods in
the Learning of any Trades, Arts or Sciences.

All Songs, Lessons and Divisions are hard, troublesome, laborious and
intricate, to all that cannot divide or play the Time with assurance; and
though there be many that by beginning in their Youth and force of practice,
attain to great and swift Hands, yet its observable, if they give over
practicing but for a little while, they quickly forget; and it is certain that
their want of Time and assurance to play off Hand, at sight as they call it,
makes them often when the Eyes of Parents and Tutors leave them, give it quite
off; and indeed there is a great deal of reason for their so doing, seeing in
every new Lesson, Division or Song they must not only puzzle their Fancies and
Intellectuals, but still be under the Tutorage of a Master, which is tedious
and burdensome to the most industrious, besides, the Learning and Playing the
same Lesson over and over again tires and dulls the Ears, and all the Airy,
Intellectual Powers belonging to that noble Sense of Hearing.

But altogether the contrary is to be understood on the other side, with the
Person that has obtained the assurance of Time, who can readily Play at sight,
and consequently in Consorr, which is the highest Pleasure, and the Fancy and
airy Motions of the Mind are always united and pleased; and such a Person never
can forget by neglect, but whenever he pleases, all his Powers and Faculties
are ready, and a small practice will bring him in again; so great are the
advantages of a proper and right Method of learning this noble Science.

Now, the proper Age or Time for sowing the Seeds of Arts and Sciences, and of
all Trades also, (except such as are hard and robustick) and so of this Science
in particular, is early, while the Plants are young, green and tender, of which
God and his Handmaid Nature gives us a Precedent in all Vegetables: and
therefore such as would have their Children to be excellent Proficients in any
Art or Science, let them begin early with them: And for all such as are fitted
by Nature for Musical Harmony, the best time for them to begin, is at four or
five years of Age, their Youthfulness giving them great command of Hand, and
they will draw forth curious, mellow, graceful Sounds, far beyond such as begin
at ten or twelve years of Age: And the like is to be understood of several
other Branches of the Mathematics, as Writing, Drawing and Reading; the last
whereof we have set forth in several of our Tracts; so that it is possible, by
such a proper Method and constant Practice, to advance Musical Harmony still to
a far higher degree than it is at this day, though I must confess there are great
things done in this Science; but being the numbers are but small, that clips
the Wings of its higher flight; for no Sciences, Arts, Trades or Employments do
in any Place or Country, arrive to their pitch or utmost bounds of Perfection,
but in such alone, where they have not only numerous Practisers, but also
necessitous ones too; Necessity, according to the verity of the Proverb, being
the Mother of Invention; but as long as our Masters of Music, or such as
pretend to the teaching of that Science, go on in their own common, blind,
selfish and ignorant Road or Method; I Will engage they never will have occasion
to Petition the Parliament for a Charter, to Prohibit such as are not
qualified, from Teaching; for their Methods of Learning do as much even in the
very Bud; so that the English Nation has never bred up a sufficient number of
good Masters, to Play upon all sorts of Instruments, which has given occasion
to many Strangers to press in upon us, as Italians, Germans, Dutch, Danes,
Flanderkins and French, who many of them, besides the Encouragement they have
met with in the Practice of Teaching, have and do daily Marry our Rich Widows
and Daughters of Fortune, but of that enough; and to return more immediately to
our Subject, as I have already given you my Sentiments as to the years of the
Learners of this Art, I must now add, that the proper time for such to practice
it, should be at least three hours in a day, (viz.) One in the Morning, another
about Two or Three in the Afternoon, and one at Seven at Night; and this ought
to be done, not only in respect to Instrumental but Vocal Music also; which
last is of all others the most charming, as being of a nearer Affinity to the
Mind, and all Real and Intellectual Faculties, since it proceeds from the same
Principles Man is compounded of, and is the first Birth, whereas the
Instrumental is a second Birth; for which reason all or most People are better
pleased with the first, though the learning thereof proves more difficult to many
than Instrumental Music, not only for want of good tunable Ears, but Voices
too; and this proceeds from a threefold Cause.

First, Children have not Parents that distinguish one Tone or Sound from
another, as not being in the least degree Skilled in Harmony.

Secondly, In that Children are not amongst and accustomed to hear either Vocal
or Instrumental Music well performed; for there is nothing has such great,
and as it were secret Energy and Power to tune the Humane Principles and
Qualities, as frequent hearing, as all the Learners of Music must acknowledge,
who by constant Playing, Singing and Hearing, come to understand the
Distinctions of Sounds, which cannot be done any other way, as is already
mentioned; so that if little Children were used to hear, they would as readily
distinguish one Sound or Note from another, as they do all sorts of Words, and
the meaning thereof; for all the Senses in every particular Person are made
good, and there can be no other way to distinguish the Virtues and Vices of
each thing, be it what it will, than this; and as the Sight is made capable of
distinguishing all kinds of Forms, Figures and Objects, the very same is to be
understood in the other Senses of Smelling, Feeling, Hearing and Tasting; for
through and by these five great Faculties and Powers all material things are
conveyed to the Intellect: From whence it is manifest, that each Child becomes
more or less Skilled in Arts and Sciences, according as they Converse with
Persons that practice the same.

Thirdly, The occasion that renders Music so hard, is our way of Speaking or
Talking, for all Men that distinguish Sounds, do agree, that Singing is nothing
else but Talking well, by dividing each Word into shorter or longer Tone, true
Sound and Accent, which cannot be done nor performed if Nature be opposed, as
it is in our common way of Speaking; and this does appear by the Methods all
Skilful Musick-masters use and Teach by, who open their Mouths and keep their
Teeth from being as it were closed, whereby the Breath or Air passes freely
from the Lungs, through the Windpipe and Mouth, without Interruption, which
gives each Word its true Sound, and renders it mellow, soft and sweet, free
from Squeeking or Jarring, and a dead, lumpish Heaviness.

This is the true and most natural way of Talking and Speaking, and therefore
no Person can Sing or Speak in Tune, nor give each Letter or Word its true and
natural Sound or Tone, except the Mouth, Teeth and Lips be set open, as that
the Breath or Air may pass freely without any Interruption.

But instead of this true and natural Method of Speaking, we Speak quite
contrary, that is, we depress the Sound of each Word, by shutting our Teeth and
Lips, especially the first, whereby the Air passes with difficulty, and so the
Word gives no true Tone or Sound, it being no better than that of the Pipes of
an Organ half stopped; and so it is, that the Children imitating this way of
Speaking from their Childhood, makes Singing hard, or as it were unnatural to
them; whereas if they did hear the true way at first, they would find it much
more easy than the common way is now, Singing would be natural to them, and
thereby each Person would with ease and pleasure distinguish Sounds and Notes,
and the noble Sense of Hearing would obtain a greater Perfection; for the more
things any Man understands and distinguishes, the greater is his Pleasure,
while the quite contrary is to be understood of any Person that is ignorant of
himself and of the noble Senses and Powers he is compounded of, which render
him a complete Man.

Now, this shutting of the Teeth and Mouth in Speaking and Pronouncing our
Words, alters and changes the true and natural Sound of each Word so much, that
when any that are well Skilled in Vocal Music shall Sing, the Auditors if they
do not understand Music, can hardly distinguish the Articulation of one Word,
though each Word be pronounced much fuller and plainer than by the common way,
which renders the Sense of Hearing as Uncultivated, and the Person as Ignorant
of Sounds, as of any Trade or Science he never saw or learned; and whereas we
Experimentally find, that such Persons can much better understand a common
Ballad-singer, than they can a Skilful Master that Sings with Judgment; the
reason is, the former Sings as he Speaks, which the latter does not, but gives
to each Word its natural Sound, which is quite contrary to the common Method of
Speaking; for such a Master, in Singing lets each Word pass clear through the
Windpipe without shutting his Mouth, which mellowness of Sound drowns and
hides the Letters and Words, whereof the Song is compounded, so that it seems
to be composed in an unknown Language.

Now, to touch a little upon the customary way of Speaking, it has no truth in
it, because the Words are uttered without any regard or Knowledge of the
Signature, I mean of Composition, Sound or Judgment of Time, and the Science of
Speaking, is nothing else but a proper and natural Composition of the four and
twenty Letters, and a giving a true Accent, Sound and Time to each Letter or
Word; and such Persons as are best Skilled in the composing of the twenty four
Letters, have the best Method of Speaking, and are called Rhetoritians, and
according to each Person's Judgment and Skill, their Words and Discourses have
a proportionable Influence on their Auditors; for which cause let any two
Persons, whereof the one is Skilled in the Composition of Words, and the other
is not, either read or discourse of any particular Thing, Art or Science; the
Words and Discourses of the first will have a greater influence, and not only
make a deeper Impression upon the Hearers, but be more pleasing too: And to say
the truth, there is a very great variety of Musical Harmony and charming
Discourses, to be made by any Person that is Skilled, and has the true
Understanding and Knowledge of the Four and Twenty Letters, and how to place
and compose them into Words, and to set each Word and Discourse on its proper
Key, so that each Letter and Word may be capable to sound forth and express the
very Nature and Quality of the Matter or Thing discoursed of; for each Sound
has a Sympathetical Key in its own Bosom, that with great vigor and power
penetrates to the Center of the Hearers, and impresses its own Property, and
all Persons are as capable and liable to be charmed and composed by Words and
Discourses that proceed from a proper Composition of the four and twenty
Letters, as any Person is from the lofty, curious and delightful Harmony that
proceeds from the Composition of the seven Notes, which is the Ground and Basis
of all Musical Harmony, whether Vocal or Instrumental; for Speaking, Discourse
and Music have but one Ground and Original, and the Pleasure and charming
Influences of Talking would be as powerful as those of Vocal and Instrumental
Music are, provided each Person was so well Skilled, that he could distinguish
the true Sound of the Letters, and compose and place each Word on its proper
Key or Place, that so it might be capable to have a Sympathetical Agreement
with the next Words that follow, each Word keeping within its own bounds,
whereby there is a certain Ecchoing or Tuneableness between the Sounds of them.

This Method, Sir, is always observed by the Composers of Music, both Vocal
and Instrumental, so that when they compose a Song, they consider what Key will
best express the matter or thing intended, and place each Note at proper
distances, and the better to humor the thing, they make use of Flats and
Sharps, which is always done by a certain Mathematical Rule, so that when they
would express Lamentations and Melancholy Dispositions, they compose and place
their Notes accordingly on proper Keys, when on the contrary, to charm their
Auditors with Joy, Pleasure and Delight, the Compositions are formed on other
suitable Keys, which still is done by a Mathematical Rule: the very same
Judgment and Skill each Person ought to have in Speaking and Reading, and
particularly all Schoolmasters and Tutors ought to have the true Knowledge of
Compositions, else they can never make their Scholars capable of Speaking or
Reading by any true Mathematical Method; and as there is always a proper Time
to be observed in the Notes of Music, so the like ought to be practiced in
Speaking, and when these Particulars are not nicely observed in Musical
Compositions, a Master of the Science will say, that such Compositions have no
Sense in them, that is, no true Mathematical Agreement.

Now, these things being not understood by those who have the Management and
Education of Children, is the true reason why so few Speak or Read according to
the forementioned natural Method, but go on at random, by chance, or
ignorantly, whereas Speaking, Reading and Discoursing are as essential a branch
of the Mathematics, as Music or Navigation, but not being performed from
certain Basis, Principles or Measures, they come short of the Perfection they
otherwise might be brought to.

But not to deviate too much from the main Subject, which might still be more
amply handled, were it suitable with the Scope and Design of this Letter, I am
persuaded you will find the forementioned Reasons, enough to deter you or any
other Lovers of the Science of Music, from learning in the common Method,
since you will be sure to be cheated both of your Time, Money, Practice and
Industry too, whereas if you go in the regular and natural way I have
prescribed, you will be rendered capable to obtain your Desire, and that in a
short time, and become Master of a Science, than which there is nothing so
excellent, beautiful, equal, composed and harmonious, and that comes so near
the Original Unity God Created Man in; there being no material Art performed by
Man, that so nearly imitates the Blessed Angels and Celestial Powers above, as
this; for all other Sublunary things are mixed with some unequal Qualities, but
Music agrees in all its parts, and all the wonderful variety of things clap
Hands, Echo and Sing forth God's Praises in Equality and Harmony, being the
liveliest Pattern of the Eternal Unity in Time and Eternity, more especially if
Mankind could or did Praise the same with pure Hearts and undefiled Hands. I
hope you will excuse my tediousness, and take it as a Testimony of the sincere
Affection I bear you, who am,

SIR, Your Loving Friend, T. T.

LETTER XXX. Of LANGUAGES.
SIR,
YOurs by the Ship Fairfax I have received, with much satisfaction, as being
mightily pleased with some curious Enquiries made therein, but more
particularly, I cannot but take notice of your desire to have my Sentiments,
concerning the best and properest Method for a Person of advanced years, to
Speak and Pronounce truly and plainly any Foreign Language, whereof he was
wholly ignorant before, with the same ease and perfection (...) the Natives do
themselves.

PRay give me leave to tell you, it makes me Smile to think you should have a
mind to go to School in your old Age, ^ho' I confess your present Circumstances
do in a manner abso^tely require it) and of what diversion I shall have, to
find out ^oper Punishments for the Neglects and Delinquencies of an an^ent
Pupil: However, your Curiosity is laudable; for the understanding of Tongues is
not only a noble Accomplishment and Qualification in a Gentleman, but an
extraordinary advantage (...) the Knowledge and Improvement of all Humane Arts
and Sci^ces, and though one part of a Man's Life is much fitter for it than
^other, yet it is not to be neglected, as occasion shall offer in any Age: Cato
was 40 years Old before he applied himself to ^arn the Greek Tongue, nor did I
ever hear his Endeavors in that respect redounded to his Dishonor, or
occasioned any Re^ction upon Wisdom and Gravity.

I confess it is scarcely known that any Persons of an advanced Age, though they
have lived and Communicated ten or twenty years, be it more or less, among the
Natives of any Foreign Country, have arrived to the perfection of Speaking and
Pronouncing their Language truly and naturally, when their Children in far less
time, without the help of a Master, have been able to Speak it both properly,
exactly and readily; yet such an Attainment is not to be despaired of in Men of
years, if there be due Application used in the learning thereof, to which
purpose I have sent you some few Observations, having already discoursed of the
Reasons of Childrens Aptness and Capacity, in our small Treatise of Education,
to which I refer you.

First, Such an one should Communicate and be constantly amongst the Natives,
as also take particular notice of their Words, Discourses, Gestures and
Actions; yet not speak a word after them, but keep always silent, so far as is
possible for him, at least for one year, or a year and an half, doing all
things as it were by Signs, in which space an elderly Person will be found
capable with such Promptness and Facility to Pronounce and Speak the Language,
as though he or she were natural Born; for you must know the greatest difficulty
in Learning or Speaking of any Language true, consists in the natural
Pronunciation, which cannot be done by such as are in Age, but by this way of
Silence; for no Person can speak or sound any Word true, but only by hearing it
well Pronounced; for if the Sounds and various Tones of Words be not
distinguished, then it is impossible for any Person to make any Harmony in his
Words or Discourses; for which very reason the most apt and ingenious Person in
the World, cannot Tune with any perfection any Musical Instrument, but only by
a constant Practice and hearing the variety of Sounds, for one year or two at
least; during which space such various Sounds being expressed, the Sense of
hearing becomes Cultivated, and distinguishes one Sound from another, as he
that speaks his Mother Tongue does one word from another; for as soon as that
noble Sense of Hearing is made good, and comes to distinguish the Forms and
Sounds one from another, at the very same moment it conveys them to the
Internal Senses, which presents them to the Understanding and Judgment: And
when this is done, then any Person becomes a Master; wherefore it is manifest no
Person can make any Musical Instrument to express any Tone, Song, or other
Lesson true, if the Pronunciation of each Word or Note be not understood and
distinguished, which cannot be done but by a constant silent Hearing.

Now, if Children and young People cannot understand nor distinguish the
variety of Notes, Tones and Sounds of Musical Harmony and Speech, without large
expense of Time and constant Practice, notwithstanding the Disposition of their
Organical Powers for true Articulation, as not having received, or, I may say,
been Indisposed by any previous Impressions from other Sounds or Languages; how
is it possible, that one in years should ever be capable to Speak plainly, and
to Pronounce any Foreign Tongue, without some considerable time spent in the
hearing of it spoke? for Sounds and Words do by degrees beget their Similies in
the Mind and Understanding; and it is as possible for any Person to Tune and
Play upon a Musical Instrument, without a convenient time for hearing, as for a
Man to Pronounce or Speak any Foreign Language true at the first hearing
thereof; and therefore most do miscarry, or at leastwise prove Lame in their
Performances, that do at the beginning endeavor to speak and hear together;
for as no Person can Tune any Musical Instrument before he distinguishes the
variety of Sounds, the very same is to be understood in Speaking; for in little
Children the understanding and distinguishing Power of Hearing is perfected
before they can Speak or Articulate any Word: And Mothers, Nurses and Maids
will tell us, that most Infants distingush many things, long before they can
Speak or Pronounce them.

And as it is the Sense of Hearing that is only capable to present to the
Understanding, all Sounds, Words and Languages, so by a constant practice and
frequent hearing, they are pronounced, understood and distinguished, and that
with great ease and pleasure; so that whether they mind or incline to learn or
no, yet the Sounds, Words and Pronunciation, will, as it were against their
wills, steal into them, and beget a habit; for in this case it is not barely a
great and longing Desire or Inclination, that is capable to make any Person
Learn, Understand or Distinguish, but it is the use of cons^nt hearing, though
Desires and Inclinations must be owned to be good Spurs or Incitatives in the
doing, ^ning and understanding of all Arts, Occupations and Sciences: ^t if
Learning depended chiefly upon Inclinations, then thou^ds of Children would
learn but little, and understand less; but (...) any young Person has proper
Faculties for the thing he learns, ^he does but practice, he will become
excellent in the Art, be (...) what it will, though his Desires and Inclinations
be not so much (...) it, but rather wholly inclined to other things.

And seeing all the Senses are made capable to distinguish and ^present the
true Nature and Property of each thing to the Un^standing, and Intellectual
Powers of the Mind, as Hearing ^es all Sounds, Cries and Tones; the Sight all
Forms, Figures, ^pes and Objects; the Sense of Smelling, the nature of all ^nts
good and bad; and the like of the rest: So it is clear, that ^ring is the first
true step to the learning and distinguishing of ^y Language, as being the
Foundation and head Principle ^reof, for without it no Man could ever Speak,
Articulate, or ^stinguish one Tone from another no more than Cows, Horses (...)
Sheep do; and for this cause one Tongue or Language is as ^ily and familiarly
learned by a Child as another; the whole ^thod of Speaking being nothing else
but an Imitation of that which is spoke and heard; and therefore the true way
and rea^est method of Hearing, is, first, to make that great intelligi^e Power
of Hearing good, which cannot, as was said in Musi^l Harmony, be any other way
done but by constant Applicati^ to hear.

Wherefore, if any elderly Person has occasion or inclination (...) learn any
Language or Foreign Tongue, and at the same time (...) not in a capacity to
Travel into the Place or Country where (...) said Language is supposed to be
easiest learned, then such a (...) may learn it at home with much ease and
delight; if he does (...) take a young Man or Woman that speaks the Lingua
natural^ and well, and also English too, in whose Company let him and the
greatest part of his time, and order him to talk the (...) continually in his
presence, he at the same time instructing (...) other in English what to talk
or discourse of, also what La^ or Exercise he shall do, so as to be obliged
continually to ^ke Repetitions of the names of all common Things and Acti^s:
For Example, when he comes into any House, he shall ^ke the opportunity to call
over and name all the Household ^ds, and at other times discourse of Husbandry,
or the pre^ing of Foods, and generally of all other Materials, belong^ to an
House and Furniture: The like you must instruct him (...) do when you walk in
the Street, Exchange, Garden and ^lds, so as to let no Figure or Object pass
without some dis^se, both of the Nature and Method thereof; to which must be
added a constant Repetition of each Thing or Accident that happened; and all
this while the Person that hears must be silent, only giving the Tutor an
account of what he shall discourse and act, and within the limits of the
forementioned time, of a year or two, the Learner shall be able to Speak
properly, easily and readily, with a true Accent or Pronunciation, as though he
had been bred up in that Country, whose Language he learns. Thus briefly, and
with my wonted freedom, I have given you my Thoughts of this Matter, but how
far they may concur with your Judgment and Inclination, is wholly to your self,
only I desire you to believe they are sincerely intended for your Benefit by
him, who is,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend, and very humble Servant, T. T.

LETTER XXXI. Of Times for EATING.
SIR,
YOurs of the 18th of August is before me, and am heartily glad of you and your
Familys good Health and Welfare, and in particular take notice of your
Question, which when you was in London we had some discourse about, (viz.) The
best and properest times of the day for Eating our common Meats, and the
Natural and Physical Reasons thereof, which you desire more fully. This
Question we have in our Way to Health, and some other of our Writings, given an
account of, to which we referr you; however, the Talents the ever Blessed
Creator and Preserver of all Beings has given me, are always Devoted, both to
the Public and Private, which please to take as follows:

THE goodness or badness of Concoction of Foods does chiefly consist in the
strength or weakness of the natural Spirits, and according to their Degrees and
Powers, so is each Person's Digestion better or worse, quicker or slower, the
Root and Center of a strong Stomach stands in the Fire; therefore all such as
are dignified with strong heats, such are likewise endued with brisk, lively
Spirits, and consequently with their respective Virtues and Vices, cleanness or
the contrary, so is each Person in Health, Strength, Sickness and Weakness;
likewise the times of the day for Eating and Drinking do also add or diminish
to each Person's Health, Strength, Briskness, or dull cloudy Heaviness; for
this cause we have in several of our Writings given Direction for the times,
that is, to Eat about 8 of the Clock in the Morning, and about 3 or 4 in the
Afternoon: Now, the natural Reasons for it, is,

First, The length of time, between 4 in the Afternoon and 7 or 8 in the
Morning, is considerable, and more hours than half the Day and Night, by which
the Digestion of the Meats and Drinks are completely Concocted, and the Stomach
freed, and as it were cleansed from all superfluous Matter, and thereby is
rendered fit and capable to receive proper Meats and Drinks, and though the
Appetite so early in the morning be not so sharp and craving as it is in the
day after Labor and Motion in the open Air, occasioned by the heat of the Bed
and Stilness or gentle Motion; but this kind of Dullness, that most have so
early, proves a Benefit rather than the contrary, for both craving or sharpness
of Appetite does frequently center in a kind of Gluttony; from whence the old
Proverb did take its Birth, Too long Fasting and too sharp an Appetite makes a
gluttonous Meal; and the like is to be understood in too great Drought, both
being a kind of Distemper, and never passes off without leaving behind some
signal Evil, or at leastwise sowing Seeds and laying sure Foundations for
Diseases: But the indifferency and cleanness of the Stomach and Appetite in the
morning, prevents this sort of Gluttony, and yet at the same time the Meats and
Drinks find a well-prepared Stomach, and a Warehouse, where there is
sufficient place and room to stow the Foods, without prejudice to Nature,
whereas great hunger and strong, or too sharp Appetites is in many Persons, apt
to continue the pleasure of the Palate in Eating and Drinking, much longer than
the convenience or necessity of the Stomach, and therefore most after such
Meals do Experience a heavy, hot, cloudy Indisposition.

Secondly, Sleep and Rest from action and motion, are the principles from which
the natural Spirits take their Birth, and are hereby continually recovered and
sustained; and on the other side, Motion, Exercise and Action are means and
methods that waste, spend and weaken: Now it is clear, that in a Morning every
Persons Experience does witness a more brisk lightsomness, and that the Body
and Mind are more able and fitter to perform all actions of the Body, and
likewise to exert the Functions of the Mind, far exceeding what they are in the
Afternoon or latter part of each day; and as each Person is more capable and
better prepared for all the Actions of Life in the first part of the Day or
Morning: The like is to be understood of the Actions of the Stomach, because
all the power of Concoction and Digestion consists in the strength, weakness,
goodness and badness of the natural Spirits; for this cause, it always proves
an evil for any Person to consume or waste the natural Spirits too much, either
by Labor, Fasting, or any other Motion or Exercise before Eating, because
Meats and Drinks do require as strong Spirits and many, for the Concoction and
Digestion of Foods, as Labor, Motion and the brisk actions of Life do, or
rather more, as most can or may experience; for the cloudy, heavy, hot,
weariness, and unnatural Disposition that follows after such great Meals of
Food and strong Liquors, which do overfill and stock the Stomach, or Natures
Magazin, with too great quantities, and of contrary qualities, proves far
harder to bear, and of more dangerous consequence, than either hard Labor,
motion or action of the Body; for this cause, every Person ought to Eat and
Drink before the brisk, lively, natural Spirits are too far spent, either by
motion, labor, or too long Fasting, by which they are preserved; so that such
a one shall be capable to go through the fatigue and business of the day with
ease and pleasure, and thereby free Nature from various Indispositions, and
from Sowing of Seeds for future Diseases; for these reasons all Persons will
find by experience, after a little use and custom, that an early Breakfast as
we call it, of some sort of Pottages, within half or one hour at the most after
they rise, always Drinking a Draught of Small Ale or Beer before they eat, that
is, so soon as they are up, will prove of far more advantage, both for Health,
Pleasure, and performing all the actions of Life and Business, than a Breakfast
about 9 or 10 of the Clock, and a Dinner about 12, 1 or 2, as the Custom is,
which does for the most part prove burthensom all the last part of the day, and
prejudicial to Nature: For this is to be noted, that the Meats or Foods after
they come into the Stomach, do not afford nor distribute their nutritive
Virtues under the length or time of 5 or 6 hours, or at leastwise, that a
Person can be sensible or feel a refreshment proceeding from thence, but rather
the contrary; and therefore most do from the 1st, 2d or 3d hour after Eating,
find a kind of dullness or heaviness, more especially, if the Foods were hard of
Concoction, or if they exceeded in quantity: And this common method of Eating
about 12, 1 or 2 of the Clock, proves the more prejudicial in hot Seasons and
Climates, for first, the Mornings Labor or Exercise spends great part of those
brisk or winged Spirits, which by rest were at the rising up, powerful, are
weakened; and then the Breakfast, together with the motions and exercises
between that and Dinner, do set going great part of what remains; as also the
Sun or great Vital heat of the World being in or near the Meridian or full
South, which does make a considerable addition, for the Evaporation, or
spending and weakening of the natural Spirits, so that it is no wonder most
People after Dinner are so hot, indisposed and drowsy, and that which does
mightily increase this great Inconveniency, is, that the Dinners are Foods for
the most part compounded of strong, gross, suckulent things, of hard
Concoction, so that it lies as it were frying or boiling in the Stomach 4, 5 or
6 hours, calling for Liquor, to quench the unnatural Heats and Fires it awakens
through the whole Body, and no Member is free from those burthensom
Inconveniences, whereas altogether the contrary is to be understood and
experienced, by an early Breakfast of some sort of substantial Pottage, and
drinking a good quantity of small Liquor, as before hinted, for the morning
Labor, Motions or Exercises, are performed by the lively, strong, natural
Spirits, that have been not only recovered, but Generated by the true
Concoction of the late Dinner or Supper and Rest, and these Spirits are all the
morning supplied by fine Spirits of the Pottage; for all such Foods do more
easily concoct, and steal or Insinuate their Virtues, than hard, gross Foods,
so that there is a Support all along; and for this very cause from 11 of the
Clock to 3 or 4, when most People are hot, weary and indisposed, those Persons
that Breakfast early are cool, lightsome and pleasant, and in a word, free from
these burdensome Indispositions; for that Food and Drink affords the best
Nourishment, and adds the greatest Strength, that is the least felt in the time
of Concoction or Separation, and that causes no Heat, Indisposition, nor calls
for the aid of the liquid Regions; therefore those Foods are the most agreeable
in which the four Elements are most equally mixed or compounded, that is, where
the Fire or natural Heat does not over balance the Element of Water; the
Equality and Inequality of those Elements in Foods are always felt in the time
of the Concoction, for heat after eating is occasioned by Inequality, which
Physicians and every other Person ought to understand in the compounding of
each thing, for that Person that is quickly droughty, and that his Appetite
calls for Liquor, is a true and sure Indication that the Qualifications of the
Foods were unequal; therefore upon the whole Matter, our most natural and
kindly Pottages are the most friendly, they being properly compounded and
prepared, do as it were at once answer all the ends of Food, and gratify Nature
far beyond all strong, hard, salt, high prepared or relished Foods, leaving
behind them no droughty or hot burdensome Indispositions; and if you or any
other Person would know the Verity and Truth of what we have here, and also in
several of our Writings, endeavored to make Mankind sensible of, each Person
must fall into the Practice, for there is no other way or method to make it
Essential; for so long as Men's Knowledge and Philosophy remains in the Magia,
Notions and Words, such Wisdom, as they call it, is altogether uncertain and
unbounded, passing and repassing through the a^y Fancies unlimited; and
therefore all or most such Notions become altogether obliterated and changed
into other Notions of differing Qualities and Natures, never fixed, neither
indeed can they be, because they were not founded on the Principles of Nature,
nor by Practice made material.

And for this cause all Imaginations and Knowledge that reside in the Fancy or
in Notions, are Incorporeal or Invisible Powers, and consequently not
demonstrated; and they do remain almost as unknown to them that talk of them or
others that would understand them, as the invisible Powers, Imaginations and
Thoughts of one Man is unknown to another; and therefore every one that would
understand and know the Truth, must retire and go home and practice, and then
every Notion becomes as it were Mathematical, that is, demonstrable, and
without these material motions of the Body, no Knowledge, Notion nor
Imagination can be made a Man's own, nor become Essential to him; so great is
the necessity of good Methods and a prudent Practice of Life, to which I referr
you; for true Knowledge, Wisdom and Understanding cannot be obtained, but only
by a proper Method, (viz.) The same way that Arts and Sciences are, that is by
Labor and a continual Practice, which by degrees opens and unlocks all the
secret Doors and inward Cabinets of the Intellect, and thereby the invisible
Powers become manifest and visible, which is strangely, and as it were
wonderfully done and performed in all Sciences, Arts and Trades, so that by and
through the Motions and Actions of the Body and Members, the Magical Births of
the Imaginative Faculties and Thoughts become manifest and material, and so
that which was Incorporeal becomes Corporeal; and therefore Motion, Action and
Practice is endued with a most wonderful Power and Energy, it commands the
unbounded Fancy, and encircles the wandering imaginative Power, fixing and
limitting those high lofty Spirits that lead most Men into Delusions and
Errors, and all this and a thousand more Calamities and great Miseries attend
Mankind, for want of a true Method and Practical Life, and the true fixing all
things on their Basis and Principles, from whence true distinguishing Knowledge
of the Signature of each thing arises and proceeds, which we recommend to you
and to all Mankind, with our hearty wish of yours and Familys Welfare,
desiring a Line or two the next Ship that is bound for England. In the interim
I Subscribe,

Your Friend and Servant, T. T.

LETTER XXXII. To a Planter of SUGAR.
SIR,
IN our foregoing we have laid down some Methods how you may preserve your
selves and Posterity; to which I shall add something more, which if put into
practice, will not only advance and encourage your Plantations, but render the
Inhabitants extremely happy, both in the present and future Ages; and stem the
Current of Groans, Sighs, Melancholy Lamentations, and Turmoil of your
Servants, into a pleasant, calm, serene Life, of happy Employments; and the
Masters of each Family shall enjoy many degrees more quiet, and be freed from
those continual troubles and cares they now labor under, and do and will
unavoidably increase upon your selves and Posterity, if some other more easy
and profitable Method be not put into practice: Which please to take as
follows, viz.

1. SInce the employing of the Natives of each Country, in the most usual
improvement and manufacturing the Growth and Productions, has always been of
the greatest moment and value to that place or Country; and on the other side,
the neglect thereof has never failed to produce the contrary; therefore it
will be highly necessary that your Lawmakers should think of some easier, less
chargeable way, to employ some part of their Natives and also their Negroes in
improving the Cotton, which in a little time (proper Methods being taken by the
public) would advance all the Sugar Plantations to a higher degree of
perfection, both of Riches, Ease and Pleasure, than is possible to be effected
in that violent and cruel Art of making such large quantitys of Sugar. First,
let there be an Act of your Parliament that there be two Schools or proper
Houses erected in each Parish, for the Dressing, Spinning and Weaving of
Cotton, one for the Children of the English, the other for the Children of the
Slaves, Black Servants, where in a short time they would, with the help and
assistance of proper Tutors, attain to make not only Fustians, but all sorts of
course and fine Callicoes and Muslins too; these Houses ought to be erected by
the public, and also Instructors both Men and Women, well skilled in the
management of that Trade or Employment, where the Children of the White People
should be kept and Dieted as at Boarding-Schools: The like ought to be done
with the Black Children, and every Plantation should be obliged according to
their numbers, to send yearly so many of their Black Children, at the Age of 4
or 5 years; and the like the English ought to do, and at the same Ages; for it
has never been known that the Natives of any Country have attained to any
degree of Excellency in the working of their own or others Manufactury, but
only where they have Sowed proper Seeds in due Season, that is, where they have
begun betimes with Children.

As for Example, do not the Blacks in the East Indies do as it were wonders, in
that Manufacturing of Cotton Wool, that is no better than yours of the West
Indies, and differs no more than their Canes of Sugar and yours? which
perfection in their Callicoes and Muslins have been arrived to no other way,
but by putting and bringing their Children up very young, from 4 or 5 years of
Age, together with their constant Marrying their Children to their own Trades,
that is, the Son of a Weaver to the Daughter of a Weaver; and so in all other
Trades, a Merchant is a Merchant for ever, and Marrys the Daughter of a
Merchant, be they poor or rich, that makes no difference, neither does it alter
their Methods, so that it is not with them as it is with us in Europe, the more
Children the poorer, but amongst them the more the richer, each Child getting
their Bread under their Fathers and Mothers Conduct, from 4 or 5 years old; by
which they do not only Educate their own Children, but do prevent and save the
great charges we are at to put our Children Apprentices to others, and at the
same time over look the Actions of their Children, and not expose them to
Strangers; many do take them more for the Money they have with them, than for
any real Benefit to the Children: And is it not a Paradox, that when a Mother
and Father have, (through their foolish Conduct) Sowed Seeds of Disobedience in
their Children, insomuch that they cannot rule nor keep them in Order, for them
to imagine that others will take that slavery off their Hands for a little
Money, and that others, or Strangers, should do more for Children than you were
willing to do your selves, more especially, when the Seeds of Mismanagement are
grown too sturdy and strong; whereas the Parents had the Fore-Horse by the
Bridle, and might have cut off Vice in the Bud.

And what the Blacks in the East Indies do perform in the Manufacturing of
Cotton, the like the Europeans do perform in the management of Flax and Wool,
as our near Neighbors, viz. the curious Thread that is Spun in Flanders,
Holland, Germany and France, which is made into sundry sorts of Lace, Holland
and Cambrick, which curious fineness could never have been performed, had they
not taught their Children very early: The very same is to be understood in
England, of the Woollen Manufactury, for One Hundred and Fifty Years since our
Woollen Cloth was all very course, and came short of our common Prizes; and
there is as much difference between the Cloth now and then, ^s there is between
the Fustian we now make for Hammocks and Stockings, and the East India
Callicoes and fine Muslins; but so soon as Navigation, Trade and Rack-renting
came on, all Trade was encouraged, and ever since the Natives of England have
made it an Employment to get Money and their Bread: The management of all our
Growth has every Age and Year advanced in more excellent performances, which
have been wonderfully increased within 50 or 60 Years, more especially, in the
management of our Woollen Manufacturies; and perhaps, that England now does as
much exceed in the Spinning and Weaving of Woollen Cloth, as Flanders, France,
Holland and the East Indies, do in Linen and Callicoes: And it is to be Noted,
that we have attained to this Excellency, since many Hundreds of poor Families
have, through necessity, trained up their Children in Spinning, Carding, and
other work about the said Trade of Cloth-making, from 5 or 6 years of Age; so
that they can now draw almost as fine a Thread as in Silk, or in Linen; so
that it is very clear that the early cultivation and Sowing Seed in due season,
crowns the Action: Children are like white Paper at first, before it be
sullyed, or ill Customs and Characters stamped, you may Sow what Seed you
please, and according to each Child's Genius, they will arrive to a happy
Maturity.

Now the West Indies is able to Cope with the East Indies, as to the management
and manufacturing of Cotton. First, because young Children can get more than
their Bread before they are able to perform any other work that belongs to
making of Sugar. Secondly, the Meat, Drink and Clothing is near as Cheap as in
the East Indies. Thirdly, the Commodity made, is of more value than in the East
Indies, goodness for goodness. Fourthly, it is an easy and soft Employment, it
hinders not the Growth, nor wastes the strength. Fifthly, it preserves the
Females and their Offspring from many cruel Diseases, that hard Field Labor
subjects them unto, which have, and do prove no small detriment to the Sugar
Plantations, the Females not being by Nature endued with such robust or strong
Constitutions as the Males; besides, they by Nature are subject to a hundred
Weaknesses that Men are not; and for this very cause, all Nations by their Laws
and Customs, more especially, those that have had regard to the increase,
strength and health of their Posterity, have always allotted the ea^est and
finest Employments for Women: And I must tell you, that nothing has more hurt
and injured the Plantations, than the hard Labor and unkind Usage toward your
Black Women, for the whole preser^tion of Mankind as to Increase, Health and
Strength, resides in the prudent Conduct of Women.

For, pray tell us what can be a greater Indication of Evil unto any Country,
than that the Offspring or Children of the Natives, will not maintain their
numbers of People; can any Person be made to believe, that if there were 10000
People of all Ages, both Males and Females, put into any open, Healthy Country,
where they have all conveniences of Life, and there to Inhabit for 20 or 30
years, that then they should be dwindled away to 5000 or a less number? would
not any Man expect instead of 5000 more than 20000. Now this Decrease of People
does never happen but on some eminent occasion, either the Climate is extremely
unhealthy, or the People intemperate; sweeping Sicknesses and Wars: This
Decrease of Negroes in all the Sugar Plantations is too true, and the occasions
thereof too little examined into or regarded, which proves the greatest
detriment to your Settlements; does not the contrary of this manifestly appear
in England? has not their Offspring and Native Children within the compass of
a few years, viz. 60 or 70, at the most, settled many great Collonies and
Plantations, as New England, Iamaica, the Island of Barbados, Virginia, etc.
besides the great numbers that have of late been destroyed in the Wars, at Land
and Sea; and others that yearly have and do furnish the great numbers of Ships
with Seamen; and notwithstanding these Consumptions, England has more Natives
and Hands than Employments, or Bread at a reasonable rate.

Now when these things are considered and understood, you then will find upon
the whole matter, what sort of Conduct and Methods you have subjected your
selves to, and that your great industry to make large quantities of Sugar,
without having a sufficient number of Hands, and very often good keeping too;
for it is always a rule that never fails, if there be not a due proportion
between the Labor, Foods and Rest, then Nature must by degrees sink and
dwindle into a Consumption, extraordinary Labor calls for extraordinary Meats,
Drinks and Rest, more especially in hot Climates, where hard working cannot be
endured, as in Cold; which we have more largely set forth in our Treatise of
the Fruits of the East and West Indies. Now I say, that some such Methods as we
have proposed, would certainly give you great ease, and at once set you and
your Posterity free from those intolerable Burdens and Slaverys, you and your
Servants undergo; for there is nothing more true than Gods Eternal Law, that
if, we over-burthen our Servants that are subjected under our Government for
what cause or reason is unaccountable, and do not in some degree do by them as
we would be done unto, if we had been served as they have, viz. carried away
contrary to our own Wills and Inclinations into Foreign Regions; or as we would
have our Children done by in the like condition, that then you may be sure that
suitable returns will be made to the Oppressor, or to his Offspring; for the
Groaning of him that suffers pain is the beginning of trouble and misery to
him that caused it; and it is not to be doubted, but under this black Character
of Oppression and Violence, the Sugar Plantations do now lie under; is not this
manifest by many, and some of the chiefest Note? for the more they forecast,
take care, Labor, and Oppress in hard, severe Methods, the poorer and more
behind hand they become; also the loose and extravagant Education of your
Youth, is a sure indication of Calamity and Misery to any Country; for in a few
years they come to Govern the public Affairs: These things are of greater
moment and importance than the foolish and unthinking do imagine; and though
Mankind does slight these Admonitions and natural Methods, and goes on in their
hard Hearted ways, yet Gods Providence and the Divine Hand never forgets, but
early or late there must be retalliation made: These things we recommend to
your prudent consideration.

SIR, Your very humble Servant, T. T.

LETTER XXXIII. To a Gentleman in Barbados.
SIR,
WIth many serious Thoughts and Reflections, have I at times revolved upon the
State of our American Plantations, and the various Methods our Government has
used in reference to them and their Trade; so much, I presume, to theirs and
our own disadvantage, at least at long run, notwithstanding the small Benefit
that has been reaped seemingly, by the Imposts laid upon them; and the receipt
of your last, together with your Request therein, having awakened my Mind
afresh, to resume my former Conceptions upon the said Subject, I am free to
Communicate all that I have thought of in general thereupon, but more
particularly what regards the Sugar Settlements, and your Island of Barbados,
which is the chief of them still, both for its own Produce, the advancement of
Navigation and vending the Manufactures of England; and how advantageous it has
been in former times to the Crown of England in all those Respects, might be
manifested by diverse Instances; but not to run back too far; it is sufficient to
observe, that that little spot of Ground, (which you know is not above 12 Miles
over, and 28 in length) did in King Charles the 2d's Reign (the Commodities
being then free from high Customs and Impositions for many years together) load
between 3 and 400 Sail of Ships, and most of them of a considerable burden,
with the Produce of it; the reason of which Plenty must arise from no other
than the natural goodness of your Soil; and the extraordinary Diligence and
Industry of the Planters, and I may say Slavery too: For if in the Infancy of
our Sugar Plantations, their Produce of Sugar, Indico, Ginger and Cotton, had
not yielded a considerable Price, and the Duties been easy; it had been
impossible ever to have settled them, or at leastwise to have brought them to
any such perfection as they be; for a Man must be in disburst at least 2 or
3000 l. before he can make 100 weight of brown Sugar, not worth above 12 or 14
s.

For this reason most of the first Settlers being Persons of small Stocks;
others would not run the Hazard of tedious and dangerous Sea-Voyages, into the
Torrid Zones, which at first proved very unhealthy for want of Conveniences of
Life, and a prudent Conduct of Affairs, which occasioned the Death of many in
the very Enterprise, who left the Benefit of their Labors to others; and most
of those that Survived, before they could bring things to Maturity, had
contracted such large Debts with the Merchants, both there and in England, that
they were forced to Sell; and the very same Fate attended the second, and many
of the third Buyers and Settlers: So difficult was the Undertaking, and great
the Charge of these first Settlements.

But notwithstanding the forementioned Difficulties and Discouragements, the
Undertakers were buoyed up by the great Prizes the Commodities bore, and the
easy Duties and Customs they paid; and had it not been so, it is certain this
Island could never have been brought to any Maturity, which in the flourishing
State thereof was the brightest Jewel in the Crown of Trade, as well upon
account of the great Improvement and Benefit had thereby, both in that noble
Science of Navigation, as in Vending such considerable quantities of all sorts
of English Commodities, which have not been well understood, and hardly at all
rightly considered by our Legislators; for the West India Trade employs about
1000 Sail of Ships, whereof formerly about 150 went yearly from England and
Ireland laden with Provisions of Beer, Ale, Bread, Flower, Butter, Cheese,
Beef and Fish, to the Sugar Islands, which by the discouraging of the Trade
thither, together with the high Impositions, is already almost sunk, and must
be altogether so in a small time; since the Planters do already and must
Retrench in all their Expenses, especially such as are Extravagant; for
Necessity is not only the Mother of Invention, but of Temperance and Order, and
how the Planters may still Support themselves, Families and Estates under the
present Circumstances of things; and notwithstanding the vast Losses they have
sustained during the late War, (they having suffered more than all other Trades
put together, the Loss of Barbados it self, within the compass of one year,
being computed at 380000 Pounds) is a Matter worthy of our Enquiry.

Now, the first thing that should naturally fall under your consideration upon
this account, is, whether it be advisable for you, to Plant for the future but
one half of the Sugar Canes you have been hitherto wont to do, and Manure the
other half of your Land for Provisions, wherewith you may supply your Families
and all your Negroes in a great measure, so as that you need not Buy such great
quantities of salt Fish and Flesh, which are found by Experience frequently to
prove injurious to the Health of your People; whereas your own Produce will
better support Health and Strength, and are by many degrees wholsomer than the
other; by which means alone you will acquire many Conveniences, for then you
will have Hands enough for your Concerns, and be enabled to maintain your
Numbers without yearly Buying, which you know is a vast and constant Charge to
all Plantations; for all the Art of Planing and Making of Sugar is very heavy
and laborious; of which I need not inform you, Sir, who are so well acquainted
with the same in all its Circumstances, but the sight of the Operation in a
Refining-House in London is enough to convince any, that otherwise have never
known any thing of the matter.

And now, Sir, if the preceding Suggestion carries such a face of Advantage to
your Plantation, undoubtedly the Changing and Planting your Ground with other
Vegetations cannot but be extremely Beneficial, whereas one and the same sort
being one year after another Planted in the same Land, do cause such
Vegetations to dwindle away, and become poor, for it is the Nature of every
thing to attract such Juices from the Earth as are proper for it, and have a
proportionable Nature and Assimilation with it self, and though the Ground may be
rich to another, yet it becomes poor to that which has been so often Planted,
of which all Husbandmen are very sensible, who for that reason do often change
their Seeds and Vegetables.

Now, your Island being but of a small extent, and you being often necessitated
to Plant the same Vegetations in the same Ground, must have worn it out
extremely in respect to Virtue and Strength for them, which is farther and more
clearly demonstrable by the depth thereof at the time of the first Settlement,
which was very considerable, whereas now the whole Island is become a kind of a
Rock, the proper and natural Earth being no more than 2 or 3 Foot deep, before
you come to a whitish Marle, somewhat like our chalky Ground in England, though
much hotter, so that the Land in general is mightily wasted, not only in
respect to its quantity, but also quality; it being evident for the first 20 or
30 years after the first Planting or Settling thereof, the Canes then Planted
would bring forth a considerable Crop yearly, from 3 years to 9, without
farther Planting, but only Weeding and keeping it clean, for being cut, they
would grow from the old Stock, and all this while every Acre would make double
the return it does now, notwithstanding your great charge of Manuring and
Dressing the said Ground, amounts to near 10 times as much as it was in the
Youthfulness thereof, it being grown as it were Sick and so Beggarly, that it
will not do without yearly Dunging and Planting, which requires considerably
more Hands than formerly, and yet produces more uncertain Crops; for all that
are Skilled in the nature of Agriculture, do know that when the natural Virtues
or Juices are decayed, as they do by frequent Tillage, and that the Ground
comes to be often Dunged, which they call Forcing, that then such Land, and the
Vegetations thereof, will not be able to encounter or withstand the inequality
of Seasons; for in case the year happens to be over-dry, then immediately the
Veins and porous Passages of the Earth become stiff, narrow and stagnated,
which obstructs the Canes from arriving at any happy Growth or Maturity, while
on the other hand, if the Seasons or Years prove to be over-wet, all of them
become large and rank, and will not ripen in due time; both which of late
years, by reason of the Earths decay, as aforesaid, very often happen; so that
now nothing but a temperate Year and Season, will produce a tolerable Crop.

Besides all which, it is farther observable upon this Head, that most Land that
is often Tilled and Dung'd, produce a great multitude of new and unknown
Vegetables, called Weeds, in a manner wholly unknown to the first Planters, and
this arises from the variety of Dungs used in the Manure, which proceeding from
sundry sorts of Creatures, and consequently being endued with as many different
Qualities and Natures, when they become mixed with the Earth thus worn out, do
open and penetrate to the Center, and wheresoever they meet with any agreeble
Matter or Juice, they unite and kindle new Essences, from whence new
Vegetations, Herbs and Weeds are Generated.

Now, if these things be true, and are duly considered, will there not be a
kind of necessity for the Sugar Plantations to alter their Methods, and fall to
the Propagating of such other things as will be conducive to the Support of
every Man's Family, self Perservation being always preferable to all other
Considerations? and it can be no small Inducement for them hereunto, who cannot
but be generally sensible, that 20 Acres of their Ground being Planted with
Provisions of several kinds, will bring forth more, and with less Charge too,
than 100 Acres will in a cold Climate; and whereas it will produce but one Crop
of Sugar Canes, which it will not now do neither, it will with far less
Industry, Care and Charge bring forth two Crops a year of brave Wheat, Rice and
Guiney Corn, which is almost equal to Rice; and the like must be said in the
Rearing and Propagating of all Black Cattle, Sheep, Goats, Swine, Hens,
Turkeys, Ducks, or the like, and can by no means be denied concerning Fruits,
Herbs, etc. which are there so forward and so fully ripened, that they make an
excellent Food, never pestering the Eaters with flatulent, crude or windy
Distempers, as most of those produced in cold Climates do; but are in all
degrees very friendly and natural, purging by Urine, and keeping the Passages
of the Belly free from Obstructions, Costive Humors, and to most Stomachs easy
of Concoction.

Besides, Sir, you do not naturally need so many things in hot Climates or
Countries, as we do in cold, neither in Meat, Drink nor Clothing, every thing
being as it were Cooked to your hands, so that there is no such necessity of
hard Labor in such respect. And for your Clothing, whereas you have been wont
to be furnished with constant Supplies from hence, cannot you make what
quantity of Fustians you please, and almost of what quality you will, having of
your own growth plenty of brave Cotton, with which a great number of the East
India Inhabitants do cloth themselves, and being Manufactur'd with prudence,
is the only proper Covering for such Climates.

These things, Sir, being duly weighed by you, and a serious Application made
to the performance of them, it will be both easy and expeditious for you to
remedy those Evils you have labored under, though not so much the great Losses
which you have sustained, (though they have been very heavy) as upon the large
Impositions laid upon the Produce of your Labors, and much easier than for us
in the Northern cold Zones under such Circumstances, for the forecited Reasons,
which should make you give over Fretting and Pining, and employ part of your
Land, as abovesaid, and make but one half of the quantity of Sugar you were
used to do, the burden will immediately and insensibly cease, and as it were
give you at once an Universal freedom, for then you will have as much for the
half, and more than you have now for the whole; and not only so, but your
charge vastly lessened.

How great labor it is Sir in making Sugar, I need not tell you; nor that if
you have not plenty of Hands or Servants, Land, Houses, and all chargeable
Utensils, that you still labor to be poor; and I do not doubt but you are
satisfied that this is a proper Method to put an effectual stop to that
Flood-Gate, or strong Current, that wastes your Estates, I mean the yearly
Buying of Five Hundred or a Thousand Pounds worth of Negroes, in lieu of those
who Die through hard Labor, and other Accidents; but more especially, for want
of a sufficient number of Servants: And I am bold to affirm that there are but
few, if any Plantations that have Hands enough to do their Business without
Oppression to them, to particularize nothing in respect to the so great, and
many other, Casualties that do befall them.

Neither can it be thought prudence in any Body of Men, without very great
encouragement indeed, to depend wholly upon any one Commodity, as it is now;
but you should Sir have something else to shelter under, without our Parliament
would be pleased to ease the Burden laid upon you, which some will have to have
had its rise from certain Persons Observations of your luxurious Living, and
Gaiety of the rich Commodities that have been yearly Exported to your Islands,
of your sending your Sons into England for Education, and most of them proving
great Gallants in Apparel; from whence it was inferred, you were grown
wonderful rich, so that it could not be thought amiss, or any Oppression, to
lay impositions upon your produce or Commodities, they having at the same time
but an indifferent Opinion of those Settlements; but hereof the Wiser sort of
Men have other Sentiments as well as my self: However, by the way could not but
give you a hint of it.

But from what mistakes soever the Methods from without have proceeded to keep
you low, or rather to reduce you to that miserable Consumptive Life, I may say
you labor under, as being filled with great Debts, perplexing Accounts,
protested Bills of Exchange, at Ten per Cent. loss, besides the disparagement
of your Reputation and Credit; to which may be farther added, as an Argument
for the alteration of your Methods of Planting, the double hazard you run, in
keeping to Sugars only, of a long and tedious Sea Voyage; which in time of
Peace makes the insurance for Commodities to be Three per Cent. as we for the
Commodities carried from England, to furnish your Plantations, as Three per
Cent. to bring your Sugars, etc. to Market, besides the time they can be
possessed of the next proceed of the said effects, which is often a Year; but
in times of War the Insurance is given from Six to Eight per Cent. outward and
from Twenty to Thirty per Cent. from thence to England: To say nothing of the
many other Casualties and Damages that happen, such as Plunderage, and the
like; which no Masters of Ships do ever make a full recompense for, neither
must the charge be forgotten of two and an half per Cent. for buying the
Commodities to furnish your Plantations, and as much for selling your Sugars;
which makes your whole, Five per Cent. Charge.

Sir, many more of these reasons might be suggested to you upon this occasion,
had I time for it; and were it thought necessary for your farther Information,
in a matter that is so highly conducive to your Welfare, and so nearly regards
your true Interest: But I shall surcease upon the matter, only the
consideration of your want of good Firing just ^oming into my Mind, I cannot
pretermit giving you very briefly my thoughts concerning it; you know in most
other Productions of the Earth, little Wood or Coals will serve, but that in
making of your Sugars great quantities are indispensibly required, to the well
ordering and preparing of the same; Fire being the principal Tool or Element
that brings it to its perfection, which you are now in a manner destitute of;
so that neither of the two can be procured, but at such great and dear Rates as
cannot reasonably be afforded by you; for should you buy either the one or the
other, you would quickly find your Plantations sink, for which reason you have
been necessitated for several years past to dry your Trash, as you call it, and
Cane tops, to Boil your Sugar withal; which let me tell you, is a very hard
shift, the same being but a poor weak Fire in comparison, either of Wood or
Coals, which does not only create more labor and enhaunse the trouble of your
Works, and proves longer in point of time, but does not and cannot make so good
Sugar as the other, since you very well know your Sugars in the Boiling and
Clarifying require a brisk, strong Fire, whereby it is made of a stronger
grain, better colored, and the gross, flegmy or crude watery parts are more
freely separated from the finener; whereas weak Fires do not only prolong the
Preparation, as already hinted, but it dulls and flattens the Sal Nitral
Virtues of the Lime Waters, as also of the sharp, lively, Spirituous Virtues of
the Juices of the Canes; so that such Sugar is not and cannot be so good, nor
of such virtue as that which is made with Wood or Coals; and the very same may
be understood in most other Cookeries, or in the Preparation of Food, the
cleanness, strength and constancy of the Fire, adding much to the goodness
thereof, whilst the contrary is to be allowed in such Fires as are weak, slow,
intermitting or unconstant.

And now Sir to conclude, laboring under these and many other great
Inconveniences, which attend your decaying Plantations; is it not very natural
that you should enter upon such Methods as have been suggested, without delay,
for your relief, and the prevention of a speedy ruin? and how can you be justly
blamed for it? you have formerly bore with the Act of Navigation, prohibiting
Foreigners to Trade with you, to your inestimable loss; (tho much to the Gain
of England) with the additional Duties laid upon your Commodities, in the Reign
of K. Charles II. to the great decay of your Trade; but that you should much
longer bear up upon the doubling of the whole Impost upon you, in this present
Kings Reign, after the many grievous Losses you have sustained by the late
destructive Year, can hardly be believed of you, upon the present Basis of your
Trade and Planting; and surely its not the Interest of England, to put you upon
the necessity of alienating your Plantations, to any other than the rarifying
of Sugars: And we hope after all, our Parliament will at length better consider
of it, and give you all fitting encouragement and relief, which is heartily
desired.

By SIR, Your affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, T. T.

LETTER XXXIII. A Letter to a Planter touching the Manufactory of Cotton.
SIR,
HAving no reason to doubt of your receiving my last, wherein I gave you my
free thoughts in diverse particulars, concerning the Methods you were to use for
your own and the preservation of your Posterity, in your present Settlements;
and being persuaded of the good impressions it must have made upon your
ingenuous Temper, it has been an inducement to me to resume my considerations
upon the same Subject, wherein, without any recapitulation, I shall add
somewhat more, which I am of opinion, if put into serious practice, will not
only very much advance and encourage your declining Plantations, but be a means
to render the Inhabitants extremely happy, both in the present and future Ages,
and stem the current of Sighs, Groans Turmoils, and doleful Lamentations of
your Servants, converting them into a pleasant, calm and serene Life of happy
Employments, very much to the ease and satisfaction of Masters of Families, and
the Planters; who will thereby be freed from those continual troubles and cares
they now labor under, from diverse causes; and which does and will unavoidably
increase upon them and their Posterity, without they be removed by the
introduction of some more easy and profitable Employments amongst you, than
that of making Sugar, which is so laborious and destructive to the Health of
Mankind.

I gave you Sir a hint before concerning your Manufacturing of Cotton Wool; and
as it is a matter I have since more seriously thought upon, in respect to your
present Constitution and Settlement, I do not doubt but if your Legislators set
upon the right Methods of employing some part of your Natives and Negroes
therein, but it would in a little time advance your Plantations to a higher
degree of perfection, both in respect to Riches, Ease and Pleasure, than is
possible to be expected in that violent, I may say cruel Art of making such
large quantities of Sugar as you do: And as public Works cannot successfully
be carried on without public Authority and Encouragement, it will be necessary
for this end, that your Government make an Act for the erecting of two Schools
in every Parish or District, one for the Children of the English Inhabitants,
and the other for those of the Negroes, who all of them shall be taught there
how to Dress, Spin and Weave Cotton, and where in a short time they would, with
the assistance of proper Instructors, attain not only to make Fustians, but all
sorts of course and fine Callicoes, yea and Muslins too; for as the said Houses
are to be erected by the public, so also they must find Instructors of both
Sexes, well Skilled in the management of that Trade or Employment; and under
whose care the Children, as well of the Black as White People should be kept
and Dieted, as well as Instructed, as beforesaid, as at Boarding-Schools, and
the Inhabitants not to be left at their liberty to send them thither or not:
But for the more effectual carrying of the Work on, every Plantation should be
obliged in proportion to their numbers, to send yearly so many Children of both
Kinds thither, and that at the Age of four or five years; for as they can never
begin too soon, so has it never been known that the Natives of any Country have
attained to any excellency in the working up of their own, or the Manufactury
of others, but only where they have Sown proper Seeds in due Season, I mean
where they have begun betimes with their Children.

And for a very remarkable Instance hereof, I referr to your consideration, the
practice of the Blacks in the East Indies, who do as it were Wonders in that
Manufactury of Cotton Wool, which in it self is no better than yours of the
West Indies, and differs no more than their Sugar Canes and yours do; and who
have brought their Callicoes and Muslins to that perfection we see them in, no
other way but by putting their Children to, and bringing them up in this Work
very young, even from four or five years of Age; together with their constant
Marrying them unto their own Trades, that is, a Weavers Son to a Weavers
Daughter, and so in all the rest; so that a Merchant is a Merchant for ever,
and Marrys the Daughter of a Merchant, be they poor or rich, it makes no
difference, neither do they alter their Methods thereupon; so that it is not
with them as it is with us in Europe, the more Children the poorer, but quite
the contrary, the more numerous so much the richer, each Child yearning his
Bread under his Father's and Mothers Conduct, from four or five years old and
upwards; whereby as a farther convenience, they have not only the Education of
their own Children, but do prevent and save the great Charges we Europeans are
at to put them Apprentices to others, where we cannot overlook their Actions as
they can, but expose them to the Governance of Strangers, many of whom take
them more for the Money they have with them, than for any real benefit they
design them. And here, though it be digressive, give me leave to observe, Is it
not a Paradox, that when a Father and Mother have, through their foolish
Conduct, Sown Seeds of Disobedience in their Children, insomuch, that they
cannot rule nor keep them in order; for them to imagine that others will take
that off their Hands for a little Money, and that Strangers should do more for
their Children than they are willing to do themselves, especially when the
Seeds of mismanagement are sprouted up, and grown too sturdy and strong;
whereas the Parents had the Fore-Horse by the Bridle, and might have nipp'd
Vice in the Bud.

But to return to our purpose, what the Blacks in the East Indies do in the
Manufacturing of Cotton; the like is performed by the Europeans in the
management of their Flax and Wool: ^or the first of which we need only cast our
Eye upon our Neighbor Nations in Flanders, Holland, Germany and France, where
the Thread which is made into sundry sorts of Laces, Holland and Cambrick,
could never have been brought to that curious fineness, had they not taught
their Children very early to Spin it: And as for the other, which is the
Manufactury of England, let me observe, that whereas our Woollen Cloth about
an Hundred and Fifty years since, was all very course, and came short of our
common Prizes now; so that there is as much difference between the Cloth now
and then, as there is between the Fustian we now make for Hammocks and
Stockings, and East India Callicoes: As soon as Navigation, Trade, and
Rack-renting came on, all Trade was encouraged, and ever since the Natives have
made it an Employment to get Money, and their Bread thereby: The management of
all our Growth has every Year and Age been advanced in more excellent
performances, which have been wonderfully increased within these Fifty or Sixty
Years, more especially, as to the above mentioned Woollen Manufactury; and
England perhaps now as much exceeds in the Spinning, and Weaving of Woollen
Cloth, as Flanders, France, Holland, and the East Indies do in their Linen and
Callicoes; and it is worth our noting, and makes much for your Argument, that
we have attained to this Excellency, since many hundreds of poor Families have
through necessity, trained up their Children in Spinning, Carding, and other
Works about the said Clothing Trade, from Five or Six years of Age; so that we
find by experience, they can now draw almost as fine a Thread as in Silk or
Linen; from whence it is manifest, that early cultivation, and sowing Seed in
due Season, is greatly necessary to bring the same to perfection: Children are
like white Paper at first, before it be sullied, or ill Customs and Charac^s
stamped upon them; so that you may Sow what Seed you please, and according to
each Child's Genius, they will arrive to a happy Maturity.

Now Sir, that the West Indian Colonies are able to cope with the East Indies,
in the Manufactury of Cotton, may be made to appear from many Considerations;
but more particularly. First, your Young Children can get more than their
Bread, as well as theirs do, before they are able to perform any of the Servile
Work that belongs to the making of Sugar. Secondly, Meat, Drink and Clothing,
is as cheap with you as in the East Indies, (or at leastwise might be so, if
you did but pursue the Methods laid down for you in my former Letter.) Thirdly,
the Commodity made, is of more value than in the East Indies, Goodness for
Goodness. Fourthly, what is proposed, is an easy and a soft Employment, that
neither hinders Growth, nor wastes Strength. Fifthly, it preserves, more
especially the Females as well as their Offspring, from many cruel Diseases,
that hard Field Labor subjects them unto; which have, and do prove no small
detriment to your Sugar Plantations, they being by nature not of so robust a
Constitution as the Males; besides they are naturally subject to an Hundred
Weaknesses that Men are not, which is the reason that all Nations, by their
Laws and Customs, more especially those that have had regard to the Health and
flourishing state of their Posterity, have allotted the easiest and finest
Employments to their share: And give m^ leave to tell you Sir, nothing has been
more hurtful and injurious to your Plantations, than the unkind Usage and hard
Labor you put your Black Women to, whose preservation, health and strength,
you ought to have made your main Study: But you on the contrary, have doubled
their Burdens, and what you unwarily design for their preservation, manifestly
leads to their Destruction; for though after those intolerable Works and
Fatigues you give them Rum, which at present is a little refreshing, yet you
cannot but know it is destructive to Nature, wasting the Vitals, and an Enemy
to Propagation: So much of it in respect to the Women Kind. I am loath to be
particular with you Sir, in respect to the Negro Men, and your plying of them
with this destructive Liquor; and that upon Sundays too, to very bad purpose:
And though your Intention herein be to perpetuate their Servetude, etc. the very
Methods you take to do it, by such indulging of them in this excess of
Drinking, at the same time proves very frequently your Disappointment, and
their Death: And as you cannot but be convinced of the truth hereof, so I
appeal to your own experience, whether your allowing of Polygamy, or plurality
of Wives to your Black Slaves, does any ways answer your end in the
multiplication of Servants thereby, I very much doubt the contrary, and that
it is the ready way to lose both Root and Branch, nothing being more destructive
to Humane Nature, than the immoderate use of Venery, which upon the persecuting
of a fresh Object, etc. is usually provoked beyond all due bounds, to the
manifest enervation and decay of the Man, from whom no vigorous Issue can be
expected; and if any at all, seldom or never comes to Maturity. Many things
might be said upon this Head, as to the practice both of former and latter
Ages, but not to multiply Instances; its remarkable to consider the difference
between the Turkish Empire and the other Kingdoms and States of Europe; that
whereas the first allows of Polygamy in the utmost extent thereof; and
notwithstanding the greatest part of the Turks Dominions is in it self
exceeding rich and fertile, and was anciently full of Populous Cities and
Inhabitants, its now so thin of People, that in many places, for Thirty or
Forty Miles together, you cannot see House nor Man; while the other Territories
of Europe, who allow of no such thing, are on the contrary exceeding Populous
every where, and seem daily to be on the increasing hand.

Now Sir, I do suppose you are by this time convinced, this allowing of
Polygamy does not at all advance your Secular Interest; and besides what has
been already said, your being forced yearly to buy so many fresh Slaves into
your Work, is a manifest Indication of it, as well as of the difficulty of the
Labor, and your unkind usage of the Poor Creatures; without which you could
never be subject to such a constant want of Supplies, as you are: Its very
strange that the Offspring or Children of the Native, will not maintain their
number of People; can a Man be made to believe, that if there were Ten Thousand
People, of all Ages and Sexes, put into any open, healthy Country, where they
could have all conveniences of Life, and there to Inhabit for Twenty or Thirty
Years, that then they should be dwindled away to Five Thousand, or a less
number? whereas any one might reasonably, instead of such a dimunution of them,
expect double the increase; and so you might certainly expect from your
Negroes, were it not for your mismanagement, which is to your own detriment,
though little enquired into by you; you find it is otherwise with England it
self, whose Offspring and Native Children, within the compass of Sixty or
Seventy Years, have settled a great many Plantations, as New England, Iamaica,
Virginia, Maryland, Pensilvania and Barbados; besides the great numbers that
have been destroyed in the former and late Wars, both by Sea and Land; and
others that yearly have and do furnish our Shipping with Seamen; and
notwithstanding these Consumptions, the Kingdom has still more Natives and
Hands, than Employment or Bread at a reasonable rate.

When these things are well considered and understood, you cannot but find what
sort of Conduct and Method you have subjected your selves to, and that your
great Industry is misplaced, to go about such to make large quantities of
Sugar, without having a sufficient number of Hands, and very often good Keeping
too; for it is a never failing rule, if there be not a due proportion between
Labor, Food and Rest, Nature by degrees must sink and dwindle into a
Consumption, extraordinary Labor calling for extraordinary Meat, Drink and
Rest, more especially in hot Climates, where hard working cannot be so well
endured as in Cold, which I have the more largely set forth in my Treatise of
the Fruits of the East and West Indies, a Book I remember to have sent you;
wherefore some such Methods as we have formerly, and do now propose to you,
would certainly give you great ease, and at once set you and your Posterity
free from almost the fatal necessity you are now under; to be Cruel and
Inhumane to your poor Slaves, and give them at least a kind of Captivated
Freedom, and relaxation from their insupportable Burdens laid upon them: And to
excite you to the Discharge of your duty herein, its worth your consideration
to suppose your selves or Children, for once in the condition of your poor
Negroes, would you not have thought it punishment enough to have been carried
out of your Native Country, without your own Wills and Inclinations, into
Foreign Regions, so in the sweat of your Brows to labor for the Maintenance,
not only of your selves in a poor despicable State, but of the ease and luxury
of others, they being forced to make Brick, as I may say in a Sense they are,
without Straw: Think not therefore to thrive by such Oppressive Methods and
Severities; but consider with your selves, that the Groaning of him that
suffers the Pain, is the beginning of the Trouble and Misery of them that
laid it on; begin a reformation in your selves, and cure the looseness and
extravagancies of your Youth, (a sure Indication of Calamity and Misery to any
Country) otherwise you may in a full measure, expect to feel the Vindictive
Hand of the Divine Power, which that you may avert, by a Strenuous application
of your selves to the Exercise of such Methods as have been now and formerly
suggested to you; wherein the present and future Welfare of your Settlements
will mainly consist, and whereby the causes of the above mentioned Calamities
of your Slaves and Servants will be removed; is the hearty desire of him who is
an unseigned well wisher to all our American Plantations, and to that of
Barbados in particular,

Your Friend and Humble Servant, T. T.

LETTER. XXXIV. Of the making of SUGAR.
SIR,
YOURS of the 10th. of March, concerning the making, Use and Excellency of
Sugars, Distilling Brandies, etc. I have frequently perused, before I would
resolve to send an Answer; the delay being occasioned not out of the least
disrespect to your Person or Desires, but out of a Sense of my own Inability,
to satisfy such curious Inquiries as amply and satisfactorily as I would do:
However, I have spent some serious thoughts, and made some recollections upon
the matter; which I shall here communicate to you, upon assurance of the kind
acceptance of them, from one who you know is neither Planter of Sugar, nor
Refiner, or Sugar-Baker, nor Distiller; but so far disinterested, as not justly
to be suspected of partiality. It will be too tedious to enter upon an
Historical Narration of the first Settlement of our Sugar Plantations, and the
many Discourage ments the Planters at the very first, (and gradually afterward
by the Art of Navigation, and high Imposts laid upon their Manufactures,) have
labored under; therefore to omit these things, I shall come to the matter in
hand, without any farther delay; hoping you will find as much satisfaction in
perusing the particulars, as I have had in collecting them for you.

To begin then, the first makers of Sugar, Ground, or break their Canes with
Mills, Drawn by Horses or Black Cattle, and not by Windmills, which were not
then in use; though indeed the first was less chargeable, but not so expeditious:
But however, no Man, though his Plantation were his own, could make Sugar without
having a Stock, both quick and dead, of at least Two Thousand Pounds Sterling,
which was counted no great beginning neither; and since they have Ground their
Canes with Windmills, a Man cannot make an Hundred Pound weight of Sugar, but
he must be possessed with Three, Four, Six, nay, Ten Thousand Pounds Sterling
in Windmills, Houses, Coppers, Negroes, and many other Utensils belonging to
Sugar-making; besides their Land, which is of a very considerable value: And as
the greatest part of their Stock consists in Living Creatures, and those of
Humane Race, therefore the more subject they are to Losses and Casualties; and
the same also may be said in respect to their having great store of Houses, and
considerable Buildings, which are a constant charge to the Owners; and more
particularly that Planter who has Six, Seven or Eight Hundred Acres of Land,
must have at least two or three Windmills, each of them costing 1000 l. besides
150 or 200 Negroes, with some other Servants also, which are worth in an
Average, Twenty Pounds a Head; to which I may safely add, that it frequently
costs them above 1500 l. in Houses and Coppers, to manage the Sugar Trade,
besides 12 or 14 Horses, Black Cattle, and other smaller ones in great numbers;
so that to be a Master Planter, is to be a kind of a King over great numbers of
disobedient and troublesome Subjects, every day bringing fresh Intelligences of
Tumults and Disturbances: In short, it is to live in a perpetual Noise and
Hurry, and the only way to render a Person Angry, and Tyrannical too; since the
Climate is so hot, and the Labor so constant, that the Servants night and day
stand in great Boiling Houses, where there are Six or Seven large Coppers or
Furnaces kept perpetually Boiling; and from which with heavy Ladles and
Scummers, they Skim off the excrementitious parts of the Canes, till it comes
to its perfection and cleanness, while others, as Stoakers, Broil as it were
alive, in managing the Fires; and one part is constantly at the Mill, to supply
it with Canes, night and day, during the whole Season of making Sugar, which is
about Six Months in the year; so that what with these things, the number of the
Family, and many other Losses and Disappointments of bad Crops, which often
happen; a Master Planter has no such easy Life as some may imagine, nor Riches
flow upon him with that insensibility, as it does upon many in England; and I
cannot but persuade my self, if Mankind were sensible how many degrees of
Slavery and Violence the makers of Sugar go through, but that then they would
not only have a true value for its excellent Virtues, but be eagerly intent for
the discharge of the many burdensome, and I may say unreasonable Impositions
laid upon it.

But not to be too General, nor yet digressive upon this Head, I am to observe
to you, that the Season for Planting Sugar Canes, is from August to the
beginning of December sometimes; which Canes do not arrive to maturity under
Fifteen or Eighteen, sometimes Twenty Months: Their manner of growing is in
Branches, three, four, five or six from one Root; being in tallness and bigness
of various degrees, according to the goodness of the Land and Seasons; some
arising from three to six Foot the solid Cane, and the flaggy part that grows
from the top of the Cane, to Eight or Nine Foot high, some more; which top or
flaggy part, that by the way is not fit for Sugar, makes very good Food for
Horses and Black Cattle: But the solid Cane being ground or broken through the
Mill, thereby the Juices are separated from the hard and pithy part, which last
is dried in the Sun; and which, since they are in scarcity of Wood, is become
the principal Fuel they use in several of their Plantations; but more
especially in Barbados, where it is called Trash; and which making but a weak
and more uncertain Fire, is much inferior, either to Wood or Coals, in the
Boiling of Sugars. But whereas one Acre of Canes at the first settling of these
Sugar Works, yielded considerably more at that time than now; and that also
then and some years since, they Planted them but every four, five, six or seven
years, according to the strength of each sort of Land, for so many years the
Canes would bear great Crops, from the same Root, and that without Dunging; yet
in process of time, the Sugar Canes being of so great a substance, and
containing such a quantity of rich Juices in them, and the Planters being
limited to so small a proportion of Land, have pressed it so often with one
sort, I mean with the Cane, rarely, if ever letting it lie still from the same,
is become so Impoverished, that they are now forced to Plant and Dung it every
year; insomuch that an Hundred Acres of Cane now, require almost double the
Labor and Hands, they did formerly, whilst the Land retained its Native
Strength; which also then did not only bring forth certain Crops, but fewer
Weeds too, that since by frequent Dunging, are so very much increased, as to
create great Labor and Charge to keep them clean: Besides, most of the Sugar
Islands, especially Barbados have a kind of white chalky Gravel, called Marle,
two or three Foot deep, which of it self is of so hot a Nature and Temper, and
the same is so increased by constant dunging, that their Crops in all dry
Seasons are sure to fail, and dwindle to little or nothing; when on the other
side, if the year proves over wet, the Canes become too rank and will not
attain to their due Maturity: So that from hence we may by the way observe,
that when Land has lost its natural Virtue and Strength, all foreign Aids are
inconsiderable, and what Difficulties the Planters labor under from
home-discouragements, to say nothing in this place of their other
Inconveniences.

But having spoken of the Planting of the Canes, I come to the Nature of the
Juice thereof, which is much like to that of Apples, but something thicker, and
if the Cane be ripe, its Complexion is of a yellowish Color, and the Liquor or
Juice a complete Sweet, clean and without any ill Taste or Hogo, but of a pure
Sweet in the beginning and end of the Taste; and for the Canes themselves they
are full of Joints, two, three, four or five Inches asunder, and covered with a
thin Skin or Bark somewhat hard on the inside, being of a white spungy
Substance and full of Juice, whereof the Servants and others do suck and eat
great Quantities, without any manifest Injury to their Health, nothing being
more pleasant than the Juice of a ripe Cane; the same being also very
nourishing, provided too great a quantity be not taken: Now the way of eating
them, is to cut the Skin or Rind off, and to put the Pith or spungy Part into
the Mouth, when the Juice will come more freely out than Honey out of a Comb;
the Sweetness whereof does as far exceed it, as a Pippin does a Crab; yea, and
any Person may frequently suck this Juice without tiring or dulling the
Appetite or Palate, which cannot be practiced with the best of Honey; so that
it may be truly said of this Noble Plant or Vegetable, that the Great Creator
of all things, has endued it with the Perfection of all Sweets, as appears
from the Sugar made thereof, there being no Juice nor Fruit in the World that
is so clean and complete a Sweet, so good nor of so universal Use.

But notwithstanding this Juice of the Cane is so perfect a Sweet, yet nine
Pounds thereof, which is one Gallon, makes but one Pound of Muscovado or Brown
Sugar, and one of Molosses or Treacle, all the rest being Scum and Dregs, which
is separated by boiling, scumming, clarifying and straining; and if the Canes
be not very good or ripe, then nine Pounds or a Gallon of Juice makes but three
quarters of a Pound of Muscovado Sugar, and the like quantity of Molosses, and
this very frequently comes to pass: For if the Canes be planted too thick,
which intercepts the Heat from penetrating through them to the Roots, or if the
Season be too wet, then some are ripe and some are not, and in such a case the
Sugar is neither so much in Quantity, nor so good in Quality, and there is as
much difference between that made hereof, and of the ripe Canes, as there is
between Cider made of Apples growing on the Top, and the outside of the Trees,
and of those that grow under the shady Boughs, where the Sun cannot influence
them with his warming Beams; therefore it must be a grand Error to plant Canes
so thick, especially in moist or wet Seasons: Now the Scums, Dregs and
excrementitious Parts, which are separated from the finer and more essential
Parts, in making of Sugar are of some value, for from the same being fermented
and distilled, is extracted a strong Spirit which they call Rumm; so that you
see, Sir, that the Juice of the Cane, by Art and extreme Labor, is made into
three considerable Commodities, viz. Sugar, Treacle and Rumm, beside which the
Servants and Negroes, make a very good Drink with Molosses, Water and some
Ginger worked up all together, the Strength being in proportion to the Quantity
of Molosses put in, (as our Beer or Ale is stronger or smaller, according to
the Quantity of Malt) and this Drink is called by the Indian name of Coow woow,
the same being altogether as wholesome as our Ale and rather stronger than the
common sort; and though there are many other sorts of Drinks made of Molosses,
Sugar and the Juices of Fruits, yet this is one of the best and wholsomest, if
it be not kept till it be too stale; but it being the cheapest and most common,
is a sufficient Reason with most that have wherewithal to make more chargeable
Liquors, to reject it: But to leave this, and come to the principal Ingredient
used in making of Sugar in all parts of the World (of which all eat, but so
very few know the manner and difficulty of the Preparation) I am to acquaint
you; it is the Sal Nitre, of Stones I mean Lime slacked and infused in common
Water, which does as readily imbibe the Salt of the Lime, as hot Water does the
Sweetness of Malt in Brewing; now the Boiler makes his Liquor stronger or
weaker according to the Goodness of the Canes; and there is never any brown nor
white Sugar made, nor can be made without this Limewater or its Equivalent,
viz. Potashes, which yet is very rarely used, the same being neither so good
nor so reasonably cheap, whereas the other is experimentally found to be the
best for bringing of Sugar to its highest Perfection.

Now Muscovado or Brown Sugar is made sometimes with stronger Limewater, than
our Sugar-Bakers or Refiners do use in Refining white Sugar; for the Juice of
the Canes could never be made into Sugar, that is, into a firm substantial
Body, nor obtain a sparkling Grain, without the Help and Assistance of this
Limewater; but the same would remain forever, a dull, glewy, fat Substance or
Syrup, of an heavy gross Nature and Operation, neither wholesome nor pleasant:
For as the Juice of the Cane is a complete Sweet, wherein the saltish
Astringent, bitter and sharp Qualities are weak and impotent, therefore with
out the Assistance of the other three it cannot obtain a Body, especially
without an Astringent Quality, of which Stones are endued with an ample Share;
from whence proceeds the strong, hard Body or Coagulation in them, and the
harder they are the stronger and more powerful are the salnitral Virtues of
Lime made thereof, as all Builders and Workers in Mortar experimentally find;
seeing good Lime by the Assistance of Water and good management in tempering,
will obtain as hard and strong a Consistency or Coagulation as the Stone had,
or be rather harder than before it was turned into Lime: For the fire, you must
know, in the burning of Lime, does not at all weaken the salnitral Astringency,
but breaks and melts down the cold gross Coagulation, opening the hard Body,
and frees the more essential Parts and Virtues of Nature, setting them at
liberty; which, while such stones remained entire were not useful for any such
purposes: For this Sal Nitre or original Salt is encircled in the innermost
Center of all things, both in the Animal, Vegetative and Mineral Kingdoms, and
each specific Thing is clothed with a suitable Body, according to the Power,
Strength and Nature of the Sal Nitre or astringent part thereof; therefore in
what Man, Beast, Vegetable or Mineral the Salnitral forms are weak, so the Body
is alw^ in proportion. Now this Salt of Stones is of great Use, and the
principal thing that brings Sugar (as I have already said) to perfection; and
as the Artist cannot perform the first part of the Operation without the
Assistance of this Limewater, so the brown Sugar made or refined into white
Sugar, must also be boiled up with a proper Quantity thereof, stronger or
weaker according to the Strength, Goodness or Badness of the Muscovado or brown
Sugar; for that Body and lively sparkling Grain, which the brown sugar received
from the Limewater in the first preparation, is in great part lost when it
comes to the Refiners Pans or Coppers, and melts down into a Syrup: and
therefore it must again be supplied with fresh Limewater, to reduce it to a
firm Grain or Consistency, or else it will remain a Syrup for ever. And now,
pray give me leave to tell you, is it not strange that the Brains of the
Learned and others should condemn this wholesome and beneficial Ingredient, by
whose Assistance alone, the Juices of the Sugar-Cane you see is brought to the
highest Perfection, and rendered useful to Mankind, and without which it could
be but of very little Advantage; and whereas many thousands do suppose that the
dusty, stony quality of the Lime remains in white and other Sugars, and for
that reason several of our nice Madams, Learned Physicians and Apothecaries,
will rather eat brown, dirty or clayed Sugar, than Refiners white Sugar: It Is a
grand mistake in them, not but that such Sugars are good in their kind, but not
to be compared with our white refined Sugars; this being a general and a sure.
Rule, that the whiter any Sugar is, the cleaner, finer and wholsomer it is, and
the more it is purged from all Grossness and Impurity; when on the other side,
the blacker, duller and moister any Sugar is, the fouler and grosser it must
be, and consequently the more unwholsom and unhealthy: For the most if not all
the Operations of boiling, scumming, clarifying and straining, performed in
making the gross, crude Juices of the Sugar-Cane into Muscovado Sugar, is done
by the Refiners, even to an higher degree and with great Charge, Skill and
Cleanliness in working brown Sugar into white; and surely, the more Sugar is
freed from its Grossness and Molosses, the more compact and harder is its Body,
and the more Spirits and Life there is in it, and will perform all the uses in
Housewifery to a greater perfection, is of a finer Taste, of a more excellent
Complexion, and causes all things wherein it is mixed to be more wholesome and
pleasant; so that our Scruplers may assure themselves, that the Sparklings and
Grain and hardness of white Sugar is not at all occasioned by any mixture of
Lime, but by its own fineness; as being freed from the grosser part of Molosses
quality, which is soft, gross and of a black or dull ^mplexion, as is already
noted: Besides, the Sal nitral Powers and Virtues that imbibe and give
themselves forth and incorporate with the Water, are invisible and spirituous
Qualities, as much unseen and unknown to Mankind, as the Powers and Virtues
that dwell in the Center of all vegetative and animal Creatures, which give
them a lively Birth and Complexion; and though we know each Creature increases,
grows and multiplies, that the inward Power from whence this proceeds, remains
a Mystery and altogether invisible to us; now for the Satisfaction and better
Information of such as persist in a Belief, that there is some Trick of the
Workman, in preparing a Compost or Mixture of Lime or some such thing in white
refined Sugar: Let them take common Water; as that of the Thames or River,
which for the most part is not very fine not clear, into which let them infuse
such a quantity of slacked Lime as Refiners do, and in a short time the Compost
or dusty Body of the said Lime will sink to the bottom, and the Water will
become as it were purged or rarefied from all its Impurities, and thereby be
rendered much finer and clearer than other Water that comes from the same
Spring; besides, the Limewater will keep sweet and free from all kind of
stinking Foulness a considerable time longer than any other common Water, that
is entire or without this Ingredient of Lime: Now it is with this clear and
fine Water, that both brown and white Sugars are boiled up, and that which
endues both sorts with its sparkling lively Grain and brisk spirituous Body,
and without which no Art could raise it to such a complete and useful
Commodity, and become so lively and brisk in Operation, unto which most or all
the best and exhilerating Cordials made by Physicians, Apothecaries and
Housewives owe their Original also; so that let them believe or not, it is
manifest there is no such Mixture of Lime, Alum, or the like thing in our
Refiners white Sugar.

Farther, whereas there are many Arts and Trades that are Preparers both of
various sorts of Meats, Drinks and Medicine, that do adulterate each particular
thing in their Preparations and Methods, for Gain and Interest; I need not name
any that is not so with the Refiners of Sugar, for they have a powerful Circle
that surrounds them, I mean their own Interest also, which is said never to
Lie; whereby they are confined from using or practsing any ill Methods in the
Operation of Sugars, be the same what it will, for if. they do, themselves are
the Sufferers; and for this means they use all the regular ways they can to
make and advance their Commodity to the higest degree of Whiteness, Fineness
and Clearness, as appears by what I have already said. Toward the beginning of
this Letter, concerning nine Pounds of the Juice of Canes making but one Pound
of brown Sugar, and one of Molosses; and if you consider that an hundred Weight
of this brown Sugar makes but about thirty three Pound of single refined white
Sugar, and that thirty three but fourteen of double refined Sugar, it is next to
a Demonstration of what is above asserted.

Then as to the various degrees both of Color and Goodness of brown or
Muscovado Sugar, it proceeds from three Causes; First from the Goodness or
Badness of the Land the Canes grow on; Secondly from the good or bad Seasons
and Times of the Year it is made in; And thirdly from the Art and Skill of the
Chief Workman Boiler. Note, that Muscovado Sugar, which is of a lively, whitish
and bright Yellow, with a sparkling Grain, has the first place; the next is
that which tends toward an Ash Color, having a large sandy Grain or Body, and
is a good Sugar for Refiners; so is the first also, but being dearer by 3^ 4 s.
per Cent. than the other, it is a better sort for Grocers, and therefore
Refiners generally work the second: The third is of a darkish sad Color, and
of a good Grain or Body, being proper for refining, but somewhat inferior to
the other two; besides which there are several other sorts and degrees of
goodness in this Commodity, the worst of all being of a kind of a deep reddish
Color, having generally a soft, weak Grain and Body, and makes the poorest
work in refining both in Quality, Color and Quantity, so that the value of
Muscovado is always in proportion to its Color and Strength. There is another
white Sugar of various Colors, exceeding our Muscovado, called Lisbon Sugar,
because it came first from Brasil, but since our Settlements in the
West Indies, great Quantities have come from Barbados, altogether as good as
the Lisbon Sugar; though most of our Housewives do mightily esteem this last
named, calling it a fat Sugar, as supposing it endued with a better sweetning
Quality than our Refiners white Sugar, and therefore will give four or five
Shilling per Cent. more for it, whereas ours is much whiter dryer and cleaner,
but such is the fondness of our Women for Brasil Sugar, that our Grocers have
frequently sold our moist Barbados clayed Sugar for Lisbon.

And now since I have mentioned clayed Sugar, it will not be improper to give
some Account of it in this place; this sort therefore is made white by an
Operation they call Claying, the Pots of Muscovado Sugar, wherein they take a
kind of whitish Clay somewhat like Tobacco-pipe-clay, and temper it with Water
for that purpose, to about the thickness of a Pancake Batter or thereabouts;
they pour it with a Ladle on the Sugar in the Pots near an Inch thick, which
Clay has a strong, I may say a wonderful Operation and Power over the Sugar to
purge the grosser, flatulent or treacly Substance downwards, and to cause the
Pot of Sugar, which generally contains about half an hundred of brown Sugar, to
become much less in Quantity, and of several Colors and Goodness, viz. In that
part of the Pot which is next the top toward the Clay, for three or four
Inches deep, the Sugar is very white, near the whiteness of our refined Sugar,
and so the whole Pot is in degrees, till you come to the battom, every degree
downwards growing worse and worse; for which reason the Makers and Clayers of
this Sugar call it Firsts, Seconds, Thirds and Fourths, for so many degrees of
Goodness and Whiteness it is divided into, and each is sold apart. Now this
sort of white Sugar is not refined, and therefore not so free from various
gross, Treacly Qualities, which no other Art but Refining will purge away or
separate, though it must be confessed, this clayed Sugar is much clearer than
Muscovado, else it would not turn to any Account or Profit to the Planter: And
indeed none of our Sugar Islands can make this sort to any Advantage, save
Barbados, and but some of the Plantations there will do neither, there being
but some sort of Ground that will bear Canes to make Muscovado Sugar fit for
this purpose: Now the two best sorts, that is, Firsts and Seconds, if it should
be refined to the Quantity of an hundred Weight, will not make above half that
Weight, the rest being Molosses, course Sugar and Scums, of a dirty, black
Substance; which gross and excrementious matter, while the Sugar remained
entire, was unknown and unperceivable to the most curious Eye; and the like is
to be understood in Muscovado, to a larger degree, as to the gross matter.

Again, the Marks of good or bad Sugar are known by its keeping a longer or a
shorter time, particularly Muscovado Sugar, that has gone through one Operation
only of purging or boiling, is fouler and grosser, than either clayed or
refined, and therefore it will not keep so long, though it will keep for several
years, and be fit for use, but not so good the second year as it was the first;
and when it becomes toward a year and an half old, it grows of a soft yielding
Temper, and of a small weak Grain or Body; and when the same comes into the
Refiners Pan, they will find out the weak side thereof, and it will neither
answer their ends in Quantity nor Quality; but clayed Sugar, if well ordered
will keep somewhat longer, though not much; hence we find Brasil Sugar generally
moist, the same having been long made and taken two Sea Voyages before it comes
to be used; our clayed Sugar that comes from Barbados, dwindles also into the
same moist Clamminess, and will not keep so long as our single refined Sugar,
but the most permanent and durable is our double refined; so that there is
nothing can be clearer than this, that the more any thing advances in
Perfection, its Purity is proportionable,

But because there is something analogous, or rather closely interferes with
this Subject in the Art of Distillation or drawing Spirits, or Brandy extracted
from Grain, as Malts; also from Cider, Raisins, Grapes, Treacle, Molosses,
Sugar and the like, we shall a little consid^ the same in this place: I say
that every particular sort of Spirit is better or worse, clean or unclean,
according to the degrees or cleanness each thing is brought to, or what Purging
and Purification it has passed through before it comes to the Still; for which
Cause, Brandy made of Malt, the best and most skilful Operator in the World
cannot draw so fine nor so clean, as from many other things, though he may make
it as strong by Rectification, since the Juices or sweet spirituous Virtues of
the Malt or Wort, has not passed through any Purging, Scumming or Purification,
which always separates the grosser phlegmy Part from the fire; but this Wort is
only worked up after the same manner as Ale is, and so passes into the
Distillers Backs without any other Operation: So that the Spirits drawn from
thence must necessarily be proportionable to their Original; the like is to be
understood in all other crude or unrefined Juices, as that of the Sugar Cane,
for though it is the most complete, and as a Man may say, the Prince of all
Sweets, yet if it be fermented, and Brandy or Spirits drawn therefrom;
notwithstanding this Juice is so noble and highly qualified, that it will not
only make a strong Body, but more in Quantity than any other Vegetation or
Fruit in proportion; yet it will be very foul and unclean, and so all Spirits
or Brandies will be, drawn from the first Operation: But if it were the Brewers
Interest to brew Strong Ale or Beer, and then to let it stand so long in the
Cask till it became exceeding fine, and after that, distill it; the Brandy
thereof would be found to be many degrees cleaner and finer than now it is; the
same may be said of old fine Cider, Wine, etc. and notwithstanding the Goodness
and Quantity of Brandy supposed to be made in France, there is but a very small
Quantity that does come up to the highest Perfection in its kind, and that must
necessarily be distilled from fine clean Wines, which is so chargeable away,
that there is but little of that sort made, or to be met withal.

Now for the Art of Distillation in general, it is allowed to be very Ancient,
being first invented by Philosophers and Physicians for Medicines; as being a
lively, powerful and as it were an inspiring Ingredient in many sorts of
Physic, they being dull and flat without it; but surely the first Inventers
never thought this Spagyrick Liquor would ever become to be a common Drink for
Pleasure and Delight; which Practice took its Rise from the general drinking of
Wines, Strong Beer and Ale; for in Brewing and pressing the Grape to make Wine,
there are Quantities of Bottoms, Settlings, Grounds and Lees, with other sorts
of Scums and gross Excrements, that are of no value no^ account whatsoever,
Were it not for this Art of Distillation; which extracts and separates a fiery
lofty Brandy or Spirit therefrom, that by common Use and superfluous Drinking
is of considerable Value; but it must be observed by the way, that if the
Parent or Original Principles and Properties be unclean and filled with foul
Qualifications, the Production from them must in some proportion be so
likewise, which no Art or Skill can obliterate or remedy. Now such as would be
satisfied whichis the best, cleanest and wholsomest Brandy, must consider each
sort's Original, whether clean or the contrary, as as also the Strength,
Substance and Power of the Thing or Juice it is extracted or drawn from; and
further, the Purgations, Purifications and Refinings it has gone through, before
it comes to this last Operation of Distilling, by which conside ation together
with distinguishing the Qualifications and Original Principles, a Person shall
become capable to Judge aright, otherwise it is not to be done, unless by
chance.

But more particularly, the first Brandy or Spirits made of our own Growth in
England, was that called Aqua Vitae, being fulsom, gross and unclean Stuff,
which the poorer and meaner sort of People generally drink of; so that the
French Brandy exceeding ours both in Cleanness, Strength and Goodness, quickly
obtained the Ascendant in the Minds and Opinions of most or all People;
especially such as did take to the common sipping of this Liquor, which was
distilled from several foul and unclean Dregs of several Things, as that of ^t
Beer or Ale, also of Grounds, and Bottoms and the like Materials, together with
unskilful and unexperienced Workmen: So that being inferior both in respect to
the goodness of the Ingredients and Skill of the Operators; to that made in
France, (which by the way was was not then near so good neither as it is now) it
grew more despisable: Not that I would intimate thereby, that the French are
better Workmen than we, for certainly there are no better Artificers or
Improvers of curious Arts in the World than the English: It will be needless to
multiply Instances, but I only say, that though as we are young in the making and
managing of Sugars, and yet outdo all Mankind therein, witness our
incomparable, double and treble refined Sugars, so our Skill we attained to in
the Art of Distillation, according to our Materials is not to be paralleled.
But to return to the next sort of Spirits or Brandy distilled amongst us, it is
that from new Ale made of Malt, which is many degrees preferrable to the other,
and in proportion to its Original; but as this Ale is full of gross, thick
Lees, and raw, heavy, dull, unclean and earthy Matter, so the Brandy made
thereof partakes of its Nature, and therefore is not so clean as some Brandy
made of our own Fruits. The third better sort is that made of Cider, whereof
there is two kinds; the best distilled from good sound Cider, half a year or a
year old, being free from all Sharpness and Acidity, and being also clear,
fine, and well settled, which is the best of any Braudy made of our own Growth;
and comes but one degree behind the French Brandy, or Spirits drawn from the
Juices of the Grape; but the other is meaner, made of new Cider, and nohing so
good as the former, the Matter or Juice being not so well cleansed or purged
from the thick Lees and gross Substance as the other, and therefore the Brandy
made thereof is of a proportionable Goodness. The next to this is Brandy
distilled from Molosses, that comes from our Sugar Plantations, which is a very
lofty, noble, clean Brandy, far exceeding all the former both in Cleanness and
Goodness. Another is made of our Refiners Treacle, which is drained and purged
from white Sugar, which is somewhat better than that from brown; the next
superior to this is Brandy, being made of brown Sugar, which is every degree
finer and better than the former: Another is Brandy which may be made of white
Sugar, that is still finer, according to the Materia from whence it is
extracted; and indeed this last does as many degrees exceed all other Brandies
or Spirits, as Light does Darkness, being the Highest and Noblest Cordial that
can be made of the Juices of any Fruit or Vegetable.

Moreover, there are several Spirits or Brandies made of Honey and Spanish
Fruits, which are better or worse according to the goodness or badness of the
Fruit, and newness or oldnest of the Honey, as also of the Herbs and Flowers
the Bees extract it from: Now Honey makes very good Brandy or Spirits, but it
is foul; for if Honey were to pass through the Art of Refining, there would not
be above one part in five or six so clean as Sugar, or the Syrup of Sugar; but
the best Honey comes from Alicant, where the Bees extract it from
Rosemary-Flowers, and other Blossoms of a proportionable Fragrancy and Virtue;
the Climate of the Country whether hot, cold or temperate, has also an
Influence thereon: Now Honey, next to Sugar, makes the greatest quantity of
Spirits, because it is higher graduated in the sweet quality of Nature than any
of the Fruits, Herbs, Seeds and Grains from whence Brandy or Spirits are
extracted or distilled; for by how much a compleater and more entire Sweet any
thing is endued with, so much Brandy or proof Spirits may be drawn from the
thing, or very near, if it be handled by a skilful Artist. Now the heat of the
Season or Climate does mightily advance or quicken Fermentation, for which
reason, all sorts of Juices that are intended for common Drinks in hot
Countries, will ferment much quicker and stronger; and the Drink will
precipitate it self into Fineness, Clearness and Raciness, and be better for
Use in five or six days, than any of the like Ingredients will be in cold
Climates in eight or nine weeks; therefore hot Countries do as it were forbid
the drinking of fermented Liquors and Drinks, and Custom has done the same,
they having found by many years Experience, that such Drinks proved extremely
prejudicial to the Healths of the Natives: Strong and spirituous hard Drinks
have the same Operation, and produce the like Effects in colder Climates, though
not to the same degree; hence it is, and upon no other Account, that the
Torturing Gout and Cruel Pains of the Stone have not spread their Venoms
amongst the Natives that constantly keep to the drinking of Water, and the
eating Food of a proportionable Nature, of which I have elsewhere written more
at large: For all Liquors or Juices that have passed through any degree of
Fermentation, do thereby divide themselves, that is, the four Grand Qualities,
from their still Rest or sleeping Magia; by which Motion or Fermentation, there
arises a moving boiling Strife, and as it were a justling or wrestling with
each other for the Mastery, whereby they render themselves capable of being
separated one from the other, and of being changed and transmuted out of one
form into another; so that by the powerful Operations of the two great Elements
of Fire and Water, and the Assistance of the Artist, the separate powers of
these four great Qualities, are brought into their original or central Circle,
from whence neither Nature nor the Assistance of Art can promote or advance a
further Motion or Progression, but the same must remain in their fiery Circle
or Region for ever. It Is further to be observed, that fermented Liquors, which
by the forementioned Motion, open so powerfully the Bodies of the said
Qualities, and by a concatenative Power, tend toward a spiritual Kingdom, and
so by degrees move toward their original Principles, and become finer and
racier and fit for drinking: But when any fermented Liquor, be it what it will,
arrives at this pitch of goodness; it can neither by Art nor Ingredients be
commanded to stand still, but on it goes, and the Motion continues either
quicker or slower, being never contented nor satisfied till it obtains its
Center; but phlegmy, gross, watery Qualities are so strong in most or all such
Drinks, that they cannot obtain a clean fiery Body, without the Assistance of
the spagirick or fiery Art of Distillation, but they run and transmute
themselves into a Sharpness or Vinegar Quality; and in such a Case, all the
Skill and Art of the ablest Distillers, can never bring back or make a Cordial
Spirit of such Liquors, saving that called the Spirit of Vinegar; which yet is
of another nature and Operation, altogether contrary to the former, and of but
little Use and Virtue, except in some particular Medicines: But when any such
Drinks are weak, and the sweet Quality has but a small share or government in
them, they, after they have attained to the highest Degree and Ripeness for
drinking, which they do in a shorter time than those Liquors wherein the sweet
Quality is strong; very frequently fall into a Flatness, which is called dead
Beer, whereas where this great sweet Quality is prevalent, the original Salts
are in proportion, and consequently the principle of Heat and Fire is powerful,
which appears as soon as the Bodies of such Fruits are opened, or put into
Motion by the Art of Fermentation.

But to confine my self as nigh as may be to the two main Things, I mean Sugar
and Brandies, intended by this Letter; give me leave to tell you Sir, all sorts
of Sugar are so highly graduated both by Nature and Art, that the same is
become the greatest Preserver and the best Cordial in the World, there being
nothing found that will so long preserve Crude or raw Fruits, Herbs, Liquors
and many other things, as Sugar, more especially the first and second sort; Sal
Nitre or common Salt coming short thereof, so that it seems to have obtained
the Ascenden^) over all other things in the Vegetable Kingdom: And as to its
Sweetness or Operations in many sorts of Foods, it is endued with many charming
Properties, whereby it mollifies and as it were unites all the unequal Motions
and predominate Powers of the other three-domineering Qualities: I mean the
As^ringent or Saltish, Bitter and Sour, and melts them down unto a degree of
Equality, so that by the help hereof many Crude, raw Fruits and others,
otherwise in a manner useless, become beneficial, of which there are made many
brave, wholesome, exhileratings Foods and Liquors too; though by the by, I am to
observe, that such Foods wherein Sugar is mixed or compounded, ought not to be
frequently eaten, more especially not by Children or young People, since it
never fails to operate and act like it self, I mean, to heat and warm the
Blood, generating many powerful brisk Sprits, that for the most part prove of
no small prejudice to them; whereas on the contrary, to most that are of
advanced years, the proper Mixture of Sugar in some part of their Food,
especially spoon Meat, mightily inspires them with a chearing, warming Quality,
giving as it were a youthful Life and Vigor to aged drooping Natures, and
heavy dull Spirits, and are to be preferred before all spirituous Cordials and
strong Drinks whatever; which most aged People affect, and which seldom fails
to pinch and heat the Ureters, to obstruct the Passages, as also the free
Circulation of the Blood, by drying up and consuming the thin moist Vapors and
dewy Qualities, which old Age generally wants in a great proportion; the
Preservation and Support of which depends most upon spoon Meats, which
sweetened, as already ^entioned, (...) more suitable and homogeneal, than any of
those Liquors taken for that purpose.

And as Sugar used in Meats and Preserves is thus so very excellent, the
Spirits or Brandies made thereof are no (...) so, and must have the first place
allowed it of all others, in a manner upon all accounts; though I must say, all
Brandies are useful, and have as it were a kind of Operation, which is an hot,
fiery, warming, restoring, reviving and penetrating the whole Body with its
powerful and rapid Motion, which is the innate and unnatural Disposition
thereof: These Liquors being as it were spiritual Powers, by Art divested from
their natural Clothing, or crude phlegmy Bodies; and therefore at the very
first intermission of them into the Body, penetrate to the very Center of all
the Principles and Powers of Nature, and joining and incorporating with the
original Fire and natural Spirits, makes the Person the same moment he drinks,
to feel a brisk lively Fire to kindle; which upon some occasions, proves of
great Benefit, as in fainting Fits, Swoundding, over Dullness of the natural
Spirits, also after hard Labor, and so forth: and here give me leave to note,
that those Brandies that are thin and less Cordial, such as are distilled from
thin small Wines, and old clean Cider, are more penetrating and digesting, as
proceeding from a meaner, thinner and weaker Original; and therefore their
Operations are good, and may be taken on Foulness and Surfeits to as good
purpose, as that made of Sugar; but the Sugar or Treacle Brandy is more
Substantial, fuller and more Cordial, and therefore the drinking thereof does
not so soon wound and decay the Drinkers of it, nor cause them to dwindle into
Consumptions, as the drinking of French Brandy does; and this has been observed
ever since both sorts have been become a common Drink for Enterment, especially
in the Sugar Islands, and other Parts of the West Indies: That when any one
took to the drinking of French Brandy, his Friends and Acquaintance condemned
him to a short Life of Course; whereas if any took to the drinking of that made
of the Spirit of Molosses, or Juices of Sugar-Cane, they would cry he would
hold out. For though the common drinking of one or the other be a sin against
God, yet it is certain the sipping of that made of Sugar, does not so soon wound
and destroy the radical Moisture and Digestion of the Stomach, as the other
does which comes from France; whose thin, hungry Leanness is manifested by
putting a raw Piece of Flesh into it, and another the like Piece into
Sugar-Brandy, where you will find the former as it were eaten to pieces and
destroyed much sooner than that in the latter; than which nothing can better
set out the Eagerness, Thinness and Acidity thereof: For by how much the more
eager, thin and hungry any Liquor is, the less Cordal Sweetness its Body
possessed with, the more it seeks after Matter, breathing as it were violently
with open Mouth, to devour all Substances that come within its Circle or
Province: And further, to illustrate this with an Example, if you put Eggs or
any other the like thing into Ale, Beer, Cider, Wine or Vinegar, you will find
that put into Ale to have the first place of keeping, that of the Beer, if
mild, next, and so on; so that that which is sharpest, you see devours or eats
up the thing first, whereas the mildest, fullest and most Corpial Body, or that
wherein the four Qualities are most equal, will preserve the thing so put into
it longest, because all its parts are more equal.

But Sugar, Treacle or Molosses* are not useful only in the forementioned ways,
but also upon many other Accounts, too long to be inserted: And I hope Sir you
are satisfied by this time, of their Natures, Distinctions, and different
Operations; and the preferrence due to Sugar both to Foods, Drinks and
otherwise, whereunto Molosses cannot pretend to arrive: For having passed through
the several Fluxes and Operations of the Refiners, and after all the Force of
Clay which, by an Innate or natural Disposition purges the grosser, thinner or
watery Parts, and separates them from the stronger, cleaner and firmer: The
Treacly Substance not only loses all the salnitral Quality of the Lime, but
also its own original salnitral Virtues, wherewith the Juice of the Cane was
endued; so that it can never be raised to a grainy, hard, compact Substance,
there being no Confederate in the original Character thereof to incl^e it so to
do; but for a further Illustration of this, I am to observe to you, that Flesh
that is salted, will keep no longer from Putrefaction than while the lively
salnitral Virtues of the Flesh remain, which at the first salting were
powerful; and so joining and incorporating with the said Salt, by their joint
power are tied, bound or incircled the flatulent, gross, bloody parts of the
Flesh, and kept it pure; but when once corrupted, no new or fresh salting will
ever recover it to its former state and condition of Goodness.

But though our Molosses will not do this way, they are of exceeding use in
Medicines and ather things, and more particularly in fermented Liquors or
Drinks; wherein they are to be preferred by many degrees before the Sweets of
Malt: If it were not so, why should the Brandy or Spirits made of Treacle be
esteemed so much before that made of Malt, selling 10, 12 or 14 l. per Tun more
than the other? And you will find, if you put a proper Quantity of Treacle into
either Ale or Beer, that is well fermented and kept to a proper Age; such
Liquor will not only be more mild, soft and mellow, but keep much longer than
that which is Brewed with Malt only; and it has been experimented, that three
Quarts of it put into a Barrel of Ten Shilling Beer, will make it equal in
strength to common strong Drink, and much better too: But you must observe to
keep it longer than other Drink, all made of Malt; for you must know Malt is
extreme gross and foul, and consequently the Wort drawn from it, is endued with
the same excrementitious qualities, which occasions all such Liquors to run and
transmute the whole into a racy, brisk, sharpness or fullness in a much less
time, than that which has some Treacle mixed with it, because Treacle is
cleaner, and so free from those foul, harsh, rough qualities Malt is endued
with.

Lastly, for Sugar it self, it is yet much more to be valued in Liquors than
Molosses, and the usual Method before its put into Wine, is to melt it down to
a Syrrup, they finding by experience its fitter that way for their purpose; for
indeed in the said melting down, it loses neither its sweetness nor cleanness,
but only its Sal Nitral, grainy or racy Body, which is no friend to them in the
advancement of their Wines: However, I must observe this, that if the Wine
where into its put, be good in its kind, and free from cloudy, stagnated
Spirits, it must necessarily advance the goodness and strength thereof, and the
operation is accordingly; but in case the Cane be foul, pricked, or otherways
defective, then though such Sweets so hide the evil, that many Pallates cannot
discern it in the Drinking, yet the Stomach when it has separated it, finds
the pernicious influences thereof; otherwise this putting of those clean, rich
Sweets into their Wine, must certainly be one of the Wine Coopers and Vintners
least Errors or Deceits.

I acknowledge Sir I have been both tedious and digressive upon this occasion,
for which I desire you to excuse me; and to be fully assured of my being
entirely disinterested in the matter, and so not in the least to be suspected
of uncand^ dealing with a Gentlemen whom I so much respect and honor: And
whose humble Servant I am, and shall remain whilst

T. T.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
AFter such an acknowledgement as I have made in the close of my Letter, I hope
you will believe it is not without reluctance, that I would add any thing more
in this place; but not expecting to meet with a like convenient opportunity,
pray give me leave to subjoyn to the above mentioned Uses and Excellencies of
Sugar, a very few things concerning the great Benefits this Commodity brings to
the Nation; which very few People are any way thoughtful or regardful of.

FIrst then, the Manufacturies of this excellent Juice is of much more
importance, than all other Fruits and Spices imported to us, in respect of the
improvement of our Navigation and Consumption of our Manufactures; for in King
Charles II. Reign, the small Island of Barbados Loaded yearly about 350 Sail
of Ships, and most of them of considerable burden, with Cotton and Ginger, but
chiefly with Sugar: (And so in some proportion did our other Sugar Islands)
when it does not contain above an Hundred Thousand Acres of Land, whereof a
considerable part of that is poor and Rocky, and not worth Manuring; and at the
same time there was above Twenty Thousand English of all sorts upon it, and
70000 Negroes or Black Servants; who both the one and the other, were not only
Clothed with the Manufactury of England, but a great part of their Eatables
and Drinkables came from thence also: Besides which there were Thirty Sail of
Ships employed yearly in the Guinea Trade, all Laden with our Growth, to
furnish this and the other Sugar Plantations with Slaves: To say nothing of the
great quantities of Utensils for their Sugar Works, as Copper, Iron, and other
things belonging to Building, that were constantly carried to them. And though
since the late War there are not above Two Hundred and Fifty Sail Laden there
or thereabouts, and not above Fifty Thousand Negroes, and fewer White People in
Barbados; for the Island could once Muster 10000 able Men, but since not above
5000; yet both their numbers, and that Trade, is still very considerable; and
surely it is the Nations Interest not farther to depress, but to encourage it to
the highest degree.

Secondly, Sugar finds an Employment for many Thous^nds in England it self, so
as common Partees, Sugar-Bakers, or Distillers, Coopers, Grocers, Carriers,
ye^, and abundance of Ladies too; who, many of them since the common use of it,
have their Closets better furnished than the Confectioners Shops were in former
days.

Thirdly, how many Thousand Acres of Land are by the use of this noble Plant,
made of five times the value and more, than otherwise they would have been? as
having brought a great number of Fruits, Grains and Seeds into use, that were
hardly thought of, or at leastwise but little valued formerly, such as Apples,
Pears, Plumbs, Apricocks, Gooseberries, Currants, and many more of the like
nature; which do all increase the Consumption of Grain: To which may be added,
the many brave and exhilrating Drinks that are made of the Juices of our
Fruits, by the assistance of Sugar, such as Cherry Wine, Current Wine,
Gooseberry Wine, Rasberry Wine, Cowslip Wine, and many more; nay, it renders
diverse things of considerable value, which of themselves are of little or none,
witness, in green, raw, sharp Gooseberries, which by its sweet and friendly
power, are rendered much more preferrable to those that are ripe.

Fourthly, There are but very few who are not sensible how mightily Sugar
advances the Kings Customs, not only in respect to the Imposts laid upon it
self, but by occasioning many Foreign Commodities to be imported; which before
our Sugar Settlements were not thought of, as the noble Nut called the Cocoa,
of which the most equal and agreeable Pottage is made, which if it were not for
Sugar, would be but of little use; and several other Foreign Fruits and Drugs,
as Tea, Coffee, etc.

Fifthly, Physicians and Apothecaries cannot but think themselves highly
befriended by this noble Juice, since more than half their Medicines are mixed
and compounded with Sugar; and a great part of our Herbs and Medicinal Flowers
would be of little or no use without it, there being by a modest computation,
above Three Hundred Medicines made up with Sugar; by whose assistance, their
Volatile Virtues are incircled and preserved, which otherwise could not be done.

Sixthly, Then for the Confectioners, what do, or indeed can they do without
Sugar? it being manifest, there are above Two Hundred several sorts of
Sweetmeats made by them with Fruits of our own Growth, which are so many
excellent Cordials, delitious and pleasant, and may be all eaten, to the
advantage both of health and pleasure, (if order and temperance be not wanting)
and confederated with things of a meaner quality; but otherwise, without Sugar
they would be harsh, crude, sharp, and subject to decay; as would also great
quantities of Foreign Fruits and Seeds, which are preserved by them, and which
upon their Importation, pay the King considerable Customs.

Seventhly, It may not only be mixed and compounded with most, if not all sorts
of Vegetations, their several Sal Nitral Virtues, all proceeding from agreeable
Principles, but even Bread it self; which, with good reason, is styled the
Staff of Life, and esteemed the best and cleannest of all Foods; if it be eaten
only with a little good Sugar, it inspires it with a more brisk and lively
taste, and is of much easier Digestion, than if it had been eaten by it self:
But give me leave by the way to insert one Caution, and that is, that Sugar is
not so good mixed with the Fat of Animals, nor with Butter; that being I may
say, an Heterogenious practice; for the Sal Nitral properties of Vegetables
cannot so easily incorporate with the Animal Sulphurs or Fats, and consequently
open the Bodies of each other; and therefore all such Foods as are made up with
Butter and Sugar, are generally of an heavy, dull and cloying nature, and never
fall to obstruct the Stomach, and retard Digestion: And this antipathy between
Animal Fats or Sulphurs, and Vegetable Sal Nitres, is very manifest by what is
practiced in the Art of Refining of Sugar; for when the Juice of the same is
Boiled in Coppers with most fierce and vehement Fire, such as is necessarily
required for that purpose, whereby the Liquor rises up with a much more
turbulent and ungovernable motion, than either Beer or Ale, as the Syrrups do
exceed in sweetness and strength, and so is subject to run over the Pan, to the
great damage of the Refiner: The only Antidote they have found out to allay and
quiet it, is Butter; for though the Copper contains 2 or 3 Hundred Gallons,
Boiling and Swelling up in the foresaid manner, yet a piece of Butter put in to
the bigness of a small Nut, and no more, quickly makes it fall down within its
circle in the Copper, and all with an amazing Hush; and whence should this
Ascendancy proceed, but that the Animal power is deduced from an higher Birth,
as being made and generated from sensibility; and passing through all the Animal
Digestions, there is a kind of an Antipathy in the Butter to the Juice of the
Vegetable, as there is in other things of the like contrary kinds. But for all
that is said, it must still be owned that the Juices of Sugar are of so
generous a Nature, that when they happen to be mixed with any fat things, the
Concoction is the easier, especially in all Milk Foods, which are more than
twelve parts in fourteen Phlegm.

Eighthly, The Use of this noble Juice has not only reached to our Raw and
unripe Fruits, and the vast improvement of them, (as before noted) for common
and daily Use; but proper ways have been found out to keep and preserve them
for Tarts and other things all the Year round; whence as a farther Benefit, it
is come to pass in the revolution of a few years, perhaps not exceeding
Seventy, than for every Ten Fruit Trees we had then in England, there are now
above a Thousand.

Ninthly, Though Wine and Tobacco may be justly allowed to be two of the most
principal Commodities Imported, that do advance Navigation and the Kings
Revenue, yet the Premises considered, they come infinitely short of Sugar,
since they are not only confined (as it were) within the circle of their own
Consumption; but even that Consumption may in some degree be asserted to hinder
our own Growth, at leastwise in respect to one of them.

Lastly, to add no more Benefits, and to close the whole with a familiar
Instance.

Does not the Queen of the Dairy, by the assistance of this noble Juice, vary
or manufacture (as I may say) her Milk into more than Twenty several delicious
Dishes of Food? And is it also not a Friend to the Laborious Husbandman, by
encouraging the Consumption of a great quantity of fine Flower? so that in
short, it spreads its generous and sweet influences through the whole Nation; and
there are but few Eatables or Drinkables that it is not a Friend to, or capable
to confederate with: And upon the whole, as there is no one Commodity whatever,
that does so much encourage Navigation, advance the Kings, Customs, and our
Land, and is at the same time of so great and Universal Use, Virtue and
Advantage as this King of Sweets, more especially, when by Art it has been
brought to its highest degree of perfection: So our Sugar Plantations should
have suitable Supports and Aids from the Government, which is the hearty desire
of

once more SIR, Your humble Servant, T. T.



LETTER. XXXV. Of the Burial of BIRDS.
SIR,
I Have considered yours of the 26th of May, with a more than ordinary
application, for the Novelty thereof, but more particularly in respect to your
uncommon thoughts concerning the Burial Place of Birds; and in what Element or
World they make their Exit; though I find after all, the Solution of your
Question so extremely difficult, that for me it must yet remain a Mystery, as
it has done all along to Mankind, who, though they have Lived and Communicated
with the great numbers and variety of these Airy Troops, for some Thousands of
years, have hitherto remained so ignorantly Blind in this matter, that there
has been but very few that have considered, or as much as thought of it: But
to endeavor as much as lies in me to satisfy your curiosity, I shall set down
some probable Guesses concerning them, farther than which I do not pretend to
go; and they are reduced to the following Considerations.

1. IN all Birds and Fowl, that excellent Element the Air has the ruling
power, to which their very Constitutions are subjected, notwithstanding the
variety of their Shapes, Forms, Natures and Dispositions; as all Four Footed
Beasts and other Animals of the Earth and Water have those Elements predominant
in them: And for this cause, Birds do excel all other visible Creatures in the
perfection of their Senses of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling;
and that the Air has the principal government in them, is very manifest, first,
from their Voices, Tones and Singing, as that Element is known to be the very
Life of all Tones and variety of Harmony, wherein Birds exceed all other
Sublunary Creatures, Mankind alone excepted; for which we may assign a reason
in another place.

Secondly, Their Flying, and conveying their Bodies through the Air with a swift
motion, is a proof of it, that being a Faculty that as far exceeds all the
Inhabitants of this inferior World, as Angels do them.

Thirdly, They Build their Nests for the most part on Trees, making the Heavens
their Habitations, wherein they mount aloft; and with their speedy and swift
motions, can in a little while not only move themselves to great distances of
places, but at the same time behold the Earth creepers as I may term them,
grovelling in their heavy, sluggish motions; and herein have such exceeding
advantages above even the rational part of this lower World, that could a Man
be but endued with this Flying Faculty, as Birds enjoy it, it cannot be thought
he would be willing to lose or exchange such an Heavenly freedom and
perfection, for any Earthly Diadem, or circumscribed dominion amongst us.

Fourthly, Their manner of Subsistence for some parts of the year, is in a
manner unaccountable to us, particularly in the Winter Season, from about
Christmas to the end of March; which, though subject to most pinching cold Winds,
Snow, and Rainy Weather, that never fail to cut off and destroy all Insects and
Flies; and that there is nothing visible to our Senses, whereby such great
numbers of Winged Creatures can be Sustained; yet Birds of most sorts are then
in the best case, most Fat, and so esteemed the best and most wholesome Food;
upon account of which, Men double their diligence with Guns, Snares, and the
like, to destroy them, without any consideration had, either to their
Innocence, Harmonious Sounds and Voices, or other Heavenly properties the
Creator has endued them with, above, and in a far more excellent perfection,
than any other of the Sublunary Beings. Now that these Creatures that are
Corporeal, and compounded of the same Elements and Qualities of Flesh and
Blood, as other Animals are, should be able, not only to support themselves
from Starving, but at such a time to grow Fat too, when most other Creatures we
know or communicate with, sink and perish; is very strange: But as the
Constitution and Composition of Birds are more Airy and Heavenly than other
Creatures, Inhabiting the dark, cold, lumpish Earth; so their Support and Food
must be more thin and Spirituous.

Fifthly, Birds exceed all other Animals in their Love and Chastity, and the
Fidelity and Constancy of the Male and Female is admirable, as I have set forth
at large in my Complaint of the Birds, which I know you have read with
Satisfaction; and as much may be said of them in respect to the Shortness,
Entireness and Intelligibility of their Language, being well known to every one
of the same Species and kind, a Blackbird to be a Blackbird, and so with the
rest. For Birds in their original Constitution are more Sublime than other
inferior Creatures or Beasts, and still retain more of those excellent
Branches entire, than the most earthly, since Mankind having had no commanding
Power over them, as over other Creatures (besides Guns and Snares) it must
reasonably be supposed their Natures cannot be depraved as other Animals must
needs be, that are subject to the adulterated Methods of Men; and this
Preservation of theirs has been chiefly owing to that Noble and as it were
heavenly Faculty of Flying, in comparison whereof other Motions are dull,
heavy, burthensom, dark and melancholy, seeming to be be but one degree behind
that of Angels, or the invisible Powers: And this is most certain, that the
more entire any Creatures keep themselves from communicating with Mankind, as
has been just now hinted, the more they keep or act within the Circle or Limits
of their own original or first Love wherewith their Creator bound them, so that
is, as the Fowls of the Air have a double Advantage over most if not all other
Creatures; for as by their first Constitution, they are made more heavenly and
Ethereal, so by the Help and Assistance of these sublime Qualities, they avoid
those Evils and Adulterations of their natural constitutive Powers that other
Creatures have been subjected to, through the intolerable Burdens and Slaveries
Men have imposed upon them; for Mankind cannot but influence all the
under-graduates, whose Lives and Fortunes are at his Will and Pleasure, with
the same or the like Miseries and Depravities he has subjected himself unto,
which is plainly manifested by some of the winged Troops that are of grosser
Compositions and familiar Dispositions, such as Greese, Hens, Ducks, Turkeys
and others, whose Bodies being gross in Quality, and large in Quantity,
occasion them to lose most of their excellent Faculties and airy Qualifications
and the like, which they but very lamely perform in comparison of those that
neither communicate with, nor are fed by Men; to say nothing of their being
unhealthy, liable to many Diseases, and become short lived, as all other
Animals are, which are governed by Mankind.

Sixthly, As Birds and Fowls of the Air that do not converse with, or are not
fed by Men, are much freer from Distempers than others; so it is to be observed,
that naturally there are but a few particular Diseases amongst them, and that
if they have any, they are their own Physicians, and it is certain, they have no
sweeping or general Plagues amongst them; so that they are not only healthy,
but long lived too, and History tells us, that some Birds have been observed to
have lived three, four or five hundred Years, and yet appeared in youthful
Dresses, and undoubtedly their lives are very long, and as unaccountable to us
as their Diseases, and more especially Deaths and Burial-places; which few or
none of the Ancient Historians or Philosophers have taken notice of, and that
we should remain, I may say, wholly ignorant hereof to this very day, knowing
nothing in what Climate, Region or World those airy Beings make their Exit, is
as wonderfully strange, as it has been little enquired into by us.

For if we examine and enquire of Shepherds, Cowherds, Fowlers and all sorts of
Field-men, whose Business and Employments are in the Fields, Woods, Mountains,
Valleys, about and upon both Fresh and Salt Waters; they will tell you, it is
very rare that any sorts of Birds, great or small are found dead, unless
wounded by some way or other: Besides, how is it likely any of them should die
and their Feathers and Carcases not to be seen, for Feathers are of such a
hard, tough Quality, that the Elements cannot destroy or wear them out under a
considerable time; so that they must necessarily be found by one or other, as
all Birds that meet with Misfortunes are; to which we may add, that some Birds
have large Bodies, which dying and falling upon the Earth, must infect the
common Air with the evil Smells of the Carcass, and be a sufficient Direction
to find them out; and is it possible that Dogs, Swine and other Brutes would
not seek them out to devour them, which hereby as well as by the scattered
Feathers could never be long concealed from Human Knowledge and Observation.

The like is be understood not only in our own but all other Countries of the
World, for if these Airy Creatures were found to die with particular Diseases,
or Epidemical Distempers in any other Climates or Regions of the Earth, then we
might have some reason to conclude, that toward the approaching time of their
Death, they moved themselves accordingly, as some say Swallows and many Birds
do against Winter; but to what Country, Climate or Place they fly is yet to be
decided; that being in a manner as dark and unknown to Mankind, as the place of
their Exit, which not having yet been determined by any, I crave leave to
thrust in a reasonable Conjecture, viz. That they are buried or swallowed up in
some superior Region or World (wholly unknown to us) as being most suited to
their Natures, wherein they very much excel all other terrestrial and watery
Animals; these being heavy, dull and melancholy, like the predominant Element
in them, and their Tones and Cries in like proportion; while the Volatiles of
the Air are quick, full of Life, and in their common Motion have a nearer
Similitude to Incorporeal Beings, whose blessed Harmony above, they do by their
Singing, in some degree imitate.

But, to expatiate a little upon the Qualifications of these Airy Creatures, in
respect to other kinds; the excellency thereof does arise from their original
Composition of Air and fiery Sal Nitral Powers and Virtues, which have the
Ascendant or Predominancy in the Center of their being; whereas the contrary is
to be understood of all other Creatures that Walk upon the Earth, and Swim in
the Water, the Sal Nitral Properties of those grosser Elements, having the
governing Power in them, and therefore they are like them, I mean gross, heavy
and phlegmatic, and their Food is accordingly; and though all visible Creatures
be made and compounded of the four Elements, together with the four grand
Qualities, yet each Individual Creature or Thing is endued with Qualifications,
according to the Element, that has the Predominant Power, whether it be Earth,
Water, Air or Fire; and each of them feed and preserve their own Children; for
which cause there is a wonderful variety and strange difference in the Nature
and Complexion of the Creatures and Things appertaining to the Earthy Region,
and so of the other Elements that proceed from each Creatures Composition, i.
e. when the airy and fiery Elements have a large share in the Composition of
any Terrestrials; such are lively, brisk and quick in Motion, as though they had
Wings to fly with; and the same is to be understood in Veget^, some Trees being
tall and lofty, and all others in proportion, neither are the Creatures
belonging to the watery and fiery Regions by no means to be excluded herefrom;
yea, all the Inhabitants and Children of the four Elements do vary and differ
in their Forms, Shapes, Figures, Dispositions, Inclinations, Manners and
Natures, respectively according to their several Compositions, degrees of each
Element in them, and the variety of the four grand Qualities, together with the
Sal Nitral Properties, as is most manifest by the Offspring and Children of
each Element; for what a vast and wonderful difference, and how many degrees is
there between the Mole, whose Habitation is in the Earth, and the high soaring
Eagle and other Birds, belonging to the airy Region?

Is not the same thing to be understood of the Phlegmatic Shoals or Scaley
Inhabitants of the watery Element, the Forms, Figures and Natures of them, all
being in proportion to their various Compositions of the Elements and Sal
Nitral Powers? for which reason some are wonderfully large, heavy and slow in
Motion, others swift, etc. but in all such, wherein the watery Element is most
Predominant, and the other three are weak and impotent, we see, they can hardly
live three minutes out of their own Element; whereas some other Animals, in
whose Compositions the Elements of Earth and Air have a large share, can both
live in the Water and also out of it, on the Earth for some time; and the same
is also to be understood of Creatures, wherein the Earth and Air are most
Predominant: And give me leave farther to observe unto you, that God's Creating
and Preserving Power being in the very Center of all Beings; therefore each
Element does not only midwife its Productions, and wonderful variety of Beings
into this visible World, but at the same time gives Food and all Necessaries of
Life too, until each Creature or Thing has attained to its due Limits, and then
every Element receives her own Children again; the Earth being the Grave of all
Creatures, wherein that lumpish Element did Predominant, and so of the other
three, so that it may be fairly inferred, that Birds, upon the approach of
their Death, do withdraw themselves from Humane view, to some Regions or Places
not only unknown, but invisible to us; else why should not we find their
Carcases upon the Earth, as we do those that are tame and accustomed to our
Company, which undoubtedly were originally wild, and as hard to come at, as
other Birds and Fowls of the Air?

It may be farther urged, that all the Winged Troops are bounded, and by Nature
limited, so as none of them can exceed in their Flights, as all the Terrestrial
Creatures, many of which can run more Miles in a day, than several sorts of
Birds can fly; and most Dogs could more easily catch Birds, could they keep in
sight, and prevent them from resting on Trees and other places out of their
reach; nay, many of them are so short of flight, that Men and Boys can tire and
catch them by ordinary running, if they can but keep their Eyes on them; and in
short, there is hardly any Bird that is able to Fly 100 or 150 Miles without
resting diverse times; and though they are the swiftest of any others in Motion,
yet none of them can hold out so long; for most certain it is, that the swifter
and quicker the motion of any Creature is, the sooner the same is tired, and
wants rest: Wherefore it is a weak Imagination in any, to suppose, that several
of our Birds that are not seen in the Winter, fly into Foreign Countries beyond
the Seas, of which Seafaring Men and Travelers know nothing at all; not but
that there are various sorts of Fowls and Birds seen 500, or it may be 1000
Leagues off at Sea, but then they are such, whose Constitutions are more, or as
much Watery as Earthy and Airy, and that cannot only rest on the Water, but also
get great part of their Food from that Element, being much of the Nature of our
Ducks, Swans, and the like, so that upon the whole, it is no ways probable, that
our Summer Birds do remove themselves into Transmarine Countries to Winter, nor
to make their Exits in, but rather according to their Airy Original, Die in
places more agreeable to their Natures, as I before noted; so that the
wonderful and most amazing Wisdom of the Great and ever Blessed Creator appears
in, through and over all his Works, in that every particular specific Body and
sensible Creature is made complete, and wants nothing that can render it more
Happy, provided it keep within the bounds of its own Circle and Law, and no
additions then can contribute to its farther Blessing; and though the degrees are
wonderful and various, as to Virtue and the contrary, and that each, from their
own Qualifications, have obtained their Names, which originally distinguished
their Natures, according to the Meliority of them, or otherwise, yet the
meanest and lowest degrees of Created Beings, even the Reptiles of the Earth,
are altogether as complete and happy in themselves, as those that are in Nature
and Composition many degrees higher Graduated; so that the meanest have no
Inclination to change Conditions with the highest, nor the highest with the
lowest; every individual Species being content to dwell with in its own bounds,
wherein its Happiness consists, and upon this ground there is no sensible
Creature in the World, that is miserable, but only such as have broken the
Bounds and natural Limits of their and others that are forced to break it; so
that upon the whole, Man must be the only miserable Creature under Heaven, both
in respect to the Depravation of his own Nature, and his having by Fraud and
Cunning, spread his Malignity and evil Influences through and over all the
Under-graduates of Animals, forcing many of them to act and yield Obedience to
his violent Hands, contrary to the Law, wherein God had Circumscribed, and
their own natural Instinct.

Sir, If I have made any undue Excursions in this my endeavoring to answer
your desire, I hope you will excuse me, and attribute it to the barrenness of
the Subject, and not to any other design in me, than to serve you as becomes,

SIR, Your Friend and Servant, T. T.

LETTER XXXVII. Of FERMENTATION.
SIR,
IT IS much more out of Complaisance to your Desires, than any real Opinion I
have of my own Ability, I shall attempt to answer the Abstruce Questions you
were pleased to propose unto me, in your Letter of the 26th of September,
concerning the wonderful Power of Fermentation, together with the Reasons why
the Fat, Flesh and Blood of Animals cannot be fermented nor separated, (as all
Vegetations can be) nor one Quality Changed nor Transmuted into another.

AND first I am to observe to you, that the Animal Ferment of the Stomach is
not only higher Graduated, (as appears by its Virtue in Turning or Transmuting
the Insensible into Sensible Creatures) but by not dividing or separating the
Original Forms and Qualities from their natural Operations, or Phlegmy, gross
Bodies, as common Fermentation does, or according to that way and manner as
Artists Ferment the Juices of Herbs, Fruits and Grains, whereby the gross Body
is destroyed or sunk into (...) stinking Liquor, that invests the Original
fiery Principles of their natural or gentle Methods, but only by a fiery,
turbulent, rendering, thunder-like Motion; and before which all those unbounded
Powers and Principles were still and quiet, being incircled in the Embraces of
the sweet Quality and phlegmy Body, as though no such fierce invading Fires or
Principles had been there.

Now, this comes to pass, because Fermentation opposes all the regular Motions
of Nature, and the Eternal Law of the Creator, as being a Death and total
Destruction to Multiplication and Progression, and not unlike unto the Deaths
of Animals, which cannot be effected without terrible fierce Agonies; and
indeed the dividing the Spirit from the Body, without such a fierce, turbulent
and irresistible Motion, is not to be done, as is clearly evinced in all sweet
Liquors or Juice whatever, who, when their sleeping silent Powers or original
Properties, are disturbed, as they are in a full or strong Ferment, all the Art
in the World cannot incircle or tame them.

But, the Fermentation of Food in our Stomachs, as well as of all Beasts, is
performed after another manner, imperceptible to the Creature, wherein all is
quiet and silent, provided the Meats and Drinks be of a suitable Quality, and
not too great in Quantity: And these sweeter Juices or Spirits that Nature
draws or extracts for her Support, are not divested of, or separated from their
natural Clothing or Bodies; neither are the sweet Qualities of such Foods
Transmuted into fiery Spirits or first Principles; for in such Cases the Body
and Life could not be supported and continued; but instead thereof, the
Nutriment is divided, and distills its Virtues into Body and Spirits, that is,
into Blood; from whence are made and generated Flesh, Bones, Fat, Spirits,
Inclinations, Dispositions, Words, and all Actions of Life; and for this
reason, the more equal our Meats and Drinks are, the better is the Nutriment,
and consequently all the Offsprings proceeding from thence; hence it is that
the frequent Eating and Drinking unequal Foods, never fail to beget and lay
open the fierce Gates and invading Powers of Inequality, called Sickness, and
particularly the Drinking of strong Spirits or Brandy does always prove
baneful, except in a Medicinal way, because the original Principles are
divested of their Body, and Transmuted into a fiery Circle, out of which there
is no deliverance or progression, so that you see the Stomach or Chemical
Furnace does that in a silent Method, which the outward Fermentation performs
in a tumultuous Manner; for in the first Elaboratory, Natures Fires are so mild
and friendly, that they do not disinherit the original Principles and Forms of
their native Right or Propriety, nor divide them into self-ful Desire, or
Transmute their beloved Spouse, I mean, the sweet and most aimable Quality into
original Fires, as the other does; no, no, the original fierce Principles of
all Food put into the Stomach, do still, notwithstanding the digesting, melting
or separating Quality of the Stomach, hide themselves, and continue in the Arms
and sweet Embraces of the uniting sweet Quality; so that there is no such
Division or Transmuting the Body and sweet Virtues into a fiery Principle, as
is done in Fermentation and Distilling; therefore if the Meats and Drinks be
temperate and equal in their Qualities, the Nutritive Juices are the same through
the whole Body, and the Volatile Salt of such Foods influences the whole with
its pleasant Virtues, whence proceeds a bris^, lightsome Temper, which is the
highest pitch of Health; not but that the equallest and best Meats and Drinks
have the same fiery Principles hid in them, as a Mystery, which are not known
nor perceived by the nicest and most curious Palates, so long, as is already
hinted, the Thing or Food remains entire: But still they are there, for they
are the Father, as we call it, being the original of those things, I mean the
first and the last, as is more apparent by the Excrements of all Animals, and
also by their Bodies, when they fall into Putrefaction, wherein there is a
considerable quantity of Sal Petre or Nitre contained, and in some more than
others, according as the Constitution of the Creature is, hotter or colder; but
the hottest affords the most, which being refined by Water and the help of
Fire, is separated from the phlegmy, gross Parts, of which Gunpowder is made,
that with the addition of other Sulphurs, (viz.) Brimstone and Charcoal, being
the head Principle of that cruel, fierce Fire, which exc^eds all others, as
proceeding from grosser, darker, and more Excrementitious Matter, and as it
were generated in the very Abyss of evil Qualities, wherein the Light and
uniting good Qualities of Nature are wholly extinguished, and as in the Art of
Fermentation and Distillation, all the sweet Virtues of the Vegetable Kingdom,
are Changed or Transmuted into a burning, fiery Spirit; the like Putrefaction
does in the Bodies and Excrements of Animals; and as this last is more heavy,
gross, stinking and baneful, so is the Production thereof.

And here give me leave to observe to you, that there is no other way found out
to separate or incircle the fiery Sal Nitral original Principles of Animals,
from their sweet Virtues, than by Putrefaction, all the Art and Skill of Man
being not able to touch or unlock their Sulphur or Oily Bodies; so strongly are
their sweet Properties incircled by the Animal Digestion, which does every
moment advance and transmute Insensible into Sensible things, and Inanimate
into Animation; by which wonderful Method and secret Operations of Nature,
Vegetables become higher Graduated, and attain to the farthest pitch any
Created thing can attain to, which is a Sensitive Life, and about which such a
powerful and natural Circle is drawn, as will admit of no farther Progression
or Advance.

So that now it clearly follows, that those things that have passed through the
Animal Kingdom or Digestion of any sensitive Creature, will not produce so
clean a Nutriment and fine Spirits, as Vegetables do, each Production or Thing
being mild, or fierce and turbulent; clean, or the contrary, according to the
original from whence it proceeded; and therefore, I say farther, it is past the
Skill of the most Ingenious Spagyricks, to Extract any Cordial sweet Virtues
from those original Sal Nitral Powers, that all putrified Excrements or Bodies
of Animals are endued with; nor to cloth or reinvest them in their former
Estate, Beauty, Virtue and Splendour, that is, to incircle them in the Royal
Bodies of Phlegm, wherein all the united Powers and four grand Qualities were
contained, before such Vegetations or Things had passed through the digesting
Powers and Faculties of the Animal Kingdom, that is the Stomach, and all the
circular Motions of Nature: But this must be performed by the Progression and
Handmaid of God, by whose circular Motions and Operations it is effected.

For Example, take some Compost or putrified Bodies or Excrements of Animals,
wherein is contained a considerable quantity of Sal Nitre or Salt Petre, more
or less, according to the Disposition of the Creature; for the original Salts
from whence they proceed, are of proportionable Complexions, and therefore the
Experienced Husbandman manages his Land accordingly, some Dung being better
for one sort than for anot^r; now lay these Excrements or putrified Matter upon
poor Land, wherein the Sal Nitral Qualities are weak and impotent, and they do
as it were, in a moment, by the assistance of Heat and Moisture, together with
the sweet Influences of the Sun and Elements, mix and confederate with the
fading Sal Nitral Properties of such Land, whereby it brings forth considerable
Crops of all sorts of Herbage, Seeds, Grains, Trees, and the like, and this no
Art is capable to imitate.

Now, this degree of Equality that Vegetations have obtained by a gradual
Progression and mystical Operation of Nature, Fermentation does, as it were, in
a moment disunite, whereby the original Forms become tumultuous, each Form with
a rapid, invading Motion laying, as I may say, violent Hands on the Child of
Love, which is the sweet Quality; so that by this friction, boiling and fierce
Motion, the whole Liquor or Thing becomes sharpened or racy, which while the
original Principles remained united to the sweet Quality, all was silent, and,
as it were, asleep, without Motion or Action; and this is evident in the Art
both of Brewing and Distilling, and this turbulent Motion or Ferment, is
stronger or weaker, according to the degrees and strength of the sweet Quality
and heat of the Season.

Now, Fermentation is an opposite and contrary Motion to Nature, and so
threatens the total Destruction of the whole, being, as it were, a Death to the
united Powers and uniform Principles, and a prevention of all farther
Progression; and therefore whatever is done by Art this way, can never be
retrieved, or the Forms and Properties of Nature united, but only by the
forementioned way.

The same is to be understood in the Animal Kingdom, for as soon as the four
grand Qualities be awakened or roused up, then great Agonies are immediately
felt, according to the degrees of Fermentation; and here by the way I am to
observe, that all Spagyrical Fermentations of Animals, as aforesaid, is
Diametrically opposed and forbid by the Laws of God and Nature, and indeed, if
that did not stand in Mankind's way, it is not to be doubted but he would long
since have Extracted lofty high Drinks from the Blood, Flesh and Fat of
Animals, as also from the Flesh of Fish, seeing he loves such Liquors so well,
and consequently would have been Drunk with the Blood of his Fellow Creature;
and indeed there has been no Art wanting in Man, to Extract the more Essential
parts from the meaner, that is, to get the Blood and Gravey, as they call it;
but instead of obtaining the finer, cleaner Juices, they have an addition of
contrary Qualities, that is, heavy, gross, dull, unclean Matter, that is more
subject to an hasty Putrefaction than that which they leave or reject: Now, the
Stomach cannot make so easy a Digestion thereof, as it can of Foods made of
Vegetations, if properly managed in the Preparation, which is the reason why
some have refrained Eating of Animals, whereby they have obtained an higher
degree of Health and Pleasure than they had before.

Now, it is to be noted, that as Fermentation in Vegetables, breaks and
destroys the Rest of that thing, so Drinks that have passed through these fiery
Operations, are changed for the worse, that is, the original Unity by this
Motion is disturbed, and there is an unequal working, struggling and dividing
Power between t^em, each Quality endeavoring to be Lord over the other,
whereby the whole sinks into its original Form, and all such Liquors in a short
time become sharp, harsh or flat, so that both the Water and the Juices of the
Fruits become divested of their natural Bodies, which as long as any thing
remains entire, incircles all the spiritual Powers or original Principles, and
preserves them in the Unity wherein they were Created; wherefore all Fermented
Drinks, and more especially those that are strong, never fail to operate like
themselves, so that as the original Forms are by this Art divided in a
self-ful, domineering Operation; the very same they do in the Stomach,
wherefore the common drinking of such Liquors are Experimentally found baneful
to Mankind, by the great number of cruel Diseases, that more particularly of
latter years have been introduced amongst us, especially Gravel, Stone, Gout,
and the like Evils, which the Natives of all such Countries, who constantly
drink Water, know nothing of, though it is not such Liquors alone that are thus
destructive to Humane Nature, for since sensible Creatures, I mean Flesh and
Fish, are become our principal Food, Mankind not only inherits all the
Disorders and Diseases such Creatures as he Eats are subject to, he having
little or no regard to Cleanness, Uncleanness, Season of the year and of
Generation; but the worst of all is, these cruel Distempers are conveyed down,
and entailed upon our Children and Posterity, and therefore grow more and more
upon us, and there are no Medicines found out, that will Cure them; for the
Stomach cannot draw any proper Aliment from things that have passed through the
fierce, unequal Operations of Fermentation, because Inequality cannot
administer Equality, each thing operating like it self; and for this cause, if
Men's Foods were to be managed after the manner of Drinks, they would in a short
time destroy Men's Health, and sink the Body into Death; and hence it is, and I
presume, with very good reason too, that I have given Water, the Pre-eminence,
before all Liquors, as in respect to Food I have done to Herbs, Seeds, Grains
and Fruits, whatever the unthinking World may imagine to the contrary, and
since we find there can be no greater Character of the Virtues of Meats and
Drinks, than their long keeping sound and good, and that Fruits, Grains and
Seeds, together with Water, do so much longer than Flesh, Fish or Fermented
Liquors, one should think there could be no difficulty made in the choice of
them, seeing the Almighty has provided such amazing varieties of Vegetables
for us, and much easier to be got than either Fish or Flesh.

But to return to the Art of Fermentation, as to the Original thereof; it was
first found out and promoted by the Egyptians, or Eastern Philosophers and
Physicians; for as soon as Man had depraved and separated himself from his
Original state of Unity, all the Original Qualities and Principles in him, were
terribly stirred up, by his longing, free Will after all Intemperances and
Evils, to which he was continually tossed to and fro, so that many destructive,
dark Inventions, have, and do still take their rise from thence, which did, and
ever since have filled the whole Earth with Violence; and as such Inventions
and evil Customs have been admitted and encouraged, so have our Diseases
proportionably increased, which has occasioned the more prudent and sober part
of former Ages, to think of and invent equivalent Medicines or Antidotes, and
so went to work, raking as it were, into the Center of all Elemental Things and
Creatures, and more especially into the three Grand Kingdoms of Nature, viz.
the Animal Vegetable, and Mineral, to find out an Universal Medicine, that
might be able to cope with or Cure Universal Distempers, concluding there was
no Vice so great, but there was a Virtue as great; which if obtained, might be
effectual to that end. But herein the most Learned and Ingenuous of all Ages
have found themselves grossly mistaken, as experience witnesses; yet for all
their continued Failures, every Age and Country are still pestered with a great
number of those Philosophical Heads, that tell Lies in the face of the Sun, and
magnify what they can do in this kind, especially on Minerals: Its true they
have been able, by the power of their Calcinary Fires, to Flux and Refine
Metals into a much higher degree of purity and fineness, which has proved very
beneficial to Mankind, as being thereby fitted for various profitable uses: But
all this while they found no such thing as the Seeds of Metals, nor yet any
Ferment that was capable to divide the Original Forms, or to bring them into a
working, boiling, active power, or strifeful, opposite motion; which
Qualifications and Operations do appear in all things that are capable of
Fermentation, as we see in Vegetables; but instead of extracting or obtaining
such Seed or Ferment, they procured all the opposite qualities, for their
fierce Fires, did in a moment destroy all the Seminary or Living powers of such
Metals, of what kind or nature soever they were, and totally obliterated the
Characters and Powers of Multiplication.

The very same thing happens in the Vegetative Kingdoms, for if you offer any
Seed or Grain to the heat of common Fires, a little will kill all the
Spermatick or Seminary Quality, which that moment puts a final stop both to the
progression and multiplication of the said Seed or Grain; and no better can
surely be expected from such fiery Trials in the Animal Kingdom: Will any
Person of common understanding believe you, should you tell him, that by
Killing of Beasts, and refining their Flesh and Blood with harsh and strong
Fires, you can obtain the Seed, and that by the virtue and efficacy thereof,
with the help of some Menstruum, you can multiply the same Species of
Creatures, from Tenfold to Ten Thousand, as some of the Learned in the Art of
Refining, are apt to talk and boast of: But so far it is from being in Man's
power to effect this, that we see if two Beasts of different kinds couple
together, the Creature that proceeds from such, is rendered incapable of
Generation; so fruitless have most of our, Spagyrick Philosophers in all Ages
been mostly, both in their fiery Operations on Minerals and Animals; and all
they have done, has been but to draw a circle of Darkness about themselves,
wherein many Thousands have not only been accessory to their own Destruction,
by the venomous fumes of their own Fires, but enticed others into the same
Mischiefs, by their Lying Volumes left behind them, which have had no small
influence on many very Ingenuous Persons, whose Inclinations prompted them to
those curious Studies, together with the hopes of Gain, and to become Richer
than the Princes of the Earth; and who, though they have been endued with much
Wit, and other ingenuous Faculties, yet they are void of any spark of true
light or distinguishing understanding in the wonderful Operations of Nature,
Gods Eternal Power and fixed Methods of his Law. But admit we should suppose
they could attain to a proper Ferment, both in the Mineral and Animal Kingdoms,
and Seminary Qualities; whereby they could Ferment all Minerals, as also the
Flesh and Blood of Animals; yet they shall not be able thereby to obtain the
multiplying quality of Nature, let their Menstruum be what it will; because
Fermentation, wheresoever it is effected, does in a moment destroy the unity of
that thing, and all its Seminary Qualities; from whence multiplication
proceeds, by this fierce motion awakening the Central Principles out of their
rest, as already mentioned.

Further, I say, if this Fermentation could have been effected in the Mineral
and Animal Kingdoms, these Gentlemen would be as far off an Universal Medicine
as ever; neither would they be able ever to have made better Work or Medicines,
than there are made of Vegetations, in the method of Fermentation and
Distillation, nor probably so good; because Minerals are harder, crude and
harsher by much than Herbs, Fruits, Grains and Seeds, having as it were no
proportionable assimilation with the Humane Nature, to which they are great
Strangers, and so rendered not capable of being made Homogeneal; insomuch, that
Metals this way could be of no real benefit to Mankind, but rather increase our
Evils and Intemperances; and our Operators, instead of preparing Universal
Medicines, would have made Universally destructive Liquors or Spirits, which no
Art could ever make agreeable to Humane Nature; and must be much worse than the
Spirits, or Brandies made of Vegetables are. Again, whatever could that way be
drawn or extracted from the Bestial Nature of Animals, must of necessity be
gross and unclean, in proportion to the Original from whence it proceeds; for
Nature never lies, but is constant and true in all her Operations.

I will not take upon me in this place, to say that the Arts of Fermentation
and Distillation in any kind, had been better lost than found in the World;
though it is most certain, that Fermentation in the strictest and best Sense, is
no other than a certain vegetative and insensible Delirium or Madness, and
therefore all its Operations when the Fermented Liquor is strong and
spirituous, are in proportion; and the same as I may say, being Disbanded from
under the Government of its Superior Officers, so soon as a quantity of it is
introduced into Man's Body, it plunders Nature of all its sweet Virtues, by
drying and parching them up; and at the same time breaks the Government of the
Sentes, turning Reason and Wisdom adrift; so that the Body is in no better
condition, than a Ship without either Pilot or Rudder; and penetrating into all
parts and corners, awakens and stirs up the Original Fires; and by
confederating with the same, the whole Man becomes Mad, and like one out of his
Wits: For which cause, the Egyptians and Eastern Countries, (where the Art is
supposed to have been invented) foreseeing the Evils that would necessarily
ensue, did both by Laws and customs, prohibit* the Drinking thereof, confining
the said Liquors to the circle of Medicines. I might take upon me, were it
necessary to ennumerate here the many kinds of Evils and Distempers, the
Drinking of such Liquors has introduced into the World; but to wave that, as
being well known, and but too sensibly felt. I shall touch a little upon the
other Inconveniences that do attend Fermentation and Distilling: Are not most
of our noble Fruits, Grains and Seeds, very much wasted and destroyed hereby?
which if otherwise managed, would be considerable Preservatives. For Example,
one Bushel of good Barley made into Malt, Ground, Fermented and Distilled into
what they call Common Proof-Spirit, makes but about Five Quarts thereof, which
in weight is not above Eight Pounds and an Half; whereas, the Barley before it
was so ordered, as aforesaid, weighed about Forty Five Pounds, and would have
made Bread enough to sustain Six or Seven Persons for a whole Week, with some
other Foods; or if the said Bushel of Malt had been Brewed into Beer or Small
Ale, it would have made Twenty or Four and Twenty Gallons of good Drink: And
though this last be of much less value to Mankind, than the said Corn made into
Bread; yet it far exceeds the Five Quarts of Brandy, both in quality and in all
its Uses. The like is to be understood in most of our other Grains and Fruits:
In a word, Fermentation and Distillation have Midwifed into the World all the
enticing Drinks and Liquors that are Drunk; and though these Arts may be allowed
to advance some particular things to an higher degree of usefulness, yet they
are but few; and might well enough be spared: Indeed, Bread and Flour of Corn
being of a ponderous, close, glewy Body, Fermentation does advance, and better
accommodate it to our Stomachs, making it of an easier Digestion; though at the
same time, this virtue of putting Ferment into our common Bread, the supposed
advantages thereof proceed chiefly from custom; for the Ancients, whose Health
and long Life, far surpassed ours in these latter days, according to the
Testimony of History, used neither Ferment nor Salt in their Cakes; and many of
the Eastern People do follow that custom to this day. And it is also
remarkable, that among the Jews, and other Religions too, after some of them
came to allow Drinking Wine, and Fermented Liquors, yet they would not admit of
Bread that was Fermented, either with Leven or Lees of Wine, to be eaten in
their Religious Rites or Worship, esteeming the same unclean, in comparison to
that which had no Ferment or Leaven therein; and this they called clean or
unleavened Bread: Neither is this also to be omitted concerning our common
Bread; that if the Yeast be too much in quantity, such Bread becomes in a very
short time dry and harsh, losing its sweet, pleasant taste and moisture. And by
the by, I may add in like manner, that Salt is a certain and sure Enemy to
Bread, not only by causing it to corrupt in a short time, but also it takes
away, and does as it were destroy the natural, pleasant sweetness thereof; and
indeed there is no manner of thing to be urged, but custom, for putting it in;
and it is well known, that Bread which is designed to be kept for a considerable
while, must have neither Salt, Ferment nor Yeast in it; and this sort of Bread
which is generally made for Sea, is some of the sweetest.

And now Sir, methinks I hear it objected and said, that strong Fermented
Liquors, as Beer, Ale, Brandy, Wine, and the like, are brave exhilerating
Cordials; and that therefore the Drinking of them must be highly Beneficial to
Nature: I grant it is true, they are so if used as they ought to be; but the
contrary is practiced, as daily experience witnesses; for ever since Man's deep
degree of Depravation, and since all kinds of Intemperances and Disorders have
obtained the Ascendency in his Mind and Heart, he has with all application and
cunning inventions, studied inequality, and attracted to himself, and violently
desired all Meats and Drinks that have a proportionable Disposition and Similie
with himself; and consequently Inequality and Disorder has been increased both
in his Body and Mind, beyond all due Bounds and Limits of Sobriety and
Temperance; for which reason, it must be really conducive to his happiness, to
have all such strong, heady Things and Liquors totally prohibited; more
especially since it has never yet been doubted, that I know of, by any Man, but
that Water was and is the only Drink ordained by the All-wise Creator, both for
Man and Beast; which having no unequal nor turbulent motion therein, begets
none, but its Operations and Influences are like it self; and they that Drink
it shall never want nor desire any other Drink, this being the only Digesting
Liquor, keeping the Stomach or Subservient Vessels clean, and causing a sharp
and strong Appetite, far beyond all Fermented Liquors, who heat the Blood, and
are the causes of many Distempers, as already noted: Nay, does not experience
tell us, that the Natives o^ all those Countries, that constantly Drink Water,
are not only Healthier, but much stronger than others; as in Guinea, Turkey,
etc. where their Laboring People will Travel, and carry much heavier Burdens
than our strong Beer Drinkers; it being a commonthing for a Porter in Turkey,
to take upon his Shoulders one o^ our Pigs of Lead, to the weight of 250 l. and
sometimes more, without any help, and to carry it a good way; which will make
two of our Porters stagger and blow to carry it between them at a Poles end:
Nay, it is usual for the Turkish Porters or Laborers, to lift and carry Four
or Five Hundred Weight, and yet their Drink is all Water, and Food very mean,
according to our estimation of it; that is, Bread and Grapes, Bread and Herbs,
other Fruits, they eating but a very small quantity of Flesh or Fish^; so that
from hence it is manifest, that strong Drinks and gross heavy Foods, do as it
were but cramp Nature in the very Bud; and therefore it is that there are not
near so many Die of immature Deaths in any Countries where the Natives Drink
Water, as in those where strong Drinks are in use; and for this cause also, the
Natives in England Four Hundred Years ago, were not only much Healthier and
longer Lived, b^t much larger of Stature too; so that upon the whole, the use
of strong Fermented Liquors, is pernicious and destructive to Mankind, and more
particularly to those of the Female Sex; to which, without naming any more the
terrible Vapors they themselves are subject to, and the dreadful Convulsions
in their Children, are their Original; and if there be any so temperate, as to
Drink little or none of these Liquors, which is exceeding rare indeed, yet if
either of their Parents, Father or Mother, did frequently use them, then it is
Twenty to one, but these Distempers are thereby conveyed and entailed on them
and their Posterity.

Sir, I could say much more upon this occasion, did I think it proper for me,
or convenient for you; but thinking there is no farther occasion for it, I
shall conclude with my humble Respects to you, hoping you will so far oblige
me, as to let me have the result of your thoughts hereupon, as opportunity
shall offer; and that you will do me the justice, to believe the sincerity of
my Sentiments and Intentions herein.

and that I am Sir, Your very humble Servant, T. T.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Desire you would give me leave to add a word more in this place upon the
Subject matter of Fermentation, as it comes just into my Head, and that is the
assimulation, as I may say, there is between all fierce and unequal Passions of
the Mind and it; for whether they be of Love or Hatred or the like, I can
conceive them to be nothing else but a stirring up the original Fires, or a
strong Fermented motion of the first Principles, and a violation of their Law
of Equity or Union; and the quicker or fiercer this Ferment or turbulent Fiery
motion is, the more malignant are its influences; and therefore in what
Creature soever such a Fire is stirred up or awakened from its silent Magia, or
separated from the incorporating and sweet Embraces of the beloved Spouse
called the Radical Humor, whether the Disease be Corporal or Mental, the Life
is presently in danger; for all such unequal motions and the continuance of
them will sink Nature down to Death, which is manifested in the case of Agues,
to go no farther, wherein if the Cold Fit should continue, it would quickly put
a period to Life, so would the Hot Fit do likewise; nay the continuance of the
very Sweating would do it Infallibly. I might also subjoin the sad influences
Fermented Liquors have to Ferment Men's Minds, to the unspeakable Detriment of
Human Race: But to leave that, I shall only farther add, that what is said in
Agues, the like may be understood in Fevers, as when a Fever is constant and
without Intermission, the Life is then quickly in danger; and there are rarely
any Medicines found out that are capable to cure it; the most Skilful
Physicians then Administer at great Uncertainty; but when intermitting, the
Danger is not so great, nor the Physic so uncertain of giving Assistance: The
same may be also farther manifested by all the Operations of Nature, and
particularly in the Elements themselves, whereof if any of them obtains the
Ascendent, the other three suffer Violence; and the mischiefs are more or less,
according to the length of time it governs, as when the Fire gets uppermost,
then all is Burnt up and Destroyed; if the Watery part prevails, the Body is
Deluged, and so of the other two, according to their respective Natures and
Properties: And indeed if the Great and Adorable Creator had not set bounds,
and limited them by his Eternal and unalterable Law of Creation, the whole
System of Nature must very soon have sunk into its original Chaos or first
Principles again: But God has Confined all Celestial Bodies, Powers and
Elements, yea and the offspring or various productions of them, so as that
they shall not by their fierce, self-full operations, and invading, turbulent
powers violate the Creative and Generative Method of his Law; for so it is,
that in what thing or creature soever the Unity or Seminary Qualities are
Wounded, whether the same be done by the unequal operations of the Elements, or
by the Art and curious Fancies of Chemists, or any other ways, that thing is
presently made incapable to Generate or Multiply; for the verity whereof the
whole Creation and amazing varieties of Creatures therein are manifest
Testimonies: And could Mankind but understand this aright, he should find upon
the whole matter, that the principal Business is so to Regulate the Actions of
his Life that he may keep within the Bounds of Equality, Unity and Concord, or
as near thereunto as possibly he can, without which there can be neither Health
of Body nor Mind in this World, nor any true pleasure had in Time or Eternity,
Unity being the Eternal Bond of Peace in all Enjoyments. Sir, I Beg your Pardon
heartily for my prolixity in the Postscript as well as Epistle, and desire you
to Believe that I am once more

Your Humble Servant, T. T.



FINIS.

