England's Grandeur, AND Way to get Wealth: Or, Promotion of TRADE Made easy,
and Lands advanced; Beneficial to particular Persons, and to the Kingdom in
general; wherein many Thousand of Indigent Poor Families may be Employed;
breaches made in our Trade by the French, Portuguese, Genoese, Swedes, Dutch
and Danes, demonstrated. Furnishing Funerals by Undertakers, making Buttons and
Shoe-Buckles of various sorts of Metals, a great detriment to Weavers of Tape,
Cotton, Ferrit, and Silk-Riband, and in short to all other Trades, the West
India Trade discouraged, it being one of the Noblest Branches in Navigation,
the prejudice of Trade by Strangers, that are Lodgers and Inmates only, who by
their Monopolizing ways, have got Estates, and then bid Farewell to England, the
cause of the Rent of Houses falling, the reasons why great Taxes cannot easily
be paid, laying Taxes on the Back and Belly, the best way to raise Money, which
will hurt neither Rich nor Poor, provided Navigation and a free Circulation of
Trade be Maintained, and Merchants Encouraged. Reasons why we have not a more
considerable Trade now the War is over. A remedy proposed to cure this Malady.

By T. Tryon, Merchant of London.

Sold by I. Harris, at the Harrow, and G. Conyers, at the Ring in Little
Britain: 1699, Price 6d.

SOME General Considerations OFFERED, etc.
THere is nothing that Mankind, in our latter times especially, has more bent
his Thoughts about, and been more Conversant in, than the business of Trade,
being fully sensible that its improvement, tends not only to the support of
Personal but National Interests; and hence it is, that our Industrious
Ancestors, while it was in its Infancy, exercised all possible care in nursing
it up, and defending it from those mischiefs wherewith it might be beset, The
Foundations of this Kingdom, are Land, Trade, and Manufactures, and are such
supports, which by no means ought to be shaken; they have for a considerable
time born the brunt of the War, and it is time now they should have a
breathing, and slide their Necks out of the Collar: The Trade of this Kingdom
has all-along been an advantageous Ornament to it, and would be still so, if
the occasion of its pinings were looked into, and fit ways applied for its
recovery. I would not pretend to Dictate, but with all Submission Crave, that
we should but have an eye to the Vitals of Trade, which seems to be deeply
affected. For what thing soever is a damage to our Manufacture, or Weight upon
our foreign Trade beyond what it can bear up under, stabs it to the Heart:
hereby the Subject is disabled: but when our Manufactures are encouraged, and
our foreign Trade made easy, and firmly secured, our Lands then will be
advanced. And it is indeed very evident that the promoting of our Manufactures
is not only beneficial to particular persons, but also to the Kingdom of
England in general, wherein many thousands of poor indigent Families are
employed, and as the said Manufactures are either advanced, or diminished, so
the Value of our Lands must increase or decrease in propotion; for
notwithstanding that the product of our Lands has born a very considerable
price, for seven or eight years last past, occasioned by the badness of our
Coin, the Clothing our Armies at Home and abroad, and the devastations made in
several of our Neighboring Countries by the late Wars, as well as the taking
of great Numbers of our outward-bound Ships, which obliged the Merchants to buy
double the quantities thereof, than otherwise they would have done: the Peace
having put a Period unto all those things, our product must come down to its
ancient Price, and in all probability much lower; for, within these Eight or
Ten Years we have had several Wounds and Breaches made in our Trade by our
Neighbors, they having the same opportunity to advance their Trade and
Navigation, that England had for several Years, at least before the War, I mean
the French, Portuguise, Genoese, Swedes, and Danes, not to say any thing of the
Dutch, who, by their Industry and good Husbandry, never fail to advance their
Interest wherever they get footing; for what advantage in Traffic soever any
Kingdom gains, is generally so much lost by another.

During the late War, those Nations above mentioned have not only been the
Carriers of their own Manufactures, but also of their Neighbors in siing their
own Shipping, by which they are not only become very Rich in general, but even
in this, that they have furnished themselves with as many Ships and Men, as are
sufficient to manage their own Trade, which within these dozen Years was the
great part of it ours, and managed by us; for England having been many Years at
Peace, whilst most of our Neighbors were oppressed by War, and by consequence
rendered in a great degree incapable of Navigation. We pos^ess'd most of the
Trade of Europe, having then no Partners but the Dutch, and they too, but
Fourths or Fifths, which by good Husbandry they have so much improved, that
they are now more than joint Partners.

If it be objected, That though those Nations have, during the last War, gained
the ascendant over us in several parts of our Trade, yet now that we enjoy
Peace, we may probably recover it again. To this I answer, That we have little
reason to hope to out-Trade the Dutch, as matters now stand, more than the rest
of our Neighbors, who Build, Victual, and Sail cheaper than the Dutch, having
most or all of their Materials or Merchandises within themselves, and the
Labor of Workmen and others much cheaper than the Dutch, who have little or
nothing of their own, but obtain all by Navigation, paying but very small
duties for Exportes and Importes, which is the great encouragement of
Merchants, as the contrary is the Pane of Trade, to the woeful Experience of
many Nations, our own not excepted. And though this may seem a digression from
the Matter in hand, yet may it serve as an Auxiliary, to excite our diligence,
not only in propagating Navigation, but also the Staple Commodities of this
Nation, viz, the Woollen Manufactury, etc. which, if neglected, will in a few
Years pine; for we having Competitors in our Foreign Trade, and so may have the
like in our Manufactures, there being in America diverse considerable
Settlements, which hitherto have been furnished with most of their Clothing
and Utensils from England, but their Countries not furnishing them with
sufficient quantities of Vendible Commodities for England, by this means their
Clothing proving excessive dear and chargeable, has put them upon breeding
all sorts of Cattle, and making their own Clothing, which is certainly very
detrimental to us.

The like may be said of Ireland, whose Cattle and Provisions being low and
likely to be lower, occasions their taking such Methods as may advance the
Woollen Manufactures there, they being provided of all suitable Materials for
such an Undertaking, which being Transported, they will as much outvy us in
Woollen Commodities as they do in their Provisions; and if it should be in any
degree or particular hindered, or prohibited, it would not only lessen the value
of the English Settlements, but mightily weaken the Protestant Interest, or at
least make things uneasy, and hinder Foreigners from going and settling there:
for all Persons that transport themselves into Foreign Regions, do it in
expectation of an advantageous and secure Settlement, which is the principal
Motive to run Adventures, and to visit unknown Countries; so that it may be
better to lay a Duty of (...) upon every pound weight of Woollen Manufactury
exported from Ireland: It will make theirs equivalent with our Woollen
Manufactures, so both Nations may go on jointly in the preservation thereof,
and prevent the Exportation of Wool from either Kingdom into Foreign Parts:
For all Trade and Industry ought to be free, so as not to be fettered with
heavy Impositions; for where they are so, all Commerce will fail, the Common
People and Tradesmen growing poor, and thereby the intrinsic value both of
Lands and all its productions are lessened, insomuch that many of the best
Subjects, ( viz.) the laboring people, will be in a manner forced to seek
their Fortunes in other Countries, as meeting with nothing but discouragement
at home: therefore it will be highly necessary not only to promote the
Exportation of the Woollen Manufactury, but also the Consumption at home: a
Specimen of the Benefit thereof is very evident in the late Act made in King
Charles II's Reign, for burying in Woollen, which Act cannot do less then
occasion the yearly Consumption of three Million of yards of Woollen for
Funerals in this Kingdom.

But there are several projects of late that have obtained Reputation, to the
prejudice of the forementioned Manufacture, one whereof is the furnishing of
Funerals, by a small number of Men called Undertakers, who always keep by them
all necessaries and proper materials to Fit and Accommodate Funerals, viz.
Cloaks, Hangings, Coach-coverings, etc. So that such Persons who formerly were
at great expenses in mourning for their Relations and Friends, may now, for a
small matter, have all things fitted for that purpose: and though, it is true,
when Gentlemen bought those things themselves, they made a less show, yet it
did bring more advantage to the Nation, such things being generally spent
within the compass of one Year: but by this invention one Cloak and other
necessaries do serve several Years, and furnish some hundred Funerals, working
Journey-work as long as one thread will hang to another. And this is not only
an Enemy to the Consumption of the Woollen Manufacture, but very injurious to
many Tradesmen, as Weavers, Drapers, Tailors, Glovers, etc. For these Gentlemen
the Undertakers are good Husbands, pinchingly buying all things in gross and at
first hand, and Tradesmen employed, under them have very low rates, no better
then Tailors have of Salesmen; for it must needs be detrimental to our Nation
to diminish its number of Laborers and lower the Prices.

Moreover, since the Method of these Undertakers have got footing, Persons of
ordinary Rank, may for the value of Fifty pounds make as great a Figure, as the
Nobility and Gentry did formerly with the expense of more than Five Hundred
Pounds. The Undertakers are great gainers, because one Suit of Mourning
Furniture will serve above an hundred times; so that hence there not only
happens a less Consumption, but the Gayety and Splendour both of the Nobility
and Gentry is hereby very much eclipsed, so that not many of them do in this
exceed the show of the Common people, except some few of the Nobility, who lie
a considerable time in State, so that it is very clear that twenty or thirty of
those sort of Men do greatly hinder the Consumption of our Woollen Manufacture,
and consequently destroy the livelyhoods of many thousand Families.

For Nations are generally poor where the Labourer's Wages are small, and the
Consumption but little, it having been for many Years past, the great Wages and
free Circulation of Trade amongst the common people as well as others, that
has made England exceed all her Neighboring Nations in Riches and in the
Consumption not only of our own Growth and Manufactures, but likewise of many
Foreign Commodities, such as Wines, Spanish Fruits, Sugars, Silks, Spices,
Tobacco, etc. of which perhaps this small Island has consumed more than
Poland, Swedeland, Denmark, and France, and thereby have brought very great
Revenues to the Crown: if this were not so, why should not Scotland and Ireland
be as beneficial to the Government as England, for nothing more advances Lands
and all its productions, then Traders large gains, which promoteth free Eating,
Drinking, and Genteel living, whatever contrary mistaken notions may have got
footing.

It is also further to be considered, That there are two or three other
Inventions prejudicial to the public, viz. making Buttons and Buckles of
various sorts of Metal, with which things, a few hands can supply many
Nations, three or four Boys and Girls being able to make two thousand four
hundred dozen in a Week of Pewter Buttons, every dozen whereof will last a very
long time, far longer then either Thread, Silk, or Hair, and which are valued
at first hand but from twelve to eighteen pence per Gross, great and small
together, which indeed may be of some advantage for Exportation, but hinders
the Consumption of our own Manufactures at home. The like may be understood of
Shoe-Buckles, of which a small number of Poeple can supply a whole Nation, for
you may buy a pair of Shoe Buckles, from a penny to twopence (unless Silver)
that will last from one year to seven, and some others of greater value that
may wear twenty Years, not only to the detriment of our Manufactures in
general, but more particularly to the Narrow Weavers; for it is supposed, that
less then one hundred of Buckle-Makers will supply more people, than fifty or
sixty thousand narrow Weavers, in Tape, Cotton, Ferret, and Silk Ribband, which
Trade of late have been forced to seek their Fortunes in other Countries, to
the damage and dishonor of the English Nation.

The like may be considered of the invention of Paper Hangings, which are but
of small value, endure long, and employ but a few people: Nevertheless they
will last almost as long as our common Woollen Hangings, provided the Walls are
lined with Slit-Deal, or Mat, Chair high; which does likewise lessen the number
of our People, and the Consumption of our Woollen Manufactures.

Moreover, though Navigation be one of the greatest Pillars of Trade, and
brings the greatest advantage to the Nation, nevertheless the Consumption of
our own Manufactures and Employment of many hands are considerable additional
advantages; for, suppose ten Shoe-makers could make as many Shoes in a Week as
a hundred do now, and those too wear five times as long, what then must become
of the rest of the Workmen? must they not seek their Fortunes in other
Countries? the like may be said of all other Trades: does not the strength of
this Nation consist in Traders, Artificers, and Tradesmen, they being most
Tractable and Ingenious, both in Peace and War. It is the working People and
Tradesmen that pays the King his Tax for Ale and Beer, and not so much the
Countrymen nor Shepherd; no, it is the former that more abundantly consumes the
Sugar, Spices, Spanish Fruits, Tobacco, and Wines too, and do thereby advance
the Consumption of our own Provisions and Fruits, many of which would be of
little value, if it were not for the forementioned Commodities, mixed with
Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Gooseberrys, Currants, and none of which would be made
Food, and so be advantageous to us, if they were not mixed with such Sweets,
which do likewise occasion the Consumption of Flower: and it is most clear that
the Consumption of their Commodities, have of late Years mightily encouraged
Importation and Exportation: so that if our expenses at home be lessened for
want of a free Circulation of Trade amongst the people, our Plantation Trade
will suffer as well as others; for the French, Dutch, Portuguise, etc. who have
all of them Plantations in the West Indies, and as theirs do rise, ours
consequently declines, and will continue declining unless they have some
special Encouragement and Assistance, and that because the French King does as
much bend his inclinations and strength to the advancement of Trade and
Navigation, especially his Plantations, greatly encouraging them by laying on
small Duties on their several productions, as Sugar, etc. and lending his Care
also to all such Projections and Proposals that his Subjects do offer for the
advancement of Trade, and the Manufactures of his Kingdom; and if they have a
fair prospect of advantage, he is then willing to bear some of the Losses and
Charges that may happen to the same Project, for the first two or three Years;
he does likewise mightily endeavor to advance the profitable Trade of the
Fishery and sundry Manufactures, which are advanced since the Peace about
twenty per Cent. which is a great Encouragement to them.

The Portuguise likewise, of late being advanced in Trade and Navigation, and
having one of the best and largest Settlements for Sugar, viz. Brasil, etc.
will be thereby encouraged to make greater Quantities of that Commodity than
formerly, which together with the forementioned French Settlements will supply
most of the Markets of Europe, which hitherto the English have done.

Whereas, on the other hand, our own Sugar Plantations must decline, especially
that of Barbados, the Land being weakened and almost worn out by often
Planting, which perhaps in its youthful days was the most Fertil'st Spot of
all America, and twenty or thirty years ago was so strong and fertile, that
from once Planting their Sugar, Canes would from the same root bear
considerable crops seven years together before they need^d to be Planted again,
and had no occasion to be d^^ged all that time: but they now are forced to new
Plant and Dung them every Year, and have treble the Labor and Hands to keep
them from Weeds; so that formerly one hundred Negroes and one Sugar Windmill
would clear the Planter more Money then three hundred Negroes and two or three
Wind-mills will do now: so that every hundred weight of Sugar stands the maker
thereof in more than double what it did then, and yet does not yield him half
the Price.

The West- India Settlements, for these Thirty or Forty Years last past, have
been the brightest Gem in our Crown of Trade, by employing great numbers of
Ships, and making the best of Seamen; for within these twenty Years the Island
of Barbados alone did load yearly near four hundred sail of Ships, so that no
Trade has advanced Navigation like those Settlements: but now the charge of
making Sugar is so great, and the price so low, that this, together with the
high Duties lately laid on their Commodities, will force them to make but a
third or half the Quantity of Sugar, and oblige them to apply themselves to
raise Provisions to support their Families with their own Product* which have
hitherto been furnished from England, Ireland, and the Settlements upon the
Main; for within these twenty Years we did lade from England more than one
hundred and fifty Sail of Ships, with Bread, Butter, Cheese, Beer, Flesh, and
other Eatables, besides all sorts of Merchandises, and now we do not load
three: therefore it will needs be for the interest of England to lighten their
Burden, viz* the great Customs under which it is impossible for the Plantations
to stand, for that which formerly raised and advanced the Planters, was the
making of much Sugar, but that does now ruin and undo them, the Charge being
much more than the Interest; to which if there be not proper remedies applied,
it will cut off one of the Noblest Branches of Navigation.

Consider in the next place, as to our Trade with France, many are of various
Opinions concerning it, the differing Notions whereof I will not here undertake
to reconcile; but upon the whole we have good reason to affirm that it has
always proved very profitable to this Nation, as all other Trades, wherein
great numbers of our own Ships are employed as Carriers, which was the original
advancement of Navigation.

Some will perhaps object and say, that the French Trade is of no great
Importance to England, because of their exhausting from us great sums of Money.

To this I answer, that our Navigation may be lessened, and they may from
necessity, which is the Mother of Invention, be further setting up of
Manufactures to the lessening of ours: besides, they have taken considerably of
our Product, which we shall be deprived of by not trading with them; for it is
observed that great Numbers of Artificers have shifted their Habitations, and
transported themselves to seek their Fortunes in unknown Countries, and many of
them leaving their miserable Wives and Children to the Parish, and most of them
have done so for want of such encouragement as they had formerly, and this has
been partly occasioned, not so much from great numbers of Strangers that of
late years have pressed in upon us, whose Education and miserable low way of
living in comparision of ours, which have rendered them capable to Live and
Work at lower rates than the English, most of them being Lodgers, Inmates, and
sheltered under a few Housekeepers, and a House that contains four, six or
eight Rooms does for the most part entertain near as many Families, as is usual
in their own Countries, which does likewise hide and defend them from paying
Taxes either to the Parish or Government: I say not so much on this account, as
from great declension of their several employments.

In the next place, our Trade is likewise prejudiced, by another sort of
Strangers of more value, most of which are single Men, as Factors, Gentlemen,
and others, that are also Lodgers and Inmates, many of them live here from
Seven to Twenty Years, employing some of our Eminent Tradesmen, as Packers,
etc. who are paid but little better than Journeymen to Buy and Collect their
Merchandises in Gross, and at first hand, whereby they obstruct and hinder the
lively-hoods of many of our Tradesmen, whose hands they would otherwise have
passed through before they came to the Exporter, as in former-times was usual:
And when these Factors have by their frugal living and Monopolizing methods
obtained great Estates, they then remit them into their own Countries, and bid
farewell to England, wherein they have so much advanced themselves, and have
lived so free and easy from all Duties and Impositions, being not only excused
from any Office or Charge of the Parish, but also to the King and Government,
when at the same time our own poor Tradesmen that are Housekeepers, and who
have but a mean way of geting a Livelihood, are overwhelmed and oppressed with
Taxes and Offices, when these Strangers get the Money and bear none of the
Burdens, there being many thousands of those people, for which there is no
President in any other Nation: for these encroachments are like Sheep fed upon
the Cottshold-hills, and black Cattle on the Welsh Mountains, which when they
come into the Valleys or better Pastures, will Improve and grow Fat, whereas
such as are bred upon the same spot or Pasturage, can hardly live: These are
some of those Moths that spoil us in our Trade. Another Consideration, is that
we have lost very much of our Navigation, which appears from the unheard of
losses Merchants have met with during the late War, there having been many
brave Estates sunk, and others rendered weak and feeble.

The inland Traders have this advantage of the former, (viz.) to spend what
they have formerly got, for want of a free and generous circulation of Trade,
which occasions many eminent Tradesmen of all sorts, and such as were good
Housekeepers to shift and hide themselves in Lodgings, and to follow the
fashions of our neighboring Nations, which does and will prove very
prejudicial, not only to the Employments of many People, but to all such as
have their Estates in Houses, there being many hundreds in and about London,
that do not pay the King's Tax; and other Casualties that happen, which do not
only mightily lessen the Consumption of our own Growth, but more especially
that of all Foreign Commodities, and such as come from our own Plantations
also, as Sugar, Tobacco, etc. Likewise Wine, Spice, Spanish fruit, and a
hundred other things, for of late and at this time those Commodities are very
low in Price, notwithstanding the Merchants have not above a third or fourth of
the quantities at Market as there used to be in peaceable times, but especially
of some sorts of them, the principal occasion of this lowness and dead trading
is, we do not consume half the quantities we did formerly, neither do we Export
so much, for our neighboring Nations do and will furnish themselves from their
own Settlements or Plantations and other parts which is another considerable
wound to Navigation.

Now, though some of the forementioned Imported Commodities are consumed by some,
makes some of the unthinking sort to suppose, that there is as much spent as
ever, yet the Dealers in those Commodities will inform us otherwise, and to
their great loss; for the grand Consumption of those things, do chiefly depend
on the middle or common people, viz. the Tradesmen, who are numerous, and as
the Proverb has it, Many hands make light work, for every Tradesman is under a
kind of necessity to spend in proportion to his Trade and Gain: as for Example,
in several out parts of London, there were within the compass of two or three
small Streets, Lanes, and Allies, two or three thousand working Tradesmen, and
such as belonged to them, some of which Trades did get about twelve hundred
pound per Week, when they had full Employment, and most of this momey was spent
every Week in the Neighborhood in strong-Drink, several sorts of Flesh, Bread,
Butter, Cheese, Sugar, Spice, Spanish Fruit, and in Clothing, which caused a
quick Circulation in all Business.

But now the Numbers of Laborers is not only lessened, but those that are, do
work for less Wages, and have not work enough neither, which does likewise
occasion the Rents of all Houses, etc, to fall, and in a little time those
things will have an influence upon Land; for Tradesmen did not use to matter
whether they gave from Twenty to Fifty or Sixty pound for a House, provided
that their Trade was good, but are not able to give such Rents now.

The like is to be understood in all Expenses and Taxes to the King, therefore
the promotion of Navigation and a free Trade, gives life to the Trading People,
more especially if the Customs and Imports be made easy, for great Weights and
Burdens laid on any particular Member, will not only discourage it, but must
cause it to sink and perish; besides, Merchants are, as is said before, the
Engines of the whole Nation, and if encouraged, have an innate power to set all
hands at work, and to advance all the Manufactures and Productions of the
Nation, and render the whole capable not only to live well, and spend Money
liberally, but to pay Taxes as freely.

Now great Taxes cannot, as is mentioned before, be born by any particular part
of the people without endangering their ruin, more especially the Importers and
Exporters, because they are the Highways and principal Gates that all Commerce
must pass through, which, if in any degree be stopped or obstructed, the whole
must suffer in proportion; besides, such Taxes and Impositions as are laid
unequally on the people have hardly ever answered hitherto, neither is it
reasonable to think, that they will for the future.

And indeed, it seems to be a general opinion, that a small gentle Tax laid on
the Mouth and Back, would answer and supply the Nations present occasions, and
raise such sums as their necessities call's for, without any manifest Burden
or Injury to them, for the Belly will not be cheated, besides, then there would
be many Millions of people more to pay that which now lies on less than one
Million, by this, you bring in considerable numbers of Strangers, Young People,
and Lodgers, such as we before treated of, who have hitherto shifted their
necks out of the Collar, many of them being Eminent and better able to pay
Taxes, than some Housekeepers, both of our own Nation and others: This way
would hurt neither rich nor poor, provided that Navigation and a free
Circulation of Trade be maintained, and Merchants in couraged; for the sums of
Money that are now wanted, and that must be raised to make good the deficiency
of former Funds, and for the present supply of the King, will be much more
difficult to be advanced than ever, for as Trading sinks, so in proportion all
things fall into a Consumptive State, and therefore Taxes will rarely answer,
because the Commodities they are laid on, are not spent and consumed as
formerly, great part of the people being forced by pure necessity to retrench
their expenses in all Luxurious Commodities, of which no more then is consumed
in England, are of value to the King, for those that are Exported, pays next to
nothing, most of the Customs being drawn back.

So that it is clear and manifest beyond Contradiction, the want of Trading
makes the generallity of the people grow poor, of which our Experience has
made us too sensible already, so that not only the Consumption of the
forementioned Commodities, but likewise of our Manufactures too, will be
lessened.

It may be some will object, That the English Nation have never been used to
have their Food and Clothing Taxed, so that it will be a hard Morsel to
swallow: I answer hereunto that before now, we never had occasion for such
great sums of Money, and therefore, as the sums are great and strange, the
Methods of raising them, must be as universal, and it will be well if the
Nation can do it either by this or any other equal way or Method.

Now it is further to be noted that the principal cause and reason, why we have
suffered such great Shipwracks of late in our Trade has been from the War, so
that our neutral Neighbors have had opportunity to increase their number of
Ships and Seamen, which by their considerable gain, have wounded us to the very
heart, in the next place our Merchants and Traders, are of as various Opinions
and Notions in Trade, both those that Trade abroad and such as Trade at home,
and for the most part so many Trades as there are, so many Notions and Opinions
they are of, in those Trades they have been bred up, so that if Traders do not
know nor essentially understand and have not true universal Principles and
Notions, but disagree among themselves.

But it is not to be doubted, that if the Exporters and all inland Traders, and
dependers or Craftsmen, did agree in true universal Notions and Methods of
Trade, then our Country Gentlemen must be convinced and made sensible, that it
would be their principal interests to propagate and advance Trade, which
hitherto has made this Nation richer than any of our Neighboring Countries, and
has more than trebled in value every Acre of Land in England, within the
compass of one hundred years, for about that time Trading and Merchandise did
take its birth, we having very little before, for in King Henry VIII.'s Reign
the Customs were not much more then Ten thousand pound Per Annum, by which any
person may easily Judge of Trade then and now, and all Land Manufactures, bore
then a proportionable low value; but it is to be noted, that our great and as
it were unheard of Trade, has advanced within the compass of Fifty years, when
it came on with a rapid motion, which was chiefly occasioned by the Wars and
continual devestations, our Neighboring Nations made one upon another, and if
any of them had Peace Seven or Ten years, then new Wars were waged again, so
that by their Misery and Poverty, England had the opportunity to invest
themselves in the whole Trade of Europe, and about the same time the
West Indies was settled to the very great profit and advancement of Navigation,
which has now seen its best days and if the present Impositions lately laid on
their Commodities, be not eased, many brave Plantations must of necessity sink
and come to nothing, or at least yield no profit nor advantage to England, and
will as it were cut of one of the principalest Branches of Navigation, as has
been already said: for it is the great quantities of Bulksom Commodities, that
multiplies Ships and Men, and that pays the King most Customs, viz. Sugar,
Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, Wine, and the like, which Commodities can never be in
any Quantity Imported nor consumed, but only in such Nations, as have a free
brisk Trade and easy Duties to the Importer, and where the Commonalty and
working people have great Wages, which renders them able to Drink and Eat them;
for that is the Mouth or Carrier that vends the most part of such things.

For this cause the Tradesmen and other common people of England have spent and
consumed greater quantities of such things than half Europe; the Tradesmen and
poor of other Nations hardly knowing their names, and much less their natures.

Now many do allege, that it is the Exportation of several Commodities that we
bring for Returns from Foreign parts, that affords the most benefit to this
Nation, which I agree to, yet nevertheless there are many eminent Commodities,
which are Imported and pays the King considerable Duties which must be spent in
England, viz. Spanish Fruit, as Raisins of several sorts, Figs, Pruens,
Currants, Dates, Almonds, Rice, Spice, Silks, Wines of all sorts, etc. the
Consumption whereof, since the dead Trading and high Taxes, have been
contracted into a narrow Circle, and must be yet more if Merchants, Traders,
and Tradesmen, do not meet with more encouragement than they have lately, or
than they have a present prospect of; so that it is most clear that the
Consumption of such things at home is as profitable to the Nation, as those
that are Exported again: for if we can neither consume them at home nor Export
them abroad, how should our Neighbors be able to pay for our Manufactures, for
which we have those Commodities in Exchange; Some perhaps will object, and say
we may have money, which cannot be: but suppose such a thing could be effected,
what then would become of our Navigation, for a few Ships would carry our own
Manufactures and bring in Money, and what support would this be to the
Government, for then all the Customs would not pay the King's Officers their
Salleries, more especially since our Markets are not so encouraging as
formerly; and hence it is that the Revenues of the Crown do decrease,
occasioned by the general retrenching of expenses.

I shall further add, That the additional duties and high imposts laid on
Merchandises, do either discourage the Trader, or oceasion less quantities to
be Imported, making such things dear to the Subject, and thereby the
Consumption is abated, because the people cannot reach to buy them, which as
has been said already, will ruin our Plantations in the West Indies.

The like is to be understood of great excises on several Commodities at home,
which does so advance them, that thereby the common people consumes but a third
or half the quanties they did when they were cheap: besides high duties on some
Commodities, do as it were put a full stop to them, so that they pay the King
little or no duty nor Custom, for if the imposts be greater than the interest,
it does as it were at once cut off all public commerse and puts people on
contriving indirect Methods and Ways how they may run such things, by which
means the King is deprived of his Customs and the universal use of the thing is
lost, and what is spent is made dear, so that people cannot obtain it, and
there is no Man of sense but must acknowledge, that it is the Circulation of
Trade amongst the inferior Artificers and Tradesmen, on whom the chief and
principal Consumption of our own Manufactures, and more particularly of
Imported Commodities, such as Sugar, Spices, Spanish Fruit, all sorts of Wines,
and the like, depends, and it is clear that if our Trade both at home and
abroad, had been in such a Consumptive state Twenty or Thirty years ago as it
is now, then this City would never have been built, nor so many Noble Houses
and Structures Erected, as there has been in and about London, which are as so
many Monuments of our former Riches and great Trade.

It has been also observed, that in England, after Wars and Devastations, we
used to have a considerable increase of Trade, and this being within the memory
of most Traders, the people on the late Peace did expect to see the same, but
they now find altogether the contrary, and instead of an increase, most Trades
have been much worse than before, and as to our Merchants, what was taken
before and destroyed by our Enemies in the War, has been as it were cast away
on Shore, by the small vend and low prices. So Melancholy at present are the
Circumstances of Traders and Merchants of all degrees.

Therefore it would be highly necessary that there should be a Commit
composed of two or three of the most prudent of each Trade who have, during the
late War, been Traders, and continue to be at this time, and whose Estates and
Stocks are now employed that way, for such are most sensible of the late Wounds
our Trade has received, and can best advise Methods how they may be healed
again; so that it were better such a Committee do not consist of those whose
Education and manner of Life has tended another way; nor yet of old Merchants,
who for a considerable time have withdrawn their Stocks from Trade: for, though
these may be Men of sufficient Parts and Integrity, yet now, all the
Circumstances of Trading seem to be new; and therefore the Management and
Methods that were formerly proper, before we had so many Rivals, cannot be
supposed to be serviceable at present.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in Little-Britain.
1. A Complete History of Europe, or, a View of the Affairs thereof, Civil and
Military: From the Beginning of the Treaty of Nimeguen, 1676. to the conclusion
of the Peace at Reswick, 1697, Including the Articles of the former, and the
several Infringements of them; The Turkish Wars; The forming of the Grand
Confederacy; The Revolution in England, etc. With a Particular Account of all
the Actions by Sea and Land on both sides; and the Secret Steps that have been
made toward a Peace, both before, as well as during the last Negotiation.
Wherein are the several TREATIES. The whole intermixed with diverse Original
Letters, Papers, and Memoirs, never before published. Written by a Gentleman,
who kept an exact Journal of all Transactions for above these 20 Years: Price.
2. The Secret History of White Hall, from the Restoration of K. Charles II,
down to the Abdication of the lato K. James. Writ at the Request of a Noble
Lord, and conveyed to him in Letters by -- late Secretary Interpreter to the
Marquess of Louvois, who by that means had the perusal of all the Private
minutes been England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of Secret
Memoirs, which have hitherto lain concealed, as not being discoverable by any
other hand. Publish^d from the Original Papers. By D. Jones, Gent. Price 5 s.
3. A Continuation of the Secret History of White Hall, from the Abdication of
the late King James, in 1688. to the Year 1697. Together with the Tragical
History of the Stuarts, from the first Rife of that Family, in the Year of
1068, down to the death of her late Majesty Queen Mary of Blessed Memory. By D.
Jones, Gent. Price 5 s. 4. God's Judgment against Whoring. Being an Essay
toward A General History of it, from the Creation of the World, to the Reign
of Augustulus, (which, according to common Computation, is 5190 Years) and from
thence down to the present Year 1697. Being a Collection of the most Remarkable
Instances of Uncleanness, that are to be found in Sacred or Profane History
during that time. With Observations thereon. Price 3 s. 6 d. 5. Concubinage and
Poligamy disproved: Or, the Divine Institution of Marriage betwixt one Man and
one Woman only, asserted. In answer to a Book, writ by John Bulter, B. D.
called his Case, lately presented by the Grand Jury of London; wherein he
mentions, it is Lawful to keep a Concubine, etc. Price 1 s. 6. The Political
mischiefs of Popery: Or, Arguments demonstrating. (1.) That the Romish Religion
Ruins all those Countries wheae it is established. (2.) That it occasions the
loss of above 200 Millions of Livres, or 16 Millions Sterlin per Annum to
France in particular. (3.) That if Popery were abolished in France, that
Kingdom would become incomparably more Rich and Populous; and the King's
Revenues would advance above 600 Millions of Livres per Annum. (4.) That it is
impossible that France should ever be Reestablish'd, while Popery is their
National Religion. By a Person of Quality, a native of France; Author of they
Desolation of France demonstrated; Dedicated to the Honorable House of
Commons. Price 1 s. 6 d.
ERATA.
PAge 3. L. 16. for sing, read using, p. 8. l. last, for two pence, r. twelve
pence, p. 15. l. 22. for Encroachments, Incroachers, p. 25. l. 29. for what was
taken, r. what (...)


