THE Good House-wife MADE A Doctor, Or, Health's Choice and (...) Friend Being
a Plain Way of Nature's own prescribing, to Prevent and Cure Most Diseases
incident to Men, Women and Children, by Diet and Kitchin-Physick only.

With some Remarks on the Practice of Physic and Chemistry.

By Thomas Tryon, Student in Physic; And Author of The Way to Health, Long
Life and Happiness. Country-mans Companion. The New Art of Brewing, etc.

The Second Edition. To which is added some Observations on the Tedious Methods
of Unskilful Chyrurgions; with Cheep and Easy Remedies. By the same Author.

London, Printed for H. N. and T. S. And are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1692.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HEalth is the greatest temporal Blessing we can enjoy in this Mortal state:
Without it the choicest Beauty vanishes in a Moment, like a withered Flower;
the stoutest Strength dwindles into a childish Weakness, scarce able to support
the tottering Carcass; Riches become insignificant Lumber; Honor an empty
Bubble, or extrinsick Shadow, yielding no delight; Nay Wit and Parts grow
Useless, and Life it self but an unwelcome load and continual Torture. For how
often may we see Lords and Aldermen, the Rich and the Great, swelled with
Dropsies, or wasted with Consumptions, or racked with the Stone, or laid up
with the Gout, or crippled with Sciatica's, and the like, heartily envying
those Jolley Swains, who feed only* with Bread and Cheese, and trotting up to
the Knees in Dirt, do yet with lusty Limbs, and vigorous Stomachs, and merry
Hearts, and undisturbed Heads, whistle out more sollid Joys than the others,
with all their Wealth and State can purchase.

So that it is undeniably one of the most important Businesses of this Life, to
preserve our selves in Health. And this all People, when they are actually
groaning under the smart of Sickness, will readily acknowledge. Oh! then they
would give all they have in the World for Ease and Remedy, though it be but an
Ague, or a fit of the Toothache! but as soon as the Pain is over, and whilst
Nature is yet pretty sturdy, and as long as ever she can bear up, they care not
how they use her, and seem to value this precious Jewel [Health] no more than
the silly Indians of old did their Wealth, when they contentedly parted with
Gold and Pearl, for Toys, and Baubles, and Knives, and Beaugles, and
Looking-Glasses. Most men will moil and toil like Horses, and rise early and
lie down late, and eat the Bread of Carefulness, to get Money and Land, though
they neither make good use thereof themselves whilst they live, nor know who
shall enjoy it after they are dead* And how diligent are others by fawning and
flattering, and courting those whom in their hearts they hate and scorn, and by
servile Offices and irksome Attendances, and a thousand other pitiful Arts, to
acquire a Rattle to their Name, and get a Title of Honor, or some Place of
Preferment that may give them an opportunity* to domineer over their Inferiors,
but there is scarce one Man or Woman of a thousand that does in earnest
consider and pursue the means of preserving their Health, but either lives at
Random, or at least takes up with the pernicious Notions of Custom, Tradition
and Blind Guides, whose Prescriptions of Diet are most improper and
prejudicial, their Medicines Nauseates to Nature, and their Physic a close
Confederate with the inva^ing Disease.

Nay, so prodigal are the generality of this in^steeamble Blessing, that they
use it not only with Neglect, but Contempt, as if they exposed it to sale by
I^ch of Candle, and he that bid least should have it. Rather than ^ot gratify
a liquorish Palate, the Stomach shall be overcharged; and rather than break up
a foolish lewd Company, or refuse to comply with a wicked Drunken Custom, the
Brain shall be set a-float, and Reason turned a-drift, and Nature exposed to a
general Inundation of violent strong Liquor, and left to shift for her self,
without either Pilot or Rudder. I am confident most People are more careful to
provide wholesome proper Food for their Cattle, and Gentle^en are more curious in
ordering and dieting their Race-Horses (though therein too they are generally
mistaken, as I have demonstrated in a little Treat^se, entitled, The
Country-man's Companion) than in the Food which they take themselves, or about
the course of their own Eating, Drinking and Exercises, whereon not only their
own Health and Lives, but the strength and vigor of their Posterity, does in
so great a measure depend.

The Meats and Drinks commonly used are for the most part improper, and
detrimental in their Nature and Composition, more in their unskilful ways of
Preparation, and most of all by the Heterogenious Mixtures, and excessive
Quantities. And this more especially to those that are already sick and
languishing. Having therefore in this small Treatise resolved to detect those
Errors in all three respects, and the Reasons thereof: And on the other si^e,
to show the true Method of Diet fit for the Prevention or Cure of most
Diseases, intermixing therewith several most useful and necessary Remarques
touching the Nature, and right ways of preparing of diverse sorts of the most
beneficial Foods, I shall begin with those that best serve for the Assisting
and Restoring of decayed Nature, because I have therein observed both the most
common and the most dangerous and irretreivable Errors to be committed; as also
because from what we shall deliver on that subject, every one that has the Wit
to know by a Penny how a Shilling is coined, may learn what Diet is proper to
b^ used both for the Preventing and Curing of most other Distempers. For
Nature, like Truth, is always entire, uniform and agreeable to its self, so
that whoeve^ has the right Key, may therewith unlock her whole Cabinet; whereas
the blind Paths of Tradition, Ignorance, Custo^ and Error, are not only various
and interferring, but many times opposite and contradictory to each other.

The Contents.
Chap. I. OF the several Causes of Consumptions, page 1, 2, 3, 4. The absurd
Course of Diet usually oraer^d in those cases, p. 5, 6, 7. And the proper
Remedies for prevention and Cure of those decays of Nature, p. 8, 9. Other
preposterous Courses prescribed by learned Doctors, Chemists, etc. for Cure of
Consumptions, p. 20, 21, 22. Chap. II. The Nature of Milk, and the best ways of
preparing and Cooking it, p. 25. How Milk ought to be eaten entire, p. 26, 27.
An Excellent way of prep^ring Milk with Wheat Flour, p. 28. Another way of
preparing Milk with Water, Oatmeal and Eggs, p. 29, 30. Of Furmety, p. 33. Of
Boniclapper, its nature and operation, p. 34. Chap. III. Of Water Gruel, p. 39,
40. What it is that causes Butter made in Winter to have a bitter Taste, p. 42,
43. Another excellent healthy Food for all sorts of People, p. 45, 46. Chap.
IV. Of Flesh Broths, p. 49. Chap. V. Of F^umery. p. 56. Chap. VI. Of the
sev^^al sorts of Bread, and which is best, especially for sickly People, p. 61.
Chap. VII. Of Butter, its Nature, and how best to be eaten, p. 68. Chap. VIII.
Of Cheese, p. 71. Chap. IX. Of the best sort of Puddens, and the contrary, p.
74. Chap. X. Of Eggs, their Nature, and the best way of dressing and eating
them, p. 80. Chap. XI. Of Pyes, etc. p. 83. Chap. XII. Of Rai^ins of the Sun,
p. 93. Chap. XIII. Of Currants, p. 96. Chap. XIV. Of Spices, viz. Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger, Pomento, etc. their Nature and Operation, p. 101.
Chap. XV. Of Oil, and its Nature, p. 115. Chap. XVI. Of Honey, its Nature and
Operation, with some Notes on the Practice of Chemistry, p. 118. Chap. XVII. Of
Sugar Sugar Candy and Pan-Sugar, their Nature and Operation, p. 137. To prevent
and Cure Colds certainly, p. 148. Chap. XVIII. Of the four principal Tastes, or
the Bitter, the Saltish, the Sour, and the Sweet Qualities, and their
respective Natures, p. 157. Chap. XIX. Of Drinks, and first of Canary, p. 170.
Chap. XX. Of Sherry, p. 179. Chap. XXI. Of White Wind, p. 180. Chap. XXII. Of
Rhe^is^-Wine, p. 185. Chap. XXIII. Of Claret, p. 188. Chap. XXIV. Of Cider, its
Nature and Operation; and several new ways prescribed how (...) make good
Syder, p. 195. Chap. XXV. Of Mum, its Nature, p. 205. Chap. XXVI. Of Coffee, p.
207. Chap. XXVII. Of Tea, p. 215. Chap. XXVIII. Of Herbs and Sallads, both
boiled and raw, p. 217. What Herbs may properly be mixed in a Salad, as also
how to season and eat them to best advantage, p. 219. Sallads for the Winter,
p. 223. Of the most proper times for eating of Sallads, p. 225* ^ow to supply
the want of Oil in Sallads where Persons do not love it, or cannot have it, p.
227. Chap XXIX. The best way to make Herb-Pottage, not only in the Spring, but
also at all times of the year, p. 229. Chap. XXX. The best way to make
Diet-Drink with Herbs, Grains, Seeds, etc. or the proper methods of Infusion of
Herbs in Beer, Ale, or other Drinks, p. 235. Chap. XXXI. Of Salt, its Nature
and Vperation, p. 241: Chap. XXXII. Of the Scurvey, and its Generation, p. 253.
Rules and Derections to prevent the Scurvey, p. 260. An Excellent Poul^^^^
which cures Burns, Scalded Limbs, Boyls, Fellons, Tumors, etc. p. 271. Another,
etc. ibid* Another, etc. p. 272. Another, etc. ibid. Another, etc. ibid.
Another, etc. ibid. Observations on the tedious ^ethods of unskilful
Chyrurgions, etc. p. 274. The Conclusion.
EVERY Good House-wife MADE A Doctor, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the several Causes of Consumptions: The absurd course of Diet usually
ordered in those c^ses. Together with the proper Re^^dies for Prevention and
Cure thereof.
OF all Diseases, Cons^mptions, and the like wasting Dist^mp^rs, are those
which hitherto ^ave been most attempted to be cured by Diet, but after such an
u^natural and preposterous Method, that those very Rich and chargeable Foods
which generally are by the learned prescribed in such cases, are apt, instead
of bringing Relief, to increase the Disease, more impare the Powers of Nature,
and hasten on Death, rather than a Cure: This, I doubt not, will appear to
every considerate Reader, from the following Discourse, wherein I shall first
give an account of the common Causes (or occasions) of those Diseases, and in
the next place inform my Country People of the proper Remedies for the same, by
Foods fitly prepared and adapted for the supply and assistance of Nature in all
such Languishments; withal, showing how improper and mischievous those things
are which be commonly used and prescribed for that purpose.

Those Diseases called Consumptions are Decays of the Radical Moisture or
Essential Oil, whereby the Natural Heat of the Stomach is so weakened that it
cannot make any perfect or due separation of the Meats and Drinks received,
from whence arises abundance of evil Juices and Phlegm, so that no good
Nourishment is bred, though the Food be never so Rich, and the Drinks never so
Cordial, as most that are afflicted in this kind, may find by Experience.

But though this be the general Nature of these Diseases, yet they proceed from
various Causes and Intemperances; As,

1. In some Complexions, from overcharging of Nature with Rich Food, and too
great Quantities; or in others, by much drinking of Wine, Brandy and
Strong-Drinks, which weaken the Natural Heat, and wash (as it were) Nature away
by destroying the action of the Stomach.

2. In others, these general Decay^ and Weaknesses are caused by a Sedentary
and Idle course of Life, for want of proper Labor and Exercises, overwarm
Clothings, soft F^ather-Beds and excessive Lying in Bed, which always proves
pernicious to the Health both of Body and Mind.

3. There are others that contract these consuming Diseases by their too much
Dalliance, and frequenting the Shades of Venus, and that not only by eating and
drinking such things as irritate and provoke Nature, but also by their
heightened Lusts and depraved Imaginations, force her beyond her Power and
Ability, who often times corrupts her in her very Radi^: Many are caught in this
Snare, as well Young-Marriea People, as the more Lewd and Lascivious, which
prostitute themselves to common Mixtures; and many of these (...) Incureable.

4. Others fall into these Diseases by Surfeits of O^er-lab^ur, exc^ssive Heats
or Colds, and the like Accidents.

5. Some by great Fevers and long Fits of Sickness, which frequently leave
behind them such Seeds of Diseases as are not without great difficulty overcome
or rooted out.

6. To some they happen through Grief or Trouble of Mind, a Melancholy
Disposition, (one of the worst Companions of Life) violent Passions, as of
Love, Hatred and Envy, or a Disp^ir of Gods Divine All-sufficient and always
Liberal and Indulgent Hand of Providence; and these by pining and fretting,
waste their Spirits, and thence the Natural Heat being weakened, is unable to
generate a new Supply; and so having first disordered their Minds, the Body is
destroyed by Concomitancy^* for these two mutually operate upon, and enfluence
each other, and you can hardly preserve either of them in its due state, unless
you take care of both.

Lastly, In not a few a Consumptive Constitution is Hered^tary, and derived
from one or both their Parents; and Th^^ of all other is the most hard to
Remedy.

Now let us see what are the Common Methods whereby not only the Vulgar, but
also the Learned many times, do think to help these Decays, and what are the
usual things prescribed for the sick Party in this case, to restore him to
Health and Strength? And that is, when any one is in such a weak languishing
state of Body, every one, Doctor, Apothecary, Nurse and all, cry out, You must
take Nourishing Meats and Drinks, sup goo^ Sack, Old Malago, Tent, or the like,
with Yolks of Eggs in i^; and get you good Rich Broths, and Jellies, and
Pottages made of Knucles of Veal, and the Flesh of an old Cock beat, and
bruised, and battered, and boiled all to pieces; for you must boil your Flesh
till it fall off the Bones, that all the goodness and virtue may diffuse it
self into the Broth; and be sure you boil it in but little Water, that it may
be the Heartier; and keep your Vessel or Pot close covered, that the Virtue may
not evaporate, but your Broth may be thick, and good, and strong; for you want
Strength (poor Creature!) and Nourishment, and this will cherish you bravely;
together with a Rich Cordial of Alchermes that I Will send you: But forget not to
keep your self warm with a Flannel Shirt, and a Wastcoat, Doublet, Coat and
Campaign, a Gown over all lined, and a quilted Stomacher for your Breast; and
have a care of Cold a Nights, but bathe your tender Nerves in a Down or soft
Feather-Bed, and get a quilted Cap and a Napkin over it for your Head, and draw
your Curtains before your Windows and round your Bed, and there lie as long as
you can; so Sleep is a great Refresher and Nourisher: And against you rise let
there be a Rouzing Fire in your Chamber, and a Quart of New-Milk boiled above
half away, with Snails in it, and well sweetened with Sugar, and then three or
four hours after take a Mess, as much as you can get down, of the aforesaid
Cock or Jelly-Broth, with good Spice in it; and after that you may eat a good
Chicken, or some other nourishing Flesh tenderly boiled; and when you have
done, take a good piece of fat toasted Cheese for Concoction, and wash all down
with three or four Glasses of Racy Canary or stout Old Malago, wherein there is
stee^ed a Quantity of Raisons of the Son stoned, and a lettle Saffron to cheer
the Heart; but if you do not so well like Snails, then take only Milk hot from
the Cow, or Strokings, and swee^ten it with Sugar or Sugar of Roses. And be
sure continue this course constantly, and though you are now weak as Water and
have no more Spirits than a Dish^^ clout, you shall shortly be as strong as
Sampson, and as lusty as Hercules, who (they say) got fifty Children in one
Night. -- Probatum est.

This is the sum and substance of many a learned Lerry, and passes with the
Crowd for most Orthodox Doctor Croft, though in truth the whole is altogether
Ignorant Tattle, contrary to Nature, Reason and Experience.

But lest I should seem (like those I oppose) to assert things without Proof or
Demonstration, I desire the Reader would with me, impartially consider the
unproperness and contrariety of these Prescriptions, to the end intended:
First, In their Nature and Composition; and Next, in respect of the undue
Prepara^i^ns.

1. When Nature languishes, and is already weak and decay^d then they cry, You
must tak N^urish^ng things; when ^tis probable most times* that the first
occasion of the Disease was (...) and up^rst^^ty in Meats and Drinks, that did
over charge Nature with two much Nou^ish^^^nt. But how^ver, (...) be what it
will, Nature is no^ we^k and indisposed, the (...) dulled, the Stomach^s
Natural (...) and digestive Faculty decayed, so that they cannot bear either
with great Quantity, nor Foods that are of a strong Quality which ought in the
first place to be considered; for Overcha^ging, either in Quantity or Quality,
is generally very prejudicial to those that are in Competent Health, but much
more to such as are Sick; This being a most certain Aphorism, That Nature ought
at all times to be stronger than the Food, and not the Food too strong for
Nature, as in these cases is general, but very absurdly practiced; for if there
be not a proportionable agreement between the Food and the Stomach, in vain do
you expect Relief, but rather thereby Nature is yet further oppressed, and her
whole Concord and Tranquillity disordered and destroyed. For whenever the
Natural Heat is weak and impotent, the Food ought to be suitable: And to do
otherwise, is just as if in very cold Weather, when your Fire is almost quite
out, and not above a Spark or two left upon the Hearth, you should cry out,
Throw (...) an huge ^imber-Log, or bring a B^sh^^ or two of larg^ round Coals,
for (...) is (...) best Fuel that can be to make (...) Fire; which is very
true; but yet, in this case, instead of increasing your Fire, it will, by its
weight and unsuitableness quite put it out; whereas if you had fed it at first
with a little Small-Cole, Shavings or Chips, you might have nursed it up into a
competent Flame, and then, and not before, it would be able to deal with your
Coals and your Timber, and turn them into Aliments for its self. The
Application is easy, Nothing does more hurt the Health than Disproportion, and
to heap together Superf^uity of Meats and Drinks, beyond the Power of the
Digestive Faculty, especially when they are made strong and fulsom by bad
Preparations; and this respect the usual Prescriptions to Consumptive Persons
are very much to be blamed. For,

2. Broths and Pottages made with any kind of Flesh, be it what it will, where
it is boiled in small Quantities of Water, and the Vessel or ^ot kept close
covered, and boiled so long till it becomes soft and a mere Mash, so that it
falls from the Bones; such Broths, I say, will become thick, and of a blackish
color, or a stron^ unpleasing scent or smell, and of a fulsom nauseating
taste, hard of Concoction, and apt to cloy the Stomach; for the much, or
over-boyling of any sort of Food (especially Flesh, which is of its own Nature
the grossest of all Food, and most subject to Putrefaction) does destroy all
the good Virtues, and so much the more speedily and certainly when it shall be
boiled in small Quantities of Water, and the Vessel kept covered; for thereby
the pure volatile Spirit is suffocated, and then presently the sweet Oil of
such Food turns strong and ^our for want of the egress and regress of the Air,
which is the true Life and Preserver of the essential Spirit, as the Spirit is
the Life and Preserver of the sweet Body in every thing, and in whatsoever the
Spirit suffers violence, the Balsa^ick Body and Oil is turned into a strong
fulsom substance as is manifested by all fermented Liquors, which if exposed to
the open Air, the Spirits will evaporate, and then the sweetness thereof turns
sower, and becomes of an heavy dull Nature and Operation. But in the
preparation o^ a^ gross phlegmy Bodies, especially Flesh, the Vessel being
open, and having good Water* with the free Influences of the Air, keeps the
Spirits living, till such Bodies be digested, and the Spirits set at liberty;
and then such thing is said to be enough, or rightly prepared: For if such
Preparations or Digestions be afterward continued, the spirituous parts and
brisk lively Tinctures become either suffocated or evaporated, let the thing be
of what Nature it will; as is manifest in all Preparations, especially in
making of Hay, for there, when once the gross phlegmatic Body of the Grass is
sufficiently digested or exhaled by the virtue and power of the Sun and
Elements, if the Hay be afterward continued open abroad, the Sun and Air would
quickly exhale and destroy the essential Virtues and good Properties also; the
very same is to be understood in the Preparation of all sorts of Food

Furthermore, if the Vessel in which your Food is prepared* be close covered
whilst it is boiling, such Food is thereby made yet worse; for then those ^^ery
sulphurous Fumes* and Vapors which are raised by the Fire, and would freely
pass away, as you see in a mighty continual Reek or Steem, if the Vessel were
uncovered, are stopped and forced back into the Meat, and being of a fiery sharp
Nature, and full of gross Humidity, by this Repr^cussion or Con^inement, they
become gradually more intense and raging, because of the want of the free
Influence of the Air, and so sinking down again upon the Meat, do wound the
pure volatile Spirits, and not only destroy the natural Color, Smell and
Taste, but also make the Food Lumpish, close, heavy, dull and gross on the
Palate, hard of Digestion in the Stomach, generating thick Blood and unwholsom
Nourishment; from whence proceed dull Indispositions, and noxious Fumes flying
up into the Head.

For all Cooks and H^usewives ought to note and understand, that the digestive
Faculty and true Virtue of all Food does consist in the pure spirituous parts,
and if any violence be offered or done unto them in the Preparation, ^hen such
Food becomes dull, and as it were half dead of Taste; for the Fumes or Vapors
which Pots and Vessel, surrounded with the heat of the Fire, do send forth, are
of a poisonous pernicious Nature, and contrary to the genuine heat of the Food;
as you may perceive, if you take up any sort of Food, when boiled, and
presently whilst it is hot, cover it close, which will force those fiery sharp
Fumes back, and cause them to re-enter the Food, which will thereby presently
become Palled, and lose its natural briskness of Taste, Smell and Color,
because the pure Spirits are suffocated, and so such Foods will not only be
heavy, and have a dull gross Taste and Smell, but shall be unpleasing both to
the Palate and Stomach, and harder of Concoction.

Therefore nothing is more unnatural than for People to eat or drink any kind
of Food, whilst those fiery Steams and Fumes are in it, especially such as are
weakly Consumptive People; for they Swell the Body, and generate Wind in
abundance, send Fumes and Vapors into the He^d, infect the ^hole Mass of Blood
with hot sharp Itching Scorbutic Humors: And indeed no sort of Food or Liquors
ought to be eaten or drank hotter than the Blood in cold Weather, but in hot
Seasons most sorts are best cold, which a little use will make very easy and
familiar to every one, let their Stomachs be never so much depraved by Custom,
as I have more at large demonstrated in my Way to Health, long Life and
Happiness, etc.

What has been said of thick strong over-prepared Pottag^s and Broths made of
Flesh, the very same ill effects have all or most Iellies; for by their
improper Mixtures and over preparing they became loathsome, and Nauseates to
Nature, even as sick as the languishing Patient that takes them: And the like
also may be understood of Snails and Milk boiled till it becomes of a Iellous
substance, and then lustily sweetened with Sugar or Sugar of Roses (which is ten
times worse than common Sugar) being burthensom to the sick Patients Palate
and Stomach, very heavy and hard of Concoction, and therefore the use thereof
does generally prove of evil Consequence; for undoubtedly if Hea^thy People
should confine themselves to such t^^ngs, they would in a little time bring
Disorders upon them, and how profitable they can be then to the sick and weak,
or rather how very destructive they must needs prove, may easily be judged.

But here some will say, Many have been known to recover by or after the eating
and drinking of such things. -- To which I Answer, That it can never be proved,
but is absurd to Reason, that they recovered By such things, but that some may
have recovered After them, may be true; for though I know them to be improper and
dangerous, yet I do not say they are Mortal to all that take them; and if an
hundred People be at one time sick of the same Disease, if they had neither
D^ctor's Advice nor Physic, there would (no doubt) many of them recover* but
amongst the Ignorant, when any one happens to escape they attribute the Glory
to the Doctor and his I^^scriptions, never considering the Divine Hand of the
Lord, nor the secret working Power of his Hand maid ^atu^e, but cry with open
Mouth Such or such a Doctor cured me, or e^se I had been i^ my (...); Or such a
Pottage or ^ehy is a rar^ thing, it cured me when all hopes of Life were past;
when in truth neither the Doctor's Prattle, nor the Nauseous Slip-slop
contributed any more to the Cure, than the Chattering of a Magpye, or the Roe
of a Red Herring.

But if the People will be cheated, let ^^em; only give me leave to whisper a
litter better Advice to the Sons and Daughters of Wisdom, who will be so
thankful to Truth, so obedient to Reason, and so kind to Themselves as to
hearken unto it; And that is thus, When any Person shall find him or her self
indisposed, their Stomachs to grow weak, with a general Disorder through the
whole Body, and a decay of Strength, then first of all they ought to look back
and consider what manner or course of Life they have drove, as to Temper^nce or
Int^mpe^ance in Meats or Drinks, and that both in respect of the Quantity and
Quali^y as also their Ex^rcises, and all other Extremes they have inured
themselves unto, which none can so well know, or be able to judge of as
themselves; and likewise ^o consider the Air he has lived in* where the
Disease was bred. And by this Reflection, if it be impartial, serious and
considerate, every man will be enabled to guess much more rightly at the Cause
and Nature of his Distemper, than any Docter can by the supposed Magic of the
Vrinal, Thumbing the uncertain Pulse, or any other of their Whimsical Oracles.

Having well considered the past Causes, that gave Birth to his present
Distemperature, he ought then (gradually) to Alt^r for the better the whole
course of his Life, not only in the Nature and Quality of Meats and Drinks, but
in their Quantity; as also his Exercises, and the Air, as far as the condition
of his Life will admit thereof. For if the same Intemperances, bad Airs and ill
regulated Exercises, which were the first original of the Disease, (or rather
Worse, as most do make it, by such strong and fulsom Preparations and contrary
Mixtures, under the Notion of Helps and Remedies, as aforesaid) be continued,
then there can be no rational hope of Cure, either by Medicine or any other
way; but change of Food, Exercises and Airs do work wonders, especially when
People betakes themselves to mere simple Meats and Drinks that are easier of
Concoction, and generate a finer and firmer Substance; for there is less danger
in declining strong Foods and Drinks, and using meaner, than in going from mean
and simple to rich and strong* for this Alteration of Food, Drinks and
Exercises, has power to alter, and does actually change the whole Humor and
Constitution, according to the nature and simpathy of the Food, for the better
or worse: And this not only manifest in the Humane Nature, but also in Beasts;
for if the Food, Drinks, Air and Exercises be innocent and natural* then good
Blood is generated, whence proceed pure fine Spirits, and the sweet Oil or
Radical Moisture burns clear and bright, and consequently the whole Disposition
is airy, brisk and pleasant.

And if this good state of Body happen in Beasts, as often it does, then such
are of lively Dispositions, and their flesh proves tender sweet and delicate,
and full of brisk Spirits, by reason of the plenty of which it will take Salt
greedily: But on the contrary, if any sort of Cattle be fed plentifully with
Flesh (as some Creatures will eat it, as Swine* and the like) or with other
strong Food, and kept close up that they cannot exercise their Bodies in the
open Air, as Swine in Sties, and Ho^ses in their close hot Stables, then their
Blood becomes very thick and waterish and the whole Humors of their Bodies are
gross tending toward ^utrifaction, their flesh Rank, and more fulsom than such
as divert themselves in open airy places* neither will such flesh take Salt so
well, nor keep so long from (...).

These things ought to be considered by all People, but more especially by such
whose ^ea^th is already wounded by any of the aforesaid Accidents, but are too
seldom thought of, either by the Learned or the common People; but presently
when they find themselves, or their Friends, or Patients disordered, as
aforesaid, they muster up all the Richest sorts of Food, and most Cordial
D^inks they can think of; and to mend the matter, or rather to complete their
own Tragady, they take the general Advice of some Lip-Learned Doctors, together
with the no lose infallible Counsel of the good Dame and Sage Mistress Nu^se,
what sorts of Meats and Drinks are most suitable to recover them out of their
wasting Condition; and then (as every body is either a Fool or a Physi^ian) One
advises ^^llies that are compounded of several Ingredients of disagreeing
Natures, and to be boiled stewed or baked so and so abundantly; Another directs
A^^s Milk, which perhaps may prove a Cure by ^^mpath; The Third will have Cows
Mink, (but for all Loves, let it be a Red ones, though you go to High-Ga^e for
it) and Snales boiled in it; but be sure wash them well with Salt for you know
Man was made of the Slime (for so I am told the Word in H^brew signifies,
rather than Dust) of the Earth; and if they should not be well scoured, they
might happen to be too like him, and do him too much Good, and so spoil the
Doctor's Practice) and when you have carefully Rinsed away all that is good of
them, yet still to prevent any suspicion of Virtue from them, Boil them stoutly
to a tough thick substance, and sweeten them with Sugar till they are able to
Cloy the Stomach of an Horse; And if this will not recover the Co ^sumptive
Creature bespeak the Sex on and the Flannel-Shroud; for there is no withstanding
of Death.

But upon this, up starts a Politic paty Man-Le^ch, who always farts in Plush,
and never strokes his Beard without an Aphorism of Hippocrates, and he cries
out, Ho^d a Blow my Master! stop the Kn^ll; there is Life in a Muscle: Let me
tell you what you shall do, you see the poor Soul wants Flesh and good
Heartning things, therefore get me a dozen or two of Cock-Sparrows, a brace of
Turtle-Doves, taken just as they are Billing, and a parcel of Eringo-Roots, and
boil them in a Gallon of Alicant, till it is wasted to a Quart, and then let
him sup up Meat and Broth with a Boon Courage, and it shall make him as lusty
as old Father Aeson, when he came out of the Life-renewing Balneo. -- You prate
like an old Gallientical Cockscomb (says a young spruce Gallant that stood by,
and affected the Title of Vertuoso I Will have a lusty Ram sent for, and first
let the sick Patient have a Vein opened, and at the same instant broach the
Sheep on the Right Shoulder, and by Transfusion of his Blood into the Man, you
shall presently see him restored, and g^ow as hail and s^u^d as a Trout* -- But
then a Chemist interposes, and tells them, None of these dull stale Gallenical
Devices are sufficient, it is only Philosophy by Fire must do the Feat;
therefore (quoth he) reach me my Crucible, and an Ounce of Aurum Potabile
dissolved in the Yolk of a newlaid Phaenixes Egg, with a Dram of Quicksilver,
and a little of the Tincture of the Sun; let this be distilled seven days in
Balneo Mariae, when Jupiter beholds Venus with a friendly Aspect, and whilst
the Moon is in Leo, let the Patient take three Drops every four hours; and then
I Will venture fourteen years Purchase upon his Life, though he were already as
much stricken in years as old Father Parr, that outlived six couple of Ravens.

The serious Reader, I hope, will pardon this Mirth; for in earnest, it is but
the effect of those Extravagances which some Pretenders to Science daily impose
upon the credulous Vulgar; An hundred such Ridiculous Whimsies being advanced,
as the Products of famous Skill, though they carry neither Reason, Sense nor
Possib^lity with them, but are mere ignorant fraudulent Fancies, the Authors
knowing nothing (as they ought to do) of God Nature or Themselves; and by their
Talk, poor silly People being persuaded, that they want Nour^shment, heap up
all the rich costly things they can get or think of, with which and the
unnatural Preparations thereof they overload and oppress the weak Heats and
Stomachs of the Sick so that they do not only continue the Diseases, but
increase them, forgetting that sure and stable Rule of Health and Temperance,
That weak Heats and lang^ishing Natures o^ght to have simple innocent Meats and
Drinks, of a Nat^re proportionable.

These mischievous Opinions, abominable Customs and irregular Courses have much
grieved me, when I have considered and consulted the innocent Ways of God in
Nature, which has moved and stirred me up to set down for a general benefit
and service, Food, Drinks and Preparati^ns more natural and agreeable to the
Stomachs of sick and languishing Persons; And since Milk, and its Product and
Compounds, is one of the most excellent things i^ that kind, when rightly
ordered, therefore I shall begin with That.

CHAP. II.
The Nature of Milk, and the best ways of Preparing and Cooking it.
MILK in its own Nature is of a brave mild friendly nature and operation; for
in this sublime Liquor, or rather Nectar, the Qualities of Nature seems to
stand in Equality, and therefore it may justly be called Concord, or a thing
which God and his Handmaid Nature has befriended with all the good Virtues of
the Animal Kingdom, having no manifest Quality that does too violently
predominate, but is as well in its inward Nature, as its outward Color, the
Emblem of Innocence, deriving that aimable and pleasant Candor from a Glea^^ of
the divine Light; and therefore it is said, The Holy Land did flow with Milk and
Honey.

It Is certainly an incomparable Food, and being joined or mixed with Bread or the
Flower of Wheat, has the first place of all Victuals, and is a Foundation to
all good Nourishment, there being so great an agreement in Nature between the
Flower of Wheat and Milk, that when they are incorporated together, there is
hardly any Food of equal Excellency, or that will gratify Nature to that
degree; for it does not only afford a brave friendly Nourishment, but also of a
strong firm Substance, standing nearest the Center of UNITY, (whence is derived
all Perfection) of any sort of Food, except Bread; and for this cause it is so
much desired by Children, and the Young Ones of most other Creatures.

How Milk ought to be eaten as it is entire.
The best way for weak sickly Consumptive People to eat Milk Raw, as they call
it, or not altered, is after this manner, Take a Pint (or what quantity you
please) of New-Milk from the Cow, let it stand open to the Air two hours, and
then skim the thick or creamy my substance off the top thereof, and put it by,
but the rest of the thin Milk that remains, eat with well baked Bread; but
remember you neither Toast your Bread nor warm your Milk, except the season be
cold, and then you may warm your Milk as hot as your Blood, but do not then
toast your Bread, for it does it much harm; or if you please, you may eat
Bisquet with your Milk, but be sure you do not eat too great aquantity at once;
and sometimes it will do well to mix a little Water with your Milk, and then
you may sweeten it with good White Sugar; if you make this your whole Food, you
may eat thereof three times a day; for it is a brave sort of Diet, and will
gallantly support Nature, and recover lost Strength, but then you ought to
continue it for 6, 8, or 12 Months, or else you cannot prove it; for Diseases
that have been several Months or Years a generating, and have crept on by
degrees, cannot be recovered in a Moment, as some vainly and ignorantly imagine,
but will require the like Graduation in the Cure.

An excellent way of preparing Milk with Wheat Flour.
Take two thirds of new-Milk, after it has stood six or seven hours from the
time it is milkt, and add th^reto one third part of River or Spring Water, set
it on a quick clear fire, then take some good Wheat Flour and temper it with
either Milk or Water into a Batter, and when you see your Milk ready to boil,
but before it does actually boil, put in your thickning, and stir it a litttle
while, and when it is again just ready to boil take it off, and add Bread and
Salt to it, as much as you please, and remember to let it stand in the Dish or
Platter you put it out into, a while to cool, but do not lade it with your
Spoon, as the manner is, but let it cool of it self, without any such Motion,
which will make it much sweeter than it will do when it is cooled with a Spoon.

A good Spoonful of Flower is sufficient to thicken a full Pint of Milk and
Water, and so proportionably, but you may make it either thicker or thinner, as
you like it, but it is best about the thickness of ordinary Milk-Pottage, and
will eat sweetest, and be easiest of Concoction. This sort of Food affords a
Nourishment of a firm Substance, does neither bind nor loosen the Body, but
keeps it in good order, and breeds good Blood and fine Spirits, whence brisk
and lively Dispositions proceed; this way of Preparation being much more
friendly to Nature than the common way of Boiling, and the continual eating
thereof will have better success, and never tire or cloy the Stomach.

Another good way of ordering Milk.
Take two thirds of Milk and one of Water, add what quantity of Oa^meal you
please, or as you would have it in thickness, but inclining to thin is best,
set it in your Sawce-pan on a fire that is quick and clear, and when it begins
to rise or make a show of boiling, take it off, and brew it in two Vessels or
Juggs for that purpose eight or ten times to and fro, which will cause the fine
Flower of the Oatmeal to give it self forth, and incorporate with the Milk;
then put it again into your Sawce-pan, and set it on the Fire, and as soon as
it is again ready to boil up, take it off, and let it stand a little, if you
would have it fine (for the Husky or Branny part of the Oatmeal will sink to
the bottom) then add Bread and Salt, and let it stand in your Platter or
Pottinger till it be Blood-warm, without causing any Motion to cool it. This is
an excellent sort of Pottage, very friendly and agreeable to weak Natures*
affording a good firm Nourishment, and easy of Concoction.

But if you are not satisfied that this will afford sufficient Nourishment,
then you may between whiles, both in this Pottage, and also in the
beforementioned Flowered Milk when you are minded to regale your self with a
Rich Dish, add one New-laid Egg to a Pint, or a Pint and half, after this
manner, viz. when your Milk and Water is ready to boil, have your Thickning
ready, with the Egg or ^ggs beaten in it, and put it in, as aforesaid.

So when you would add Eggs to Milk-Pottage, first put your Milk and Water into
your Sawce-pan, then take one spoonful of good Oatmeal newly make or grown'd,
and beat it up with your Egg or Eggs, with either a little Water or Milk, and
when it is ready to boil, stir it in, as you did in Flower'd-Milk, and then you
will have no occasion to brew it, as aforesaid. This is also a brave
substantial friendly Food, and the Composition agreeable, there being no
variation made by the Ingredients, but they embrace and incorporate themselves
mutually as one entire Body. However, in all the aforesaid Milk-Meats you ought
to add some well baked Bread, and a little Salt, but do not by any means put
Sugar in any of these Pottages; for Sugar is apt to obstruct the Stomach,
hinder Concoction, fur the Passages, and dull the edge of the Appetite; it also
heats the Blood, and causes a sharp itching Humor to possess it; for this
cause the frequent eating of it in our common Food, does prove of evil
consequence to our Nor^hern Bodies, but more especially to Children and Sickly
weak People; the ^ame is to be understood of Spanish Fruits, and the Spices
that come from the East Indies, they all growing in Countries as different from
ours as Summer is to Winter; and therefore those that do indulge themselves
with such things may daily find the Evil effects thereof, as I have more
particularly demonstrated in The Way to Health, etc. But when there shall be
occasion or reason for the sweetning of any kind of Food or Drinks, let it be
done with good White Sugar, and not with Syrups as the custom of most is.

Milk boiled entire or by it self, is nothing so commendable as when it is
mixed with Water, Flower, Oatmeal, as aforesaid, being not so easy of
Concoction, nor of so cleansing a Quality.

Note also, That Milk is best the first half year after the Cow has calved,
but not so good after taking Bull or Conception, nor so wholesome either for the
^ickly or the healthy; consider Women's Milk after they conceive again with
Child, is it so good as before? none will pretend it: Therefore those that have
a mind to prove the Virtues of a Milk-Diet, let them begin in the Spring, viz.
March or April, take their Milk from Cows newly calved, not from
through-milch'd Cows, though this last sort is the thickest, but I advise none
to esteem of Milk for that Property.

There is yet another Preparation of Milk, called Furmety, viz. Milk and Wheat,
which are in themselves two excellent things whilst they remain entire, but
when mixed and made into Furmety, according to custom, with Spanish Fruit,
Sugar and Spice, it is no commendable Preparation of Food; for first, the long
boiling of the Wheat destroys not only the brisk spirituous Virtues, but also
the firm binding substantial Essence, so that thereby it becomes weak, feeble
and insipid: It Is true, being mixed with Flower and ^orreign Ingredients, it
may be made a pretty pleasing grateful food, but the common frequent eating
thereof will quickly tire and glut the Stomach, by reason of the improper
Preparation and Mixtures; therefore it is nothing so good as plain Flower, Milk
and Water, the same is to be understood of Wheat ^utier'd and suga^r'd.

Of Boniclapper, its Nature and Operation.
AMong the various sorts of Milk-Meat* I thought good to mention this, which
though last spoken of deserves the first place, for its excellent use and
virtue. Boniclapper is nothing else but Milk that has stood till it was sower,
and become of a thick slippy substance, which will be in twenty four hours
after it is milked, or thereabouts, if the weather be very hot, not else; but
if it be put into Vessels in which Milk use to be sowred, it will be done
sooner; and being of a pleasant sowrish Taste, and thick slippy Substance, it
must be eaten only with Bread, especially by Consumptive People; it is a brave
Noble Food both for healthy and unhealthy, especially for all that are troubled
or subject to any kind of Stoppages; for it it powerfully opens the Breast
and Passages, its easy of Concoction, and helps to digest all hard or sweeter
foods, and makes them easy; it also cools and cleanses the whole Body, and
renders it brisk and lively, quenc^eth Thirst to admiration; and we know no
sort of Milk-meat or other spoon-meat, that is so proper and beneficial for
Consumptive and languishing People, as this; for though Nature be much
debilitated, and the natural Heat wasted and the Spirit dulled, yet this sort
of Food will be light and easy on the Stomach, and be easily separated, and
consequently digested, when new sweet creamy Milk cannot; for there is a
ferment awakned in Milk by standing, viz. out of its own Body, which does tend
to separation, and indeed is a high degree of Digestion, which has a near
simile with the ferment and separative Quality of the Stomach; for in this time
of standing, the Milk, by virtue of its own ferment, has done that which is
left for the Stomach to do, when Milk is eaten sweet and new; and indeed if the
Stomachs of those that eat new sweet creamy Milk, be not in good habit and
case, it cannot possibly make so gentle, mild or friendly fermentation or
digestion, as this sort of Milk does by virtue of its own ^erment; for most
distempered Peoples Stomachs are so much depraved, through ill habits, that
they are too sour, with a keen sharp matter, which does in a moments time so
violently coagulate and turn the creamy part into a thick curd or hard
substnace, and the Wheyie parts into a sharp keen Liquor, both which are very
hurtful to Nature; Others Stomachs are dull and flat, the ferment, separative
and digestive Faculties have (as it were) lost their brisk Liveliness and
Power, so that it cannot make any true separation or digestion, but the creamy
and thick parts of the Milk and other Food, does not only fur and obstruct the
Passages, but they naturally generate crude ^lumors, evil Juices, dull heavy
Spirits, and bad Blood; for this cause those People are dull, heavy and
indisposed, full of disorders and pain, apt to be oppressed at the Stomach,
^specially after eating* indeed they are not well full nor fasting; wherefore
we have advised such People, if they betake themselves to a Mild-Diet, to let
their Mild stand three or four hours, or more, and then take off the ^op, which
does contain the thick or creamy substance, by which means the Milk becomes
more easily digested and separated.

But here ^ome will be ready to say, That this sowred Milk will not agree with
the Stomach, nor be pleasant to the Palate. This may be true at first; for
Nature seems to dislike with all changes, though it be for the better, but a
little custom and use will salve this sore, and make it not only familiar, but
most pleasant to the Stomach and Palate; and he or she that have neither
patienc^ nor wisdom to admit of a little inconveniency, shall never have
opportunity to know the true intrinsic Virtue of any thing, nor its nature or
Operation. We know no Reason in Nature why people should dislike with this
sowred Food, seeing most desire it in one degree or other, more especially such
as have disordered Stomachs and weak Heats? for the help whereof Viniger,
Verjuice, the Juice of Lemmones, Oringes, and many the like sharp keen Juices
have been invented and mixed with Food, and no doubt to good advantage, if
order be observed therein because all such things have some affinity with the
ferment (...) Stomach, or rather with the separative Property* therefore Food,
eaten, in which a proper quantity of such Juices are mixed will be easier, and
digest sooner than a like quantity of food will do, in which there is none. But
still, this sowred Milk has a far nearer affinity both to the ferment,
separative and digestive Faculties of the Stomach, than any of the sharp Juices
last mentioned; for in this Milk, as is said before, there is a real ferment
and separative Quality arises and proceeds out of its own body, and from the
Animal Spirits therein contained, which has much agreement with the Stomach,
and above half the Work is done to Natures hand. And before People do envigh
against this innocent simple Food, they should consider, that the Stomach and
natural Heat cannot make any separation or digestion of any Food before there
is a sowring or fermentation? This is most manifest in all Chemical Operations
and Preparations* the spirituous parts will not separate from the gross body
until such Menstrums are fermented, and become somewhat keen or sower, but then
it must not be too keen or sharp, for the the Spirit will suffer, and receive
hurt; the same in some degree is to be observed in all sowred Food* it most not
be too keen or sharp, for then it will heat the Blood and irritate the original
or sleeping Poisons in the Body? but when this Sower Quality is moderate in any
thing, or properly mixed, its a gleam of the life, and the true delight of the
Spirit, it opposes the fierceness of the Bi^ter and A^^ringent Properties, and
quickens and enlivens the Sweet, and is the quickening Power in every thing, all
things are heavy, dull and flat when this Quality is impotent.

CHAP. III.
Of Water Gruel.
ANother thing very proper for weak Consumptive Natures, is Water Gruel, and
that is best which is made after this manner, viz. Take a quart of River or
Spring Water, add to it one spoonful and an half of good Oatmeal newly made or
grown'd, being stirred well together, set it on a clear Fire, when it is
rising, or just ready to boil, take it off, and brew it out of one thing into
another, and so back again, as you do Buttered Ale, then set it on the fire
again till it be ready to boil, but before it do so, take it off, and let it
stand a while in the Swacepan* that the course Husks of the Oatmeal may sink to
the bottom, and then putting it out, add Bread and Salt, or if you please,
Bread, Salt and Butter, stirring it about well until your Butter be melted,
that it may not turn to Oil, and then let it stand without any further stirring
till it be but Blood-warm; for much stirring or motion to cool it, does
oft-times offer some violence to the pure Spirits; for all Gruels, Pottages and
Milk-M^ats, if they are let stand after they are prepared and put into the Dish
or Platter, do naturally, as it were, skin over, which does retain and keep in
the pure B^lsamick V^rtues, but will not confine the fierce furious Fires of
Saturn and Mars, which being Aliens to the good Virtues of such Food, will not
continue in it any longer than forced by the continual heat of the Fire,
wherefore of their own accord they hastily fly away. Besides, it is to be
noted, that continual Motion in all Liquid Bodies destroys and causes to
evaporate the essential Spirits and good Virtues thereof. An Example of this we
have in that Milk Women carry about two or three Miles in their Pails, shaking
and measuring of it out by degrees, causing thereby, as it were, a continual
Motion, which makes the Volatile Spirits to evaporate, and then presently the
sweet Body and oily Quality is thereby wounded, and the Milk becomes thin and
Wheyish, and it will not afford half the quantity of Cream, as Milk will do
that is set to cream as soon as it is milk't; for that skinny substance that all
Milk covers it self with, does keep in the pure essential Spirits, whereby the
sweet Oily Body is preserved in its full Virtue and Strength; for the Volatile
Spirit is the true Life of the Balsamic B^dy, and the Oily Body or sweet
Quality in all things is the House or Habitation of the Volatile Spirits;
therefore if one be destroyed the other cannot subsist, but immediately dies.
Likewise all violent Heat and Cold does the same; for which cause in cold
frosty Weather the like quantity of Cream will no^ make above two thirds of the
Butter as it will do in warm moderate Seasons, and it will be much longer (...)
coming: The like in some degree is to be understood when the Season is extreme
hot; for hot weather too v^olently evaporates the volatile Spirits, and causes
the sweet Body to sower, as the cold condenses the spirituous parts, whereby
they become less volatile, which hinders separation, so that the oily fat
Quality in the Milk cannot rise to the top in such quantity as in warm moderate
Seasons.

For this cause all Dairy-Women ought to have such Milk-Houses as are Warm in
the Winter and Cold in the Summer; for in cold Weather most Women are forced to
let their Milk stand a long time, viz. several days, or else they will have a
very small quantity of Cream; which long standing of Milk to get the more
Cream, does awaken the original Fires, viz. the astringent and bitter
Qualities; for which reason most of the Butter made in the Winter has a kind of
sower bitter Taste, which does not proceed from the Hay or Grass, as some
suppose, but from the long standing of the Milk, as aforesaid. For Butter made
in Winter, if the Milk stand no longer than in Summer, will be very good and
sweet: And if the Hay had any such nature to cause a sower bitter Taste, how
comes it to pase, that the Flesh of all Beasts fatted in the Stall in the
Winter with Hay, is not only more firm, but also far sweeter, and fuller of
brisk lively Spirits than in Summer, and therefore will take Salt much better,
and afford a firmer Nourishment, and also continue sound and good much longer.

Note also, That Boiled Milk is nothing so good as either raw or scalded; for
the boiling it does not only fix it, and thereby render it more stopping and
harder of Concoction, but also the violent Motion of boiling does, as it were
totally destroy the volatile spirit, so that if boiled never so little, it will
not afterward afford any Cream but only a thin skin; for the volatile Spirit
is so pure and subtle that it will not endure any harsh or violent Motion, and
so soon as that delicate Spirit is wounded, the sweet Quality of fa^ Oil
loosing its Power and Virtue, passes away in an invisible vapor or^fume,
^nsensible to the Preparers; and this is the true cause why boiled Milk will
not cream; whereas if you take Milk and scald it (but it must be done to a
point, not too hot) and then take it off the Fire and let it stand in the same
Vessel, and there will arise a brave thick clouted Cream, which way many use in
the West parts of England, and therewith make very good Butter; but if you let
your Milk be too hot, it will not cream to such advantage as otherwise. And
this I hope may be a sufficient demonstration to the good Dame and provident
Housewife, that the boiling of Milk entire, or by it self, is not proper,
esp^^ially for weak Consumptive Persons, or Children, but that it is much
better for Health, and to prevent Windy Diseases, and breed good Blood and
Nourishment, to eat it raw, or altered with Flower, as above directed. And if
Women were so wise and kind to themselves and their Children, as to eat such
Foods as are proper both in Quality and Quantity, properly mixed and duly
prepared, and to give their Children no other, we should quickly have a
healthier Generation, and not be so strangely afflicted with such variety of
torturing Diseases, nor have such great Numbers snatched away with immature
Deaths. And for their benefit herein, if they are not too follish to learn, and
too froward to be taught, I will here add,

A very excellent healthy Food for all sorts of Ages, but more especially for
Children and sickly People.
Take a quart of good Water, two full Spoonfuls of Wheat Flower, and two or
three Eggs, beat the Eggs and Flower together with some Water, and when the
Water is ready to boil, but before it quite boil, stir in your batter or
thickning, and keep stirring it till it be ready to boil, by which time it will
be sufficiently thick; then take it off, and add to it only Salt and Bread, and
let it stand and cool without your help, till it become about as warm as Milk
from the Cow, and so eat it. If you wnat Eggs, you may instead thereof add
But^er after the Water and Flower is so prepared with Bread and Salt, but Eggs
are best.

This is a curious clean sweet Food, affords a brave sound Nourishment, opens
all the Passages, breeds good Blood and pure brisk Spirits, is pleasant unto
the Palate, grateful to the Stomach, and easy of Concoction; the common use
thereof sweetens the Blood, and all the Humors, prevents Windy Distempers, and
griping pains, both of the Stomach and Bowels, having no manifest Quality that
does too violently predominate, all the Ingredients bearing a simile with each
other, so that it may justly challenge the first place of all Spoon-Meats or
Pap, and is the next Food to Breast-Milk for Children, and indeed oftentimes
much better, by reason of the many Diseases and improper Foods many Women are
subject to, or use. It Is also a special Diet for Consump^ive people, if they
will keep constant to it for one half year or a twelve Month, eating nothing
else, and drinking every day two or three glasses of clear well brewed Ale,
with gentle Exercise, and sweet clean hard Beds, and moderate Clothing. But
remember that you do not add any other Ingredients to this sort of Food, as
Sugar, Spices, Fruits, or the like, for then it will become of another nature
and operation, and that for the worse, as I have demonstrated in the Chapter of
Mixtures of Foods, in my Book entitled, The way to Health, long Life and
Happiness, etc.

It is further to be noted, that this sort of Spoon-meat, and also all others,
ought to be made rather thin than thick; for in such Foods the Liquid Element
ought to predominate, whether it be Milk or Water, else the pure spirituous
parts being in a degree suffocated, they will become dull on the Palate and
heavy on the Stomach; therefore all Pottages and Spoon-meats that are made
thin, and quick prepared, are sweeter and brisker on the Palate, and easier of
Digestion, as being more spirituous than those that are thick and long a doing.
And as all Foods that are properly mixed, and a due order observed in the
Preparation, will have no manifest Taste or strong Hugo, as all others have,
but on the contrary, will yield a pleasant friendly Taste, and Smell most
grateful; so you may observe of all Meats and Drinks, whose Taste and Smell are
innocent and fine, they never cause any loathing in Nature, because there is no
manifest Quality that does too violently predominate, but all the Properties or
Tastes seem to be united, or stand in equal weight and measure; for where any
does bear sway, it will quickly awaken its Likeness, whence Discord, and an
unequal motion arises, and thence a loathing follows; for in Sickness, all
such Meats and Drinks as were the original of the Disease, the very sight and
smell thereof is offensive, and for that reason English People eating much
Flesh and strong Drink in Health, do for the most part perfectly loath and
abominate such things in Sickness, desiring Water and more simple Foods,
wherein wise Nature indicates and points out the proper Diet in such cases, if
Men would but hearken unto her.

CHAP. IV.
Of Flesh Broths.
IF sick languishing People must eat Flesh, which in my opinion is nothing so
proper to recover lost Health and Strength, as more simple innocent Foods, for
several Reasons; As, 1st. Because it is that which most, both Young and Old at
all other times make their chief Food, and consequently from thence their
Distempers mostly proceed. 2dly, It Is of a gross Phlegmatic nature and
operation, of a moist oily Quality, therefore harder of Concoction than many
other sorts of Food, whereby it generates gross Humors and thick Blood. 3dly,
The Beasts are often distempered, sometimes for want of care and skill in their
Keepers, at other times by hot Weather and much driving they are surfeited, and
yet killed before they have recovered those Disorders. 4thly, By being killed
in improper Seasons, viz. in the declining part of the year, as August,
September and October, at which time the central heat in all things decays, and
the Flesh of all Beasts becomes more gross, their fat soft, greasy and full of
Phlegm and corrupt Juices; and therefore Flesh will not take Salt nor keep so
well then as at other times, and also, it is then their time of Generation and
Uncleanness, which renders it still more dangerous and pernicious. However, the
common eating of almost all sorts of Flesh, both clean and unclean, has gotten
such a dominion in Man, that all that I can say is little likely to abate those
furious Inclinations; therefore if the Sick will still follow Custom, and
gratify his Humor, and must needs have his Fleshpots and Flesh-Broths, we
shall give some directions for the best ordering thereof, which is done after
this manner, VIZ.

Let your Flesh be fresh killed, and otherways good, whether Fowls, Beef or
Mutton; First, make your Water boil, then have your Flesh ready to put in, and
increase your Fire that it may not lie long in the Water before it boyls again;
and let your Pot or Vessel be large that it may hold a sufficient quantity of
Water, that the flesh may swim freely; and when it boyls take your Pot-lid off,
that the sulpherous fiery Fumes may pass freely away, and the Air have its free
Influences upon it; for that Element is the true Life of the Spirit, and by
having plenty of Water, the flesh is cleansed from its gross Impurities, which
the best of Flesh is subject to; likewise you ought to keep a brisk clear Fire,
that there be no intermission in the boiling, which would deaden or flatten the
spirituous parts, so that the Meat will become dull and of an heavy operation,
and grosser nourishment; nor ought you to let it boil too long; for Flesh
over-prepared is of an heavy dull nature, and ungrateful to the Palate and
Stomach.

All Broths made of Flesh ought to be thin, brisk and full of Spirits, which
render them easy of Concoction, and breed thin pure Blood. Many People imagine
Flesh not only the most Nourishing, but also the Substantialst Food; but this
must be numbered amongst Vulgar Errors, it is indeed endued with abundance of
gross Phlegmatic^ and corrupt Juices, and therefore those that make it their
chief Victuals are most obnoxious to gross Scorbuti^ Humors in their Blood,
whence proceed very impure Spirits, and bur-thensome unactive Dispositions,
which by degrees occasion and increase man Diseases; for all Flesh is of a moi^
Phlegmy Nature, subject to Putrifacti^on; and therefore such as make i^ their
common Food are forced to dri^^ much either with or after it, or (...) least
they accustom themselves so (...) do, which much increases the aforesaid
Inconveniences and Distempers But on the contrary, many sorts o^ Fruits,
Grains, Herbs and Seeds are for the most part endued with a far more firm, dry
and cleaner Nourishment free from Corruption, and yieldi^^ more sublime
Spirits. And there as much difference between Them a^^ Flesh as there is
between Grass and Cor^ for true it is, Grass generates more Humors, viz. flesh
and fat, and in shorter time in all Cattle, but then suc^ flesh is more soft,
greasy, phlegmatic^ and subject to Putrefaction, than that which is fed with
Hay and Corn.

For this cause, the Flesh of all Beasts is much better in Winter than in
Summer; and also all Grains and Fruits when the Sun and Elements have dried up
and exhaled the gross cold phlegmy parts, are thereby made substantial,
warming, and full of brisk lively Spirits, and will keep good several years
without the help of Art; for the gross Humidity being purged away, their own
innate Salt and spirituous Virtues preserve them; but Flesh cannot be kept
without Salt, nor with it but for a little season. So that most Men, as well
the ignorant as the learned, are deceived, when they fancy F^esh to be a more
substantial warming Food than Fruits, Grains, Milk, Herbs, etc. for Experience
will tell us that Bread, Bu^ter, Cheese, Flowered Milk and Water, Raw Herbs in
their Seasons made into Salads, mixed with Oil, Salt and Vinegar, and the like,
are not only cleaner Foods, but more substantial, affording a more chearing and
warming Nourishment, and all that have ever lived on them for any competent
time, do find themselves not so subject to Coldness and Qualms at their
Stomachs, as those that frequertly eat Flesh; for all sorts of Foods that are
in their own Nature clean, dry, and free from gross phlegmatic Juices, will
not only keep longer from Purifaction without the Body, but they afford a
cleaner and more solid Nourishment, in the Body, warming, chearing,
exhilirating and increasing the Spirits, whence proceeds an healthy vigorous
Constitution of Body, strong and active Limbs, good Stomach and free Digestion;
for always the more you imitate Nature in the Choice and Preparation of Food,
the more useful it will be to you: For many Distempers, especially that general
one, (The Wind,) which few that outlive Youth are free from, are chefly caused
through bad Preparations and improper Mixtures, or excess in Quantity or
Quality of Food; which Defects are not to be remedied without great Wisdom and
Temperance. But those that have not the knowledge and measure of their own
Natures and Complexions, nor have seriously considered the intrinsic Qualities
of what they eat o^ drink, it is no wonder if their Thoughts or Imaginations are
wrong (for blind men will stumble) so that what they think is best and most
profitable for the Health of their Bodies and Minds, Proves the contrary. An
Example we have in Peoples eating of Food hot from the Fire, or out of the Pot
or Oven, they cry out, The Meat will grow cold and be spoiled, and there is
little or no virtue in it if the fiery heat be g^ne; Others are for Boiling
their Food and Pottages very much, until they become unpleasant for Sight,
Taste and Smell, and grow thick, gross and dull; Others there be that think
themselves brave Doctors or Cooks, when they mix ten or twenty rich things
together, crying, The more and the Richer, the better, as if they were to make
Mithridate in their Bellies. All which, and many other the like preposterous
Conceits and unnatural Ways, serve only to wound their Healths still more and
more, as first to Contract, and afterward to Continue and Increase great
numbers of Diseases.

CHHP. V.
Of Flumery, its nature and operation.
FLumery is the ancient Gruel the Britains used to eat, and the use of it is
still continued amongst the Welsh; it is made after this manner; Take two or
three spoonfuls of Oatmeal, more of less, and put into it a convenient quantity
of Water, and let it stand until it begin to be sowrish, th^^ ta^e this Water
and Oatmeal and put it into a Vessel* stirring it, and make it boiling hot with
a quick Fire, and when it begins to rise, brew it to and fro with your Ladle,
to keep it from boiling, this do about five or six Minut^s, and th^n take it
off the Fire, for it is prepared to the highest degree. The Br^^^ains and those
that now eat this (...) of Gruel, had and have various ^^ys of eating it, viz.
to mix Al^ am^^gst it, and so eat it with Bread, others Milk, Cream, and the
like, which Mixtures are not much amiss; but in my judgment those that have
regard to their Healths, Strength, and brisk lively Dispositions, or such as
eat it to open, cleanse, and help the digestive Faculty, and to remove
offensive Matter from the Stomach, ought to eat this sort of sower Gruel only
with Bread; for thereby it more powerfully removes the Obstructions of the
Breast, helps the natural Heat, strengthens the Stomach, cools the whole Body,
opens the Passages, and makes the Body lightsome and airy. This is a most
commendable Gruel to be eaten for a Breakfast in all hot Seasons and Clymates;
for the sowerness, or the fermentation does so aptly fit it to the Stomach, and
has, as it were, digested all tough or slimy matter, so that it becomes easily
separated, and so passes away more quick and free, leaving no Dregs behing it
that does either fur or obstruct (...) Passages, which most sweet foods are
(...) to, especially when any shall exceed in Quantity. I commend this sort of
Gruel to all weak Stomach't People, and to such whose Breast and Passages are
fur'd and obstructed by sweet, tough or Phlegmy matter.

There is also another way of making this Gruel, used chiefly among the wanton
Gentry, viz. they take Water and Oatme^l, as is before mentioned, and let it
stand a day, more or less, as they think fit, then they pour off that Water and
put on fresh; some will do this four, five, six, seven, eight or nine times one
after another, letting each Water remain on the Oatmeal a certain time, then
they take it and boil it up, and mix it with Milk, Cream and the like: But this
way is nothing so brisk, lightsome and lively as the former; for Oatmeal has
passed through, in its Preparation, a certain fermentation or digestion, by
which the gross body in the Oats is opened, and the more internal or central
Virtues become thereby volatile, so that it readily gives forth its virtue when
it is committed to the great Menstrum, viz. Water, even as Malt does, though
not to that degree, because the digestion or fermentation is not so high; but
being washed with several Wa^^r, it becomes thereby stupid and destitute of all
its good Qualities; nay, the very Air will exhale and draw forth the more
spirituous parts of all Flower, if exposed to it; though the Grain have never
passed through any fermentation or digestion, as the Flower of Wheat, which is
the strongest, and of the best substance of any others; for this cause, Flower
that has been grown'd five or six Weeks, or more, though it be kept close in
Sacks, will not make so sweet nor so moist pleasant Bread as that which is
newly grown'd; therefore all Bread in London does eat drier and harsher than
Bread in the Country that is made two or three days after the Wheat is grown'd;
for so soon as any Grain is bruised or broken into a powdery substance, the
essential Spirits become thereby, as it were, violated, and liable to
evaporation; for they are so subtle, quick and penetrating that nothing can
hold or continue them, but of necessity they either evaporate or become
suffocated, if enclosed by any thing: Therefore all Gruels ought to be made
with new grown^d Oatmeal, and Bread with new-grown'd Flower; but this way does
not please, neither is it so profitable for those that make a Trade of selling
Meal; for Meal new grown'd will not so freely separate from the Branny
substance, nor yield so much Flower; but lying a while after it is grown'd,
makes a kind of Distillation, or giving way, that the branny parts, as is said
before, are easier to be separated, and the ^lowry parts seem ^iner to the Nice
Da^es, but the Bread made of such Meal is nothing so good and balsamic, or at
least not so opening nor cleansing; besides, or Flower in a little time will
from its own Body generate Worms, which comes to pass by reason of the
Essential Spirits and pure volatile Salt is wounded, suffocated or evaporated;
but all sorts of Grain kept entire and not violated, will remain sound and good
a long time; and if the essential Spirits and sweet Virtues of any thing or
Creature could be preserved entire from evaporation or suffocation, then that
thing would continue sound and good forever; for the true Life, pleasure,
delight and joy of all Bodies does consist in the essential Spirits and
balsamic Virtues, therefore no Vegetable, Animal or Mineral can be preserved
any longer than the Spirit remains entire and unviolated: This we would have
all Men consider, especially Physicians and Preparers of Food; and we must
needs say, he that invented this last way of making Flummery; was no
Philosopher, his Eyes were too dim to behold the true Spirit and Life of things.

CHAP. VI.
Of the several sorts of Bread, and which is best, especially for sickly People.
ONE of the best sorts of Bread for sickly People is made of Wheat Flower, the
course or husky Bran dressed out, but not fine dressed; for then it will be dry
and hus^y, apt to obstruct the Stomach; for the inward skin or Branny parts of
Wheat do contain the moist Quality, which is opening and easy of Digestion,
and in the fine flo^ery parts does consist the Nutrimentive Property, therefore
they do best together, and ought not to be too curiously separated, as some
nice People will do, who know no more of the Nature of things than an Horse,
and observe less

Also it is to be noted, that Leaven'^ Bread is to be preferred before that
which is made of Yeast; for Leaven was a Philosophical Invention, that Sower
quality therein being much more agreeable to the ferment of the Stomach than
Yeast, and easier of Digestion, and more cleansing; So it opens the Vessels and
Increases the Appetite; and a little use will make it familiar and pleasant to
the Eater. But Yeast has a contrary Nature and operation, it being a mere
frothy fume or nauseous Excrement, which Nature throws off, and spews out as
her Enemy, and when it is mixed with any thing it endues it not only with an ill
Taste (which you will quickly perceive, if you are not accustomed to it) but
also is apt to send fumes into the Head, and to foul the Stomach, and therefore
nothing so profitable and wholesome, as well made Leavened Bread; which may more
manifestly appear by most of the Ale in London; for that not being sufficiently
wrought and cleansed from this Yeasty matter, it is not only thick, but its
Taste gross and unpleasant, sending dulling fumes into the Head, fouls the
Blood, destroys the Appetite, and generates evil Juices in the Body.

Leavened Bread is best when made after this manner; Take what quantity of
Flower you please, make an hole in the midst of it, then break your Leaven in,
and take so much Water made as warm as your Blood, as will wet half your
Flower, mix the Le^ven and Flower well together, then cover it with the
Remaining Flower close, this do at Night, and the next Morning the whole Lump
will be well fermented or Leavened; then add so much warm Water (but remember
it be no hotter than the Blood) as will suffice, and knead it up very stiff and
firm, until it be smooth and pliable; but the more pains you take in kneading
it, the better and smoother the Bread will cut, and eat much softer and
pleasanter in the Mouth, and be easier of digestion; and when you have well
kneaded it, let it lie warm by some fire about two hours, until your Oven be
ready, then make it into small Loaves as you think convenient, and let them be
Baked* with the Ovens mouth not close stopped, that the Air may have more or less
Egress and Regress; but the better way is to make it into thin Cakes, like
Oat-Cakes, and bake them on a Stone, which many in the North of England use for
that purpose, making a Wood Fire under it. This sort of Bread is sweeter, of a
more innocent Taste, and far easier of Concoction than any Bread baked the
common way in Ovens.

After the same manner you may make Cakes of any sort of Grain, viz. Rye, Oats,
or Barl^y, and you will find it a brave wholesome hearty Bread, and every way
more profitable to Nature, than such as are made in the usual manner.

Note also, that the putting of Salt into Bread is injurious; for Salt is an
unseparated body, in which the Original Qualities do too violently predominate,
being of a keen tart hot Nature and Operation, and therefore if it be joined
with any Body or thing that is not subject to Putrefaction, or full of Phlegmy
gross Humors, then it presently preys on the good Virtues and essential
Spirits; For this cause Salt does cause all forts of Bread to corrupt; for in
it* it finds no manifest matter of Putrefaction to work on, and therefore
seizes the good Virtues, and by its keen fierce hot property destroys and
corrupts it. Therefore such Bread as is intended to be kept a considerable
time, no Salt is wont to be put into it, as Biskets that are carried to Sea,
and the like: But for such as make Flesh most of their Food, Salt is an
excellent Ingredient, and for some other sorts of Food, that is for present
eating, For Salt naturally sharpens (...) Appetite, begets good Digest^^n,
being grateful to the Stomach, and resisting Putrefaction, provided it be not
used in too great a Quantity, for then it spoils all or, when it has lain in
any Flesh or Fish too long, by which the good Virtues are Evaporated or
Distempered; for then such Flesh and Fish proves very Injurious to the Health,
and corrupts the Blood, as is most manifest by such as feed on such over-kept
salt Meats at Sea, for they are at the very next door to Putrefaction. And as
Salt is endued with the firce Original fire, so on the other side, it has a
most powerful lively spirituous Quality, but the firce harsh fires do
predominate; Therefore it is fit to eat Salt with all fresh Flesh, or to have
the Flesh salted three or four weeks before you eat it; but Bacon of all other
is best when longer salted and smoak't. Likewise many Innocent Foods will admit
of Salt, but then they must be eaten presently, as Pottages, Salads, and the
like; so likewise in Butter and Cheese, Salt preserves them a considerable time.

By the way, I would have the House-wife take notice, that Bread or Cakes baked
on Sto^es in Chimnies, or at the Ovens Mouth, will be much whiter than if the
same were baked in an Oven close stopped up; for the former having the free
Influences of the Air, the pure Spirits are thereby kept living, and their
pleasant white color does not only show its clean Innocent Nature, but it
proceeds from and is a true Gleam of Light, arising from the Tincture and
Volatile Spirits, which are destroyed when the heat is intolerable, and the
egress and regress of that Friendly Element, the Air, obstructed. And therefore
Bread baked in close stopped Ovens is of a duller dusky Color, more Saturnine
and Martial, according to the degree of Heat, and time of standing in the Oven.
The good House-Wife may also remember, that Bread is not of so strong a
substance and nourishment as Flower, when it is mixed with Water or Milk, for
that potent glewy tough substance that naturally Flower is endewed with, is
lost and destroyed in Bread by the intolerable heat of Ovens, and some other
Circumstances that belong to the making of Bread; therefore it will not thicken
either Water, Milk or any other liquid Body, nor be so strong, tough and glewy;
and therefore all such Foods as are made with Flower are more strong and
substantial than Bread mixed with such things. Also ^lower so eaten is white,
innocent, soft to the Touch of the Palate though otherwise it is a brave food,
proper to be eaten with Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Herbs, and many other things, in
so much that for its frequent and excellent use it is not undeservedly called
and accounted, The Staff of Life.

CHAP. VII.
Of Butter, its Nature, and how bes^ to be Eaten.
BVtter consists of the fat or Oily parts of Milk, and is a brave wholesome
Ingredient to be eaten moderately with Bread, For few, and indeed scarce any of
the other ways of eating and using it are proper or so agreeable to Nature; and
that my asserting this may not startle the Reader, I shall give him my Reason
for it, which is this, Because Butter having already in the making of it passed
through due Fermentation, the Spirituous properties thereof, are thereby
unbounded or set at liberty, and become Volatile, the truth whereof you may
perceive by this Experiment, If Butter be but exposed four or five days to the
open common Air, it will lose a great part of its pure smell and taste; but
much more if it be committed to the Fire; therefore all melted Butter, and such
Foods wherein Butter is mixed, that are baked or fiyed, are not profitable for
Health, but become heavy of Concoction, and strong upon the Palate, and the
common eating thereof does generate evil Juices, thick Blood and dull heavy
Spirits, whence proceeds, scorbutic Humors and various Diseases in the Blood,
But Butter in its own Nature is an excellent thing, and very profitable, if
mixed with proper Food, as Bread, Herbs, Roots, and the like; but if not
properly mixed and eaten, then it Oils and Furs the Vessels of the Stomach and
Passages, hinders Digestion, and generates evil Juices and many Diseases.

The best Butter for the Stomach is that which is made from the beginning of
May, to the last of July, or middle of August, or there-abouts; for then Grass
is in its full strength and Virtue. Yet what is then potted or firkin'd up for
Winter will have somewhat a stronger taste, by reason of the length of time,
and heat of Weather, but still it is much finer and more wholesome, and free from
phlegm, and easier of Concoction than that which is made of Rowings or
Leather-Math (as they call it) though this latter sort is often times much
sweeter to the Palate at first eating, but it quickly cloyes, by Greasing the
Stomach; for it is endued with much gross phlegmy matter, like the Grass at
that season; For Hay made thereof is of little strength or Virtue, as all
Husbandmen do know. And as to Bu^ter you may try it thus, melt a like quantity
of the Summer and After-Math Butter, in two several Vessels, and let it stand a
while, you will find the latter throw off and afford more Phlegm a great deal
than the former; But as this is made near the Winter, so it is new, and that is
the cause why it seems somewhat sweeter to the Touch of the Palate, though
the former be much better, and wholsomer, and will go further. All Butter ought
to be well seasoned with Sa^t, for that quickens and makes all fat Bodies brisk
and easier of Concoction; For Butter otherwise is but a dull heavy body, and
ought by all People to be eaten sparingly, but more especially by those that
are weakly.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Cheese.
CHeese is an hard tough strong Food, very nourishing and substantial, and
excellent for healthy working People; for being eaten with good store of Bread,
it endues those that commonly feed thereon with clean sound Bodies, and brisk
lively Spirits, able to endure Labor and Travel, if good Drink be not wanting;
And this so far beyond those that make Flesh their Food, that experience
teaches us, that no Men are able to hold out in hard Labor with those that eat
good Wheaten-Bread, and Fat Cheese, that is one or two Years old, (for both
sorts are good according to the Country they come from, and as the Cheese is in
thickness, or the contrary) it is true Bread; and Cheese does not breed so much
Nourishment as Flesh, but it is clean and of a stronger firmer substance,
digesting and relishing Drink to better advantage than the best Fles^ in the
World can. And suppose four Men were only to eat Bread and goo^ Cheese,
intermixed now and then with Flower'd^ Milk, Milk-^ottage, Water Gruel and Raw
Salads seasoned with Vinegar, Salt and good O^l, and for their Drink good sound
well prepared Beer or Ale, not over-strong: And a like Number of Men, seeming
of equal Limbs and Strength, were to live on variety of Flesh, with Br^ad, and
the same Liquor; and let both Companies be kept to the same hard Labor: In one
half years time the former, by virtue of their plain simple Food will be able
to outdo the latter, and tire them to Admiration; and the Reason hereof I
taught you before, viz. because Flesh is gross and full of Phlegmatic Juices,
which load the Body with superfluous Humors; but Bread, Cheese, Pottages and
Herbs are clean, and free from such Impurities, and consequently breed better
Nourishment, fine Blood, pure brisk sparkling Spirits, which give great
strength and virtue to the Body. Nevertheless, Cheese in its own Nature is
somewhat hard of Concoction Where good strong natural Heats are* it proves a
great strengthener to the Stomach and all the Vessels thereof, but all weak
People ought to eat Cheese sparingly, viz. a little Cheese and a great qu^ntity
of Bread, so that the Cheese may serve only to relish it; for as Cheese is a
pleasing Food to the Palate, so it is grateful to most dull flat Stomachs, if
it be eaten sparingly, and with discretion, and will comfort, cheer and
strengthen them. What we said of B^tter may be repeated of Cheese, That the
best is that which is made from the beginning of May, to about the beginng of
August; for after that season, the Sun, which is the central Heat and vivifying
Power of all things declines with winged speed, and all Vegitations by sympathy
do the same.

CHAP. IX.
Of the best sort of Puddens, and the contrary.
THis is a great sort of Food in England, we are famous for it abroad, and
there is no Nation besides, that I know or have heard of, that practices it so
much, and if we were not altogether so fond of them, especially as they are
commonly made, 'twere no matter; for such Puddens as are enricht with various
sorts of Spanish Fruits and Indian Spices are for the most part very hurtful to
Health, because the variety of improper Ingredients does destroy most of the
good genuine Virtues of our own Country-simples, so that such things cannot
properly be called Food. It Is true, all sorts of Spanish Fruits, so long as
they remain entire, and in their own simple Nature, and for proper uses, are
brave rich things, but if any sort of ^aisins be altered, by being mixed with
several things, and then boiled, the true natural Virtues are hurt, and they
are rendered next door to Putrefaction; for the Sun and Elements had before
already prepared them to the highest degree, and whatever else is done by way
of Preparation, proves injurious to them.

In Puddens it is usual to mix Flower, Eggs, Milk, Raisins or Currants, and
sometimes both Spice, Suet, the Fat or Marrow of Flesh, and several other
things; whereas in truth any two of those things would far better have supplied
Nature with true and proper Nourishment; and if any healthy Person should be
confined to such Puddens but for one week, he would be tired, and perfectly
loath them: whereas he may well live many years upon ^lower and Milk, or Eggs
and Bread, or Raisins and Bread; but when all these, etc. are jumbled together,
they make a confused Portion.

There is another sort of Pudden, called, Bread-Puddens, which are a sick
fainty Food; for nothing can be good and proper, if twice prepared, if the
first Preparation be to the highest degree, as it is in Bread; also, to put
some things prepared, as Bread, with things unprepared, as F^ower, Eggs,
Spices, and the like, is not only improper, but unnatural to the Stomach:
Therefore such Foods ought not to be eaten by any that love their Health and
Strength. For common sense may suggest what a strange disorderly jumble and
Mishmash so many contrary Ingredients must needs make, when boiled together in
the Stomach, and what Heterogenious kind of Juices or Nourishment the same will
produce. ^o^ Experiment, be pleased to take F^ower, Fat, Spices, Eggs, ^urrants
and Raisins, put them altogether in any Vessel, and then take Flower and Milk
and put into another Pot or Vessel, or Eggs and Flowers, or Fruit and Flower,
or Spice and Flower, or Bread and Milk, and let both Pots stand two or three
days, then observe both, and smell and taste of the one and the other, and you
will certainly find, that the simplest and where the fewest Ingredients are,
will smell and taste better, and be less offensive than that wherein they all
are mixed; for the first will stink, corrupt ^^d putrify much sooner than the
simple things will. But this is nothing -- How many things more besides these
confused Puddens, do men eat at the same Meal, cram down into their Paunches,
viz. various sorts of Flesh, Fish, Butter, Olives, Capers, Herbs, Roots,
Mustard, Tarts, Raw Fruits, Cheese, etc. which when rightly considered cannot
but appear a strange Composition, and odd Mess of Stuff, able to corrupt the
strongest and best of Stomachs, only Custom does make them somewhat more
friendly, and easier for Nature to bear, than otherwise they would be; for do
but put all the beforementioned Dishes of one extravagant Meal altogether in a
lump into a Pot, or if that be too little, into a Caldron or Furnance, and mix
them all together, Hicklede-Pickledy, and let them lie a day or two so and
ferment, and then smell to the heap, and if you do not conclude that the common
use of such Dinners or Suppers is Natures Destruction, and the Parent and Nurse
of a multitude of strange and complicated Diseases, you are fitter to eat out
of a Trough with Swine in a Stye, than to be consulted with about Diet for
Health.

But since 'twill be difficult wholly to wean People from their beloved
Puddens, the best way of making them is thus, Take Wheat Flour, Eggs, Milk and
Water, of each a convenient quantity, mix therewith a little Salt, and beat
them well together, put this Batter into a Bag, boil it sufficiently in a good
quantity of Water, with your Pot-lid off, and a quick clear Fire, and let it
boil without intermission, till it is enough, and then s^ice it, and butter it
with good Butter. This is a good sort of Puddens for such as admire the^, which
(...) (...) baked, before the hot furious Fumes are evaporated and dispersed,
it will, the most of any Food generate Windy Diseases, which you may prevent by
letting it lie in the Dish or on your Trensher a while, and these sulpherous
Vapors will separate and fly away in a Rapid Motion. And in truth, a little
use and custom will render this sort of Pudden, or any others, more friendly to
the Stomach, and in all respects wholsomer, and freer from Windiness, if eaten
quite Cold, which is for certain more commendable than any other way. I cannot
perhaps by words make People either belive it, or be sensible of it, Cu^tom,
and the false Prophet ^r^dition has so blinded the Eye of Mankind, so that
nothing but Experience will be able to convince them: And if none will try nor
follow the Rules of R^asen, I shall yet be well satisfied, in that I have done
my Duty; therefore let none be offended at, or despi^e the simplicity of what I
recommend; For all the Ways of God, and his Handmaid Nature, are plain and
familiar, and all needful Furniture, both for the Body and Mind, are every
where ready at hand, cheap and obvious: But the Evil one has taught subtle
Devices, and men have found out many Inventions, equally chargeable and
pernicious.

CHAP. X.
Of Eggs, their Nature, and the best way of dressing and eating of them.
EGgs are an excellent sort of Food, each of them completely containing all the
true Properties and seminal Virtues of that Creature whence they proceeded,
therefore are one of the best sorts of things that is eaten, being of a fat
oily quality, but very friendly and innocent in operation, if well prepared,
affording a strong substantial clean Nourishment, easy of Concoction, and such
as breed good Blood, but then they must not be eaten after the common way of
dressing, that is to say, (...) and after eaten with Butter; for Eggs, I told
you before, are of an oily f^t Nature, especially the Yolks, and being eaten
with Butter whilst the sulpherous heat of the Fire remains in them, that turns
the Butter to a kind of a gross Oil, which does not only tie or hold captive
the sierce Atoms of the Fire, so that they cannnot separate and fly away, but
the melted Butter does dull and flatten the brisk spirituous part of the Egg,
and makes it gross and heavy of Concoction, as also cloys the Stomach; and for
this cause many cannot eat hot buttered Eggs, without having their Stomach^
much offended, and so many do not love nor eat Eggs on this very score, but are
insensible of the true cause thereof. But these very Persons shall love them,
and find them very agreeable, when prepared properly, as I have often known.
Therefore I shall here briefly set down several Methods of preparing of Eggs
both proper and natural, and very agreeable to most Stomachs, both of strong,
and of weakly, or cons^mptive People.

1. Boil Eggs rere, or soft, then break the Shells, and put them into a Plate
or Pottinger, and let them stand till they are but Blood-worm, then eat them
only with Bread and Salt, or such whose Stomachs are strong, and (...) are
great lovers of Eggs, may eat them with Bread and Butter, but the Butter not
melted, but spread upon Bread.

2. You may boil them pretty hard, peel the Shells off, and when cold, eat them
with Bread, Vinegar and Salt.

3. Poaching, or boiling them unshelled in Water, is a commendable way, being
eaten with Salt and Bread, or Bread, Salt and Vinegar.

4. Take a Pint of Water, and one large spoonful of Wheat Fl^wer, made into
Batter with Water, when your Water is boiling hot, break one Egg into this
Batter, and beat it together, and just as the Water is ready to boil, stir in
your Batter a little while, until it be again ready to boil, then take it off,
and it will be of a sufficient thickness, put thereunto a little Bread and
Salt, and a small quantity of good Butter, stirring of it about that the Butter
may not turn to an Oil, then ^^t it stand till Blood-warm, and eat it. This is
a brave clean Food, easy of Digestion, breeds good Blood, and a firm
Nourishment, with brisk Spi^^ts*

Lastly, Eggs are very wholesome raw, supped off in a Morning, and Bread eaten
after them; for they clear the Stomach and free the Passages from Obstructions,
and make the Eaters thereof lively, and long breathed, if frequently eaten. But
let all People remember that they do never eat Eggs boiled in the Shells,
whilst they are hot, for they often then prove pernicious to Health.

CHAP. XI.
Of Pyes, how they ought to be made.
APple and Pear-Pyes are a good wholesome healthy Food, provided such Fruit be
through ripe, and no improper Ingredients added, as too frequently People of
late do, both amongst the Apples and in the Cr^s^, for most put a great deal of
Butter into the Crust, and such Dough or Crust having no Fer^ent, viz. Leaven
or Yeast to make i^l^ght, thereby becomes of a close ^ea^y ^^b^tance, and the
Butter makes it still more heavy, close and ponderous, and being baked in the
close strong sulpherous heats of Ovens, they yet become more unwholsom, hence
^ye-crust does load the Stomach, and disagrees with many; and those that find
it best are more beholding to use, which has familiariz'd it to their Bodies:
Besides, most that have wherewithal do put too great quantities of Sugar
amongst their Apples and Pears, whereby it becomes more like a Medicine than
Food; therefore such Pyes, if a man makes a Meal of them, will not give his
Stomach that satisfaction as all proper Foods will; and also the eating of much
Sugar in our Food does extraordinarily foul the Stomach and fur the Passages,
is injurious to the natural Heat, and breeds bad Blood, and fills the Body full
of the Scurvey, taking off the edge of Appetite, and generates evil
Nourishment; for this cause most People, and especially Children and Women, who
eat much Sugar and Spices in their Victuals, are so ^uling, and aff^icted with
a number of Diseases; for much sweetness in Food is as dangerous, and proves as
great an evil to Health, as the bitter, ^our or astringnt Qualities do, when
they shall ^^ceed in any Food, and far more, because sweetness is more enticing
to most sorts of People, especially to Children and Youth; whereas the other
Quality is not so, but the contrary, and no Person need so strongly to arm
himself against those Intemperances that his natural Inclinations do not lead
to, but the greatest danger of his being misled or overcome, is by those
Intemperances that are most agreeable to his temper, for by such Evils he is
overcome, as it were, insensibly: For sweetness is an enticing Quality, and
though in it self the best, yet proves of dangerous consequence where it
exceeds in Food, in which too much Sugar is mixed; for indeed every sort of
proper Food has sufficient quantity of Sugar, I mean sweetness in its self, to
moderate the other Qualities, viz. the bitter, sour and astringent, so that
when People mix such quantities of Sugar in their common Food, they destroy the
Equality and Harmony of that thing, so that it becomes an extreme, and causes
the like disharmony in the Elements of the Body; for the best Quality in Nature
is as great an evil when it too violently predominates, if not greater than
those we least esteem of, as the Bitter, Sour or Astringent; for these last
carry their corrector with them, as having no enticing property. But these
things are seldom consulted either by the Learned or by good House-Wives, but
they go on in the Road, and every day increase hurtful Extravagances,
persuading themselves that the more cost they bestow, the more rich things they
jumble together, the better and more nourishing their Food must be; and more
nourshing indeed it is, but of Diseases and evil Juices; whereas plain, course
cheap, simple Foods are much more fri^ndly to Nature, and consequently more
strengthening and restorative. And therefore in former Ages, when Sugar, Spanish
Fruits, Spices, Sweetmeats, and the like, were not known in these Northen
Climates, People were not only healthier, but stronger, larger, and bigger
bon'd than of late Years, since the frequent eating and mixing those foreign
Ingredients with our more natural Food, which have and do daily prove of fatal
consequence to the Healths of many that immoderately use them.

The best Pyes, whether of Apples or Pears, are made thus. Take good Wheat
Flower, make it into a Paste with a little Leaven or Yeast, as you do Bread,
with warm Water, or Milk and Water, but no warmer than your Blood; let your
Apples and Pears be full ripe, and you need not mix any other Ingredients with
them, except you please to put a few of our own Country Seeds, either Carraway
or Fenn^l-Se^ds, which are very good and agreeable to most Stomachs: The best
fashion to make these Pyes in, is that of Pasties, which in some Countries they
call Ov^rstaps; for Crust or Paste that is made after this manner will not
stand or be raised according to the common custom And indeed if this wholesome
Food were in shion, and that esteem which it deserves, People need not be at
that charge with their Daughters to learn them to R^is^ Paste, which invention
was more for State and Pride than Health. This last sort of Apple and Pear-Pyes
are the best, most natural and agreeable of all others; for they afford a
Nourishment of a fine clean substance, open Obstructions of the Breast, cleanse
the Passages, and gently open the Belly, and you may eat of it every day,
without any kind of weariness, during the time such Fruits are in their full
strength and virtue: I wish the Nice-Cockered Palated Citizens would but try
the difference for one year, and then many of them would hate that Ignorance
and Vanity whereby they have contracted Diseases on themselves, and entailed
them on their Posterity, which have no Remedy, if they shall continue stubborn,
and walk down Hill to Destruction in the Path of blind Tradition; for no
Medicines have power to cure the Distempers that are contrcted by improper
Preparations, Mixtures and Superfiuity, if the smae be still continued. This is
evident from daily Experience; for do we not find every succeeding Generation
more infirm and diseased than the former?

2. In the baking your Pyes the O^^u. ought to stand open, or at least the
Ovenlid not so close but that some Air may pass, for this Element is the true
Life of the Spirit: therefore all Preparations in which the Air has its free
circulation the Tincture and pure spirituous Virtues are preserved from
Suffocation, and thereby the true natural Color, Smell and Taste preserved
without violation, which other-wise cannot be done to that advantage.

3. When your Pyes are sufficiently baked, draw them, and cut holes in the top
of each, that the sulpherous Atoms and fiery vapors may the better pass away,
and separate themselves, which will make such Pies sweet, and less windy, and
much more wholesome.

4. You ought neither to eat them hot, nor put Butter into them, as the custom
of some is; for that does but waste your Butter, and render your Pyes less
wholesome than otherwise they would be. But if you let them stand, as aforesaid,
till they are through cold, you may eat freely of them, for they are a brave
wholesome food.

Also, ripe Apples raw are ve^^ good, being eaten alone, or with Bread, not as
a common food, but sometimes between whiles; for they clear an^ open
Obstructions of the Stomach, an^ gently loosen the Belly; the same (...) most
other Fruits, as Apricocks, P^ches, Plumbs of all sorts, Goose^^rr^ Currants,
and the like, if eaten moderately on clean well-prepared Stomachs, not after
Dinner, or in Wantonness on full Paunches, as is the custom of Gluttons, and
such as are (...) much strangers to Nature as to Tem^rance

As for Pies made of ^iesh, with Fruits, Spices and Butter in the Crust, they
are utter Enemies to the Stomach, and the natural Heat thereof, they dull the
edge of the Palate, stop and cloy the Orifice of the Stomach, obstruct and fur
the Passages, breed evil Juices, bad Blood, and consequently, impure Spirits,
causing heavy lumpish Dispositions to attend all those that frequently eat such
improper Food, and this so much the more if eaten Piping-hot, as the common way
is; And rather than the Ve^ison-Pasty shall want store of poisonous sulpherous
Steams, my Lady will have it put into the Oven three of four days one after
another, that it may forsooth!) come to the Table R^eking-hot; whereas if her
Madamship had but any Acquaintance with Dame Nature, or the Princess Reason, or
plain Grammar Experience, they would all tell her, That though her fine Pasty,
with as many Towers of the top on it as a fortified City, presaging danger or
destruction to those that shall attaque it, be at best but an untoward
unnatural kind of Food, yet 'twere much better Cold than Hot at first, much
more after the greasy Cru^st and stifled Flesh has so often been Parboyled in
the furious Steams of a close sulpherous Oven. The cause of which I have often
told you already, and fear I must do so again, before you will understand, and
so regard it as to abandon your old silly mischievous Customs; but the Reason
is this, The pure volatile Spirits and sweet Balsamic Virtues of all things
are in a great measure destroyed by the sierce Saturnine and Martial Fires, and
for want of the free Egress and Regress of the Air, and therefore a less
quantity of baked Flesh, espe^cially hot, will cloy and dull the edge^ the
Appetite, than either Roasted o^ Boiled, which is a sure demonstration that the
Preparation is not so proper or natural.

Likewise, here by the way I cannot but advertise all that regard their Health,
That they ought to for bear the eating of Hot Bread; for the same does
plentifully contain the fierce fulpherous Vapors and windy Fumes which are
very injurious to the Health, of the Body; as also, that Bread ought not to be
eaten till it is at least two days old; for before, it is stopping, and apt to
fur and obstruct the Stomach, being harder of Concoction than that which is
two, three or four days old, because in such new Bread, not only the fore
mentioned sulpherous Atoms of the Fire lie lurking, but there is also a
phlegmy humid part, which a little time does dissipate and dry away, and then
the Bread becomes much wholsomer, and also easier of Concoction: It Is true, new
Bread is much desired and eaten in Towns and Cities, but it is not for its
Virtues, but merely for Wantonness and Custom, and want of Understanding

CHAP. XII.
Of Raisins of the Sun.
THis is a Foreign Fruit, but of late years become of general use, and by some
admired and esteemed, especially in Diet for sick and weak People, as if it
were as necessary as W^eat, which is much to be pitied, except People did know
how to use them to better advantage than commonly they do. The truth is,
Raisins are a brave noble Fruit, endued with an excellent Virtue the aimable
and friendly sweet Quality is predominate in them, and therefore they afford a
good strong lusty Spirit, and are hot in operation, if not allayed by the
mixture of some proper Ingredients; but they being unequal in their parts, the
frequent eating them does naturally h^at and sharpen the Blood, generate
Phleg^y Humors, obstruct the Passages. clog the Stomach, dull the Appetite,
and consequently indispose the whole Body; and they are far more injurious to
Children than to mature Age, though bad to both: It Is a sort of Fruit that
ought not by any means to be mixed with our common Food, nor to be boiled or
baked, as the usual Custom of the English is; for that destroys most of their
pure Virtues, and renders them unhealthy, as most people may find by Experience.

Besides, our Women, who are the chief promoters of such things, ought to
consider that the Fruits that grow in hot Climates, are nothing so agreeable to
our Natures and Constitutions as those of our own Growth, especially such
things in which any Quality of Nature is extreme, as it is in this Fruit, which
the Sun and Elements have already prepared to the highest degree, and therefore
they will not endure any other Preparation without violence done to the good
Virtues, which renders them next door to Putrefaction, and whatsoever Food they
shall be either boiled or baked in or with, such Food will stink and putrify
so much the sooner; and as they will keep good a year, if they remain entire,
so being any ways altered, then they will not keep three days good: Therefore
all that are wise will forbear using them in such manner and Mixtures.

Yet it must be acknowledged, that Raisins have their Uses, though we might
well be without them, and many others of the like Nature; For 1st. They are
very good and wholesome being eaten with Bread for a Breakfast or a Supper; for
the Bread moderateth the Inequality of the Raisins, and makes them easy of
Digestion, cleansing the Stomach, and gently loosening the Belly; and indeed
this is the only proper way of eating them as Food. 2 dly, They are better in
Physical Operations then any other sweet thing, especially than Sugar, because
they are not altered from their first entire state, therefore their Juices are
far more cleansing than Sugar, or any other Sweets that have been prepared by
the Fire.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Currants, their Nature, etc.
CVRRANTS are much more injurious to the Health of English Constitutions than
Raisins; for the latter may be properly used by eating them with Bread; but do
what you will with Currants, they will be no better than Doctor Butler's
curiously prepared Dish of Cow^umbers, only most excellently fit to be thrown
away to the Dunghill: And indeed, the Inconveniences of eating or mixing
Currants amongst common Food, the Natives of those Countries whence they come
teach us, if Custom, and the common Cry of the Ignorant Multitude did not blind
People with strange Prejudices against all the R^mon^rances of Reason or
Expe^ience; for they will rarely ever eat them, either alone or mixed amongst
their Food; for they do not esteem them wholesome, nor hardly so proper as our
Hawthorn or Elder-Berries; nay, these by a little custom would be much more
proper for our Healths to be eaten by themselves, or mixed with other things,
than Currants, which are of such an untoward Nature, that those Natives that
work amongst them, and strew and pack them into the Casks, have their Feet,
Legs and Hands made Leporous and S^abby thereby, which proceeds from their hot
v^n^mous Qualities, and with these loat^som Lepo^ous Feet and Legs they tread
them into the Casks, and then you ca^ them for Dainties. And though when eaten
here these evil Qualities, are mittigated by being mixed with our moderate and
more friendly Grains and Fruits; yet still, whatever they are put into, does
thereby become the worse, and the more unwholsom. Amongst other Extravagances,
it is a great fashion to boil them in Water Gruel, and after they are so
boiled, this Water Gruel cannot with any delight or pleasure be eaten with
Bu^ter and Salt, as plain Water Gruel can, the Currants give it such an
unpleasant flat nauseous Relish, having no true natural Sweetness, or lively
Briskness in it; the very same is to be understood of Raisins, when boiled;
therefore the good Housewife is forced to add another Ingredient viz Sugar, to
raise it to a more full and perfect Taste and Relish. Now by these improper
foreign Ingredients the true genuine Nature and Operation of that friendly
Grain Oatmeal is destroyed, as though there had been no such thing; nor is the
hurt less to many other sorts of Food that are of greater Consequence, which
are daily spoiled by these improper Mixtures, which render them hot, and
subject to s^op and fur the Passages, generating evil Juices, gross Blood and
impure Spirits. For which cause all People that eat frequently of such Foods,
more especially young Children, are nothing so strong, brisk or lively as those
who are constrained by pure Necessity to feed and live on the most simple, and
meanest of our own Country Fruits, Grains and Herbs.

This all will confess, yet most that have wherewithal are so bewitched to
Foreign Novel^ies, that they had rather be afflicted with an hundred Diseases
and Miseries, and have their Children weakly, Ricketty and Leprous, tha^ not to
gratify a wanton Desire.

It is the common Opinion that Currants are Cooling, therefore both the Learned
and your common Nurses advise, that they should be boiled in Water Gruel for
sick People, and then Bs^ter'd and Sugared, which makes it not only very hot,
but strong enough for an Healthy ^low-man, whereby it overcomes weak Stomachs,
they always forgeting what ought always to be remembered, viz. Tha weak H^ats
must have proportionable Foods, or else Nature will come by the worst of it.
And as for Currants being to ^ing, it is absolutely false, like most of the rest
of the grounds they go upon; for all Fruits in which the Sweet Quality does
carry the upper Dominion, are hot i^ operation, and if it were not so, such
things would not affo^d the greatest Spirits, and also the most in q^antity
when the Distiller takes them in hand. Also, their Heat will hereby appear, if
you put such things into Beer, Ale, Wine, nay, Water it self, it will make such
Liquor to ferment, and render it much stronger than before; for if you put
Sugar into Str^ng Beer, a less quantity will make a Man drunk, than that which
has none in it. Let a person eat a Pint of (...) that is, only ^ater and (...)
with a little Selt, Bu^ter and Bread in it, and at another time a Pint made
with Cu^rarts, Sugar, Butter and B^^ad, as the ^s^al way is, and let him
observe which is hardest of Concoction, and hottest of Operation, and also
which he is lightsomest after; he shall certainly fi^d by Expe^ience, that the
Plain Gruel is not only coolest, but easiest of Digestion, and he most Airy and
pleasant after it. The truth is, it Men would but give themsel^es the leisure
to try and observe things, they could not be such strangers to the Method of
Well-living and to the knowledge of Nature, who is the Handmaid of God. For the
Reasons afo^esaid, you may undoubtedly ^onclude, Currants are not only hot, but
may also learn, that they are of a Naus^ous Quality, and if much eaten or
frequently mixed with Food, they breed thick gross Juices in the Body, and
infect the Blood with a sharp salt itching Quality or scorbutic Humor, whence
proceed general Weaknesses in the Joints and Limbs, and unnatural Heats in the
external parts, causing a lumpish Indisposition both of Body and Mind.
Therefore we advise all that have any regard to their Healths, to refrain all
such hurtful things, and content themselves (as their innocent lusty Fore
Fathers did) with the Growth of our own Country, which will abundantly furnish
our Tables, and contribute whatsoever is needful for the maintenance of Health
and Strength; but especially, we caution Children, Young People, and such as
are Sickly, from the use of them, they being most hurtful to weak Natures.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Spices, their Nature and Operation.
ALL sorts of Spices that come from the East or West Indies, are in nature and
operation hot and dry, and therefore not agreeable to our Northren
Con^^itutions, nor by any means fit to be mixed with our common Food; for they
too violently heat the Blood, and destroy the pure thin refreshing Vapors and
Spirits, and awaken the central Heat, which ought by no means to be stirred up;
for it presently sets Nature into an unequal Motion, making all the external
parts in a flame. There is a vast difference between the Regions and Climates,
both in respect of C^elestial Influences, and by the Nature of Soil and
Constitution of Air whence those Spices come, and ours, that it amounts to
almost a perfect Opposition; and what is Poison, but a violent Antipathy or
Contrariety in Nature? And if the Natives of those Countries will so cautiously
mix or use them, how sparingly ought we to meddle with them? But our English
have such an itching desire after Novelties, and every Joan is so proud to be
of my Lady Fidd^e-Faddles Humor, and long for things Far-fetcht and
Dear-bought, that if we had ten times as many more brought over as we have,
there be those amongst us would cry up the excellent Virtues of them, though
there is scarce any one thing so much destroys and hurts our Health, both of
Body and Mind, as the eating and drinking Foreign Ingredients with and amongst
our common Food; and how absurdly are those things mixed together, whose Virtues
and Vices are as contrary to each other as the Climates are different? What
agreement or affinity is there between our Fruits, Grains, Herbs and Seeds, and
those that come from the East and W^st-Indies? not so much as between the
Complexion of a Fat-nosed Lubber-lip'd Blackamore, or swarthy Bantame^, with a
Head like a Sugar loaf, and our most Florid Beauties. In particular, what
likeness or correspondence is there between Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Ginger, or Pomento, and the Flower of Wheat, or any other Grain, or with
Apples, Milk, Bu^ter, Herbs or Flesh? Verily there is no simile between them,
and the foolish Painter, that to a Man's Head added a Stags Neek and a Fishes
Body, did not Limn a more deformed Monster, than those prepare a monstrous
unwholsom Diet for either the well or sick, who jumble together Ingredients so
heterogenious, and as it were diametrically opposite. The compounding of these
Foreign Ingredi^^ts with our Domestic Pr^ductions, that chiefly destroys the
Health of our People, and not so much the Composition^ of our own Growth,
though there are too often very improper Mixt^res of them also, but those
however are not pernicious to that degree as the others are: For Example, Is
not S^gar the occasion of such great Quantities of G^os^r^ies, and many other
Fruits are gathered and eaten whilst they are immature, and have no more
goodness nor virtue in them than the Leaves or Sticks of the same Trees? Also,
what abundance of the like unripe Fruits are Pres^rv'd (as the call it (though
more properly they might say, Dest^^y'd) and when you have been at all that
pains and charge, pray tell me what they are really good for, unless to please
Children and Fools, and indulge wanton Liquorish Palates, who yet for the most
part pay dear enough for those Vanities, by losing all Appetite to wholesome
Food, and bringing upon themselves variety of Diseases, and then the Wizard of
a Doctor must be sent for, to Redress those Mischiefs which the Mother's
Fondness occasion^d; but then he goes so awkwardly to work, that instead of
Remidying, he Increases the Distempers, and at last the puling Young Heir, or
the most beloved Girl dies, and then Father and Mother weep and wring their
hand^, and are ready to be distracted; And indeed they have more cause of Grief
than they commonly think of, for Thousands of Parents by their foolish
Indulgence, in giving their Children rich costly improper Food, become
accessory to the shortning of their Lives.

Many of our Gentlewomen, who look upon themselves to be Saints, do yet make no
Conscience of spoiling those good Creatures and hopeful Fruits which the
Providence of God sends into the World for the real use and benefit of Mankind,
whilst they turn them into Wantonness, and waste and pervert them before ever
they come to Maturity, to quite contrary ends than that for which the great and
good C^e^tor design^d them; for he intended them to supply humane Necessities,
they abuse them to Extravangance, and Riot, ^^d ^iquorishness, He gave them
Virtues to add Health and Strength to such as should in their due season eat
them, but they, by seizing upon them with an unnatural and untimely Violence
(the same thing to Vegetabl^s as Mu^der or Killing is to Animals) and using
them absurdly and preposterously, make them the occasions of Diseases and
Destruction; and yet how many Pounds do some Women tris^le away in a year upon
these harmful Vanities and Superfluities? yea, and think themselves rare
Housewives too, for this Prodigality, and are at Pains or Cost to bring up
their Daughters to these Baneful Mysteries of Preserving, Conserving, etc. All
which, besides a most impetinent Waste of their Husbands Money, and spoil of
Gods good Creatures, tend likewise to the destruction of their own Health, and
that of their Children; for no sooner have they by Gluttony, or eating of too
great Quantities of Flesh, Fish, or other Rich F^ods or over^strong Liquors
brought ^^emselves out of order, but away they run or send Iillian the
Chambermaid (who has already spoiled her Teeth with Sweetmeats and Kisses) to
the Closet for some Conserves, Prese^ves, or other Confectionary-Ware; and if
that will not do (as alas! how should such sower abortive things, only Embalmed
with nauseous Sugar, do any good?) then fetch the Bottle of
Black-Cherry-Brandy, the Glass of Aqua Mirabilis, and after that take a Dose of
Plague-Water; and she is no Body that has not a Room furnished plentifully with
these pernicious confused Slip stops and Extravagancies.

But tell me, my good Dames! what have you to say for these Curi^sities? What
Benesit, what Advantage do you receive by them? Are you more Sound, Healthy or
Strong than the Honest poor Country-Woman, that has none of them? Are you more
free from sudden Qualms or settled Distempers? Have you better Appetites than
they? Have you more Pleasure in eating your Larks and Pheasants, your dainty
Bi^s, with Rich Poinant Sawces, and delicious costly Wines, than they have in a
Mess of good Milk, or a lusty piece of Br^ad and Ch^ese, and a Cup of
Nutbrown-Ale of their own Brewing? Are your Sleeps more sound on your Down
Beds, double fortified with Curtains of Silk and Sarcenet, than theirs on their
wholesome S^raw-Couches open to the Air that whistles in between the wooden
Windows? Are you more free from Colds with your ^lannel Shifts, and your
Man-like Drawers, and your Quilted Wastcoats, and Petti^oats so many as makes
you show as big about the Haunches as a Dutch-Woman, and would half set up a
Long-Lane Bro^er? Are you, I say, with all this Furniture free from catching
Cold, any more than the Rosie-Complexion'd Lass that courts the sweet kisses of
the Air in her Smock Sleeves, and trips over the Dewy-Plains in a Winters
^rosly M^r^ing with but a brace of Linsey-Woolsey Coats that are not long
enough to conceal the shape of her Well-Proportioned L^gg? Or are your Children
born more Lusty, or more free from Dis^ases, as the King's Evil, Lepr^sies,
Rickets, Ioynt-Aches, and other Distempers? Or are they better Complex^on'd, or
strai^er-Limb'd, or handsomer Shaped, or in any kind more active, sprightly or
vigorours than theirs?

Alas! none of all this; the Advantages lie all on the other side: Whilst you
are continually complaining and sighing, they are merrily Singing; Whilst you
are weak, and lose your natural Complexions, and have no App^tite, and can
scarce relish the rarest Dain^ies, and your Sleeps are restless, and Distempers
are continually either actually seizing on you, or at least threatening you, so
that you are always forced to keep a Doctor or two in Pension for your
Lifeguard; They are strong and lusty, and look as fresh as a May-Morning, and
have Stomachs as sharp as a Scyth, and all their Meat seems N^ctar, and their
Drink Ambrosia, and their Sleeps are sweet as Mariners after a Tempest, their
Breath as fragrant as Honey-Suckles; they never so much heard of half the
Diseases that you groan under, and look upon Doctors as only Bawbles for
Gentlefolks, and find an Oatmeat Cawdle or a Cardus Posset better Physic than
any the Apoth^caries Shop affords; their Children are in all respects lustier,
founder, healthier, more active and strong, of better Complexions and
compleater Proportions for the generality, than yours And why then will you
still so indulge a Sottish Fond Humor and wanton Pa^ate, seeing it is so
destructive to your Wellbeing, and that of your Dear Posterity!

But waving this not unseasonable Digression, and to return to Spice, -- It
must be acknowledged, that God made nothing in vain; Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger and Pomento or Iamaica Pepper are brave noble Fruits,
and smell, as it were, of Paradise, and the great and good Creator is as much
to be admired in them as any other Vegetations, for though they are not so
useful for common Food, yet they have their excellent uses: Their chief Virtues
reside in their most pleasant Scent, which is very refreshing and chearing to
the Spirits; also, they are endued with a warming Quality, very profitable in
Physical Operations, especially for some sort of Melancholy and Phlegmatic
Complexions. The same is to be understood in Brandy, and other distilled
Spirits, which often prove profitable being taken when there is just occasion,
in a Physical way; but of fatal consequence to such as accustom themselves to
the drinking of it at every turn; for then it quickly wounds the Healt^ by
destroying the natural Heat; the like is to be understood of all Extremes, in
Drinks and Food, which are disharmonious in their parts. Therefore it is no
ways safe to mix unequal Fruits with those that are equal; for then the Harmony
of the whole will be violated. As to use our familiar Example, Take the Flower
of Wheat, Milk and Water, mix them and heat them to a Pap, these three things
are equal and agreeable in their peculiar parts each with other, and make a
brave wholesome Food either for young or old, on which alone you may live healthy
and contentedly for diverse years; but if you mix with them Sugar and Spice, or
either of them, then the company of this Stranger puts them out of Tune, and
breaks the Consort, so that if any one should be confined to this last sort but
for one Month or two, their Palates and Stomachs will grow weary and loath it;
And so it is with Cakes, in which eight or ten Ingredients are mixed; how long
could those that love them best, eat them, and not be weary? Not sixteen days
together: But take Flower and Water and make Cakes thereof, and on them you may
live several years and never be tired.

In like manner Flesh, Bread and Herbs harmonive, and a man may eat of them
every day, but mixed Spanish Fruits, Spices, and the like, with fat Flesh and
Butter, and prepare them as well as you can, you shall not eat them every day
for one Month without loathing and weariness; the very same is to be understood
of all other Foods and Drinks, and if People would not prefer Custom, and what
is cried up by the Multitude before the simple innocent ways of Nature, it
would be casie for every one to choose and understand what is most proper and
agreeable to the Stomach. For if they would set Gustom aside, then most would
be led to Meats and Drinks that are natural and proper by mere instinct, as
most of the inferior Creatures are, except some unclean Savages, as Swine,
Bears, Lions, and the like: And in truth the greater part of Beasts have more
understanding in Meats and Drinks than many Men; for Man cries, What were those
things made for? As if God intended that all, right or wrong, must be crammed
into his Paunch, and that there could be no other use for them, but for him to
devour them; as if to be Ornaments to the Universe, to set forth the Power and
the Wisdom of God, in the making, and feeding, and preserving so many
innumerable Creatures, and invite Man thereby to praise, magnify and adore his
Maker, were not more Noble ends than to eat them to his own Prejudice. But so
greatly precipitated is he into Wrath, Viol^nce and Oppression, that he is not
willing any thing should escape his luxurious Throat, though the use of it be
to the destruction both of his Body and Mind. For the source of all Evils to
Man has been his suffering his Imaginations and unclean Desires to wander
after those things that are neither needful nor any way benificial; for faslly
imagining that all things were made merely for his use, he entered with the
power of his free depraved Will, with a rapid Motion, into all Beastiality, and
so deprived himself of the divine Vision which he was made in and for, and not
to live in the Power of the dark Magic and Brutality, to domineer, and rend,
and tear each other to pieces, far worse than the Savages of the Desert. For
Man was created in the Image of God, and ordained to live under the Government
of the divine Principle, and if he had continued under its dominion, then every
sort of innocent Food would have satisfied him, according to that Commission,
Every green Herb and Tree bringing forth Fruit shall be to thee for Meat. Nor
was he clothed with the Skins of Beasts before his Transgression, and they are
still the Spoils and Relics of Violence; for he was made Naked, that is, in
Innocence, and his Clothing himself with the Excrements of Beasts, does truly
intimate his depraved state, especially when he becomes proud thereof; than
which there cannot be a greater Vanity in the World.

CHAP. XV.
Of Oil, and its Nature.
AMongst all Fruits or other things eatable, brought from beyond Seas, OIL is
one of the best, being of a brave nourishing clean Nature, mild and friendly to
most Constitutions, far exceeding Butter or the Fat of ^lesh, and that it
agrees not with some, is for want of use when they are Young; it is endued with
Equality and Concord, as being distilled by Nature's choicest Limbeck, and It
would be much for the Health of our English People if they did eat more of it,
and less Fruits and Spices, though we have no necessity for either; but since
our Desires do so itch after Novelties, it were much more commendable for us to
choose those things that have the nearest affinity with our Natures; and of all
sorts of fat things, Oil is the most innocent, as proceeding from the cleanest
Radix, and being the product of Vegetation, and therefore is very proper and
agreeable to humane Nature, being joined unto and eaten with H^rbs and Fruits,
they having the nearest a^finity in their Basis or Original, and therefore Gyl
being eaten with Bread or Herbs, is to an undepraved Palate, not only more
delightful, and to the Stomach easier of Concoction, affording a finer and
cleaner Nourishment, better Blood and purer Spirits, than either fat of Flesh
or Butter, though the last of them is very wholesome, Cream and Butter being our
Oil, and eaten with proper or cleaner things, as Bread, Herbs, and the like,
does make a proper Mixture, and consequently good Food.

The Reason why Oil is with greatest commendation eaten with Herbs and Bread,
is, because all Mixtures of Food are most agreeable to the Human Nature that
bear the nearest affinity in their Basis; and as Oil is the true fat of
Vegetables, so it suits and agrees better with them, than with any sort of
Flesh, or other Food proceeding from Flesh; but with Fish it is very good and
wholesome, especially Sal^-fish, for by its Balsamic Quality it allayes the
^ierce keen Property of the Salt, and sweetens the lean Body of the Fish: And
for these Purposes it is far better than Butter.

But it is to be noted, That Oil ought not to come near the heat of the Fire,
for that will presently destroy the purer parts and virtues thereof, and then
it will become strong and fulsom; the same is to be understood if it be mixed
with any Foods whilst hot which ought always to be pretty cool before you mix
your Oil: Therefore To sted Brend and Oil, though frequently used, is not so
good as cold b^ked Br^ad and Oil; than which there is scarce a better Breakfast
or Supper; for it cleanses the Passages, is easy of Concoction, breeds good
Blood and fine Spirits, whence proceeds any airy lightsom Disposition, and good
habit both of Body and Mind. However, those that accustom themselves to the
frequent eating thereof, ought to remember their best Friend Tem erance, that
is, to eat it sparingly, and not in too great Quantities.

Olives, or the Fruit whence Oil proceeds, are nothing so good as the Oil it
self; for being gathered unripe, o^ immature, and put into a Pickle made for
that purpose to keep them sound, they are apt, especially if frequently eaten,
to obstruct the Stomach and Passages. The best way is to eat them with store of
good Bread, now and then between whiles, but most that are eaten in England are
taken on full Stomachs, in Superfluity and Wantonness, so that it would be no
loss to is to be without them.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Honey, its Nature and Operation, with some Notes on the Practice of
Chemistry.
THe Ancients have attributed some hundreds of Medicinal Virtues to Honey; but
in my opinion it will hardly perform half that which is said of it; yet to give
it its due, it must be acknowledged to be a brave Noble and friendly thing to
Nature, of which, some is better, some worse, according to the Nature of the
Herbs and Flowers out of which this King of Flies extracts it; for cause, some
Honey is of a more unpleasing Taste than other, as being harsh, and with a kind
of bitterish farewell, apt to gripe the Stomach and Bowels when it is tinged
with Martia^ and Saturnine Herbs, as when the Bees gather it from the Blossoms
of Furz, Centaury, or other Vegetables of like Nature, that grow upon harsh,
sower, poor Commons and Heaths; yet for Women and Maids, who are afflicted with
Stoppages, and the Disease called the Green Sickness, Medicines made with this
sort of Honey, are very powerful to remove those Evils: But for general use
that Honey is best which is extracted or drawn from the most pleasant fragrant
Flowers that grow in Meadows and sweet Downs, where Co^slips, and the like,
delight to grow; as also from the Blossoms of Corn, Peaches and Honey-Suckles;
for the Honey thereof made is smoother, finer and pleasanter than the other,
and more agreeable to Nature.

But there is yet a more subtle and almost nnknown difference in Honey, which
ought to be noted; for as Honey being drawn from a vast variety of innocent
delicate Herbs, and most beautiful sweet smelling Flowers, (the bright Stars of
Earth, as the Planets and Constellations are the Flowers of Heaven) may justly,
in its own Nature be styled, The most Transparent and Richest Juice or Liquor
in the World, and the finest and most pleasant Sweet of all others; so the same
is to be understood not so much of our vulgar Honey, as in its original
Preparation and Perfection, viz. if it could be procured whilst it remains
entire, as it is extracted out of the Herbs and Flowers into a little Bag or
thin Skin, which lies in the very center of the Be, as may be manifest to
sense, if you can be so cruel, when you catch one of them, to sever it in two,
for then, if you are quick, you may take out the bag entire, but if you are too
long about it, then the Be will suck it up, or destroy it. This Bag contains a
most curious thin transparent Liquor, of an excellent fine Color, and fine
innocent and perfect Taste, leaving behind in the Mouth no Hugo, or strong
Taste, as our vulgar Honey does, when eaten alone. Now this is the Bees true
Elixir, the proper Paradisical Honey; but when the Bees have d^gested it, which
cannot be done without some violation to the pure volatile Spirits, then they
spue or vomit it up. After which it becomes of another color, smell and taste,
and also of a diff^rent nature and operation; for whilst it remains entire and
undigested, its Color is clear and white, its Taste an innocent sweet, with a
grateful come-off on the Palate, its Small pure, ai^y and delightful, but after
the Be has digested or separated it, and spued it up with her Winters
Provision or store, then i loses its white Color, and its pure Ta^^e, and its
airy Smell, and becomes more strong, dull and unpl^asant, and in no particular
so gratefully as whilst it remai^'d in the Bag entire.

It is further to b^understood, that this Spagyrical or C^ymical Art of the
Bees do sc^i^fl consi^^ in the Poys^^ us Root or Sting in Nature; for the
Attractive Faculty stands in the wrathful Poisons of Saturn, which powerfully
attracts all things unto it self, and the S^paratire Proper^y consists in the
bitter S^ing of Mars and Mercu^y, therefore the Chemical Furnace, the Bees
Labo^^tory, or that Tool whereby they and some other Flies perform these
wonderful things, and separate the pure Essential Spirit and Balsamic Body of
what they gather from the gross phlegmy Qualities, is their Sting, which is of
a poisonous Nature, as it app^ars, when they in Anger leave it behind them in
any Animal, for presently the part rages and swells; but when they have thus
lost or dispoiled themselves of this Sting or Poison, then they cannot be
Laborers in this Spagyrical Art any longer, nor draw more Honey out of the
Flowers, but pure necessity compels them to become Thieves and Robbers, and
live on the spoil of others, and thenceforth are called Drones. Now so it is,
that most sort of Flies do love Honey, and all sweet things, as Sug^r and the
like, to feed on, but only those that are naturally endued with a Venom or
Sting, are able to extract it; for it is by that sting that they separate the
Virtue from the Vice, which is a wonderful Arcanum, and may afford a most
curious Philosophical Speculation; for indeed it surpasses all the Spagyrical
skill of men; for they make a present separation, and are not obliged to
serment or sower their Liquor before they put it into their Limbeck; for if
they should, they could obtain only the fierce fiery wrathful Spirit, as
happens in all Distillations of Balsamic Liquors, as Wine, and the like; but
the Bees extract the more pure substance, viz. the Volatile Spirits, Tinctures,
and sweet Balsamic Body, which in all Distillations is destroyed, and only the
firce original fiery Spirit preserved, which when it loses its friendly
Companion, i^s amiable Sun of true Light, and sweet pleasant Virtue, then
presently it becomes a high lofty untameable Power, of a fierce fiery Nature
and Operation, as is manifest in all such Spirits as Brandy, Rum, etc. which
all prey upon the Natures of such as accustom themselves to those fiery
Liquors; of which, if poor Mortals were s^nsible, they would hate themselves
for their Labors in that ^i^d, and Kings and other Gover^ou^s would make Laws,
not only against the I ^inkers, but against the Inven^ion too of such
pernici^us Arts.

Wherefore th^n do our earned Spagyri^^ men spread their ^^ums so large and
lo^tily, and keep such a clutter and boasting of their Art and Chemical
Medicines, which in their highest Preparations are not to be compared to the
skill and product of a poor silly Fl^e^ (...) Be? Let us survey the Method
taken by these fiery Philos^phers, and let Reas ^n^judge what Virtues are to be
extracted from such Preparations. First, when they t^ke any Herb, Flower, Seed,
Crain or (...) to make a M^dicine of, they put it into some Mers^ru^m as they
call it or Liquor, wherein it may lie and ferment or sour, which does presently
^urn and suffocate the odo^iferous Smells, pure V^la^ile Spiri^s and sweet
Body, in which consists the true Virtue and healing Q^^lity of all things, both
in the Animal, Veger^ble and Mineral Ki^gdoms: After this, they put it into the
Furn^er or Lambeck, and through the fierce heat of the Fire there will run off
a Brandy, or hot sulpherous Spirit, which does contain only the fierce original
S^irits, void of the middle Quality, and all the Seminal and Balsamic Vertu^s;
therefore such their Spirits are at the end of Nature, and you may add what
Balsamic Bodies or Sweets you please, they cannot be made to work or ferment;
and although such fiery Spirits are good in some Medicines, being properly
mixed with things of a Balsamic Nature, yet alone they are not, because they
have lost the Medicinal Virtues in their Preparation; for the healing Virtue in
all things proceeds from and consists in the benign and friendly Quality, which
the Fire dissipates and destroys; and as long as it remains, so long the pure
Smell and sweet pleasant Taste of that thing continues; but in the hot
sulpherous fierce original Fires the evil Smells and nauseous Tastes (which
most of the vulgar things called, Medicines, are subject unto) do consist.

There is a certain Maxim, though little understood or regarded,

That all Preparations, either in Food or Physic, that do not conserve the
Essential Virtues of those things pretended to be prepared (that is, the pure
volatile Spirits and sweet Body, whence the true Color, pure Smell and
delightful Taste, and all other good Quali^ies, both Medicinal and Nutrimental,
do arise and proceed) such Food and Medi^ines can never answer the ends of
Nature, being weak naus^^ous, improper, and deprived of those very Virtues
which should do the business for which they were administered. The truth of what
is here delivered may be confirmed from daily Experience; for do not all
Vegetations quickly putrify and rot when there is any Violence offered, to the
subtle Spi^its and sweet Qualities, whether it be by improper Preparations, or
other Accidents proceeding from the Elements.

Therefore there is required greater Understanding and skill in preparing
Medicines, than most are either endued with or imagine; for the amiable healing
Quality in all things is of a very subtle tender Nature, and the pure
Nutrimental and Medicinal Virtues, lie, as it were hid, or captivated in the
crude Phlegmy Body both in Veg^tables, Animals and Minerals; and when the
Artist would make a Medicine thereof, he must either by the help of the
Celestial Fire and Elements, or by the common Fire, or some proper Menstruums
digest and open the gross Saturnire and harsh Martial Body, which in all things
does in some degree captivate the Essential Virtues and Paradisical Properties,
but so delicate is the friendy Nature, that it will not endure any kind of
Violence without great Prejudice; for being (by opening its Poison, the crude
Body) set at liberty and becomes volatile, if such Preparations be continued
any longer than the proper point of time, the Essential Virtues being already
upon the Wing, will presently fly away; and if the friendly Element the Air
have not its free Circulation, then they become suffocated; for the Air is the
Life of the true and living Spirit in all things.

Is not this clear and manifest in Herbage, as Hay, which Husbandmen preserve
for their Cattle; and in Corn, if it stand after it is full Ripe, or when cut,
if it lie too long in the open Air, will not the pure Essential Virtues depart
and evaporate? and then, do not all such things lose their natural Color, pure
mell and pleasant Taste, and so become of no use nor true ve^^ue either for
Food or Physic? The very same comes to pass in all Housewifery and Prepa
ations; if it be under-prepared, it is gross, heavy and full of flatulent
^ui^es; if over, then its pure Virtues become evaporated, and it will afford no
good nor firm Nou^ishment, but is of a ^^ull Taste, a Duskie or else Martial
Color. For Example, Bread, whose predominant Quality stands in the Ventrial
and I^vial Nature, and therefore of a pure White; but the ^aturnine and Martial
heats of the Or^^, where the friendly Element, the Air, has not its free
egress and regress, it becomes of a Duskish Brown or Yellowish Color, and a
rough harsh Taste; whereas if the Preparation were proper, it would be white,
smooth, soft, and of a sweeter Taste, and easier of Digestion.

From what has been said, it appears, not to be an easy matter in Physical
Preparations and Separati^ns to preserve the friendly healing Properties
complete and entire, and yet at the same time open, digest and destroy the
gross Phlegmatic Body, since the former is so apt to be violated, if great
Prudence be not used; And if once this benign Quality be wounded, such Foods
or Medicines become fulsome, fierce and nauseous to Nature, far worse and of
more dangerous consequence than they were whilst they remained crude, as being
hotter and more fierce, because the Moderator is gone; so that it would prove
much safer if the diseased took the crude Herbs, etc. for then they would have
the innate Virtues, as well as the Vice; but after the common Preparations,
which most Physicians and Apothecaries use, you must be contented with a mere
Nauseate or Loathsome Medicine, in which the pure Essential Virtues are all, or
for the most part, destroyed; for all Vegetations and other things, in which
the Properties and Qualities of Nature are unequal, either by Nature, or
rendered so by Artless Art, will be strong, and of a fulsome Taste, dull and
heavy on the Palate and Stomach, etc.

And whatsoever is said here of the improper Preparation of Vegetables, and the
Evils that come thereby, will in a more especial manner take place in the
Spagyrical or Chemical Art, when it drives into the Mineral Kingdom; for all or
most of the benign Virtues or good Properties of Minerals are locked up and
captivated in the harsh Poisons and gross crude Bodies of Saturn and Mars, and
their Birth and Generation is in the deep Bowels of the Saturnine cold Earth,
where the Sun and Elements have not so free Influences and Circulation through
them, as they have on all Vegetations and Fruits; therefore they are far more
harsh, hard and poisonous, than those things that grow in the open Elements;
neither are they in any degree so friendly and familiar to our Natures, as
Herbs, Fruits, Grains and Seeds; therefore Mineral Medicines are of much more
dangerous and fatal consequence than the others, if they be not prepared as
they ought to be, that is, so as that the good Virtues be not destroyed; for in
Vegetable Preparations there does at best remain only a dull gross flatulent
Body, which indeed has no power to cure, nor very much to hurt. But nothing is
more dangerous and poisonous than ill prepared Medicines of Minerals: Therefore
in Si^kness I had rather fall into the hands of an unskilful Gallenist, than of
a rash and ignorant Chemist, the last being much more to be dreaded than the
former, though both are bad. And it is common with some that think themselves
great in the Chemical Art, to take Antimony and other Minerals, and prepare
them, and make Medicines, which are tenfold worse than when it was in its
natural crude Body, as appears by its fierce poisonous operation; for before
its Preparation a man might take forty, sixty or an hundred Grains without any
manifest prejudice, but when it has passed the strong sulpherous Fires and
Calcinings of the Chemists, then ten or twelve Grains will do the business,
that is, purge and vomit, as if it would rend and tear Nature to pieces; and if
any should take but half the quantity that might safely have been taken whilst
it remained crude in all its parts, it would prove an infallible Cure for all
Diseases, by putting a period to Life.

Whereby i^undeniably appears, that the Chemist has not, as many falsely boast,
by his Art digested or meliorated the terrible fierce Wrath and strong Poisons
of Saturn and Mars, and preserved the blessed and most aimable Properties of
Venus, Jupiter and Sol, which last endue all things, in which they carry the
upper Dominion, with a gentle mild friendly Nature and Operation; but on the
contrary, they render the poisonous Qualities more violent and intense; and the
benign Properties in most Mineral Preparations are destroyed, suffocated and
wounded by their fierce and improper Fires, and for want of Understanding in
the time, so that the venomous Wrath becomes tenfold more fierce than it was
before; and the chiefest matter they can boast of, is, That with much Art and
Industry they have destroyed the good healing balsamic Virtues, and so enraged
the poisonous Wrathful Nature, that a less quantity will do their business. But
let them know, that all the Healing and Medicinal Properties re^de in the
friendly Principle, and in whatsoever Food or Medicine the amiable Virtue or
balsamic Oil is wounded, that thing thenceforth becomes abominable, so far
from deserving the Name of an Help or Remedy, that it is a mere Nauseat to
Nature.

It is further to be noted, that all Medicines that are fierce, wrathful,
poisonous, and unequal, in which the benign Properties are impotent, and the
fierce original dark Powers so predominate, that ten, twenty or thirty Grains
or a few Drops will affright Nature, and put her into an Agonious fit, as for
the most part destructive to the Wellbeing and Health both of the Body and
Mind; for they do incorporate with their Similes, and excite the lurking
Poisons in the Body, and put a further Dismayment on the weak Oil and pure
Virtues, the strengthening of which would be the right Cure. And it is a very
great chance if any such rough churlish Medicines do any Cure, but altogether
the contrary. It Is true, many perhaps may recover after such Physic, but that
is no Argument of their excellency or safety. If a Physician should have at any
time three hundred Patients, one might safely pass ones words, That if not one
of them took any of his Medicines, yet two hundred and fifty of them would
recover; and ye should the Physician in this case have the glory of Curing them
all, when in truth they owe the benefit solely to the Mercy of God, and
goodness of his Handmaid Nature.

It is also to be considered, That there are some Chemical Preparations, as
Powders, and the like, that have no Purgative or Vomiting Quality, nor any
other manifest way of working or altering of Nature, being no more sensibly
felt than a crum of Bread after it is in the Belly. And these have been and are
much cried up for the wonders they do: And in truth they are much to be
preferred before the former uncorrected Poisons, which rend and tear the Body
to pieces; for these, perhaps, do not hurt, and what do they do, I am not able
to say; but most certain it is, that as many as happen to be well after the
taking them, do attribute their Cure to these silent Medicines. However, this I
will be bold to tell you, That in Chemical, and especially Mineral
Preparations, it is a very difficult point, and I think, more than any mortal
man can certainly undertake to perform, To correct, allay and destroy the
Venoms of Saturn and Mars, and at the same time preserve the more amiable and
friendly Virtues, which are in their own Nature so very subtle, tender and
fine, that every little Inconveniency or Violence wounds them; and the
difficulty is hereby further increased, for that in what Medicine soever the
original Fires of Saturn and Mars are destroyed or wholly annihillated, the
benign Properties can no longer subsist; For where there is no Fire there is no
Light; for the Fire is the Father of the Light, and all Life and Moveability
stands in the Poisonous Root; therefore the Artist must not annihillate those
poisonous Principles in Nature, for they are the very Original of every Life,
but his work is to correct them, that the benign Principle and healing Quality
may arise and tincture, or shine through them, that so their Strife may cease,
and all the Properties incorporate and embrace each other, and so attain the
Unity, and then such a Medicine will have power and virtue to tune the Discords
of Nature into an Harmony, and allay the irritated Poisons in the Body, and so
awaken and strengthen the dismayed Oil and fading Virtues, and so the Cure will
be soon effected.

Thus it appears, that to take a crude poisonous Mineral or Vegetable, and open
its gross Body, and correct the Venoms, and awaken the good Balsamic Virtues,
that so they may predominate and tinge the whole, is one of the highest and
most difficult Points in the Spagyrical Science: But on the contrary, it is no
great matter to make a Devil, being half made already, that is, it is easy to
make a thing worse, but hard to render it better; for its Virtues cannot appear
till the Poisons be moderated, which must be done by the Artists helping hand,
which to do, requires as great Understanding as to obtain that wonderful Thing,
so much talked of, but rarely, if at all known or understood, viz. The Grand
Elixir or Philosophers Stone; whereas indeed neither this nor the other can be
attained by any humane Study, Learning, or Industry, but only by the divine
Bounty and favorable Mercy of the God of Peace and true Love. But however, it
often comes to pass, that though the Medicines be not prepared in Nature's own
way, nor so as to them narurally p^ofitable and Homogeneal, yet nevertheless
the Prayers of the Administer, and the Faith of the Receiver, may and do often
work Wonders; for Faith is ab^e to remove Mountains. Therefore many Medicines,
though in themselves imp^oper, have wrought great Cures, so great is the Power
of Zeal and Faith, and sincere calling on the Name of the Lord, which is the
only Univers^l and Infallible Medicine, and surest Port of Safety.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Sugar and Sugar Candy, their Nature and Operation.
SUgar is of late Years become of almost universal use with all that have where
with to procure it, which proves of evil Consequence to most of them,
especially Women and Children, who are the chief eaters thereof; it is in truth
an excellent and rich Fruit, being endued with the King of all Tastes; for
Sweetness is the best and richest Quality in Nature, being the moderator and
qualifier of the Bitter, Sour, Astring^n^ or Sal^ish Quality, both in Animals,
Vegetables and Minerals, and from this amiable Quality does arise all beau^iou^
Colors, Smells and Tastes in Meats and Drinks, and other things, the House or
Cabinet of the pure volatile and essential Spirits, the appeaser and qualifier
of the fierce ^rathful Saturnine and Martial Fires; therefore in whatsoever
things that sweet Quality is impotent, the same become fierce, wrathful and
harsh; if in Animals they are ravenous and cruel, as Bears, Lions, Tygars,
Butchers, Soldiers, Wolves, Dogs, Crocadiles, Pikes, Cormorants, Sharks,
Vultures, and many others both on Earth, and in the Air, and Water, of
monstrous Shapes and hideous Forms; if in Vegetables, as Herbs and Fruits, they
are strong, rank and poisonous, and much more in Minerals.

Nevertheless, if this sweet and so much desirable Quality shall be too strong,
so as it were totally to captivate all the other Qualities, as happens in
Sugar, and many other Fruits, then its good and amiable Virtues are turned
e^il, for such are all extremes of whatsoever kind in Nature, and of bad
consequence, if it be no^ properly mixed or incorporated and eaten with other
things, or by it self very sparingly; for many times the best things prove as
prejudicial to health as those of less value, nay, more harmful to Health,
because they are more enticing. Thus the too frequent mixing of Sugar with our
common Foods and Drinks, obstr^cts the course of Nature, heats the Blood till
it becomes thick and putrified, whence proceed Stoppages of the Nerves,
hindering the Passages of the Spirits, so that they become heavy, dull and
impure, because the Blood cannot freely circulate; and these Evils do in an
especial manner take place amongst Children, Women and Young People, who
chiefly maintain the Confectioners, and are the great Devourers of Sweetmeats.

Few there be that are sensible, or indeed so long as they live intemperately,
can be sensible of the mischiefs of improper Mixtures; and as it must be
confessed that Sugar in its own nature is one of the best Vegetables, so it
must be affirmed, that as it i^an Ex^ream or a thing unequal in its Parts and
Qualifications, so whatsoever Foods and Drinks it is mixed withal, it inclines
them to its own Nature, viz. to Inequality, if care and wisdom be not use^; and
therefore is not to be used with e^^able Fruits and Grains, as Wheat, and the
like, nor with Milk, nor several sorts of Gru^ls and Pott^ges, for they are all
endued with sufficiency of this Balsamic or Sweet Quality already.

Besides, the art that is used to make the Juice or thin Liquor of the
Sug^r-Canes into Sugar, does so alter and change it from its simple Original,
that it becomes of another Nature and Operation, as is manifest from the
different Tastes of the one and the other; for the Juice of r^pe Sugarcanes
has a most delicate fine simple, and as one may say, innocent sweetness,
leaving Behind in the Mouth no strong Taste or ill Relish, but every way
perfect, and without offense to Nature, and a man may without weariness eat
more thereof than he can of Sugar, especially of fine Sugar; but on the
contrary Sugar after the first 2 or 3 Mou^hfuls, does not only leave b^hind it
a^n us^ous strong Taste or Hug^* but also quickly tires the eaters thereof. And
as the mixing of Sugar with the before-m^n^ion^d b^^ign Grains and Fruits is
improper, so ^^kewise is it in vain to add the same to Mart^al ^atu^nine and
unripe Fruits that are harsh, sour and bitter; for unripe Fru^^s can no more be
made prop^r by mixing mature Fruits with t^em, t^an Brandy can be made wholesome
Drink by mixing Sugar or Sweets with it; This you may perceive in the case of
stale harsh Beer, you may mix Sugar with it, viz. such a quantity as will allay
and hide the roughness and hardness of the Beer, as to the Palate, and make it
go down somewhat pleasantly, but when it comes into the Stomach, (Natures
Laboratory) ^here she makes separation, then t^^^ ^aturnine and Martial
harshness will again appear in its own Form, and he^t the whole Body, and
generate the Grav^l or S^one, if it find suitable matter: The same is to be
understood in Foods; what Stom^ch will be satisfied after a whole Meal only of
Goosebery-Tarts made of young green Gooseberries made pallatable with Sugar?
and so of all other things that are either unripe or unequal in their parts,
and the reason is at hand, viz. because two Extremes, though never so cunningly
joined, cannot produce a thing of a middle Nature or equal Operation, and
agreeable to Nature.

But here perhaps some will object, If these good things, Sugar, Spanish
Fruits, etc. most not be eaten, wherefore were they made?

To which I answer; The Creator made all things for his own Honor and Glory,
and made Man in his own Image, and endued him with divine and humane Wisdom, by
which he might be able to choose unto himself the better part; but this Eye of
the understanding he has ^^ut out, by suffering himself to be pre^^pitated
into all Evil, Su^erfluity and Intemperance; but the Allwise Creator did never
command mankind to increase and make vast Quantities, viz. a thousand times as
much more as is needful of any sort of eatable or drinkable things, and then
oblige them to swallow them down their Throats for fear (forsooth) they should
be spilt, or be counted useless, as if there could be any greater Spoil than
that which spoils both the thing and the receiver, or as if it were not better
to let a thing remain seemingly useless, than to abuse it to my own
Destruction? the truth is, the original of most superfluous and pernicious
Inventions, and also of such a prodigious increase of Sugars, Spanish Fruits,
Wines and Spices, have chiefly sprang from the hellish Root of COVETOUSNESS,
being promoted for the sake of Gain, and to raise great Estates, and to live a
rich easy superfluous Life, and not for any private or public good; and as
their ends were bad, so the effects prove no better. Some also will say, We
have need of them, and why should we debar our selves of those things? And thus
if there were an hundred Toys and needless Novelties brought into England more
than there is, they would quickly find footing, and the People would quickly
have as much need of them as they have of Tobacco, Bra^dy, Sugar, Spices, etc.
And that we have no real deed of any of these things is undeniable, since our
Forefathers lived not only as well, but much better too, that is, were
stronger, lu^^ier, longer-liv'd and freer from Diseases, before the use of such
things, than their Posterity are since; nay, many Discases which we nowadays
groan under, were not then known.

But yet for all this it must be acknowledged, as I said before, that Suga^ is
a brave noble Fruit, and has its uses, but chiefly as Wine, it ought to be
taken and used as a Cordial, or in a Physical way, and not at every turn to be
mixed with our common Food and Drinks, as most do at this day, it being o^e of
the richest Juices in the world, and therefore the fitter for Cordials, when
Nature wants such Recruits: but the too common use thereof is of ev^l
consequence, particularly all sweetened Drinks and Foods do much forward the
generation of the Gout, and other Obstructions and Diseases in the Body, which
sim^le innocent Foods will prevent, if Temperance be at any ^ate observed; but
if Suga^ be now and then a little used in Milk-Meats and Pottages for old
People, it will prove grateful and benefical; for of all sorts of People
sweetened Foods are best for the aged, and are least hurtful to them.

Touching Sugar Candy and Pan-Sugar, I shall first discribe to you how it is
made, and then shall the more easily make it appear how improperly it is used
commonly amongst us.

Sugar Candy is made thus, First it is boiled as high as other Sugars, then
they take this Syrup out of the Pans, and put it into an earthen Pot, and set
it in an hot Stove, there to stand eight or ten days, in which time the
fierceness of the sulpherous heat does Candy or coagulate it into an hard tough
substance, and then you take it out from the Syrup, and put this Candy, or the
hard lumps into the Stove again, but made two or three degrees hotter, where it
must remain ten or twelve days longer, and then it is done.

There are two sorts of it, White and Brown, but they are both of one Nature
and Operation, and the chief use that is made of either, besides spoiling of
Childrens Teeth, is to several sorts of People as a Medicine, when they are
troubled with Coughs, Colds and inward Stoppages of the Breast. Now
Sugar Candy, as to its Nature and Operation, is the same in the Radix as Sugar,
from whence it is produced, only it is nothing so good, nor of so cleansing and
opening a Quality as Common-Sugar, though the contrary is generally believed,
but any Man that wears Eyes in his Head, may from the before cited method of
its preparation easily perceive my Opinion to be true, for by that tedious
unnatural preparation, and being made stronger of the Lime, that thereby it may
more easily harden and coagulate. This Candid Sugar must needs become of an
hotter Nature, and tougher Substance than the common Sugar, and consequently
not so wholesome especially for those People that are troubled with Colds or
Stoppages, for being by that way of preparing dried, hardened, and brought into
an hard glewy tough Substance, of a slimy ropy Nature, when it comes to
dissolve, it naturally heats and stops the Passages, instead of opening them,
causing Drought, etc. there being nothing more contrary and burdensome to Nature
in such cases, than this very thing which is given almost as an universal
Medicine to both Young and Old; and therefore ought by all wise People to be
abandoned; for all things in which the Sweet Quality is extreme (in which
respect Sugar is chief) do dull the Palate, clog and obstruct the Stomaeh, stop
the Passages, destroy Concoction, spoil the natural Heat, making it weak and
feeble, heats the Blood, and renders it thick, whence proceed dull and impure
Spirits. Therefore all such things ought to be avoided by ^ound and healthy
People, but much more by such as are already obstructed, except they intend to
increase their Maladies, which is often done by such improper means, it being a
custom too general when any such Disorder is on People, to make most of their
Foods and Drinks sweet, that (forsooth) they may Rot away the Cold, as they
call it; never considering the evil Consequences of such things, which are as
far from any Property to help such Infirmities, as I (...) is from Darkness,
and only (...) Blindness and ^olly have been and are the original of all such
Customs and Inventions; for in truth, such as find themselves invaded with such
Distempers, the best Food is thin brisk Gruds and Pottages made in the manner
we have taught before in the Chapter of Gru^ls, etc. also good Raw Salads, with
Bread and Oil, but Oil sparingly; likewise Bread and Butter and all sorts of
lean Food that are light of Digestion: And for Drinks Toast and Water, Water
and Rhenish Wine, or Water and White Wind, two parts Water and one Wine, or
clear small Ale, with moderate Clothing and Exercise in open airy places, which
will gradually cleanse the Passages, open all Obstructions, and s^on remove
those Evils.

It is further to be noted, That all sorts of sweet Fruits, as Raisins, Figgs,
and the like, being frequently eaten by such People as are subject to Stoppages
and Colds, does increase those Distempers, by heating the Blood and weakening
the digestive faculty and natural Heat, and generating evil Juices, except such
Fruits are eaten sparingly and with Bread, which with such Fruits is to be
preferred before any other things mixed or eaten with them whatsoever: Likewise
there are various sorts of Drinks made by boiling Fruits in Beer, Ale, Wine,
and the like, with various sorts of Herbs, Roots, Seeds, and Druggs of
disagreeing Natures, and stoutly sweetened with Sugar or Honey, such Liquors for
the most part prove of very evil consequence to Health; For no sweet Fruits
ought to be boiled, neither for Food nor Physic; for boiling does naturally
evaporate and destroy the pleasing friendly opening Qualites, and sends packing
the purer Spirits, as appears both by the Fruits after they are so boiled, and
also the Liquor that they are boiled in, and the nauseous unpleasing Taste
which remains in both, which is the Reason that all that use this way of
Preparation, are forced to sweeten such Drinks with Sugar or Honey, or else
they will not be drinkable; but if you take any of the beforementioned Fruits
raw, and bruise or stone them, and then infuse them in any of the said Liquors,
especially in common Water, it will become sweet and pleasant, and far more
opening and cleansing, and every way wholsomer: The same advantage you have
when you infuse Herbs properly gathered, dried and preserved, and also Seeds,
Drugs and Roots, and all such Drinks will have a pleasant Taste, and be welcome
to the Stomach; but if the same be boiled, it will be altogether the contrary,
as having lost their essential Virtues by the Violence of Fire; for the pure
volatile Spirits in all sweet lucious Fruits, are not only very powerful, but
stand, as it were external, and on the surface, and therefore will not endure
the fierce motion of the Fire, as Flesh, and several sorts of Martial and
Saturnine Fruits, Grains and Seeds will; for in them the pure sweet virtues and
spirits, are (as it were) locked up under the harsh Forms and earthly Properties
of the Original Poisons, and therefore cannot be brought out to manifestation,
but only by the heat of the external ^ire. These things ought to be considered
and understood in all Preparations, both in Food and Physic, or else there
will be but sorry Diet and worse Medicines.

As for Coughs, Colds and Stop^ages, (for which People commonly use Sugar Candy
and Pan-Sugar) the same are generally procured by Ill-living, and Intemperance
in Mea^s, Drinks, Exercises and Habits, and also by eating and drinking too
much in quantity, and things of a contrary quality, or improperly prepared.
These things are the original Inlets of your Colds; nor do proceed so much from
thin Clothing, as most imagine; for if the inside be sound and clean, then
there is but little danger of outward Inconveniences; but the best way for such
as are of weak tender Spirits and sanguine Natures, and indeed for all sorts of
People to prevent outward Colds, and the evils that happen through thin and
thick Clothing, and by Heats, Sweatings, and the like, is to use themselves to
change their Clothes often. As for Example; such as stay in the House in the
Morning to put on one sort of Clothes, and when they go out to put off their
Coats and Wastcoats to their Shirt, and put on fresh cold Clothes; and then
again in the Afternoon or at Night, when they stay at home, and have no
occasion to go forth, to put off their Clothes they went forth in, and put on
the others; which a little custom will make so easy, familiar and delightsome,
and so refresh them, that such as use themselves to such change of Habits, will
not be satisfied if they omit it: And for others who are subject to Sweat by
their Labors, if it be Extreme, and more than is usual, then let them at all
such times put off all their Clothes, Shirts and all, and put on fresh Shirts
and cold Clothing; And for such as Over-Travel themselves, and are sweaty and
weary, let them also put off all their Clothing, and put on fresh; but let
both one and the other observe to sit still a little while before they either
eat or drink. Also, when you change your Clothes, as to put on thinner or
thicker, or when you put on New-Clothes, which generally are warmer than old,
you ought not to wear the thick or the thin, the new nor the old constantly,
but to wear the new one day, and then on the Morrow to wear the old or thinner
again, and so by degrees you may wear either without danger to your Health; for
Nature, especially when weak will not admit of sudden alterations or changes,
either inwardly or outwardly, without injury.

But some will be ready to say, That it is not only troublesome to change a Man's
Clothes so often, but also the ready way to procure great Hurts by putting on
old Clothes when they are hot. And it is confessed, this may at first seem very
improper; but if the matter be better considered, our Directions will not
appear either unreasonable or unwholesome; for does not every one, even the most
tenderest People, and such as do often sweat a Nights, and lie, ten, twelve or
fourteen hours soaking themselves as in an hot Bath, yet every Morning rise out
of those close hot Beds, and put on cold Clothes, without any prejudice to
Nature or catching Cold? And if so, why then should putting on cold Clothes,
when they are up in the cold open Air (which is far more tolerable than the
former) do them any prejudice? Besides, the putting on cold Clothes, provided
they be not wetor damp* is so far from being an injury, that it is altogether
the contrary; for this fresh cold Clothing shuts and closes up the Pores, and
drives the natural Heat more central, which is the greatest security that may
be to Nature, causing a lively briskness through the whole Body, sharpens the
Appetite, and helps Concoction, enabling the Natural Heat to withstand the
attaques of outward Inconveniences: Is not this further manifested in Swimming,
Wading, and the like? Do not such Exercises wonderfully beget Appetite? Which
is for no other Reason but by the Coldness of the Water, which shuts the Pores,
and forces the Natural Heat more inwardly, which does in a moments time digest
Crudities and cleanse the Stomach from all slimy superfluous matter, which did
dull and fur the Passages and hinder Concoction; so that you see what you fear
as your greatest Enemy, is your chiefest Friend.

Is is further to be noted, That ^iggs, Pru^ns, and also several sorts of Nuts,
as Almonds, and many other things of like Nature, that are the Productions of
hot Climates, are not (...) agreeable to our Northern Cons^^^utions, and ought
not to be frequently eaten, or indeed not at all, except only with common
Bread, or in a Physical way in opening Drinks. The Mischiefs of eating such
Fruits alone, may appear by their effects, viz. the Stoppages and Obstructions,
thick Blood, weak Joints and Limbs, and troublesome unnatural Heats, possessing
all the outward parts, whilst the more central are cold, whence proceeds
dullness of Appetite, and many other Inconveniences, especially to Women and
Children, who are the chief eaters of such things, to the great imparing of
their Health. The like is to be understood of Green and Candid Gingers, as also
all sorts of Conserves and Preserves that many of the more curious Dames stuff
their own and their Childrens Paunches with; not forgetting the great
quantities of the Confectinners Hodge-Podge, and the Cakes, the Buns, the
Ginger-bread, etc. All which do wonderfully fur and obstruct the Passages, and
generate Crudities, and indispose the Stomach, and prepare matter for the
Regiment of Diseases.

Some may think or say, That I talk after a strange rate: But if they be so
discreet and wise as to consider the Natu^es, Ingredients and Operations of the
beforementioned things, or consult either Doctor Reason, or their near
Neighbor Doctor Experience, they will be of my mind. For there are as great
Superfluities, Intemperances and Disorders committed in Meats and Drinks, as
there are in Cloathings, Houses and Furnitures, but the Mischiefs arising from
the former are worse than those from the latter; for Excess, bad Preparations
and improper Mixtures in Foods and Drinks, do an hundred times more injury to
Health and Tranquillity of Body and Soul, than the highest Extravagances in
Ornament and Clothing; The one being external, but the other inward; One is
seen, but the other lies hid, and is felt to the disquieting of the Body and
Mind; and as it is less Ornamental, so is it less excuseable; For what are
Monuments that Gluttons leave behind them? Verily nothing but an Ill Name, as
stinking as their Carcasses, weakly and d^seased Children to curse their
Intemperances and Fat Houses of-Office.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Four Principal Tastes, or the Bitter, the Saltish, the Sour, and the
Sweet Qualities, and their respective Natures.
HAving occasionally in the foregoing Discourse several times mentioned the
Sweet Quality I shall here take leave to inform the Reader more particularly of
the Nature of the four principal Tastes or Qualities, since the knowledge
thereof will be very useful to all discreet Lovers of Health.

The BITTER Taste or Quality is the Radix or central Fire in every Life,
whether in Animals, Vegetables or Minerals, it has the strong might of the
Fire, whence arises the Attractive Quality, which draws together the Water
in the Air, and again dissipateth it, by which it becomes separable, distilling
it self in drops and Showers. And if Men or other A^imals be dignified with
this Quality, then have they strong Attractive Faculties and great Heats, and
consequently eat much, and are subject to Wra^h and Fierceness, especially if
the Male Aspects and Configurations of the Stars and Elements be awakened; for
then presently this bitter harsh furious Fire breaks forth, whence follows
Thunder, Lightnings and terrible fierce Storms of Hail, Rain, Wind, and the
like; and if it gets dominion in the Hearts of Men, then follows War,
D^solation of Countries, Burning of Cities, Devastation of Towns, etc. Also,
this Quality being incorporated with the pure spirituous parts or vapors of
the Air, Clothes all Vegetables with a pleasant lovely Green, but it does
differ, some deeper, some more light, all according to the strength of the
Salnitral Virtue in each Herb or Tree.

If this Bitter Quality be temperate, and dwell meekly in either Men, Beasts,
or other thing, then it is a most friendly chearing Life thereunto; for by its
central and pleasant Heat, it dissipateth all Malignity and Evil Influences, is
the cause of all Joy and the Root of Motion: Therefore Men and all other
Creatures in whom this Bitter Quality is strong, are brisk, lively, active and
nimble; so Vegetatives wherein the same does bear sway, are powerful Openers of
all Obstructions in the Body, of which the Ancients seems to have been
sensible, by their attributing opening cleansing Virtues and Qualities to
Bitter Martial Herbs, S^eds, Fruits and Grains.

It is most true, that this is a powerful Quality, and when it is temperate in
any Creature, causes a pleasant Noise or Emotion, which in Men we call
Laughter, in other things an Elevation of Spirits; and when the Astringent,
Sour and Sweet Qualities do equally incorporate, gives the brisk lively Taste
to all Food, which renders it not only pleasant and delightful to the Palate
and Stomach, but affords a profitable Nourishmennt that will never tire the
Eaters thereof, being soberly used; For Equality and Concord maintain their
like Properties, both in the Body and Mind.

But this Bitter Spirit or Quality has likewise in it another Species, viz. a
Fierceness and Wrath, which is a terrible furious Spirit, and the House of
Death, a Corruption of all good, and Destruction of the Life in Body; for if it
be too much elevated in Man or Beast, then it presently enflames the central
Fires, whence proceed cruel Burning Fevers, and other accute Mortal Diseases;
for this Quality is the principal Mother and kindler of the hot poisonous Fire
in all Elements; and when it too violently predominates in any Herb, Fruit,
Grain or Seed, they are strong, fulsom, hot and bitter, not fit for Food, nor
indeed for Physic, without skilful Correction; but if a wise Artist takes them
in hand, that knows how to ally their fierce Martial Poisons and hot bitter
Fires, then they prove excellent Medicines; and if any shall mix such Herbs
with their Drinks or Foods, as some do unadvisedly, by infusing of Wormwood, or
the like, in Beer or Ale, letting it lie too long, till it becomes almost
Rotten, by which means the volatile Spirits become suffocated, then such
Liquours will be apt to awaken the bitter hot fulsom Qualities, and prove hot
and unpleasant, and send dulling Fumes and Vapors into the Head, prejudicing
both the Eyes and Brain. Nor can the wisest Cook make proper and agreeable
Foods or Drinks of any thing in which either of the four Qualities are extreme;
indeed they may by various mixtures palliate and hide the Excess, and for the
present render them pleasant to the Palate, but when the natural Heat of the
Stomach comes to separate them, there still remains a Touch of the old Relish,
and they afford neither a firm nor good Nourishment; and should any Person be
confined but a Month to live only on them, he would perfectly loath them, which
is a demonstration that they are not natural and wholesome.

The SAITISH or ASTRINGENT Quality is the very original matter of every
Creature in the four Worlds, it attracteth or naileth all things together, it is
the Vestment of the Spirit, and the true Clothing of Life in all things,
whether Animal, Vegetable or Mineral, an harsh drawing Property, which
encompasseth and encloseth the Life, Spirit and Power of every material Being,
whence proceeds the Shell or Body* which serves to preserve the more essential
parts from being evaporated, suffocated, or otherwise violated: Thus if the
Skin, Shell or Body of any thing be any ways hurt, then presently the most
essential parts are disturbed, and the Spirit of Life suffers, and becomes
wounded, it being the first and the last in all things; and when this
coagulating or saltish Quality is temperate in any Creature or Vegetation,
being equally incorporated or mixed with the Bitter, Sour and Sweet Properties,
it renders it benign and pleasant, and operates in number, weight and measure;
for it is this sharp Quality that gives that delightful pleasurable Taste in all
Meats and Drinks.

But if this Astringent Quality be too highly exalted, if it be in humane
Nature, It becomes a terrible Fiercess, and inflames the bitter Root or Fire,
whence are engendered in the Body Diseases of a tearing stoney Wrathful Nature,
as the Gravel, Stone, Gout, Palsies, Agues, etc. or if it happen to be inflamed
in the Water, then it engenders Scabs, tedious Sores, Small Pox, Leprosies,
Dropsies, and the like; but if it be violently enkindled in the (...) Quality,
then follows Consump^ions, general W^stings of the Radical Moisture, Plague
Sores and great Pox; or if enflamed in the Sour Property, then the Palate
forfeits its Taste and good Relish, thence arises Loss of Appetite, Stoppages,
sour Belchings and Vapors, Windy Diseases, and cruel Obstructions of the
Stomach and Passages: And when this Inequality happens in any sorts of Foods or
Drinks, then they are astringent, harsh, sour, sharp and unpleasant both to the
Palate and Stomach, binding the Body, and generating the Gravel and Stone, and
various other Diseases, according as it finds matter in each Constitution. And
though Cooks and others do by their diverse Ingredients and improper
Compositions hide or captivate this harsh Saturnine Fire, so that it cannot be
felt, or very little tasted on the Palate; nevertheless when the natural Heat
of the Stomach has made separation, then the aforesaid ill Juices become
manifested and exert their harmful Operations and Effects, as all may know, if
they will but give themselves the leisure and heed to observe it. For Example,
Take any kind of harsh astringent Fruits, and allay them with Sugar, Spicies,
Spanish Fruits, Flower, Butter, Milk, or any other Balsamic pleasant things,
and make it up together for Food, as in Pyes, Tarts, and the like, then make
your whole Meals thereof for several days together, and you shall certainly
find an unpleasant sour keeking or qualmish gnawing or griping at your Stomach,
as if it were always unsatisfied.

The SOVR Quality, when it is moderate, opposes in any Creature, or other
thing, then it opposes all Extremes, both of the Bitter, Sweet and Astringent
Properties, being of a cooling refreshing nature and operation, it makes an
excellent temperature, giving a most pleasant Taste to all sorts of Food,
causing them easily to ferment and digest, so that they become, as well the
most pleasant as the wholsomest of Foods, being a quick lively powerful
Quality, the true Habitation and delight of the pure Spirit; but if this
Quality be too weak in any Creature, then they are dull, sottish and heavy; if
in Foods, unpleasant, and apt to cloy both Stomach and Palate; but when it is
too highly elevated, it engenders Sadness or Melancholy, causing a stink, or
Putrefaction and Rankness in all Animals ane Vegetables.

The SWEET Quality opposes the other three, being an amiable, blessed and
pleasant Property, comforting and refreshing every thing; it is an Asswager of
Wrath and Fierceness, a Calmer of Storms and Tempests, and gives all things
their pleasant and friendly Look, affords the pure spirituous fragrant Taste in
Vegetables, whose fair, yellow, white and ruddy Colors do all from hence
proceed; it is a Glimps of the divine Ray, a Qualification of Love and Mercy,
the sweet Solace and Joy of every created being; and when it is temperate and
moderate in any thing, bearing a gentle sway over the Martial and Saturnine
Properties, then such Creatures are Sanguine, of Friendly Dispositions and
Temperatures, of tractable humane Inclinations, and all Meats and Drinks in
which it does a little predominate, are endued with Concord and Equality, as
Bread, Milk, mild Ale, Beer well Brewed and fermented, Cider, Wine sufficiently
allayed with Water, etc. such Foods and Drinks do by consent administer a
proportionable Nourishment by equal Portions to all parts of the Body; for this
good Quality does sweeten and allay the bitter hot Fires of Mars, and opens all
the doors of the Melancholy Astringent Chambers of Saturn, by its friendly
Influences.

But still this amiable Property does contain a fierce wrathful Poison, which
is the Root and very Center of every Being; for if there were no harsh nor
fierce wrathful Fire, there could neither be any Light or Love, and when this
lurking Poison is too violently kindled in the bitter Quality in the Element of
Water, then it engendereth many Disorders, as botchy S^es and Leprosics, which
quickly corrupt the Flesh; but if it be kindled by the heats of Mars, then it
infecteth the Element of Air, and occasions a sudden and spreading Plague,
that corrupts all in a moment. So when this Quality shall too violently bear
sway in Foods and Drinks, they thereby become heavy and dull, apt to clog both
the Appetite and the Stomach, hot in operation, making the Blood thick and
sharp, and consequently the Spirits impure, the Senses stupefied, the
Understanding clouded, the Joints loaded with pernicious Juices, etc.

By all which it appears, that whenever any one of the four Qualities
beforementioned, does too violently predominate, or is inflamed, it presently
kindles or awakens the hot bitter astringent Poisons, whether it be in Animals
or Vegitables, so that the central Fires which lay hid or captivated in the
sweet Oil begin to burn fierce, and appear in their own Form. Most People that
enjoy Riches and Plenty may know this by their daily experience as when they
have drank freely of Wine or strong Drink, does it not first too violently burn
up and waste the sweet Oil and pure volatile Spirits? Its either by Evaporation
or Suffocation, and thence follows excessive Heat, so that all the Body burns
with a burthensom and unnatural Flame; whereas before the intemperate drinking
of such unequal Liquors, all the Body and Members were cool, brisk, and full of
Life and Pleasure; yet the same fierce wrathful central Fires were then as
strong and powerful, only they lay hid or captivated in the sweet Oil, and pure
spirituous parts, which is the Moderator of those central Fires, but when by
Inequality or disorder that sweet Oil or Humor Radicalis is wounded, then these
original Poisons appear, and manifest themselves in their fierce Forms and
Natures, which so long as the good Virtues were strong, they could not do; for
these four Qualities are set in opposition to each other, that thereby the
fierceness of each may be tempered and mitigated, that so all Creatures,
Animals, Minerals and Vegetables might be brought to a fit temperature, by the
embracing and incorporating of the said Qualities each with other; for the
sweet Quality opposes and moderateth the fierce Elevation of the Bitter,
Astringent and Sour, and makes an Harmony, resulting from them all; and the
sour Quality opposes the fierceness of the bitter, sweet and astringent, being
their cooling and refreshing Life; So again the saltish or astringent Quality
makes an excellent Temperature in the b^tter, sweet and sour, as the bitter
Quality opposing the excess of the other three, reduces them to Equality,
making them more p^easant and gentle in their operation. Therefore all sorts of
Food and Drinks, in which any one of those Qualities are too highly exalted,
become unequal, and the predominate quality presently incorporates with its
(...) in the Body, and thereby discompose it, destroying the Health and Harmony
of the parts. But on the other side, all mean simple Meats and Drinks, in which
the Properties are near equality, and have no manifest Taste that does too
violently predominate, do by Sympathy embrace and incorporate with their
Likenesses in the Body, equally distributing proper Nourishment to all parts
and Members, which makes the whole Lightsome, full of Joy and Pleasure; if this
were understood, a little practice of Temperance would make many loath
themselves for their Disorders, and their continual affronting of Nature,
causing her to lose that simple innocent Way, wherein she delights to walk to
Health and Felicity.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Drinks, and particularly of Canary.
I Now proceed to speak of the most usual Drinks at this day used amongst us,
especially such as are esteemed most Cordial, and prescribed many times in a
kind of Physical way for Diet, or in order to the preventing or remidying of
Diseases; and because the Richest of our Drinks is Canary, I shall begin with
that.

CANARY (commonly called Sack) is a brave noble Juice or Cordial, one of the
most excellent Drinks in the World, far transcending any Cordials prepared by
the Apothecaries, or any Juice which the best of Flesh affords; the same being
enriched with the choicest Virtues of Nature, being too rich for common Drink,
but nothing more cherishing and reviving, if taken on special occasions, when
Nature does require a Recruit; and indeed the intent of those that first
brought it into England, was for no other use: And therefore the first
Ingrossers and Buyers thereof were Apothecaries, who sold it again to their
Patients in small quantities, as by the Advice of Physicians, which then was of
good use for the comforting and chearing sick weak decay^d People, it being
endued with a brave Balsamic Body, yielding abundance of pure subtle Spirits;
its predominant Quality stands in the Sweet Body, therefore ought not to be
frequently drank in times of Health, its Virtues being too great for common
use; for that which is extraordinary good in season, may prove of ill
consequence when used unseasonably; for the common use thereof dulls the edge
of the Appetite, weakness the natural Heat of the Stomach, and spoils the
Concoction, and for that reason a very little will satisfy those that drink
much of this Cordial Liquor; besides, it replenishes the whole Body with
superfluous Humors and evil Juices; for all sorts of Wine are Extremes,
especially Sack, and though it e^ceed in the best Property of Nature, yet the
frequent use of such high graduated Drinks may prove as prejudicial to the
Health and Strength both of the Body and Spirits, as things of meaner Vertu^s,
nay, much more harmful; for all Extremes, or things in which any Property of
Nature is too highly advanced, ought to be taken very sparingly, and as Physic
rather than Food.

It Is a dangerous Error to imagine (as most People do) That the sweeter and
richer Drinks and Foods are, whether simple or compound, so much the better or
stronger Nourishment they shall ^fford. Whereas the clean contrary is true; for
nothing can maintain the Body and Spirits in good Health and Tranquillity but
such Meats and Drinks as are simple, and nearest the Equality. For Drinks
wherein the Spirit is predominant, if not taken very seldom and sparingly, are
apt to destroy the action of the Stomach, and to incorporate with their
similes, viz. with the pure natural Spirits, and balsamic Virtues in the Body,
causing them to burn too violently, so that an evaporation or suffocation of
them follows; therefore although whilst such spirituous Drinks are in
operation, all the Spirits of him that has drank, are in an hot Rage or
Tumult, and he forgets all Sorrow, Modesty and Temperance, and by the awakening
an unequal Motion of the Spirit, skips like a Wild Asses Colt, and Sings and
Rants, and becomes brisk and Jolley, and in his own floating Imagination as
Great as a KING; yet when a little Sleep has quelled this Tumult and dissolved
these Fumes, you shall find the poor Creature with much fewer Spirits and less
Oil in his vital Lamp, than he had before the Merry Carrouze, and he is weak,
and faint, and feav^rish, and goes trembling, and looks as dejected as a
conquered City; which shows what Spoil and Waste, what Hav^ck and Desolation
the strong spirituous Liquor has made upon his natural Spirits; and this is a
sure Demonstration, which all true Topers cannot but subscribe to and confirm
from their own wretched Experience.

Moreover, all Rich sweet Wines and Cordial Liquors, if frequently drank,
though not the degree of disturbing the Brain, do yet heat the Blood, and put
it into a kind of disorderly ferment, and set the Gate of Venus open, and makes
Men too Effemenate and Women too S^lacious, being not at all agreeable to our
Northen Constitutions; therefore if healthy People will drink Wine, they ought
to allay it with Water, and then it makes a Drink more equal and more wholesome,
viz. two thirds Water and one Wine. And for such as are weak, sick and fainty,
if they would have stronger Cordials than our own Country affords, let them
drink some Wine, which is the choicest of Cordials, and higher graduated in
Nature than any other Liquor that can be made by Art; but if Men and Women
addict themselves in health to guzzle down the Richest Wines daily, as many
Thousands do now a days, what must they have for Cordials in their Sickness?
for their Bodies being so habituated to Wine, that will have no operation to
help them. Shall they take Brandy and Rectified Spirit of Wine? Alas! this too
they have already made their common Drink, and Wine is long since become too
cold for their destroyed Stomachs, even when they are in the best Health they
are capable of; and B^andy, Rum and Vsquebath are scarce able to furnish out so
much warmth and activity to the natural Heat, as to digest a small Dinner: Now
when such People come to be sick, (and to be sure long they cannot continue
well) what Cordial shall be prescribed for them? I believe the learned Doctor
in Europe cannot tell, unless he should make them swallow two or three Ladles
full of scalding Lead, boiling Pitch or flaming Brimstone: They are at the end
of Nature, and therefore cannot arrive any higher; for those that drink strong
Ale and Beer in Childhood, their Nature shall require Wine in their Middle
Years, and Brandy in Old Age; for Nature as it grows old, becomes weaker and
colder, and so requires more hot spirituous Drinks; and therefore Wine and such
strong Liquors are drank with most advantage by the Aged.

And if Children and Young People be used commonly to drink Water (which will
be most for their Healths) then Small or middle Beer or Ale will be as cordial
to them, and warm and comfort them as much in their middle Age, as Wine will,
that drank strong Ale or Beer in Youth. And to speak truth, no sort of Drink
does maintain the Spirits and natural Heat in such vigor and strength as mean
Liquors, viz. such as are of the middle Nature, or nearest the Temperature,
viz. good Water, or well-brew'd Ale or Beer of a middling strength, or Wine
allayed with Water, as aforesaid. But now, most are grown to that degree of
Blindness, Excess and Folly, that nothing will give their ^oracious Desires and
greedy ^aunches satisfaction, but such Drinks as are strong, hot and unequal in
their Parts, which indeed is like themselves; for ever since man has suffered
his desiers to enter into Discord, he cannot but desire such disagreeing meats
and drinks, for every Like desires its Likeness, and is its highest Joy;
Inequality begets Discord, and Concords Peace. Therefore all plain simple Meats
and Drinks, are for certain of the greatest strength and virtue, and the only
maintainers and continuers of Heal^h and long Life. And English People have
need of no other or better Drinks and Cordials than may be made of our own
Seeds, Grains and Fruits, as Ale, Beer and Cider, which may be made to what
degree of strength and goodness you please; and being well prepared, are far
more agreeable to the Constitutious of English People, than the Liquors that
come from other Counties.

But all thick strong Ale and harsh, bitter, or stale, strong Beer, is very
injurious to the Health, as also Double Beer, which is now a fashion, but never
invented by Philosophers. The common drinking of such Drinks does strike at the
very Sinews of Health, being much worse than Wine, especia^ly than Wine and
Water, which is (...) commendable clean healthy Drink, that beg^ts App^tite,
cleanses the Stomach, Purgeth^y Urine, and is endued with many excellent
Faculties, and if it were the Growth of our own Country I would commend the use
of it to my Countrymen, but being a dear Drink, and therefore not Come-at-able
by the middle or meaner sort of People, I shall forbear to speak any thing more
of its Virtues, only I advise the Physicians and Apothecaries to use and prefer
Wine, especially right Rich Racy Cana^y as their best and general Cordial in
times of Disorder and Sickness; and do commend all People in general, to that
brave mild friendly Drink, viz. Ale, made and brewed according to our
Directions in the Book, entitled, The Way to Health, Long Life and Happiness,
etc. there also you will find an account of the Virtues and Vices of Beer and
common Ale, and which is most agreeable to Nature and best to preserve Health.

CHAP. XX.
Of Sherry.
SHERRY (by many here in England called Bristol-Milk) is a fine Cordial Wine,
as good for common drinking as Cana^y, but nothing so Rich; being mixed with
Wa^er it begets Appetite, helps concoction, cleanses the Passages, and purges
more by Urine than Canary, neither is it so apt to weaken the Natural Heat, nor
lead the Lovers thereof into Consumptions; but as it is a strong Wine, and
heady, discretion and Temperance ought to regulate the use of it; for being too
frequently drank, or in too great Quantity, it may prove of ill consequence: To
which purpose, most of those Observations we have made upon Canary, may also
conveniently be referred unto this sort of Wine. And though I am forced to use
Repetitions sometimes for the Readers sake, I take no delight therein for my
Own.

CHAP. XXI.
Of White Wind.
White Wind is a brave clean brisk Drink, if moderately taken; it begets
Appetite and purges by Urine; yet it contains two Qualities that are not
friendly to nature, especially if frequently drank, viz. Heat and a keen
Sharpness, whereby if Temperance be wanting in the Drinkers thereof, it will
quickly kindle and irritate the central Fires of Mars and Saturn, which will
not only indispose the Body and Spirits, by putting them into an unnatural
flame; but in some Complexions generates an hard gritty matter or substance
both in the Reins and Bladder: Therefore this, as well as the other Wines,
ought to be well allayed with Water, which will bravely moderate, cool and
sweeten the hot sharp Properties thereof, and bring them near the Equality; and
then, viz. (...) th^s sort of Wine is thus allayed, Two thirds of Water to one
of Wine, it is one of the best Stomach-drinks that I know; for it powerfully
helps Concoction, washes and cleanses all the Passages and Vessels, and ^egets
Appettite, and gallantly purges by Urine.

But if too frequently drank alone, as the custom of most is, then it heats the
Blood and fumes into the Head, and after a little custom of drinking, is so far
from being a Whet, (as our Tavern-haunters, to excuse their Morning-Debauches,
call it) that it dulls the edge of Appetite, and hinders Concoction, and breeds
the Stone or Gravel by its sharpness and heat, and yet at the same time purges
powerfully by Urine, by reason of its pure thin spirituous and Balsamic
Virtues, but notwithstanding that Torrent of Urine, it leaves behind it an hot
harsh or gretty Substance, which in some Natures or Complexions does generate
an hard stoney substance; and indeed all sorts of Drinks or Foods in which
either hear or sharpness does predominate, are not proper nor Healthy to be
frequently drank or eaten; for all such things do by degrees awaken and
strengthen their like Properties in the Body, stealing on them, as it were,
insensibly, till such matter has gotten strength, then presently they put
Nature into an unequal Motion; for which cause all Old Wines, (which some so
much love and commend) are injurious; for the longer any Wines are kept after
they are fit to drink, the clearer, sharper, brisker and hotter they become;
for length of time does, as it were, digest or waste the sweet Balsamic
Virtues, by which they become more sharp, harder and nearer to the strong
original Spirit: Therefore all Old Wines and Stale Drinks do more heat the
Body, and sooner irritate and awake the natural Heat, than New; it being a
grand Error for any to imagine that New Wine or Ale is not so good or wholesome,
or does not afford so proper a Nourishment as Old Wine and Stale Beer; for
indeed the former is far to be preferred before the latter; for the milder,
sweet and friendly any Drink is, the more true Nourishment it affords both to
the Body and the Spirit; and the Reason why such Liquors do not so soon and so
much heat the Body and irritate the Spirits, is because New Mild or Sweet
Liquor contains more of the balsamic Body, which does qualify, and as it were
captivate the fierce original Spirit, so that it can hardly be tasted or
perceived. Not but that in all New or Balsamic Drinks, whether Wine or Ale,
there is contained a far greater quantity of Spirits than in Old Wine or stale
Beer; for the more gentle and the sweeter any Liquor is, the more Spirits it
contains, as all that are versed in Distillations well know; for such as make
Spirits of Mault-Drink do always distill Ale, not stale Beer. And so in boiling
strong sweet Wort, it shall waste more in quantity in one hour, than small Wort
will in three; And wherefore is this? Only because the strong sweet Wort has a
greater Body, mild, friendly and Balsamic, containing a larger quantity of
pure Spirits, that will not endure the Violence of Boiling without Evaporation.

Likewise, the older any sort of Drink is, the leaner it becomes; for as the
sweetness digests by length of time, so the original hot fierce Spirits seem
not only to be more in quantity; but stronger too, but it is not so, only the
sweet pure Body or friendly Quality is weakened or digested by long keeping,
which was the Allayer or Moderator of this hot Spirit; for a quart of New Ale
contains more Spirit than a quart of stale Beer that was originally of like
strength and sweetness; the same is to be understood of New and Old Wine, and
other Drinks. For which Reasons we conclude New Wine is far more wholesome,
healthy and agreeable to Nature than Old; And Ale, when well-brew'd, and
according to the Rules set down in our Way to H^alth, etc. is to be preferred
before much boiled or stale Beer, and so of other Drinks, especially by all
such People as are subject to the Stone or Gravel, who must observe to drink
mild gentle friendly Liquors, that are neither sharp, keen nor hot in
operation, as middle Ale, Water and Wine, and Water. The same Rule they ought
to follow in their Food; for some sort of Victuals are altogether as apt to
generate the Stone and Gravel as any sorts of Drinks, if not more; Therefore
all such Foods and Drinks as are of a middle Nature, and nearest the
Simp^icity, are always safest, as to Health, and for preventing all kinds of
Diseases.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Rhenish-Wine, its Nature and Operation.
THis sort of Wine is a kin to White Wind, but more substance, a brave noble
Juice, an excellent Cleanser of the Stomach, whereby it begets Appetite and
helps Concoction. Nevertheless it is endued with an hot sharp Quality, which
when the same is too plentifully drank, heats the whole Body, and is apt to
precipitate the Drinkers thereof into Fevers; and as for such as by their
Complexions are any thing subject to the Stone, it will help forward the
generation thereof; for though this Wine does naturally purge by Urine, yet
there is in it an hot or harsh Quality, that heats the Blood and congeals the
Humors with a Saturnine or gretty Substance; for all sorts of Drinks and Foods
in which the hot sharp Quality does predominate, are friends to the generation
of the Stone and Gravel: But as every thing has in it a latent Poison, and yet
carries always above it its own Antidote, if wisely handled; so if this sort of
Wine be discreetly mixed with Water, and drank only with Food, or when Nature
require, then it will prove one of the best sorts of Drink, not only to beget
Appetite, help Concoction, and cleanse the Stomach, but also prevent the
generation of the Stone and Gravel; for this Drink does Purge by Urine, as
much, if not more than any other. The truth is, all sorts of Wine drank in
Health, ought to be allayed with Water, or otherwise taken very sparingly; for
there must be a sympathetical agreement between the Meats or Drinks and Nature,
both in number, weight and measure, or as near as may be, or else the
Tranquillity and Health of the Body and Mind cannot be continued; but such as
are ill or faintish may drink now* and then a Glass of entire to great
advantage of their Health, being the best of Cordia^s, if used with discretion.

As for Old Hock, a sort of Rhenish, of which some will now and then boast,
that it is twenty or thirty years old, I will only say, that then it has been
kept seventeen or twenty five years too long. The keeping of Wine to that Age
was only to gratify Conceit, Vanity, Ostentation and a drunken Humor, and to
offer the greater Violence to Nature; for how improper all such very stale
supernatural Wines are, we have mentioned in the last Chapter. And if People
would be but so kind to themselves to observe the Distempers of their Bodies,
and what feverish Heats they labor under after the drinking of such stale
Liquors, they would certainly for the future forbear them.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Claret, its Nature and Operation.
CLARET is a good Stomach-Wine, of a brisk chearing Operation, the moderate use
thereof helps Concoction, and begets Appetite, but it purges not so much by
Urine as White Wind, being of a rough or harsher Nature, but of the two more
agreeable to English-men's Stomachs; if healthy strong People drink frequently
of this Wine, it is apt to make them fat, phlegmatic, especially such as
therewith use little Exercise, as Gentlemen, Citizens, and the like; for no
Creature, Man or Beast, will be fat, except they be given up to Idleness and
Superfluity; it is true, some People, and some Beasts will with the same Meats
and Drinks be more full and fleshier than others, but not fat: Others that use
Exercises, and but ordinary Food, seem to be fat, but for the most part the
same is a Distemper, as watery dropsical Humors, which in some puff up the
^embers and swell the Body; but the chief reason Claret Wine makes Gentlemen,
Citizens, and the like, fat, is for want of Exercise, and by its agreeableness
with the Stomach, which sharpens the Appetite, and opens the Vessels by its
rough harsh quality, whereby they are enticed to eat great quantities of fat
rich Foods and so passing their time without due labor, they become overgrown
with Fat, like crammed Capons (their beloved Dish) or Swine in a Stye.

Yet it must be acknowledgeded, that Claret is the best of Wines, for those
that eat abundance of fat Flesh and succulent Foods, for by its rough keen
quality, it digests and separates such oily Foods, as many of our English
Epicures too frequen^ly gormandize, which milder sweeter Liquors cannot do, as
Canary, Ale, or the like; for this cause many that eat such fat Foods and
Sawces made with Butter, do so much desire brisk spirituous Drinks, finding
that such Liquors do best digest them.

But yet they are to know, that the frequent use of such Drinks will weaken the
natural Heat, so that by degrees the Appetite of such People grows dull, and
the Vessels of the Stomach are contracted, and then their Stomachs will desire
still more and greater quanties, and to drink them oftener, till at length
Health is utterly subverted, and Nature debilitated; for (I cannot say it too
often) the frequent use of all spirituous strong Liquors, being unequal in their
parts, do in a little time beget the like Inequality in the Elements of the
Body, and instead of preserving Health destroy it; for there cannot be a better
thing than a glass of Claret, or a dram of Brandy, or the like, now and then
when People have eat too much in Quantity, or Foods too fat or gross in
Quality; but I know no necessity for those Spurs and Helps, except to such as
lead idle gluttonous Lives, but for others who feed on plain simple Foods and
middle Drinks, and use proper Exercises, and keep within the ^ounds of
Moderation, they shall have no need to drink a glass of Claret before Dinner as
a Preparative, nor a dram of Brandy after for a Restorative of their natural
heat, to help it concoct their simple natural Foods; for such innocent natural
Diet will maintain the natural Heat in great Vigor, especially if the
friendship and advice of Temperance be observed; but if Temperance be wanting,
then the necessity which men do thereby bring upon themselves by drinking of
Claret, does sufficiently revenge it self upon their Bodies as well as Purses;
for it heats the Blood, sends Fumes up into the Crown, destroys the vigor of
the Natural Heat, awakens the central Fires, makes the Stomach (by its
continual use) flat and dull; by which means, Drinkers of this Wine can fast
long, neither can they eat heartily with Appetite, except they do fast a
considerable time, which gives a further occasion to a phlegmy Fatness, which
many of its common Drinkers are subject unto; for those Persons that are of the
Phlegmatick-Melancholly, Phlegmatick-Sanguine, or Phlegmatick-Chollerick
Complexion, if once they get the habit of drinking this sort of Wine, though
they do not well love it, yet their Nature will seem to require it, so that if
their Purse be but strong enough, they must have a Glass or two or three before
Dinner, to clear their Stomachs of that gross slimy matter which their
Over-Nights D^bauches, or superfluous Evening Draughts have occasioned and left
behind and four or five Glasses at Dinner, as a spur to force it down, and five
or six more after Dinner, with a File of Pipes o^ Toba^co to help Concoction.

This is the Trade which some Gentlemen, and too many Ci^izens drive, which not
only wastes their Esta^es, and destroys their Health (which is the greatest
Enjoyment in this World) but also beclouds their Intellectuals, stupifies their
Senses, destroys that true natural Pleasure of eating and drinking, which is
one of the greatest where Health is, and a well-prepared Appetite, joined with
a clean Stomach, free from Obstructions; for he that has a full-spread Table
every day of various sorts of Rich compounded Foods, with strong Drinks and
Wine, is a Thousand times more weary and glutted with it, and has nothing of
that pleasure which the Poor Man (who eats his Bread and Cheese in the Sweat of
his Brows under an Hedge) enjoys.

Nothing so much ^loys and oppresses the Appetite and Stomach as always to have
varieties of Flesh and Fish, compounded Sawces, Pudd^ns, Pyes, Broths, Bisques,
Oglio's, and the like Extravagant ^ur^iture of Gluttony, enricht with East and
West-India^ Ingr^dients, and followed with heaps of Sweetmeats and lucious
Fruits, and other Kickshaws. This all that use such Intemperance, may know by
their own woeful Experience, and by the great number of Diseases, they do
through Wantonness contract, and yet (their Brains being sunk into their
Bellies, and their Understandings buried in the Ordure of their swelling
Paunches) they have not the wit to consider it, but finding their Stomachs
dull, weary, and apt to loathing, never thinking of the true cause thereof,
will needs go about to mend this defect of Appetite by invented New Dishes, and
more Poin^nt Saw^es, and greater variety of Compositions foollishly imagining
thereby to cure all, as if they would quench Fire with pouring on Oil; for too
much of this was indeed the original cause of their Grievance.

Therefore let all Men, that prize the Health either of their Bodies or Minds,
fly such Excesses, and the Pomp of Glut^ony as they would do the Pestilence;
and for such as have a desire to drink of this charming ruddy Wi^e, they ought
to allay and mix it with Water, Two thirds Water and one Wine, but if you drink
it commonly or frequently, then three fourths Water and one Wine, will be
enough, which will be an excellent Drink to beget Appetite and cleanse the
Stomach; it also Purges powerfully by Urine, cools the Body, makes the Blood
thin and fine, whence proceed brisk lively Natural Spirits, Senses,
Intellectuals, Dispositions and Inclinations.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Cider, its Nature and Operation.
CIDER, if well made and fermented, is a fine brisk or quick Drink, and that is
best which is made of good sound and proper Apples, of which there are various
sorts, as Redstr^aks, P^ppins, Pearmains, Iillyflowers, Golden-P^ppins, and
many others well known to the Makers of Cider, and therefore needless here to
enumerate. But this ought to be noted, that the Apples you intend for Cider, be
they of what sort soever* ought to be ripe before they are gathered, and
afterward to lie in an open Airy Room for two, three or four weeks, in which
time, by the Apples sweating the phlegmatic raw Quality will in some degree be
digested, which will ^^nder your Cider sweeter, of a better B^dy, and more
Balsamic than that whi^^ is made of Apples either unripe* or made into Cider
as soon as they are gathered.

Note further, that those that would have a sweeter, st^onger and better bodied
Cider than ordinary, ought in some degree to observe the Rules as are usual in
Brewing, viz. not to press your Apples too hard, as commonly is done, but to
half press them, and then put them by for a smaller Cider; for the first that
runs off, when you do but gently squeze your Apples, (as flowing almost of its
own accord) is much sweeter* and more balsamic than that which is pressed
forth with violence from the harsh center of the Fruit, and consequently is
stronger and more Spirituous, as from the Malt, that liquor or Wort which runs
off first is many degrees better than the latter; for though it must be
confessed, the case is not altogether the same, because the Malt has passed
through several Digestions, which have opened the Closset of Saturn, and set
the sweet spirituous Quality at liberty, just upon the Wing, by which it
readily gives forth its good Virtues, yet the Analogy holds in Apples and other
Fruits ( for Nature's Operations are unifo^m, he that rightly understands one
Link, will easily compr^hend the whole Chain) for if you observe, you shall
find, that any sort of Fruits will, when any violence is offered to them, first
give forth their more sweet Virtues and pure spirituous Qualities, as if you
bite a piece of Apple, will not the sweeter and more pleasant Juices be
extracted first? And so by degrees yield that which is harsher and more
unpleasant? The astringent Properties of Saturn and the hot bitter harsh
Qualities of Mars are the first and last in all Vegetations: The same we find
in the Stomach ( Nature's Laboratory) does not she separate and extract all the
Balsamic and good Virtues first, to the supply of Nutriment for all parts of
the Body? As you may perceive if you give your Stomach any occasion of Casting,
if it be within an hour or two after you received your Food or Drink, then it
will be somewhat sweet, very tolerable, and come up easy, but if this Puking
happen long after, as sever, eight or ten hours, then it will be very nauseous,
bitter, sour, and of various Colors, as Yellow, Green, and the like, whereby
it is evident that the bitter parts are drawn away first.

So if Apples be pressed hard, there is forced out an hard, harsh, astringent,
^our Property, which may cause such Cider to ripen sooner, and be thereby fit
to drink in a shorter time, but it will also cause it to fret, or become of a
keen sharp Nature, and often causes it to sour, more especially if such Cider
shall be put on a fresh ferment by Carriage; either by Land or Sea.

Now to know when you have drawn enough from your first gentle pressing, the
best way will be to taste your Juice as it comes from the Press, and when it
begins to taste any thing harsh, unpleasant or bitterish, then hold your hand
as to that, and keep the Juice of the latter pressing by it self, as Brewers
and Housewives do their latter Wort.

If this course be duly observed, your first running from the Press will make a
Noble Balsamic Cider, altogether as good as White-Wi^^ or Claret, and perhaps
better than either of them for our English Bodies, If drank temperately. And as
it will be thus much better than your common Cider, so it will keep longer from
being sour, sharp or eager, and consequently continues more friendly to Nature.

Another, or new way to make Cider.
Take the first or second Juice you press out of your Apples, and put it into a
Kettle or Copper, and make it ready to boil, or boyling-hot, but not boil, then
put it into Coolers for that purpose, as you do in Brewing Ale or Beer, and
when it is at the degree of coolness, as is usual for Wort, when set a working,
then put a convenient quantity of Yeast of Barm to it, and let it work,
observing the very same Method as is done in working and tunning up Beer and
Ale, and when it has done working stop it close up.

This will be a brave full-bodied wholesome Cider, keep very well, and drink
pleasant and mellow; for this heating and fermentation does digest that crude
phlegmy Quality which makes Cider drink lean and sharp, from which also it
often gets a sour Quality.

But if you would have your Cider to keep long, or draw as Beer and Ale does,
and not grow flat for a Month, two or three, then when you have heat your Juice
or Liquor, as aforesaid, so that it begins to be hot, put in what quantity of
good Hops you think fit, and let them infuse a full half hour, but let it not
boil, and then strain it as you do Wort, and put it into your Coolers, and when
cool set it a working, as before directed; But therein observe two things, 1.
That you do not let it stand too thick in your Coolers, 2. Nor put it in to
working before it be sufficiently cold; for if either of those Accidents
happen, it will cause the irritation or awakening of the Saturnal and Martial
Poisons, which will destroy the Balsamic Virtues or S^eet Quality, by causing
it to ferment too fiercely, which is cal^ed Fr^^ting, and causes all sorts of
Drink to grow hard and stale in a short time.

This last sort of Cider will not only drink pleasant, with a good Body, but
will also keep a long time, and draw or ^run good as long as Beer or Ale, and
not flatten, as is usual for Cider; so that you will not be obliged to the
trouble of Bottling it, which for Families, and the common use of an House, is
tedious and chargeable, and not so wholesome, as I have demonstrated in my Way
to health, in the chapter of Beer and Ale.

Note, that you may Boil your Cider, either small or strong, and use the same
Order as common Brewers do in making of Beer and Ale, and some People of late
years do manage their Cider accordingly; but in my opinion it is not so good as
that which is made either without boiling or heating at all, or that which is
only heat, without boiling, as is before mentioned; Not but that which is
boiled may be made very good* and to drink, full and satisfactory to the
Stomach, but still the former is to be preferred before it.

No sort of Cider ought to be kept above One Year, i^ the Drinkers thereof
regard their healths though it may be kept several years in Bottles, and drink
pleasing to the Palate of many People, especially such as have dull flat crasie
cold Stomachs, but as I have told you already, no stale Drinks, whether Wine,
Cider, Beer or Ale, are so homogeneal and profitable to Nature as those that
are Newer, provided they be first sufficiently fermented; for the longer any
fermented Liquors are kept after they have obtained to proper ripeness and
clearness, the harder, keener and sharper they grow; and therefore are not so
agreeable and friendly to Nature as milder, fatter, or full-bodied Drinks; for
every thing being come to its mature Age, does by degrees tend toward the
center, and decline; for there is no standing still in the operations of
Nature. Thus in all Drinks the keeping them a proper time after they are made
does digest a gross phlegmy Quality, which would make it drink fulsom or
nauseous to the Palate and Stomach, which a little Age consumes, even as it
comes to pass in all Herbage, as Hay, which when new cut down is sweet and
faintish in comparison of what it will be when it has lain half a year or more
in the Rick or Mow, but if such Hay lie too long, viz. three, four or seven
years, then it becomes dry, harsh, and of less Virtue and Substance, and in no
respect so good, as in its proper time: So when fermented Drinks have reached
to a proper degree of Age, or digestion of the more unpleasing and phlegmatic
Juices, then if it be continued much longer, it goes as fast backwards toward
its Original, and the sweet Body or Balsamic Virtues are by degrees wasted,
and as it were, eaten up by the fierce hungers and eager properties of the dark
original Forms, viz. of the Saturnine and Martial Natures, which are greedy
devourers of the amiable sweet Balsamic Body; for the harsh astringent bitter
fierce Qualities of Nature are always and in every thing the first and the
last; Are not your curious delicate well-tasted Apples in the beginning of
their generating, or whilst they are young and green, harsh, astringent,
bitter, sour, and very unpleasing both to the Palate and Stomach, affording a
Juice or Nourishment altogether as ungrateful to Nature? But through the sweet
Influences of the Coelestials and Elements, the Solar, Iovia^ and Venerial
Qualities are awakened and strengthened to that degree that by their benign
Particles they moderate, allay and qualify both the astringent, bitter and sour
harsh Properties, so that each of them does with an hearty and corteous
friendliness incorporate and embrace each other, whence does proceed that
lovely pleasant Taste, Smell and Color, which being once become full ripe, if
they be kept much longer they will decay and fall into Putrefaction, and
neither be pleasant nor wholesome, and just so it is with the Liquor that comes
from them after its kind; if it be kept too old or stale, it proves injurious
to Health, being of a hot tart keen Nature and Operation, which heats the
Blood, irritates the pure Spirits, causing weariness and hot I^dispositions to
possess the whole Body and generating various Diseases, according to the Nature
of each Constitution and Complexion, it being Ig^orance, Vanity and Custom that
have and do make so many (...) and use such over-stale Liquors, not that ever
any found any real benefit thereby; for it is a never-failing truth, That all
sorts of Drinks are best whilst the p^re vola^ile Spirits are strong, and the
balsamic Body potent; and that the same is not only the wholsomest of all
others, but the most pleasant too to the Palate and Stomach, and in every
respect more agreeable to the needs and operations of Nature.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Mum, its Nature and Operation.
MUM is a brave Balsamic Liquor, very wholesome for Melancholy Phlegmatic
Complexion'd People, if they observe the Rules of Temperance, viz. To drink it
sparingly, as also for those whose Food is dry, hard and lean, as course Bread,
ordinary Cheese, Flowered Milk, Herbs, and lean Pot^ages. But this sort of
Drink (...) another Species or Property, viz. It is of an hot strong Nature; It
dulls the Appetite, sends fumes into the Head, and is nothing so good, healthy
and wholesome as clear well brewed Ale; for being much being much boiled with
the Martial Ingredients, they do not only suffocate, evaporate and destroy the
pure thin su^tle spirituous parts, but it thereby becomes of a thick gross
tough substance, and consequently harder of Concoction, so that the Natural
heat cannot so easily separate and digest it, as other clearer finer Drinks, as
Ale, Cider, Wine and Water, and the like: For this cause, it is not good for
such as live at ease, and eat fat rich compounded strong Food; for it naturally
heats the Blood, and makes it thick, generates heavy dull Spirits, whence
proceeds hot unpleasant Dispositions; for it being unequal begets the like
Inequality, both in Body and Spirits, so that the common use of it lays
Foundations for Diseases, more especially in Choleric and Sanguine
Complexions, and all Children and Young People.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Coffee, its Nature and Operation.
COFFEE is a new Liquor, invented by the Turks and Heathens; for being by their
Alchoran or Law prohi^^ted all Wine, they wanted something to spend their time
in, and be a Companion to their Tobacco, of which in late years they take great
Quantities, and therefore gratified their Appetites with this Liquor, which in
few years is grown into much Esteem and Practice amongst the English, more
because it is a New farfetcht drink, than for its Virtue, though it must be
acknowledged to be one of the most Innocent and harmless drinks that is used in
Public Houses, and brings the least Inconveniency to the Drinkers thereof,
only it wastes precious time and occasions many discourses which were better
let alone.

This sort of drink ought not to be used, but in a Physical way, by such as are
troubled with Fumes and D^lling Vapors that fly up into the Head, and thereby
stupifie the Senses; also it is profitable for such as have brought upon
themselves such distempers by too large drinking of Wine and strong Drink, or
by Weariness, Labor or Fasting, and for such as are troubled with the
Headache. But for others that are well, and not troubled with any of the
aforesaid Inconveniences, they ought not to addict themselves to the frequent
sipping of this Black Broth, though there is not so much mischief to be
apprehended from it, as from strong spirituous drinks. Yet it is not without
its Inconveniences; For Nature does not effect any kind of Inequality. Now
Coffee is a Saturnine and Martial d^ink, it derives it sooty Color and
naus^ous Taste from Saturn, and its Bitterness from Mars; For the Jovial Solar,
and Venereal Prop^rties are destroyed in the preparation, or making it into
^owder, that is to say, the ^ure subtl^ or Volatile Spirits and Oily Balsamic
Virtues are suffocated, consumed or evaporated, by the harsh Fire, by which it
becomes fixed in the properties of Saturn and Mars, and for that cause prevents
Funes from flying up into the Crown, or at least it sends none; For all things
in which the pure flying Spirits, sweet Oily Virtues and Natural Colo^r are
destroyed by Preparations, are of a dull heavy Nature and Operation, and of no
good Smell, Color not Taste. Therefore this Liquor dulls the Appetite, and if
frequently drank, obstructs the Stomach, and generates evil Juices.

One of the chiefest Reasons why the Turks at first invented and made Coffee a
common Drink, was to allay the Fumes and stupifying Poisonous Vapors, caused
by the common eating of Opium, which ill custom most of them art subject unto.
Now Opium is apt to disorder the Eaters thereof by awakning the Natural
Spirits, and then stupifying and besetting them, even as the superfluous
drinking of our Wine and strong Drin^s does; For those Mahumetans being
forbidden the Intoxicating Juice of the Vine, had an itching desire to disorder
their Brains some other way, so fond is d^praved Humane Nature to make it self
mad (as we see by the Indians, when once they have tasted Rum or Brandy, how
passionately they will beg for more, crying, A little more, and then to s^ep)
so at last they found out this way to Debauch themselves with eating of Opium,
whose Poison by custom and frequent use they have rendered easy and familiar to
them, as also they and most of our People have done Tobacco, whose predominant
Quality does likewise stand in the same poisonous Root; But to allay the
stupifying fumes and Vapors, which Opium and Tobacco send up into the Head,
they frequently drink Coffee; for the Invention of this Liquor was not for any
pleasure, as most other Drinks have been, as Wine, Ale, Beer, Cider, and many
others, which do not only exhilerate the Spirits, but are of a most pleasant
Taste; whereas Coffee altogether on the contrary, is very distateful to the
Palate.

Would Men but be so kind and Friendly to themselves as to observe the Rules of
Temperance and Cleanness, a very little Coffee would serve, though it has it
uses in a Physical way, as is before mentioned, and no otherwise, it being an
improper and unequal drink, therefore not good for Common use or at every turn
daily, or two or three times a day, as now a days many Thousands amongst us,
especially in London and great Towns do.

It is further to be noted, that several of our own Grains will make not only
as good Coffee, but in every particular like this sort, both in Smell, Color
and Operation, if it have the same preparation; for the species of Coffee
before it is prepared is of a white Flowery substance, as our Grains are, and
if you take Wheat, Barley, Ry^ or Oats, and prepare it in every respec^ (...)
Coffee, it will have a like Taste, (...) ^mell, Color and Operation; for there
will only remain or lie hid in a Saturnine Powder, the fixed Salt, which no
fire can destroy, and this too will stop or repress ^umes and vapors as well
as the other, but whoever uses either of them frequently and wantonly, the
Physical Virtues thereof to Him or Her will cease, and have little or no
effect, and therefore were it palpable that men in general are set upon
Conceits, and wedded to Humors and Custo^s, and mad after things new and
Foreign, it would be a wonder to see such swarms of People so fond of this
nauseous exotic Liquor, which always carries its own Brand along with it; do
but consider its Taste, Color and Smell, and compare the same with proper and
agreeable drinks, as Water, Al, Beer, Cy^er and the like, how vast is the
difference? Has not Water (that u^iversal Mother of all Drinks) a pleasant
friendly mild or meekly Taste, and to underbauched Palates, the most grateful
of all Liquors, of a clear Whitish Color and Aerie Smell, and agreeable to all
Creatures, because the four Qualties there stand and have their Operati^^ (...)
Equality? Is not Ale pleasant, sweet, brisk, spirituous or Ba^samick Taste, its
colo^r Solar and Jovial, with a comfortable smell? The same is to be understood
of all other proper Drinks, whereof the moderate use does ^hear, and refresh
the Spirits, and maintain Health and Strength. But C^ffe^ has none of these
inviting properties, for its natural Virtues are burnt up and totally destroyed
in the preparation; Its love^y White and Yellow C^lour, which proceed from
Venus and Sol are turned into a Saturnine Bla^k, and its sweet Spirituous Taste
into a naus^ous fu^so^e Bitter, with a sm^ll unpleasant. And therefore the
Drinkers thereof are forced to drink it very hot, to hide the ungrateful Taste;
whereas Heat destroys the pleasant Taste of proper and Natural Drinks. And for
this reason Coffee is dull on the Palate and Stomach, very apt to obst^uct the
^assages and ^inder Digesti^n, and ought not to be drunk but in the way of
Medicine; for there is as much and more reason for any Person to burn Wood,
Herbs or ^rains to Ashes, and then take those Ashes and infuse them in hot
Water, and when it is settled or clear, to drink it; ^or such sorts of ^rinks
are ^edici^es proper for several Diseases, but by no means to be drank as
common Drinks. In a word, Coffee is the Drunkards Settle-brain, the ^ool^
P^ss-Time, who admire^ it for being the Production of Asia, and is ravished with
delight when he hears the Berries grow in the Deserts of Arabia, but would not
give a farthing for an Hogshead of it, if it were to be had on Hampstead-Heath
or Banstead-Downs; it is the Sauce for News, the Busie-mans Recreation, and the
Idle man's Business, The Lazy Prattlers colorable pretense to spend his Money
and more precious Minutes vainly, and whilst he is censuring his Superiors, and
New-vamp^ing the Government, his Wife wants Shoes, and his Children cry for
Bread. But since the Indiscretion of the Age has rendered Sipping and Tippling
almost necessary to Bargains and Business, and that men, especially in Cities
and great Towns, many times cannot so conveniently transact their Negotiations,
nor discourse their private Affairs, as in such places where there is Liquor
sold, a Dish of Coffee now and then to be drank by an healthy Person, will not
hurt him, nor make any variation, the quantity is so small; but drinking of it
frequently, and smoking Tobacco therewith, is injurious to Health; yet strong
sound Bodies may drink or eat improper things, for continual custom will
thereby render them less hurtful, especially if they be but small quantities at
a time. However, the best and surest way for every one, is to let such Foreign
Curiosities alone, and to take such Meats and Drinks only as are proper in
Quality, and therewith not to over-charge Nature in Quantity.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Tea, its Nature and Operation.
TEA is another Forregn Drink, the use whereof has not been long known in
England, the best that can be said of it is, That it is a pretty innocent
harmless Liquor, it has an opening Quality, and purges by Vri^e, but not so
much as many of our own Coun^ry-Herb^, and its great esteem is not from the
more than ordinary Virtues that it is endued withal, but chiefly for
Novelty-sake, and because it is O^tland^sh, and dear, and far-fetcht, and
therefore admired by the Multitude of ignorant People, who always have the
greatest esteem for those things they know not. The truth is, our Herb called
Dandelion (that is in English, Lions Tooth, because of the similitude of its
Leaf) being gathered according to our Directions in The Way to Health, etc. and
infused in boiling hot Water about half an hour, and then the Liquor poured
from the Herbs, and sweetened with fine White Sugar, is a far better Drink than
Tea, though the latter costs sixteen or twenty Shillings a Pound, whereas the
former may plentifully be had by most people for gathering, and is of far more
use and virtue; for it cleanses the Stomach, and powerfully purg th by Urine;
its natural Taste is a moderate Bitter, which being allayed by Sugar, becomes
as grateful, if not more than the best Tea.

There are several other of our common Herbs that will perform the like, which
I shall not trouble the Reader with in this place, only this I must tell you,
that Sage, Pen^y-Royal, Mint, Mother of Thime, and Garden Th^me being gathered
and dried in their proper Seasons, and preserved in Baggs, will make more
suitable Drinks for our Constitutions, and answer the end of Nature's wants to
a greater advantage than Tea.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Herbs and Sillads, both boiled and Raw.
THere are various s^rts of Herbs and fragrant (...) that are endued with most
excellent Virtues, many of which are so ravishing and sublime, that with the
favor of a Metaphor they may be called, The good Food of Angels; and therefore
they were the only Food for Man in the beginning, when he remained in his
Angelical state; for till he defaced the Image of God wherein he was created,
every green Herb and Seed was his Meat, and should have been to this day, if he
had continued in that heavenly Condition he was created in and to; but so soon
as he suffered his Desires to wander after Vanity, then immediately the
original Wrath got mastery, and the divine Moderator became weak and impotent,
whence arose that desire after Blood and Flesh, in which that outward Life
stands, and has birth from that strong might of Wrath; for the original of all
Life stands in Poison; therefore when Man ent^ed into the Wrathful Nature and
un^qual ^peration of the original Forms, which does cause such greedy
Inclinations, not only to eat Flesh and (...), but also to Fighting, Killing
and Opp^^ss^o^s* both of those of his own kind, and all the inferior Graduates;
for according to what Principle and Quality does carry the upper dominion in
man's heart, whether Love or Ang^r, such Food, Drinks, Exercises, and all other
things he desiers, Nature being always best gratified with that which has the
nearest affinity to its self; whence it appears that men's coveting Flesh and
Blood, is a true sign and testimony of their miserable Fall, and that they live
under the power of the dark fierce Wrath. -- But I have discoursed more of this
in my general Treatise, entitled, The Way to Health, long Life and Happiness,
As also I have there showed at large the excellency of Herbs, Grains and Seeds
for Food, whereunto I refer the Reader; and shall here only tell you in
particular how to make the best and wholsomest Salads, which if practiced, may
much conduce toward the Praservation of your Bodies in Health.

1. Take Spinnage, Pars^ey, Sorrel, Lettice, and a few Onions, then add Oil,
Vi^gar and Salt, a good quantity of each to make it of an high Taste and
Relish, but let the Salt a little predominate or exceed both the other
Ingredients, and eat nothing with it but Bread, which is sufficient* and will
be much more grateful to the alate than if you eat Bread and Bu^ter, or Brea^
and Cheese, or Bread and Meat, though all those things may be admitted, when
you season your Sallad only with Salt and Vinegar; but it is not proper to eat
Butter, Cheese or Flesh with such things or Sallads wherein Oil is mixed, there
being but little affinity in the Radix of Oil and Butter or Cheese, and the
natural Heat of the ^tomach does not ^ike that Food in which there are several
sorts of fat things intermixed, of disagreeing Natures; besides, ^at is always
heavy of digestion.

Another sort of good Sallade.
2. Take Lettice, Spinnage-Top^, Pennyroyal, Sorr^l, a few On^ons and Pers^^y,
and season it as before mentioned, with Oil, Salt and Vinegar.

Another.
3. Take Lettic^, Sorrel, Pepper-Grass, Spinnage Tops of Mint, and Onions, and
seasoned as before.

Another.
4. Take Spinnage, Lettice, Tarragan, and Pars^^y, with some Leaves of Balm.
Or, Sorrel, Tarragan, Spinnage, Letticee Onions and Parsley. Or Tops of
Pennyroyal, Mint, Lettice, Spinnage, Sorrel and Parsle. Or Lettice, S^innage,
Onions, Pennyroyal, Balm and Sor^el. Or Sage, Lettice, Spinnage, Sorrel,
Oni^ns. and Parsley, and seasoned as before.

Another.
5. Take Sage, Pennyroyal, Mint, Balm, a few Lettice, and some Sorrel, and
season it with Oil, Salt and Vinegar, as is before mentioned. This is a brave
noble warming Sallad, as indeed they all are, but this in a more especial
manner.

Another.
6. Take Lettice, Sorrel, Endife, Celery, Spinnage and Onions, seasoned as
before.

Another.
7. Take young green Buds of Colwo^ts, or young Colow ^s, or Colwort-Plants, or
a hollow C^lworty Cabbage, with some Onions. This is a good Sallad, season^d in
the same manner. Some there be that will make Sallads of hard Cabbage, but they
are but very indifferent ones. Nor do I know any way of Preparation that can
make an hard white Cabbage wholesome: Many People admire it for its whiteness;
but though the pure White color in some things is of excellent Virtues, it is
not so in this, because it is not natural for it to be so, but it comes to pass
by Accident, that is, because the friendly Element, the Air, has not its free
Circulation and Influence in and through it which causes it to be so white;
whereas its natural genuine Color is Green. And therefore, if you please to
observe it, all white hard Cabbages are more fulsome, and of a stronger nature
and operation, either raw or boiled, than your open hollow greenish Cabbages,
and harder of Concoction, and the Liquor in which they are boiled is more
nauseous, and will sooner putrify and stink than that in which Co^worts are
boiled. Therefore young green Colworts and Cabbage-Colwots, are the wholsomest,
more cleansing and easier of Concoction.

Another warming chearing Sallad.
8. Take the green fresh Leaves of Colworts or Cabbage Plants, L^ttice, Sorrel
and Parsley, Tarragan, Ne^tle-Tops, Pennyroyal and Mint, let the quantity of
each be according to your Palate, being seasoned with Oil, Salt and Vi^egar, it
is a brave warming or exhilirating Sallade, if seasoned to the highest degree.

Sallads for the Winter.
Take Colwort-Plants, Sorrel, Lettice, Endife, Celery, Parsley, Old Onion^s,
(which are far better to be cut and eaten with Sallads in the Winter, than
Young) and season them well with Salt, Oil and Venegr. This is of a warming
chearing Nature, and gives briskness to the Spirits, opening and keeping the
Passages from obstructions and furring, which in Winter they are most subject
unto; for then, Nature having, as it were, locked up all her Gates, the central
heat is driven more inward, which causes great Appetite of hard, strong, fat
and succulent Foods, and strong Drinks, which where Discretion, Order and
Temperance are wanting, sows the Seeds and lays the Foundation for Diseases,
that commonly manifest themselves in the Summer following, which the common and
frequent eating of Herbs and Sallads in the Winter, will in a great measure
prevent. And though Herbs have not so much Life and Vigor, nor are so much
opening and cleansing in the Winter as in the Spring, yet all such Herbs as do
grow and continue fresh and green, do also retain their true natural Virtues
and Qualities, and being eaten in Sallads, and seasoned as they ought, have in
a degree the same operation as at other seasons of the year.

This few People do understand or consider, but cry out, Herbs in Winter! Who
will or can eat them then? they are cold, and very hurtful -- And this foolish
false Doctrine they receive by Tradition from one to another, without any
experience or trial; whereas a Sallad well seasoned and ordered in December or
January, if the season prove open and mild, is as chearing, and (being eaten
only with good well made Bread) will warm the Stomach as much as two or three
Glasses of Wine, and is for more pleasant and natural; ^or there is a greater
excellency in all green Herbs in the Winter, than most imagine, especially for
old People, and such as are subject to Stoppages or shortness of Breath, who
instead of Onions may use a clove of Garlic in their Sallads, which is one of
the best ways of eating it, and it will bravely open, cheer and warm the
Stomach.

Or you may make it thus:
Take L^ttice, Spinnage, Endiff, Celery, and cut half an head of Garlic
amongst it, and then season it well with Oil, Vinegar and Salt. This is a brave
warming Sallet, and very wholesome.

Of the most proper times for eating of Sallads
Sallads are not improper to be eaten at all Times and Seasons of the Year, but
more especially from the beginning of February to the middle or last of June,
for then they are more brisk, lively and powerful then at other seasons, and
better able to Cleanse, Purge, open Obstructions, sweeten and purify the
Blood, and make pure fine Spirits; for the frequent eating of Herbs do prevent
that pernicious and almost general Disease, the SCURVEY, and all windy Humors
that does offend the Stomach. Then again from the middle of September till
December, and indeed all the Winter, if the Weather be mild and open, all green
Herbs are welcome to the Stomach, and very whol^om, because most People do
then live (...) hard strong substantial Food; and (...) that can get them, on
hot strong spi^i^uous Drinks, which are apt to disorder Nature, if Temperance
and some Cleansing Foods be not eaten between whiles.

In the Spring, Nettle-tops, Spinnage, Corn-Sallet, the young Buds of Cabbage
and Colworts that grow on Stalks, and others of the like Nature, being boiled;
for though when you eat Herbs alone, as Food, you ought not to boil them, yet
when you use them only as Sauce, or a Co^rective to Flesh-Meats, you may boil
such of them as are proper) make a good Sauce for such as eat Flesh, they
loosen the Belly, help Concoction, and consequently open Obstructions, which
the long Winter may have occasioned; but later in the Spring, as April, May or
June, there are several other excellent Herbs, as Lettice, Soweed, Spinnage,
Parsley, Mint-Tops, Pennyroyal, Borrage, Endiffe, Succory, Beets White and
Red, and many others in Gardens, besides diverse that grow common in the Fields,
as the Red-Dock, Dandelion, Comfory, and the like, which being boiled in plenty
of good River or Spring Water, with a brisk Fire (and one of Wood prepares any
Food best) and the lid or cover of the Vessel taken off as soon as they begin
to boil, till they are quite boiled, (which will be in a very little time) and
then Butter melted with Water into a thick substnace, being put to them, and
some Salt, and then eaten with Bread, or Bread and Flesh, makes a brave wholesome
Food -- Touching the Nature of all Green Pulses, and that the frequent eating
of them does generate crude windy Humors, and thick gross Blood, and are the
occasion of several Diseases; see our before-cited Treatise, viz. The Way to
Health, long Life and Happiness, etc.

How to supply the want of Oil in Sallets, where Persons do not love it, or
cannot have it.
For seasoning all sorts of green Sallads I have mentioned Oil as a principal
Ingredient, and deservedly; for nothing is more excellent for that purpose, it
being called Sallet-Oyl from that very use. But whereas some People for want of
use, (or by I know not what secret Antipathy) do not love Oil; and others many
times cannot procure it, especially here in England, I shall here acquaint them
how they may furnish themselves to supply the want of it: You must know then,
that Butter is our English Oil, the nearest thing we have in affinity to the
Nature of Oil, and designed no doubt by Nature to serve our turn instead of it;
for no Country yields all things, and yet such is the gracious Providence of
God, that every Region affords all things necessary to the Inhabitants; if
therefore you melt good Butter thick, and pour it upon your Sallad, it will
relish and suit with it excellently well, and serve very conveniently instead
of Oil, being so like it amongst the Herbs, both in show and Taste, that an
ordinary lover of Oil will not doubt but he has it; and he that does not love
O^l, may be sure he has it not, and both enjoy (upon the matter) as much
Virtue, for Nourishment and Wholsomeness as if they had eat the purest
Salad-Oyl that is brought from beyond the Seas. A curious Secret, not commonly
practiced, and which I am confident many People will have reason to thank me
for.

CHAP. XXIX.
The best way to make Herb Pottage, not only in the Spring, but also at all
times of the Year.
TAke Elder-buds, Nettle tops, Clivers, and Watercresses or Smallage, and what
quantity of Water you please preportionable to your quantity of Herbs, add
Oatmeal according as you would have it in thickness, and when your Water and
Oatmeal is just ready to boil put your Herbs into it, cut or uncut, as you like
best, and then when it is again ready to boil, take a Ladle and lade it so that
you keep it from boiling and when you have done thus near half a quarter of an
hour, take it off the Fire, and let it stand a little while, then you may
either eat it with the Herbs or strain it, adding a little Butter, Salt and
Bread, the best way will be not to eat it till it is somewhat cooled, and not
past as hot as Milk from the Cow, and you are to remember not to let it boil at
all. This is a brave wholesome cleansing sort of Pottege, far beyond what is
commonly made.

Another sort of Herb-Pottage,
Take Water and Oatmeal, make it boiling hot on a quick Fire, then take
Spinnage, Corn-sallet, Tops of Pennyroyal and Mint, cut them and put a good
Quantity into it, let it stand on the Fire till it be ready to boil, and then
lade it to and fro five or six Minuits, then take it off, and let it stand a
while, that the Oatmeal may sink to the bottom, then strain it, adding Butter,
Salt and Bread, and when it is about Blood warm, Eat it.

This is a gallant sublime Pottage, pleasant to the Palate and Stomach,
cleansing the Passages by opening Obstructions; it also chears and comforts the
Spirits, breeds good Blood, and makes the whole body lightsom. The same method
you ought to follow in making all sorts of Gruels and Herb-Pottages, be the
Herbs of what Nature they will; for the boiling of Herbs, not only in Pottage,
but for any other use of Food, was not invented by wise Seers into the Arcana
of Nature; for it does, as it were, totally destroy the pure volatile Spirits
and balsamic Virtues, as also the strong warming Properties thereof. For this
cause, Raw Herbs are much better, affording a firmer Nourishment, better Blood
and purer Spirits, and feel more warming in the Stomach than boiled; nor are
they so apt to loosen the Bowels. But if any shall make boiled Herbs their
Food, though they prepare them by dressing them with Butter, and the like, they
will prove phlegmatic, cold and windy, with other evil Properties, and not
afford half so good a Nourishment as if they were Raw; nor are Raw Herbs more
Windy than boiled, as some People, not for want of Ignorance, suppose, but
rather the contrary; for the common eating of Raw Herbs does naturally resist
all crude windy matter and gross Juices, by assisting the natural Heat and
helping Concoction; they give Life to the Stomach, by opening the Mouth of the
Appetite, and sharpen it, as appears by such as have dull flat Appetites; for
when such shall come to a good Salle^, it does (as it were) create or revive a
Stomach and good Taste, whereas before they could relish nothing: Also, they
help to digest and carry off all heavy fat or gross Food, and make it less
hurtful, insomuch that some have been thereby cured of windy Phlegmatic
Humors that offended the Stomach, and consequently sent Fumes up to the Head,
causing it to ache. Therefore this was the way the wise healthy long-lived
Ancients prepared their Herbs, who made them one of their principal Foods; but
now-a^ days People do scarce eat them but as Sauce. And as boiling of Herbs
does destroy the purer Virtues and firmer Substance of them, so that they
become phlegmy, cold and windy; The same is to be understood in all sorts of
Herb-Pottage, whether for Food or Physic; for boiling any sorts of Herbs does
in a Moments time either suffocate or evaporate the volatile Spirits of them,
and then all the sweet pleasant opening cleansing Virtues are gone, and they
become like Beer, Ale or Wine, that has lost its pure Spirits, which is further
evidenced by that strong nauseous or fulsom Taste, ill Smell and dull Color,
all such boiled Pottages have, so that very few care for eating them, unless
they are forced to it, as they are to Physic that is against their Stomachs.
For the pure sweet pleasant Taste and lively briskness of all things resides in
the power of the Spirits; which all Housewives and Preparers of Food ought to
consider* and understand, as also the degrees of the Fire, the quantity of
Water, and that the Water be in sufficient quantity, and that the Air have its
free circulation, and to give it true time, or else none can prepare any kind
of Food without prejudice; for in the sweet and spirituous Properties stand the
healing nourishing Virtues, which will not endure any violent Heat or unequal
Motion.

To make Garlic or Onion Pottage.
Take Water and Oatmeal, stir it together, and when it is ready to boil, bruise
as much Ga^lick as you please, to make it either strong or weak, put this
bruised Garlic into your boiling hot Gruel, and brew it to and fro with your
Ladle, that it may not boil for five or six Minutes, then take it off, and let
it stand a little, then add Butter, Salt and Bread, and eat it as warm as your
Blood. It Is a brave warming cleansing and opening Gruel, nothing so strong and
nauseous as that which is boiled; for this way you do extract the finer and
purer parts of the Garlic, and leaves the strong nauseous Qualities behind;
but on the contrary, much boiling or boiling according to custom, does destroy
the good opening cleansing Virtues, and awaken the Evil.

CHAP. XXX.
The best way to make Diet-Drink with Herbs, Grains, Seeds, etc. or the proper
method of ^nfusion of Herbs in Beer, Ale, or other Drinks.
THe best, proper and most natural way to make all sorts of Herb-Drinks, is
thus, First, gather your Herbs in their proper times and seasons, as we have
taught in our ^ay to Health, etc. Then dry them in the Sun, and put them into
close Paper-Baggs; and when you would use them, take such a quantity as you
think fit, and put them into a Linen Bag, and hang the same in your Bear or
Ale when it is a working or fermenting, for two, three, four, five, six, seven
or eight hours, and then take it out. (But if you would make Wormwood-Drink,
then you ought not to let it lie so long, for of that 3 or 4 hours will be
sufficient.) And thus if your Herbs be rightly gathered and ordered as
a^foresaid, all their good, pure and Balsamic Virtues will as easily and
readily give themselves forth into the Beer, Ale, Wine, or other Liquor,
whatever it be, as the pure sweet spirituous Quality in Malt does into the
warm Liquor when you Brew, which is performed in one hour to admiration. But as
in this Example, if after you have put in your Malt you should let the Water
or Liquor remain six, eight or ten hours before you draw it off, then the pure
sweet spirituous Quality will become suffocated, and such over long continuance
thereof will awake or irritate the phlegmy gross nauseous Properties, which
would, as it were, totally destroy all the good Virtues, as every one that can
but Brew a peck of Malt, may know by experience. So the very same is to be
understood in infusing any sort of well prepared Herbs; for in such dried
fermented Bodies or things, the purer Virtues do stand as it were external, and
when they are put or infused in any proper Menstruum or Liquor, they give
themselves forth, first with all readiness, because the Essential Virtues of
every thing consists in the volatile Spirit, and balsamic or sweet Body, which
is an hidden flying Virtue, whence the true Color, Smell and Taste do proceed:
And therefore great care ought to be taken in all Preparations, that this
benign Virtue be neither evaporated nor suffocated; for then the thing will
presently tend to Putrefaction, and become a Nauseate and loathing to Nature.
The Learned are Men of Tongues, and so they may talk at their pleasure, but I
do assure all the humble Enquirers after Wisdom's Footsteps, That the long
lying or Infusion of any sorts of Dry or Gr^en He^bs, does destroy their good
Properties, as a Candle by being held downwards is extinguished by that which
before fed it, and also do irritate the gross fulsom Qualities thereof, as is
plain by the ill Tastes and Smells of all such Drinks, more especially if it be
Wormwo^d; for then they become harsh, strong, bitter, and very ungrateful to
Nature, and no less unwholsom; For the common Wormwood-^^ink that is sold in
Al^-Houses, is of a string, bitter, hot, fuisom Nature and Operation, and the
frequent drinking thereof does wound and destroy the natural Heat, and by
degrees spoil Digestion, so that the Drinkers thereof cannot be well without
Morning-Draughts of their nauseous Purt^; such fort of Drink especially if any
shall drink much of it, being of kin to Spirits and Brandy; those that are once
much used to them, cannot without great difficulty leave them.

The long lying of Wormwood in the Drink does totally destroy the subtle
Spirits and pure fragrant Virtues, awakens the strong bitter poisonous Quality,
which not only checks and debilitates the natural Heat, but heats the Blood,
making it thick and gross, causing the Spirits to become heavy and dull, and
sends up stupifying fames to the Brain, which falling upon the Optic Nerves,
do often times extremely prejudice the Eye sight; but if Worm^ood rightly
gathered and preserved be infused but for two or three hours when your Drink is
working, and then taken out, you will have all its good Qualities, and a most
delightful odoriferous Drink, and unattended with any of those ill
consequences; if you love it very strong of the Wormwood, then add a greater
quantity, and not infuse it longer, as is usual with some.

Another way of making Wormwood-Ale or Beer.
Take what quantity you please, more or less, as you would have your Liquor
strong or weak of the Herb, infuse it for half an hour in your boiling hot
Wort, then strain it out, and put your Wort a cooling, the very same way as I
have taught in The way to Health, of Brewing, and infusing Hops, which does far
exceed all the common ways for goodness and virtue.

Wormwood-Drinks thus prepared, either this or the former way, are brave noble
Liquors, gentle, warming, helpful to Concoction, they fine the Blood, send no
gross Fumes to the head, and therefore hurt not the Eyes, as the common sort
generally does.

The same Method ought to be followed in making all sorts of Drinks in which
any strong bitter Herbs are infused; and whereas the usual way of making such
Drinks does not only render them unpleasant but destroys all the Medicinable
Virtues of the Herbs. This new Method which we recommend, makes them pleasant
and grateful to both Palate and Stomach, and moreover preserves all the
Physical virtues; for most bitter Herbs do naturally and powerfully open
Obstructions, if they be wisely ordered, but otherwise they prove pernicious;
for every thing has two ^a^dles, and Fire that is good to warm you, will also
bu^n you, ^f you do not manage it with Discretion.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Salt, its Nature and Operation.
ALL common Salt is of an high sharp penetrating fierce hot wrathful Nature and
Operation, an unseparated Body, wherein the poisonous fierce Original Fumes or
Qualities of Saturn and Mars are predominant, and therefore it is unequal in its
Operation, except it be allayed or moderated by some other thing whose Nature
is more equal. The Sea or Sa^-Water is as it were, the Original or Fountain of
the Essential Salts in each particular thing, whence does proceed the brisk
sharpness and distinguishing matter in all Tastes, and in what Creature or
other thing this essential Salt is strong and powerful, that Creature is brisk,
lively, of good Complex on, strong Appetite and perfect Palate; if in
Vegetabl^s, then such Herb^, Seeds, Grams, or Fruits are vigorous, and of good
Color Smell and Taste.

This is that Salt which the Wise Man says, savours all things, and not that
Pillar of Salt that Lots Wife was precipitated into, which was the strong
Original Properties, where each form has its Operation in strife and
inequality, where there is nothing but sharpness, rending, tea^ing, bitterness
and a Poisonous fierce Operation, of which the c^mmon Salt is a true figure;
therefore it must be moderated with some mild or meeker Body, to render it fit
for humane use. Hence if in any sort of Food there be too great a quantity of
Salt, the same is very apt to heat the whole Body, and consume the Radical
Moisture, causing drought and uneasiness, and filling the Body full of Wind: it
also heats and frets the Blood with an It^hy or Mangie humor; and indeed
common Salt destroys all sorts of Inanimate Foods, as Herbs, Seeds, Fruit^, or
Grains, if the same be not presently eaten; for it preys upon the Spirituous
parts, and by its fierce hunger destroys the whole; for there is no sort of
Food can be long preserved but only by its (...) Salt, as appears by
intermixing Salt with Bread; For that Bread into which you put Salt, will
sooner decay than that which has none; therefore Bread that is provi^ed for the
Sea, where it must be kept very long, is always made without Salt. And all
B^kers and House-wives Bread would be be much better, if they put none in, it
being nothing but custom that makes Men's Palates expect or desire Salt in their
Bread, and the less Salt any shall eat, the less they will covet it; for the
mixing of common Salt with sundry sorts of Vegetable (...), does hide or
E^lipse the fragrancy and pleasant Taste of the Essential Salt, that it cannot
be felt by the Palate; for as this inna^e Salt is the preserver and keeper of
each thing from Putrefaction, not only in Inanimate things, but also in all
Animals, and therefore a very little of our common Sa^^ will serve such as feed
on Veg^tatives; for the less Salt is put into those things, the milder, cooler
pleasanter and easier they are of digestion; For much Sal^ in Food makes them
not only hard of Concoction, but heats and dries the Body, and by simily stirs
up and awakens the Central Heat, thereby endangering Health.

Yet still, our common Salt is a brave Noble thing and of mighty use, as the
World goes, for those that eat Flesh and Fish; for it contains several
Qualities, especially two, viz. One strong fie^ce hot Poisonous. Another, sweet
friendly pleasant, sharp and lively, but the first exceeds and therefore all
sorts of Flesh and Fish that do lie or are kept long after salted, do prove
pernicious to such as eat them; for by length of time the corrupt parts of such
Flesh does with a greedy hunger eat up and destroy both the pure brisk sweet
Spiri^uous particles of the Salt, and also of the Flesh, and then such Flesh or
Fish cannot be called back or recovered by a fresh salting, or any other Art,
to its former state; and the reason is, because in such corrupt Flesh there is
no simile for the second salting to Incorporate withal, therefore it will
proceed to Putrefaction in de^iance of all Art.

For this cause all Flesh and Fish that has been long salted is Injurions to
Health; for it dries, heats and frets the Body and Blood, and is one great
cause of the SCURVEY; It also spoils and loosens the Teeth and eats away the
Gums: But ^^ill, Salt is very proper and wholesome to be eaten with fresh Flesh
and Fish, and some sorts of Flesh (as B^ef) may be salted two, three or four
weeks, and if smoaked, it will continue good longer, and therefore the order
used in Bacon is very Proper; for Salt, where it is moderate in food, does
quicken the Appetite, and makes the Stomach brisk and lively, especially for
those who by some disorders or Intemperances have wounded their Health and hurt
the Essential Salts, which makes the Palate dull, and the Stomach flat and
unrelishing, and then People cry, -- My Stomach goes against both Food and
Drinks; more especially they are averse to all such Meats or Drinks as are
compounded or made by Art: But others, as for Example, fair Water, they can
best take, it being more simple. The like is to be understood of Foods; but
there is hardly any Food so simple in all particulars as Water; indeed Bread is
a brave, mild, simple, friendly Food, but the mixtures in making, and the
manner of common Baking does alter the case, and make it nothing so simple as
Water; therefore Water in all states, both Health and Sickness is pleasant and
delightful to the Palate, Stomach and all the Senses. For it is observable,
that if you eat sweet things Water is grateful after them, or any other Foods
of extreme Tastes, but other compounded or fermented Drinks are not; which does
commend Water to be the cleanest and compleatest drink of all others, and that
People may and can drink it with delight in Sickness, and when the Essential
Saits have lost their savor, and also shows that the disease did not proceed
from any of its Qualities; for when such Loathing and Distempers proceed from
Meats or Drinks, as most commonly it does, then the Stomach and Palate do
perfectly abominate all such things. Thus in all or most sicknesses People
choose Water before Beer, Ale, Cider or Wine, and for Foods had rather eat
Bread, Fruits, and the like, than Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Puddens, etc. and most
had rather eat Fish than Flesh, the reason is, because in Health they seldom
eat Fish, and so the Disease did not proceed from thence.

Likewise Salt is a brave addition to Butter and Cheese, to preserve and keep
it from putrefaction for a convenient season, but all sorts of Vegetations are
highly to be esteemed, for that they have in themselves the Essential Salt,
sufficient to preserve them a long time from falling into corruption; but that
which is most to be admired is Oil, which though it be of an unctious fat Nature,
is yet so pure, and void of offensive matter, that it may be kept good several
years, nor can the best salting preserve Butter half so long.

Here you are to understand, that all sorts of Food that quickly tend and turn
to putrefaction are not to be counted so good as those that by their innate
Virtue and Essent^al Salt, will continue good a considerable time, as all sorts
of Grains, Whe^t, Barley, Rye, Peas^, Beans, Fruits, etc. since they are far
more strong, firm and spirituous, than any sort of Flesh or Fish. Not but that
there is the same Essential and pure S^lt in these, as in Grains, or rather
greater, but the gross phlegmatic Body overcomes it, and as soon as the
Sensitive Life is destroyed, the good Virtues are in a moments time dissipated
and tend to corruption, and though it be sal^ed, yet the Salt does not, nor
has any power to extinguish or purge forth this gross Body of Corruption, but
the Spirituous parts of the Salt do incorporate and join with the Essential
parts of the Flesh, and captivate the gross body for a season, that it cannot
proceed to putrefaction, but in length of time, viz* two, three, four, five,
six, seven or eight months, the gross body continuing so powerful, and the more
pure parts or Essensial Salts both in the Flesh and Salt do by degrees waste,
suffocate or evaporate, and then the Original fierce Poisonous forms of Saturn
and Mars grow strong and powerful, and with a greedy hunger quickly destroy all
the remaining good Virtues, and then all falls into Corruption, from which
there is no recovery. And indeed so powerful in Flesh and Fish is the gross
Phlegmy Corruptive part, that there is no way found that can continue it very
long from Putrefaction; the best course to preserve it sweet, sound and
wholesome is to dry Fish very well, and the same may be done with Flesh, but
with more difficulty, and this is far the healthiest way. But I know no reason
why People should be so fond of this sort of morose Food, or sustain any such
difficulty to preserve it so extraordinary long, since the Lord our Bountiful
Creator has in a superabundant manner supplied and furnished us with varieties
of brave, noble, friendly and most fragrant sorts of sound healthy Foods,
easily providable, and which may in all particulars gratify all the ends and
necessities of Nature.

To conclude this matter -- Salt moderately used especially with Flesh, Fish,
Butter and Cheese does prove of excellent use and benefit; for it naturally
warms, cheers, comforts and settles weak or disordered Stomachs, prevents
b^lching, vomitings, and other Inconveni^n^ies o^ that Nat^re; but if (...) be
immodera^ely used or eaten, then it has the contrary operations. And in many
Countries where Salt is scarce, People li^e very healt^y without it to great
Ages. For as he that drinks all Water will never want any other Drink, so
Custom makes every thing not only a second Nature, but causes great s^eming
Wants to be where there is no real or natural cause for it; and so Salt is very
unpleasant to such as have never or very seldom eat any.

But some may say, How can fat Foods or things be eaten without Salt?

It Is true, if you have accustomed your self to eat plenty of Salt with such
Foods, then your Palate and Stomach will not without trouble, and some
reluctance, receive them without Salt; but if you had never eaten any Salt with
them, then you would have counted them much sweeter without; though all fat
Foods that proceed from Beasts do really want Salt, by reason of the abundance
of gross humidity, but all f^t or Unctious things that proceed from the
Vegetable Kingdom, do not need any Salt, they being so sweet and clean in their
Radi^^s, that if you incorporate Salt with them, (unl^ss it be just when you
eat them) i^ will destroy their natural Virtues; which does further show the
purity and excellency of the one, and the evil or grossness of the other. And
this let all men know, and that of a truth; That there are no Juices, Oils,
Fats, or any thing of that nature, which depraved Man makes Food of, that a^e
so rich, clean, simple, wholesome and grateful to Nature, as the Oils, Fats,
etc. of Grains, and other things that proceed from the Vegetative Kingdom. What
production of Animals is for Food fit to be rankt in equal esteem with the Oil
either of Olives or Nuts? The former is enricht with such an essential Salt in
it self, as can for several years preserve it soun^ and good; whereas the
Animal Fat is so gross and corrupt, that it will presently turn to
Putrefaction, if you have not the assistance of the grand Pillar of Salt, the
fierce original or unseparated Body. Is Flesh to be valued equal to Bread,
which is deservedly enti^ul^d, The Staff of Life, and under which we are taught
by our Lord to comprehend all things necessary to our subsistence here below,
in that Petition, Give us this d^y^o^r da^ly B^ead? Is Flesh, I say, (^hic^ is
gross humid^ subject to putre^action in the hig^est degree, always attended
with dying Groans and dolorous Cries, Rage, Violence and Oppression, and in it
self both not healthy, and also unpleasant to the Palate and Senses, if once
enlightened, and not debauched by custom) fit to be comp^^ed with Bread, a
brave, noble, f^^m, innocent, substantial, healthy Food, and proper for
Angelical Me? Nay, the Fruits that proceed from the Animal Kingdom, viz. Milk
the most noble and useful of them all, cannot we use and dignifie with the most
delicious Juices that flow from the Vegetative Regions, as the various sorts of
excellent Wines, Cider, Ale, B^er, etc. which if temperately used supply the
wants of Man, and gratify Nature to the highest, and by their ow^ i^nate alt
preserve their own Bodies, without being beholding to the grand original Pillar
of Salt? What have you in your Animal ^ore that can match the vast var^eties of
noble fragrant Herbs, Seeds, Grains, and Fruits, whose Number is beyond any
humane Capacity to coun^? The one smells sweet, and fills the Air with most
plea^ant odoriferous Scents, ravishing the Senses of man, and serving ^im both
for Food and Physic, Use and ^e sure; whereas the other stinks, and fi^ls the
Ear^h with Ordure, and sends up Fumes alike unpleasant and unhealt^y, and by no
Art can long be preserved from Putrefaction and Rot^enness. And as in these, so
in many other respects, the Vegetative Productio^s so far transcend the Animal,
as to Food, that whether you respect Innocency or W^olsomness, D^light or
Cleanliness, there is no comparison to be made between them.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Scurvey, and its Generation.
THe SCURVEY is of late Years become an Epidemical, or almost gener^l Disease
amongst English people, the principal Causes of which are Intemperance, and
want of care in some of the following particulars:

1. By eating too much in quantity, beyond the power of the digestive Faculty,
so tha^ the natural heat cannot make any perfect separation, whence Crudities
and noxious Juices are generated, which do replenish the Joints and Members,
and not only cause the Blood to be thick, but infect it with a sharp keen
fretting Quality, which discolours the Flesh and Skin, and makes the Limbs and
Members ache with pain.

2. The frequent eating of Foods that are of a contrary Quality to the
Constitution, which do secretly wound the pure Spirits, and put Nature out of
her natural way.

3. Improper Preparations of Food, which do render them burthensom to Nature,
generating evil Nourishment, bad Blood, and i^ pure Spirits.

4. The frequent eating of moist phlegmatic Food, which naturally dull,
stupifie and drown the Senses, and makes the Sweet Oil burn dim, which causes
Indisposition and unpleasant Humors.

5. The common eating of Flesh, without di^^inction, or regard had to the
season of the Year, healthfulness or unhealthfulness of the Creatures, which do
as it were corrupt the very Radix of Nature, from whom proceed various
Diseases, as Pthycks, Stoppages of the Breast, Phlegm, and Phlegmatic Humors,
which makes the Spirits dull and impure, whence do arise heavy, lumpish
Dispositions, with ravenous fierce Inclinations and cruel Passions, which cause
many of them to use such evil Words, demonstra^ing that the dark center of
Wrath is awakened, and does predominate; for all evil Words are generated from
the fierce wrathful or devilish Nature. This every one ought to consider, as in
those two common Passions; when the poisonous and fierce fury of Saturn and
Mars is stirred up, are not most then apt to belch forth vain, wicked and
hel^ish Speeches as Swearing, Cursing, and not only impiously profaning the
holy Name of God, but even challenging, and as it were daring his Tremendous
Majesty, (whose Wrath is a consuming Fire) to damn and confound them, and
calling their fellow Creatures, Dogs, Whelps, Sons of Whores, Devils, and a
hundred of the like evil Names. Now consider O Man! from what Root such Word:
do take their Birth? And so on the contrary, do not all good Men, and ot^e^s,
when pleased or in good Humors, breathe forth am^cable loving Words or
Discou^ses, there being more, either good or evil, in words than most imagine,
for they declare what Kingdom has the upper dominion in them; nor is it
unobservable, that the word Scurvey denotes well and evil Affection of Mind,
and a cross way-ward peevish ill conditioned D^sposition, as well as a
disordered habit of Body, and not without cause, since they both proceed from
the same occasion or radical cause of man's precipi^ating himself into the dark
Ab^sse or Cruelty, preying upon and devouring his fellow Creatures.

6. The much eating of Flesh and Fish does generate in some Complexions cloded
Blood, King's Evil, Plurisies, Scabs, Leprosi^s, and many other mangie
Diseases; or Dropsies, heaviness of the Spirit, and in some it causes Fevers,
Swellings of the Members, also the Gout, Stone, and many other unnatural
Di^^empers; which at last having reduced the Body into a general discrasie or
unnatural Ferment, terminates in the Scurvey, as so many stinking Puddles into
one Common-Shore; for indeed the Scurvey is a Complication of several Diseases
and Disorders, as appears by the various and very different Symptoms, appearing
on such as are afflicted therewith.

7. By eating most sorts of Food, whilst the fiery Heat is in it, not suffering
the sulpherous Vapors and ^erce, Fumes to separate, after it is prepared, which
causes a Scorbutic Itch to possess the Blood, and swells the Body with win^y
Humors.

8. By eating too often, that is, before the former Meal be concocted, which
does not only dull, and indispose the whole Body, but also it generates
Crudi^ies and evil Juices, which cause Stoppages, and shortness o^ Breath.

9. By drinking too much in Quantity of rich Cordial-d^ink, which irritates and
awakens the cen^ral Spirits, and by degrees destroys the digestive Faculty and
natural Heat, and hurts the Blood.

10. The drinking small Beer that is brewed after Ale and strong Beer, which is
nothing but the washing of the Grains, viz. a sour nauseous Quality; nothing
breeds worse Blood than the frequent drinking of such Liquor.

11. The drinking of Ale not well fermented, or such as has the Barm or Yest
beaten into it, as is usual for Brewers to do in London, to make it seem
strong, sweet and full in the Mouth, such Drin^^ is very offensive to Nature,
it generates Phlegm (...) the Stomach, dulls the edge of the Appetit^, furs the
Passages, sends dulling Fumes and Vapors into the Head, and breeds bad Blood;
likewise new small Beer and Ale is pernicious.

12. By drinking stale strong Beer, which is boiled a long time with Hops, this
sort of Drink is pernicious, it heats the Blood, swells the whole Body,
generates in some Complexions a hard gretty substance in the Reins and Bladder.

13. By drinking various sorts of Wine, when need and nature does not require
it, which do irritate the Spirits, heat the Blood, destroy the Appetite, and
indisposes the whole Body.

14. By accustoming themselves to close Houses, warm Clothings, soft
Feather-Beds, and lying long in Bed, which does soften and weaken Nature that
she becomes impotent, and hinders the free circulation of the Blood.

15. Idleness, and want of proper Exercise in open airy places, destroys the
Health and weakens the whole Body.

16. By visiting the Shades of Venus too often, and forcing Nature beyond her
Inclinations and Power, which does corrupt her in the very Radix; and this is
frequently done by ^^imulating Nature with gluttonous Provocations, high
compounded Foods, and rich Cordial Drinks, viz. such as need no Teeth to chew
them, nor Stomach to digest them, that being done already in the Preparation.

17 By Carking Cares and Perturbations of Mind, Passions of Love and Hatred,
Superstition, Envy, and the like.

These are some of the Intemperances that have destroyed the Health b^th of the
Body and Mind, even in the very Radix; and indeed when I consider the various
Disorders that Mankind daily commits, I cannot admire at the great number of
cruel Diseases they are afflicted with; but rather I am apt sometimes to wonder
that there are any that escape, or that so many do outlive Childhood; but it
must be said, That through the custom of ill usage and disorders, great numbers
do crowd through many Inconveniences; as in the most fatal (...) some escape.

Rules and Directions for such as are Wise and Well minded, and would prevent
the Scurvey, and other Diseases.
1. MEats and Drinks ought not to be taken that are too strong for Nature, but
rather she ought always to be stronger than the Food, and so the Stomach and
the Natural Heat will be able to digest and make perfect Separation, whence
will be generated good Blood and pure brisk Spirits, and they always make the
Body light lights^me and agile.

2. Meats or Drinks ought not to be taken that are of a contrary Nature or
Quality to the Constitution; but such as are simple in their kind, agreeable to
the ^omplexion, and as near as may be, equal in the^r parts, which will breed
good blood, and increase the Spirits, and keep the Passages free from
Obstructions, and give strength to all the members of the Body.

3. Neither ought any to eat to Dullness; for if healthy People feel themselves
oppressed after Meals, they ought to make abatement in the quantity. Do not
most People before eatting and drinking find themselves qui^k, brisk and
lightsom, provided they have not, either by over-labour or fasting too long,
evaporated or wasted their Spirits? But after their eating and d^inking,
because they do it immoderately, they are sensible of a cloging heaviness and
dull Indisposition, which is a certain sign that the necessity and convenience
of Nature is exceeded; for the intention of Food is to refresh, not to oppress
or incommode her.

4. The pleasure of the Palate in eating and d^inking is prolonged many degrees
beyond the necessity of the Stomach, especially where Foods or Drinks are made
by Art and Compulsition, enticing, and many People thereby over-charge
themsel^es, before they are aware, whence Crudities, noxious Juices, and many
cruel Diseases are generated, and in the end Death it self; therefore let all
Persons watch over themselves in this respect, and take the wise man's advice,
To set a Knife to th^ir^ Throat; that is, to take up a Resolution of Temperance
whenever they find their Appe^ites tempted, and like to be inveigled, and drawn
in to Excess.

5. Your Meats and Drinks ought in every respect to b^ properly prepared; for
Food ill dressed does destroy Health in a secret, yet Powerful manner. Some
will but ha^f do it, others over-do it, both are great and dangerous Errors, so
that the S^omach cannot draw any good Nourishment from it for the Body, and so
the Blood is thickened, the Spi^its wounded, and many Diseases are multiplied.

6. All sorts of Flesh, and other gross Foods that are boy^^d, o^ght to be
boiled in plenty of Water, with brisk quick Fires, without intermission, and as
soon as they begin to boil, the Vessel should be uncover^d until it be done;
which will pres^rve the pure balsamic Virtues and Spirits, whence the pure
delightful Taste, Smell and Color do proceed.

7. Forbear to eat Flesh without distinction, more especially in Iu^y, August,
September and Oct^ber; for then the Flesh of all sorts of Cat^el is more
subject to putrefaction than at an^ other season, not only from the heat of the
Weather, but because the Sun is then declining, which causes all other things
to do so too; and the Grass on which they feed is weak, fainty and phl^gmatick,
which is the reason why their fat is then so soft and greasy that it will not
duly take salt, and more especially if hard d^iven, as most Cattle killed about
Lond^n, and other great Cities, has been; therefore in the forementioned Months
the Griping of the Bowels and p^^nicio^s F^av^rs do reign more than at any
other time of the year.

8. Forbear the freq^ent eating of Fish wit^out regard had to the Season, or to
their cleanness or uncleanness, or their being killed after they are taken,
that is, by a Wound, which would cause the free evacuation of the original
Properties of Saturn and Mars, which is seldom done by the ignorant Fishermen,
but they let them dye, that is, strangle or suffocate themselves, whereby the
pure Spirits and sweet Virtues (by the Agony of the Creature at the departure
of Life) are fixed or overcome; for the original Venoms, in which all Life
consists, are then so terribly stirred up and aggitated, that they immediately
suffocate the pure Spirits and sweet Oil, if there be not a Wound made, whereby
those raging Poisons may freely pass away in the Vehicle of the Blood. For this
Reason Experience, that all Flesh, as of Fowls, or the like that a^e strangled,
will not eat so sweet and pleasant as others that have a Wound made and bleed
plentifully, but has a stronger and grosser Taste and Smell, nor will it breed
so good Blood or Nourishment as the other.

9. Remember that you eat not before the former Foods be digested; nothing is a
greater Preserver of Health than proper Fasting, it cleanses the Stomach,
keeps the Passages from being furred, prevents Stoppages, Colds and Shortness
of Breath, and makes People Aerie, strong, and of good clean Complexions.

10. Drink moderate and simple Drinks, not exceeding either in Quantity or
Quality, for fear you waste and destroy your Health; and be sure let your Drink
be well fermented, clear and free from that Yeasty Quality, which most of your
Ale in London is subject unto; nor such Small-Beer as is there commonly put off
by Chandlers, which the Brewers make after the brewing of their Ale and strong
Beer, being little better than the washing of their Vessels and contains a sour
nauseo^s Property, that heats the Blood and hurts the Body.

11. Let your ordinary Drinks be mild and friendly to Nature, not stale, hard,
sour, nor too new; for all these are prejudicial.

12. Let your Habit or Day-Clothing be moderate, rather thin than thick,
whereby the pleasant vapors of the Air may freely court Nature, and be sucked
in at the Pores as by Spunges on all parts, which will continually cheer,
comfort and refresh the Spirits and whole Body, and makes your Limbs strong,
nimble and lively, preventing Drought, unnatural Heat, and the like
Indispositions.

13. Let your Houses be Aerie; your Windows large, and often set open, your
Beds hard, clean and sweet, for which purpose Straw or Flock-Beds, with Quilts
on them, will be much better than Feather-Beds, and will not only prevent the
generation of Vermin, but make you more healthful, and enable all the Limbs to
discharge their respective Functions with ^ase and pleasure, as I have at large
demonstrared, and given the Reasons thereof in my Way to Health, etc.

14. Forget not to use proper Exercises and Labor in open airy places, which
will prevent many occasions of Weaknesses and Obstructions; and such as cannot
or will not labor, let them take good Walks every day by River-sides, or on
Downs and Plains.

15. Observe the Rules of Chastity, provoke not Nature, nor turn her out of her
simple and innocent way, but use such Meats, Drinks, and Exercises, as will
replenish her with brisk lively Spirits and Virtues; neither ought you to give
way to loose Imaginations, but to abhor unlawful Lusts, and to make use of the
Remedy he has permitted with Moderation, and only for the ends for which the
same was ordained.

16. Avoid as much as may be, Compounded Foods, especially ^uch as have been
invented to entice Nature beyond her proper Inclinations, but content your
selves with simple Meats and Drinks, which you will find to be the Sinews of
Health and Strength, so that your Stomach and natural Heat shall continue good
and vigorous all your appointed time.

17. Let not Carking Cares, nor Perturbations afflict your Minds about such
things as are out of your power to help or remedy, nor abandon your selves too
much to any Passion, be it Love, Hate, Revenge, or the like; avoid Envy,
Strife, Violence and Oppression either to Man or Beast; Stillness and
Complacency of Mind are two main Props to support our Adamical Building; a
cheerful Heart causes the Countenance to shine; a good Conscience is a
continual Feast, and Content is Nectar to the Spirits, and Marrow to the Bones.
Therefore study to be satisfied with your Portion, and thank and bless God for
his Bounties which you enjoy, and use his Creatures for the end they were given
thee; and above all, consider, that thou art made in the Image of God, and in
thee is truly contained the Properties of all Elements, therefore thou art
obliged to imitate thy Creator, and so to conduct thy ways that thou may
attract the benign Influences of the Coelestials and Terrestrials, and the
favorable Irradiations of the superior and inferior Worlds; and on the other
side, not to awaken the Dragon, that is always lurking about the Golden Fruit
in the fair^ Garden of the internal Hesperides, nor irritate the Original
Poisons, nor raise Combustions within, by falling into Disorders without; but
managing all things in Temperance and Simplicity, and hearkening to the Voice
of Wisdom, and the Dictates of Reason and Nature, thou shall transact the days
of thy Pilgrimage here in Peace and Tranquillity, and be prepared for the
fruition of more complete and undisturbed, as well as endless Felicity.

Observing the tedious methods of some unskilful Chyrurgeons, together with
their improper Compositions and unnatural Applycations, which do not only Ruin
and Undo many poor necessitous People, but to the losing of their Limbs, and
sometimes their Lives too; therefore I think it no worthless Service to
recommend unto the World, especially to the poor, the use of the following
Remedies, which are not only cheap and easily Come-at-able, but certain in
their Opperation, far beyond any things hitherto known or published, viz.
An Excellent POULTICE.
WHich does Cure Burns, Scalded-Limbs, Boyls, Fellons, Tumers, proceeding
either from Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy: Also Cures all Infla^ations,
Contusions or Bruizes, either with or without a Wound, Ulcers, old Wounds, or
running Sores; also an excellent Remedy against all sorts and kinds of the
Gout, (and Inflammations of the Eyes, let them proceed from what cause soever.)
By asswaging the swelled part, and eases the torturing Pains thereof, as it
were in a moments time; also it is admirable against sore Breasts, and bites of
Dogs, or any other hurt of what kind or nature soever it be.

Take one quart of good Water, viz. River, Spring, or Rainwater, the last
being the best, and as much small or ground Oatmeale as will make it thick, fit
for a Poultice, unto which add two ounces of good Sugar, and a handful of
^andelion cut small, then put it over ^he Fire in an open convenient Vessel,
keep it stirring all the time till it be ^eady to Boil, or boiling hot, the^^
it is done.

Another.
Take one quart of Water, and as much good well baked Household-Bread as will
make it thick, then add three ounces of beaten Raisins of the Sun, and one
ounce of Sugar, and a glass of good new Ale, stir all your Ingedients together,
and make it boiling hot over a clear quick Fire, and then it is done.

Another.
Take one quart of good Ale, three ounces of Raisins of the Sun beaten, two
ounces of good Sugar with some Mallow Leaves, cut them small, put them over the
fire till boiling hot, or ready to boil, then it is done.

Another.
Take one quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it thick, fit for a
Poultice, five ounces of Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of Coriander-se^^
beaten with a glass of Ale, make(...) boiling hot, and then it is done.

Another.
Take one quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it thick, two Ounces of
Sugar, and a Glass of good Sack or other Wine, make it boiling hot, and then it
is done.

Apply the forementioned Remedies to the part grieved, viz. -- Spread your
Poultice indifferent thick, on a Linen Cloth, that will cover the whol^ part,
somewhat warmer then Milk from the Cow, but not so hot as is usual, for all
extremes prove prejudicial to Wounds, Sores, and B^uises, except it be on some
particular occations.

These Poultices you must apply every hour, or every two hours, (at least) in
the day, and three or four times in the Night, if your Hurt or Wound be
dangerous, If not twelve or fourteen times in the Day and Night may do, viz.

When your Poultice has lain on one hour, or an hour and a half, or two at the
most, put it away off your Cloth, and put fresh on, and so keep a constant
repetition of it for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or ten days if occasion be, but it
will heal and cure most of the forementioned Evils much sooner, if you observe
this method, -- but remember to wash your Wounds or Sores between whiles with
Sugar and Water, and sometimes with fresh Butter and Water beaten together, to
keep it clean and plya^t.

These are noble Poultices, and all the Ingredients do cast a friendly aspect
to each other, being of a cleansing mild Balsamic Nature and Opperation, and
therefore they do by their active penetrating Power, strengthen and raise up
the dismayed Oil or wounded Spirits by meliorating and asswaging the irritated
or awakened fierce poisonous Humors, by which this does as far exceed the
common and usual methods and practices of Chyrurgeons, and other Practitioners,
as that light does darkness.

But here I shall meet with a swinging objection, viz. Why do you leave out of
your Poultices the great l^gredie^t, viz. the fulso^ Grease of Swine and other
Fats? which all skilled in the Art of curing, have for the most part advised,
and for no other reason as I know, then that their Poultices should not offend
the Patient by sticking to the Sore or wounded part, for their long lying on
the grieved part, if there were not some Fats or Oils, the Poultices would
occasion them to become hand and stiff, and so stick to the Sore, which we
prevent by our often repetition for the Spirituous Virtues and Qualities of
Fats, are so hid and locked up in the oily Body, that Nature cannot separate nor
draw forth their fine sweet Sp^rituous Virtues to that degree, as she can from
Vegetations, as all Men skilled in Nature and Chemistry do know, they being of
a heavy dull flat Nature and Operation, very offensive to the tender Spirits
and Blood, by which they impede and hinder the Cure, therefore those Poultices
wherein Fats are mixed, the fine Spirits and Virtues thereof do not so easily
nor powerfully penetrate the Wound as rich Vegetations, whose Spirits and
lively Virtues are as it were on the Wing, and therefore Poultices aptly
compounded thereof, their Virtues do in a moments time pe^etrate to the Center,
and incorporate with their similes, by which they strengthen and raise up the
wounded Spirits, and at the same time do qualify the fierce raging Poisons,
more especially if our method be observed, and ^o effect the Cure, not only in
a shorter time, but much safer, and with greater ease to the Patient. For by
this Phylosophi^al Operation, of repeating (...) does mig^tily advance and
forward the Cure: An^ Note, that every fresh Application of this
Homogenial-^oultice to the grieved part, do add n^w and fresh Supplies of
Virtue, for in all Operations of this Nature, the fine healing spirituous
Qualities thereof, do first impart and give themselves forth, which by a secret
simpathetical Power, do penetrate the whole, and incorporate with their
similes, administering their sweet Virtues, which gives a new Life to the
wounded Spirits, and dismayed Oils, and do at the same time withstand and
allay the fierce raging awakned or irritated poisonous Humors; it being the
way of Nature for all homogenial Bodies, that have passed through any
Preparation; Digestion or Fermentation, when aptly applied or joined to any
proper Subject or thing. For the fine cleansing healing Qualities and good
Ve^tues, do give themselves forth and join or incorporate with their Similies;
even as the fine sweet spirituous Qualities of Maul^ ^o imbibe or give
themselves forth and incorporate with the hot Water in your Mash-Tub, in the
method of Brewing; therefore every Applycation do add new Su^plies of Virtue
and strength to the wounded Spirits, and draws forth and consumes the gross
humidity, and exalts the Essential Life of that part and are as refreshing to
the wounded Spirits, as the pleasant influences and salutiferous Breezes of
Wind in a hot season: For Note, that the Spirits and fine Qualities of each
thing, are light, Volatile, ready, quick and powerful in Operation, that in a
moments time they penetrate even to the Center; for every particular Quality in
Nature, has a Key in it self to open the Gate of its own Principl^; what Man in
the World would believe the attractive inclination which the Lodestone has
upon Iron, if it did not appear to his sight; the very same simpathetical Power
have all other things, though in some it is more occult. And for this cause,
one Body works upon another, by a certain natural attraction and simpathetic^l
Inclination. Thus the wise and wonderful Creator, has endued every thing with
an attractive and influential Virtue; it is not therefore the gross Body of
your Poultice, that will do your Business, that is full of corrupt and
poisonous humors, which are awakned by the long continuation thereof, for
these Reasons, the long lying of Poultices and Plasters, on Wounds and Sores,
have no better Effects, then the long continuation or standing of the Liquor on
the Malt in your Mash-Tub, which if it continue more then two, three or four
Hours, it will spoil and corrupt the whole, for First, (as I said before) the
fine sweet Volatile Spirituous Virtues, imbibes or incorporates themselves with
the hot Liquor, and then if there be not a separation made in two, three or
four Hours, by drawing it off, but the applycation continued, then there will
soon awaken another Quality of a gross harsh sour keen Nature, which with a
rapid motion, tinges or transmutes all the fine sweet healing Virtues into
their own Qualities, which all Brewers and good House-Wifes are sensible of;
the like is to be understood in the applycations of Poultices and Plasters, do
not their long lying of them on the wounded or sore part, cause them to smell
sour and stink, when they have been continued on for twelve or twenty four
Hours, which do not only endanger the part, and prolongs the Cure, but it puts
the Patient to great pain and Torment, and often the Limb is cut off, and
sometimes the Life too, which by this forementioned method might have been
prevented; for if Physicians and Chyrurgeons do not understand Nature, then
there can be no certainty in their Operations or Cures.

Also Note, that during the time your Poultices, Plasters, Ointments, or
Salves, are making on the Fire, that you keep them stirring, by which you keep
the fine Spirits and Qualities Living, for by this stirring, the friendly
powers and thin Spirits of the Air do penitrate the whole Mass or Body, which
incorporate and assist the Spirits and good Virtues, and keep them from being
Stagnated or Suffocated, the Air being the Life of all things, and where its
friendly influences and circulations are prevented, the Life and Spirits
becomes heavy, dull and gross; for these Reasons, all Spoon-Meats made thin,
are sweeter and of a more quick penetrating Operation and Digestion, then those
made thick, therefore despise not our method, nor our plain homebred
Poultices, I could produce many living Testimonies of its Success, but it is
needless, since every Man's Experience that tries it, will soon confirm the
Truth of what is here delivered, nor I am not much Solicitous whether I am
credited or not; it is the consideration of the public good it may do to many
poor People, prompts me to publish it, whether you will follow the
forementioned Rules or not, I have done my Duty in offering it, and therefore
am satisfied.

THE CONCLUSION.
THus have I presented thee (honest Reader) with some Observations; nor shall I
trouble my self to make Apologies for them t^ any, who having their Eyes
blinded with the Dust of Custom and Tradition, may be apt to condemn or slight
these Advices, as Heterodox-Paradoxes, or needless Chymaerea's; but let such
Capers say what they please, I am certain what I have delivered is agreeable to
undisguised Nature, and whoever shall act accordingly, will certainly find very
great Benefits accrewing in respect of Health both of Body and Mind; but
without Practice all Precepts are vain, or at least fruitless, unless it be
only to remain as Monuments to reproach those Fools that despise and neglect
them.

I thought once to have proceeded further in this Treatise, to have discovered
the ways of making up or preparing most of the Medicines that are now adays
cried up; but on second thoughts I desisted, not as envying my Countrymen any
thing that might tend to their general good, but for such Reasons as these:

1. There are very few of the common Medicines that deserve that credit, which
by Knaves vapouring and Fools credulity they have obtained; and to speak truth,
I humbly conceive the People had even as good be without them as have them; and
therefore I was very well content that the learned Doctors and their Laborers,
the Apothecaries, should enjoy to themselves their Pharmacentick Mysteries, or
way of making of Medicines; and when they have done, let them alone, take and
use them too if they please.

2. Those that shall observe the Rules herein laid down, of Temperance, Choice
of Diet, due manner of Pr^paration, etc. will (I am very confident) have little
or no need of that which is commonly called Physic. And for others, if I had
set down never so many excellent Receipts for the cure of Diseases, it is like
they would have regarded them no more than these Directions for avoiding the
same. He that scorns to prevent a Mischief foretold, scarce deserves a Remedy
when he is fallen into it. But,

3. The discreet Reader will here find such things recommended to his use, both
in Health and Sickness, which though they are more plain, pleasant, easy to be
had, and cheaper, are not less effectual both to preserve and restore Health
than those administered by the learned; and in vain he goes about, that may go
to rights; or gapes for a Remedy to be brought him by another from the Indies,
when he may make himself as good an one (and better) at home.

What I have here heartily, and in a plain familiar manner delivered, I leave
to God's Blessing, and the Practice of all prudent Lovers of their Health, and
humble followers of Nature, in her easy and innocent Methods. Farewell.

FINIS.

