Truth seeks no Corners: OR ADVICE FROM A Non-interessed SOLDIER TO HIS Loving
Fellow Soldiers That were under FLEETWOOD AND LAMBERT.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creake. 1660.

Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers,
HAving for these twenty years, been Employed in Marshall Discipline, and
carefully observed the Practices of some Officers Late of the Army, with grief
I express the many Injuries and unparrallel'd Cruelties exercised on persons
deserving so much honor and affection from them as you have done; is the only
Cause that drew me to this! And no sinister or byast-Interest whatsoever;
having always valued the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, far above my own
Concernments. And now perceiving that there are strong endeavors once more to
make these Nations and yourselves miserable, by continuation of a War; and that
there are not wanting those who labor to persuade you that your Interest lies
in Adhering to some Officers late of the Army; who have made shipwreck of all
Oaths and Engagments, through whose breach of faith you are become contemptible
to all Nations; who are so far from making a Reconciliation toward God or Man
by an unfeined Repentance, and turning from the evil of their practices, that
they with their Instruments, palliate their fowl Enormities, endeavoring by
all means possible to destroy the honor of all your Actions, by Adhering to
them whose Power is Will, whose Justice is Cruelty, whose Laws are Confusion,
whose Religion is the Seat of Rebellion, whose Design can have no other End
then Tyranny, and to involve you and yours in perpetual Slavery. Therefore
Fellow Soldiers, Let us look back and survey their by past practices, and we
shall find there was never Oath or Promise kept farther then served their own
Interest. Did not most of those Officers (by Gods mercy) now cashiered the
Army, purchase your Debenters (the price of blood) from two shillings to a
noble in the pound, to enrich themselves, and perpetuate your Slavery. And
through their Cruelty many of our Fellow Soldiers, which were wounded in
Battle and made unservicable, with wives and children starved in the streets
for want of bread, while they Lorded it over you, Tyrant-like.

Now Examine your selves whether when you have demanded your pay, you were not
had before Court Martialls, and hanged to all your shames, while they robbed you
and the Commonwealth of your Dues. And let me further desire you to consider
what you can expect; who have always been made the scorn and contempt of
those whom you have advanced by your valor. The premises being duly and
Christianly considered, I as a Friend and Fellow Soldier, have made bold to
write to you these lines, that you might the better see your Condition, if you
should suffer your selves again to be captivated by the specious pretenses of
an Interested sort of People, who rage and rore (like their Father the Devil)
wanting your assistance to help them to devour.

Therefore my earnest Request to you is, that you would as you are Christians
and Englishmen, bewail the blood you have already spilt in your own Country,
and with souls fitted for the Receipt of Mercy, humbly prostrate your selves
before the God of Mercy, beseeching him to distill into your souls by the
Influence of his holy Spirit, Grace: whereby you may be fitted to be made
partakers of so great a Mercy and Deliverance, as the Lord himself is now a
working in the three, wounded, bleeding, and miserable Nations, which is his
own blessing, Peace, the fruits whereof though but in the bud, should raise
your souls to that pitch, that you should with all cheerfulness humbly submit
to his gracious hand of providence, who seems mercifully once more to shine
upon these Nations, by restoring unto us our native Rights as men, and my dear
fellow soldiers, let not railing Rabshekeys prevail over you, in persuading
you that you shall lose your rights as Christians, for the Lord himself will
plead the cause of the humble and meek, but the stiffnecked and rebellious he
will destroy.

I shall conclude with this exhortation, That you would seriously consider, and
ponder in your hearts this truth, That if you comply not, and submit not with
the Nations public Interest, and just Power now made choice of by common
consent of the people, but follow a few private Ambitious Restless persons,
whose gain is their godliness, whose glory is their shame, you will run your
selves on the rock of Ruin, and make your names infamous to all posterity: And
which is most deplorable, run headlong to your own eternal ruin.

The which that you may prevent, with one heart yield consent and obedience to
the peoples free Choice in Parliament; And let all that love Englands peace say
Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
Fellow Soldiers, This Paper is presented to you from a Lover and Friend, who
has always honored you for your Valor; and has a more real affection for
you, then the cruelty of your Taskmasters will suffer him that is your friend
to discover. If any one shall say the Penman of this is a lover of General
Monck, it is true I am: though I never received any favor from him; for his
faithfnlnesse, mercifulness, prudence, justice, valor, and constancy, command
no less from all just men and lovers of their Country; Whom the Lord Preserve
in all his just Designs. Thus Prays a Lover of his Country.

E. S.

FINIS.

